

Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century 

Handbook of the History of Logic  
Volume 6  

Handbook of the History of Logic  
Volume 6  
Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century  
 
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD 
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO  
 
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier  
Edited by
Univers
Akihiro Kanamori
Department of Mathematics
Boston University
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
John Woods
Department of Philosophy
ity of British Columbia
1866 Main Mall 
Vancouver BC
Canada V6T 1Z1
Dov M. Gabbay  
Department of Computer Science  
King’s College London  
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK  

North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier  
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands  
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford  OX5 1GB, UK  
 
 
 First edition 2012  
 
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved  
 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system  
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying,  
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher  
 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights  
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333;  
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by  
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting  
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material  
 
Notice  
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or 
property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or 
operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. 
Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent verification of 
diagnoses and drug dosages should be made  
 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data  
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library  
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data  
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress  
 
ISBN: 
978-0-444-51621-3 
 
  
For information on all North-Holland publications 
visit our website at elsevierdirect.com 
 
 
Printed and bound in Great Britain 
 
12 13 14 15 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 



PREFACE
Most of the chapters of this volume present the historical development of aspects of
modern, ZFC set theory as a ﬁeld of mathematics, and several chapters at the end,
of categorical logic and type theory. Be that as it may, as part of the Handbook of
the History of Logic the volume can be construed as the one focusing on extensions
vis-`a-vis the intension vs. extension distinction.
That distinction, traditionally
attributed to Antoine Arnauld in the 1662 Logique de Port Royal, is exempliﬁed
by “featherless biped”, a conceptualization, and the corresponding extension, the
collection of all homo sapiens sapiens. However this distinction was historically
developed and worked in logic, it was in the mathematical development of set
theory that extensions became explicit through the mathematization of inﬁnitary
concepts and the further development of mathematics, itself increasingly based on
informal concepts of set.
How many points are there on the line? This would seem to be a fundamental,
even primordial, question. However, to cast it as a mathematical question, under-
lying concepts would have to be invested with mathematical sense and a way of
mathematical thinking provided that makes an answer possible, if not informative.
First, the real numbers as representing points on the linear continuum would have
to be described precisely and extensionally. A coherent concept of cardinality and
cardinal number would have to be developed for inﬁnite mathematical collections.
And, the real numbers would have to be enumerated in such a way so as to ac-
commodate this concept of cardinality. Georg Cantor made all of these moves
as part of the seminal advances that have led to modern set theory. His Contin-
uum Hypothesis would propose a speciﬁc, structured resolution about the size of
the continuum in terms of his transﬁnite numbers, and the continuum problem,
whether the Continuum Hypothesis holds or not, would henceforth stimulate the
development of set theory as its major outstanding problem.
From Cantor’s work would come forth new developments drawing out the inten-
sion vs. extension distinction, for analyzing his famous diagonal argument Bertrand
Russell came in 1901 to his well-known paradox. Thus full “comprehension” was
ruled out, as self-applicability precluded that every intension corresponds to a vi-
able extension. Exercised by the implications for any theory of extensions, Russell
the artful dodger eventually developed his theory of types, a complicated formal
system of logic for mathematics featuring type distinctions for functional appli-
cation as well as a further ramiﬁcation into orders. He thus enshrined non-self-
applicability, but in his aspiring for universality he had to build in encumbrances

Preface
viii
like the Axiom of Reducibility. Russell’s theory stood as a remarkable achieve-
ment of mathematical logic into the 1920s, when David Hilbert and Paul Bernays
focused attention on the restricted, ﬁrst-order logic as already the provenance of
signiﬁcant issues and Frank Ramsey directed criticism at the intensional aspects
of the theory as alien to mathematics.
During this period, set theory was crucially advanced in coordination with
emerging mathematical practice.
Ernst Zermelo eﬀected a ﬁrst transmutation
of the concept of set with his ﬁrst, 1908 axiomatization, which made explicit prin-
ciples like the existence of an inﬁnite set, the power set of any set, and the Axiom
of Separation, a natural, restricted form of comprehension. That axiom together
with the Russell paradox argument established Zermelo’s ﬁrst theorem, that the
universe is not a set, so that “is a set” has no extension. In the 1920s John von
Neumann incorporated the transﬁnite numbers as sets, his ordinals, drawing in
the Axiom of Replacement, and promoted the use of proper classes, like the uni-
verse, as intrinsic to a coherent axiomatic framework. In Zermelo’s ﬁnal, 1930
axiomatization the now-standard set theory ZFC is recognizable.
It was Kurt G¨odel’s 1930s work on the constructible universe L that launched
set theory on an independent course as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics. With L
he established the relative consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis, synthesizing
what had come before in axiomatic set theory with ﬁrst-order logic through the
infusion of metamathematical methods. Through deﬁnability, intensionality be-
came woven into a fully extensionalized context. G¨odel himself regarded his work
on L as a transﬁnite extension of Russell’s types and a rectiﬁcation of the ram-
iﬁed theory, but in any case set theory would henceforth proceed with a further
transmutation of the concept of set as stratiﬁed into a cumulative hierarchy.
Having become a theory of extensions par excellence in coordination with the
mathematization of logic, set theory began its transformation into a sophisticated,
autonomous ﬁeld of mathematics with Paul Cohen’s 1963 creation of forcing, with
which he established the independence of the Continuum Hypothesis.
Forcing
quickly became a general method; a myriad of propositions and models were in-
vestigated; and lasting structural incentives were put into place.
The ﬁrst chapter of this volume describes the historical development of set the-
ory up to this point. Its length and detail, as well as those of the other set-theoretic
chapters, speaks to the extent and richness of modern set theory. The chapter on
the continuum reaches back to Cantor’s original incursions and engagingly pro-
ceeds forward to how the arithmetical view of the continuum as a collection of
points has led to the investigation of combinatorial structures and cardinalities.
The chapter on inﬁnite combinatorics describes, from its early beginnings, the
direct investigation of the Cantorian transﬁnite as extension of number, mainly
ordering and partition properties. Bringing the subject up through the 20th Cen-
tury, the chapter draws in the wide-ranging enrichments resulting from the infusion
of modern methods and initiatives. Its range and reach speaks both to the au-
thor’s enthusiasm and expertise and to the remarkable and myriad ways in which
set theory has expanded and transmuted.

The next several chapters deal with those aspects of modern set theory that
came into prominence largely after the great expansion of the subject since 1963.
The chapter on large cardinals with forcing brings to the fore the mainstream
investigation of “strong axioms of inﬁnity” and their intimate relationship with
strong propositions through relative consistency, developed through the comple-
mentary methods of forcing and inner models. The articulation and analysis of
inner models of set theory has itself become an abiding, expansive subject through
the infusion of the “ﬁne structure” deﬁnability method and pivotal “covering the-
orems”. The next chapter, written by one of the principals involved, proves an
informative account of the development of the subject through its self-fueling ini-
tiatives.
The investigation of the “determinacy” of inﬁnite games is the most distinc-
tive and intriguing development of modern set theory, and the deep correlations
achieved with large cardinals and inner models the most remarkable and synthetic.
The chapter on determinacy provides a detailed history and compendium of re-
sults that chronicles the emergence of the subject as a central theme of modern
set theory.
The chapter on singular cardinals describes the most recent major initiative in
modern set theory, singular cardinal combinatorics. A critical point was reached in
set theory when singular cardinals, owing to their fast approachability from below,
provide the setting and motivation for fresh, combinatorial arguments and sophis-
ticated relative consistency results that have articulated the transﬁnite landscape
in new and distinctive ways.
Are there alternatives to the new-standard ZFC set theory? None has led to a
comparable, sustained development, but many have arisen owing to a variety of
motivations, and their comparative study have generated interesting mathematical
analysis and problems, as described in the chapter on alternative set theories.
The alternative to set theory as such for developing extensions had been, from
the time of Russell, to have explicit types. But Russell’s original theory was com-
plicated and artiﬁcial as a matter of logic, and set-theoretic, extensional thinking
became basic to mathematics. Types would come to the fore again however, as
new ingredients within mathematics and as part of system building, with the de-
velopment of category theory and the emergence of computer science. The objects
of a category can be taken to be types and the arrows, mappings between the cor-
responding types. The chapter on sets, types, and categories provides a sweeping,
integrative view through to the working out of the “propositions-as-types” doctrine
in Martin-L¨of’s constructive dependent type theory. The chapter on categorical
logic provides a detailed, tightly-knit account of the work of the “Montreal school”
of F. William Lawvere, Andr´e Joyal, and others. These categorical developments
have secured theories of extensions separate from set theory and more directly em-
beddable into the motivational frameworks of mathematical logic. Finally, going
full circle back to Russell, the last chapter of this volume discusses uses of Russell’s
orders, his original ramiﬁcation of types, in modern logic and computer science.
For support and encouragement we warmly thank the following persons: Pro-
ix
Preface

fessor Paul Bartha, Head of the Department of Philosophy, and Professor Nancy
Gallini, Dean of Arts, at the University of British Columbia; Professor Michael
Stingl, Chair of the Department of Philosophy, and Professor Christopher Nicol,
Dean of Arts and Science, at the University of Lethbridge; Jane Spurr, Publica-
tions Administrator in London; Carol Woods, Production Associate in Vancouver;
and our colleagues at Elsevier, Lauren Schultz and Derek Coleman.
As a ﬁnal note, Aki Kanamori would like to express a special gratitude to
the Lichtenberg-Kolleg at G¨ottingen.
Awarded an inaugural 2009-2010 fellow-
ship there, he was able to carry out editorial work in a particularly supportive
environment at the Gauss Sternwarte.
The Editors
x
Preface

CONTRIBUTORS
John L. Bell
University of Western Ontario, Canada.
jbell@uwo.ca
Robert Constable
Cornell University, USA.
rc@cs.cornell.edu
Thomas Forster
University of Cambridge, UK.
tf@dpmms.cam.ac.uk
M. Randall Holmes
Boise State University, USA.
holmes@math.boisestate.edu
Akihiro Kanamori
Boston University, USA.
aki@math.bu.edu
Fairouz Kamareddine
Heriot-Watt University, Scotland, UK.
fairouz@macs.hw.ac.uk
Menachem Kojman
Ben Gurion University, Israel.
kojman@cs.bgu.ac.il
Twan Laan
Switzerland.
twan.laan@gmail.com
Jean A. Larson
University of Florida, USA.
jal@math.ufl.edu
Paul B. Larson
Miami University, USA.
larsonpb@muohio.edu
Thierry Libert
Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.
tlibert@ulb.ac.be

Jean-Pierre Marquis
Universit´e de Montr´eal, Canada.
jean-pierre.marquis@umontreal.ca
William J. Mitchell
University of Florida, USA.
wjm@math.ufl.edu
Gonzalo E. Reyes
Universit´e de Montr´eal, Canada.
reyes@dms.umontreal.ca
Juris Stepr¯ans
York University, Canada.
steprans@yorku.ca
xii
Contributors

SET THEORY FROM CANTOR TO COHEN
Akihiro Kanamori
Set theory is an autonomous and sophisticated ﬁeld of mathematics, enormously
successful not only at its continuing development of its historical heritage but also
at analyzing mathematical propositions and gauging their consistency strength.
But set theory is also distinguished by having begun intertwined with pronounced
metaphysical attitudes, and these have even been regarded as crucial by some of
its great developers. This has encouraged the exaggeration of crises in foundations
and of metaphysical doctrines in general. However, set theory has proceeded in the
opposite direction, from a web of intensions to a theory of extension par excellence,
and like other ﬁelds of mathematics its vitality and progress have depended on a
steadily growing core of mathematical proofs and methods, problems and results.
There is also the stronger contention that from the beginning set theory actually
developed through a progression of mathematical moves, whatever and sometimes
in spite of what has been claimed on its behalf.
What follows is an account of the development of set theory from its beginnings
through the creation of forcing based on these contentions, with an avowedly
Whiggish emphasis on the heritage that has been retained and developed by the
current theory. The whole transﬁnite landscape can be viewed as having been ar-
ticulated by Cantor in signiﬁcant part to solve the Continuum Problem. Zermelo’s
axioms can be construed as clarifying the set existence commitments of a single
proof, of his Well-Ordering Theorem. Set theory is a particular case of a ﬁeld of
mathematics in which seminal proofs and pivotal problems actually shaped the
basic concepts and forged axiomatizations, these transmuting the very notion of
set. There were two main junctures, the ﬁrst being when Zermelo through his
axiomatization shifted the notion of set from Cantor’s range of inherently struc-
tured sets to sets solely structured by membership and governed and generated by
axioms. The second juncture was when the Replacement and Foundation Axioms
were adjoined and a ﬁrst-order setting was established; thus transﬁnite recursion
was incorporated and results about all sets could established through these means,
including results about deﬁnability and inner models. With the emergence of the
cumulative hierarchy picture, set theory can be regarded as becoming a theory of
well-foundedness, later to expand to a study of consistency strength. Throughout,
the subject has not only been sustained by the axiomatic tradition through G¨odel
and Cohen but also fueled by Cantor’s two legacies, the extension of number into
the transﬁnite as transmuted into the theory of large cardinals and the investiga-
tion of deﬁnable sets of reals as transmuted into descriptive set theory. All this
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

2
Akihiro Kanamori
can be regarded as having a historical and mathematical logic internal to set the-
ory, one that is often misrepresented at critical junctures in textbooks (as will be
pointed out). This view, from inside set theory and about itself, serves to shift
the focus to those tensions and strategies familiar to mathematicians as well as to
those moves, often made without much fanfare and sometimes merely linguistic,
that have led to the crucial advances.
1
CANTOR
1.1
Real numbers and countability
Set theory had its beginnings in the great 19th-Century transformation of mathe-
matics, a transformation beginning in analysis. Since the creation of the calculus
by Newton and Leibniz the function concept had been steadily extended from ana-
lytic expressions toward arbitrary correspondences. The ﬁrst major expansion had
been inspired by the explorations of Euler in the 18th Century and featured the
infusion of inﬁnite series methods and the analysis of physical phenomena, like the
vibrating string. In the 19th-Century the stress brought on by the unbridled use of
series of functions led ﬁrst Cauchy and then Weierstrass to articulate convergence
and continuity. With inﬁnitesimals replaced by the limit concept and that cast
in the ǫ-δ language, a level of deductive rigor was incorporated into mathematics
that had been absent for two millenia. Sense for the new functions given in terms
of inﬁnite series could only be developed through carefully speciﬁed deductive pro-
cedures, and proof reemerged as an extension of algebraic calculation and became
basic to mathematics in general, promoting new abstractions and generalizations.
Working out of this tradition Georg Cantor1(1845–1918) in 1870 established a
basic uniqueness theorem for trigonometric series: If such a series converges to zero
everywhere, then all of its coeﬃcients are zero. To generalize Cantor [1872] started
to allow points at which convergence fails, getting to the following formulation:
For a collection P of real numbers, let P ′ be the collection of limit points of P, and
P (n) the result of n iterations of this operation. If a trigonometric series converges
to zero everywhere except on a P where P (n) is empty for some n, then all of its
coeﬃcients are zero.2
It was in [1872] that Cantor provided his formulation of the real numbers in
terms of fundamental sequences of rational numbers, and signiﬁcantly, this was
for the speciﬁc purpose of articulating his proof. With the new results of analysis
to be secured by proof and proof in turn to be based on prior principles the regress
led in the early 1870s to the appearance of several independent formulations of
the real numbers in terms of the rational numbers. It is at ﬁrst quite striking that
the real numbers came to be developed so late, but this can be viewed as part of
1Dauben [1979], Meschkowski [1983], and Purkert-Ilgauds [1987] are mathematical biographies
of Cantor.
2See Kechris-Louveau [1987] for recent developments in the Cantorian spirit about uniqueness
for trigonometric series converging on deﬁnable sets of reals.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
3
the expansion of the function concept which shifted the emphasis from the con-
tinuum taken as a whole to its extensional construal as a collection of objects. In
mathematics objects have been traditionally introduced only with reluctance, but
a more arithmetical rather than geometrical approach to the continuum became
necessary for the articulation of proofs.
The other well-known formulation of the real numbers is due to Richard Dedekind
[1872], through his cuts. Cantor and Dedekind maintained a fruitful correspon-
dence, especially during the 1870s, in which Cantor aired many of his results and
speculations.3 The formulations of the real numbers advanced three important
predispositions for set theory: the consideration of inﬁnite collections, their con-
strual as unitary objects, and the encompassing of arbitrary such possibilities.
Dedekind [1871] had in fact made these moves in his creation of ideals, inﬁnite
collections of algebraic numbers,4 and there is an evident similarity between ideals
and cuts in the creation of new numbers out of old.5 The algebraic numbers would
soon be the focus of a major breakthrough by Cantor. Although both Cantor and
Dedekind carried out an arithmetical reduction of the continuum, they each ac-
commodated its antecedent geometric sense by asserting that each of their real
numbers actually corresponds to a point on the line. Neither theft nor honest toil
suﬃced; Cantor [1872: 128] and Dedekind [1872: III] recognized the need for an
axiom to this eﬀect, a sort of Church’s Thesis of adequacy for the new construal
of the continuum as a collection of objects.
Cantor recalled6 that around this time he was already considering inﬁnite iter-
ations of his P ′ operation using “symbols of inﬁnity”:
P (∞) =
∞
\
n
P (n), P (∞+1) = P (∞)′, P (∞+2), . . . P (∞·2), . . . P (∞2), . . . P (∞∞), . . .
In a crucial conceptual move he began to investigate inﬁnite collections of real
numbers and inﬁnitary enumerations for their own sake, and this led ﬁrst to a basic
articulation of size for the continuum and then to a new, encompassing theory of
counting. Set theory was born on that December 1873 day when Cantor established
3The most complete edition of Cantor’s correspondence is Meschkowski-Nilson [1991]. Ex-
cerpts from the Cantor-Dedekind correspondence from 1872 through 1882 were published in
Noether-Cavaill`es [1937], and excerpts from the 1899 correspondence were published by Zermelo
in the collected works of Cantor [1932]. English translations of the Noether-Cavaill`es excerpts
were published in Ewald [1996: 843ﬀ.]. An English translation of a Zermelo excerpt (retaining
his several errors of transcription) appeared in van Heijenoort [1967: 113ﬀ.].
English transla-
tions of Cantor’s 1899 correspondence with both Dedekind and Hilbert were published in Ewald
[1996: 926ﬀ.].
4The algebraic numbers are those real numbers that are the roots of polynomials with integer
coeﬃcients.
5Dedekind [1872] dated his conception of cuts to 1858, and antecedents to ideals in his work
were also entertained around then. For Dedekind and the foundation of mathematics see Dugac
[1976] and Ferreir´os [2007], who both accord him a crucial role in the development of the frame-
work of set theory.
6See his [1880: 358].

4
Akihiro Kanamori
that the real numbers are uncountable.7 In the next decades the subject was to
blossom through the prodigious progress made by him in the theory of transﬁnite
and cardinal numbers.
The uncountability of the reals was established, of course, via reductio ad ab-
surdum as with the irrationality of
√
2. Both impossibility results epitomize how
a reductio can compel a larger mathematical context allowing for the deniability
of hitherto implicit properties. Be that as it may, Cantor the mathematician ad-
dressed a speciﬁc problem, embedded in the mathematics of the time, in his seminal
[1874] entitled “On a property of the totality of all real algebraic numbers”. After
ﬁrst establishing this property, the countability of the algebraic numbers, Cantor
then established: For any (countable) sequence of reals, every interval contains a
real not in the sequence. Cantor appealed to the order completeness of the reals:
Suppose that s is a sequence of reals and I an interval. Let a < b be the ﬁrst
two reals of s, if any, in I. Then let a′ < b′ be the ﬁrst two reals of s, if any, in
the open interval (a, b); a′′ < b′′ the ﬁrst two reals of s, if any, in (a′, b′); and so
forth. Then however long this process continues, the (non-empty) intersection of
these nested intervals cannot contain any member of s.
By this means Cantor provided a new proof of Joseph Liouville’s result [1844, 1851]
that there are transcendental numbers (real non-algebraic numbers) and only af-
terward did Cantor point out the uncountability of the reals altogether.
This
presentation is suggestive of Cantor’s natural caution in overstepping mathemati-
cal sense at the time.8
Accounts of Cantor’s work have mostly reversed the order for deducing the
existence of transcendental numbers, establishing ﬁrst the uncountability of the
reals and only then drawing the existence conclusion from the countability of
the algebraic numbers.9 In textbooks the inversion may be inevitable, but this
has promoted the misconception that Cantor’s arguments are non-constructive.10
It depends how one takes a proof, and Cantor’s arguments have been implemented
7A set is countable if there is a bijective correspondence between it and the natural numbers
{0, 1, 2, . . .}. The exact date of birth can be ascertained as December 7. Cantor ﬁrst gave a proof
of the uncountability of the reals in a letter to Dedekind of 7 December 1873 (Ewald [1996: 845ﬀ]),
professing that “. . . only today do I believe myself to have ﬁnished with the thing . . .”.
8Dauben [1979: 68ﬀ] suggests that the title and presentation of Cantor [1874] were deliberately
chosen to avoid censure by Kronecker, one of the journal editors.
9Indeed, this is where Wittgenstein [1956: I,Appendix II, 1-3] located what he took to be the
problematic aspects of the talk of uncountability.
10A non-constructive proof typically deduces the existence of a mathematical object without
providing a means for specifying it.
Kac-Ulam [1968: 13] wrote: “The contrast between the
methods of Liouville and Cantor is striking, and these methods provide excellent illustrations of
two vastly diﬀerent approaches toward proving the existence of mathematical objects. Liouville’s
is purely constructive; Cantor’s is purely existential.” See also Moore [1982: 39]. One exception
to the misleading trend is Fraenkel [1930: 237][1953: 75], who from the beginning emphasized the
constructive aspect of diagonalization.
The ﬁrst non-constructive proof widely acknowledged as such was Hilbert’s [1890] of his basis
theorem. Earlier, Dedekind [1888: §159] had established the equivalence of two notions of being
ﬁnite with a non-constructive proof that made an implicit use of the Axiom of Choice.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
5
as algorithms to generate the successive digits of new reals.11
1.2
Continuum Hypothesis and transﬁnite numbers
By his next publication [1878] Cantor had shifted the weight to getting bijective
correspondences, stipulating that two sets have the same power [M¨achtigkeit] iﬀ
there is such a correspondence between them, and established that the reals IR and
the n-dimensional spaces IRn all have the same power. Having made the initial
breach in [1874] with a negative result about the lack of a bijective correspondence,
Cantor secured the new ground with a positive investigation of the possibilities for
having such correspondences.12 With “sequence” tied traditionally to countability
through the indexing, Cantor used “correspondence [Beziehung]”. Just as the dis-
covery of the irrational numbers had led to one of the great achievements of Greek
mathematics, Eudoxus’s theory of geometrical proportions presented in Book V of
Euclid’s Elements and thematically antecedent to Dedekind’s [1872] cuts, Cantor
began his move toward a full-blown mathematical theory of the inﬁnite.
Although holding the promise of a rewarding investigation Cantor did not come
to any powers for inﬁnite sets other than the two as set out in his [1874] proof.
Cantor claimed at the end of [1878: 257]:
Every inﬁnite set of reals either is countable or has the power of the
continuum .
This was the Continuum Hypothesis (CH) in the nascent context. The conjecture
viewed as a primordial question would stimulate Cantor not only to approach the
reals qua extensionalized continuum in an increasingly arithmetical fashion but
also to grapple with fundamental questions of set existence. His triumphs across
a new mathematical context would be like a brilliant light to entice others into
11Gray [1994] shows that Cantor’s original [1874] argument can be implemented by an algo-
rithm that generates the ﬁrst n digits of a transcendental number with time complexity O(2n1/3),
and his later diagonal argument, with a tractable algorithm of complexity O(n2 log2 n log log n).
The original Liouville argument depended on a simple observation about fast convergence, and
the digits of the Liouville numbers can be generated much faster. In terms of 2.3 below, the
later Baire Category Theorem can be viewed as a direct generalization of Cantor’s [1874] result,
and the collection of Liouville numbers provides an explicit example of a co-meager yet mea-
sure zero set of reals (see Oxtoby [1971: §2]). On the other hand, Gray [1994] shows that every
transcendental real is the result of diagonalization applied to some enumeration of the algebraic
reals.
12Cantor developed a bijective correspondence between IR2 and IR by essentially interweaving
the decimal expansions of a pair of reals to deﬁne the associated real, taking care of the countably
many exceptional points like .100 . . . = .099 . . . by an ad hoc shuﬄing procedure.
Such an
argument now seems straightforward, but to have bijectively identiﬁed the plane with the line
was a stunning accomplishment at the time. In a letter to Dedekind of 29 June 1877 Cantor
(Ewald [1996: 860]) wrote, in French in the text, “I see it, but I don’t believe it.”
Cantor’s work inspired a push to establish the “invariance of dimension”, that there can be
no continuous bijection of any IRn onto IRm for m < n, with Cantor [1879] himself providing an
argument. As topology developed, the stress brought on by the lack of ﬁrm ground led Brouwer
[1911] to deﬁnitively establish the invariance of dimension in a seminal paper for algebraic topol-
ogy.

6
Akihiro Kanamori
the study of the inﬁnite, but his inability to establish CH would also cast a long
shadow. Set theory had its beginnings not as some abstract foundation for math-
ematics but rather as a setting for the articulation and solution of the Continuum
Problem: to determine whether there are more than two powers embedded in the
continuum.
In his magisterial Grundlagen [1883] Cantor developed the transﬁnite numbers
[Anzahlen] and the key concept of well-ordering. A well-ordering of a set is a linear
ordering of it according to which every non-empty subset has a least element. No
longer was the inﬁnitary indexing of his trigonometric series investigations mere
contrivance. The “symbols of inﬁnity” became autonomous and extended as the
transﬁnite numbers, the emergence signiﬁed by the notational switch from the ∞
of potentiality to the ω of completion as the last letter of the Greek alphabet.
With this the progression of transﬁnite numbers could be depicted:
0, 1, 2, . . . ω, ω + 1, ω + 2, . . . , ω + ω(= ω·2), . . . , ω2, . . . , ωω, . . . , ωωω, . . .
A corresponding transition from subsets of IRn to a broader concept of set was sig-
naled by the shift in terminology from “point-manifold [Punktmannigfaltigkeit]” to
“set [Menge]”. In this new setting well-orderings conveyed the sense of sequential
counting and transﬁnite numbers served as standards for gauging well-orderings.
As Cantor pointed out, every linear ordering of a ﬁnite set is already a well-
ordering and all such orderings are isomorphic, so that the general sense is only
brought out by inﬁnite sets, for which there are non-isomorphic well-orderings.
Cantor called the set of natural numbers the ﬁrst number class (I) and the set of
numbers whose predecessors are countable the second number class (II). Cantor
conceived of (II) as being bounded above according to a limitation principle and
showed that (II) itself is not countable. Proceeding upward, Cantor called the set
of numbers whose predecessors are in bijective correspondence with (II) the third
number class (III), and so forth. Cantor took a set to be of a higher power than
another if they are not of the same power yet the latter is of the same power as a
subset of the former. Cantor thus conceived of ever higher powers as represented
by number classes and moreover took every power to be so represented. With this
“free creation” of numbers, Cantor [1883: 550] propounded a basic principle that
was to drive the analysis of sets:
“It is always possible to bring any well-deﬁned set into the form of a
well-ordered set.”
He regarded this as a “an especially remarkable law of thought which through
its general validity is fundamental and rich in consequences.”
Sets are to be
well-ordered, and thus they and their powers are to be gauged via the transﬁnite
numbers of his structured conception of the inﬁnite.
The well-ordering principle was consistent with Cantor’s basic view in the
Grundlagen that the ﬁnite and the transﬁnite are all of a piece and uniformly
comprehendable in mathematics,13 a view bolstered by his systematic develop-
13This is emphasized by Hallett [1984] as Cantor’s “ﬁnitism”.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
7
ment of the arithmetic of transﬁnite numbers seamlessly encompassing the ﬁnite
numbers. Cantor also devoted several sections of the Grundlagen to a justiﬁca-
tory philosophy of the inﬁnite, and while this metaphysics can be separated from
the mathematical development, one concept was to suggest ultimate delimitations
for set theory: Beyond the transﬁnite was the “Absolute”, which Cantor even-
tually associated mathematically with the collection of all ordinal numbers and
metaphysically with the transcendence of God.14
The Continuum Problem was never far from this development and could in fact
be seen as an underlying motivation. The transﬁnite numbers were to provide
the framework for Cantor’s two approaches to the problem, the approach through
power and the more direct approach through deﬁnable sets of reals, these each to
initiate vast research programs.
As for the approach through power, Cantor in the Grundlagen established that
the second number class (II) is uncountable, yet any inﬁnite subset of (II) is either
countable or has the same power as (II). Hence, (II) has exactly the property that
Cantor sought for the reals, and he had reduced CH to the positive assertion that
the reals and (II) have the same power. The following in brief is Cantor’s argument
that (II) is uncountable:
Suppose that s is a (countable) sequence of members of (II), say with initial
element a. Let a′ be a member of s, if any, such that a < a′; let a′′ be a member
of s, if any, such that a′ < a′′; and so forth. Then however long this process
continues, the supremum of these numbers, or its successor, is not a member of s.
This argument was reminiscent of his [1874] argument that the reals are un-
countable and suggested a correlation of the reals through their fundamental se-
quence representation with the members of (II) through associated coﬁnal se-
quences.15 However, despite several announcements Cantor could never develop a
workable correlation, an emerging problem in retrospect being that he could not
deﬁne a well-ordering of the reals.
As for the approach through deﬁnable sets of reals, this evolved directly from
Cantor’s work on trigonometric series, the “symbols of inﬁnity” used in the analysis
of the P ′ operation transmuting to the transﬁnite numbers of the second number
class (II).16 In the Grundlagen Cantor studied P ′ for uncountable P and deﬁned
14The “absolute inﬁnite” is a varying but recurring explanatory concept in Cantor’s work; see
Jan´e [1995].
15After describing the similarity between ω and
√
2 as limits of sequences, Cantor [1887: 99]
interestingly correlated the creation of the transﬁnite numbers to the creation of the irrational
numbers, beyond merely breaking new ground in diﬀerent number contexts: “The transﬁnite
numbers are in a certain sense new irrationalities, and in my opinion the best method of deﬁning
the ﬁnite irrational numbers [via Cantor’s fundamental sequences] is wholly similar to, and I
might even say in principle the same as, my method of introducing transﬁnite numbers. One
can say unconditionally: the transﬁnite numbers stand or fall with the ﬁnite irrational numbers:
they are like each other in their innermost being [Wesen]; for the former like the latter are deﬁnite
delimited forms or modiﬁcations of the actual inﬁnite.”
16Ferreir´os [1995] suggests how the formulation of the second number class as a completed
totality with a succeeding transﬁnite number emerged directly from Cantor’s work on the oper-
ation P ′, drawing Cantor’s transﬁnite numbers even closer to his earlier work on trigonometric

8
Akihiro Kanamori
the key concept of a perfect set of reals (non-empty, closed, and containing no
isolated points). Incorporating an observation of Ivar Bendixson [1883], Cantor
showed in the succeeding [1884] that any uncountable closed set of reals is the
union of a perfect set and a countable set. For a set A of reals, A has the perfect
set property iﬀA is countable or else has a perfect subset. Cantor had shown in
particular that closed sets have the perfect set property.
Since Cantor [1884; 1884a] had been able to show that any perfect set has the
power of the continuum, he had established that “CH holds for closed sets”: every
closed set either is countable or has the power of the continuum. Or from his new
vantage point, he had reduced the Continuum Problem to determining whether
there is a closed set of reals of the power of the second number class. He was unable
to do so, but he had initiated a program for attacking the Continuum Problem
that was to be vigorously pursued (cf. 2.3 and 2.5).
1.3
Diagonalization and cardinal numbers
In the ensuing years, unable to resolve the Continuum Problem through direct
correlations with transﬁnite numbers Cantor approached size and order from a
broader perspective that would incorporate the continuum. He identiﬁed power
with cardinal number, an autonomous concept beyond being une fa¸con de parler
about bijective correspondence, and he went beyond well-orderings to the study of
linear order types. Cantor embraced a structured view of sets, when “well-deﬁned”,
as being given together with a linear ordering of their members. Order types and
cardinal numbers resulted from successive abstraction, from a set M to its order
type M and then to its cardinality M.
Almost two decades after his [1874] result that the reals are uncountable, Cantor
in a short note [1891] subsumed it via his celebrated diagonal argument. With it,
he established: For any set L the collection of functions from L into a ﬁxed two-
element set has a higher cardinality than that of L. This result indeed generalized
the [1874] result, since the collection of functions from the natural numbers into
a ﬁxed two-element set has the same cardinality as the reals. Here is how Cantor
gave the argument in general form:17
Let M be the totality of all functions from L taking only the values 0 and 1.
First, L is in bijective correspondence with a subset of M, through the assignment
to each x0 ∈L of the function on L that assigns 1 to x0 and 0 to all other x ∈L.
However, there cannot be a bijective correspondence between M itself and L.
Otherwise, there would be a function φ(x, z) of two variables such that for every
member f of M there would be a z ∈L such that φ(x, z) = f(x) for every x ∈L.
But then, the “diagonalizing” function g(x) = 1 −φ(x, x) cannot be a member of
M since for z0 ∈L, g(z0) ̸= φ(z0, z0)!
series.
17Actually, Cantor took L to be the unit interval of reals presumably to invoke a standard
context, but he was clearly aware of the generality.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
9
In retrospect the diagonal argument can be drawn out from the [1874] proof.18
Cantor had been shifting his notion of set to a level of abstraction beyond sets
of reals and the like, and the casualness of his [1891] may reﬂect an underlying
cohesion with his [1874]. Whether the new proof is really “diﬀerent” from the ear-
lier one, through this abstraction Cantor could now dispense with the recursively
deﬁned nested sets and limit construction, and he could apply his argument to
any set. He had proved for the ﬁrst time that there is a power higher than that
of the continuum and moreover aﬃrmed “the general theorem, that the powers of
well-deﬁned sets have no maximum.”19 The diagonal argument, even to its nota-
tion, would become method, ﬂowing later into descriptive set theory, the G¨odel
Incompleteness Theorem, and recursion theory.
Today it goes without saying that a function from L into a two-element set
corresponds to a subset of L, so that Cantor’s Theorem is usually stated as: For
any set L its power set P(L) = {X | X ⊆L} has a higher cardinality than L.
However, it would be an exaggeration to assert that Cantor was working on power
sets; rather, he had expanded the 19th-Century concept of function by ushering
in arbitrary functions.20 In any case, Cantor would now have had to confront, in
his function context, a general diﬃculty starkly abstracted from the Continuum
Problem: From a well-ordering of a set, a well-ordering of its power set is not
necessarily deﬁnable. The diagonal argument called into question Cantor’s very
notion of set: On the one hand, the argument, simple and elegant, should be
part of set theory and lead to new sets of ever higher cardinality; on the other
hand, these sets do not conform to Cantor’s principle that every set comes with a
(deﬁnable) well-ordering.21
18Moreover, diagonalization as such had already occurred in Paul du Bois-Reymond’s theory
of growth as early as in his [1869]. An argument is manifest in his [1875: 365ﬀ] for showing that
for any sequence of real functions f0, f1, f2, . . . there is a real function g such that for each n,
fn(x) < g(x) for all suﬃciently large reals x.
Diagonalization can be drawn out from Cantor’s [1874] as follows: Starting with a sequence
s of reals and a half-open interval I0, instead of successively choosing delimiting pairs of reals
in the sequence, avoid the members of s one at a time: Let I1 be the left or right half-open
subinterval of I0 demarcated by its midpoint, whichever does not contain the ﬁrst element of s.
Then let I2 be the left or right half-open subinterval of I1 demarcated by its midpoint, whichever
does not contain the second element of s; and so forth. Again, the nested intersection contains
a real not in the sequence s. Abstracting the process in terms of reals in binary expansion, one
is just generating the binary digits of the diagonalizing real.
In that letter of Cantor’s to Dedekind of 7 December 1873 (Ewald [1996: 845ﬀ]) ﬁrst establishing
the uncountability of the reals, there already appears, quite remarkably, a doubly indexed array
of real numbers and a procedure for traversing the array downward and to the right, as in a now
common picturing of the diagonal argument.
19Remarkably, Cantor had already conjectured in the Grundlagen [1883: 590] that the collection
of continuous real functions has the same power as the second number class (II), and that the
collection of all real functions has the same power as the third number class (III). These are
consequences of the later Generalized Continuum Hypothesis and are indicative of the sweep of
Cantor’s conception.
20The “power” in “power set” is from “Potenz” in the German for cardinal exponentiation,
while Cantor’s “power” is from “M¨achtigkeit”.
21This is emphasized in Lavine [1994: IV.2]. Cantor did consider power sets in a letter of 20

10
Akihiro Kanamori
Cantor’s Beitr¨age, published in two parts [1895] and [1897], presented his mature
theory of the transﬁnite. In the ﬁrst part he described his post-Grundlagen work
on cardinal number and the continuum. He quickly posed Cardinal Comparability,
whether
for cardinal numbers a and b, a = b, a < b, or b < a ,
as a property “by no means self-evident” and which will be established later “when
we shall have gained a survey over the ascending sequence of transﬁnite cardinal
numbers and an insight into their connection.” He went on to deﬁne the addition,
multiplication, and exponentiation of cardinal numbers primordially in terms of
set-theoretic operations and functions. If a is the cardinal number of M and b is
the cardinal number of N, then ab is the cardinal number of the collection of all
functions : N →M, i.e. having domain N and taking values in M. The audacity
of considering arbitrary functions from a set N into a set M was encased in a
terminology that reﬂected both its novelty as well as the old view of function as
given by an explicit rule.22 As beﬁts the introduction of new numbers Cantor then
introduced a new notation, one using the Hebrew letter aleph, ℵ. With ℵ0 the
cardinal number of the set of natural numbers Cantor observed that ℵ0 · ℵ0 = ℵ0
and that 2ℵ0 is the cardinal number of continuum. With this he observed that
the [1878] labor of associating the continuum with the plane and so forth could be
reduced to a “few strokes of the pen” in his new arithmetic:
(2ℵ0)ℵ0 = 2ℵ0·ℵ0 = 2ℵ0 .
September 1898 to Hilbert. In it Cantor entertained a notion of “completed set”, one of the
guidelines being that “the collection of all subsets of a completed set M is a completed set.”
Also, in a letter of 10 October 1898 to Hilbert, Cantor pointed out, in an argument focused
on the continuum, that the power set P(S) is in bijective correspondence with the collection of
functions from S into {0, 1}. But in a letter of 9 May 1899 to Hilbert, writing now “set” for
“completed set”, Cantor wrote: “. . . it is our common conviction that the ‘arithmetic continuum’
is a ‘set’ in this sense; the question is whether this truth is provable or whether it is an axiom.
I now incline more to the latter alternative, although I would gladly be convinced by you of
the former.” For the ﬁrst and third letters in context see Moore [2002: 45] and for the second,
Ferreir´os [2007: epilogue]; the letters are in Meschkowski-Nilson [1991].
22Cantor wrote [1895: 486]: “. . . by a ‘covering [Belegung] of N with M,’ we understand a law
by which with every element n of N a deﬁnite element of M is bound up, where one and the
same element of M can come repeatedly into application. The element of M bound up with n
is, in a way, a one-valued function of n, and may be denoted by f(n); it is called a ‘covering
function [Belegungsfunktion] of n.’ The corresponding covering of N will be called f(N).” A
convoluted description! Arbitrary functions on arbitrary domains are now of course commonplace
in mathematics, but several authors at the time referred speciﬁcally to Cantor’s concept of
covering, most notably Zermelo [1904]. Jourdain in his introduction to his English translation
of the Beitr¨age wrote (Cantor [1915: 82]): “The introduction of the concept of ‘covering’ is the
most striking advance in the principles of the theory of transﬁnite numbers from 1885 to 1895
. . . .”
With Cantor initially focusing on bijective correspondence [Beziehung] and these not quite
construed as functions, Dedekind was the ﬁrst to entertain an arbitrary function on an arbitrary
domain. He [1888: §§21,36] formulated φ: S →Z, “a mapping [Abbildung] of a system S in Z”,
in less convoluted terms, but did not consider the totality of such. He quickly moved to the case
Z = S for his theory of chains; see footnote 36.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
11
Cantor only mentioned
ℵ0, ℵ1, ℵ2, . . . , ℵα, . . . ,
these to be the cardinal numbers of the successive number classes from the Grund-
lagen and thus to exhaust all the inﬁnite cardinal numbers.
Cantor went on to present his theory of order types, abstractions of linear order-
ings. He deﬁned an arithmetic of order types and characterized the order type η
of the rationals as the countable dense linear order without endpoints, introducing
the “forth” part of the now familiar back-and-forth argument of model theory.23
He also characterized the order type θ of the reals as the perfect linear order with
a countable dense set; whether a realist or not, Cantor the mathematician was
able to provide a characterization of the continuum.
The second Beitr¨age developed the Grundlagen ideas by focusing on well-
orderings and construing their order types as the ordinal numbers. Here at last was
the general proof via order comparison of well-ordered sets that ordinal numbers
are comparable. Cantor went on to describe ordinal arithmetic as a special case
of the arithmetic of order types and after giving the basic properties of the second
number class deﬁned ℵ1 as its cardinal number. The last sections were given over
to a later preoccupation, the study of ordinal exponentiation in the second number
class. The operation was deﬁned via a transﬁnite recursion and used to establish
a normal form, and the pivotal ǫ-numbers satisfying ǫ = ωǫ were analyzed.
The two parts of the Beitr¨age are not only distinct by subject matter, cardinal
number and the continuum vs. ordinal number and well-ordering, but between
them there developed a wide, irreconcilable breach. In the ﬁrst part nowhere is
the [1891] result a < 2a stated even in a special case; rather, it is made clear
[1895: 495] that the procession of transﬁnite cardinal numbers is to be secured
through their construal as the alephs.
However, the second Beitr¨age does not
mention any aleph beyond ℵ1, nor does it mention CH, which could now have
been stated as
2ℵ0 = ℵ1.
(Cantor did state this in an 1895 letter.24) Ordinal comparability was secured,
but cardinal comparability was not reduced to it. Every well-ordered set has an
aleph as its cardinal number, but where is 2ℵ0 in the aleph sequence?
Cantor’s initial [1874] proof led to the Continuum Problem.
That problem
was embedded in the very interstices of the early development of set theory, and
in fact the structures that Cantor built, while now of intrinsic interest, emerged
in signiﬁcant part out of eﬀorts to articulate and solve the problem.
Cantor’s
[1891] diagonal argument, arguably a transmutation of his initial [1874] proof, ex-
acerbated a growing tension between having well-orderings and admitting sets of
arbitrary functions (or power sets). David Hilbert, when he presented his famous
list of problems at the 1900 International Congress of Mathematicians at Paris,
23See Plotkin [1993] for an analysis of the emergence of the back-and-forth argument.
24See Moore [1989: 99].

12
Akihiro Kanamori
made the Continuum Problem the very ﬁrst problem and intimated Cantor’s dif-
ﬁculty by suggesting the desirability of “actually giving” a well-ordering of the
reals.
The next, 1904 International Congress of Mathematicians at Heidelberg was to
be a generational turning point for the development of set theory. Julius K˝onig
delivered a lecture in which he provided a detailed argument that purportedly
established that 2ℵ0 is not an aleph, i.e. that the continuum is not well-orderable.
The argument combined the now familiar inequality ℵα < ℵℵ0
α for α of coﬁnality
ω with a result from Felix Bernstein’s G¨ottingen dissertation [1901: 49] which alas
does not universally hold.25 Cantor was understandably upset with the prospect
that the continuum would simply escape the number context that he had devised
for its analysis.
Accounts diﬀer on how the issue was resolved. Although one has Zermelo ﬁnding
an error within a day of the lecture, the weight of evidence is for Hausdorﬀhaving
found the error.26 Whatever the resolution, the torch had passed from Cantor to
the next generation. Zermelo would go on to formulate his Well-Ordering Theorem
and axiomatize set theory, and Hausdorﬀ, to develop the higher transﬁnite in his
study of order types and coﬁnalities.27
2
MATHEMATIZATION
2.1
Axiom of Choice and axiomatization
Ernst Zermelo28 (1871–1953), born when Cantor was establishing his trigonometric
series results, had begun to investigate Cantorian set theory at G¨ottingen under the
inﬂuence of Hilbert. In just over a month after the Heidelberg congress, Zermelo
[1904] formulated what he soon called the Axiom of Choice (AC) and with it,
established his Well-Ordering Theorem:
Every set can be well-ordered .
25The coﬁnality of an ordinal number α is the least ordinal number β such that there is a set
of form {γξ | ξ < β} unbounded in α, i.e. for any η < α there is an ξ < β such that η ≤γξ < α.
α is regular if its coﬁnality is itself, and otherwise α is singular. There concepts were not clariﬁed
until the work of Hausdorﬀ, brought together in his [1908], discussed in 2.6.
K˝onig applied Bernstein’s equality ℵℵ0
α
= ℵα·2ℵ0 as follows: If 2ℵ0 were an aleph, say ℵβ, then
by Bernstein’s equality ℵℵ0
β+ω = ℵβ+ω · 2ℵ0 = ℵβ+ω, contradicting K˝onig’s inequality. However,
Bernstein’s equality fails when α has coﬁnality ω and 2ℵ0 < ℵα.
K˝onig’s published account
[1905] acknowledged the gap.
26See Grattan-Guinness [2000, 334] and Purkert [2002].
27And as with many incorrect proofs, there would be positive residues: Zermelo soon general-
ized K˝onig’s inequality to the fundamental Zermelo-K˝onig inequality for cardinal exponentiation,
which implies that the coﬁnality of 2ℵα is larger than α, and Hausdorﬀ[1904: 571] published his
recursion formula ℵℵα
β+1 = ℵβ+1 · ℵℵα
β , in form like Bernstein’s result.
28Ebbinghaus [2007] is a substantive biography of Zermelo. See Kanamori [1997; 2004] for
Zermelo’s work in set theory.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
13
Zermelo thereby shifted the notion of set away from the implicit assumption of
Cantor’s principle that every well-deﬁned set is well-ordered and replaced that
principle by an explicit axiom about a wider notion of set, incipiently unstructured
but soon to be given form by axioms.
In retrospect, Zermelo’s argument for his Well-Ordering Theorem can be viewed
as pivotal for the development of set theory. To summarize the argument, sup-
pose that x is a set to be well-ordered, and through Zermelo’s Axiom-of-Choice
hypothesis assume that the power set P(x) = {y | y ⊆x} has a choice function,
i.e. a function γ such that for every non-empty member y of P(x), γ(y) ∈y. Call
a subset y of x a γ-set if there is a well-ordering R of y such that for each a ∈y,
γ({z | z /∈y or z R a fails}) = a .
That is, each member of y is what γ “chooses” from what does not already precede
that member according to R. The main observation is that γ-sets cohere in the
following sense: If y is a γ-set with well-ordering R and z is a γ-set with well-
ordering S, then y ⊆z and S is a prolongation of R, or vice versa. With this, let
w be the union of all the γ-sets, i.e. all the γ-sets put together. Then w too is a
γ-set, and by its maximality it must be all of x and hence x is well-ordered.
The converse to this result is immediate in that if x is well-ordered, then the
power set P(x) has a choice function.29 Not only did Zermelo’s argument analyze
the connection between having well-orderings and having choice functions on power
sets, it anticipated in its deﬁning of approximations and taking of a union the proof
procedure for von Neumann’s Transﬁnite Recursion Theorem (cf. 3.1).30
Zermelo [1904: 516] noted without much ado that his result implies that every
inﬁnite cardinal number is an aleph and satisﬁes m2 = m, and that it secured
Cardinal Comparability — so that the main issues raised by Cantor’s Beitr¨age
are at once resolved. Zermelo maintained that the Axiom of Choice, to the ef-
fect that every set has a choice function, is a “logical principle” which “is applied
without hesitation everywhere in mathematical deduction”, and this is reﬂected
in the Well-Ordering Theorem being regarded as a theorem. The axiom is consis-
tent with Cantor’s view of the ﬁnite and transﬁnite as unitary, in that it posits
for inﬁnite sets an unproblematic feature of ﬁnite sets. On the other hand, the
Well-Ordering Theorem shifted the weight from Cantor’s well-orderings with their
residually temporal aspect of numbering through successive choices to the use of a
function for making simultaneous choices.31 Cantor’s work had served to exacer-
bate a growing discord among mathematicians with respect to two related issues:
whether inﬁnite collections can be mathematically investigated at all, and how far
the function concept is to be extended. The positive use of an arbitrary function
29Namely, with ≺a well-ordering of x, for each non-empty member y of P(x), let γ(y) be the
the ≺-least member of y.
30See Kanamori [1997] for more on the signiﬁcance of Zermelo’s argument, in particular as a
ﬁxed point argument.
31Zermelo himself stressed the importance of simultaneous choices over successive choices in
criticism of an argument of Cantor’s for the Well-Ordering Theorem in 1899 correspondence with
Dedekind, discussed in 2.2. See Cantor [1932: 451] or van Heijenoort [1967: 117].

14
Akihiro Kanamori
operating on arbitrary subsets of a set having been made explicit, there was open
controversy after the appearance of Zermelo’s proof.
This can be viewed as a
turning point for mathematics, with the subsequent tilting toward the acceptance
of the Axiom of Choice symptomatic of a conceptual shift in mathematics.
In response to his critics Zermelo published a second proof [1908] of his Well-
Ordering Theorem, and with axiomatization assuming a general methodological
role in mathematics he also published the ﬁrst full-ﬂedged axiomatization [1908a]
of set theory. But as with Cantor’s work this was no idle structure building but a
response to pressure for a new mathematical context. In this case it was not for the
formulation and solution of a problem like the Continuum Problem, but rather to
clarify a speciﬁc proof. In addition to codifying generative set-theoretic principles,
a substantial motive for Zermelo’s axiomatizing set theory was to buttress his Well-
Ordering Theorem by making explicit its underlying set existence assumptions.32
Initiating the ﬁrst major transmutation of the notion of set after Cantor, Zermelo
thereby ushered in a new abstract, prescriptive view of sets as structured solely by
membership and governed and generated by axioms, a view that would soon come
to dominate. Thus, proof played a crucial role by stimulating an axiomatization
of a ﬁeld of study and a corresponding transmutation of its underlying notions.
The objections raised against Zermelo’s ﬁrst proof [1904] mainly played on the
ambiguities of a γ-set’s well-ordering being only implicit, as for Cantor’s sets,
and on the deﬁnition of the well-ordering being impredicative — deﬁned as a γ-
set and so drawn from a collection of which it is already a member. Largely to
preclude these objections Zermelo in his second [1908] proof resorted to a rendition
of orderings in terms of segments and inclusion ﬁrst used by Gerhard Hessenberg
[1906: 674ﬀ] and a closure approach with roots in Dedekind [1888].
Instead of
extending initial segments toward the desired well-ordering, Zermelo got at the
collection of its ﬁnal segments by taking an intersection in a larger setting.33
With his [1908a] axiomatization, Zermelo “started from set theory as it is his-
torically given” to seek out principles suﬃciently restrictive “to exclude all contra-
dictions” and suﬃciently wide “to retain all that is valuable”. However, he would
transform set theory by making explicit new existence principles and promoting
a generative point of view. Zermelo had begun working out an axiomatization as
early as 1905, addressing issues raised by his [1904] proof.34 The mature presen-
tation is a precipitation of seven axioms, and these do not just reﬂect “set theory
as it is historically given”, but explicitly buttress his proof(s) of the Well-Ordering
Theorem.
32Moore [1982: 155ﬀ] supports this contention using items from Zermelo’s Nachlass.
33To well-order a set M using a choice function ϕ on P(M), Zermelo deﬁned a Θ-chain to be
a collection Θ of subsets of M such that: (a) M ∈Θ; (b) if A ∈Θ, then A −{ϕ(A)} ∈Θ; and
(c) if Z ⊆Θ, then T Z ∈Θ. He then took the intersection I of all Θ-chains, and observed that
I is again a Θ-chain. Finally, he showed that I provides a well-ordering of M given by: a ≺b iﬀ
there is an A ∈I such that a /∈A and b ∈A. I thus consists of the ﬁnal segments of the same
well-ordering as provided by the [1904] proof. Note that this second proof is less parsimonious
than the [1904] proof, as it uses the power set of the power set of M.
34This is documented by Moore [1982: 155ﬀ] with items from Zermelo’s Nachlass.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
15
Zermelo’s seven set axioms, now formalized, constitute the familiar theory Z,
Zermelo set theory: Extensionality, Elementary Sets (∅, {a}, {a, b}), Separation,
Power Set, Union, Choice, and Inﬁnity. His setting allowed for urelements, ob-
jects without members yet distinct from each other. But Zermelo focused on sets,
and his Axiom of Extensionality announced the espousal of an extensional view-
point. In line with this AC, a “logical principle” in [1904] expressed in terms of an
informal choice function, was framed less instrumentally: It posited for a set con-
sisting of non-empty, pairwise disjoint sets the existence of a set that meets each
one in a unique element.35 However, Separation retained an intensional aspect
with its “separating out” of a new set from a given set using a deﬁnite property,
where a property is “deﬁnite [deﬁnit] if the fundamental relations of the domain,
by means of the axioms and the universally valid laws of logic, determine without
arbitrariness whether it holds or not.” But with no underlying logic formalized,
the ambiguity of deﬁnite property would become a major issue. With Inﬁnity and
Power Set Zermelo provided for suﬃciently rich settings for set-theoretic construc-
tions. Tempering the logicians’ extravagant and problematic “all” the Power Set
axiom provided the provenance for “all” for subsets of a given set, just as Sep-
aration served to capture “all” for elements of a given set satisfying a property.
Finally, Union and Choice completed the encasing of Zermelo’s proof(s) of his Well-
Ordering Theorem in the necessary set existence principles. Notably, Zermelo’s
recursive [1904] argumentation also brought him in proximity of the Transﬁnite
Recursion Theorem and thus of Replacement, the next axiom to be adjoined in
the subsequent development of set theory (cf. 3.1).
Fully two decades earlier Dedekind [1888] had provided an incisive analysis of the
natural numbers and their arithmetic in terms of sets [Systeme], and several over-
lapping aspects can serve as points of departure for Zermelo’s axiomatization.36
The most immediate is how Dedekind’s argumentation extends to Zermelo’s [1908]
proof of the Well-Ordering Theorem, which in the transﬁnite setting brings out
the role of AC. Both Dedekind and Zermelo set down rules for sets in large part
to articulate arguments involving simple set operations like “set of”, union, and
intersection. In particular, both had to argue for the equality of sets resulting
after involved manipulations, and extensionality became operationally necessary.
However vague the initial descriptions of sets, sets are to be determined solely by
35Russell [1906] had previously arrived at this form, his Multiplicative Axiom. The elimination
of the “pairwise disjoint” by going to a choice function formulation can be established with the
Union Axiom, and this is the only use of that axiom in the second, [1908] proof of the Well-
Ordering Theorem.
36In current terminology, Dedekind [1888] considered arbitrary sets S and mappings φ: S →S
and deﬁned a chain [Kette] to be a K ⊆S such that φ“K ⊆K. For A ⊆S, the chain of A is the
intersection of all chains K ⊇A. A set N is simply inﬁnite iﬀthere is an injective φ: N →N such
that N −φ“N ̸= ∅. Letting 1 be a distinguished element of N −φ“N ̸= ∅Dedekind considered the
chain of {1}, the chain of {φ(1)}, and so forth. Having stated an inherent induction principle,
he proceeded to show that these sets have all the ordering and arithmetical properties of the
natural numbers (that are established nowadays in texts for the (von Neumann) ﬁnite ordinals).

16
Akihiro Kanamori
their elements, and the membership question is to be determinate.37 The looseness
of Dedekind’s description of sets allowed him [1888: §66] the latitude to “prove”
the existence of inﬁnite sets, but Zermelo just stated the Axiom of Inﬁnity as a
set existence principle.
The main point of departure has to do with the larger issue of the role of proof
for articulating sets. By Dedekind’s time proof had become basic for mathematics,
and indeed his work did a great deal to enshrine proof as the vehicle for algebraic
abstraction and generalization.38 Like algebraic constructs, sets were new to math-
ematics and would be incorporated by setting down the rules for their proofs. Just
as calculations are part of the sense of numbers, so proofs would be part of the
sense of sets, as their “calculations”. Just as Euclid’s axioms for geometry had
set out the permissible geometric constructions, the axioms of set theory would
set out the speciﬁc rules for set generation and manipulation.
But unlike the
emergence of mathematics from marketplace arithmetic and Greek geometry, sets
and transﬁnite numbers were neither laden nor buttressed with substantial an-
tecedents. Like strangers in a strange land stalwarts developed a familiarity with
them guided hand in hand by their axiomatic framework. For Dedekind [1888] it
had suﬃced to work with sets by merely giving a few deﬁnitions and properties,
those foreshadowing Extensionality, Union, and Inﬁnity. Zermelo [1908a] provided
more rules: Separation, Power Set, and Choice.
Zermelo [1908], with its rendition of orderings in terms of segments and inclu-
sion, and Zermelo [1908a], which at the end cast Cantor’s theory of cardinality
in terms of functions cast as set constructs, brought out Zermelo’s set-theoretic
reductionism. Zermelo pioneered the reduction of mathematical concepts and ar-
guments to set-theoretic concepts and arguments from axioms, based on sets doing
the work of mathematical objects. Zermelo’s analyses moreover served to draw
out what would come to be generally regarded as set-theoretic out of the presump-
tively logical. This would be particularly salient for Inﬁnity and Power Set and was
strategically advanced by the relegation of property considerations to Separation.
Zermelo’s axiomatization also shifted the focus away from the transﬁnite num-
bers to an abstract view of sets structured solely by ∈and simple operations. For
Cantor the transﬁnite numbers had become central to his investigation of deﬁnable
sets of reals and the Continuum Problem, and sets had emerged not only equipped
with orderings but only as the developing context dictated, with the “set of” op-
eration never iterated more than three or four times. For Zermelo his second,
[1908] proof of the Well-Ordering Theorem served to eliminate any residual role
that the transﬁnite numbers may have played in the ﬁrst proof and highlighted
the set-theoretic operations. This approach to (linear) ordering was to preoccupy
his followers for some time, and through this period the elimination of the use of
37Dedekind [1888: §2] begins a footnote to his statement about extensional determination with:
“In what manner this determination is brought about, and whether we know a way of deciding
upon it, is a matter of indiﬀerence for all that follows; the general laws to be developed in no
way depend upon it; they hold under all circumstances.”
38Cf. the ﬁrst sentence of the preface to Dedekind [1888]: “In science nothing capable of proof
ought to be accepted without proof.”

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
17
transﬁnite numbers where possible, like ideal numbers, was regarded as salutary.39
Hence, Zermelo rather than Cantor should be regarded as the creator of abstract
set theory.
Outgrowing Zermelo’s pragmatic purposes axiomatic set theory could not long
forestall the Cantorian initiative, as even 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 could not be asserted directly,
and in the 1920s John von Neumann was to fully incorporate the transﬁnite using
Replacement (cf. 3.1).40 On the other hand, Zermelo’s axioms had the advantages
of schematic simplicity and open-endedness. The generative set formation axioms,
especially Power Set and Union, were to lead to Zermelo’s [1930] cumulative hier-
archy picture of sets, and the vagueness of the deﬁnit property in the Separation
Axiom was to invite Thoralf Skolem’s [1923] proposal to base it on ﬁrst-order logic,
enforcing extensionalization (cf. 3.2).
2.2
Logic and paradox
At this point, the incursions of a looming tradition can no longer be ignored.
Gottlob Frege is regarded as the greatest philosopher of logic since Aristotle for
developing quantiﬁcational logic in his Begriﬀsschrift [1879], establishing a logical
foundation for arithmetic in his Grundlagen [1884], and generally stimulating the
analytic tradition in philosophy.
The architect of that tradition was Bertrand
Russell who in his earlier years, inﬂuenced by Frege and Giuseppe Peano, wanted
to found all of mathematics on the certainty of logic. But from a logical point of
view Russell [1903] became exercised with paradox. He had arrived at Russell’s
Paradox in late 1901 by analyzing Cantor’s diagonal argument applied to the
class of all classes,41 a version of which is now known as Cantor’s Paradox of
the largest cardinal number. Russell [1903: §301] also refocused the Burali-Forti
Paradox of the largest ordinal number, after reading Cesare Burali-Forti’s [1897].42
Russell’s Paradox famously led to the tottering of Frege’s mature formal system,
the Grundgesetze [1893, 1903].43
39Some notable examples: Lindel¨of [1905] proved the Cantor-Bendixson result, that every
uncountable closed set is the union of a perfect set and a countable set, without using transﬁnite
numbers.
Suslin’s [1917], discussed in 2.5, had the unassuming title, “On a deﬁnition of the
Borel sets without transﬁnite numbers”, hardly indicative of its results, so fundamental for
descriptive set theory. And Kuratowski [1922] showed, pursuing the approach of Zermelo [1908],
that inclusion chains deﬁned via transﬁnite recursion with intersections taken at limits can also
be deﬁned without transﬁnite numbers. Kuratowski [1922] essentially formulated Zorn’s Lemma,
and this was the main success of the push away from explicit well-orderings. Especially after the
appearance of Zorn [1935] this recasting of AC came to dominate in algebra and topology.
40Textbooks usually establish the Well-Ordering Theorem by ﬁrst introducing Replacement,
formalizing transﬁnite recursion, and only then deﬁning the well-ordering using (von Neumann)
ordinals; this amounts to another historical misrepresentation, but one that resonates with how
acceptance of Zermelo’s proof broke the ground for formal transﬁnite recursion.
41Grattan-Guinness [1974], Coﬀa [1979], Moore [1988], and Garciadiego [1992] describe the
evolution of Russell’s Paradox.
42Moore-Garciadiego [1981] and Garciadiego [1992] describe the evolution of the Burali-Forti
Paradox.
43See the exchange of letters between Russell and Frege in van Heijenoort [1967: 124ﬀ]. Rus-
sell’s Paradox showed that Frege’s Basic Law V is inconsistent.

18
Akihiro Kanamori
Russell’s own reaction was to build a complex logical structure, one used later
to develop mathematics in Whitehead and Russell’s 1910-3 Principia Mathemat-
ica. Russell’s ramiﬁed theory of types is a scheme of logical deﬁnitions based on
orders and types indexed by the natural numbers. Russell proceeded “intension-
ally”; he conceived this scheme as a classiﬁcation of propositions based on the
notion of propositional function, a notion not reducible to membership (exten-
sionality). Proceeding in modern fashion, we may say that the universe of the
Principia consists of objects stratiﬁed into disjoint types Tn, where T0 consists of
the individuals, Tn+1 ⊆{Y | Y ⊆Tn}, and the types Tn for n > 0 are further
ramiﬁed into orders Oi
n with Tn = S
i Oi
n. An object in Oi
n is to be deﬁned either
in terms of individuals or of objects in some ﬁxed Oj
m for some j < i and m ≤n,
the deﬁnitions allowing for quantiﬁcation only over Oj
m. This precludes Russell’s
Paradox and other “vicious circles”, as objects consist only of previous objects and
are built up through deﬁnitions referring only to previous stages. However, in this
system it is impossible to quantify over all objects in a type Tn, and this makes
the formulation of numerous mathematical propositions at best cumbersome and
at worst impossible. Russell was led to introduce his Axiom of Reducibility, which
asserts that for each object there is a predicative object consisting of exactly the
same objects, where an object is predicative if its order is the least greater than that
of its constituents. This axiom reduced consideration to individuals, predicative
objects consisting of individuals, predicative objects consisting of predicative ob-
jects consisting of individuals, and so on—the simple theory of types. In traumatic
reaction to his paradox Russell had built a complex system of orders and types
only to collapse it with his Axiom of Reducibility, a fearful symmetry imposed by
an artful dodger.
The mathematicians did not imbue the paradoxes with such potency. Unlike
Russell who wanted to get at everything but found that he could not, they started
with what could be got at and peered beyond. And as with the invention of the
irrational numbers, the outward push eventually led to the positive subsumption
of the paradoxes.
Cantor in 1899 correspondence with Dedekind considered the collection Ωof all
ordinal numbers as in the Burali-Forti Paradox, but he used it positively to give
mathematical expression to his Absolute.44 First, he distinguished between two
kinds of multiplicities (Vielheiten): There are multiplicities such that when taken
as a unity (Einheit) lead to a contradiction; such multiplicities he called “absolutely
inﬁnite or inconsistent multiplicities” and noted that the “totality of everything
thinkable” is such a multiplicity. A multiplicity that can be thought of without
contradiction as “being together” he called a “consistent multiplicity or a ‘set
[Menge]”’. Cantor then used the Burali-Forti Paradox argument to point out that
the class Ωof all ordinal numbers is an inconsistent multiplicity. He proceeded to
44See footnote 3 for more about the 1899 correspondence.
Purkert [1989: 57ﬀ] argues that
Cantor had already arrived at the Burali-Forti Paradox around the time of the Grundlagen
[1883]. On the interpretations supported in the text all of the logical paradoxes grew out of
Cantor’s work — with Russell shifting the weight to paradox.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
19
argue that every set can be well-ordered through a presumably recursive procedure
whereby a well-ordering is deﬁned through successive choices. The set must get
well-ordered, else all of Ωwould be injectible into it, so that the set would have
been an inconsistent multiplicity instead.45
Zermelo found Russell’s Paradox independently and probably in 1902,46 but
like Cantor, he did not regard the emergence of the paradoxes so much as a crisis
as an overall delimitation for sets. In the Zermelian generative view [1908: 118],
“. . . if in set theory we conﬁne ourselves to a number of established principles such
as those that constitute the basis of our proof — principles that enable us to form
initial sets and to derive new sets from given ones – then all such contradictions
can be avoided.” For the ﬁrst theorem of his axiomatic theory Zermelo [1908a]
subsumed Russell’s Paradox, putting it to use as is done now to establish that for
any set x there is a y ⊆x such that y /∈x, and hence that there is no universal
set.47
The diﬀering concerns of Frege-Russell logic and the emerging set theory are
further brought out by the analysis of the function concept as discussed below in
2.4, and those issues are here rehearsed with respect to the existence of the null
class, or empty set.48
Frege in his Grundlagen [1884] eschewed the terms “set
[Menge]” and “class [Klasse]”, but in any case the extension of the concept “not
identical with itself” was key to his deﬁnition of zero as a logical object. Ernst
Schr¨oder, in the ﬁrst volume [1890] of his major work on the algebra of logic, held
a traditional view that a class is merely a collection of objects, without the { }
so to speak. In his review [1895] of Schr¨oder’s [1890], Frege argued that Schr¨oder
cannot both maintain this view of classes and assert that there is a null class, since
the null class contains no objects. For Frege, logic enters in giving unity to a class
as the extension of a concept and thus makes the null class viable.
It is among the set theorists that the null class, qua empty set, emerged to the
fore as an elementary concept and a basic building block. Cantor himself did not
dwell on the empty set. At one point he did write [1880: 355] that “the identity
of two pointsets P and Q will be expressed by the formula P ≡Q”; deﬁned
disjoint sets as “lacking intersection”; and then wrote [1880: 356] “for the absence
of points . . . we choose the letter O; P ≡O indicates that the set P contains no
single point.” (So, “≡O” is arguably more like a predication for being empty at
this stage.)
Dedekind [1888: §2] deliberately excluded the empty set [Nullsystem] “for cer-
tain reasons”, though he saw its possible usefulness in other contexts. Zermelo
[1908a] wrote in his Axiom II: “There exists a (improper [uneigentliche]) set, the
null set [Nullmenge] 0, that contains no element at all.” Something of intension re-
45G.H. Hardy [1903] and Philip Jourdain [1904, 1905] also gave arguments involving the injec-
tion of Ω, but such an approach would only get codiﬁed at a later stage in the development of
set theory in the work of von Neumann [1925] (cf. 3.1).
46See Kanamori [2004: §1].
47In 2.6 Hartogs’s Theorem is construed as a positive subsumption of that other, the Burali-
Forti Paradox.
48For more on the empty set, see Kanamori [2003a].

20
Akihiro Kanamori
mained in the “(improper [uneigentliche])”, though he did point out that because
of his Axiom I, the Axiom of Extensionality, there is a single empty set. Finally,
Hausdorﬀ[1914] unequivocally opted for the empty set [Nullmenge]. However, a
hint of predication remained when he wrote [1914: 3]: “. . . the equation A = 0
means that the set A has no element, vanishes [verschwindet], is empty.” The
use to which Hausdorﬀput “0” is much as “∅” is used in modern mathemat-
ics, particularly to indicate the extension of the conjunction of mutually exclusive
properties.
The set theorists, unencumbered by philosophical motivations or traditions,
attributed little signiﬁcance to the empty set beyond its usefulness.
Although
embracing both extensionality and the null class may engender philosophical diﬃ-
culties for the logic of classes, the empty set became commonplace in mathematics
simply through use, like its intimate, zero.
2.3
Measure, category, and Borel hierarchy
During this period Cantor’s two main legacies, the investigation of deﬁnable sets
of reals and the extension of number into the transﬁnite, were further incorporated
into mathematics in direct initiatives. The axiomatic tradition would be comple-
mented by another, one that would draw its life more directly from mathematics.
The French analysts Emile Borel, Ren´e Baire, and Henri Lebesgue took on
the investigation of deﬁnable sets of reals in what was to be a paradigmatically
constructive approach. Cantor [1884] had established the perfect set property for
closed sets and formulated the concept of content for a set of reals, but he did not
pursue these matters. With these as antecedents the French work would lay the
basis for measure theory as well as descriptive set theory, the deﬁnability theory
of the continuum.49
Soon after completing his thesis Borel [1898: 46ﬀ] considered for his theory of
measure those sets of reals obtainable by starting with the intervals and closing
oﬀunder complementation and countable union. The formulation was axiomatic
and in eﬀect impredicative, and seen in this light, bold and imaginative; the sets
are now known as the Borel sets and quite well-understood.
Baire in his thesis [1899] took on a dictum of Lejeune Dirichlet’s that a real
function is any arbitrary assignment of reals, and diverging from the 19th-Century
preoccupation with pathological examples, sought a constructive approach via
pointwise limits. His Baire class 0 consists of the continuous real functions, and
for countable ordinal numbers α > 0, Baire class α consists of those functions f not
in any previous class yet obtainable as pointwise limits of sequences f0, f1, f2, ...
of functions in previous classes, i.e. f(x) = limn→∞fn(x) for every real x. The
functions in these classes are now known as the Baire functions, and this was the
ﬁrst stratiﬁcation into a transﬁnite hierarchy after Cantor.50
49See Kanamori [1995] for more on the emergence of descriptive set theory. See Moschovakis
[1980] or Kanamori [2003] for the mathematical development.
50Baire mainly studied the ﬁnite levels, particularly the classes 1 and 2. He [1898] pointed

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
21
Baire’s thesis also introduced the now basic concept of category. A set of reals
is nowhere dense iﬀits closure under limits includes no open set, and a set of reals
is meager (or of ﬁrst category) iﬀit is a countable union of nowhere dense sets —
otherwise, it is of second category. Baire established the Baire Category Theorem:
Every non-empty open set of reals is of second category. His work also suggested a
basic property: A set of reals has the Baire property iﬀit has a meager symmetric
diﬀerence with some open set. Straightforward arguments show that every Borel
set has the Baire property.
Lebesgue’s thesis [1902] is fundamental for modern integration theory as the
source of his concept of measurability. Inspired in part by Borel’s ideas but no-
tably containing non-constructive aspects, Lebesgue’s concept of measurable set
through its closure under countable unions subsumed the Borel sets, and his ana-
lytic deﬁnition of measurable function through its closure under pointwise limits
subsumed the Baire functions. Category and measure are quite diﬀerent; there
is a co-meager (complement of a meager) set of reals that has Lebesgue measure
zero.51 Lebesgue’s ﬁrst major work in a distinctive direction would be the seminal
paper in descriptive set theory:
In the memoir [1905] Lebesgue investigated the Baire functions, stressing that
they are exactly the functions deﬁnable via analytic expressions (in a sense made
precise). He ﬁrst established a correlation with the Borel sets by showing that
they are exactly the pre-images of open intervals via Baire functions. With this
he introduced the ﬁrst hierarchy for the Borel sets, his open sets of class α not
being in any previous class yet being pre-images of some open interval via some
Baire class α function. After verifying various closure properties and providing
characterizations for these classes Lebesgue established two main results.
The
ﬁrst demonstrated the necessity of exhausting the countable ordinal numbers: The
Baire hierarchy is proper, i.e. for every countable α there is a Baire function of
class α; correspondingly the hierarchy for the Borel sets is analogously proper.
The second established transcendence beyond countable closure for his concept of
measurability: There is a Lebesgue measurable function which is not in any Baire
class; correspondingly there is a Lebesgue measurable set which is not a Borel set.
The ﬁrst result was the ﬁrst of all hierarchy results, and a precursor of funda-
mental work in mathematical logic in that it applied Cantor’s enumeration and
diagonalization argument to achieve a transcendence to a next level. Lebesgue’s
second result was also remarkable in that he actually provided an explicitly de-
ﬁned set, one that was later seen to be the ﬁrst example of a non-Borel analytic
set (cf. 2.5). For this purpose, the reals were for the ﬁrst time regarded as en-
coding something else, namely countable well-orderings, and this not only further
embedded the transﬁnite into the investigation of sets of reals, but foreshadowed
out that Dirichlet’s function that assigns 1 to rationals and 0 to irrationals is in class 2 and also
observed with a non-constructive appeal to Cantor’s cardinality argument that there are real
functions that are not Baire.
51See footnote 11. See Hawkins [1975] for more on the development of Lebesgue measurability.
See Oxtoby [1971] for an account of category and measure in juxtaposition.

22
Akihiro Kanamori
the later coding results of mathematical logic.
Lebesgue’s results, along with the later work in descriptive set theory, can be
viewed as pushing the mathematical frontier of the actual inﬁnite past ℵ0, which
arguably had achieved a mathematical domesticity through increasing use in the
late 19th-Century, through Cantor’s second number class to ℵ1. It is somewhat
ironic but also revealing, then, that this grew out of work by analysts with a
deﬁnite constructive bent. Baire [1899: 36] viewed the inﬁnite ordinal numbers
and hence his function hierarchy as merely une fa¸con de parler, and continued to
view inﬁnite concepts only in potentiality. Borel [1898] took a pragmatic approach
and seemed to accept the countable ordinal numbers. Lebesgue was more equivocal
but still accepting; recalling Cantor’s early attitude Lebesgue regarded the ordinal
numbers as an indexing system, “symbols” for classes, but nonetheless he worked
out their basic properties, even providing a formulation [1905: 149] of proof by
transﬁnite induction. All three analysts expressed misgivings about AC and its
use in Zermelo’s proof.52
As descriptive set theory was to develop, a major concern became the extent of
the regularity properties, those properties indicative of well-behaved sets of reals
of which Lebesgue measurability, the Baire property, and the perfect set property
are the prominent examples.
These properties seemed to get at basic features
of the extensional construal of the continuum, yet resisted inductive approaches.
Early explicit uses of AC through its role in providing a well-ordering of the reals
showed how it allowed for new constructions: Giuseppe Vitali [1905] established
that there is a non-Lebesgue measurable set of reals, and Felix Bernstein [1908],
that there is a set of reals without the perfect set property. Soon it was seen that
neither of these examples have the Baire property. Thus, that the reals are well-
orderable, an early contention of Cantor’s, permitted constructions that precluded
the universality of the regularity properties, in particular his own approach to the
Continuum Problem through the perfect set property.
2.4
Hausdorﬀand functions
Felix Hausdorﬀwas the ﬁrst developer of the transﬁnite after Cantor, the one
whose work ﬁrst suggested the rich possibilities for a mathematical investigation
of the higher transﬁnite. A mathematician par excellence, Hausdorﬀtook that sort
of mathematical approach to set theory and extensional, set-theoretic approach to
mathematics that would dominate in the years to come. While the web of 19th-
Century intension in Cantor’s work, especially his approach toward functions,
now seems rather remote, Hausdorﬀ’s work seems familiar as part of the modern
language of mathematics.
In [1908] Hausdorﬀbrought together his extensive work on uncountable order
types.53
Deploring all the fuss being made over foundations by his contempo-
raries (p.436) and with Cantor having taken the Continuum Problem as far as
52See Moore [1982: 2.3].
53See Plotkin [2005] for translations and careful analyses of Hausdorﬀ’s work on ordered sets.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
23
seemed possible, Hausdorﬀproceeded to venture beyond the second number class
with vigor. He provided an elegant analysis of scattered linear order types (those
having no dense subtype) in a transﬁnite hierarchy, and constructed the ηα sets,
prototypes for saturated model theory. He ﬁrst stated the Generalized Continuum
Hypothesis (GCH), that 2ℵα = ℵα+1 for every α, clariﬁed the signiﬁcance of coﬁ-
nality, and ﬁrst considered (p.443) the possibility of an uncountable regular limit
cardinal, the ﬁrst large cardinal.
Large cardinal hypotheses posit cardinals with properties that entail their tran-
scendence over smaller cardinals, and as it has turned out, provide a superstructure
of hypotheses for the analysis of strong propositions in terms of consistency. Haus-
dorﬀobserved that uncountable regular limit cardinals, also known now as weakly
inaccessible cardinals, are a natural closure point for cardinal limit processes. In
penetrating work of only a few years later Paul Mahlo [1911; 1912; 1913] inves-
tigated hierarchies of such cardinals based on higher ﬁxed-point phenomena, the
Mahlo cardinals. The theory of large cardinals was to become a mainstream of set
theory.54
Hausdorﬀ’s classic text, Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre [1914] dedicated to Can-
tor, broke the ground for a generation of mathematicians in both set theory and
topology. A compendium of a wealth of results, it emphasized mathematical ap-
proaches and procedures that would eventually take ﬁrm root.55 After giving a
clear account of Zermelo’s ﬁrst, [1904] proof of the Well-Ordering Theorem, Haus-
dorﬀ(p.140ﬀ) emphasized its maximality aspect by giving synoptic versions of
Zorn’s Lemma two decades before Zorn [1935], one of them now known as Haus-
dorﬀ’s Maximality Principle.56 Also, Hausdorﬀ(p.304) provided the now standard
account of the Borel hierarchy of sets, with the still persistent Fσ and Gδ notation.
Of particular interest, Hausdorﬀ(p.469ﬀ, and also in [1914a]) used AC to provide
what is now known as Hausdorﬀ’s Paradox, an implausible decomposition of the
sphere and the source of the better known Banach-Tarski Paradox from Stefan
Banach and Alfred Tarski’s [1924].57
Hausdorﬀ’s Paradox was the ﬁrst, and a
54See Kanamori [2003] for more on large cardinals.
55Hausdorﬀ’s mathematical attitude is reﬂected in a remark following his explanation of car-
dinal number in a revised edition [1937:§5] of [1914]: “This formal explanation says what the
cardinal numbers are supposed to do, not what they are. More precise deﬁnitions have been
attempted, but they are unsatisfactory and unnecessary. Relations between cardinal numbers
are merely a more convenient way of expressing relations between sets; we must leave the deter-
mination of the ‘essence’ of the cardinal number to philosophy.”
56Hausdorﬀ’s Maximality Principle states that if A is a partially ordered set and B is a linearly
ordered subset, then there is a ⊆-maximal linearly ordered subset of A including B.
57Hausdorﬀ’s Paradox states that a sphere can be decomposed into four pieces Q, A, B, C
with Q countable and A, B, C, and B ∪C all pairwise congruent. Even more implausibly, the
Banach-Tarski Paradox states that a ball can be decomposed into ﬁnitely many pieces that can
be rearranged by rigid motions to form two balls of the same size as the original ball. Raphael
Robinson [1947] later showed that there is such a decomposition into just ﬁve pieces with one
of them containing a single point, and moreover that ﬁve is the minimal number. See Wagon
[1985] for more on these and similar results; they stimulated interesting developments in measure
theory that, rather than casting doubt on AC, embedded it further into mathematical practice
(cf. 2.6).

24
Akihiro Kanamori
dramatic, synthesis of classical mathematics and the Zermelian abstract view.
Hausdorﬀ’s reduction of functions through a deﬁned ordered pair highlights the
diﬀering concerns of the earlier Frege-Russell logic and the emerging set theory.58
Frege [1891] had two fundamental categories, function and object, with a function
being “unsaturated” and supplemented by objects as arguments.
A concept is
a function with two possible values, the True and the False, and a relation is a
concept that takes two arguments.
The extension of a concept is its graph or
course-of-values [Werthverlauf], which is an object, and Frege [1893: §36] devised
an iterated or double course-of-values [Doppelwerthverlauf] for the extension of a
relation. In these involved ways Frege assimilated relations to functions. As for
the ordered pair, Frege in his Grundgesetze [1893: §144] provided the extravagant
deﬁnition that the ordered pair of x and y is that class to which all and only the
extensions of relations to which x stands to y belong.59
On the other hand, Peirce [1883], Schr¨oder [1895], and Peano [1897] essentially
regarded a relation from the outset as just a collection of ordered pairs. Whereas
Frege was attempting an analysis of thought, Peano was mainly concerned with
recasting ongoing mathematics in economical and ﬂexible symbolism and made
many reductions, e.g. construing a sequence in analysis as a function on the natural
numbers. Peano from his earliest logical writings had used “(x, y)” to indicate the
ordered pair in formula and function substitutions and extensions. In [1897] he
explicitly formulated the ordered pair using “(x; y)” and moreover raised the two
main points about the ordered pair: First, equation 18 of his Deﬁnitions stated
the instrumental property which is all that is required of the ordered pair:
(∗)
⟨x, y⟩= ⟨a, b⟩iﬀ
x = a and y = b .
Second, he broached the possibility of reducibility, writing: “The idea of a pair is
fundamental, i.e. we do not know how to express it using the preceding symbols.”
In Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica [1910-3], relations distin-
guished in intension and in extension were derived from “propositional” functions
taken as fundamental and other “descriptive” functions derived from relations.
They [1910: ∗55] like Frege deﬁned an ordered pair derivatively, in their case in
terms of classes and relations, and also for a speciﬁc purpose.60 Previously Russell
[1903: §27] had criticized Peirce and Schr¨oder for regarding a relation “essentially
as a class of couples,” although he did not mention this shortcoming in Peano.61
58For more on the ordered pair, see Kanamori [2003a].
59This deﬁnition, which recalls the Whitehead–Russell deﬁnition of the cardinal number 2,
depended on Frege’s famously inconsistent Basic Law V. See Heck [1995] for more on Frege’s
deﬁnition and use of his ordered pair.
60Whitehead and Russell had ﬁrst deﬁned a cartesian product by other means, and only then
deﬁned their ordered pair x↓y as {x} × {y}, a remarkable inversion from the current point of
view. They [1910: ∗56] used their ordered pair initially to deﬁne the ordinal number 2.
61In a letter accepting Russell’s [1901] on the logic of relations for publication in his jour-
nal Rivista, Peano had pointedly written “The classes of couples correspond to relations” (see
Kennedy [1975: 214]) so that relations are extensionally assimilated to classes. Russell [1903: §98]
argued that the ordered pair cannot be basic and would itself have to be given sense, which

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
25
Commenting obliviously on Principia Peano [1911; 1913] simply reaﬃrmed an or-
dered pair as basic, deﬁned a relation as a class of ordered pairs, and a function
extensionally as a kind of relation, referring to the ﬁnal version of his Formulario
Mathematico [1905-8: 73ﬀ.] as the source.
Capping this to and fro Norbert Wiener [1914] provided a deﬁnition of the
ordered pair in terms of unordered pairs of classes only, thereby reducing relations
to classes. Working in Russell’s theory of types, Wiener deﬁned the ordered pair
⟨x, y⟩as
{{{x}, Λ}, {{y}}}
when x and y are of the same type and Λ is the null class (of the next type),
and pointed out that this deﬁnition satisﬁes the instrumental property (∗) above.
Wiener used this to eliminate from the system of Principia the Axiom of Re-
ducibility for propositional functions of two variables; he had written a doctoral
thesis comparing the logics of Schr¨oder and Russell.62 Although Russell praised
Sheﬀer’s stroke, the logical connective not-both, he was not impressed by Wiener’s
reduction. Indeed, Russell would not have been able to accept it as a genuine anal-
ysis. Unlike Russell, Willard V.O. Quine in a major philosophical work Word and
Object [1960: §53] regarded the reduction of the ordered pair as a paradigm for
philosophical analysis.
Making no intensional distinctions Hausdorﬀ[1914: 32ﬀ,70ﬀ] deﬁned an ordered
pair in terms of unordered pairs, formulated functions in terms of ordered pairs,
and the ordering relations as collections of ordered pairs.63 Hausdorﬀthus made
both the Peano [1911; 1913] and Wiener [1914] moves in mathematical practice,
completing the reduction of functions to sets.64 This may have been congenial
to Peano, but not to Frege nor Russell, they having emphasized the primacy
of functions. Following the pioneering work of Dedekind and Cantor Hausdorﬀ
was at the crest of a major shift in mathematics of which the transition from an
intensional, rule-governed conception of function to an extensional, arbitrary one
was a large part, and of which the eventual acceptance of the Power Set Axiom
and the Axiom of Choice was symptomatic.
In his informal setting Hausdorﬀtook the ordered pair of x and y to be
{{x, 1}, {y, 2}}
would be a circular or an inadequate exercise, and “It seems therefore more correct to take an
intensional view of relations . . . ”.
62See Grattan-Guinness [1975] for more on Wiener’s work and his interaction with Russell.
63He did not so deﬁne arbitrary relations, for which there was then no mathematical use, but
he was the ﬁrst to consider general partial orderings, as in his maximality principle.
Before
Hausdorﬀand going beyond Cantor, Dedekind was ﬁrst to consider non-linear orderings, e.g. in
his remarkably early, axiomatic study [1900] of lattices.
64As to historical priority, Wiener’s note was communicated to the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, presented on 23 February 1914, while the preface to Hausdorﬀ’s book is dated 15 March
1914. Given the pace of book publication then, it is arguable that Hausdorﬀcame up with his
reduction ﬁrst.

26
Akihiro Kanamori
where 1 and 2 were intended to be distinct objects alien to the situation.65 In any
case, the now-standard deﬁnition is the more intrinsic
{{x}, {x, y}}
due to Kazimierz Kuratowski [1921: 171]. Notably, Kuratowski’s deﬁnition is a by-
product of his analysis of Zermelo’s [1908] proof of the Well-Ordering Theorem.66
2.5
Analytic and projective sets
A decade after Lebesgue’s seminal paper [1905], descriptive set theory emerged
as a distinct discipline through the eﬀorts of the Russian mathematician Nikolai
Luzin. He had become acquainted with the work of the French analysts while
in Paris as a student and had addressed Baire’s functions with a intriguing use
of CH. What is now known as a Luzin set is an uncountable set of reals whose
intersection with any meager set is countable, and Luzin established: CH implies
that there is a Luzin set.67
This would become a paradigmatic use of CH, in
that a recursive construction was carried out in ℵ1 steps where at each state only
countable many conditions have to be attended to, in this case by applying the
Baire Category Theorem. Luzin showed that the characteristic function of his set
escaped Baire’s function classiﬁcation, and Luzin sets have since become pivotal
examples of “special sets” of reals.
In Moscow Luzin began an important seminar, and from the beginning a major
topic was the “descriptive theory of functions”. The young Pole Wac law Sierpi´nski
was an early participant while he was interned in Moscow in 1915, and undoubtedly
this not only kindled a decade-long collaboration between Luzin and Sierpi´nski but
also encouraged the latter’s involvement in the development of a Polish school of
mathematics and its interest in descriptive set theory.
Of the three regularity properties, Lebesgue measurability, the Baire property,
and the perfect set property (cf. 2.3), the ﬁrst two were immediate for the Borel
sets. However, nothing had been known about the perfect set property beyond
65It should be pointed out that the deﬁnition works even when x or y is 1 or 2 to maintain the
instrumental property (∗) of ordered pairs.
66The general adoption of the Kuratowski pair proceeded through the major developments of
mathematical logic: Von Neumann initially took the ordered pair as primitive but later noted
(von Neumann [1925:VI]; [1928: 338];[1929: 227]) the reduction via the Kuratowski deﬁnition.
G¨odel in his incompleteness paper [1931: 176] also pointed out the reduction. In his footnote
18, G¨odel blandly remarked: “Every proposition about relations that is provable in [Principia
Mathematica] is provable also when treated in this manner, as is readily seen.”
This stands
in stark contrast to Russell’s labors in Principia and his antipathy to Wiener’s reduction of
the ordered pair. Tarski [1931: n.3] pointed out the reduction and acknowledged his compatriot
Kuratowski. In his recasting of von Neumann’s system, Bernays [1937: 68] also acknowledged
Kuratowski [1921] and began with its deﬁnition for the ordered pair.
It is remarkable that
Nicolas Bourbaki in his treatise [1954] on set theory still took the ordered pair as primitive, only
later providing the Kuratowski reduction in the [1970] edition.
67Mahlo [1913a] also established this result.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
27
Cantor’s own result that the closed sets have it and Bernstein’s that with a well-
ordering of the reals there is a set not having the property. Luzin’s student Pavel
Aleksandrov [1916] established the groundbreaking result that the Borel sets have
the perfect set property, so that “CH holds for the Borel sets”.68
In the work that really began descriptive set theory another student of Luzin’s,
Mikhail Suslin, investigated the analytic sets following a mistake he had found
in Lebesgue’s paper.69 Suslin [1917] formulated these sets in terms of an explicit
operation A70 and announced two fundamental results: a set B of reals is Borel
iﬀboth B and IR −B are analytic; and there is an analytic set which is not
Borel.71
This was to be his sole publication, for he succumbed to typhus in a
Moscow epidemic in 1919 at the age of 25. In an accompanying note Luzin [1917]
announced the regularity properties: Every analytic set is Lebesgue measurable,
has the Baire property, and has the perfect set property, the last result attributed
to Suslin.
Luzin and Sierpi´nski in their [1918] and [1923] provided proofs, and the lat-
ter paper was instrumental in shifting the emphasis toward the co-analytic sets,
i.e. sets of reals X such that IR −X is analytic. They used well-founded rela-
tions to provide a basic tree representation of co-analytic sets, one from which the
main results of the period ﬂowed, and it is here that well-founded relations entered
mathematical practice.72
After the ﬁrst wave in descriptive set theory brought about by Suslin [1917] and
Luzin [1917] had crested, Luzin [1925a] and Sierpi´nski [1925] extended the domain
of study to the projective sets. For Y ⊆IRk+1 and with ordered k-tuples deﬁned
68After getting a partial result [1914: 465ﬀ], Hausdorﬀ[1916] also showed, in essence, that the
Borel sets have the perfect set property.
69Sierpi´nski [1950: 28ﬀ] describes Suslin’s discovery of the mistake.
70A deﬁning system is a family {Xs}s of sets indexed by ﬁnite sequences s of natural numbers.
The result of the Operation A on such a system is that set A({Xs}s) deﬁned by:
x ∈A({Xs}s) iﬀ
(∃f: ω →ω)(∀n ∈ω)(x ∈Xf|n)
where f|n denotes that sequence determined by the ﬁrst n values of f. For a set X of reals, X
is analytic iﬀX = A({Xs}s) for some deﬁning system {Xs}s consisting of closed sets of reals.
71Luzin [1925] traced the term “analytic” back to Lebesgue [1905] and pointed out how the
original example of a non-Borel Lebesgue measurable set there was in fact the ﬁrst example of a
non-Borel analytic set.
72Building on the penultimate footnote, suppose that Y is a co-analytic set of reals, i.e. Y =
IR −X with X = A({Xs}s) for some closed sets Xs, so that for reals x,
x ∈Y iﬀx /∈X iﬀ(∀f: ω →ω)(∃n ∈ω)(x /∈Xf|n) .
For ﬁnite sequences s1 and s2 deﬁne: s1 ≺s2 iﬀs2 is a proper initial segment of s1. For a real
x deﬁne: Tx = {s | x ∈Xt for every initial segment t of s}. Then:
x ∈Y iﬀ
≺on Tx is a well-founded relation ,
i.e. there is no inﬁnite descending sequence . . . ≺s2 ≺s1 ≺s0. Tx is a tree (cf. 3.5).
Well-
founded relations were explicitly deﬁned much later in Zermelo [1935]. Constructions recognizable
as via recursion along a well-founded relation had already occurred in the proofs that the Borel
have the perfect set property in Aleksandrov [1916] and Hausdorﬀ[1916].

28
Akihiro Kanamori
from the ordered pair, the projection of Y is
pY = {⟨x1, ..., xk⟩| ∃y(⟨x1, ..., xk, y⟩∈Y )}.
Suslin [1917] had essentially noted that a set of reals is analytic iﬀit is the projec-
tion of a Borel subset of IR2.73 Luzin and Sierpi´nski took the geometric operation
of projection to be basic and deﬁned the projective sets as those sets obtainable
from the Borel sets by the iterated applications of projection and complementa-
tion. The corresponding hierarchy of projective subsets of IRk is deﬁned, in modern
notation, as follows: For A ⊆IRk,
A is Σ1
1 iﬀ
A = pY for some Borel set Y ⊆IRk+1 ,
i.e. A is analytic74 and for integers n > 0,
A is Π1
n iﬀ
IRk −A is Σ1
n ,
A is Σ1
n+1 iﬀ
A = pY for some Π1
n set Y ⊆IRk+1 , and
A is ∆1
n iﬀ
A is both Σ1
n and Π1
n .
Luzin [1925a] and Sierpi´nski [1925] recast Lebesgue’s use of the Cantor diago-
nal argument to show that the projective hierarchy is proper, and soon its basic
properties were established. However, this investigation encountered basic obsta-
cles from the beginning. Luzin [1925a] emphasized that whether the Π1
1 sets, the
co-analytic sets at the bottom of the hierarchy, have the perfect set property was a
major question. In a conﬁdent and remarkably prophetic passage he declared that
his eﬀorts towards its resolution led him to a conclusion “totally unexpected”,
that “one does not know and one will never know” of the family of projective
sets, although it has cardinality 2ℵ0 and consists of “eﬀective sets”, whether ev-
ery member has cardinality 2ℵ0 if uncountable, has the Baire property, or is even
Lebesgue measurable. Luzin [1925b] pointed out the speciﬁc problem of estab-
lishing whether the Σ1
2 sets are Lebesgue measurable. Both these diﬃculties were
also pointed out by Sierpi´nski [1925]. This basic impasse in descriptive set theory
was to remain for over a decade, to be surprisingly resolved by penetrating work
of G¨odel involving metamathematical methods (cf. 3.4).
2.6
Equivalences and consequences
In this period AC and CH began to be explored no longer as underlying axiom and
primordial hypothesis but as part of mathematics. Consequences were drawn and
even equivalences established, and this mathematization, like the development of
non-Euclidean geometry, led eventually to a deﬂating of metaphysical attitudes
and attendant concerns about truth and existence.
73Borel subsets of IRk are deﬁned analogously to those of IR.
74Analytic subsets of IRk are deﬁned as for the case k = 1 in terms of a deﬁning system
consisting of closed subsets of IRk.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
29
Friedrich Hartogs [1915] established an equivalence result for AC, and this was
the ﬁrst substantial use of Zermelo’s axiomatization after its appearance. The
axiomatization had initially drawn ambivalent response among commentators,75
especially those exercised by the paradoxes, and its assimilation by structuring
sets and clarifying arguments began with such uses.
As noted in 1.3, Cardinal Comparability had become a concern for Cantor by
the time of his Beitr¨age [1895]; Hartogs showed in Zermelo’s system sans AC that
Cardinal Comparability implies that every set can be well-ordered. Thus, an evi-
dent consequence of every set being well-orderable also implied that well-ordering
principle, and this ﬁrst “reverse mathematics” result established the equivalence of
the well-ordering principle, Cardinal Comparability, and AC over the base theory.
Hartogs actually established without AC what is now called Hartogs’s Theorem:
For any set M, there is a well-orderable set E not injectible into M. Cardinal
Comparability would then imply that M is injectible into E and hence is well-
orderable. For the proof Hartogs ﬁrst worked out a theory of ordering relations in
Zermelo’s system in terms of inclusion chains as in Zermelo’s [1908] proof.76 He
then used Power Set and Separation to get the set MW of well-orderable subsets
of M and the set E of equivalence classes partitioning MW according to order-
isomorphism. Finally, he showed that E itself has an inherited well-ordering and
is not injectible into M.77
Reminiscent of Zermelo’s subsumption of Russell’s
Paradox in the denial of a universal set, Hartogs’s Theorem can be viewed as a
subsumption of the Burali-Forti Paradox into the Zermelian setting.
The ﬁrst explicit uses of AC mostly amounted to appeals to a well-ordering
of the reals, Cantor’s preoccupation. Those of Vitali [1905] and Bernstein [1908]
were mentioned in 2.3, and Hausdorﬀ’s Paradox [1914; 1914a], in 2.4.
Georg
Hamel [1905] constructed by transﬁnite recursion a basis for the reals as a vector
space over the rationals; cited by Zermelo [1908, 114], this provided a useful basis
for later work in analysis and algebra.
These various results, jarring at ﬁrst,
broached how a well-ordering allows for a new kind of arithmetical approach to
the continuum.
The full exercise of AC in ongoing mathematics ﬁrst occurred in the pioneering
work of Ernst Steinitz [1910] on abstract ﬁelds. This was the ﬁrst instance of
an emerging phenomenon in algebra and topology: the study of axiomatically
given structures with the range of possibilities implicitly including the transﬁnite.
Steinitz studied algebraic closures of ﬁelds and even had an explicit transﬁnite
parameter in the transcendence degree, the number of indeterminates necessary
for closure. Typical of the generality in the years to come was Hausdorﬀ’s [1932]
result using well-orderings that every vector space has a basis. As algebra and
75See Moore [1982: 3.3].
76This is better done in Kuratowski [1921]. The Hausdorﬀ[1914] approach with an ordered
pair could have been taken, but that only became standard later when more general relations
were considered.
77As with Zermelo’s Well-Ordering Theorem, textbooks usually establish Hartogs’s Theorem
after ﬁrst introducing Replacement and (von Neumann) ordinals, and this amounts to a historical
misrepresentation.

30
Akihiro Kanamori
topology developed however, such results as these came to be based on the maximal
principles that Hausdorﬀhad ﬁrst broached (cf. 2.4) and began to dominate after
the appearance of Zorn’s Lemma [1935]. Explicit well-orderings seemed out of
place at this level of organization, and Zorn’s Lemma had the remarkable feature
that its hypothesis was easily checked in most applications.
Poland since its reuniﬁcation in 1918 featured an active school of mathematics
establishing foundational results in mathematical logic, topology, and analysis, and
at Warsaw Tarski and Kuratowski together with Sierpi´nski were making crucial
contributions to set theory and the elucidation of its role in mathematics. The
Polish school of mathematics carried out a penetrating investigation of the role
of AC in set theory and analysis. Sierpi´nski’s earliest publications, culminating
in his survey [1918], not only dealt with speciﬁc constructions but showed how
deeply embedded AC was in the informal development of cardinality, measure, and
the Borel hierarchy (cf. 2.3), supporting Zermelo’s contention [1904: 516] that the
axiom is applied “everywhere in mathematical deduction”. Tarski [1924], explicitly
building his work on Zermelo’s system, provided several propositions of cardinal
arithmetic equivalent to AC, most notably that (m2 = m for every inﬁnite cardinal
m. Adolf Lindenbaum and Tarski in their [1926] gave further cardinal equivalents,
some related to the Hartogs [1915] result, and announced that GCH, in the form
that m < n < 2m holds for no inﬁnite cardinals m and n, implies AC. This study
of consequences led to other choice principles, further implications and sometimes
converses in a continuing cottage industry.78
The early mathematical study of AC extended to the issue of its independence.
Abraham Fraenkel’s ﬁrst investigations [1922] directly addressed Zermelo’s axioms,
pointing out the need for the Replacement Axiom and attempting an axiomati-
zation of the deﬁnit property for the Separation Axiom (cf. 3.1). The latter was
motivated in part by the need to better articulate independence proofs for the var-
ious axioms. Fraenkel [1922a] came to the fecund idea of starting with urelements
and some initial sets closing oﬀunder set-theoretic operations to get a model. For
the independence of AC he started with urelements an, an for n ∈ω and the set
A = {{an, an} | n ∈ω} of unordered pairs and argued that for any set M in the
resulting model there is a co-ﬁnite AM ⊆A such that M is invariant if members of
any {an, an} ∈AM are permuted. This immediately implies that there is no choice
function for A in the model. Finally, Fraenkel argued that the model satisﬁes the
other Zermelo axioms, except Extensionality because of the urelements.
Fraenkel’s early model building emphasized the Zermelian generative frame-
work, anticipated well-founded recursion, and foreshadowed the later play with
models of set theory. That Extensionality was not to be had precluded settling
the matter, but just as for the early models of non-Euclidean or ﬁnite geometries
Fraenkel’s achievement lay in stimulating interest in mathematical constructions
despite relaxing some basic tenet. Fraenkel tried to develop his approach from time
to time, but it needed the articulation that would come with the full espousal of
the satisfaction relation. In the latter 1930s Lindenbaum and Andrzej Mostowski
78See Moore [1982], especially its 5.1, for other choice principles.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
31
so cast and extended Fraenkel’s work. Mostowski [1939] forged a method according
to post-G¨odelian sensibilities, bringing out the importance of groups of permuta-
tions leaving various urelements ﬁxed, and the resulting models as well as later
versions are now known as the Fraenkel-Mostowski models.
Even more than AC, Sierpi´nski investigated CH, and summed up his researches
in a monograph [1934]. He provided several notable equivalences to CH, e.g. (p.11)
the plane IR2 is the union of countably many curves, where a curve is a set of form
{⟨x, y⟩| y = f(x)} or {⟨x, y⟩| x = f(y)} with f a real function.
Moreover, Sierpi´nski presented numerous consequences of CH from the litera-
ture, one in particular implying a host of others: Mahlo [1913a] and Luzin [1914]
had shown that CH implies that there is a Luzin set, an uncountable set of reals
whose intersection with any meager set is countable (cf. 2.5). To state one con-
sequence, say that a set X of reals has strong measure zero iﬀfor any sequence
ǫ0, ǫ1, ǫ2, . . . of positive reals there is a sequence of intervals I0, I1, I2, . . . such that
the length of In is less than ǫn for each n and X ⊆S
n In. Borel [1919] con-
jectured that such sets are countable. However, Sierpi´nski [1928] showed that a
Luzin set has strong measure zero. Analogous to a Luzin set, a Sierpi´nski set is
an uncountable set of reals whose intersection with any Lebesgue measure zero set
is countable. Sierpi´nski [1924] showed that CH implies that there is a Sierpi´nski
set, and emphasized [1934] an emerging duality between measure and category.
The subsequent work of Fritz Rothberger would have formative implications for
the Continuum Problem. He [1938] observed that if both Luzin and Sierpi´nski
sets exist, then they have cardinality ℵ1, so that the joint existence of such sets
of the cardinality of the continuum implies CH. Then in penetrating analyses of
the work of Sierpinski and Hausdorﬀon gaps (cf. 2.1) Rothberger [1939; 1948]
considered other sets and implications between cardinal properties of the contin-
uum independent of whether CH holds. It became newly clariﬁed that absent CH
one can still isolate uncountable cardinals ≤2ℵ0 that gauge and delimit various
recursive constructions, and this approach was to blossom half a century later in
the study of cardinal characteristics (or invariants) of the continuum.79
These results cast CH in a new light, as a construction principle. Conclusions
had been drawn from having a well-ordering of the reals, but one given by CH
allowed for recursive constructions where at any stage only countably many con-
ditions corresponding to as many reals had to be handled. The construction of a
Luzin set was a simple recursive application of the Baire Category Theorem, and
later constructions took advantage of the possibility of diagonalization at each
stage. However, whereas the new constructions using AC, though jarring at ﬁrst,
were eventually subsumed as concomitant with the acceptance of the axiom and as
expressions of the richness of possibility, constructions from CH clashed with that
very sense of richness for the continuum. It was the mathematical investigation
of CH that increasingly raised doubts about its truth and certainly its provability
79See Miller [1984] for more on special sets of reals and van Douwen [1984] as a trend setting
paper for cardinal characteristics of the continuum. See Blass [2008] and Bartoszy´nski [2008] for
recent work on cardinal characteristics.

32
Akihiro Kanamori
(cf. end of 3.4).
3
CONSOLIDATION
3.1
Ordinals and Replacement
In the 1920s fresh initiatives structured the loose Zermelian framework with new
features and corresponding developments in axiomatics: von Neumann’s work with
ordinals and Replacement; the focusing on well-founded sets and the cumulative
hierarchy; and extensionalization in ﬁrst-order logic.
Von Neumann eﬀected a
counter-reformation of sorts: The transﬁnite numbers had been central for Cantor
but peripheral to Zermelo; von Neumann reconstrued them as bona ﬁde sets, now
called simply the ordinals, and established their eﬃcacy by formalizing transﬁnite
recursion.
Von Neumann [1923; 1928], and before him Dimitry Mirimanoﬀ[1917; 1917a]
and Zermelo in unpublished 1915 work,80 isolated the now familiar concept of
ordinal, with the basic idea of taking precedence in a well-ordering simply to be
membership. Appealing to forms of Replacement Mirimanoﬀand Von Neumann
then established the key instrumental property of Cantor’s ordinal numbers for
ordinals: Every well-ordered set is order-isomorphic to exactly one ordinal with
membership. Von Neumann in his own axiomatic presentation took the further
step of ascribing to the ordinals the role of Cantor’s ordinal numbers.
Thus,
like Kepler’s laws by Newton’s, Cantor’s principles of generation for his ordinal
numbers would be subsumed by the Zermelian framework. For this reconstrual
of ordinal numbers and already to deﬁne the arithmetic of ordinals von Neumann
saw the need to establish the Transﬁnite Recursion Theorem, the theorem that
validates deﬁnitions by transﬁnite recursion. The proof was anticipated by the
Zermelo 1904 proof, but Replacement was necessary even for the very formulation,
let alone the proof, of the theorem.
With the ordinals in place von Neumann
completed the restoration of the Cantorian transﬁnite by deﬁning the cardinals as
the initial ordinals, those ordinals not in bijective correspondence with any of its
predecessors. Now, the inﬁnite initial ordinals are denoted
ω = ω0, ω1, ω2, . . . , ωα, . . . ,
so that ω is to be the set of natural numbers in the ordinal construal, and the
identiﬁcation of diﬀerent intensions is signaled by
ωα = ℵα
with the left being a von Neumann ordinal and the right being the Cantorian
cardinal number.
Replacement has been latterly regarded as somehow less necessary or cru-
cial than the other axioms, the purported eﬀect of the axiom being only on
80See Hallett [1984: 8.1].

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
33
large-cardinality sets. Initially, Fraenkel [1921; 1922] and Skolem [1923] had in-
dependently proposed adjoining Replacement to ensure that E(a) = {a, P(a),
P(P(a)), . . .} be a set when a is the particular inﬁnite set Z0 = {∅, {∅}, {{∅}}, . . .}
posited by Zermelo’s Axiom of Inﬁnity, since, as they pointed out, Zermelo’s ax-
ioms cannot establish this. However, even E(∅) cannot be proved to be a set from
Zermelo’s axioms,81 and if his axiom of Inﬁnity were reformulated to accommodate
E(∅), there would still be many ﬁnite sets a such that E(a) cannot be proved to
be a set.82 Replacement serves to rectify the situation by admitting new inﬁnite
sets deﬁned by “replacing” members of the one inﬁnite set given by the Axiom of
Inﬁnity. In any case, the full exercise of Replacement is part and parcel of transﬁ-
nite recursion, which is now used everywhere in modern set theory, and it was von
Neumann’s formal incorporation of this method into set theory, as necessitated by
his proofs, that brought in Replacement.
That Replacement became central for von Neumann was intertwined with his
taking of function, in its full extensional sense, instead of set as primitive and
his establishing of a context for handling classes, collections not necessarily sets.
He [1925; 1928a] formalized the idea that a class is proper, i.e. not a set, exactly
when it is in bijective correspondence with the entire universe, and this exactly
when it is not an element of any class. This thus brought in another move from
Cantor’s 1899 correspondence with Dedekind (cf. 2.2). However, von Neumann’s
axiomatization [1925; 1928] of function was complicated, and reverting to sets as
primitive Paul Bernays (cf. his [1976]) recast and simpliﬁed von Neumann’s system.
Still, the formal incorporation of proper classes introduced a superstructure of
objects and results distant from mathematical practice. What was to be inherited
was a predisposition to entertain proper classes in the mathematical development
of set theory, a willingness that would have crucial ramiﬁcations (cf. 3.6).
3.2
Well-foundedness and the cumulative hierarchy
With ordinals and Replacement, set theory continued its shift away from preten-
sions of a general foundation toward a theory of a more deﬁnite subject matter,
a process fueled by the incorporation of well-foundedness. Mirimanoﬀ[1917]] was
the ﬁrst to study the well-founded sets, and the later hierarchical analysis is dis-
tinctly anticipated in his work. But interestingly enough well-founded relations
next occurred in the direct deﬁnability tradition from Cantor, descriptive set the-
ory (cf. 2.5).
In the axiomatic tradition Fraenkel [1922], Skolem [1923] and von Neumann
[1925] considered the salutary eﬀects of restricting the universe of sets to the
well-founded sets.
Von Neumann [1929: 231,236ﬀ] formulated in his functional
terms the Axiom of Foundation, that every set is well-founded,83 and deﬁned
81The union of E(Z0), with membership restricted to it, models Zermelo’s axioms yet does
not have E(∅) as a member.
82See Mathias [2001].
83∀x(x ̸= ∅−→∃y ∈x(x ∩y = ∅)). This is von Neumann’s Axiom VI4 in terms of sets. The

34
Akihiro Kanamori
the resulting hierarchy of sets in his system via transﬁnite recursion: In modern
notation, the axiom, as is well-known, entails that the universe V of sets is stratiﬁed
into cumulative ranks Vα, where
V0 = ∅; Vα+1 = P(Vα); Vδ = S
α<δVα for limit ordinals δ ;
and
V = S
αVα .
Von Neumann used this, the cumulative hierarchy, to establish the ﬁrst relative
consistency result in set theory via “inner models”; his argumentation in partic-
ular established the consistency of Foundation relative to Zermelo’s axioms plus
Replacement.
During this period mathematical logic gained new currency, and a tussle based
on the diﬀerent approaches of ﬁrst- and second-order logic to set theory would lead
to a substantial axiomatic development.84 The prescient Skolem [1923] made the
proposal of using for Zermelo’s deﬁnite properties for the Separation Axiom those
properties expressible in ﬁrst-order logic with ∈as a binary relation symbol. After
Leopold L¨owenheim [1915] had broken the ground for model theory with his result
about the satisﬁability of a ﬁrst-order sentence, Skolem [1920; 1923] had located
the result solidly in ﬁrst-order logic and generalized it to the L¨owenheim-Skolem
Theorem: If a countable collection of ﬁrst-order sentences is satisﬁable, then it is
satisﬁable in a countable domain. That Skolem intended for set theory to be a
ﬁrst-order system without a privileged interpretation for ∈becomes evident in the
initial application of the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem to get Skolem’s Paradox:
In ﬁrst-order logic Zermelo’s axioms are countable, Separation having become a
schema, a schematic collection of axioms, one for each ﬁrst-order formula; the
theorem then implies the existence of countable models of the axioms although
they entail the existence of uncountable sets.
Skolem intended by this means
to deﬂate the possibility of set theory becoming a foundation for mathematics.
Exercised by this relativism and by the recent work of Fraenkel and von Neumann,
Zermelo [1929] in his ﬁrst publication in set theory in two decades proposed an
axiomatization of his deﬁnit property in second-order terms. In direct response
Skolem [1930] pointed out possible diﬃculties with this approach and reaﬃrmed
his ﬁrst-order formulation, completing the backdrop for a new axiomatic synthesis.
Zermelo in his remarkable [1930] oﬀered his ﬁnal axiomatization of set theory as
well as a striking view of a procession of natural models that would have a modern
resonance. While ostensibly a response to Skolem [1930], the dramatically new
picture of sets in Zermelo [1930] reﬂects gained experience and the germination of
ideas over a prolonged period. The main axiomatization incorporated Replacement
but also the Axiom of Foundation. In contrast to Zermelo [1908a], while urelements
term “Foundation [Fundierung]” itself comes from Zermelo [1930].
84First-order logic is the logic of formal languages consisting of formulas built up from speci-
ﬁed function and relation symbols using logical connectives and ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers ∀and ∃,
quantiﬁers to be interpreted as ranging over the elements of a domain of discourse. Second-order
logic has quantiﬁers to be interpreted as ranging over arbitrary subsets of a domain.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
35
continued to be allowed, Inﬁnity was eschewed and Choice was regarded as part of
the underlying logic. Concerning Separation and Replacement it becomes evident
from how Zermelo proceeded that he regarded their applicability in what we would
now call a fully second-order context.
The now standard axiomatization of set theory
ZFC, Zermelo-Fraenkel with Choice,
is recognizable if we inject Inﬁnity and AC, the main diﬀerence being that ZFC is
a ﬁrst-order theory (see below). “Fraenkel” acknowledges the early suggestion by
Fraenkel to adjoin Replacement; and the Axiom of Choice is explicitly mentioned.
ZF, Zermelo-Fraenkel,
is ZFC without AC and is a base theory for the investigation of weak Choice-type
propositions as well as propositions that contradict AC.
As described in above, Foundation in modern set theory ranks the universe of
sets into the cumulative hierarchy V = S
α Vα. Zermelo substantially advanced
this schematic generative picture with his inclusion of Foundation in an axiom-
atization. Replacement and Foundation focused the notion of set, with the ﬁrst
making possible the means of transﬁnite recursion and induction, and the second
making possible the application of those means to get results about all sets. It is
now almost banal that Foundation is the one axiom unnecessary for the recast-
ing of mathematics in set-theoretic terms, but the axiom ascribes to membership
the salient feature that distinguishes investigations speciﬁc to set theory as an
autonomous ﬁeld of mathematics. Indeed, it can be fairly said that modern set
theory is at base a study couched in well-foundedness, the Cantorian well-ordering
doctrines adapted to the Zermelian generative conception of sets.
In [1930] Zermelo described a range of models for set theory, each an initial
segment of a cumulative hierarchy built on an initial set of urelements. Zermelo
then established a categoricity of sorts for his axioms, one made possible by his
second-order context. He showed that his models are characterized up to isomor-
phism by two cardinals, the number of their urelements and the height of their
ordinals. Moreover, he established that if two models have the same number of
urelements yet diﬀerent heights, then one is isomorphic to an initial segment of
the other’s cumulative hierarchy. Grappling with Power Set and Replacement he
characterized the heights of his models (“Grenzzahlen”) as ℵ0 or the (strongly)
inaccessible cardinals, those uncountable regular cardinals κ that are strong limit,
i.e. if λ < κ, then 2λ < κ.
Zermelo posited an endless procession of models, each a set in a next, advocating
a dynamic view of sets that was a marked departure from Cantor’s (and later,
G¨odel’s) realist presumption of a ﬁxed universe of sets. In synthesizing the sense
of progression inherent in the new cumulative hierarchy picture and the sense of
completion in the limit numbers, the inaccessible cardinals, he promoted the crucial
idea of internal models of set theory. The open-endedness of Zermelo’s original
[1908a] axiomatization had been structured by Replacement and Foundation, but

36
Akihiro Kanamori
he advanced a new open-endedness with an eternal return of models approaching
Cantor’s Absolute.
In the process, inaccessible cardinals became structurally relevant. Sierpi´nski-
Tarski [1930] had formulated these cardinals arithmetically as those uncountable
cardinals that are not the product of fewer cardinals each of smaller power and
observed that they are weakly inaccessible — the ﬁrst large cardinal concept, from
Hausdorﬀ[1908: 443] (cf. 2.4). Be that as it may, in the early model-theoretic
investigations of set theory the inaccessible cardinals provided the natural models
as envisioned by Zermelo. Moreover, strong large cardinal hypotheses emerging in
the 1960s were to be formulated in terms of these initial segments of the cumulative
hierarchy.85
The journal volume containing Zermelo’s paper also contained Stanis law Ulam’s
seminal paper [1930] on measurable cardinals, the most important of all large
cardinals. For a set S, U is a (non-principal) ultraﬁlter over S iﬀU is a collection
of subsets of S containing no singletons, closed under the taking of supersets and
ﬁnite intersections, and such that for any X ⊆S, either X ∈U or S −X ∈U.
For a cardinal λ, an ultraﬁlter U is λ-complete iﬀfor any D ⊆U of cardinality
less than λ, T D ∈U. Finally, an uncountable cardinal κ is measurable iﬀthere
is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ. Thus, a measurable cardinal is a cardinal whose
power set is structured with a two-valued measure having strong closure property.
Measurability embodied the ﬁrst large cardinal conﬂuence of Cantor’s two lega-
cies, the investigation of deﬁnable sets of reals and the extension of number into
the transﬁnite: Distilled from measure-theoretic considerations related to Lebesgue
measure, the concept also entailed inaccessibility in the transﬁnite. Moreover, the
initial airing generated a problem that was to keep the spark of large cardinals
alive for the next three decades: Can the least inaccessible cardinal be measurable?
In the 1960s consequences of, and a structural characterization of, measurability
were established that became fundamental in the setting structured by the new
Zermelian emphasis on well-foundedness (cf. 3.6).
3.3
First-order logic and extensionalization
The ﬁnal structuring of set theory before it was to sail forth on its independent
course as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics was its full extensionalization in ﬁrst-
order logic.86
However inﬂuential Zermelo’s [1930] and despite his subsequent
advocacy [1931; 1935] of inﬁnitary logic, his eﬀorts to forestall Skolem were not to
succeed, as stronger currents were at work in the direction of ﬁrst-order formal-
ization.
Hilbert eﬀected a basic shift in the development of mathematical logic when
he took Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica, viewed it as an unin-
terpreted formalism, and made it an object of mathematical inquiry. The book
85See Kanamori [2003: chap.5].
86See Goldfarb [1979] and Moore [1988a] for more on the emergence of ﬁrst-order logic.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
37
[1928]87 by Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann reads remarkably like a recent text.
In marked contrast to the formidable works of Frege and Russell with their forbid-
ding notation and all-inclusive approach, it proceeded pragmatically and upward
to probe the extent of structure, making those moves emphasizing forms and ax-
iomatics typical of modern mathematics. After a complete analysis of sentential
logic it distinguished and focused on ﬁrst-order logic (“functional calculus”, and
later “(restricted) predicate calculus”) as already the source of signiﬁcant prob-
lems. Thus, while Frege and Russell never separated out ﬁrst-order logic, Hilbert
through his mathematical investigations established it as a subject in its own right.
Hilbert in the 1920s developed proof theory, i.e. metamathematics, and pro-
posed his program of establishing the consistency of classical mathematics. The
issues here gained currency because of Hilbert’s preeminence, just as mathematics
in the large had been expanded in the earlier years of the century by his reliance
on non-constructive proofs and transcendental methods and his advocacy of new
contexts. Through this expansion the full exercise of AC had become a mathe-
matical necessity (cf. 2.6) and arbitrary functions, and so Power Set, had become
implicitly accepted in the extensive investigation of higher function spaces.
Hilbert-Ackermann [1928: 65ﬀ,72ﬀ] raised two crucial questions directed at the
further possibilities for ﬁrst-order logic: the completeness of its axioms and the
Decision Problem [Entscheidungsproblem]. These as well as Hilbert’s program for
securing consistency were to be decisively informed by penetrating work that for
set theory eventually led to its ﬁrst sophisticated metamathematical result, the
relative consistency of AC and GCH.
Kurt G¨odel (1906–1978), born when Zermelo was devising his proofs of the
Well-Ordering Theorem, virtually completed the mathematization of logic by sub-
merging metamathematical methods into mathematics. The main vehicle was of
course the direct coding, “the arithmetization of syntax”, in his celebrated In-
completeness Theorem [1931].
Establishing a fundamental distinction between
what is true about the natural numbers and what is provable, this theorem trans-
formed Hilbert’s consistency program and led to the undecidability of the Decision
Problem from Hilbert–Ackermann [1928] and the development of recursion theory.
G¨odel’s work showed in particular that for a (schematically deﬁnable) collection
of axioms A, its consistency, that from A one cannot prove a contradiction, has
a formal counterpart in an arithmetical formula Con(A) about natural numbers.
G¨odel’s “second” theorem asserts that if A is consistent and subsumes some ele-
mentary arithmetic of the natural numbers, then Con(A) cannot be proved from A.
But starting an undercurrent, the earlier Completeness Theorem [1930] from his
thesis answered aﬃrmatively a Hilbert–Ackermann [1928] question about semantic
completeness, clariﬁed the distinction between the formal syntax and semantics of
ﬁrst-order logic, and secured its key instrumental property with the Compactness
Theorem.
87The historical development is clariﬁed by the fact that while this book was published in light
of the developments of the 1920s, it has a large overlap with unpublished lecture notes for a
1917-8 course given by Hilbert at G¨ottingen.

38
Akihiro Kanamori
Tarski [1933; 1935] then completed the mathematization of logic by providing
his deﬁnition of truth, exercising philosophers to a surprising extent ever since.
Through Hilbert-Ackermann [1928] and G¨odel [1930] the satisfaction relation had
been informal, and in that sense completeness could be said to have remained inad-
equately articulated. Tarski simply extensionalized truth in formal languages and
provided a formal, recursive deﬁnition of the satisfaction relation in set-theoretic
terms. This new response to a growing need for a mathematical framework be-
came the basis for model theory, but thus cast into mathematics truth would leave
behind any semantics in the real meaning of the word. Tarski’s [1933] was written
around the same time as his [1931], a seminal paper that highlights the thrust of
his initiative. In [1931] Tarski gave a precise mathematical (that is, set-theoretic)
formulation of the informal concept of a (ﬁrst-order) deﬁnable set of reals, thus
infusing the intuitive notion of deﬁnability into ongoing mathematics. This math-
ematization of intuitive or logical notions was accentuated by Kuratowski-Tarski
[1931], where second-order quantiﬁcation over the reals was correlated with the
geometric operation of projection, beginning the process of explicitly wedding de-
scriptive set theory to mathematical logic. The eventual eﬀect of Tarski’s [1933]
mathematical formulation of (so-called) semantics would be not only to make
mathematics out of the informal notion of satisﬁability, but also to enrich ongoing
mathematics with a systematic method for forming mathematical analogues of
several intuitive semantic notions.88
In this process of extensionalization ﬁrst-order logic came to be accepted as
the canonical language because of its mathematical possibilities as epitomized by
the Compactness Theorem, and higher-order logics became downgraded as the
workings of the power set operation in disguise. Skolem’s early suggestion for set
theory was thus taken up generally, and again the ways of paradox were positively
subsumed, as the negative intent of Skolem’s Paradox gave way to the extensive,
internal use of Skolem functions from the L¨owenheim-Skolem Theorem in set-
theoretic constructions.
3.4
Relative consistency
Set theory was launched on an independent course as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathe-
matics by G¨odel’s construction of L [1938; 1939] leading to the relative consistency
of the Axiom of Choice and the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis. Synthesizing
all that came before, G¨odel built on the von Neumann ordinals as sustained by
Replacement to formulate a relative Zermelian universe of sets based on logical
deﬁnability, a universe imbued with a Cantorian sense of enumerative order.
G¨odel’s advances in set theory can be seen as part of a steady intellectual devel-
opment. In a lecture [1933] on the foundations of mathematics G¨odel propounded
the axiomatic set theory “as presented by Zermelo, Fraenkel and von Neumann”
88Incidentally, Tarski [1931] stated a result whose proof led to Tarski’s well-known theorem
[1951] that the elementary theory of real closed ﬁelds is decidable via the elimination of quanti-
ﬁers.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
39
as “a natural generalization of [Russell’s simple] theory of types, or rather, what
becomes of the theory of types if certain superﬂuous restrictions are removed.”
First, the types can be taken to be cumulative, and second, the process can be
continued into the transﬁnite. As for how far this cumulative hierarchy of sets is
to continue, “the ﬁrst two or three [inﬁnite] types already suﬃce to deﬁne very
large [Cantorian ordinal numbers]” which can then serve to index the process, and
so on.
Implicitly referring to his incompleteness result G¨odel noted that for a
formal system S based on the theory of types a number-theoretic proposition can
be constructed which is unprovable in S but becomes provable if to S is adjoined
“the next higher type and the axioms concerning it.”89 Thus, although he never
mentioned Zermelo [1930], G¨odel was entertaining its cumulative hierarchies but
as motivated by the theory of types.
It is to this initiative, separately fueled by Zermelo and G¨odel, that one can date
how the formation of sets out of sets iterated into the transﬁnite as embodied by
the cumulative hierarchy can be regarded as a motivation for the subject matter
of set theory. In a notable inversion, what has come to be regarded as the iterative
conception became a heuristic for motivating the axioms of set theory generally.90
The iterative conception of sets, like Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth, has exercised
philosophers to a surprising extent with respect to extrinsic justiﬁcations. This
has opened the door to a metaphysical appropriation in the following sense: It
is as if there is some notion of set that is “there”, in terms of which the axioms
must ﬁnd some further justiﬁcation. But set theory has no particular obligations to
mirror some prior notion of set arrived at a posteriori. Replacement and Choice for
example do not quite “ﬁt” the iterative conception,91 but if need be, Replacement
can be “justiﬁed” in terms of achieving algebraic closure of the axioms, a strong
motivation in the work of Fraenkel and the later Zermelo, and choice can be
“justiﬁed” in terms of Cantorian well-ordering doctrines or as a logical principle
as Zermelo did.
In his ﬁrst announcement [1938] about L G¨odel described it as a hierarchy
“which can be obtained by Russell’s ramiﬁed hierarchy of types, if extended to
include transﬁnite orders.”
Indeed, with L G¨odel had reﬁned the cumulative
hierarchy of sets to a cumulative hierarchy of deﬁnable sets which is analogous to
the orders of Russell’s ramiﬁed theory. G¨odel’s further innovation was to continue
the indexing of the hierarchy through all the ordinals. Von Neumann’s canonical
89G¨odel was evidently referring to propositions like Con(S). In a prescient footnote, 48a, to
his incompleteness paper [1931] G¨odel had already written: “. . . the true reason for the incom-
pleteness inherent in all formal systems of mathematics is that the formation of ever higher
types can be continued into the transﬁnite . . . while in any formal system at most denumerably
many of them are available. For it can be shown that the undecidable propositions constructed
here become decided whenever appropriate higher types are added (for example, the type ω to
the system P [Peano Arithmetic]). An analogous situation prevails for the axiom system of set
theory.”
90Shoenﬁeld [1967: 238ﬀ][1977], Wang [1974a], Boolos [1971], and Scott [1974] motivate the
axioms of set theory in terms of an iterative concept of set based on stages of construction.
Parsons [1977] raises issues about this approach.
91See Boolos [1971] for Replacement and Scott [1974: 214] for Choice.

40
Akihiro Kanamori
well-orderings would be the spine for a thin hierarchy of sets, and this would be
the key to both the AC and GCH results.
In a brief account [1939] G¨odel informally presented L essentially as is done
today: For any set x let def(x) denote the collection of subsets of x ﬁrst-order
deﬁnable over ⟨x, ∈⟩.92 Then deﬁne:
L0 = ∅; Lα+1 = def(Lα), Lδ = S{Lα | α < δ} for limit ordinals δ;
and the constructible universe
L = S{Lα | α is an ordinal}.
G¨odel pointed out that L “can be deﬁned and its theory developed in the for-
mal systems of set theory themselves.” This is a remarkable understatement of
arguably the central feature of the construction of L. L is a class deﬁnable in
set theory via a transﬁnite recursion that could be based on the formalizability
of def(x), the deﬁnability of deﬁnability, which was later reaﬃrmed by Tarski’s
systematic deﬁnition of the satisfaction relation in set-theoretic terms. With this,
one can formalize the Axiom of Constructibility V = L, i.e. ∀x(x ∈L). In modern
parlance, an inner model is a transitive class93 containing all the ordinals such
that, with membership and quantiﬁcation restricted to it, the class satisﬁes each
axiom of ZF. In summary terms, what G¨odel did was to show in ZF that L is an
inner model, and moreover that L satisﬁes AC and GCH. He thus established the
relative consistency Con(ZF) implies Con(ZFC + GCH).
In the approach via def(x) it is necessary to show that def(x) remains unaltered
when applied in L with quantiﬁers restricted to L. G¨odel himself would never
establish this absoluteness of ﬁrst-order deﬁnability explicitly, preferring in his
one rigorous published exposition of L to take an approach that avoids def(x)
altogether.
In his monograph [1940], based on 1938 lectures, G¨odel provided a speciﬁc,
formal presentation of L in a class-set theory emanating from that of Bernays
(cf. [1976]), a theory based in turn on a theory of von Neumann [1925]. Using
eight binary operations producing new classes from old, G¨odel generated L set
by set via transﬁnite recursion. This veritable “G¨odel numbering” with ordinals
bypassed def(x) and made evident certain aspects of L. Since there is a direct,
deﬁnable well-ordering of L, choice functions abound in L, and AC holds there.
Of the other axioms the crux is where ﬁrst-order logic impinges, in Separation
and Replacement. For this, “algebraic” closure under G¨odel’s eight operations
92For a ﬁrst-order formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) in ∈, ϕx(x1, . . . , xn) is the restriction of the formula to
x, i.e. each ∀y is replaced by ∀y ∈x and each ∃y is replaced by ∃y ∈x (with these abbreviations
having the expected formal articulation).
A set y ⊆x is ﬁrst-order deﬁnable over ⟨x, ∈⟩if
there is a ﬁrst-order formula ϕ(v0, v1, . . . , vn) and a1, . . . , an all in x such that y = {z ∈x |
ϕx(z, a1, . . . , an)}.
93A class C is transitive if members of members of C are themselves members of C, so that C
is “closed under membership”.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
41
ensured “logical” Separation for bounded formulas,94 and then the full exercise of
Replacement (in V ) secured all of the ZF axioms in L.
G¨odel’s proof that L satisﬁes GCH consisted of two separate parts. He estab-
lished the implication V = L →GCH, and, in order to apply this implication
within L, that L as deﬁned within L with quantiﬁers restricted to L is again L
itself. This latter follows from the aforementioned absoluteness of def(x), and in
[1940] G¨odel gave an alternate proof based on the absoluteness of his eight binary
operations.
G¨odel’s argument for V = L →GCH rests, as he himself wrote in [1939], on “a
generalization of Skolem’s method for constructing enumerable models.” This was
the ﬁrst signiﬁcant use of Skolem functions since Skolem’s own to establish the
L¨owenheim-Skolem theorem, and with it, Skolem’s Paradox. Ironically, though
Skolem sought through his paradox to discredit set theory based on ﬁrst-order
logic as a foundation for mathematics, G¨odel turned paradox into method, one
promoting ﬁrst-order logic. G¨odel [1939] speciﬁcally established:
(∗)
For inﬁnite α, every constructible subset of Lα
belongs to some Lβ for a β of the same cardinality as α.
It is straightforward to show that for inﬁnite α, Lα has the same cardinality as that
of α. It follows from (∗) that in the sense of L, the power set of Lℵα is included
in Lℵα+1, and so GCH follows in L. To establish (∗), G¨odel actually iterated the
Skolem closure procedure, and made the ﬁrst use of the now familiar Mostowski
collapse (cf. 3.6). In an incisive 1939 lecture G¨odel announced the version of (∗)
for countable α as the crux of the consistency proof of CH and asserted that “this
fundamental theorem constitutes the corrected core of the so-called Russellian
axiom of reducibility.”95 Thus, G¨odel established another connection between L
and Russell’s ramiﬁed theory of types.
But while Russell had to postulate his
ill-fated Axiom of Reducibility for his ﬁnite orders, G¨odel was able to derive, with
an important use of Replacement, an analogous form for his transﬁnite hierarchy
that asserts that the types are delimited in the hierarchy of orders.
The synthesis at L extended to the resolution of diﬃculties in descriptive set
theory (cf. end of 2.5). G¨odel [1938] announced, in modern terms: If V = L,
then (a) there is a ∆1
2 set of reals that is not Lebesgue measurable, and (b) there
is a a Π1
1 set of reals without the perfect set property. Thus, the descriptive set
theorists were confronting an obstacle insurmountable in ZFC! G¨odel [1938] listed
each of these impossibility results on an equal footing with his AC and GCH
results. Unexpected, they were the ﬁrst instances of metamathematical methods
resolving outstanding mathematical problems that exhibited no prior connection
to such methods. When eventually conﬁrmed and reﬁned, the results were seen to
turn on a Σ1
2 well-ordering of the reals in L deﬁned via reals coding well-founded
structures and thus connected to the well-founded tree representation of a Π1
1 set
94That is, those ﬁrst-order formulas in which all the quantiﬁers can be rendered as ∀x ∈y and
∃x ∈y.
95See G¨odel [1939a: 141].

42
Akihiro Kanamori
(cf. 2.5).96
Set theory had progressed to the point of establishing, in addition to a consis-
tent resolution of CH, a consistent possibility for a deﬁnable well-ordering of the
reals as Cantor had wanted, one that synthesizes the two historical sources of well-
foundedness. Put into a broader historical context, formal deﬁnability was brought
into descriptive set theory by Tarski [1931], and by Kuratowski-Tarski [1931] and
Kuratowski [1931] which pursued the basic connection between existential num-
ber quantiﬁers and countable unions and between existential real quantiﬁers and
projection and used these “logical symbols” to aid in the classiﬁcation of sets in
the Borel and projective hierarchies. G¨odel’s results (a) and (b) constitute the
ﬁrst real synthesis of abstract and descriptive set theory, in that the axiomatic
framework is brought to bear on the investigation of deﬁnable sets of reals.
G¨odel brought into set theory a method of construction and argument which
aﬃrmed several features of its axiomatic presentation. Most prominently, G¨odel
showed how ﬁrst-order deﬁnability can be formalized and used in a transﬁnite
recursive construction to establish striking new mathematical results. This signif-
icantly contributed to a lasting ascendancy for ﬁrst-order logic which beyond its
suﬃciency as a logical framework for mathematics was seen to have considerable
operational eﬃcacy. Moreover, G¨odel’s construction buttressed the incorporation
of Replacement and Foundation into set theory. Replacement was immanent in the
arbitrary extent of the ordinals for the indexing of L and in its formal deﬁnition
via transﬁnite recursion. As for Foundation, underlying the construction was the
well-foundedness of sets. G¨odel in a footnote to his 1939 note wrote: “In order to
give A [the axiom V = L] an intuitive meaning, one has to understand by ‘sets’
all objects obtained by building up the simpliﬁed hierarchy of types on an empty
set of individuals (including types of arbitrary transﬁnite orders).”
How G¨odel transformed set theory can be broadly cast as follows: On the larger
stage, from the time of Cantor, sets began making their way into topology, alge-
bra, and analysis so that by the time of G¨odel, they were fairly entrenched in
the structure and language of mathematics. But how were sets viewed among set
theorists, those investigating sets as such? Before G¨odel, the main concerns were
what sets are and how sets and their axioms can serve as a reductive basis for
mathematics. Even today, those preoccupied with ontology, questions of math-
ematical existence, focus mostly upon the set theory of the early period. After
96When every real is in L, this Σ1
2 well-ordering is also ∆1
2 and does not satisfy Fubini’s
Theorem for Lebesgue measurable subsets of the plane, and this is one way to conﬁrm (a). What
may have been G¨odel’s original argument for (b) is given in Kanamori [2003: 170].
Texts establish (b) indirectly via the Kondˆo Π1
1 Uniformization Theorem, and this leads to
a historical point about G¨odel the working mathematician. As 1938 correspondence with von
Neumann makes evident, G¨odel was working on one-to-one continuous images of Π1
1 sets, and
his [1938] actually states the results (a) and (b) in these terms. In a 1939 letter, von Neumann
informed G¨odel of Kondˆo [1939], the paper containing the uniformization result, from which it is
immediate that the Σ1
2 sets are exactly the one-to-one continuous images of Π1
1 sets. In a replying
letter to von Neumann of 20 March 1939 G¨odel wrote: “The result of Kondˆo is of great interest
to me and will deﬁnitely allow an important simpliﬁcation in the consistency proof of [(a)] and
[(b)] of the attached oﬀprint.” See G¨odel [2003] for the G¨odel–von Neumann correspondence.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
43
G¨odel, the main concerns became what sets do and how set theory is to advance
as an autonomous ﬁeld of mathematics. The cumulative hierarchy picture was in
place as subject matter, and the metamathematical methods of ﬁrst-order logic
mediated the subject. There was a decided shift toward epistemological questions,
e.g. what can be proved about sets and on what basis.
As a pivotal ﬁgure, what was G¨odel’s own stance? What he said would align
him more with his predecessors, but what he did would lead to the development of
methods and models. In a 1944 article on Russell’s mathematical logic, in a 1947
article on Cantor’s continuum problem (and in a 1964 revision), and in subsequent
lectures and correspondence, G¨odel articulated his philosophy of “conceptual re-
alism” about mathematics. He espoused a staunchly objective “concept of set”
according to which the axioms of set theory are true and are descriptive of an
objective reality schematized by the cumulative hierarchy. Be that as it may, his
actual mathematical work laid the groundwork for the development of a range of
models and axioms for set theory. Already in the early 1940s G¨odel worked out
for himself a possible model for the negation of AC, and in a 1946 address he
described a new inner model, the class of ordinal deﬁnable sets.
In later years G¨odel speculated about the possibility of deciding propositions
like CH with large cardinal hypotheses based on the heuristics of reﬂection and
later, generalization.
Already in that 1946 address he suggested97 the consid-
eration of “stronger and stronger axioms of inﬁnity,” and reﬂection as follows:
“Any proof of a set-theoretic theorem in the next higher system above set theory
(i.e. any proof involving the concept of truth . . . ) is replaceable by a proof from
such an axiom of inﬁnity.” This ties in with the class of all ordinal numbers cast
as Cantor’s Absolute: A largeness property ascribable to the class might be used
to derive some set-theoretic proposition; but any such property confronts the an-
tithetical contention that the class is mathematically incomprehendable, fostering
the synthetic move to a large cardinal posited with the property.
In the expository article [1947] on the Continuum Problem G¨odel presumed
that CH would be shown independent from ZF and speculated more concretely
about possibilities with large cardinals. He argued that the axioms of set theory
do not “form a system closed in itself” and so the “very concept of set on which
they are based suggests their extension by new axioms that assert the existence
of still further iterations of the operation of ‘set of’ ”, citing Zermelo [1930] and
echoing its theme. In an unpublished footnote 20 toward a 1966 revision of [1947]
G¨odel was to acknowledge98 “extremely strong axioms of inﬁnity of an entirely
new kind”, generalizations of properties of ω “supported by strong arguments from
analogy”. This heuristic of generalization ties in with Cantor’s view of the ﬁnite
and transﬁnite as unitary, with properties like inaccessibility and measurability
technically satisﬁed by ω being too accidental were they not also ascribable to
higher cardinals through the uniformity of the set-theoretic universe.99
97See G¨odel [1990: 151].
98See G¨odel [1990: 260ﬀ].
99See Wang [1974: §§1,4] for more on G¨odel’s view on heuristics as well as the criteria of

44
Akihiro Kanamori
G¨odel [1947] at the end actually argued against CH by drawing on the work
of Sierpinski and others (cf. 2.6) to exhibit six “paradoxical” consequences. One
of them is the existence of a Luzin set of cardinality of the continuum, and three
others actually follows from the existence of such a set. This brought to the fore
G¨odel’s stance about what is true in set theory. Whether CH is proved consistent
or independent of ZFC, he believed in a “truth of the matter” both from the point
of view of intuitions about the continuum and from his philosophical standpoint.
That CH is implausible because it led to various implausible conclusions became
a prominent attitude, one that would stay with set theory through its subsequent
development.
3.5
Combinatorics
G¨odel’s construction of L was both a culmination in all major respects of the
early period in set theory and a source for much that was to follow. But for quite
some time it was to remain an isolated monument in the axiomatic tradition.
No doubt the intervening years of war were a prominent factor, but there was a
continuing diﬃculty in handling deﬁnability within set theory and a stultifying lack
of means for constructing models of set theory to settle issues of consistency and
independence. It would take a new generation versed in emerging model-theoretic
methods to set the stage for the next major methodological advances.
In the meantime, the direct investigation of the transﬁnite as extension of num-
ber was advanced, gingerly at ﬁrst, by a new initiative. The seminal results of
inﬁnite combinatorics were established beginning in the 1930s. As for algebra and
topology, it was natural to extend concepts over the transﬁnite, and signiﬁcantly,
the combinatorics that would have the most bearing there had their roots in the
mathematization of logic.
Frank Ramsey [1930] established a special case of the Decision Problem of
Hilbert-Ackermann [1928], the decidability of validity for the ∃∀formulas with
identity. For this purpose he established a basic generalization of the pigeonhole
principle. In a move that transcended purpose and context he also established
an inﬁnite version implicitly applying the now familiar K˝onig’s Lemma for trees.
Stated more generally for graphs by D´enes K˝onig [1927: 121] the lemma had also
ﬁgured implicitly in L¨owenheim [1915].
In what follows we aﬃrm the general
terminology for the formulation of Ramsey’s results and then K˝onig’s Lemma,
anticipating extensions into the transﬁnite.
For ordinals α, β, and δ and n ∈ω the partition property
β −→(α)n
δ
is the assertion that for any partition f: [β]n →δ of the n-element subsets of β
into δ cells there is an H ⊆β of order type α homogeneous for the partition,
i.e. all the n-element subsets of H lie in the same cell. Ramsey showed that for
intrinsic necessity and pragmatic success for accepting new axioms.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
45
any k, n, and r all in ω, there is a m ∈ω such that m −→(k)n
r . Skolem [1933]
sharpened Ramsey’s argument and thereby lowered the possibilities for the m’s,
but to this day the least such m’s, the Ramsey numbers, have not been determined
except in the simplest cases. Ramsey’s inﬁnite version is: ω −→(ω)n
r for every
n, r ∈ω. This partition property and its variants have been adapted to a variety
of situations, and today Ramsey theory is a thriving ﬁeld of combinatorics.100
A tree is a partially ordered set T such that the predecessors of any element
are well-ordered. The αth level of T consists of those elements whose predecessors
have order type α, and the height of T is the least α such that the αth level of T
is empty. A chain of T is a linearly ordered subset, and an antichain is a subset
consisting of pairwise incomparable elements. A branch of T is a maximal chain,
and a coﬁnal branch of T is a branch with elements at every non-empty level of
T. Finally, for a cardinal κ, a κ-tree is a tree of height κ each of whose levels has
cardinality less than κ, and
κ has the tree property iﬀevery κ-tree has a coﬁnal branch .
Finite trees of course are quite basic to current graph theory and computer science.
With inﬁnite trees the concerns are rather diﬀerent, typically involving coﬁnal
branches. K˝onig’s Lemma asserts that ω has the tree property.
The ﬁrst systematic study of transﬁnite trees was carried out in -Duro Kurepa’s
thesis [1935], and several properties emerging from his investigations, particularly
for ω1-trees, would later become focal in the combinatorial study of the transﬁnite.
An Aronszajn tree is an ω1-tree without a coﬁnal branch ,
i.e. a counterexample to the tree property for ω1. Kurepa [1935: §9,thm 6] gave
Nachman Aronszajn’s result that there is an Aronszajn tree.
A Suslin tree is an ω1-tree with no uncountable chains or antichains .
Kurepa [1935: appendix] reduced a hypothesis growing out of a problem of Suslin
[1920] about the characterizability of the order type of the reals to a combinatorial
property of ω1 as follows: Suslin’s Hypothesis holds iﬀthere are no Suslin trees.
A Kurepa tree is an ω1-tree with at least ω2 coﬁnal branches ,
and Kurepa’s Hypothesis deriving from Kurepa [1942: 143], is the assertion that
such trees exist. Much of this would be rediscovered, and both Suslin’s Hypothesis
and Kurepa’s Hypothesis would be resolved three decades later with the advent of
forcing, several of the resolutions in terms of large cardinal hypotheses.101Kurepa’s
work also anticipated another development from a diﬀerent quarter:
Paul Erd˝os, although an itinerant mathematician for most of his life, was the
prominent ﬁgure of a strong Hungarian tradition in combinatorics, and through
100See the text Graham-Rothschild-Spencer [1990] and the compendium Neˇsetˇril-R¨odl [1990]
for the recent work on Ramsey Theory.
101See Todorˇcevi´c [1984] for a wide-ranging account of transﬁnite trees.

46
Akihiro Kanamori
some seminal results he introduced major initiatives into the detailed combina-
torial study of the transﬁnite.
Erd˝os and his collaborators simply viewed the
transﬁnite numbers as a combinatorially rich source of intrinsically interesting
problems, the concrete questions about graphs and mappings having a natural
appeal through their immediacy. One of the earliest advances was Erd˝os-Tarski
[1943] which concluded enticingly with an intriguing list of six combinatorial prob-
lems, the positive solution to any, as it was to turn out, amounting to the existence
of a large cardinal. In a footnote various implications were noted, one of them be-
ing essentially that for inaccessible κ, the tree property for κ implies κ −→(κ)2
2,
generalizing Ramsey’s ω −→(ω)2
2 and making explicit the K˝onig Lemma prop-
erty needed. While Kurepa was investigating distinctive properties of uncountable
trees, Erd˝os-Tarski [1943] was evidently motivated by strong properties of ω to for-
mulate direct combinatorial generalizations to inaccessible cardinals by analogy.102
The situation would become considerably clariﬁed, but only two decades later.103
The detailed investigation of partition properties began in earnest in the 1950s,
with Erd˝os and Richard Rado’s [1956] being representative. For a cardinal κ, let
κ+ denote its successor cardinal and set exp0(κ) = κ and expn+1(κ) = 2expn(κ).
What became known as the Erd˝os–Rado Theorem asserts: For any inﬁnite cardinal
κ and n ∈ω,
expn(κ)+ −→(κ+)n+1
κ
.
This was established using the basic tree argument underlying Ramsey’s results,
whereby a homogeneous set is not constructed recursively, but a tree is constructed
such that its branches provide homogeneous sets, and a counting argument ensures
that there must be a homogeneous set of suﬃcient cardinality. Kurepa [1937; 1939]
in eﬀect had actually established the case n = 1 and shown that exp1(κ)+ was the
least possible. The expn(κ)+ was also shown to be the least possible in the general
case, and so unlike for the Ramsey numbers in the ﬁnite case an exact analysis
was quickly achieved in the transﬁnite. This was to be a recurring phenomenon,
that the gross features of transﬁnite cardinality make its combinatorics actually
easier than in the analogous ﬁnite situation. And notably, iterated cardinal ex-
ponentiation ﬁgured prominently, so that shedding deeper concerns the power set
operation became further domesticated in the arithmetic of combinatorics. In fact,
assuming GCH simpliﬁed results and formulations, and this was often done, as in
Erd˝os, Andr´as Hajnal, and Rado’s [1965], representative of the 1960s. Increas-
ingly, a myriad of versions have been investigated in the larger terrain without
GCH.104
102On the other hand, Kurepa [1935: §10.3] did ask whether every inaccessible cardinal has the
tree property, a question only resolved by work of Hanf (cf. 3.6).
103The details of implications asserted at the end of Erd˝os-Tarski [1943] were worked out in an
inﬂuential seminar conducted by Tarski and Mostowski at Berkeley in 1958-9, and appeared in
Erd˝os-Tarski [1961].
104The results of Erd˝os-Hajnal-Rado [1965] were extended in Byzantine detail to the general
situation without GCH by the book Erd˝os-Hajnal-M´at´e-Rado [1984]. See Hajnal–Larson [2008]
for recent work on partition relations.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
47
Still among the Hungarians, G´eza Fodor [1956] established the now familiar
regressive function lemma for stationary sets: If λ regular and uncountable, S is
stationary in λ,105 and f: S →λ is regressive (i.e. f(ξ) < ξ for ξ ∈S), then there
is an α < λ such that {ξ ∈S | f(ξ) = α} is stationary in λ. It is a basic fact
and a simple exercise now, but then it was the culmination of a progression of
results beginning with a special case established in Aleksandrov-Urysohn [1929]
and getting to the right largeness notion of stationarity. The contrast with how
the lemma’s earlier precursors were considered diﬃcult and even paradoxical is
striking, indicative of both the novelty of uncountable coﬁnality and the great
leap forward that set theory has made.
3.6
Model-theoretic methods
Model theory began in earnest with the method of diagrams of Abraham Robin-
son’s thesis [1951] and the related method of constants from Leon Henkin’s thesis
which gave a new proof [1949] of the G¨odel Completeness Theorem. Tarski had
set the stage with his deﬁnition of truth and more generally his casting of formal
languages and structures in set-theoretic terms, and with him established at the
University of California at Berkeley a large part of the development in the 1950s
and 1960s would take place there. The construction of models freely used transﬁ-
nite methods and soon led to new questions in set theory, but also set theory was
to be decisively advanced by the infusion of model-theoretic methods.
The ﬁrst relevant result was a generalization accreditable to Mostowski [1949] of
the Mirimanoﬀ–von Neumann result that every well-ordered set is order-isomorphic
to exactly one ordinal with membership. A binary relation R is extensional on X
iﬀfor any x ̸= y both in X there is a z ∈X such that z R x iﬀ¬z R y. Recall
that x is transitive iﬀmembers of members of x are themselves members of x, so
that x is “closed under membership”. If R is a well-founded relation on a set X
and extensional on X, there is a unique isomorphism of ⟨X, R⟩onto ⟨T, ∈⟩where
T is transitive, i.e. a bijection π: X →T such that for any x, y ∈X, x R y iﬀ
π(x) ∈π(y). T is the transitive collapse of X, and π the collapsing isomorphism.
Thus, the linearity of well-orderings has been relaxed to well-foundedness and an
analogue of the Axiom of Extensionality, and the transitive sets become canonical
representatives as ordinals are for well-orderings. G¨odel [1939: 222] had made the
ﬁrst substantial use of the transitive collapse; Mostowski [1949: 147] established
the general result much later; and John Shepherdson [1951: 171] in a structured
setting that brought out a further necessary hypothesis for classes X: R is set-like,
i.e. for any x ∈X, {y | y R x} is a set. The initial applications in Mostowski [1949]
and Shepherdson [1953] were to establish the independence of the assertion that
there is a transitive set M which with ∈restricted to it is a model of set theory.
While the Mirimanoﬀ–von Neumann result was basic to the analysis of number in
105A set C ⊆λ is closed unbounded in λ iﬀC contains its limit points, i.e. those 0 < α < λ
such that C ∩α = α, and is coﬁnal, i.e. S C = λ. A set S ⊆λ is stationary in λ iﬀfor any C
closed unbounded in λ, S ∩C is not empty.

48
Akihiro Kanamori
the transﬁnite, the transitive collapse result grew in signiﬁcance from speciﬁc ap-
plications and came to epitomize how well-foundedness made possible a coherent
theory of models of set theory.
The relationship between ZFC and Bernays-G¨odel (BG), the class-set theory
brought into prominence by its use in G¨odel [1940], was clariﬁed during this period.
As analyzed in Hao Wang [1949], BG can be construed as an extension of ZFC
via the introduction of class variables intended to range over subcollections of
V and correlative axioms, together with a comprehension principle asserting for
each formula ϕ with just one set variable v free and no class variables quantiﬁed
that there is a corresponding class {v | ϕ}. Ilse Novak [1950] and Barkley Rosser
and Wang in their [1950] established that if ZFC is consistent, then so is BG by
providing model-theoretic interpretations of BG relative to ZFC. Then Mostowski
[1950] showed that BG is a conservative extension of ZF, i.e. any sentence σ without
class variables provable in BG is already provable in ZFC. Subsequently, Joseph
Shoenﬁeld [1954] showed how to convert directly a proof of such a σ in BG into a
proof in ZFC. These results reinforced the impression that, as far as the axiomatic
tradition from Zermelo through G¨odel is concerned, there is essentially one set
theory, and one might as well work in the parsimonious ZFC.
Shepherdson [1951; 1952; 1953] studied “inner” models of set theory, with [1952]
giving a rigorous ﬁrst-order account of the results of Zermelo [1930]. The term
is now reserved for the case mentioned in 3.4: A transitive class containing all
the ordinals such that, with membership and quantiﬁcation restricted to it, the
class satisﬁes each axiom of ZF. The archetypal inner model is G¨odel’s L, and
L ⊆M for any inner model M since the construction of L carried out in M is
again L. Because of this Shepherdson [1953] observed that the relative consistency
of hypotheses like the negation of CH cannot be established via inner models.
Hajnal [1956; 1961] and Azriel Levy [1957; 1960] developed generalizations of
L that were to become basic in a richer setting. For a set A, Hajnal formulated
the constructible closure L(A) of A, i.e. the smallest inner model M such that
A ∈M, and Levy formulated the class L[A] of sets constructible relative to A,
i.e. the smallest inner model M such that for every x ∈M, A ∩x ∈M.106 L(A)
realizes the algebraic idea of building up a model starting from a set of generators,
and L[A] the idea of building up a model using A construed as a predicate. L(A)
may not satisfy AC since e.g. it may not have a well-ordering of A, yet L[A] always
satisﬁes that axiom. This distinction was only to surface later, as both Hajnal and
Levy took A to be a set of ordinals, when L(A) = L[A]. Hajnal and Levy (and also
Shoenﬁeld [1959], who formulated a special version of Levy’s construction) used
these models to establish conditional independence results of the sort: if the failure
of CH is consistent, then so is that failure together with 2λ = λ+ for suﬃciently
106To formulate L(A), deﬁne: L0(A) = the smallest transitive set ⊇{A} (to ensure that the
resulting class is transitive); Lα+1 = def(Lα(A)) (where def is as in 3.4); Lδ = S
α<δ Lα(A)
for limit δ > 0; and ﬁnally L(A) = S
α Lα(A).
To formulate L[A], ﬁrst let defA(x) denote
the collection of subsets of x ﬁrst-order deﬁnable over ⟨x, ∈, A ∩x⟩, i.e. A ∩x is now allowed
as a predicate in the deﬁnitions. Then deﬁne: L0[A] = ∅; Lα+1[A] = defA(Lα[A]); Lδ[A] =
S
α<δ Lα[A] for limit δ > 0; and ﬁnally L[A] = S
α Lα[A].

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
49
large cardinals λ.
After Richard Montague [1956; 1961] applied reﬂection phenomena to inves-
tigate ﬁnite axiomatizability for set theory, Levy [1960a; 1960b] also formulated
reﬂection principles and established their broader signiﬁcance.
The Reﬂection
Principle for ZF, drawn from Montague [1961: 99] and from Levy [1960a: 234], as-
serts: For any (ﬁrst-order) formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) and any ordinal β, there is a
limit ordinal α > β such that for any x1, . . . , xn ∈Vα,
ϕ[x1, . . . , xn] iﬀϕVα[x1, . . . , xn] ,
i.e. the formula holds exactly when it holds with all the quantiﬁers restricted to Vα.
Levy showed that this schema is equivalent to the conjunction of the Replacement
schema together with Inﬁnity in the presence of the other axioms of ZF. Moreover,
he formulated reﬂection principles in local form that characterized cardinals in the
Mahlo hierarchy (2.4), conceptually the least large cardinals after the inaccessible
cardinals. Then William Hanf and Dana Scott in their [1961] posited analogous
reﬂection principles for higher-order formulas, leading to what are now called the
indescribable cardinals, and eventually Levy [1971] carried out a systematic study
of the sizes of these cardinals.107 The model-theoretic reﬂection idea thus pro-
vided a coherent scheme for viewing the bottom of an emerging hierarchy of large
cardinals as a generalization of Replacement and Inﬁnity, one that resonates with
the procession of models in Zermelo [1930]. The heuristic of reﬂection had been
broached in 1946 remarks by G¨odel (cf. 3.4), and another point of contact is the
formulation of the concept of ordinal deﬁnable set in those remarks. With the
class of ordinal deﬁnable sets formalized by OD = S
α def(Vα), the adequacy of
this deﬁnition is based on some form of the Reﬂection Principle for ZF. With tc(y)
denoting the smallest transitive set ⊇y, let HOD = {x | tc({x}) ⊆OD}. the class
of hereditarily ordinal deﬁnable sets. As adumbrated by G¨odel, HOD is an inner
model in which AC, though not necessarily CH, holds. The basic results about
this inner model were to be rediscovered several times.108 In these several ways
reﬂection phenomena both as heuristic and as principle became incorporated into
set theory, bringing to the forefront what was to become a basic feature of the
study of well-foundedness.
The set-theoretic generalization of ﬁrst-order logic allowing transﬁnitely indexed
logical operations was to lead to the solution of the problem of whether the least
inaccessible cardinal can be measurable (cf. 3.2). Extending familiarity by ab-
stracting to a new domain Tarski [1962] deﬁned the strongly compact and weakly
compact cardinals by ascribing natural generalizations of the key compactness
property of ﬁrst-order logic to the corresponding inﬁnitary languages. These car-
dinals had ﬁgured in Erd˝os-Tarski [1943] (cf. 3.5) in combinatorial formulations
that was later seen to imply that a strongly compact cardinal is measurable, and
a measurable cardinal is weakly compact. Tarski [1962] pointed out that his stu-
dent Hanf (cf. [1964]) established, using the satisfaction relation for inﬁnitary
107See Kanamori [2003: §6].
108See Myhill-Scott [1971], especially p. 278.

50
Akihiro Kanamori
languages, that there are many inaccessible cardinals (and Mahlo cardinals) be-
low a weakly compact cardinal. A fortiori, the least inaccessible cardinal is not
measurable. This breakthrough was the ﬁrst result about the size of measurable
cardinals since Ulam’s original paper [1930] and was greeted as a spectacular suc-
cess for metamathematical methods. Hanf’s work radically altered size intuitions
about problems coming to be understood in terms of large cardinals and ushered
in model-theoretic methods into the study of large cardinals beyond the Mahlo
cardinals.109
Weak compactness was soon seen to have a variety of characterizations; most
notably in terms of 3.5, κ is weakly compact iﬀκ →(κ)2
2 iﬀκ →(κ)n
λ for every
n ∈ω and λ < κ iﬀκ is inaccessible and has the tree property. Erd˝os and Ha-
jnal [1962] noted that the study of stronger partition properties had progressed
to the point where a combinatorial proof that the least inaccessible cardinal is
not measurable could have been given before Hanf came to his argument. How-
ever, model-theoretic methods quickly led to far stronger conclusions, particularly
through the connection that had been made in Ehrenfeucht-Mostowski [1956] be-
tween partition properties and sets of indiscernibles.110
The concurrent emergence of the ultraproduct construction in model theory
set the stage for the development of the modern theory of large cardinals in set
theory. With a precursor in Skolem’s [1933a; 1934] construction of a non-standard
model of arithmetic the ultraproduct construction was brought to the forefront by
Tarski and his students after Jerzy  Lo´s’s [1955] adumbration of its fundamental
theorem. This new method of constructing concrete models brought set theory
and model theory even closer together in a surge of results and a lasting interest
in ultraﬁlters.
Measurable cardinals had been formulated (cf. 3.2) in terms of
ultraﬁlters construed as two-valued measures; Jerome Keisler [1962] struck on
the idea of taking the ultrapower of a measurable cardinal κ by a κ-complete
ultraﬁlter over κ to give a new proof of Hanf’s result, seeing the crucial point that
the completeness property led to a well-founded, and so in his case well-ordered,
structure.
Then Scott [1961] made the further, crucial move of taking the ultrapower of
the universe V itself by such an ultraﬁlter.
The full exercise of the transitive
collapse as a generalization of the correlation of ordinals to well-ordered sets now
led to an inner model M ̸= V and an elementary embedding j: V →M.111 With
this Scott established: If there is a measurable cardinal, then V ̸= L.
Large
cardinal hypotheses thus assumed a new signiﬁcance as a means for maximizing
possibilities away from G¨odel’s delimitative construction. Also, the Cantor-G¨odel
109See Kanamori [2003: §4] for these results about strongly and weakly compact cardinals.
110See Kanamori [2003: §§7, 8, 9] for more on partition relations and sets of indiscernibles, par-
ticularly their role in the formulation the set of natural numbers 0# and its role of transcendence
over L.
111That
is,
for
any
formula
ϕ(v1, . . . , vn)
and
sets
x1, . . . , xn,
ϕ(x1, . . . , xn)
←→
ϕM(j(x1), . . . , j(xn)), i.e. the formula holds of the xis exactly when it holds of the j(xi)s with
the quantiﬁers restricted to M. Thus elementary embeddings are just the extension of algebraic
monomorphisms to the preservation of logical properties.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
51
realist view of a ﬁxed set-theoretic universe notwithstanding, Scott’s construction
fostered the manipulative use of inner models in set theory.
The construction
provided one direction and Keisler [1962a] the other of a new characterization
that established a central structural role for measurable cardinals: There is an
elementary embedding j: V →M for some inner model M ̸= V iﬀthere is a
measurable cardinal. This result is not formalizable in ZFC because of the use of
the satisfaction relation and the existential assertion of a proper class, but technical
versions are. Despite the lack of formalizability such existential assertions have
been widely entertained since, and with this set theory in practice could be said
to have overleaped the bounds of ZFC. On the other hand, that the existence
of a class elementary embedding is equivalent to the existence of a certain set,
the witnessing ultraﬁlter for a measurable cardinal, can be considered a means of
formalization in ZFC, one that would be paradigmatic for such reductions.
Work of Petr Vopˇenka, who started the active Prague seminar in set theory in
the spring of 1963, would be closely connected to that of Scott. Aware of the lim-
itations of inner models for establishing independence results Vopˇenka (cf. [1965])
embarked on a systematic study of (mostly ill-founded) class models of Bernays-
G¨odel set theory using ultrapower and direct limit constructions. Vopˇenka not
only established [1962] Scott’s result on the incompatibility of measurability and
constructibility via diﬀerent means, but he and his student Karel Hrb´aˇcek in their
[1966] soon established a global generalization for inner models L(A): If there is
a strongly compact cardinal, then V ̸= L(A) for any set A.
Through model-theoretic methods set theory was brought to the point of enter-
taining elementary embeddings into well-founded models,112 soon to be transﬁg-
ured by a new method for getting well-founded extensions of well-founded models.
4
INDEPENDENCE
4.1
Forcing
Paul Cohen (1934–2007), born just before G¨odel established his relative consis-
tency results, established the independence of AC from ZF and the independence
of CH from ZFC [1963; 1964]. That is, Cohen established that Con(ZF) implies
Con(ZF + ¬AC) and Con(ZF) implies Con(ZFC + ¬CH). These results delimited
ZF and ZFC in terms of the two fundamental issues at the beginnings of set the-
ory. But beyond that, Cohen’s proofs were soon to ﬂow into method, becoming
the inaugural examples of forcing, a remarkably general and ﬂexible method for
extending models of set theory. Forcing has strong intuitive underpinnings and
reinforces the notion of set as given by the ﬁrst-order ZF axioms with conspicuous
uses of Replacement and Foundation. If G¨odel’s construction of L had launched
set theory as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics, then Cohen’s method of forcing
112See Keisler-Tarski [1964] for a comprehensive account of the theory of large cardinals through
the use of ultrapowers in the early 1960s.

52
Akihiro Kanamori
began its transformation into a modern, sophisticated one.113
Cohen’s approach was to start with a model M of ZF and adjoin a set G, one
that would exhibit some desired new property. He realized that this had to be
done in a minimal fashion in order that the resulting structure also model ZF, and
so imposed restrictive conditions on both M and G. He took M to be a countable
standard model, i.e. a countable transitive set that together with the membership
relation restricted to it is a model of ZF.114 The ordinals of M would then coincide
with the predecessors of some ordinal ρ, and M would be the cumulative hierarchy
M = S
α<ρ Vα ∩M. Cohen then established a system of terms to denote members
of the new model, ﬁnding it convenient to use a ramiﬁed language: For each x ∈M
let ˙x be a corresponding constant; let ˙G be a new constant; and for each α < ρ
introduce quantiﬁers ∀α and ∃α. Then develop a hierarchy of terms as follows:
˙M0 = { ˙G}, and for limit ordinals δ < ρ,
˙Mδ = S
α<δ ˙Mα. At the successor stage,
let
˙Mα+1 be the collection of terms ˙x for x ∈Vα ∩M and “abstraction” terms
corresponding to formulas allowing parameters from
˙Mα and quantiﬁers ∀α and
∃α. It is crucial that this ramiﬁed language with abstraction terms be entirely
formalizable in M, through a systematic coding of symbols.
Once a set G is
provided from the outside, a model M[G] = S
α<ρ Mα[G] would be determined
by the terms, where each ˙x is to be interpreted by x for x ∈M and ˙G is to
be interpreted by G, so that: M0[G] = {G}; for limit ordinals δ < ρ, Mδ[G] =
S
α<δ Mα[G]; and Mα+1[G] consists of the sets in Vα ∩M together with sets
interpreting the abstraction terms as the corresponding deﬁnable subsets of Mα[G]
with ∀α and ∃α ranging over this domain.
But what properties can be imposed on G to ensure that M[G] be a model
of ZF? Cohen’s key idea was to tie G closely to M through a system of sets in
M called conditions that would approximate G. While G may not be a member
of M, G is to be a subset of some Y ∈M (with Y = ω a basic case), and
these conditions would “force” some assertions about the eventual M[G] e.g. by
deciding some of the membership questions, whether x ∈G or not, for x ∈Y . The
assertions are to be just those expressible in the ramiﬁed language, and Cohen
developed a corresponding forcing relation p ∥- ϕ, “p forces ϕ”, between conditions
p and formulas ϕ, a relation with properties reﬂecting his approximation idea.
For example, if p ∥- ϕ and p ∥- ψ, then p ∥- ϕ & ψ. The conditions are ordered
according to the constraints they impose on the eventual G, so that if p ∥- ϕ, and
q is a stronger condition, then q ∥- ϕ. Scott actually provided the now common
forcing symbol ∥- , and with Cohen having worked with prenex formulas, Scott
showed how to proceed generally by separating out negation with: p ∥- ¬ϕ iﬀfor
no stronger condition q does q ∥- ϕ. It was crucial to Cohen’s approach that the
forcing relation, like the ramiﬁed language, be deﬁnable in M.
113According to Scott (Bell [1985: ix]): “Set theory could never be the same after Cohen, and
there is simply no comparison whatsoever in the sophistication of our knowledge about models
of set theory today as contrasted to the pre-Cohen era.”
114The existence of such a model is an avoidable assumption in formal relative consistency
proofs via forcing.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
53
The ﬁnal ingredient is that the whole scaﬀolding is given life by incorporating
a certain kind of set G. Stepping out of M and making the only use of its count-
ability, Cohen enumerated the formulas of the ramiﬁed language in a countable
sequence and required that G be completely determined by a countable sequence
of stronger and stronger conditions p0, p1, p2, . . . such that for every formula ϕ
of the ramiﬁed language exactly one of ϕ or ¬ϕ is forced by some pn. Such a
G is called a generic set. Cohen was able to show that the resulting M[G] does
indeed satisfy the axioms of ZF: Every assertion about M[G] is already forced
by some condition; the forcing relation is deﬁnable in M; and so the ZF axioms,
holding in M, most crucially Power Set and Replacement, can be applied to derive
corresponding forcing assertions about ZF axioms holding in M[G].
The foregoing outline in its main features reﬂects how forcing was viewed by
July 1963 and presented by Cohen himself in a course in Spring 1965.115 He ﬁrst
described the case when G ⊆ω and the conditions p are functions from some ﬁnite
subset of ω into {0, 1} and p ∥- ˙n ∈˙G if p(n) = 1 and p ∥- ˙n /∈˙G if p(n) = 0.
Today, a G so adjoined to M is called a Cohen real over M. Cohen established
the independence of CH by adjoining a set which can be construed as a sequence
of many Cohen reals. He established the independence of AC by a version of the
above scheme where in addition to ˙G there are also new constants ˙Gi for i ∈ω,
with ˙G to be interpreted by a set X of Cohen reals, each an interpretation of some
˙Gi. The point is that X is not well-orderable in the extension.
The appeal to a countable model in Cohen’s approach is a notable positive sub-
sumption of Skolem’s Paradox (cf. 3.2) into a new method. Remarkably, Skolem
[1923: 229] had entertained the possibility of adjoining a new subset of the natu-
ral numbers to a countable model of Zermelo’s system and getting a new model,
adding in a footnote that “it is quite probable” that the Continuum Hypothesis
is not decided by Zermelo’s axioms. Just as starting with a countable standard
model is not formally necessary for relative consistency results, other features of
Cohen’s argument would soon be reformulated, reorganized, and generalized, but
the main thrust of his constructive approach through deﬁnability and genericity
would remain.
Cohen’s particular achievement lies in devising a concrete pro-
cedure for extending well-founded models of set theory in a minimal fashion to
well-founded models of set theory with new properties but without altering the
ordinals.116 Set theory had undergone a sea-change, and beyond how the subject
was enriched, it is diﬃcult to convey the strangeness of it.
The creation of forcing is a singular phenomenon in the development of set the-
ory not only since it raised the level of the subject dramatically but also since it
could well have occurred decades earlier. But however epochal Cohen’s advance
there was a line of development for which it did provide at least a semblance of con-
115See Cohen [1966].
116Scott continued (Bell [1985: ix]): “I knew almost all the set-theoreticians of the day, and I
think I can say that no one could have guessed that the proof would have gone in just this way.
Model-theoretic methods had shown us how many non-standard models there were; but Cohen,
starting from very primitive ﬁrst principles, found the way to keep the models standard (that is,
with a well-ordered collection of ordinals).”

54
Akihiro Kanamori
tinuity: Interest in independence results for weak versions of AC had been on the
rise from the mid-1950’s, with more and more sophisticated Fraenkel-Mostowski
models being constructed.117
Solomon Feferman, who was one of the ﬁrst to
whom Cohen explained his ideas for the independence proofs in the process of
their development, was the ﬁrst after him to establish results by forcing; Levy
soon followed; and among their ﬁrst results were new independences from ZF for
weak versions of AC (Feferman-Levy [1963], Feferman [1965]). Cohen [1965: 40]
moreover acknowledged the similarities between his AC independence result and
the previous Fraenkel-Mostowski models. In fact, consistencies ﬁrst established
via Fraenkel-Mostowski models were soon “transferred” to consequence of ZF via
forcing by correlating urelements with generic sets.118
After an initial result by Feferman [1963], Levy [1963; 1965; 1970] also probed
the limits of ZFC deﬁnability, establishing consistency results about deﬁnable sets
of reals and well-orderings and in descriptive set theory. Intriguingly, inaccessi-
ble cardinals were brought in to overcome a technical hurdle in this study; Levy
[1963: IV] applied the deﬁning properties of such a cardinal to devise its “collapse”
to ℵ1 by making every smaller ordinal countable, and this forcing is now known
as the Levy collapse.
Forcing was quickly generalized and applied to achieve wide-ranging results,
particularly by Robert Solovay. He above all epitomized this period of great ex-
pansion in set theory with his mathematical sophistication and fundamental results
about and with forcing, and in the areas of large cardinals and descriptive set the-
ory. Just weeks after Cohen’s breakthrough Solovay [1963; 1965] elaborated the
independence of CH by characterizing the possibilities for the size of 2κ for reg-
ular κ and made the ﬁrst exploration of a spectrum of cardinals. Then William
Easton [1964; 1970] established the deﬁnitive result for powers of regular cardi-
nals: Suppose that GCH holds and F is a class function from the class of regular
cardinals to cardinals such that for κ ≤λ, F(κ) ≤F(λ) and the coﬁnality of
F(κ) is greater than κ. Then there is a forcing extension preserving coﬁnalities
in which 2κ = F(κ) for every regular κ. Thus, as Solovay had seen locally, the
only restriction beyond monotonicity on the power function for regular cardinals
is that given by the Zermelo–K˝onig inequality.119 Easton’s result vitally infused
forcing not only with the introduction of proper classes of forcing conditions but
the now basic idea of a product analysis and the now familiar concept of Easton
support. Through its reduction Easton’s result focused interest on the possibili-
ties for powers of singular cardinals, and this Singular Cardinals Problem together
with the Singular Cardinals Hypothesis would stimulate the further development
of set theory much as the Continuum Problem and the Continuum Hypothesis had
stimulated its early development.120
117See Moore [1982: 5.1].
118See Felgner [1971] and Jech [1973] for more on the independence of weak versions of AC and
transfers, and Pincus [1972] for a strong transfer theorem.
119See 1.3, especially footnote 27.
120The Singular Cardinal Hypothesis asserts that 2λ for singular λ is the least possible with
respect to the powers 2µ for µ < λ, as given by monotonicity and the Zermelo-K˝onig inequality.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
55
In the Spring of 1964 Solovay [1965b; 1970] established a result remarkable for
its mathematical depth and revelatory of what standard of argument was possible
with forcing: If there is an inaccessible cardinal, then in an inner model of a
forcing extension every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable, has the Baire property,
and has the perfect set property. Like Cohen’s results, this contextually decided
issues dating back to the turn of the century and before; as described in 2.3 the
regularity properties of sets of reals was a major concern of the early descriptive
set theorists. Classical counterexamples show that Solovay’s inner model cannot
have a well-ordering of the reals, and so AC fails there. However, he established
that the model satisﬁes the Principle of Dependent Choices, a principle suﬃcient
for the formal rendition of the traditional theory of measure and category. Thus,
Solovay’s work vindicated the early descriptive set theorists in the sense that the
regularity properties can consistently hold for all sets of reals in a bona ﬁde model
for mathematical analysis.
For his result Solovay applied the Levy collapse of
an inaccessible cardinal and built on its deﬁnability properties as ﬁrst exploited
by Levy [1963: IV]; for the Lebesgue measurability he introduced a new kind of
forcing beyond Cohen’s direct ways of adjoining new sets of ordinals or collapsing
cardinals, that of adding a random real. Solovay’s work not only opened the door
to a wealth of diﬀerent forcing arguments, but to this day his original deﬁnability
arguments remain vital to descriptive set theory.
The perfect set property, central to Cantor’s direct approach to the Continuum
Problem through deﬁnability (1.2,2.3,2.5), led to the ﬁrst acknowledged instance
of a new phenomenon in set theory: the derivation of equiconsistency results with
large cardinal hypotheses based on the complementary methods of forcing and in-
ner models. A large cardinal hypothesis is typically transformed into a proposition
about sets of reals by forcing that “collapses” that cardinal to ℵ1 or “enlarges”
the power of the continuum to that cardinal. Conversely, the proposition entails
the same large cardinal hypothesis in the clarity of an inner model.
Solovay’s
result provided the forcing direction from an inaccessible cardinal to the proposi-
tion that every set of reals has the perfect set property (and ℵ1 is regular). But
Ernst Specker [1957: 210] had in eﬀect established that if this obtains, then ℵ1 (of
V ) is inaccessible in L. Thus, Solovay’s use of an inaccessible cardinal was actu-
ally necessary, and its collapse to ℵ1 complemented Specker’s observation. Other
propositions ﬁguring in the initial applications of inaccessibility to forcing turned
out to require inaccessibility, further integrating it into the interstices of set the-
ory.121 The emergence of such equiconsistency results is a subtle transformation of
earlier hopes of G¨odel (cf. 3.4): Propositions can be positively subsumed if there
121The original application of the Levy collapse in Levy [1963: IV] also turned out to require an
inaccessible cardinal (Levy [1970: 131ﬀ]) – a remarkable turn of events for an apparently technical
artifact at the beginning of forcing.
Many years later, Saharon Shelah [1980; 1984] was able to establish the necessity of Solovay’s
inaccessible for the proposition that every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable; on the other hand,
Shelah also showed that the inaccessible is not necessary for the proposition that every set of
reals has the Baire property.

56
Akihiro Kanamori
are enough ordinals, how many being speciﬁed by positing a large cardinal.122
On the other hand, forcing quickly led to the conclusion that there could be no
direct implication for CH: Levy and Solovay (Levy [1964], Solovay [1965a], Levy-
Solovay [1967]) established that measurable cardinals neither imply nor refute CH,
with an argument generalizable to most inaccessible large cardinals. Rather, the
subsumption for many other propositions would be in terms of consistency, the
methods of forcing and inner models being the operative modes of argument. In a
new synthesis of the two Cantorian legacies, hypotheses of length concerning the
extent of the transﬁnite are correlated with hypotheses of width concerning sets
of reals.
It was the incisive work of Scott and Solovay through this early period that
turned Cohen’s breakthrough into a general method of wide applicability. Scott
simpliﬁed Cohen’s original formulation as noted above; Solovay made the impor-
tant move to general partial orders and generic ﬁlters; and they together devel-
oped, with vicissitudes, the formulation in terms of Boolean-valued models.123
These models forcibly showed how to avoid Cohen’s ramiﬁed language as well as
his dependence on a countable model. With their elegant algebraic trappings and
seemingly more complete information they held the promise of being the right
approach to independence results. But Shoenﬁeld [1971] showed that forcing with
partial orders can get at the gist of the Boolean approach in a straightforward
manner. Moreover, Boolean-valued models were soon found to be too abstract and
unintuitive for establishing new consistency results, so that within a few years set
theorists were generally working with partial orders. It is a testament to Cohen’s
concrete approach that in this return from abstraction even the use of ramiﬁed
languages has played an essential role in careful forcing arguments at the interface
of recursion theory and set theory.
4.2
Envoi
Building on his Lebesgue measurability result Solovay soon reactivated the classical
descriptive set theory program (cf. 2.5) of investigating the extent of the regularity
properties by providing characterizations for the Σ1
2 sets, the level at which G¨odel
established from V = L the failure of the properties (cf. 3.4), and showed in
particular that the regularity properties for these sets follow from the existence of
122There is a telling antecedent in the result of Gerhard Gentzen [1936; 1943] that the consis-
tency strength of arithmetic can be exactly gauged by an ordinal ε0, i.e. transﬁnite induction
up to that ordinal in a formal system of notations. Although Hilbert’s program of establishing
consistency by ﬁnitary means could not be realized, Gentzen provided an exact analysis in terms
of ordinal length. Proof theory blossomed in the 1960s with the analysis of other theories in
terms of such lengths, the proof theoretic ordinals.
123Vopˇenka had developed a similar concept in a reworking [1964] of the independence of CH.
The concept was generalized and simpliﬁed in a series of papers on the so-called ∇-models
from the active Prague seminar founded by Vopˇenka (see H´ajek [1971: 78]), culminating in the
exposition Vopˇenka [1967]. However, the earlier papers did not have much impact, partly because
of an involved formalism in which formulas were valued in a complete lattice rather than Boolean
algebra.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
57
a measurable cardinal. Thus, although measurable cardinals do not decide CH,
they do establish the perfect set property for Σ1
2 sets (Solovay [1969]) so that “CH
holds for the Σ1
2 sets” – a vindication of G¨odel’s hopes for large cardinals through
a direct implication.
Donald Martin and Solovay in their [1969] then applied
large cardinal hypotheses weaker than measurability to push forward the old tree
representation ideas of the classical descriptive set theorists, with the hypotheses
cast in the new role of securing well-foundedness in this context.
The method of forcing as part of the axiomatic tradition together with the
transmutations of Cantor’s two legacies, large cardinals furthering the extension
of number into the transﬁnite and descriptive set theory investigating deﬁnable sets
of reals, established set theory as a sophisticated ﬁeld of mathematics, a study of
well-foundedness expanded into one of consistency strength. With the further de-
velopment of forcing through increasingly sophisticated iteration techniques ques-
tions raised in combinatorics and over a broad landscape would be resolved in
terms of consistency, sometimes with equiconsistencies in terms of large cardinals.
The theory of large cardinals would itself be much advanced with the heuristics
of reﬂection and generalization and sustained through increasing use in the study
of consistency strength.
In the most distinctive and intriguing development of
contemporary set theory, the investigation of the determinacy of games, large car-
dinals would be further integrated into descriptive set theory. They were not only
used to literally incorporate well-foundedness of inner models into the study of
tree representations, historically ﬁrst context involving well-foundedness, but also
to provide the exact hypotheses, with Woodin cardinals, for gauging consistency
strength.124
Stepping back to gaze at modern set theory, the thrust of mathematical research
should deﬂate various possible metaphysical appropriations with an onrush of new
models, hypotheses, and results. Shedding much of its foundational burden, set
theory has become an intriguing ﬁeld of mathematics where formalized versions
of truth and consistency have become matters for manipulation as in algebra. As
a study couched in well-foundedness ZFC together with the spectrum of large
cardinals serves as a court of adjudication, in terms of relative consistency, for
mathematical statements that can be informatively contextualized in set theory
by letting their variables range over the set-theoretic universe. Thus, set theory
is more of an open-ended framework for mathematics rather than an elucidating
foundation. It is as a ﬁeld of mathematics that both proceeds with its own internal
questions and is capable of contextualizing over a broad range which makes of set
theory an intriguing and highly distinctive subject.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This is a revision with signiﬁcant changes of the author’s The Mathematical De-
velopment of Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
124See Kanamori [2003] for these recent developments.

58
Akihiro Kanamori
volume 2, 1996, pages 1–71, and appears here with the permission of the Bulletin.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Addison et al., 1965] J. W. Addison Jr., L. Henkin, and A. Tarski, eds. The Theory of Models,
Proceedings of the 1963 International Symposium at Berkeley, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1965.
[Aleksandrov, 1916] P. S. Aleksandrov. Sur la puissance des ensembles mesurables B, Comptes
Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 162: 323–325, 1916.
[Aleksandrov and Urysohn, 1929] P. S. Aleksandrov and P. S. Urysohn. M´emoire sur les espaces
topologiques compacts, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Weten-
schappen Tweed Reeks. Afdeling Natuurkunde, 14: 1-96, 1929.
[Baire, 1898] R. Baire. Sur les fonctions discontinues qui se rattachent aux fonctions continues,
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 129:1621–
1623, 1898.
[Baire, 1899] R. Baire. Sur les fonctions de variables r´eelles, Annali di Matematica Pura ed
Applicata, 3:1-123, 1899.
[Banach, 1967] S. Banach. In S. Hartman and E. Marczewski, eds., Oeuvres, vol. 1, Pa´nstwowe
Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1967.
[Banach and Tarski, 1924] S. Banach and A. Tarski. Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles de
points en parties respectivement congruentes, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 6: 244–277, 1924.
Reprinted in [Banach, 1967, 118–148]. Reprinted in [Tarski, 1986, vol. 1, 121–154].
[Bar-Hillel et al., 1961] Y. Bar-Hillel, E. I. J. Poznanski, M. O. Rabin, and A. Robinson, eds.
Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics, Magnes Press, Jerusalem, 1961.
[Bartoszy´nski, 2008] T. Bartoszy´nski. Invariants of Meaure and Category, in [Foreman and
Kanamori, 2008].
[Bell, 1985] J. L. Bell. Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory, second
edition, Oxford Logic Guides #12, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1985.
[Benacerraf and Putnam, 1964] P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam, eds. Philosophy of Mathematics.
Selected Readings. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J., 1964.
[Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983] P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam, eds. Second edition of [1964].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[Bendixson, 1883] I. Bendixson. Quelques th´eor`emes de la th´eorie des ensembles de points, Acta
Mathematica, 2:415–429, 1883.
[Bernays, 1937] P. Bernays. A system of axiomatic set theory, Part I, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 2:65–77, 1937.
[Bernays, 1976] P. Bernays. A system of axiomatic set theory. In Gert H. M¨uller, ed., Sets
and Classes. On the Work of Paul Bernays, pp. 1–119. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1976.
Individually appeared in various parts in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 2:65–77, 1937; 6:1–
17, 1941; 7:65–89 and 133–145, 1942; 8:89–106, 1943; 3:65–79, 1948; and 19:81–96, 1954.
[Bernstein, 1908] F. Bernstein. Zur Theorie der trigonometrischen Reihen, Berichte ¨uber die
Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematische-Physische Klasse, 60:325–338, 1908.
[Blass, 1984] A. R. Blass. Existence of bases implies the Axiom of Choice. In J. E. Baumgart-
ner, D. A. Martin, and S. Shelah, eds., Axiomatic Set Theory, pp. 31–33. Contemporary
Mathematics vol. 31, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1984.
[Blass, 2010] A. R. Blass. Combinatorial Cardinal Charateristics of the Continuum. In [Foreman
and Kanamori, 2010].
[Boolos, 1971] G. S. Boolos. The iterative concept of set, Journal of Philosophy, 68:215–231,
1971. Reprinted in [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, 486–502], and in [Boolos, 1998, 13–29].
[Boolos, 1998] G. S. Boolos. Logic, Logic, and Logic, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
1998.
[Borel, 1898] E. Borel. Le¸cons sur la th´eorie des fonctions, Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1898.
[Borel, 1919] E. Borel. Sur la classiﬁcation des ensembles de mesure nulle, Bulletin de la Soci´et´e
Math´ematique de France, 47:97–125, 1919.
[Bourbaki, 1954] N. Bourbaki. El´ements de Math´ematique. I. Th´eorie des Ensembles, Hermann,
Paris, 1954.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
59
[Bourbaki, 1970] N. Bourbaki. El´ements de Mathematique. I. Th´eorie des Ensembles, combined
edition, Hermann, Paris, 1970.
[Brouwer, 1911] L. E. J. Brouwer. Beweis der Invarianz der Dimensionenzahl, Mathematische
Annalen, 70:161–165, 1911. Reprinted in [Brouwer, 1976, 430–434].
[Brouwer, 1976] L. E. J. Brouwer. H. Freudenthal, ed., Collected Works, vol. 2, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1976.
[Burali-Forti, 1897] C. Burali-Forti. Una questione sui numeri transﬁni, Rendiconti del Circolo
Matematico di Palermo, 11: 154–164, 1897. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 104–111].
[Cantor, 1872] G. Cantor.
¨Uber die Ausdehnung eines Satzes aus der Theorie der trig-
nometrischen Reihen, Mathematische Annalen, 5:123–132, 1872. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932,
92–102].
[Cantor, 1874] G. Cantor. ¨Uber eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriﬀes aller reellen algebraischen
Zahlen, Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 77:258–262, 1874. Reprinted in
[Cantor, 1932, 115–118]. Translated with commentary in [Ewald, 1996, 839–843].
[Cantor, 1878] G. Cantor. Ein Beitrag zur Mannigfaltigkeitslehre, Journal f¨ur die reine und
angewandte Mathematik 84:242–258, 1878. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 119–133].
[Cantor, 1879] G. Cantor. ¨Uber einen Satz aus der Theorie der stetigen Mannigfaltigkeiten,
Nachrichten von der K¨oniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften und der Georg-Augusts-
Universit¨at zu G¨ottingen, 127–135, 1879. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 134–138].
[Cantor, 1880] G. Cantor. ¨Uber unendliche, lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiten. II, Mathematische
Annalen 17:355–358, 1880. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 145–148], but excluding the referenced
remark.
[Cantor, 1883] G. Cantor. ¨Uber unendliche, lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiten. V. Mathematische
Annalen, 21:545–591, 1883. Published separately as Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannig-
faltigkeitslehre. Ein mathematisch-philosophischer Versuch in der Lehre des Unendlichen,
B.G. Teubner, Leipzig, 1883. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 165–209]. Translated with commen-
tary in Ewald [1996], 878–920.
[Cantor, 1884] G. Cantor. ¨Uber unendliche, lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiten. VI, Mathematis-
che Annalen, 23:463–488, 1884. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 210–246].
[Cantor, 1884a] G. Cantor. De la puissance des ensembles parfaits de points, Acta Mathematica,
4:381–392, 1884. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 252–260].
[Cantor, 1887] G. Cantor. Mitteilungen zur Lehre vom Transﬁniten, Zeitschrift f¨ur Philosophie
und philosophische Kritik, 91:81–125 and 252–270, 1887. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 378–439].
[Cantor, 1891] G. Cantor. ¨Uber eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre, Jahresbericht
der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, I:75–78, 1891. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932, 278–
280]. Translated with commentary in [Ewald, 1996, 920–922].
[Cantor, 1895] G. Cantor. Beitr¨age zur Begr¨undung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre. I, Mathema-
tische Annalen, 46:481–512, 1895. Translated in [Cantor, 1915]. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932,
282–311].
[Cantor, 1897] G. Cantor. Beitr¨age zur Begr¨undung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre. II, Mathema-
tische Annalen, 49:207–246, 1897. Translated in [Cantor, 1915]. Reprinted in [Cantor, 1932,
312–351].
[Cantor, 1915] G. Cantor. Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transﬁnite Numbers.
Translation of [Cantor, 1895] and [Cantor, 1897] with introduction and notes, by Philip E.
B. Jourdain, Open Court, Chicago 1915. Reprinted Dover, New York, 1965.
[Cantor, 1932] G. Cantor. E. Zermelo, ed., Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematicschen und
philosophischen Inhalts, Julius Springer, Berlin 1932. Reprinted Springer, Berlin, 1980.
[Cavaill`es, 1962] J. Cavaill`es. Philosophie Math´ematique. Paris, Hermann, 1962. Includes French
translation of [Noether and Cavaill`es, 1937].
[Coﬀa, 1979] J. A. Coﬀa. The humble origins of Russell’s paradox, Russell: The Journal of
Betrand Russell Studies, 99: 31–37, 1979.
[Cohen, 1963] P. J. Cohen. The independence of the Continuum Hypothesis. I, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA, 50:1143–1148, 1963
[Cohen, 1964] P. J. Cohen. The independence of the Continuum Hypothesis. II, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA, 51:105–110, 1964.
[Cohen, 1965] P. J. Cohen. Independence results in set theory, in [Addison et al., 1965, 39-54].
[Dauben, 1979] J. W. Dauben. Georg Cantor. His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1979. Paperback edition, 1990.

60
Akihiro Kanamori
[Dedekind, 1871] R. Dedekind. ¨Uber die Komposition der bin¨aren quadratischen Formen, sup-
plement X to Dirichlet’s Vorlesungen ¨uber Zahlentheorie, second edition, F. Vieweg, Braun-
schweig, 1871. Reprinted in [Dedekind, 1932, vol. 3, 399–407]. Excerpt translated with com-
mentary in [Ewald, 1996, 762-765].
[Dedekind, 1872] R. Dedekind. Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen, F. Vieweg, Braunschweig,
1872. Fifth, 1927 edition reprinted in [Dedekind, 1932, vol. 3, 315–334]. Translated in
[Dedekind, 1963, 1-27]. Translated with commentary in [Ewald, 1996, 765–779].
[Dedekind, 1888] R. Dedekind. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?, F. Vieweg, Braunschweig,
1888. Sixth, 1930 edition reprinted in [Dedekind, 1932, vol. 3, 335–390]. Second, 1893 edition
translated in [Dedekind, 1963, 29-115]. Third, 1911 edition translated with commentary in
[Ewald, 1996, 787–833].
[Dedekind, 1900] R. Dedekind. ¨Uber die von drei Moduln erzeugte Dualgruppe, Mathematische
Annalen, 53:371–403, 1900. Reprinted in [Dedekind, 1932, vol. 2, 236–271].
[Dedekind, 1932] R. Dedekind. R. Fricke, E. Noether, and ¨O. Ore, eds. Gesammelte mathema-
tische Werke, F. Vieweg, Braunschweig 1932. Reprinted by Chelsea, New York, 1969.
[Dedekind, 1963] R. Dedekind. Essays on the Theory of Numbers. Translations by W. W. Be-
man, Dover, New York, 1963. (Reprint of original edition, Open Court, Chicago, 1901).
[du Bois-Reymond, 1869] P. du Bois-Reymond. Bemerkungen ¨uber die verschidenen Werthe,
welche eine Function zweier reellen Variabeln erh¨alt, wenn man diese Variabeln entweder
nach einander oder gewissen Beziehungen gem¨ass gleichzeitig verschwinden l¨asst, Journal f¨ur
die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 70:10–45, 1869.
[du Bois-Reymond, 1875] P. du Bois-Reymond. ¨Uber asymptotische Werthe, inﬁnit¨are Approx-
imationen und inﬁnit¨are Auﬂ¨osung von Gleichungen, Mathematische Annalen, 8:363–414,
1875.
[Dugac, 1976] P. Dugac. Richard Dedekind et les fondements des math´ematiques, Collection des
travaux de l’Acad´emie Internationale d’Histoire des Sciences #24, Vrin, Paris, 1976.
[Easton, 1964] W. B. Easton. Powers of regular cardinals. Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University
1964. Abstracted as:Proper classes of generic sets, Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, 11:205, 1964. Published in abridged form as [Easton, 1970].
[Easton, 1970] W. B. Easton. Powers of regular cardinals, Annals of Mathematical Logic, 1:139–
178, 1970.
[Ebbinghaus, 2007] H.-D. Ebbinghaus. Ernst Zermelo. An Approach to his Life and Work,
Springer, Berlin, 2007.
[Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski, 1956] A. Ehrenfeucht and A. M. Mostowski. Models of axiomatic
theories admitting automorphisms, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 43:50–68, 1956. Reprinted in
[Mostowski, 1979, 494–512].
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1962] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal. Some remarks concerning our paper “On the
structure of set mappings”, Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 13:223–
226, 1962.
[Erd˝os et al., 1984] P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, A. M´at´e, and R. Rado. Combinatorial Set the-
ory:Partition Relations for Cardinals, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Erd˝os et al., 1965] P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, and R. Rado. Partition relations for cardinal numbers,
Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 16:93–196, 1965.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. A partition calculus in set theory, Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society, 62:427–489, 1956. Reprinted in [Gessel and Rota, 1987,
179–241].
[Erd˝os and Tarski, 1943] P. Erd˝os and A. Tarski. On families of mutually exclusive sets, Annals
of Mathematics, 44:315–329, 1943. Reprinted in [Tarski, 1986, vol. 2, 591–605].
[Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961] P. Erd˝os and A. Tarski. On some problems involving inaccessible car-
dinals. In [Bar-Hillel, et al., 1961, 50–82]. Reprinted in [Tarski, 1986 vol. 4, 79–111].
[Ewald, 1996] W. Ewald, ed. From Kant to Hilbert:A Source Book in the Foundations of Math-
ematics, two volumes, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996.
[Feferman, 1963] S. Feferman. Some applications of the notions of forcing and generic sets (sum-
mary), in [Addison et al., 1965, 89–95].
[Feferman, 1965] S. Feferman. Some applications of the notions of forcing and generic sets,
Fundamenta Mathematicae, 56:325–345, 1965.
[Feferman and Levy, 1963] S. Feferman and A. Levy. Independence results in set theory by
Cohen’s method. II (abstract), Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 10:593, 1963.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
61
[Felgner, 1971] U. Felgner. Models of ZF-Set Theory, Lecture Notes in Mathematics #223,
Springer, Berlin, 1971.
[Ferreir´os, 1995] J. Ferreir´os. “What fermented in me for years”:Cantor’s discovery of transﬁnite
numbers, Historia Mathematica, 22:33–42, 1995.
[Ferreir´os, 2007] J. Ferreir´os. Labyrinth of Thought:A History of Set Theory and its Role in
Modern Mathematics, second edition, Birkhauser, Basel, 2007.
[Fodor, 1956] G. Fodor. Eine Bemerking zur Theorie der regressiven Funktionen, Acta Scien-
tiarum Mathematicarum (Szeged), 17:139–142, 1956.
[Foreman and Kanamori, 2010] M. Foreman and A. Kanamori. The Handbook of Set Theory,
Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[Fraenkel, 1921] A. A. Fraenkel. ¨Uber die Zermelosche Begr¨undung der Mengenlehre (abstract),
Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 30II:97–98, 1921.
[Fraenkel, 1922] A. A. Fraenkel. Zu den Grundlagen der Cantor-Zermeloschen Mengenlehre,
Mathematische Annalen, 86:230–237, 1922.
[Fraenkel, 1922a] A.
A.
Fraenkel.
¨Uber
den
Begriﬀ
‘deﬁnit’
und
die
Unabh¨angigkeit
des Auswahlaxioms,
Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Physikalisch-mathematische Klasse, 253–257, 1922. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 284–
289].
[Fraenkel, 1930] A. A. Fraenkel. Georg Cantor, Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-
Vereinigung, 39:189–266, 1930. Published separately as Georg Cantor, B.G. Teubner, Leipzig,
1930. Published in abridged form in [Cantor, 1932, 452–483].
[Fraenkel, 1953] A. A. Fraenkel. Abstract Set Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1953.
[Frege, 1879] G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachg¨ebildete Formelsprache des
reinen Denkens, Nebert, Halle, 1879. Reprinted Hildesheim, Olms, 1964. Translated in [van
Heijenoort, 1967, 1–82].
[Frege, 1884] G. Frege. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik, eine logisch-mathematische Unter-
suchung ¨uber den Begriﬀder Zahl, Wilhelm K¨obner, Breslau, 1884. Translated with German
text by J. L. Austin, as The Foundations of Arithmetic, A logico-mathematical enquiry into
the concept of number; Blackwell, Oxford, 1950. Later editions without German text, Harper,
New York.
[Frege, 1891] G. Frege. Function und Begriﬀ, Hermann Pohle, Jena, 1891. Translated in [Frege,
1952, 21–41].
[Frege, 1893] G. Frege. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, Begriﬀsschriftlich abgeleitet. Vol. 1, Her-
mann Pohle, Jena 1893. Reprinted Hildesheim, Olms, 1962. Partially translated in [Frege,
1964].
[Frege, 1895] G. Frege. Kritische Beleuchtung einiger Punkte in E. Schr¨oders Vorlesungen ¨uber
die Algebra der Logik, Archiv f¨ur systematische Philosophie, 1:433–456, 1895, 433–456. Trans-
lated in [Frege, 1952, 86–106].
[Frege, 1903] G. Frege. Vol. 2 of [1893]. Reprinted Hildesheim, Olms, 1962.
[Frege, 1952] G. Frege. P. Geach and M. Black, trans. and eds., Translations from the Philo-
sophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, Blackwell, Oxford, 1952. Second, revised edition, 1960.
Latest edition, Rowland & Littlewood, Ottowa, 1980.
[Frege, 1964] G. Frege. M. Furth, trans. and ed., The Basic Laws of Arithmetic. Exposition of
the System, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1964.
[Garciadiego, 1992] A. Garciadiego. Bertrand Russell and the Origins of the Set-theoretic
“Paradoxes”, Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1992.
[Gentzen, 1936] G. Gentzen. Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematicshe
Annalen, 112:493–565, 1936. Translated in [Gentzen, 1969, 132–213].
[Gentzen, 1943] G. Gentzen. Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsf¨allen der trans-
ﬁniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie, Mathematicshe Annalen, 119:140–161, 1943.
Translated in [Gentzen, 1969, 287–308].
[Gentzen, 1969] G. Gentzen. M. E. Szabo, ed., The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1969.
[Gessel and Rota, 1987] I. Gessel and G.-C. Rota, eds. Classic Papers in Combinatorics,
Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1987.
[G¨odel, 1930] K. F. G¨odel. Die Vollst¨andigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalk¨uls,
Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 37:349–360, 1930. Reprinted and translated in
[G¨odel, 1986, 102–123].

62
Akihiro Kanamori
[G¨odel, 1931] K. F. G¨odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I, Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik, 38:173–198, 1931. Reprinted
and translated with minor emendations by the author in [G¨odel, 1986, 144–195].
[G¨odel, 1933] K. F. G¨odel. The present situation in the foundations of mathematics. In [G¨odel,
1995, 45–53], and the page references are to these.
[G¨odel, 1938] K. F. G¨odel. The consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized
Continuum Hypothesis, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 24:556–557,
1938. Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 26–27].
[G¨odel, 1939] K. F. G¨odel. Consistency-proof for the Generalized Continuum-Hypothesis, Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 25:220–224, 1939. Reprinted in [G¨odel,
1990, 28–32].
[G¨odel, 1939a] K. F. G¨odel. Vortrag G¨ottingen, text and translation in [G¨odel, 1995, 126–155],
and the page references are to these.
[G¨odel, 1940] K. F. G¨odel. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized
Continuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory, Annals of Mathematics Studies #3,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1940. Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 33–101].
[G¨odel, 1947] K. F. G¨odel. What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem?, American Mathematical
Monthly, 54:515–525, 1947. Errata, 55:51, 1948. Reprinted in [G¨odel, 1990, 176–187]. Revised
and expanded version in [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1964, 258–273]. This version reprinted with
minor emendations by the author in [G¨odel, 1990, 254–270].
[G¨odel, 1986] K. F. G¨odel. S. Feferman, et al., eds., Kurt G¨odel, Collected Works, vol. I, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1986.
[G¨odel, 1990] K. F. G¨odel. S. Feferman, et al., eds., Kurt G¨odel, Collected Works, vol. II, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1990.
[G¨odel, 1995] K. F. G¨odel. S. Feferman, et al., eds., Kurt G¨odel, Collected Works, vol. III,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1995.
[G¨odel, 2003] K. F. G¨odel. S. Feferman and J. W. Dawson, eds., Kurt G¨odel, Collected Works,
vol. V, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2003.
[Goldfarb, 1979] W. D. Goldfarb. Logic in the Twenties:the nature of the quantiﬁer, The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 44:351–368, 1979.
[Graham et al., 1990] R. L. Graham, B. L. Rothschild, and J. H. Spencer. Ramsey Theory,
second edition, Wiley & Sons, New York, 1990.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1978] I. Grattan-Guinness. Wiener on the logics of Russell and Schr¨oder. An
account of his doctoral thesis, and of his subsequent discussion of it with Russell, Annals of
Science, 32:103–132, 1978.
[Grattan-Guinness, 1978a] I. Grattan-Guinness. How Bertrand Russell discovered his paradox,
Historia Mathematica, 5:127–137, 1978.
[Grattan-Guinness, 2000] I. Grattan-Guinness. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–
1940:Logics, Set Theories and the Foundations of Mathematics from Cantor through Russell
and G¨odel, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2000.
[Gray, 1994] R. Gray. Georg Cantor and Transcendental Numbers, American Mathematical
Monthly, 101:819–832, 1994.
[H´ajek, 1971] P. H´ajek. Sets, semisets, models. In [Scott, 1971, 67-81].
[Hajnal, 1956] A. Hajnal. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum
problem, Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 2:131–136,
1956.
[Hajnal, 1961] A. Hajnal. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum
problem, Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 12:321–376, 1961.
[Hajnal and Larson, 2010] A. Hajnal and J. A. Larson. Partition relations. In [Foreman and
Kanamori, 2010].
[Hallett, 1984] M. Hallett. Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size, Oxford Logic Guides
#10, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1984.
[Hamel, 1905] G. Hamel. Eine Basis aller Zahlen und die unstetigen L¨osungen der Funktional-
gleichung:f(x + y) = f(x) + f(y), Mathematische Annalen, 60:459–462, 1905.
[Hanf, 1964] W. P. Hanf. Incompactness in languages with inﬁnitely long expressions, Funda-
menta Mathematicae, 53:309–324, 1964.
[Hartogs, 1915] F. Hartogs. ¨Uber das Problem der Wohlordnung, Mathematische Annalen,
76:436–443, 1915.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
63
[Hardy, 1903] G. H. Hardy. A theorem concerning the inﬁnite cardinal numbers, The Quarterly
Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 35:87–94, 1903. Reprinted in [Hardy et al., 1979,
vol. 7, 427–434].
[Hardy et al., 1979] G. H. Hardy. I. W. Busbridge and R. A. Rankin, eds., Collected Papers of
G. H. Hardy, Clarendon, Oxford, 1979.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1908] F. Hausdorﬀ. Grundz¨uge einer Theorie der geordneten Mengen, Mathematis-
che Annalen, 76:436–443, 1908.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914] F. Hausdorﬀ. Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre,
de Gruyter,
Leipzig 1914.
Reprinted by Chelsea, New York, 1965.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914a] F. Hausdorﬀ. Bemerkung ¨uber den Inhalt von Punktmengen, Mathematische
Annalen, 75:428–433, 1914.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1916] F. Hausdorﬀ. Die M¨achtigkeit der Borelschen Mengen, Mathematische An-
nalen, 77:430–437, 1916.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1932] F. Hausdorﬀ. Zur Theorie der linearen metrischen R¨aume, Journal f¨ur die
reine und angewandte Mathematik, 167:294–311, 1932.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1937] F. Hausdorﬀ. Mengenlehre, third, revised edition of [1914]. Translated by John
R. Auman as Set Theory, Chelsea, New York, 1962.
[Hawkins, 1975] T. W. Hawkins. Lebesgue’s Theory of Integration. Its Origins and Develop-
ment, second edition, Chelsea, New York, 1975.
[Heck, 1995] R. G. Heck, Jr. Deﬁnition by induction in Frege’s Grundgesetze der Arithmetik.
In W. Demopoulos, ed., Frege’s Philosophy of Mathematics, pp. 295–233. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, 1995.
[Henkin, 1949] L. Henkin. The completeness of the ﬁrst-order functional calculus, The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 14:159–166, 1949.
[Hessenberg, 1906] G. Hessenberg. Grundbegriﬀe der Mengenlehre, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
G¨ottingen, 1906. Reprinted in Abhandlungen der Fries’schen Schule, Neue Folge, 1:479–706,
1906.
[Hilbert, 1890] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber die Theorie der algebraischen Formen, Mathematische Annalen,
36:473–534, 1890. Translated in [Hilbert, 1978, 143–224].
[Hilbert, 1900] D. Hilbert. Mathematische Probleme. Vortrag, gehalten auf dem internationalem
Mathematiker-Kongress zu Paris, 1900. Nachrichten von der K¨oniglichen Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen, pp. 253–297, 1900. Translated in the Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 8:437–479, 1902.
[Hilbert, 1926] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber das Unendliche, Mathematische Annalen, 95:161–190, 1926.
Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 367–392]. Partially translated in [Benacerraf and Putnam,
1983, 183–201].
[Hilbert, 1978] D. Hilbert. M. Ackerman, trans., Hilbert’s Invariant Theory Papers, Math Sci
Press, Brookline, 1978.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der theoretischen
Logik, Julius Springer, Berlin, 1928. Second edition, 1938; third edition, 1949. Second edi-
tion was translated by L. M. Hammond, G. G. Leckie, and F. Steinhardt as Principles of
Mathematical Logic, Chelsea, New York, 1950.
[Howard and Rubin, 1998] P. Howard and J. E. Rubin. Consequences of the Axiom of Choice,
Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 59, American Mathematical Society, Providence,
1998.
[Jan´e, 1995] I. Jan´e. The role of the absolute inﬁnite in Cantor’s conception of set, Erkenntnis,
42:375–402, 1995.
[Jech, 1973] T. J. Jech. The Axiom of Choice, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1973.
[Jech, 2003] T. J. Jech. Set Theory, the third millennium edition, revised and expanded,
Springer, Berlin, 2003.
[Jourdain, 1904] P. E. B. Jourdain. On the transﬁnite cardinal numbers of well-ordered aggre-
gates, Philosophical Magazine, 7:61–75, 1904.
[Jourdain, 1905] P. E. B. Jourdain. On a proof that every aggregate can be well-ordered, Math-
ematische Annalen, 60:465–470, 1905.
[Kac and Ulam, 1968] M. Kac and S. M. Ulam. Mathematics and Logic, Praeger, New York,
1968.
[Kanamori, 1995] A. Kanamori. The emergence of descriptive set theory. In J. Hintikka, ed., Es-
says on the Development of the Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 241–266. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
1995.

64
Akihiro Kanamori
[Kanamori, 1997] A. Kanamori. The mathematical import of Zermelo’s well-ordering theorem,
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 3:281–311, 1997.
[Kanamori, 2003] A. Kanamori. The Higher Inﬁnite. Large Cardinals in Set Theory from their
Beginnings, second edition, Springer, Berlin, 2003.
[Kanamori, 2003a] A. Kanamori. The empty set, the singleton, and the ordered pair, The Bul-
letin of Symbolic Logic, 9:273–298, 2003.
[Kanamori, 2004] A. Kanamori. Zermelo and set theory, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 10:487–
553, 2004.
[Kanamori, 2007] A. Kanamori. G¨odel and set theory, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 13: 153–
188, 2007.
[Kechris and Louveau, 1987] A. S. Kechris and A. Louveau. Descriptive Set Theory and the
Structure of Sets of Uniqueness, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series #128,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987.
[Keisler, 1962] H. J. Keisler. Some applications of the theory of models to set theory. In E. Nagel,
P. Suppes, and A. Tarski, eds., Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Proceedings
of the 1960 [and ﬁrst] International Congress (Stanford, California), pp. 80–86. Stanford
University Press, Stanford, 1962.
[Keisler, 1962a] H. J. Keisler. The equivalence of certain problems in set theory with problems
in the theory of models (abstract), Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 9:339–340,
1962.
[Keisler and Tarski, 1964] H. J. Keisler and A. Tarski. From accessible to inaccessible cardinals,
Fundamenta Mathematicae, 53:225–308, 1964. Corrections, 57:119, 1965. Reprinted in [Tarski,
1986, vol. 4, 129–213].
[Kennedy, 1975] H. C. Kennedy. Nine letters from Giuseppe Peano to Bertrand Russell, Journal
of the History of Philosophy, 13:205–220, 1975.
[K˝onig, 1927] D. K˝onig. ¨Uber eine Schlussweise aus dem Endlichen ins Unendliche: Punkt-
mengen. Kartenf¨arben. Verwandtschaftsbeziehungen. Schachspiel. Acta Litterarum ac Sci-
entiarum Regiae Universitatis Hungaricae Francisco-Josephinae, sectio scientiarum mathe-
maticarum, 3:121–130, 1927.
[K˝onig, 1905] J. (G.) K˝onig. Zum Kontinuum-Problem. In A. Krazer, ed., Verhandlungen des
Dritten Internationalen Mathematiker-Kongresses in Heidelberg vom 8. bis 13. August 1904,
pp. 144–147. B.G. Teubner, Leipzig, 1905. Reprinted in Mathematische Annalen, 60:177–180,
1905, and Berichtigung, 462.
[Kunen and Vaughan, 1984] K. Kunen and J. E. Vaughan, eds. Handbook of Set-Theoretic
Topology, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Kuratowski, 1921] K. Kuratowski. Sur la notion de l’ordre dans la th´eorie des ensembles, Fun-
damenta Mathematicae, 2:161–171, 1921. Reprinted in [Kuratowski, 1988, 1–11].
[Kuratowski, 1922] K. Kuratowski. Une m´ethode d’´elimination des nombres transﬁnis des
raisonnements math´ematiques, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 3:76–108, 1922.
[Kuratowski, 1931] K. Kuratowski. Evaluation de la class Bor´elienne ou projective d’un ensemble
de points `a l’aide des symboles logiques, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 17: 249–272, 1931.
[Kuratowski et al., 1988] K. Kuratowski. K. Borsuk et al., eds., Selected Papers, Pa´nstwowe
Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1988.
[Kuratowski and Tarski, 1931] K. Kuratowski and A. Tarski. Les op´erations logiques et les en-
sembles projectifs, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 17:240–248, 1931. Reprinted in [Tarski, 1986,
vol. 1, 551–559], and in [Kuratowski, 1988, 367–375]. Translated in [Tarski, 1983, 143–151].
[Kurepa, 1935] -D. R. Kurepa. Ensembles ordonn´es et ramiﬁ´es,
Th`ese,
Paris. Published
as:Publications math´ematiques de l’Universit´e de Belgrade, 4:1–138, 1935.
[Kurepa, 1942] -D. R. Kurepa. propos d’une g´en´eralisation de la notion d’ensembles bien or-
donn´es, Acta Mathematica, 75:139–150, 1942.
[Kurepa, 1959] -D. R. Kurepa. On the cardinal number of ordered sets and of symmetri-
cal structures in dependence on the cardinal numbers of its chains and antichains, Glas-
nik Matematiˇcko-ﬁziˇcki i astronomski, Periodicum mathematico-physicum et astronomicum,
14:183–203, 1959.
[Lavine, 1994] S. M. Lavine. Understanding the Inﬁnite, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
1994.
[Lebesgue, 1902] H. Lebesgue. Int´egrale, longueur, aire, Annali di Matematica Pura ed Appli-
cata, 7:231-459, 1902. Reprinted in [Lebesgue, 1972, vol. 1, 203–331].

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
65
[Lebesgue, 1905] H. Lebesgue. Sur les fonctions repr´esentables analytiquement, Journal de
math´ematiques pures et appliqu´ees, 1:139–21, 1905. Reprinted in [Lebesgue, 1972, vol. 3,
103–180].
[Lebesgue, 1972] H. Lebesgue. Oeuvres Scientiﬁques, Kundig, Geneva, 1972.
[Levy, 1957] A. Levy. Ind´ependance conditionelle de V = L et d’axiomes qui se rattachent
au syst`eme de M. G¨odel, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des
Sciences, Paris, 245:1582–1583, 1957.
[Levy, 1960] A. Levy. Axiom schemata of strong inﬁnity in axiomatic set theory, Paciﬁc Journal
of Mathematics, 10: 223–238, 1960.
[Levy, 1960a] A. Levy. Principles of reﬂection in axiomatic set theory, Fundamenta Mathemat-
icae, 49:1–10, 1960.
[Levy, 1963] A. Levy. Independence results in set theory by Cohen’s method. I, III, IV (ab-
stracts), Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 10:592–593, 1963.
[Levy, 1964] A. Levy. Measurable cardinals and the continuum hypothesis (abstract), Notices
of the American Mathematical Society, 11:769–770, 1964.
[Levy, 1965] A. Levy. Deﬁnability in axiomatic set theory I. In Y. Bar-Hillel, ed., Logic, Method-
ology and Philosophy of Science, Proceedings of the 1964 International Congress, Jerusalem,
pp. 127–151. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Levy, 1970] A. Levy. Deﬁnability in axiomatic set theory II. In Y. Bar-Hillel, ed., Mathematical
Logic and Foundations of Set Theory, pp. 129–145. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
[Levy and Solovay, 1967] A. Levy and R. M. Solovay. Measurable cardinals and the Continuum
Hypothesis, Israel Journal of Mathematics, 5:234–248, 1967.
[Lindel¨of, 1905] E. Lindel¨of. Remarques sur un th´eor`eme fondamental de la th´eorie des ensem-
bles, Acta Mathematica, 29:183–190, 1905.
[Lindenbaum and Tarski, 1926] A.
Lindenbaum
and
A.
Tarski.
Communication
sur
les
recherches de la th´eorie des ensembles, Sprawozdana z Posiedze´n Towarzystwa Naukowego
Warszawskiego, Wydzia l III, Nauk Matematyczno-ﬁzycznych (Comptes Rendus des S´eances
de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Classe III, Sciences Math´ematiques et
Physiques) , 19:299–330, 1926. Reprinted in [Tarski, 1986, vol. 1, 171–204].
[Liouville, 1844] J. Liouville. Des remarques relatives 1o `a des classes tr`es-´etendues de quantit´es
dont la valeur n’est ni rationelle ni mˆeme r´eductible `a des irrationnelles alg´ebriques; 2o `a un
passage du livre des Principes o`u Newton calcule l’action exerc´ee par une sph`ere sur un point
ext´erieur, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris,
18:883–885, 1844.
[Liouville, 1851] J. Liouville. Sur des classes tr`es-´etendues de quantit´es dont la valeur n’est ni
alg´ebrique ni mˆeme r´eductible `a des irrationnelles alg´ebriques, Journal de math´ematiques
pures et appliqu´ees, 16:133–142, 1851.
[ Lo´s, 1955] J.  Lo´s. Quelques remarques, th´eor`emes et probl`emes sur les classes d´eﬁnissables
d’alg`ebres. In T. Skolem, et al., eds., Mathematical Interpretation of Formal Systems, pp.
98–113. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1955.
[L¨owenheim, 1915] L. L¨owenheim. ¨Uber M¨oglichkeiten im Relativkalkul, Mathematische An-
nalen, 76:447–470, 1915. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 228–251].
[Luzin, 1914] N. N. Luzin. Sur un probl`eme de M. Baire, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des
S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 158:1258–1261, 1914.
[Luzin, 1917] N. N. Luzin. Sur la classiﬁcation de M. Baire, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires
des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 164:91–94, 1917.
[Luzin, 1925] N. N. Luzin. Sur un probl`eme de M. Emile Borel et les ensembles projectifs de
M. Henri Lebesgue; les ensembles analytiques, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances
de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 180:1318–1320, 1925.
[Luzin, 1925a] N. N. Luzin. Sur les ensembles projectifs de M. Henri Lebesgue, Comptes Rendus
Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 180:1572–1574, 1925.
[Luzin, 1925b] N. N. Luzin. Les propri´et´es des ensembles projectifs, Comptes Rendus Hebdo-
madaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 180:1817–1819, 1925.
[Luzin and Sierpi´nski, 1918] N. N. Luzin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur quelques propri´et´es des ensem-
bles (A), Bulletin de l’Acad´emie des Sciences de Cracovie, Classe des Sciences Math´ematiques
et Naturelles, S´erie A, pp. 35–48, 1918. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nski, 1975, 192–204].
[Luzin and Sierpi´nski, 1923] N. N. Luzin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un ensemble non mesurable B,
Journal de Math´ematiques Pures et Appliqu´ees, 2:53–72, 1923. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nski, 1975,
504-519].

66
Akihiro Kanamori
[Mahlo, 1911] P. Mahlo. ¨Uber lineare transﬁnite Mengen, Berichte ¨uber die Verhandlungen der
K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Mathematische-Physische
Klasse, 63:187–225, 1911.
[Mahlo, 1912] P. Mahlo. Zur Theorie und Anwendung der ρ0-Zahlen, Berichte ¨uber die
Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematische-Physische Klasse, 64:108–112, 1912.
[Mahlo, 1913] P. Mahlo. Zur Theorie und Anwendung der ρ0-Zahlen II, Berichte ¨uber die
Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematische-Physische Klasse, 65:268–282, 1913.
[Mahlo, 1913a] P. Mahlo. ¨Uber Teilmengen des Kontinuums von dessen M¨achtigkeit, Berichte
¨uber die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu
Leipzig, Mathematische-Physische Klasse, 65:283–315, 1913.
[Martin and Solovay, 1969] D. A. Martin and R. M. Solovay. A basis theorem for Σ1
3 sets of
reals, Annals of Mathematics, 89:138–159, 1969.
[Mathias, 2001] A. R. D. Mathias. Slim models of Zermelo set theory, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 66:487–496, 2001.
[Meschkowski, 1983] H. Meschkowski. Georg Cantor. Leben. Werk und Wirkung, Bibliographis-
ches Institut, Mannheim, 1983.
[Meschkowski and Nilson, 1991] H. Meschkowski and W. Nilson. Briefe / Georg Cantor,
Springer, Berlin, 1991.
[Miller, 1984] A. W. Miller. Special subsets of the real line. In [Kunen and Vaughan, 1984,
201–233].
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1917] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Les antinomies de Russell et de Burali-Forti et le probl`eme
fondamental de la th´eorie des ensembles, L’Enseignment Math´ematique, 19:37–52, 1917.
[Mirimanoﬀ, 1917a] D. Mirimanoﬀ. Remarques sur la th´eorie des ensembles et les antinomies
Cantoriennes. I, L’Enseignment Math´ematique, 19:209–217, 1917.
[Montague, 1956] R. M. Montague. Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory is not a ﬁnite extension of
Zermelo set theory (abstract), Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 62:260, 1956.
[Montague, 1961] R. M. Montague. Fraenkel’s addition to the axioms of Zermelo. In [Bar-Hillel
et al., 1961, 91–114].
[Moore, 1982] G. H. Moore. Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice. Its Origins, Development and Inﬂu-
ence, Springer, New York, 1982.
[Moore, 1988] G. H. Moore. The roots of Russell’s paradox, Russell: The Journal of Bertrand
Russell Studies, 8:46–56, 1988.
[Moore, 1988a] G. H. Moore. The emergence of ﬁrst-order logic. In W. Aspray and P. Kitcher,
eds., History and Philosophy of Modern Mathematics, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy
of Science, vol. 11, pp. 95–135. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1988.
[Moore, 1989] G. H. Moore. Towards a history of Cantor’s Continuum Problem. In D. E. Rowe
and J. McCleary, eds., The History of Modern Mathematics, vol. 1:Ideas and their Reception,
pp. 79–121. Academic Press, Boston, 1989.
[Moore, 2002] G. H. Moore. Hilbert on the inﬁnite:The role of set theory in the evolution of
Hilbert’s thought, Historia Mathematics, 29:40–64, 2002.
[Moore and Garciadiego, 1981] G. H. Moore and A. R. Garciadiego. Burali-Forti’s paradox:A
reappraisal of its origins, Historia Mathematica, 8:319–350, 1981.
[Moschovakis, 1980] Y. Moschovakis. Descriptive Set Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
[Mostowski, 1939] A. M. Mostowski. ¨Uber die Unabh¨angigkeit des Wohlordnungssatzes vom
Ordnungsprinzip, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 32:201–252, 1939. Translated in [Mostowski,
1979, vol. 1, 290–338].
[Mostowski, 1949] A. M. Mostowski. An undecidable arithmetical statement, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 36:143–164, 1949. Reprinted in [Mostowski, 1979, vol. 1, 531–552].
[Mostowski, 1950] A. M. Mostowski. Some impredicative deﬁnitions in the axiomatic set theory,
Fundamenta Mathematicae, 37:111–124, 1950. Correction in 38:238, 1952.
[Mostowski, 1979] A. M. Mostowski. Foundational Studies. Selected Works, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1979.
[Myhill and Scott, 1971] J. R. Myhill and D. S. Scott. Ordinal deﬁnability. In [Scott, 1971,
271–278].
[Neˇsetˇril and R¨odl, 1990] J. Neˇsetˇril and V. R¨odl. Mathematics of Ramsey Theory, Springer,
Berlin, 1990.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
67
[Noether and Cavaill`es, 1937] E. Noether and J. Cavaill`es, eds. Briefwechsel Cantor-Dedekind,
Hermann, Paris, 1937. Translated into French in [Cavaill`es, 1962].
[Novak, 1950] I. L. Novak. A construction for models of consistent systems, Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 37:87–110, 1950.
[Oxtoby, 1971] J. C. Oxtoby. Measure and Category. A Survey of the Analogies between Topo-
logical and Measure Spaces, Springer, New York, 1971.
[Parsons, 1977] C. Parsons. What is the iterative concept of set? In R. E. Butts and J. Hintikka,
eds., Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability Theory. Proceedings of the Fifth
International Congress of Logic, Methodology, and the Philosophy of Science (London, On-
tario, 1975), The University of Western Ontario Series in Philosophy and Science, vol. 9, pp.
335–367. D. Reidel, Dordrecht 1977. Reprinted in [Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983, 503–529].
[Peano, 1897] G. Peano. Studii di logica matematica, Atti della Accademia delle scienze di
Torino, Classe di scienze ﬁsiche, matematiche e naturali, 32:565–583, 1897. Reprinted in
[Peano, 1958, 201–217].
[Peano, 1905-8] G. Peano. Formulario Mathematico, Bocca, Torino 1905-8. Reprinted Edizioni
Cremonese, Rome, 1960.
[Peano, 1911] G. Peano. Sulla deﬁnizione di funzione. Atti della Accademia nazionale dei Lincei,
Rendiconti, Classe di scienze ﬁsiche, matematiche e naturali, 20-I:3–5, 1911.
[Peano, 1913] G. Peano. Review of:A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia Mathematica,
vols. I,II, Bollettino di bibliograﬁa e storia delle scienze matematiche Loria, 15:47–53; 75–81,
1913. Reprinted in [Peano, 1958, 389–401].
[Peano, 1958] G. Peano. Opere Scelte, vol. 2, Edizioni Cremonese, Rome, 1958.
[Peckhaus, 1990] V. Peckhaus. “Ich habe mich wohl geh¨utet alle Patronen auf einmal zu ver-
schiessen.” Ernst Zermelo in G¨ottingen, History and Philosophy of Logic, 11:19–58, 1990.
[Peirce, 1883] C. S. Peirce. A theory of probable inference. Note B. The logic of relatives, Studies
in Logic by Members of the John Hopkins University, pp. 187–203, Boston, 1883. Reprinted
in C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss, eds., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 3, pp.
195–209. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1933.
[Pincus, 1972] D. Pincus. Zermelo-Fraenkel consistency results by Fraenkel-Mostowski methods,
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 37:721–743, 1972.
[Plotkin, 1993] J. M. Plotkin. Who put the “back” in “back-and-forth?”. In Crossley, Remmel,
Shore and Sweedler, eds., Logical Methods, In Honor of Anil Nerode’s Sixtieth Birthday,
Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1993.
[Plotkin, 2005] J. M. Plotkin. Hausdorﬀon Ordered Sets, American Mathematical Society, Prov-
idence, 2005.
[Purket, 1989] W. Purkert. Cantor’s views on the foundations of mathematics. In D. E. Rowe
and J. McCleary, eds., The History of Modern Mathematics, vol. 1:Ideas and their Reception,
pp 49–65. Academic Press, Boston, 1989.
[Purket, 2002] W. Purket. Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre – Historische Einf¨uhrung. In F. Haus-
dorﬀ, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 2, 1–89, 2002.
[Purket and Ilgauds, 1987] W. Purkert and H. J. Ilgauds. Georg Cantor:1845–1918, Birkh¨auser,
Basel, 1987.
[Quine, 1960] W. V. O. Quine. Word and Object, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1960.
[Ramsey, 1930] F. P. Ramsey. On a problem of formal logic, Proceedings of the London Mathe-
matical Society, 30:264–286, 1930. Reprinted in [Gessel and Rota, 1987, 2–24].
[Robinson, 1947] R. M. Robinson. On the decomposition of spheres, Fundamenta Mathematicae,
34:246–270, 1947.
[Robinson, 1951] A. Robinson. On the Metamathematics of Algebra, North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1951.
[Rosser and Wang, 1950] J. B. Rosser and H. Wang. Non-standard models for formal logics, The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 15:113–129, 1950.
[Rothberger, 1938] F. Rothberger. Eine ¨Aquivalenz zwischen der Kontinuumhypothese und der
Existenz der Lusinschen und Sierpi´nskischen Mengen, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 30:215–
217, 1938.
[Rothberger, 1939] F. Rothberger. Sur un ensemble toujours de premi`ere categorie qui est de-
pourvu de la propert´e λ, Fundamenta Mathematicae ,32:294–300, 1939.
[Rothberger, 1948] F. Rothberger. On some problems of Hausdorﬀand Sierpi´nski, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 35:29–46, 1948.

68
Akihiro Kanamori
[Rubin and Rubin, 1985] H. Rubin and J. E. Rubin. Equivalents of the Axiom of Choice, II.
Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1985. Revised, expanded version of their Equivalents of the Ax-
iom of Choice, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963.
[Russell, 1901] B. Russell. Sur la logique des relations avec des applications `a la th´eorie des
s´eries, Revue de math´ematiques (Rivista di matematica) 7, 115–148; partly reprinted in G.
H. Moore, ed., The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, vol. 3, pp. 613–627. Routledge,
London, 1993; translated in same, pp. 310–349.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1903. Later editions, George Allen & Unwin, London.
[Russell, 1906] B. Russell. On some diﬃculties in the theory of transﬁnite numbers and order
types, Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 4L 29–53, 1906. Reprinted in [Russell,
1973, 135–164].
[Russell, 1959] B. Russell. My Philosophical Development, George Allen & Unwin, London,
1959.
[Russell, 1973] B. Russell. D. Lackey, ed., Essays in Analysis, George Braziller, New York, 1973.
[Schr¨oder, 1890] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik). Vol. 1.
Leipzig, B.G. Teubner, 1890. Reprinted in [Schr¨oder, 1966].
[Schr¨oder, 1895] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik). Vol. 3:Al-
gebra und Logik der Relative. Leipzig, B.G. Teubner, 1895. Reprinted in [Schr¨oder, 1966].
[Schr¨oder, 1966] E. Schr¨oder. Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (three volumes), Chelsea,
New York, 1966.
[Scott, 1961] D. S. Scott. Measurable cardinals and constructible sets, Bulletin de l’Acad´emie
Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques,
9:521–524, 1961.
[Scott, 1971] D. S. Scott. Axiomatic Set Theory, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics
vol. 13, part 1, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1971.
[Scott, 1974] D. S. Scott. Axiomatizing set theory. In T. J. Jech, ed., Axiomatic Set Theory.
Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics vol. 13, part 2, pp. 207–214. American Math-
ematical Society, Providence, 1974.
[Shelah, 1980] S. Shelah. Going to Canossa (abstract). Abstracts of papers presented to the
American Mathematical Society, 1:630, 1980.
[Shelah, 1984] S. Shelah. Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 48:1–47, 1984.
[Shepherdson, 1951] J. C. Shepherdson. Inner models for set theory — Part I, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 16:161–190, 1951.
[Shepherdson, 1952] J. C. Shepherdson. Inner models for set theory — Part II, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 17:225–237, 1952.
[Shepherdson, 1953] J. C. Shepherdson. Inner models for set theory — Part III, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 18:145–167, 1953.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1954] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. A relative consistency proof, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
19:21–28, 1954.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1959] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. On the independence of the axiom of constructibility, Amer-
ican Journal of Mathematics, 81:537–540, 1959.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1967] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Mathematical Logic, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1967.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1971] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Unramiﬁed forcing. In [Scott, 1971, 357–381].
[Shoenﬁeld, 1977] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Axioms of set theory. In J. K. Barwise, ed., Handbook of
Mathematical Logic, pp. 321–344. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1977.
[Sierpi´nski, 1918] W. Sierpi´nski. L’axiome de M. Zermelo et son rˆole dans la Th´eorie des En-
sembles et l’Analyse, Bulletin de l’Acad´emie des Sciences de Cracovie, Classe des Sciences
Math´ematiques et Naturelles, S´erie A, 97–152, 1918. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nsi, 1975, 208–255].
[Sierpi´nski, 1924] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur l’hypoth`ese du continu (2ℵ0 = ℵ1), Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 5:177–187, 1924. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nski, 1975, 527–536].
[Sierpi´nski, 1925] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une class d’ensembles, Fundamenta Mathematicae , 7:237–
243, 1925. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nski, 1975, 571–576].
[Sierpi´nski, 1928] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un ensemble non d´enombrable, dont toute image continue
est de mesure nulle, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 11:302–304, 1928. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nski,
1975, 702–704].
[Sierpi´nski, 1934] W. Sierpi´nski. Hypoth`ese du Continu, Monograﬁe Matematyczne vol. 4, War-
saw 1934. Second, revised edtion, Chelsea, New York, 1956.

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
69
[Sierpi´nski, 1950] W. Sierpi´nski. Les ensembles projectifs et analytiques, M´emorial des Sciences
Math´ematiques #112, Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1950.
[Sierpi´nski, 1975] W. Sierpi´nski. S. Hartman et al., eds., Oeuvres Choisies. vol. 2, Warsaw,
Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1975.
[Sierpi´nski, 1976] W. Sierpi´nski. S. Hartman et al., eds., Ouevres Choisies. vol. 3, Pa´nstwowe
Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1976.
[Sierpi´nski and Tarski, 1930] W. Sierpi´nski and A. Tarski. Sur une propri´et´e caract´eristique des
nombres inaccessibles, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 15:292–300, 1930. Reprinted in [Sierpi´nski,
1976, 29-35], and in [Tarski, 1986 vol. 1, 289–297].
[Skolem, 1920] T. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ullbarkeit oder
Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theoreme ¨uber dichte Mengen, Videnskaps-
selskapets Skrifter, I. Matematisk-Naturvidenskabelig Klass, #4:1–36, 1920. Reprinted in
[Skolem, 1970, 103–136]. Partially translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 252–263].
[Skolem, 1923] T. Skolem. Einige Bemerkungen zur axiomatischen Begr¨undung der Mengen-
lehre, in: Matematikerkongressen i Helsingfors den 4–7 Juli 1922, Den femte skandinaviska
matematikerkongressen, Redog¨orelse, pp. 217–232. Akademiska-Bokhandeln, Helsinki, 1923.
Reprinted in [Skolem, 1970, 137–152]. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 290–301].
[Skolem, 1930] T. Skolem. Einige Bemerkungen zu der Abhandlung von E. Zermelo: “¨Uber die
Deﬁnitheit in der Axiomatik”, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 15:337–341, 1930. Reprinted in
[Skolem, 1970, 275–279].
[Skolem, 1933] T. Skolem. Ein kombinatorischer Satz mit Anwendung auf ein logisches Entschei-
dungsproblem, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 20: 254–261, 1933. Reprinted in [Skolem, 1970,
337–344].
[Skolem, 1933a] T. Skolem. ¨Uber die Unm¨oglichkeit einer vollst¨andigen Charakterisierung der
Zahlenreihe mittels eines endlichen Axiomensystems, Norsk Matematisk Forenings Skrifter,
#10:73–82, 1933. Reprinted in [Skolem, 1970, 345–354].
[Skolem, 1934] T. Skolem. ¨Uber die Nicht-charakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich
oder abz¨ahlbar unendlich vieler Assagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvariablen, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 23’:150–161, 1934. Reprinted in [Skolem, 1970, 355–366].
[Skolem, 1970] T. Skolem. J. E. Fenstad, ed., Selected Works in Logic, Univesitetsforlaget, Oslo,
1970.
[Solovay, 1963] R. M. Solovay. Independence results in the theory of cardinals. I, II (abstracts),
Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 10:595, 1963.
[Solovay, 1965] R. M. Solovay. 2ℵ0 can be anything it ought to be (abstract). In [Addison et al.,
1965, 435].
[Solovay, 1965a] R. M. Solovay. Measurable cardinals and the continuum hypothesis (abstract),
Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 12:132, 1965.
[Solovay, 1965b] R. M. Solovay. The measure problem (abstract), Notices of the American Math-
ematical Society, 12:217, 1965.
[Solovay, 1969] R. M. Solovay. The cardinality of Σ1
2 sets of reals. In J. J. Bulloﬀ, T. C. Holyoke,
and S. W. Hahn, eds., Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 58–73. Symposium papers commem-
orating the sixtieth birthday of Kurt G¨odel. Springer, Berlin, 1969.
[Solovay, 1970] R. M. Solovay. A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue
measurable, Annals of Mathematics, 92:1–56, 1970.
[Specker, 1957] E. Specker. Zur Axiomatik der Mengenlehre (Fundierungs- und Auswahlaxiom),
Zeitschrift f¨ur mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 3:173–210, 1957.
[Steinitz, 1910] E. Steinitz. Algebraische Theorie der K¨orper, Journal f¨ur die reine und ange-
wandte Mathematik, 137:167–309, 1910.
[Suslin, 1917] M. Y. Suslin. Sur une d´eﬁnition des ensembles mesurables B sans nombres transﬁ-
nis, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 164:88–
91, 1917.
[Suslin, 1920] M. Y. Suslin. Probl`eme 3, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 1:223, 1920.
[Tarski, 1924] A. Tarski. Sur quelques th´eor`emes qui ´equivalent `a l’axiome du choix, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 5:147–154, 1924. Reprinted in [Tarski, 1986, vol. 1, 41–48].
[Tarski, 1931] A. Tarski. Sur les ensembles d´eﬁnissables de nombres r´eels, Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 17:210–239, 1931. Translated in [Tarski, 1983, 110–142].

70
Akihiro Kanamori
[Tarski, 1933] A. Tarski. Poj¸ecie prawdy w j¸ezykach nauk dedukcyjnych (The concept of truth in
the languages of deductive sciences), Prace Towarzystwa Naukowego Warszawskiego, Wydzia l
III, Nauk Matematyczno-ﬁzycznych (Travaux de la Soci´et´e des Sciences et des Lettres de
Varsovie, Classe III, Sciences Math´ematiques et Physiques, #34, 1933. See also [Tarski,
1935].
[Tarski, 1935] A. Tarski. Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen (German transla-
tion of [Tarski, 1933] with a postscript), Studia Philosophica, 1:261–405, 1935. Reprinted in
[Tarski, 1986, vol. 2, 51–198]. Translated in [Tarski, 1983, 152–278].
[Tarski, 1951] A. Tarski. A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry (prepared
by J.C.C. McKinsey), University of California Press, Berkeley, 1951. Second revised edition.
[Tarski, 1962] A. Tarski. Some problems and results relevant to the foundations of set the-
ory, in:Nagel, Ernest, Patrick Suppes, and Alfred Tarski (editors). Logic, Methodology and
Philosophy of Science. Proceedings of the 1960 [and ﬁrst] International Congress (Stanford,
California), pp. 125–135. Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1962. Reprinted in [Tarski,
1986, vol. 4, 115–125].
[Tarski, 1983] A. Tarski. Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938. Trans-
lations by J.H. Woodger, second edition, Hackett, Indianapolis, 1983.
[Tarski, 1986] A. Tarski. S. R. Givant and R. N. McKenzie, eds., Collected Papers, Basel,
Birkh¨auser, 1986.
[Todorˇcevi´c, 1984] S. Todorˇcevi´c. Trees and linearly ordered sets. In [Kunen and Vaughan, 1984,
235–293].
[Ulam, 1930] S. M. Ulam. Zur Masstheorie in der allgemeinen Mengenlehre, Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 16:140–150, 1930. Reprinted in [Ulam, 1974, 9–19].
[Ulam, 1974] S. M. Ulam. W. A. Beyer, J. Mycielski, and G.-C. Rota, eds., Sets, Numbers, and
Universes. Selected Works, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1974.
[van Douwen, 1984] E. K. van Douwen. The integers and topology. In [Kunen and Vaughan,
1984, 111–168].
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel:A Source Book in Mathemat-
ical Logic, 1879-1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1967.
[Vitali, 1905] G. Vitali. Sul problema della misura dei gruppi di punti di una retta, Tip. Gam-
berini e Parmeggiani, Bologna, 1905.
[von Neumann, 1923] J. von Neumann. Zur Einf¨uhrung der transﬁniten Zahlen, Acta Litterarum
ac Scientiarum Regiae Universitatis Hungaricae Francisco-Josephinae, sectio scientiarum
mathematicarum, 1:199–208, 1923. Reprinted in [von Neumann, 1961, 24–33]. Translated in
[van Heijenoort, 1967, 346–354].
[von Neumann, 1925] J. von Neumann. Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre, Journal f¨ur die
reine und angewandte Mathematik, 154:219–240, 1925. Berichtigung 155, 128. Reprinted in
[von Neumann, 1961, 34–56]. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 393–413].
[von Neumann, 1928] J. von Neumann. ¨Uber die Deﬁnition durch transﬁnite Induktion und
verwandte Fragen der allgemeinen Mengenlehre, Mathematische Annalen, 99:373–391, 1928.
Reprinted in [von Neumann, 1961, 320–338].
[von Neumann, 1928a] J. von Neumann. Die Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre, Mathematische
Zeitschrift, 27:669–752, 1928. Reprinted in [von Neumann, 1961, 339–422].
[von Neumann, 1929] J. von Neumann. ¨Uber eine Widerspruchfreiheitsfrage in der axiomatic-
schen Mengenlehre, Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 160:227–241, 1929.
Reprinted in [von Neumann, 1961, 494–508].
[von Neumann, 1961] J. von Neumann. A. H. Taub, ed., John von Neumann, Collected Works,
vol. 1, Pergamon Press, New York, 1961.
[Vopˇenka, 1962] P. Vopˇenka. Construction of models of set theory by the method of ultra-
products (in Russian), Zeitschrift f¨ur mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik,
8:293–304, 1962.
[Vopˇenka, 1964] P. Vopˇenka. The independence of the Continuum Hypothesis (in Russian),
Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 5 Supplement, I:1–48, 1964. Trans-
lated in American Mathematical Society Translations, 57:84–112, 1966.
[Vopˇenka, 1965] P. Vopˇenka. Construction of a model for G¨odel-Bernays set theory for which
the class of natural numbers is a set of the model and a proper class in the theory. In [Addison
et al., 1965, 436–437].

Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen
71
[Vopˇenka, 1967] P. Vopˇenka. The general theory of ∇-models, Commentationes Mathematicae
Universitatis Carolinae, 8:145–170, 1967.
[Wagon, 1985] S. Wagon. The Banach-Tarski Paradox, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and Its
Applications, vol. 24, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1985. Paperback edition, 1993.
[Wang, 1974] H. Wang. From Mathematics to Philosophy, Humanities Press, New York ,1974.
[Wang, 1974a] H. Wang. The concept of set. In [Wang, 1974, 181–223]. Reprinted in [Benacerraf
and Putnam, 1983, 530–570].
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vol. 1,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1910.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1912] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vol. 2,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1912.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1913] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica, vol. 3,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1913.
[Wiener, 1914] N. Wiener. A simpliﬁcation of the logic of relations, Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society, 17:387–390, 1914. Reprinted in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 224–227].
[Wittgenstein, 1956] L. Wittgenstein. G. H. von Wright, R. Rhees, and G. E. M. Anscombe,
eds., Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1956. Second
printing, 1967.
[Zermelo, 1904] E. Zermelo. Beweis, dass jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann (Aus einem an
Herrn Hilbert gerichteten Briefe), Mathematische Annalen, 59:514–516, 1904. Translated in
[van Heijenoort, 1967, 139–141].
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Neuer Beweis f¨ur die M¨oglichkeit einer Wohlordnung, Mathematis-
che Annalen, 65:107–128, 1908. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 183–198].
[Zermelo, 1913] E. Zermelo.
¨Uber eine Anwendung der Mengenlehre auf die Theorie des
Schachspiels. In E. W. Hobson and A. E. H. Love, eds., Proceedings of the Fifth International
Congress of Mathematicians, pp. 501–504. Cambridge, 1912. Vol. 2, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1913.
[Zermelo, 1929] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber den Begriﬀder Deﬁnitheit in der Axiomatik, Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 14:339–344, 1929.
[Zermelo, 1930] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Grenzzahlen und Mengenbereiche:Neue Untersuchungen ¨uber
die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre, Fundamenta Mathematicae , 16:29–47, 1930. Translated
with commentary by Michael Hallett in [Ewald, 1996, 1208–1233].
[Zermelo, 1931] E. Zermelo. ¨Uber Stufen der Quantiﬁkation und die Logik des Unendlichen,
Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 41:85–88, 1931.
[Zermelo, 1935] E. Zermelo. Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Theorie der mathematicschen
Satzsysteme, Fundamenta Mathematicae, 25:136–146, 1935.
[Zorn, 1935] M. Zorn. A remark on method in transﬁnite algebra, Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 41:667–670, 1935.


HISTORY OF THE CONTINUUM
IN THE 20th CENTURY
Juris Stepr¯ans
1
INTRODUCTION
The subject of this history is the cardinality of the continuum, as described by
Georg Cantor, as well as the various other cardinal numbers deﬁned by combina-
torial structures associated with the continuum. Among these are the cardinals
of various subsets of the ideals of meagre and Lebesgue null subsets of the reals.
Typical examples of cardinals arising in this context are the least cardinal of a
non-measurable set of reals or the least number of meagre sets whose union covers
the reals. On the other hand, the combinatorial structures giving rise to cardinals
are usually extremal objects embedded in simply deﬁnable equivalence relations or
partial orders associated with the continuum. Typical examples include maximal
families of subsets of N with all pairwise intersections being ﬁnite, or unbounded
sets of sequences of natural numbers under the ordering of eventual dominance of
minimal cardinality. Other examples of combinatorial structures associated with
the continuum are sets of reals with unusual properties; Lusin sets — these are
uncountable sets whose intersection with each meagre set is countable — provide
typical examples of such sets. However, the theory of ultraﬁlters will play only a
minor role in this discussion since these objects belong to a diﬀerent realm than
the continuum. As well, even though the descriptive set theory of the reals is very
closely linked to the continuum, this topic would require its own chapter to be
treated adequately.
Instead, this article will trace the growing understanding of the continuum, as
well as its related cardinals and associated combinatorial structures, starting at
the beginning of the twentieth century and ending at the start of the twenty-ﬁrst
century. However, it would be more accurate to describe this as a history of the
documentation of the subject as recorded in the published literature. No attempt
has been made to interview the surviving contributors to the development of the
subject, nor will this article attempt to settle controversial questions of provenance.
Instead, the focus of this history is on the questions that stimulated research on
the continuum and the often long chains of incremental progress that eventually
lead to greater understanding and, in many cases, solutions to longstanding, open
problems.
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

74
Juris Stepr¯ans
Moreover, this is not intended to be a comprehensive history providing a cata-
logue of all signiﬁcant results obtained in the last century. The reader looking for
that much detail is advised to consult [Blass, 2010] or [Bartoszy´nski and Judah,
1995] as a starting point for further investigations into the research literature.
The reader with no knowledge of the subject would also beneﬁt from at least a
superﬁcial reading of [Blass, 2010] before turning to this history. For the bene-
ﬁt of such readers much of the standard terminology and deﬁnitions have been
provided throughout the text. However, deﬁnitions are provided at that point in
the text where the explanation contributes most to the development of the story
rather than at their ﬁrst appearance. Entries to the volume index should help
the reader searching for a deﬁnition or an explanation of some terminology. Also,
the full names of individuals mentioned in this history are used only at their ﬁrst
occurrence in the story and the index can be used to ﬁnd these occurrences.
2
HILBERT’S ADDRESS
It is diﬃcult to imagine that the story of the continuum in the twentieth cen-
tury could start anywhere other than with David Hilbert’s 1900 address [1901] in
Paris. The very ﬁrst of his celebrated list of problems presented at the Interna-
tional Congress of Mathematicians is the Continuum Hypothesis, which, by this
point in time, had already been well studied. As Hilbert says, “The investiga-
tions of Cantor on such assemblages of points suggest a very plausible theorem,
which nevertheless, in spite of the most strenuous eﬀorts, no one has succeeded in
proving.”1 Hilbert goes on to emphasize a possible line of attack on the problem
which, while not solving the problem, does serve as a suitable prelude for much of
the developments in the study of the continuum that were to unfold throughout
the coming century. In his address, Hilbert focusses his attention on “another
very remarkable statement of Cantor’s which stands in the closest connection with
the theorem mentioned and which, perhaps, oﬀers the key to its proof.”2 He is, of
course, making reference here to the well-ordering of the reals, a subject that would
occupy the minds of mathematicians concerned with the foundations of their sub-
ject well into the coming century. However, Hilbert’s interest here was not with
foundations, but with understanding how the new concept of well ordering could
be used to deal with existing problems such as that of whether 2ℵ0 = ℵ1.
Both the novelty of the concept as well as the importance Hilbert attaches to
it are underlined by the detailed description of what a well-ordering of the reals
would look like.
This is to set up the question of “whether the totality of all
numbers may not be arranged in another manner so that every partial assemblage
1(The translation from the address here, as well as later, is from [Hilbert, 1902].) Die Unter-
suchungen von Cantor ¨uber solche Punktmengen machen einen Satz sehr wahrscheinlich, dessen
Beweis jedoch trotz eifrigster Bem¨uhungen bisher noch Niemanden gelungen ist . . .
2Es sei noch eine andere sehr merkw¨urdige Behauptung Cantors erw¨ahnt, die mit dem genan-
nten Satze in engstem Zusammenhange steht und die vielleicht den Schl¨ussel zum Beweise dieses
Satzes liefert.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
75
may have a ﬁrst element . . . It appears to me most desirable to obtain a direct
proof of this . . . perhaps by actually giving an arrangement of numbers such that
in every partial system a ﬁrst number can be pointed out.”3 Later developments
in descriptive set theory would have much to say on the extent to which Hilbert’s
plan could be carried out, but the importance from the point of view of the history
of the continuum is Hilbert’s clear vision of the potential connection between
combinatorial structures, such as well-ordered sets, and the topological or set-
theoretic continuum. His hope is that this will provide “a new bridge between the
countable assemblage and the continuum.”4
By the time of Hilbert’s address it had already been more than 15 years since
Cantor [1884] had concentrated his attention on perfect sets and had shown them
all to have the same cardinality as the continuum. It would be another 8 years
after Hilbert’s address before Felix Bernstein [1908] would make use of the Axiom
of Choice to construct what is now known as a Bernstein set, an uncountable set
such that neither it nor its complement contains a perfect set. While Bernstein’s
construction put an end to any hope of establishing the Continuum Hypothesis
using Cantor’s theorem on the cardinality of perfect sets, it did provide another
tool to be used in investigating the “new bridge” of Hilbert’s address, between
the countable and the continuum.
This line of reasoning, looking for connec-
tions between inﬁnite combinatorial objects and the continuum, can be traced
throughout the twentieth century. On one hand, advances in understanding the
continuum followed from results such as Pavel Alexandroﬀand Felix Hausdorﬀ’s
independent proofs [Alexandroﬀ, 1916; Hausdorﬀ, 1916] that uncountable Borel
sets contain perfect sets. On the other hand, important information about the
combinatorial nature of ω1 was obtained from constructions such as Hausdorﬀ’s
(ω1, ω∗
1)–gap [Hausdorﬀ, 1909] or Stevo Todorˇcevi´c’s counterexample [Todorcevic,
1987] to ℵ1 →[ℵ1]2
ℵ1. The motivation behind such results is often the hope of
gaining better understanding of the connection between these two facets of the
continuum, understanding such as that gained from Robert M. Solovay’s coding
by almost disjoint families. It is the purpose of this history of the continuum to
examine this line of research and the critical developments along it.
While Hilbert’s address might provide a dramatic starting point, the truth of
the matter is that there is no convenient anchor for a history of twentieth century
developments on the continuum. However, it is instructive to begin investigations
into this history by considering those questions in analysis that had attracted
the attention of mathematicians with a set-theoretic interest at the end of the
nineteenth and start of the twentieth centuries, questions which would turn out to
have a critical inﬂuence on developments in set theory and, eventually, would lead
3Denn, wenn wir als Teilmenge die Punkte einer endlichen Strecke mit Ausnahme des An-
fangspunktes der Strecke ins Auge fassen, so besitzt diese Teilmenge jedenfalls kein fr¨uhestes
Element. Es erhebt sich nun die Frage, ob sich die Gesamtheit aller Zahlen nicht in anderer
Weise so ordnen l¨aßt, daß jede Teilmenge ein fr¨uhestes Element, hat, d.h. ob das Continuum
auch als wohlgeordnete Menge aufgefaßt werden kann, was Cantor bejahen zu m¨ussen glaubt.
4der Beweis dieses Satzes w¨urde mithin eine neue Br¨ucke schlagen zwischen der abz¨ahlbaren
Menge und dem Continuum.

76
Juris Stepr¯ans
to the detailed study of cardinal invariants5 of the continuum. A focal point, if not
a starting point, for these investigations is found a year before Hilbert’s address
in the thesis of Ren´e Baire [1899b]. Baire had set himself the task of analyzing
pointwise limits of continuous functions. Among many other results, this thesis
contains the Baire Category Theorem, that no interval is of the ﬁrst category,
a theorem which 70 years later could be interpreted as a weak form of Martin’s
Axiom. The developments leading from Baire’s theorem through Martin’s Axiom
to the Proper Forcing Axiom and its variants will be discussed in §8.
His continuation of this work six years later would introduce Baire’s classiﬁca-
tion of functions as a hierarchy of classes, each the pointwise limit of functions
from previous classes. His suﬃcient condition for a function to belong to this clas-
siﬁcation inspired Nikolai Lusin’s [1914] construction, assuming the Continuum
Hypothesis, of what is now known as a Lusin set, even though Paul Mahlo’s article
[1913] with a similar construction appeared a year earlier. Almost a century later
this remains a critical example delineating the behaviour of cardinal invariants of
the continuum. It is a happy circumstance for the development of mathematics
that Lusin’s construction seems to have been ignored by mathematicians, such as
Abram Besicovitch and Fritz Rothberger, working on related questions much later.
While a Lusin set would have been suﬃcient for their purposes, the concentrated
sets they constructed, assuming the same hypothesis as Lusin, were revealed half
a century later to be subtly distinct from Lusin sets. Moreover, their method of
construction lead to important developments in the study of the structure of NN
under the ≤∗relation and the related cardinal invariants b and d which will be
examined in §5.
The study of NN under the ≤∗has its roots in the work of Paul du Bois-
Reymond [1870-71; 1872] on rates of convergence, referred to by du Bois-Reymond
as pantachies. It would be more than thirty years before du Bois-Reymond’s work
would attract serious attention. G. H. (Godfrey Harold) Hardy [1924] provided an
English exposition and considered the implication for power series and L-functions.
Hausdorﬀ, on the other hand, recognized the critical role set theory would play in
the study of pantachies. This will be the starting point for §5.
While du Bois-Reymond, his contemporary Jean-Gaston Darboux and, of course,
Cantor were engaged in the ﬁrst, tentative examinations of questions in analysis
that would lead to interesting set-theoretic developments it would be a generation
later before the study of such questions found any real resonance among ana-
lysts. Writing in 1922, Henri L´eon Lebesgue acknowledges (cf. [1972, page 92])
that Camille Jordan has established the usefulness of set theory and incorporated
it into the mainstream of mathematics, even though he does refer to Darboux’s
counterexamples as “une sorte de mus´ee de monstruosit´es”. Indeed, H´el`ene Gis-
5The use of the term invariant to describe cardinals associated with various structures on
the continuum is not universally accepted. For example, Andreas Blass [2010] uses the term
characteristic instead, arguing that these cardinals are not at all invariant and can assume
diﬀerent values in diﬀerent models of set theory.
Nevertheless, since the term invariant has
found widespread acceptance and usage in the literature, this survey will not deviate from this
tradition.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
77
pert [1995] argues that the French tradition of interest in the theory of functions
was the source of the increased interest in set-theoretic questions, especially in the
work of ´Emile Borel, Lebesgue and Baire. Given the inﬂuence of French math-
ematics, it is no surprise to see this interest reﬂected beyond France’s borders.
Indeed, the analysts in Moscow and Warsaw took up this direction so enthusias-
tically that it is fair to say that set-theoretic developments in these two centres
soon eclipsed those of Paris.
The year 1920 witnessed the founding of the journal Fundamenta Mathematicae
in Warsaw and even a casual scanning of the early editions reveals the intense inter-
est in set-theoretic questions during those years, both in Warsaw and in Moscow.
Alongside the Polish mathematicians Kazimierz Kuratowski, Stefan Banach, Hugo
Steinhaus and, of course, Wac law Sierpi´nski one also sees the names of Lusin, Pavel
Urysohn and Mikhail Suslin although Russian contributions are seen to have de-
clined with the rise of Stalin by the end of the 1920’s. An enlightening indication
of the set-theoretic interests of these two groups can be found in the problems
section at the end of each of the early issues. Perhaps the best known of these
questions, due to Suslin, is recorded on page 223 of the section Probl`emes of the
ﬁrst issue of Fundamenta Mathematicae:
QUESTION 1. Can the real line be characterized as the unique complete, dense
in itself linear order with the countable chain condition?6
The ramiﬁcations of the answer to Suslin’s question are profound and lead
to mathematics far beyond what could have been imagined by Suslin and his
contemporaries at the time. These will be discussed in §8. As well, one ﬁnds
Sierpi´nski asking:
QUESTION 2. Is there a partition of the unit interval into ℵ1 Borel sets?7
The key idea to the solution, Hausdorﬀ’s (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap, had already appeared
some ten years earlier, albeit in a rather obscure journal.
In the same list of
problems Sierpi´nski also asks:
QUESTION 3. Is there an uncountable set of reals every homeomorphic image of
which is Lebesgue null?8
Almost as an afterthought he asks whether assuming that 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 helps. The
answers to both of these questions would be known considerably earlier than the
answer to Suslin’s question.
Other questions seem considerably ahead of their time, given the little that
was known about the value of the continuum, but, nevertheless were asked by
6Un ensemble ordonn´e (lin´eairement, sans sauts at sans lacunes, poss´edant cette propri´et´e que
tout ensemble d’intervalles contenant plus qu’un ´el´ement) n’empi´etant pas les un sur les autres
est toujours au plus d´enombrable, est il n´ecessairement un continu lin´eaire ordinaire?
7Existe-il une d´ecomposition d’un intervalle en ℵ1 ensembles mesurables (B), non vides, sans
point commun deux `a deux?
8Existe-il
un
ensemble
lin´eaire
non
d´enombrable
E,
tel
que
tout
ensemble
lin´eaire
hom´eomorphe avec E soit de mesure lebesguienne nulle? Peut-on d´emontrer l’existence d’un
tel ensemble mˆeme en admettant que 2ℵ0 = ℵ1?

78
Juris Stepr¯ans
Sierpi´nski in the ﬁrst issue of Fundamenta Mathematicae:
QUESTION 4. Is it possible, without assuming that 2ℵ0 = ℵ1, to show that there
are ℵ1 Lebesgue null sets whose union is not null? What of meagre sets? What of
analytic sets?9
Two issues later, in a similar spirit, Stanis law Ruziewicz asks:
QUESTION 5. Are sets of cardinality less than the continuum necessarily mea-
gre?10
In the language of cardinal invariants, of course, Sierpi´nski is asking about the
additivity of the null and meagre ideals, while Ruziewicz is asking about the uni-
formity invariant of the ideal of meagre sets. All these questions will be considered
in §6.
Sierpi´nski’s ﬁnal question is about the additivity of analytic sets, while, in the
same list Lusin asks what the cardinality of a co-analytic set is.
This second
question would soon be answered in [Lusin and Sierpi´nski, 1923], but this line
of investigation leads away from the study of cardinal invariants. However, it is
worthy of note that these sorts of questions seemed natural long before they could
be answered.
The following question from the ﬁrst issue of Fundamenta, due to Steinhaus,
deserves special mention:
QUESTION 6. Is it possible, without assuming that 2ℵ0 = ℵ1, to show that there
is a subset of the plane which is null in all vertical sections, yet whose complement
is null in all horizontal sections?11
Sierpi´nski would show that the answer is negative and this answer would play a
central role in his book [1934a] on the Continuum Hypothesis. In the fourth issue
Kuratowski asked:
QUESTION 7. Given a set which is nowhere meagre, is it possible to partition it
into two disjoint sets, both of which are nowhere meagre?12
He mentions that this can be done by assuming either that the set in question
is analytic or by assuming the Continuum Hypothesis but, that the answer for
an arbitrary subset of the reals is not known. Partial answers would invoke large
cardinal assumptions, even though Lusin’s ﬁnal answer would have no need of
9Peut-on d´emontrer sans l’hypth`ese du continu (2ℵ0 = ℵ1) qu’une somme de ℵ1 ensembles
de mesure lebesguienne nulle n’est pas n´cessairement de mesure (L) nulle? Qu’une somme de ℵ1
ensembles de premi`ere cat´egorie n’est pas n´ecessairement de premi`ere cat´egorie? Qu’un produit
de ℵ1 ensembles (A) n’est pas n´ecessairement un ensemble (A)?
10Un ensemble (lin´eaire) de puissance inf´erieure `a celle du continu, est-il n´ecessairement de la
premi`ere cat´egorie de M. Baire?
11Peut-on d´emontrer sans l’hypoth`ese du continu l’existence d’un ensemble plan qui est de la
mesure lebesguienne nulle sur toute parall`ele `a l’axe d’abscisses et dont le compl´ementaire est de
mesure nulle sur toute parall`ele `a l’axe d’ordonn´ees?
12A ´etant un ensemble de nombres r´eels qui n’est de 1 cat´egorie dans aucun intervalle, existe-il
une d´ecomposition: A = B + C, B × C = 0 telle que ni B ni C ne soient de 1 cat´egorie dans
aucun intervalle?

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
79
these. This question will be revisited in §6.
These questions, and ones like them, will play an important role in this ef-
fort to trace the central developments leading to our current understanding of the
continuum since they can be viewed as giving meaning to questions such as the
Continuum Hypothesis. Given the broad range of independence results concerning
the continuum and its various invariants, there may be a tendency to view any
results in this area as merely a formalist exercise. Indeed, Paul Cohen himself
admits to such a perspective in an essay written shortly after obtaining the inde-
pendence of the Continuum Hypothesis — the impact of the forcing technique he
developed to do this will be discussed in §7 — and he acknowledges that Abra-
ham Robinson’s views on the subject have convinced him to accept the formalist
position. On this Cohen [1971] says,
It is a choice which carries with it certain heavy weights. Certainly one
of the heaviest is the admission that CH, perhaps the ﬁrst signiﬁcant
question about uncountable sets which can be asked, has no intrinsic
meaning.
If, contrary to Cohen’s view, there is any meaning to be found in statements
about the continuum, then, at least part of this meaning will be found in the
applications to which these statements are put. The applications of interest to
set theorists shortly after the First World War have been outlined in this section.
Subsequent sections will survey the developments stemming from these.
3
LUSIN’S SECOND CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS
Lusin’s [1914] construction using transﬁnite induction and assuming 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 to
enumerate the reals and perfect sets is now a standard technique and part of the
arsenal of any set theorist. But it is of interest to reﬂect on his conclusion and
the use to which it was to put. More than a decade earlier, Baire had examined
the classiﬁcation of functions as a hierarchy of classes, each the pointwise limit
of functions from previous classes. His necessary condition for a function f to
belong to this classiﬁcation scheme was that given any perfect set P there is a
set M which is meagre relative to P such that the restriction of f to P \ M is
continuous. It is easy to see that the characteristic function of a Lusin set has this
property; indeed, given any perfect set P there is a countable set M such that the
restriction of the characteristic function to P \ M is constant. But how did Lusin
show that the characteristic function of the set he constructed does not belong to
Baire’s classiﬁcation scheme? Had he known that all Borel sets have the Perfect
Set Property, this would have been immediate. But this fact was to be established
only two years later, in 1916, independently by Alexandroﬀ[1916] and Hausdorﬀ
[1916]. Along with the later result that Baire functions are Borel, it is easy to show
that the characteristic functions of Lusin sets are not Baire. However, this was
not available to Lusin in 1914. He had to rely on a less constructive pigeonhole

80
Juris Stepr¯ans
argument based on 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1. Various results throughout the coming century
would provide further illustrations of the usefulness of this assumption.
It is interesting to note that in the section Probl`emes of Volume 4 of Funda-
menta Mathematicae Sierpi´nski asks in Question 24 about the cardinality of all
functions satisfying Baire’s condition. It seems very likely that the motivation for
this question was rooted in considerations of the hypothesis used in Lusin’s argu-
ment for constructing a function satisfying Baire’s condition but not belonging to
the Baire classiﬁcation. It is worth noting though, that already in [1921] Lusin had
shown that there are uncountable non-Borel sets that are meagre in every perfect
set. In [1924] Sierpi´nski considers varous consequences of the Continuum Hypoth-
esis, but also devotes some space to the weak Continuum Hypothesis 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1
and, more than a decade later, it is clear that this sort of question continued to
exercise both Lusin and Sierpinski. In [Sierpi´nski, 1935] Sierpi´nski returns to the
hypothesis 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 since its failure is required for the following hypothesis of
Lusin [1935] to hold: Every set of reals of cardinality ℵ1 is co-analytic. Lusin
[1935] refers to the equality 2ℵ0 = 2ℵ1 as the “seconde hypoth`ese du continu” and
admits to not being aware of the ﬁrst author to consider this hypothesis. Martin’s
Axiom is discussed in §8, and in the paper [Martin and Solovay, 1970] introducing
this axiom it is shown that it implies that if 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 then Lusin’s hypothesis
about sets of cardinality ℵ1 being co-analytic sets holds if and only there is a real
t such that ℵ1 = ℵL[t]
1
and, hence, there are models of Martin’s Axiom in which
this hypothesis of Lusin is true.
However, the weak form of the Continuum Hypothesis, whose negation is re-
ferred to by Luzin as the Second Continuum Hypothesis, had already been exam-
ined by Hausdorﬀin 1907 and found to be useful. Hausdorﬀ’s work on maximal
linear orderings of sequences of integers under eventual dominance is examined in
more detail in §5. A key development in this early work occurred in [Hausdorﬀ,
1907] in which Hausdorﬀestablished that these maximal linear orders — which,
following du Bois-Reymond, he called pantachies — must have cardinality 2ℵ0.
Moreover, if such a pantachie happens to have no (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps — these are de-
ﬁned in §5 — then the cardinality of the pantachie must be 2ℵ1. In other words,
if 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 then there must be (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps in each pantachie. As it happens,
this early application of the negation of the Second Continuum Hypothesis was su-
perseded two years later by Hausdorﬀ’s critically important discovery [1909] that
(ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps actually exist without having to appeal to any hypothesis other than
the Axiom of Choice.
Around the same time that Lusin and Sierpi´nski were considering the Second
Continuum Hypothesis in the context of co-analytic sets of cardinality ℵ1, across
the ocean the same axiom was ﬁnding applications to the theory of metrizability of
general topological spaces. In 1937 F. Burton Jones showed that if 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 then
every separable, normal Moore space is metrizable. The point in the argument
at which the weak Continuum Hypothesis plays a role is in showing that there
are far more instances of normality — namely, disjoint closed sets that need to be
separated by disjoint open sets — than can be handled by the 2ℵ0 open sets that

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
81
are available in a separable space.
About the same time as Jones was working on questions of metrizability, Fritz
Rothberger was making some of his initial advances in the study of the structure
P(N) under inclusion modulo a ﬁnite set as well as NN under eventual dominance
which are described in more detail in §5. In the spirit of Hausdorﬀ’s results on
the weak Continuum Hypothesis and (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps, Rothberger [1948] showed
that this hypothesis implies that ω1–limits exist. Recall that an ω1–limit is a ⊆∗
descending family {Aξ}ξ∈ω1 — in other words, if ξ ∈η then Aη ⊆∗Aξ, i.e. Aη \Aξ
is ﬁnite — for which there does not exist an inﬁnite X such that X ⊆∗Aξ for each
ξ ∈ω1. Once again the key step is to ﬁnd a family of 2ℵ1 descending families any
two of which are eventually almost disjoint. Assuming 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1, it impossible to
have an inﬁnite set below each of these.
After stating some open problems suggested by his results, Rothberger com-
ments “Many propositions are known that imply Lusin’s ‘second continuum hy-
pothesis’ but very little is known about consequences of Lusin’s hypothesis.” He
refers here explicitly to Sierpi´nski’s paper [1935] dealing with Lusin’s hypothesis
that all sets of reals of cardinality ℵ1 are co-analytic, but he is actually referring
to the hypothesis 2ℵ0 = 2ℵ1.
In the same paper [1948], Rothberger considers the following two related notions:
• A Q–set is an uncountable set of reals every subset of which is a relative Fσ.
• A denumerable base for a family G of R-valued functions on a set X is a
countable family F of R-valued functions on X such that every function in
G is the pointwise limit of functions from F.
He goes on to show that there is a Q–set if and only if there is an uncountable set
X ⊆R for which RX has a denumerable base. Providing more evidence for his
comment on page 43, he shows that both these assertions fail unless Lusin’s Second
Continuum Hypothesis 2ℵ0 = 2ℵ1 holds. R. H. Bing uses this idea in his [1951]
to show that if there is a Q–set then there is a separable, normal, non-metrizable
Moore space.
In spite of the extensive use made of the hypothesis that 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 in various
contexts and by geographically diverse groups, there is a clear lack of new ideas
until the revived interest in such problems in the forcing era. The new impetus for
applications of the inequality 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 came from two sources, one was Ronald
Jensen’s detailed analysis of Kurt G¨odel’s constructible universe and the other was
rooted in the theory of abelian groups.
One of the discoveries made during the renewed examination of inner models
was reminiscent of work done by Jones, Rothberger, Bing and others who took
advantage of the fact that 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 implies there are more uncountable sets of
reals than there are reals, or objects coded by reals. Jensen and Solovay gained an
even deeper insight into this phenomenon by devising (cf. their [1970]) a coding by
almost disjoint sets. Given an almost disjoint family {Aξ}ξ∈ω1 with the property
that for any X ⊆ω1 there is a set A ⊆N such that Aξ ∩A is ﬁnite if and only if

82
Juris Stepr¯ans
ξ ∈X, it is natural to associate with each subset of ω1 a subset of N which codes it
in this way. Using this they are able to show that in a countable transitive model
M of set theory which shares the same ℵ1 with L and A ⊆ω1 there is a Cohen
extension M[x], with the same cardinals as M, such that x is a real from which A
is constructible.
However, following a diﬀerent line of enquiry, in studying G¨odel’s condensation
arguments Jensen formulated the following principle known as ♦: There is an
indexed family {Xξ}ξ∈ω1 such that
• Xξ ⊆ξ for each countable limit ordinal ξ
• for any X ⊆ω1 there is (a stationary set of) ξ such that X ∩ξ = Xξ.
Jensen had shown that ♦holds in the constructible universe and, even though it
implies that 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 the reverse implication fails. The fact that ♦implies there
is a Suslin tree will play a role in §8.
One of the ﬁrst to realize the potential applications of ♦was Saharon Shelah
[1974], who showed that ♦implies that every Whitehead group of cardinality ℵ1
is free. On the other hand, Shelah [1974] had also shown that assuming Martin’s
Axiom and the failure of the Continuum Hypothesis — which is discussed in §8 —
there is a non-free Whitehead group of cardinality ℵ1. In his proof Shelah isolated
the following combinatorial consequence C(S) of Martin’s Axiom and the failure
of the Continuum Hypothesis: S is a stationary subset of ω1 consisting of limit
ordinals and for each ξ ∈S there is an increasing sequence {ηi
ξ}i∈ω converging to
ξ and if cξ : ω →2 is a colouring of the integers by two colours for each ξ ∈S
then there is a single colouring c : ω1 →2 such that for each ξ ∈S the equality
c(ηi
ξ) = cξ(i) fails for only ﬁnitely many i.
In the introduction to their [1978], Keith Devlin and Shelah recount the devel-
opments leading to a new consequence of the Second Continuum Hypothesis:
Shelah conjectured that C(ω1) was consistent with ZFC + GCH. De-
vlin refuted this conjecture by showing that CH implies ¬C(ω1). . . Devlin’s
original proof used metamathematical techniques (precisely, inner mod-
els of set theory). Devlin, Jensen and Shelah all independently ob-
served that the proof could be modiﬁed to eliminate the use of in-
ner models, and that the assumption of CH could be weakened to
2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1. Shelah took this a step further by “extracting” from the
proof the principle Φ . . .
The principle Φ, which follows from the negation of Lusin’s Second Continuum
Hypothesis, is now known as weak ♦and asserts the following: For any function
F colouring the complete binary tree of height ω1 with two colours, 0 and 1,
there is a function g : ω1 →2 such that for any branch B of the binary tree
the set of all ξ such that F(B ↾ξ) = g(ξ) is stationary. While the proof of Φ
recorded in [Devlin and Shelah, 1978] is quite elementary and does not use concepts
unavailable to Sierpi´nski, Rothberger or Lusin, it is clear from the description of the

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
83
history leading to this proof that signiﬁcant new ideas were needed to arrive at the
elementary proof. As well, the formulation is very closely tied to the combinatorial
problems considered by Shelah in dealing with Whitehead groups. It is no surprise
then, that the weak ♦implies there is a non-free Whitehead group. Applications
to topology and model theory were soon also found and the principle continues to
play a central role in set theory.
A more recent development along these lines is a family of parametrized versions
of ♦that are closely related to certain cardinal invariants of the continuum. One
of these is introduced in [Hruˇs´ak, 2001] and is closely related to the cardinal d
examined in §5. Variations and generalizations of this to other cardinal invariants
of the continuum are found in [Moore et al., 2004] and some of these have their
roots in a much earlier weakening of ♦referred to as ♣introduced by Adam
Ostaszewski [1976]. Just as Φ does not require the Continuum Hypothesis, neither
does ♣. But to follow this line of development would lead considerably away from
the continuum. The reader interested in recent developments is encouraged to
consult the introduction of [Brendle, 2006].
4
THE CONTINUUM HYPOTHESIS
This history chose as its starting point Hilbert’s address to the International
Congress in 1900 because the ﬁrst question on his famous list was Cantor’s con-
tinuum problem. Cantor ’s unsuccessful search for a proof of his Continuum Hy-
pothesis is well documented — for example see [Moore, 1989] or [Dauben, 1979]
— and Hilbert himself was to devote considerable energies to this problem some
twenty-ﬁve years after his address, with no more success than Cantor. However,
there were some minor successes, and even more notable failures, around this time
as well.
Four years after Hilbert’s address in Paris the International Congress of Math-
ematicians met again in 1904 in Heidelberg.
The Continuum Hypothesis was
again the topic of at least one talk. Julius K¨onig presented a proof (cf. [1905])
in which he attempted to show that the Continuum Hypothesis is false on the
grounds that 2ℵ0 ̸= ℵξ for any ξ. The correct part of the proof is what is now
known as K¨onig’s Lemma: For any sequence of ordinals {σn}n∈ω the inequality
P
n∈ω ℵσn < Q
n∈ω ℵσn holds. It should be emphasized that it was the proof that
was correct, not the statement. Indeed it was Hausdorﬀwho was to make pre-
cise the notion of coﬁnality in his researches on order types which are discussed
in §5. The error in K¨onig’s argument was his use of an assertion of Bernstein
that ℵℵ0
α = ℵα2ℵ0 in which Bernstein had claimed, essentially, that if α > 0 then
the coﬁnality of ℵα is uncountable. Taking this into account one sees that what
K¨onig’s argument actually establishes is that the coﬁnality of 2ℵ0 is uncountable.
Bernstein himself was also scheduled to give a talk on the continuum problem,
resolving it in the opposite way from K¨onig. He did not give his talk though,
but published a version [1905] a year later. He argued that the continuum has
cardinality ℵ1 because each real number can be calculated according to some rule

84
Juris Stepr¯ans
and counting the set of all such rules was to yield ℵ1. The strategy employed
by Hilbert [1926] a quarter century after his 1900 address followed similar lines.
However, such arguments did not lead to any resolution of the problem until
G¨odel’s insightful analysis [1940] of such ideas lead to the consistency of 2ℵ0 = ℵ1
as exempliﬁed by the constructible universe.
It should be mentioned that the continuum problem was considered to have
two variants in the early years of the twentieth century. The strong form was
whether what is now known as the continuum hypothesis is true: Does 2ℵ0 = ℵ1?
The alternate form of the continuum hypothesis merely asserted that there are
only two possible values for the cardinalities of subsets of the reals. Assuming the
Axiom of Choice, of course, these problems are equivalent but, since this axiom was
still the subject of much controversy at the time, it made some sense to consider
both forms of the continuum problem.
Interest in the alternate version of the continuum problem was stimulated by
Cantor’s result that the alternate Continuum Hypothesis is true for closed sets.
Extending this to other classes of sets seemed a natural course to follow. Indeed,
Gregory Moore [1989, page 109] claims Hausdorﬀ’s interest in order types was
motivated by a desire to solve the Continuum Problem.
According to Moore,
Hausdorﬀ“put forward a new way of posing the problem, in the hope that this
would lead to a solution. Namely, CH is true if the following proposition holds
. . . : There is a dense order-type of power ℵ1 having no (ω, ω∗)–gaps.” However,
Hausdorﬀ’s own words13 do not add as much weight to the result quoted by Moore:
For simple reﬂection reveals that each everywhere dense type contains
the countable everywhere dense type η; consequently, each everywhere
dense type without (ω, ω∗)–gaps contains the usual continuum as a sub-
set.
As long as there is no success, for instance, in constructing
an everywhere dense type of the second inﬁnite cardinality without
(ω, ω∗)–gaps and with that in verifying Cantor’s hypothesis 2ℵ0 = ℵ1,
the questions of the existence of homogeneous types of the second inﬁ-
nite cardinality will be restricted to the 32 species with (ω, ω∗)–gaps.
It seems from this passage that Hausdorﬀis primarily interested in the classi-
ﬁcation of linear order types, but that he nevertheless recognizes the signiﬁcance
of his work to the Continuum Problem.
However, after the ﬁrst decade of the century the role of the Continuum Hy-
pothesis as a construction tool began to predominate. Lusin’s and Mahlo’s early
construction of what is now known as a Lusin set has already been mentioned in
13(Page 156 of [Hausdorﬀ, 1906]; the translation is from [Hausdorﬀ, 2005].) Denn eine einfache
¨Uberlegung lehrt, daßjeder ¨uberalldichte Typus den abz¨ahlbaren ¨uberalldichten Typus η, folglich
jeder ¨uberalldichte Typus ohne ωω∗-L¨ucken das gew¨ohnliche Kontinuum als Teilmenge enth¨alt.
Solange es also nicht etwa gelingt einen ¨uberalldichten Typus zweiter M¨achtigkeit ohne ωω∗-
L¨ucken zu konstruieren und damit die Cantorsche Hypothese 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 zu veriﬁzieren, wird
man die Frage nach der Existenz homogener Typen zweiter M¨achtigkeit nur auf die 32 Spezies
mit ωω∗-L¨ucken beschr¨anken.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
85
§2. As Akihiro Kanamori [1996, page 25] points out, “[i]t was the mathematical
investigation of CH that increasingly raised doubts about its truth and certainly its
provability”. Indeed, by 1934 such constructions had become suﬃciently common-
place that Sierpi´nski was able to devote an entire book [1934a] to the equivalents
and consequences of the Continuum Hypothesis, a hypothesis which he denoted
“H”.
Judging by its rank in the list of equivalents, the following proposition — an-
swering Steinhaus’ Question 6 — seemed to Sierpi´nski to be a critical equivalent
of the Continuum Hypothesis:
P1: The plane is the union of two sets, A and B, such that each vertical section
of A and each horizontal section of B is countable.14
Sierpi´nski himself had shown [1919] this to be equivalent to the Continuum Hy-
pothesis. From this follow various consequences which are also equivalent to the
Continuum Hypothesis. For example, the plane is the union of countably many
functions and their inverses if and only if the Continuum Hypothesis holds. As
a remark, Sierpi´nski points out that a similar result holds for Euclidean space
as well. Much later though, Sierpi´nski [1965] would show that the Continuum
Hypothesis is equivalent to the following: There is a partition of Euclidean space
R3 = A1 ∪A2 ∪A3 such that if L is a line parallel to the xi-co-ordinate axis then
Ai ∩L is not only countable, but actually ﬁnite. Moreover, there is a partition
Rk+2 = A1 ∪A2 ∪. . . Ak+2 such that if L is a line parallel to the xi-co-ordinate
axis then Ai ∩L is ﬁnite if and only if 2ℵ0 ≤ℵk.
A related statement from [Morayne, 1987] is even more striking: the Continuum
Hypothesis is equivalent to the existence of a Peano-like function P : R →R2 such
that at each x ∈R at least one of the co-ordinate functions of P is diﬀerentiable,
but even continuity can fail at the other co-ordinate. Moreover, this was improved
by Jacek Cicho´n and Micha l Morayne to show that 2ℵ0 ≤ℵk is equivalent to the
existence of a function P : Rk →Rk+1 such that at each x ∈R at least k of the
co-ordinate functions of P are diﬀerentiable, but even continuity may fail at the
other co-ordinate. It is interesting to note though, that even though this result
seems to be totally unrelated to P1 it, nevertheless, justiﬁes the prominent role
of P1 emphasized by Sierpi´nski. For example, one can prove that the Continuum
Hypothesis implies the existence of a function P : R →R2 such that at each
x ∈R at least one of the co-ordinate functions of P is diﬀerentiable by starting
with a decomposition of the plane as described by P1. One then deﬁnes the two
co-ordinate functions of the Peano curve in such a way that the ﬁrst co-ordinate
function guarantees that the image of (∞, 1) covers one half of the decomposition
of the plane, regardless of the deﬁnition of the second co-ordinate function, while
the second co-ordinate function guarantees that the image of (−1, ∞) covers the
14L’ensemble du tous les points du plan est une somme de deux ensembles dont l’un est au
plus d´enombrable sur toute parral`ele `a l’axe d’ordonn´ees et l’autre est au plus d´enombrable sur
toute parral`ele `a l’axe d’abscisses.

86
Juris Stepr¯ans
other half of the decomposition of the plane, regardless of the deﬁnition of the ﬁrst
co-ordinate function.
Other similar results stemming from Sierpi´nski’s P1 can be found, for example,
in [Komj´ath and Shelah, 1993/94]. However, it should be noted that considerably
earlier, in 1967, Barbara Osofsky [1968] had discovered algebraic results equivalent
to the Continuum Hypothesis.
For example, she showed that the homological
dimension of the ﬁeld of rational polynomials in 3 variables with real coeﬃcients
over the ring of such polynomials has dimension 2 if and only if the Continuum
Hypothesis holds.
Even in situations in which the connection between combinatorics in Euclidean
spaces of diﬀerent dimension and cardinal arithmetic is not immediately apparent,
other phenomena related to dimension manifest themselves. For example, a subset
X ⊆Rn is said to have distinct distances if any two distinct pairs of points from
X determine distinct distances.
Kenneth Kunen [1987] generalized to Rn the
following result of Paul Erd˝os and Shizuo Kakutani: Assuming the Continuum
Hypothesis, there is a partition of R into countably many pieces such that each
piece has distinct distances. The diﬃculty in generalizing results involving cardinal
arithmetic from R to Rn appears in diﬀerent contexts as well.
The following is the last in Sierpi´nski’s section on the equivalences of the Con-
tinuum Hypothesis and was studied ﬁrst by Alfred Tarski [1928].
P11: There do not exist more than ℵ1 distinct inﬁnite subsets of ω1 any two of
which have ﬁnite intersection.15
The restriction to inﬁnite sets here is crucial for obtaining the equivalence with
the Continuum Hypothesis, even though asking for the sets to be uncountable
seems more natural. However, there may have been a good reason for dealing only
with this case since it was shown much later, in 1976, that such questions lead
to independence results and were beyond the techniques available to Sierpi´nski
and his contemporaries. James Baumgartner [1976] showed that the existence of
a family of cardinality ℵ2 of subsets of ω1 all of whose pairwise intersections are
ﬁnite is independent of the usual axioms of set theory.
The largest part of Sierpi´nski book deals with implications of the Continuum
Hypothesis. The ﬁrst of the properties listed by him that follow from the Con-
tinuum Hypothesis was the existence of a Lusin set and was denoted as C1. The
early work regarding Lusin sets is described in §2 and later work will be described
in §5.
However, a key result of Rothberger [1938a] certainly bears mentioning
here: the Continuum Hypothesis is equivalent to the existence of both Lusin and
Sierpi´nski sets, at least of one of which has cardinality 2ℵ0. While this may not be
the most elegant of statements, it is signiﬁcant in that Rothberger’s proof isolates
a key translational property that has turned out to be extremely useful in many
situations. He shows that if there is a second category set of cardinality κ then R
is the union of κ meagre sets; while, on the other hand if there is a non-measurable
15Aucun ensemble de puissance ℵ1 n’est une somme de plus que ℵ1 ensembles inﬁnis ayant
deux `a deux un nombre ﬁni d’´el´ements communs.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
87
set of cardinality κ then R is the union of κ null sets. He argues by decomposing R
into a null and a meagre set and translating these. It follows easily that both the
Sierpi´nski and Lusin sets must be of size ℵ1. The requirement that at least one of
the Sierpi´nski and Lusin sets have cardinality 2ℵ0 seems awkward, but it is essen-
tial. Adding alternately Cohen and random reals to any model where 2ℵ0 > ℵ1
produces a model with both Sierpi´nski and Lusin sets of size ℵ1.
Also mentioned in §5 is the Property C whose central role Sierpi´nski acknowl-
edges by introducing it right after the Lusin set existence hypothesis:
C1: there is a set of cardinality the continuum whose intersection with each
nowhere dense set is at most countable.16
He notes that the sets with Property C are invariant under continuous maps and
then concludes that C1 implies the following:
C5: there is a set of cardinality the continuum no continuous image of which
contains the unit interval.17
Sierpi´nski [1928a] had established this from the Continuum Hypothesis. However,
this is considerably weaker than C1 as was shown by Arnold W. Miller [1983].
In particular, he showed that in the iterated Sacks model every set of reals of
cardinality ℵ2 = 2ℵ0 can be mapped continuously onto the unit interval. This is
discussed in §7. Moreover, he also remarks that it is consistent with any cardinal
arithmetic that the real line can be partitioned into ℵ1 pieces none of which can
be mapped onto the unit interval.
An indication of the range of implications considered by Sierpi´nski is provided
by the fact that the indexing of properties stops at C81. All of these are now
known to follow from Martin’s Axiom and are discussed in the paper [Martin
and Solovay, 1970] introducing this hypothesis. In [1997] Todorˇcevi´c singles out
Sierpi´nski’s Property P3: There is an uncountable subset of the Hilbert cube every
uncountable subset of which is projected onto the interval [0, 1] by all but ﬁnitely
many of the co-ordinate projections. He says of this hypothesis:
Proving this statement from CH did cause a considerable diﬃculties
. . . and we conjecture that this is because of a too strong preoccupation
with getting a statement equivalent to CH rather than just its conse-
quence (like C1). In fact, P3 is so made (perhaps artiﬁcially) that the
implication P3 →CH is a triviality.
Perhaps a similar “preoccupation” can be found in the result of Roy Davies [1974]
who showed that the Continuum Hypothesis is equivalent to the assertion that
each function from R2 to R can be represented as a sum of products of single
variable functions.
The last chapter of Sierpi´nski’s book also contains several
16Il existe un ensemble lin´eaire de puissance du continu qui admet un ensemble au plus
d´enombrable de points communs avec tout ensemble (lin´eaire) parfait non-dense.
17Il existe un ensemble lin´eaire E de puissance du continu et tel que l’intervalle lin´eaire n’en
est pas une image continue.

88
Juris Stepr¯ans
similar instances of this “preoccupation”. The question of determining that an
assertion is not a consequence of the Continuum Hypothesis however, is an even
more delicate task.
The ﬁrst result of this kind was obtained by Jensen. It had already been shown
by Solovay and Stanley Tennenbaum [1971] that it was consistent that no Suslin
trees exists.
Moreover, Jensen had also shown that Suslin trees could be con-
structed by using his principle ♦which holds in G¨odel’s constructible universe.
This, however, did no preclude the possibility that the Continuum Hypothesis
alone may be suﬃcient for the construction of a Suslin tree. Perhaps there was
an argument involving some key idea that Sierpi´nski, Lusin, Duro Kurepa and
the other early masters at using the Continuum Hypothesis had all missed. How-
ever, Jensen (cf. [Devlin and Johnsbr˙aten, 1974]) provided a sophisticated iterated
forcing construction that established the consistency of the Continuum Hypoth-
esis along with no Suslin trees. Later Uri Abraham, Devlin and Shelah modiﬁed
this approach [Avraham et al., 1978] to obtain that some of the consequences of
Martin’s Axiom and 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 are consistent with the Continuum Hypothesis.
However, Shelah later provided a general method for establishing such results
as those of Chapter V of his [1982]. The completeness systems introduced there
together with techniques for iterating proper partial orders allowed Jensen’s re-
sult to be established with methods amenable to other problems. For example,
Abraham and Todorˇcevi´c [1997] study the following property of ideals on ω1: ev-
ery ⊆∗-σ-directed ideal I on ω1 is such that one of the following two alternatives
holds:
• there exists an uncountable subset
• ω1 can be decomposed into countably many subsets Ai such that Ai ∩I is
ﬁnite for all i < ω and I ∈I.
They show this to be consistent with the Continuum Hypothesis.
While this
statement is weaker than the Proper Forcing Axiom it suﬃces to imply that there
are no Suslin trees — the history of these results will be discussed in §8 — and
that all (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps are Hausdorﬀgaps, which will be discussed in §5.
The principle ♦is discussed in §3 and it is mentioned that Shelah was one of
the ﬁrst to realize the potential applications of this principle and that he used it
to great eﬀect in studying the freeness of abelian groups. Another of the early
applications of was to topology. Ostaszewski [1976] used to construct a perfectly
normal, countably compact space that is not compact. In addition, the space con-
structed by Ostaszewski has the property that all closed sets are either countable
or co-countable. The question of whether ♦is necessary for establishing the ex-
istence of such a space, or whether the Continuum Hypothesis alone suﬃces had
vexed a generation of topologists until Todd Eisworth and Judith Roitman [1999]
showed that the Continuum Hypothesis alone does not suﬃce. The key diﬃculty
here is to devise a forcing that destroys Ostaszewski type spaces without adding
reals and, more, such that the iteration also does not add reals. Shelah’s general

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
89
framework from his [1982] provides the starting point for Eisworth and Roitman’s
work.
An important result of Woodin delineates the possibilities for obtaining results
independent of the Continuum Hypothesis. If there is a proper class of measurable
Woodin cardinals, and Ψ is a Σ2
1 sentence — in other words, Ψ = (∃X)Φ(X) where
the quantiﬁers in Φ are all over reals, but X is allowed to be a set of reals — such
that Ψ holds in some forcing extension of the set-theoretic universe, then it holds
in every forcing extension that also satisﬁes the Continuum Hypothesis. For most
purposes, this is almost the same as saying that the assertion actually follows from
the Continuum Hypothesis. In other words, in order to establish that a statement
asserting the existence of a set of reals with a Borel deﬁnable property follows
from the Continuum Hypothesis, it will quite surely suﬃce to show only that it is
consistent with set theory. Note that this result does not apply to the existence
of Ostaszewski’s space since describing this space requires a universal quantiﬁer
over sets of reals as well as an existential quantiﬁer asserting the existence of the
space. The original argument of Woodin was never published, but an accessible
account of this can be found in [Farah, 2007].
5
CARDINAL INVARIANTS OF THE CONTINUUM ASSOCIATED WITH
CONVERGENCE RATES
Investigations into the structure of sequences of natural numbers have their origins
in the work of du Bois-Reymond [1870-71], work which was later continued by
mathematicians such as Jacques Hadamard [1894] and Hardy [1910], who [1924]
used du Bois-Reymond’s ideas as a starting point for investigation into the theory
of L-functions and what are now known as Hardy ﬁelds. But, much more relevant
from the point of view of this history is the work of Hausdorﬀand its continuation
by Rothberger leading to the modern theory of the invariants b, d and related
notions.
The question on which du Bois-Reymond had ﬁxed his attention was that
of classifying rates of convergence occurring in analysis by attaching to them
some notion of order of inﬁnity in analogy with Cantor’s. He approached this
problem by deﬁning an ordering on positive, real-valued functions by declaring
f < g if limx→∞f(x)/g(x) = 0, f > g if limx→∞f(x)/g(x) = ∞and f ∼g if
limx→∞f(x)/g(x) exists and is ﬁnite but non-zero. If f < g then du Bois-Reymond
considered that f represented a smaller inﬁnity than g whereas if f ∼g then the
two functions were considered as representing the same inﬁnity. This structure was
referred to by du Bois-Reymond as a pantachie and it was du Bois-Reymond’s in-
tention to ﬁnd in it the cut point separating convergence from divergence. There
are several problems here, the existence of the cut point being one of them.
The even more serious problem however, is that, unlike Cantor’s cardinalities
under the Axiom of Choice, du Bois-Reymond’s “inﬁnitary calculus” of pantachies
suﬀers from the existence of incomparable orders of inﬁnity. Unlike Cantor’s car-
dinals, this problem persists even assuming the Axiom of Choice and under any

90
Juris Stepr¯ans
conceivable modiﬁcation of the deﬁnition of the ordering of the types considered by
du Bois-Reymond. Indeed, Salvatore Pincherle and later Hausdorﬀ[1907] had ob-
served that replacing the quotient by a diﬀerence in du Bois-Reymond’s deﬁnition
leads to an equally reasonable deﬁnition. Hausdorﬀexplains:18
In addition, starting out from the mode of expression that xα is inﬁnite
of order α, people have repeatedly endeavored to associate to the ele-
ments of such restricted function classes magnitude-like symbols with
corresponding laws of combination; among these are Stoltz’s moments,
Thomae’s complex numbers, and the symbols of Pincherle, Borel, Bor-
tolotti et al. These magnitudes do not satisfy the Archimedean axiom
and are thus “actually” inﬁnitely large or inﬁnitely small relative to
each other, which says nothing against their logical admissibility; their
usefulness can be debated since, on the one hand, they break down
with respect to the intermediate levels of scale, and, on the other hand,
they are more complicated than the functions whose inﬁnity they are
supposed to express.
One direction of research that has proved very productive is abstracting to the
simple situation of comparing the growth rates of sequences term by term. This,
of course, leads directly to the study of NN under ≤∗which will be the subject
of much of this history.
Recall that if f : N →N and g : N →N then the
relation f ≤∗g is deﬁne to hold if and only if f(n) ≤g(n) for all but ﬁnitely
many n. However, it should be remarked that this abstracted, discrete version of
the problem is not entirely equivalent to the original problem concerning functions
deﬁned on [0, ∞) considered by du Bois-Reymond. For example, Vladimir Kanovei
and Peter Koepke examine various possibilities of the discrete orderings as well
as the continuous structure C([0, ∞)) and mention that, while the existence of
(κ, λ∗)–gaps in RN under the co-ordinate-wise ordering implies the existence of
similar gaps in C([0, ∞)), the converse is an open question. In their discussion
of G¨odel’s argument that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2 J¨org Brendle, Paul Larson and Todorˇcevi´c
(cf. their [2001]) examine this same structure in some detail, as does the survey
article [Scheepers, 1993]. However, it is the discrete versions of problems on order
types that have driven developments in the set-theoretic study of the continuum
and its associated structures.
It was on the basis of the existence of incomparable rates of convergence that
Cantor [1895] rejected du Bois-Reymond’s work on this subject. On the other
18(Page 108 of [Hausdorﬀ, 1907]; the translation is from [Hausdorﬀ, 2005]) Nebenbei hat
man sich, von der Ausdrucksweise ausgehend, daßxα von der Ordnung α unendlich werde,
mehrfach bem¨uht, den Elementen solcher beschr¨anker Funktionsklassen gr¨oßentartige Symbole
mit entsprechenden Verkn¨upfungsgesetzen zuzuordnen; hierher geh¨oren die Stolzschen Mo-
mente, die Thomaeschen komplexen Zahlen, die Symbole von Pincherle, Borel Bortolotti
u.
A. Diese Gr¨oßen erf¨ullen das Archimedische Axiom nicht und sind also, relativ zu einan-
der, ”aktuell” unendlich groß oder unendlich klein, womit nichts gegen ihre logische Zul¨assigkeit
gesagt ist; ¨uber ihre Zweckm¨aßigkeit l¨ast sich streiten, denn die einen versagen gegen¨uber den
Zwischenstufen der Skala und die andern sin komplizierter als die Funktionen, deren Unendlich
sie ausdr¨uchken sollen.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
91
hand, Hausdorﬀwas not at all discouraged by this realization and took up the
challenge of analyzing the structure of rates of convergence in [Hausdorﬀ, 1907].
Given that there are incomparable rates of convergence, Hausdorﬀ’s starting point
was to take an arbitrary maximal, linearly ordered family of rates of convergence
which, extending du Bois-Reymond’s terminology, he also called a pantachie. In
Hausdorﬀ’s words,19 “if we designate it as our task to connect the inﬁnitary rank
ordering as a whole with Cantor’s theory of order types, then nothing remains but
to investigate the sets of pairwise comparable functions that are as comprehensive
as possible.” Hausdorﬀjustiﬁes the necessity of this approach by explaining that,20
“all attempts to produce a simple (linearly) ordered set of elements in which each
inﬁnity occupies its speciﬁc place had to fail: the inﬁnitary pantachie in the sense
of du Bois-Reymond does not exist.”
It is worth observing that Hausdorﬀwas not alone is viewing pantachies, in
this new and more precise formulation, as natural objects of study. In his treatise
[1914] Borel argues21 that the existence of pantachies should be an axiom, and
enjoy the same status as the Archimedean Axiom. In particular, he feels that
the transﬁnite process of constructing functions of ever increasing growth so as to
form a well-ordered set under eventual dominance will, in fact, produce a set of
functions which will eventually dominate any given function.
By the time he arrived at the study of pantachies, Hausdorﬀalready had a
wealth of experience in studying these abstract order types. Naturally, the same
sort of questions which had appealed to his interest in studying abstract order
types, ﬁgured prominently in forming his approach to pantachies. A signiﬁcant
part of Hausdorﬀ’s interest had to do with η–sets which, being generalizations of
the rationals, had certain saturation properties. In contrast and conjunction to
this study of saturated linear orders, it was reasonable for Hausdorﬀto consider
gaps in linear orders and to attempt to use these as a classifying tool. Most of his
[1906] is devoted to this pursuit. Here he isolates 50 possible uncountable order
types according to which gaps and order types appear and tackles the problem
of realizing these types by homogeneous orders.
The culmination of this work
is his [1909] construction of an (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap. While the unresolved Continuum
Hypothesis obviously thwarted Hausdorﬀ’s attempts at a complete solution to
his classiﬁcation problem, this seminal result must have provided a fair degree of
satisfaction. Indeed, even in 1936, when Hausdorﬀrepublished it in a diﬀerent
19(Page 110 of [Hausdorﬀ, 1907]; the translation is from [Hausdorﬀ, 2005]) Bezeichen wir es
also als unsere Aufgabe, die inﬁnit¨are Rangordnung als Ganzes mit der Theorie der Cantorschen
Ordnungstypen in Verbindung zu setzen, so bleibt nichts anders ¨ubrig als m¨oglichst umfassende
Mengen paarweise vergleichbarer Funktionen zu untersuchen . . .
20(Page 107 of [Hausdorﬀ, 1907]; the translation is from [Hausdorﬀ, 2005]) . . . alle Versuche,
eine einfach (linear) geordnete Menge von Elementen herzustellen, in der jedes Unendlich seine
bestimmte Stelle inne hat, mußten aus diesem Grunde scheitern: die inﬁnit¨are Pantachie im
Sinne Du Bois-Reymond existiert nicht.
21Page 117 of [Borel, 1914]. In Borel’s words, ”. . .´etant donn´e une fonction croissante quel-
conque, on ﬁnira par la d´epasser en r´ep´etant transﬁniment les proc´ed´es que nous avons in-
diqu´es. Il nous semble que c’est l`a un axiome qui doit ˆetre admis au mˆeme titre que l’axiome
d’Archim`ede. . . ”.

92
Juris Stepr¯ans
form in [1936], this argument still deﬁned the state of the art.
However there is another path of enquiry, not entirely diﬀerent, leading to the
modern detailed studies of the structure (NN, ≤∗). This has its roots in the investi-
gations of certain sets of reals and problems of category and measure. Borel [1919]
undertook a study of sets of Lebesgue measure zero and a classiﬁcation scheme
that ranked null sets X ⊆R by assigning to them sequences σ : N →R+ accord-
ing to whether there exists a sequence of intervals {In}n∈N such that S
n In ⊇X
and the length of In is less than σ(n). This, of course, is reminiscent of du Bois-
Reymond’s scheme for classifying convergence and Borel acknowledges the key fact
established by du Bois-Reymond that countable families of sequences of natural
numbers can be ≤∗-dominated in the limit. The genesis of strong measure zero sets
can be traced to this paper and Borel’s isolation of those sets which he describes
by the phrase “mesure asymptotique inf`erieure a toute serie donn´e a l’avance”. In
particular, as set of reals X has strong measure zero if and only for any sequence
of positive reals {ǫn}∞
n=1 there is a corresponding sequence of intervals {In}∞
n=1
such that the length of In is less than ǫn and X ⊆S
n In.
It was 15 years later that Besicovitch took up this study of the classiﬁcation of
null sets, apparently unaware of the earlier work of Borel. Much of Besicovitch’s
life’s work was focused on questions of geometric measure theory and much of this
theory examines measures obtained by assigning measure to certain open sets and
then extending this to at least all Borel sets. The fractional Hausdorﬀmeasures
are typical examples of this type of construction.
It was therefore natural for
Besicovitch to turn, at some point, to the simplest such example. This is obtained
by taking a continuous, monotone function φ deﬁned on the positive reals such that
limx→0+ φ(x) = 0 and deﬁning the measure of an interval (a, b) to be φ(b−a). This
is then used to deﬁne an outer measure in the usual way. Besicovitch [1934a; 1934b]
states that his interest is centred on determining those subsets of the real line
which are null with respect to any such measure. As well, he is interested in the
related problem of determining those sets on which the variation of any continuous,
monotone function is zero. Relying on the Perfect Set Property for Borel sets —
namely, that every uncountable Borel set contains a copy of the Cantor set —
Besicovitch observes that the only Borel sets with either of these properties are
the countable ones. He then poses himself the question of whether this is true in
general.
His answer is that a set of reals is null with respect to all measures obtained from
continuous, monotone functions if and only if it has the property currently referred
to as strong measure zero and denoted by Sierpi´nski as Property C. Besicovitch’s
main result in [1934a] is that, assuming the Continuum Hypothesis, there is an
uncountable set of reals which has strong measure zero; in other words, it is
null with respect to all the measures Besicovitch considers and, furthermore, all
continuous, monotone functions deﬁned on the set have zero variation.
What Besicovitch actually constructs is what he calls a concentrated set, which
he deﬁnes as an uncountable set X ⊆R for which there is a countable set H ⊆R
such that any open set containing H contains all but countably many points of

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
93
X. He provides the simple argument that concentrated sets have strong measure
zero and then shows how to construct a concentrated set assuming the Contin-
uum Hypothesis. From the point of view of the study of (NN, ≤∗) the notion of
a concentrated set will turn out to be a critical notion. Seemingly unaware of
Besicovitch’s work (although by 1942 he has met Besicovitch and the latter has
introduced him to the Cambridge Philosophical Society) Rothberger will study the
same family as well as the strong measure zero sets — although, using Sierpi´nski’s
[1928c] terminology of sets with Property C — establishing their relationship to b.
An important realization, due to Sierpi´nski [1939], established the correspondence
between open sets containing the rationals and the sequences of natural numbers
obtained by thinking of the sequences of naturals as functions Φ : Q →N and then
sending Φ to the open set S
q∈Q(q −1/Φ(q), q +1/Φ(q)). This mapping establishes
that these two structures are coﬁnal in each other and, so, for many purposes
equivalent.
Before following these later developments though, it is worth returning twenty
years to 1914 since it was in this year that Lusin’s article [1914] constructing a set
with an even stronger property than that required by Besicovitch, but under the
same assumption, appeared. These are now called Lusin sets and it is fortunate for
the development of set theory that Besicovitch had ignored their existence, since
the subtle nature of the diﬀerences between them and concentrated sets has led
to interesting mathematical developments. The central role of concentrated sets
in the evolution of the study of b has already been noted. There is no indication
that ﬁnding a weaker form of a Lusin set was Besicovitch’s motivation for his
construction, although we now do know, with the hindsight provided by close to
a century of study, that concentrated sets can exist even when Lusin sets do not.
(More on this can be found in the discussion of the random real model in §7.)
Even though he does not refer to Lusin’s much earlier work, Besicovitch must
have been aware of the possibility of Lusin’s construction since he also establishes,
using the Continuum Hypothesis, the existence of what he calls rariﬁed sets, but
which are now usually referred to as Sierpi´nski sets. Since these are the measure
theoretic analogue of Lusin sets — namely, their intersection with every null set
is countable — it is hard to imagine that Besicovitch would have overlooked the
possibility of using Lusin’s topological construction for the purposes of the ﬁrst half
of [Besicovitch, 1934a]. On the other hand, Besicovitch’s interest in the second
half of that paper is showing that it is possible to have planar sets of positive
measure that contain no subset of ﬁnite, but non-zero, measure. Further evidence
for the view that Besicovitch was not concerned with the distinction between
concentrated and Lusin sets is provided by the fact that he does not ask any
questions along these lines. He could, for example, have asked whether the family
of strong measure zero sets is the same as the family of concentrated sets, but it
was Sierpi´nski who asked this question in print in his [1938]. However, the fact
that it was Besicovitch [1942] who ﬁnally did answer this question indicates his
interest in this line of enquiry. The related question of whether the existence of a
set with Property C implies the existence of a concentrated set, of course, would

94
Juris Stepr¯ans
have to wait for methods capable of producing models with large continuum. The
same remark applies to the question of whether the existence of a concentrated
set implies the existence of a Lusin set. This would have to wait for the arrival
of forcing constructions and, in particular, the random model of Solovay that is
discussed in §7.
The ﬁrst hint of the connection between strong measure zero sets and the car-
dinal invariant b appears in Lusin’s article [1921]. His proof, in fact, shows that
there is a set of reals of cardinality b which is meagre in each perfect set, although
Lusin was satisﬁed with simply producing an uncountable such set. This uncount-
able set has the same property that had motivated Lusin’s earlier construction
of a Lusin set using the Continuum Hypothesis; three years earlier he had used
this to produce a counterexample to show that Baire’s suﬃcient condition for be-
longing to the Baire classiﬁcation was not necessary. In 1914, Lusin had not been
able to use the 1916 result of Alexandroﬀand Hausdorﬀ, independently, that any
uncountable Borel set contains a perfect set and, so, he had had to rely on some
trickery using cardinal arithmetic as described in §3. Now however, he had the
same conclusion without having to rely on any hypothesis other than the Axiom
of Choice.
Lusin’s realization was that, by following Baire and associating with each se-
quence of integers σ : N →N the irrational ν(σ) obtained from the continued
fraction
ν(σ) =
1
σ(0) +
1
σ(1)+
1
σ(2)+...
it is possible to take a scale {σβ}β∈ω1 and produce a set of irrationals G =
{ν(σβ)}β∈ω1.
Lusin then uses the fact that, given any perfect set P one may
as well assume that G ∩P is dense in P and, hence, there is an ordinal γ ∈p —
p is the least cardinal of a family F of inﬁnite subsets of N such that there is no
inﬁnite X ⊆N such that X ⊆∗F for all F ∈F — such that Gγ ∩P is dense in P
where Gγ = {ν(σβ)}β∈γ. Note that du Bois-Reymond’s observation that count-
able families of sequences can be dominated plays a key role here in guaranteeing
that γ ∈p. Lusin then realizes that G \ Gγ must be relatively meagre in P. The
fact that Gγ itself is relatively meagre in P is immediate if one is only interested in
producing an uncountable set since initial segments are countable. However, the
tools were at hand for Lusin to have proved that this can also be done for a set of
size p. He could have chosen γ to be the least ordinal such that Gγ is not meagre
in P and obtained a contradiction using diagonalization and the Baire Category
Theorem. However, at this early stage in the developments of set theory this sort
of result, asserting the existence of sets of a cardinality not known to be diﬀerent
from ℵ1, may have seemed unjustiﬁable.
In any case, this slightly more delicate argument would have to wait for Roth-
berger and his construction of what he called a λ–set which is not universally
meagre. Kuratowski had introduced the notion of a set with property λ on page
269 of his monograph [1948]. A λ–set is a subset of n-dimensional Euclidean space
with the property that everyone of its countable subsets is a relative Gδ. Sierpi´nski

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
95
[1937] addresses the question of the additivity of the λ property and establishes
that this family is countably additive if it is ﬁnitely additive and, moreover, to
obtain additivity it suﬃces to show that the union of a λ-set with a countable
set is always a λ–set. He deﬁnes a set X ⊆Rn to have property λ′ if X ∪Y has
property λ for every countable Y ⊆Rn and asks whether every λ-set is also a
λ′-set.
Rothberger [1939] describes a construction of a λ-set which is not a λ′-set using
only the Axiom of Choice, thus answering Sierpi´nski’s question in the negative.
In the same issue of Fundamenta Sierpi´nski shows [1939] that Lusin’s argument
of 1917 — recorded in [Lusin, 1921] — provides an alternate proof and, indeed,
the key ideas were already in place at that time. From the point of view of the
development of the study of cardinal invariants though, it is interesting to note
that both Rothberger and Sierpi´nski had introduced notation for the cardinal now
known as b and had isolated it as a mathematical object of study in its own
right. Sierpi´nski names it φ whereas Rothberger’s argument relies on deﬁning the
property he calls B(ℵξ) and which is deﬁned to hold if every family of sequences of
natural numbers of cardinality ℵξ is bounded. He then deﬁnes ℵη to be the least
cardinal for which B(ℵη) fails; in other words, in contemporary notation ℵη = b.
Both arguments, of course, rely on constructing sequences of reals well-ordered by
≤∗of length b or, to be precise, such that the sequences of integers obtained by
the continued fraction expansions of the corresponding reals are well-ordered by
≤∗. However, Rothberger’s interest in ℵη is clear. He remarks, for example, that
the coﬁnality of b must be uncountable — but does not mention du Bois-Reymond
— and, in a footnote, adds that this is close to all that is known about it. Do we
know much more about b today than Rothberger did in 1939? Answers to this
question will be found when discussing Stephen Hechler’s work on the subject in
the seventies.
Both Rothberger’s and Sierpi´nski’s argument rely on showing that any Gδ con-
taining the rationals must intersect any unbounded scale in the irrationals. Of
course one can immediately conclude more: Any Gδ containing the rationals must
contain all but a bounded subset of any scale in the irrationals.
Recall that
Besicovitch had deﬁned a set X to be concentrated on the rationals if every Gδ
containing the rationals contained all but countably many of the points of X. If
an unbounded scale has length ω1 then the result of Rothberger and Sierpi´nski
shows that the scale must be concentrated on the rationals. Moreover, their result
points to a useful generalization of Besicovitch’s deﬁnition that can be phrased in
terms of the cardinal invariant b. Recall that b is the least cardinal of a family
B ⊆NN such that for each f ∈NN there is b ∈B such that b ̸≤∗f.
This discussion has rushed ahead of many interesting and critical developments
in the history of the (NN, ≤∗) to which we will return shortly. But, the point to
be emphasized here is the motivation for studying one particular version of the
questions surrounding gaps and limits in the various discrete structures that might
be viewed as abstractions of du Bois-Reymond’s pantachies. Hausdorﬀhimself
had deemed worthy of examination many of these variants in 1907 and these are

96
Juris Stepr¯ans
examined in detail in [Kanovei and Koepke, 2000]. For example, two sequence of
natural numbers a and b could be compared by asking whether a(n) ⪇b(n) for all
but ﬁnitely many n or whether it is simply the case that eventually a(n) ≤b(n).
Of course the gap structure of dyadic sequences was also of interest. However, the
structure of sequences of natural numbers was the focus of the greatest attention of
researchers such as Lusin, Sierpi´nski and Rothberger because of the natural map
from the irrationals to NN using continued fractions already described by Baire
[1899a; 1992]. It has already been mentioned that the usefulness of this map was
exploited by Lusin [1914] and, later, Sierpi´nski and Rothberger. Indeed, many
of the papers dealing with Lusin sets and λ–sets invoke the continued fraction
map in an almost boiler plate fashion, the introductory remarks seeming very
similar to each other. The point to realize though, is that it was the questions
on the properties of subsets of the reals constructed using the Axiom of Choice
which drove developments on subsets of the irrationals and, this, in turn, focused
attention on (NN, ≤∗) because of Baire’s continued fraction map.
Hausdorﬀhowever, was motivated by understanding the discrete structures
themselves and devotes some energy in [Hausdorﬀ, 1907] to comparing the possi-
ble variants. He spends several pages22 discussing whether continuous or arbitrary
real-valued functions should be considered, whether or not they should be mono-
tone, and eventually arrives at the conclusion that studying discrete sequences of
numbers — Zahlenreihen or Zahlenfolge — is the correct level of generality.
Recall that du Bois-Reymond’s initial investigations were about the structure
of real-valued functions deﬁned on the positive reals ordered by limiting ratios.
Hausdorﬀ[1909] abstracted to the context of a discrete domain and his pantachies
were maximal linearly ordered subsets of RN under the ordering <∗deﬁned by
f <∗g if and only if f(n) < g(n) for all but ﬁnitely many n ∈N. For NN one can
consider the two diﬀerent orderings, ≤∗and <∗, but, of course, for 2N only ≤∗is
interesting. In all of these structures it makes sense to examine the limit and gap
structures considered by Hausdorﬀ.
In Hausdorﬀ’s terminology, given a linearly ordered set (L, ≤) and ordinals γ
and λ the pair of subsets {aξ}ξ∈γ and {bξ}ξ∈λ will be said to form a (γ, λ∗)–gap
if and only if
• aξ ≤aη ≤bα ≤bβ provided that ξ ∈η ∈γ and β ∈α ∈λ
• there is no c ∈L such that aξ ≤c ≤bα and aξ ̸= c ̸= bα for all ξ ∈γ and
α ∈λ.
A γ–limit in (L, ≤) is simply a (γ, 1)–gap. In this general setting of linear orders
the notion of a scale corresponds to a coﬁnal, well-ordered subset of L.
In a
general partial order though, a scale is a coﬁnal, well-ordered family — for our
purposes a scale is a subset of NN coﬁnal and well-ordered by ≤∗. An important
point to keep in mind is that, since Hausdorﬀwas motivated by putting du Bois-
Reymond’s work on a solid foundation, his notion of pantachie, a maximal linearly
22Pages 111 to 116.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
97
ordered subset of RN with respect to <∗, was central to all his work, at least in
1909.
For pantachies and, indeed, for all linearly ordered sets, the notions of
unbounded and coﬁnal coincide; in particular, well-ordered coﬁnal or unbounded
sets are both scales. It is not surprising, therefore, that these concepts do not ﬁgure
prominently in Hausdorﬀ’s work. Rothberger on the other hand, who arrived at
the same questions from a diﬀerent direction, did formulate and analyze these
diﬀerent notions.
In Rothberger’s terminology a tower of length κ is simply a
(κ, 1)–gap in (2N, ≤∗). For Hausdorﬀ’s purposes this would be the same as a scale.
However, when dealing with problems about sets of reals, as in [Hausdorﬀ,
1936] where he considers the problem of partitioning the reals into ℵ1 Borel sets,
Hausdorﬀchose to view the reals as the Cantor set instead of NN. In 1909 he had
established the existence of (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps in the structure RN whereas, in 1936,
by using the same methods he established the analogous result for 2N. While the
formulation for RN may have caused some slight awkwardness in establishing that
the annuli deﬁned from his gap are Borel, this would have been very similar for NN
and 2N. In [1936], using the same argument Hausdorﬀestablishes the very closely
related result that there is an (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap in the structure (2N, ≤∗). Nevertheless
the second paper quickly became widely cited and Lusin even published his own
proof of the result in [1947] and Rothberger was inspired to continue work on the
subject. Why was the earlier paper ignored while the later one so enthusiastically
accepted? In a footnote to [1936], Hausdorﬀhimself explains that he had the RN
version of the result much earlier but that this paper is little known. Kanovei and
Koepke [2000] oﬀer the following explanation:
Clearly the gap construction was far ahead of the level of development
and, perhaps, even motivation of set theory in the early years of the
century. In addition, the paper was published in a rather provincial
journal.
The “level of development” seems unlikely — surely Lusin and Sierpi´nski would
have understood the argument and embraced it. The “motivation” explanation is
certainly more convincing. Keeping in mind the questions occupying Lusin and
Sierpi´nski, questions leading to the discovery of Lusin sets and λ–sets, it seems
more likely that Hausdorﬀ’s investigations into abstract order types did not seem
germane at the time.
As well, the motivation for Hausdorﬀ’s 1936 paper was
Question 2 of Sierpi´nski. This was something more likely to attract the attention
of Lusin and Sierpi´nski who had been working on these questions for some time,
and Rothberger, who was just starting in the area.
Nevertheless, the key results were in place by 1909. The (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap has al-
ready been mentioned, but Hausdorﬀalso built on du Bois-Reymond’s work to
show that there are no (ω, ω∗)–gaps in (RN, <∗), indeed, this is a key component
in showing that there are (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps. He also established some important, but
not as surprising, results assuming the Continuum Hypothesis; for example, there
are ω1–limits, (ω1, ω∗)–gaps as well as towers and scales.
The study of these order types in (NN, ≤∗) was systematically taken up as a

98
Juris Stepr¯ans
subject in its own right only some thirty years later in the 1941 work of Rothberger,
who came to it through an interest in properties of sets of reals. Of course, some
ﬁve years earlier, Hausdorﬀhad dealt with Question 2 and Question 4 of Sierpi´nski
by showing that (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps produce partitions of the reals into ℵ1 Borel sets.
Of course, the relevance of scales to λ–sets and their variants had been known
for quite some time. But now, in 1936, Hausdorﬀshowed that his much more
sophisticated construction of 1909 also had applications to the study of sets of
reals and, from the modern perspective, to cardinal invariants of the continuum.
It is interesting that Hausdorﬀcites Question 4 as his motivation, referring to
Sierpi´nski’s questions as (A) and (B):
A: Can one show, without assuming the Continuum Hypothesis, that there is a
union of ℵ1 ﬁrst category sets which is of second category?23
B: Can one show, without assuming the Continuum Hypothesis, that there is a
union of ℵ1 null sets which has positive outer measure?24
He is able to show, that given a gap {Aξ}ξ∈ω1 ∪{Bξ}ξ∈ω1 the set of all X ⊆N
such that Aξ ⊆∗X ⊆∗Bξ is an Fσ in the Cantor set. Consequently, the family of
diﬀerences of these sets provides the required Borel partition. However, Hausdorﬀ’s
analysis of the situation, while providing a solution to Question 2, does not answer
Question 4. The fact that this is a hopeless task would not become evident until
after Cohen’s work of the early sixties.
In any case, these were the developments that lead to Rothberger’s [1939] in
which he introduced his already mentioned concept B(ℵξ) to study λ–sets. By
1941, he had become aware of Besicovitch’s work on concentrated sets and was able
to more clearly outline the connection between these objects and B(ℵξ). In syn-
thesizing earlier work of Sierpi´nski, as well as himself, Rothberger [1941] presents
the following picture of the knowledge about λ–sets and unbounded families in
(NN, ≤∗). The following are all equivalent:
• Any subset of NN of size ℵξ is ≤∗-bounded.
• Any subset of the irrationals of size ℵξ has Property Θ.25
• Given disjoint sets of reals A and B, with B an Fσ and A a set of cardinality
no greater than ℵξ, an Fσ can be found containing A and disjoint from B.
• The union of ℵξ sets with Property Θ has Property Θ.
• All sets of reals of cardinality ℵξ have property λ.
• All sets of reals of cardinality ℵξ have property λ′.
23Kann eine Summe von ℵ1 Mengen 1. Kategorie von 2. Kategorie sein?
24Kann eine Summe von ℵ1 Nullmengen von positivem ¨ausserem Masse sein?
25A set or irrationals has Property Θ if it is contained in an Fσ contained in the irrationals.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
99
• All sets of reals of cardinality ℵξ have property σ, in other words, all relative
Gδ-subsets are also Fσ.
• Every real-valued function on a set of reals of cardinality ℵξ is of Baire class
no greater than 1.
Rothberger also points out the special role of ℵ1 in these problems. The key result
here is: The failure of B(ℵ1) is equivalent to the existence of an uncountable
concentrated set of reals.
Recall that a set X is concentrated on the rationals if every Gδ containing the
rationals contains all but a countable subset of X. The role of countability allows
Rothberger’s equivalence in the case of ℵ1, but not for other cardinals.
This special role of ℵ1 would be more subtly elucidated in section 4 of Roth-
berger’s paper. Here he returns to the question of gaps themselves. A preliminary
key result here is that the failure of B(ℵ1) is equivalent to the existence of (ω1, ω∗)–
gaps in (2N, ≤∗), even though his proof actually shows, in his notation, that there
is an (ωη, ω∗)–gap in (2N, ≤∗).
However, in 1948 Rothberger shows that the existence of (ω1, ω∗)–gaps in (2N,
≤∗) implies the existence of ω1–limits in (NN, ≤∗). He does this by setting up a
bijection between N × N and N and then noting that if f : N →N and g : N →N
and f ≤∗g then {(n, m) ∈N × N | m ≤f(n)} ⊆{(n, m) ∈N × N | m ≤g(n)}.
Indeed, from the point of view of cardinal invariants, this correspondence takes
gaps to gaps and can be used to establish an inequality between the associated
cardinal invariants and need not be restricted to the case of ℵ1.
In Lemma 7 of his [1948], however, Rothberger uncovers an essential use of ℵ1
that stands besides Hausdorﬀ’s gap construction as a milestone in the understand-
ing of the role of ω1 in the combinatorics of the continuum. He begins by showing
that the existence of an (ω1, ω∗)–gap is equivalent to the following assertion: There
are families {Xα}α∈ω1 and {Ym}m∈ω of subsets of N such that Xα ⊆∗Ym for each
α ∈ω1 and m ∈ω yet there is no Z ⊆N such that Xα ⊆∗Z ⊆∗Ym for each
α ∈ω1 and m ∈ω. In other words, Rothberger extends his interest to gaps that
do not need to be linearly ordered, gaps that were not of interest to Hausdorﬀ
because his motivation was to make sense of the pantachies of du Bois-Reymond
by considering maximal linear orders. He shows that, at least for the case of gaps
which have ℵ1 sets on one side and countably many on the other, there is no loss of
generality in assuming linearity. He then uses this result to show that if there are
no (ω1, ω∗)–gaps then for every ﬁlter with base {Zα}α∈ω1 there is a ⊆∗-descending
family {Bα}α∈ω1 such that Bγ ⊆∗Zγ. In the language of cardinal invariants the
result can be stated as: If p = ℵ1 then t = ℵ1. But, from Rothberger’s point of
view, if p = ℵ1 then there is an ω1–limit in (2N, ⊆∗) and so, using his terminology,
t can be deﬁned to be the least cardinal such that there is a t–limit.
Rothberger’s idea here is that, given a ﬁlter base {Zα}α∈ω1 it is possible to ﬁrst
choose for each α a set Aα such that Aα ⊆Zγ for each γ ∈α. This is not diﬃcult
and was known already to du Bois-Reymond. However, there is no reason to believe
that the family {Aα}α∈ω1 is ⊆∗-descending. To achieve this Rothberger chooses

100
Juris Stepr¯ans
inductively ⊆∗-descending {Bα}α∈ω1 such that Zγ ⊇∗Bγ ⊇∗Aβ for γ ∈β. The
reason he is able to do this is that failure at stage γ would guarantee that the family
{Bβ}β∈γ ∪{Aα}α∈ω1\γ is an (ω1, ω∗)–gap, contradicting his hypothesis. This is
a central result which sheds considerable light on one of the major outstanding
problems concerning cardinal invariants of the continuum: Is t = p?
Before leaving the work of Rothberger it is worthwhile to look at some of his
other results that have to do with the structure of (NN, ≤∗), some of which we
will return to later.
Results such as that p = ℵ1 implies the existence of ω1–
limits in (2N, ⊆∗) or the existence of Hausdorﬀ’s gaps, to say nothing of G´odel’s
consistency results, must surely have provided encouragement to researchers in
the thirties and forties to continue trying to prove the Continuum Hypothesis.
Some of Rothberger’s results must have seemed tantalizingly close. For example,
Rothberger [1938b] shows that the Continuum Hypothesis is equivalent to the con-
junction of two assertions of a cardinal invariant nature. The ﬁrst is that there is
a family F ⊆NN of size 2ℵ0 such that for each g ∈NN the set {f ∈F | f ≤∗g }
is countable. The second assertion is that there is a scale of cardinality 2ℵ0 in
(NN, ≤∗). The result is not at all diﬃcult, but, in order to obtain it, it was crucial
that Rothberger was looking at the whole structure (NN, ≤∗) rather than a pan-
tachie within it such as Hausdorﬀwould have done in 1909. It is also noteworthy
that Rothberger begins to consider coﬁnal families in (NN, ≤∗) rather than just
unbounded families. The cardinal d is certainly implicit in this work — recall that
d is deﬁned to be the least cardinal of a coﬁnal family in (NN, ≤∗), namely a family
D ⊆NN such that for each f ∈NN there is a d ∈D such that f ≤∗d. However, it
was ﬁrst considered explicitly by Miroslav Katˇetov [1960] in the context of study-
ing the character of points in topological spaces. Other cardinal invariants are also
standing in the wings waiting to be introduced. Rothberger [1948] shows that the
failure of the Lusin’s weak Continuum Hypothesis, namely 2ℵ0 = 2ℵ1, implies the
existence of ω1–limits. In the same paper he shows that, in modern terminology,
if ℵ1 is equal to the minimum of non(N) and non(M) then there are ω1–limits.
However, a lengthy hiatus of close to twenty years would be experienced in the
study of the structure (NN, ≤∗) before it was known that the existence of ω1–
limits does not imply the Continuum Hypothesis, let alone what the nature of the
relationship between these concepts is. So, before skipping these twenty years to
begin looking at developments in the post-Cohen era, it is worthwhile reviewing
the progress that had been made by 1952, the year that Rothberger published his
last paper [1952a] on the subject. (The other paper Rothberger published that
year, [1952b], was considered in §3.) Hausdorﬀ’s initial research on (NN, ≤∗) was
motivated by examining the pantachies of du Bois-Reymond. He knew that the
axiom of choice produced these maximal linearly ordered subsets, but had more
detailed information about them only by assuming the Continuum Hypothesis.
In particular, Hausdorﬀknew that (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps existed, but he did not know
whether they existed in all pantachies. Lusin, on the other hand, was brought to
studying unbounded families by his interest in λ–sets. He was able to construct a
λ–set without assuming the Continuum Hypothesis; but, the existence of Lusin sets

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
101
or concentrated sets still requires some extra hypothesis. Rothberger continued
both lines of investigation. The relationship between λ–sets and the structure of
(NN, ≤∗) is detailed by him in his list of equivalences to sets of a ﬁxed cardinality
being ≤∗-bounded. He is also able to show that p = ℵ1 implies the existence of
ω1–limits in (2N, ⊆∗) or, in other words, t = ℵ1. Furthermore, Besicovitch had
shown that there is a set with Property C which is not concentrated, but the
question of whether the existence of a set with Property C implies the existence
of a concentrated set remained unanswered in 1952.
QUESTION 8. Does the existence of a concentrated set imply that there is a
Lusin set?
What is the role of b in these questions? It was known by Rothberger that
b = ℵ1 is equivalent to the existence of a concentrated set and that concentrated
sets have Property C. However, the following question could have been asked:
QUESTION 9. Is there a set with Property C even if b > ℵ1?
Rothberger explicitly asks in [1948] whether the implication in his Theorem 3
can be reversed, namely,
QUESTION 10. Does b = ℵ1 imply that t = ℵ1?
The answers to all of these questions would have to await the advent of forcing
techniques.
The ﬁrst of the results to address these unanswered questions about (NN, ≤∗)
dealt, unknowingly, with questions arising from Rothberger’s article [1939]. Recall
that in a footnote Rothberger had remarked that the coﬁnality of b is uncountable,
but that no more is known about it. Hechler [1974] shows that Rothberger did in-
deed know all that it was possible to know at the time. However, before describing
Hechler’s result, it should be noted that history did not unfold as it should at this
point. One might have expected that the newly available forcing techniques would
have precipitated a re-examination of the intense work on set-theoretic questions
recorded in Fundamenta Mathematicae from the twenties to the end of the forties.
However, the early applications of forcing techniques produced their own questions
in some cases, and answered questions from entirely diﬀerent sources in others.
Hechler’s main theorem in [1974] is the following:
Given any partially ordered
set (P, ≤) such that:
• |P| ≤2ℵ0
• for all countable subsets X ⊆P there is some p ∈P such that x ≤p for all
x ∈X
there is a forcing extension in which there is a Φ : P →NN such that p ≤q if and
only if Φ(p) ≤∗Φ(q) and, moreover, the image of Φ is coﬁnal; in other words, for
each f ∈NN there is some p ∈P such that Φ(p) ≥∗f.
The result can, in fact, be strengthened as has been noted by Maxim Burke
[1997] who provides a modern version of Hechler’s argument. The strengthening

102
Juris Stepr¯ans
Burke notes is that one does not need to assume that |P| ≤2ℵ0 as long as one
realizes that in the generic extension the size of the continuum will be |P|ℵ0. As a
particular corollary to Hechler’s theorem it follows that any uncountable regular
cardinal κ can play the role of (P, ≤) in the theorem and, in this case, it follows
that b = κ. So Rothberger’s footnote is, indeed, accurate. Moreover, if κ < ρ are
two diﬀerent uncountable regular cardinals then κ × ρ can play the role of (P, ≤)
in Hechler’s theorem and, in this case, it follows that b = κ even though there are
also ρ–limits in (NN, ≤∗).
Hechler’s construction also plays a key role in solving Question 10. R. C. Solomon
[1977] solves this by ﬁrst showing that the equalities b = ℵ2 = 2ℵ0 and 2ℵ1 = ℵ3
hold in a model obtained by Hechler’s construction used to establish his consis-
tency result for the case (P, ≤) = (ω2, ∈).
Using Rothberger’s result that the
weak Continuum Hypothesis implies there are ω1–limits — this was examined in
§3 — it follows that t = ℵ1 in this model. It is worthy of note that Solomon’s
discussion of sets with Property C mentions that they are the same as the sets
which have µh-Hausdorﬀmeasure zero26 for each function h. This clear link to the
work of Besicovitch may explain why Solomon was more familiar with the work
of Rothberger than many North American set theorists, such as Hechler, were at
the time.
In the same paper Solomon points to the signiﬁcance of the cardinal arithmetic
of this model and a necessary condition for solving Question 9. He notes that
Rothberger had shown that b = ℵ1 implies there is a set which is concentrated
and hence has Property C. On the other hand, Rothberger [1952a] also showed
that if X ⊆R has cardinality less than p then X has Property C. So, in order
to have a model of set theory without any uncountable set with Property C it is
necessary that p < b. The fact that this can not be ruled out follows from the
cardinal arithmetic of Hechler’s model.
Not long afterwards, Laver [1976] was able to produce a model of set theory of
the “Borel Conjecture”: all sets with Property C, or, as he referred to them, all
sets with strong measure zero, are countable. This was a milestone result in sev-
eral respects. The consistency result itself, of course, was of great interest. Laver’s
motivation here is rooted in considerations about strengthenings of the property
of being Lebesgue null. Strong Measure Zero is one such strengthening, but so is
being universally null. Laver reminds his reader that Hausdorﬀhad established,
as a corollary to the existence of (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps, that there are universally null
sets of size ℵ1. Laver points out that, “Regarding universal measure zero sets,
Hausdorﬀ’s theorem is best possible in the sense that there is a model of ZFC
+ 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 in which there are no universal measure zero sets of power ℵ2”. He
explains that adding ω2 Sacks reals or Solovay reals to a model of the Continuum
Hypothesis will provide the required counterexample and that this fact is an ex-
tension of unpublished results of Baumgartner establishing that there are no sets
with Property C of cardinality ℵ2 in these models.
The other milestone Laver’s paper marks is a new level of sophistication in forc-
26See [Rogers, 1970] for the relevant deﬁnitions.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
103
ing methods. Countable support iterations had previously been used for partial
orders which are either countably closed or, at least, not too far removed from the
countably closed domain. In [1976] (announced in [1975]) Laver showed that this
sort of support had much broader applicability. Eﬀorts to generalize Laver’s argu-
ments would lead to the notion of Axiom A27 forcing but, eventually Shelah was
to show that countable support forcing could be used in contexts not even hinted
at by Laver’s result, although the Axiom A partial orders continue to provide
important examples of Shelah’s “proper” partial orders. However, this is leading
us to topics that are discussed in greater detail in §7 since the Borel Conjecture
paper was not Laver’s only contribution to settling questions left unanswered by
the eﬀorts of Hausdorﬀ, Rothberger, Sierpi´nski and their contemporaries.
In [1979] Laver shows that it is possible to construct a model of set theory in
which 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 and the 2ℵ0-saturated linear order — recall that Hausdorﬀhad
devoted considerable eﬀort to analyzing precisely such orders some 70 years earlier
— is embedded into the structure (NN, ≤∗). But, just as Hechler’s motivation for
his embedding result was not in answering the questions that were beyond the
techniques available to Rothberger, Laver’s embedding result was used to answer
a question raised by Solovay and Woodin concerning the automatic continuity of
homomorphisms of Banach algebras. So, while Laver’s result is directly related to
the pantachies of Hausdorﬀ, these are not even mentioned in [Laver, 1979]. Using
routine methods, Laver’s embedding result can easily be modiﬁed so as to arrange
that the linear order he embeds into NN is actually maximal, in other words, a
pantachie. This then answers question α of Hausdorﬀ’s [1907] which asks whether
there is a pantachie without (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps.
Since Hechler has already been mentioned, it may be useful to pause brieﬂy
to explain why Laver’s result is not implied by Hechler’s. After all, one might
argue, the 2ℵ0-saturated linear order satisﬁes the weakened hypothesis of Hechler’s
theorem noticed by Burke, so it follows that it can be embedded, in fact embedded
coﬁnally. The subtle error in this argument is that being 2ℵ0-saturated is not an
absolute property. So, while it is true that Hechler’s argument will embed the
ground model 2ℵ0-saturated linear order into (NN, ≤∗), the forcing which does
this will destroy the saturation property. So this is the diﬃculty Laver had to
overcome.
His approach was to embed the 2ℵ0-saturated linear order by iteratively adding
new generic elements to NN which would be the targets of the embedding. At the
same time, it is possible to keep track of new gaps in the 2ℵ0-saturated linear order
which need to be mapped to NN. This seems a natural strategy, but there is a
critical obstacle to overcome and there is a degree of irony in the fact that, while
Laver was not interested in Hausdorﬀ’s pantachies, the obstacle which he had to
overcome was one discovered by Hausdorﬀin his study of pantachies, namely the
(ω1, ω∗
1)–gap. It may occur that the strategy used by Laver arrives at a situation
where the embedding has already been deﬁned on a subset of order type ω1 +ω∗
1 in
27These should not be confused with Axiom A from [Martin and Solovay, 1970] which is now
known as Martin’s Axiom.

104
Juris Stepr¯ans
the saturated linear order and has been mapped to an (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap in NN. From
the fact that the linear order is 2ℵ0-saturated and 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 in the ﬁnal model,
it follows that there must be an element A of the saturated linear order falling
between both halves of the subset of order type ω1 + ω∗
1. However, the entire
strategy must fail at this stage since the (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap can not, by deﬁnition, be
ﬁlled by any image of A. Laver’s key realization though, is that since the image
of the embedding consists of generic elements of NN, every potential (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap
in NN can be split by an element of NN obtained by forcing with an appropriate
partial order.
Laver’s realization that generic (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps can be split by suitable forcing
unveils the ﬁne structure of these objects which could not even have been formu-
lated by Hausdorﬀ. It was Kunen who provided (cf. [Kunen, 1975; Baumgartner,
1984]) an even clearer picture of the nature of Hausdorﬀ’s gaps as well as gaps of
diﬀerent coﬁnalities. To put Kunen’s contribution in the proper context, it has to
be noted that Lavers’ embedded linear order, of course, has no (κ, λ∗)–gaps at all
for κ and λ less than 2ℵ0. On the other hand, there must be (c, c∗)–gaps in the
embedded liner order since these can be constructed by a standard diagonalization
argument using the 2ℵ0-saturation property. However, Kunen was able to show
that it is consistent with Martin’s Axiom and 2ℵ0 = ℵ2 that there is a linear order
of cardinality 2ℵ0 which does not embed into (2N, ≤∗).
His key idea was to establish a relationship between the assertion that a subset
of (2N, ≤∗) of order type κ + λ∗is a gap with the assertion that the natural order
for forcing a set which splits the gap enjoys the countable chain condition.
It
will become apparent that this idea is very closely related to the construction
of a Hausdorﬀgap.
In fact, it shows that there is some justiﬁcation in using
the preposition “the” when referring to a Hausdorﬀgap. Given a family Z =
{Zγ}γ∈κ+λ∗of subsets of N such that Zγ ⊆Zγ′ if γ < γ′ let P(Z) be the partial
order consisting of ﬁnite approximations to a set splitting {Zγ}γ∈κ from {Zγ}γ∈λ∗.
To be more precise, p = (x, a, b) ∈P(Z) where x is a ﬁnite subset of N, a is a
ﬁnite subset of κ and x is a ﬁnite subset of λ∗. Moreover T
γ∈a Zγ \ max(x) ⊇
S
γ∈b Zγ \ max(x).
Kunen’s key lemma28 describes precisely when this partial
order has the countable chain condition.
1. If Z is ﬁlled — in other words, if Z is not a gap — then P(Z) has the
countable chain condition.
2. If the coﬁnality of either κ or λ is diﬀerent from ω1 then P(Z) has the
countable chain condition.
3. If κ = λ = ω1 then there is a countable chain condition partial order which
forces an uncountable set of pairwise incomparable elements, known as an
antichain, in P(Z).
The key point to observe is that it is immediate that, assuming Martin’s Axiom,
the only possible (κ, λ∗)–gaps are
28Theorem 4.2 of [Baumgartner, 1984].

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
105
• (c, ω∗
1) and (ω1, c∗)–gaps
• (c, 1) and (1, c∗)–gaps
• (ω1, ω∗
1)–gaps
• (c, c∗)–gaps
and the (c, 1) and (1, c∗)–gaps — or, limits in Hausdorﬀ’s and Rothberger’s ter-
minology — are easily constructed by induction under Martin’s Axiom. However,
the same argument does not work for (c, c∗)–gaps because an (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap may
arise at an intermediate stage bringing the induction to a halt. The same applies
to (c, ω∗
1) and (ω1, c∗)–gaps.
Kunen was able to show that, in fact, it is consistent with Martin’s Axiom that
there are no (c, c∗)–gaps, nor are there (c, ω∗
1) or (ω1, c∗)–gaps. The strategy is
to begin with a model of the Continuum Hypothesis and ♦ω2 for the ordinals
of coﬁnality ω1.
This version of ♦ω2 is used to guess initial segments of the
embedding, for example, of a (c, ω∗
1)–gap. When an initial segment is trapped at
stage δ, as
Zδ = {Zξ}ξ∈δ ∪{Zξ}ξ∈ω∗
1
it follows that the coﬁnality of δ is ω1. Hence the third clause of Kunen’s lemma
can be applied to it. In other words, there is a countable chain condition partial
order which adds an uncountable antichain to P(Zδ). Once there is an uncountable
antichain in P(Zδ) it will persist in all larger models and, hence, it is not possible
in any later model to split Zδ, by the ﬁrst clause of Kunen’s lemma. In other
words, once a (c, ω∗
1)–gap is trapped by the ♦ω2-sequence, it is possible to force
with a countable chain condition partial order so that the trapped gap can not
be extended any further. It is easy to dovetail countable chain condition partial
orders into this strategy to obtain a model of Martin’s Axiom and no gaps other
than those guaranteed by the construction of Hausdorﬀ.
It is interesting to examine this proof in a bit more detail to see that it is even
more closely connected to Hausdorﬀ’s construction than might be suggested by
the statement of the result. Recall that the key idea of Hausdorﬀin his [1909],
and later in his [1936], was to arrange that the gap H = {Zξ}ξ∈ω1 ∪{Wξ}ξ∈ω∗
1
constructed has the following property: Given any ξ ∈ω1 and any k ∈N there are
only ﬁnitely many ζ ∈ξ such that Zζ ⊆k ∪Wξ. If there were a set Y ⊆N such
that Zζ ⊆∗Y ⊆∗Wζ for each ζ ∈ω1 then there would also be some k ∈N and an
uncountable set Γ ⊆ω1 such that Zζ ⊆Y ∪k ⊆∗Wζ ∪k for each ζ ∈Γ. Any ξ ∈Γ
with inﬁnitely many predecessors in Γ then yields a contradiction. In particular,
there are only ﬁnitely many ζ ∈ξ ∩Γ such that Zζ ⊆Y ∪k ⊆∗Wζ ∪k. In the
terminology of the partial order P(H), the key property of the gap H constructed
by Hausdorﬀis that for any uncountable set Γ ⊆ω1 there are ζ and ξ in Γ such
that (∅, {ξ}, {ξ}) and (∅, {ζ}, {ζ}) are incompatible. One may say that for the
gap constructed by Hausdorﬀthe partial order P(H) hereditarily fails to have the
countable chain condition.

106
Juris Stepr¯ans
The success of Hausdorﬀ’s construction of an (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap can be thought of as
being the result of producing a family which is as chaotic as possible with respect
to the ﬁnite defects allowed by the ≤∗ordering. Todorˇcevi´c has extended this
approach by more carefully analyzing the defects in scales of length b. He deﬁnes
an oscillation of two functions f and g in NN, denoted by osc(f, g), to be the
cardinality of the set {n ∈N | g(n) ≤f(n) and g(n + 1) > f(n + 1)}.
Observe
that if f ≤∗g then osc(f, g) is ﬁnite. In Corollary 1 of [1988] (see also his [1998])
Todorˇcevi´c establishes the following: If B ⊆NN is any ≤∗-unbounded family of
monotonically increasing functions such that all countable subsets of B have a ≤∗
upper bound in B then {osc(f, g) | f, g ∈B } = N. This idea would later be used
to great eﬀect in the seminal paper [Todorcevic, 1987] establishing the negative
partition relation
ℵ1 ̸→[ℵ1]2
ℵ1
But the key realization contained in the earlier result is that the behaviour of initial
segments of unbounded scales is as chaotic as possible. So, while Rothberger’s
remark that all that can be said about b is that it has uncountable coﬁnality is
true, if one looks at the families of sequences exemplifying b then one ﬁnds there
a very complex structure.
Since Todorˇcevi´c’s results on unbounded sets in (NN, ≤∗) do not use methods
that were unavailable to Rothberger, or even to Sierpi´nski and Hausdorﬀbefore
him, it is natural to ask why it took so long before this deeper structure was
uncovered. A part of the explanation is certainly the diﬀerence in motivation for
looking at (NN, ≤∗). Except for Hausdorﬀ, all the researchers working on (NN, ≤∗),
from Lusin to Rothberger, were primarily concerned with properties of subsets of
the reals; sets with Property C, λ–sets and concentrated sets were the focus of
greatest attention and the properties deﬁning these sets are one dimensional in
nature. It is an accident of terminology that these sets are often referred to as
“linear” by the early researchers, but it is an accident worth keeping in mind.
Hausdorﬀ’s construction of the gaps named in his honour are the only hint of an
interaction between pairs of elements of NN. Todorˇcevi´c, however, was primarily
interested in higher dimensional phenomena as can be seen by examining the
generality of statements in his [1988]. Indeed, while the statement of Kunen’s
lemma has been stated in a forcing context, it is often more proﬁtable to view
Kunen’s results in the context of partition relations as is done, for example, in
[Abraham et al., 1985].
Before leaving the history of NN there is still the question of the implications
concerning concentrated sets, Lusin sets and sets with Property C. Since Lusin
sets are concentrated and concentrated sets have Property C, the two questions
to answer are:
QUESTION 11. Does the existence of an uncountable concentrated set imply the
existence of a Lusin set?
QUESTION 12. Does the existence of an uncountable set with Property C imply
the existence of an uncountable concentrated set?

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
107
Since Rothberger showed that there is an uncountable concentrated set if and
only if b = ℵ1 the ﬁrst question is equivalent to asking whether the equality b = ℵ1
implies that there is a Lusin set. This is easily seen to be false in the model obtained
by adding ℵ2 random reals since all sets of size ℵ1 are meagre in this model as was
shown by Solovay. The second question is equivalent to asking whether b > ℵ1
implies the Borel Conjecture. Martin’s Axiom and 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 easily shows this to
be false too. However, these results may be better understood if considered at the
same time as the historical developments surrounding the properties of measure
and category.
6
CARDINAL INVARIANTS OF MEASURE AND CATEGORY
The discussion of the cardinal b in §5 was quite narrowly focused and readers
familiar with the subject will have noticed, and perhaps even objected to, the
lack of reference to the notions of measure and category.
It is time to rectify
this situation since, indeed, the cardinals b and d that are central to the study of
(NN, ≤∗) are just as central to the study of measure and category. Coincidentally,
these two invariants are also central in the diagram attributed by David Fremlin
[1984] to Cicho´n, as well as Anastasis Kamburelis and Janusz Pawlikowski:
cov(N)
2
/ non(M)
4
/ cof(M)
6
/ cof(N)
8
/ c
b
3
O
10
/ d
5
O
ℵ1
12 / add(N)
1
O
13 / add(M)
14
/
9
O
cov(M)
11
O
15
/ non(N)
7
O
in which M represents the ideal of meagre subsets of the reals and N represents
the ideal of Lebesgue null subsets of the reals. Furthermore, if I is either M or
N then
• cov(I) represents the least cardinality of a set A ⊆I such that S A = R
• add(I) represents the least cardinality of a set A ⊆I such that S A /∈I
• non(I) represents the least cardinality of a set A ⊆R such that A /∈I
• cof(I) represents the least cardinality of a set A ⊆I such that for every
X ∈I there is A ∈A such that X ⊆A.
The deﬁnition of these four invariants can, of course, be applied to any ideal I.
In fact, much of the development of the study of measure and category on the re-
als can be seen from the perspective of the cardinal invariants in Cicho´n’s diagram.

108
Juris Stepr¯ans
Just as importantly, the diagram marks a watershed in the study of the continuum
by attaching names and bringing to the forefront the cardinal invariants associated
with the reals in its various guises. It seems a simple enough idea that one may
wonder why it had not appeared earlier. A probable reason is the early preoccu-
pation with the Continuum Hypothesis. Recall that one of Sierpi´nski’s questions
in the ﬁrst volume of Fundamenta Mathematicae was Question 4 asking whether
it can be proved, without appealing to the Continuum Hypothesis of course, that
there are ℵ1 null sets whose union is not null or ℵ1 meagre sets whose union is
not meagre. While it is true that in the same volume Ruziewicz asks Question 5,
whether sets of cardinality less than 2ℵ0 are necessarily meagre, the focus at that
time is certainly in ℵ1. This remains true even later in 1936 when Hausdorﬀtries
to answer Question 4 using his (ω1, ω1)–gap. Given this approach, drawing some-
thing similar to Cicho´n’s diagram would certainly have seemed senseless since the
entire diagram collapses to a single point in this case. With the range of possi-
bilities for the continuum unveiled by Cohen though, it makes perfect sense and
similar diagrams seem to have been used by many researchers in the early years
after Cohen’s introduction of forcing techniques. For example, Miller [1981; 1982b]
considers the same properties of measure and category as those that appear in Ci-
cho´n’s diagram, but he is only interested in whether or not the cardinals are equal
to the continuum. The organizational chart he uses is usually referred to as the
Kunen–Miller chart.
So, the history of measure and category can begin by examining what could
have been said about Cicho´n’s diagram in the years before the forcing era. It
should be explained that an arrow from a cardinal invariant x to the invariant y
means two things:
A: it is possible to prove that x ≤y without appealing to extra axioms of set
theory,
B: it is not possible to prove that y ≤x without appealing to extra axioms of
set theory.
In other words, each arrow corresponds to an inequality and none of the arrows
can be replaced by an equality in the sense that for each of the 15 arrows there is a
model of set theory where the cardinal invariant at the tail of the arrow is smaller
than the one at its tip. This section will concentrate on the (A) component of
the arrows in Cicho´n’s diagram, leaving the (B) component to §7. In fact, the (B)
component is best described by the Kunen–Miller chart, a matrix whose entries
correspond to possible combinations of cardinal invariants being equal or less than
c. The ﬁnal entries to this chart were added in [Judah and Shelah, 1990].
The (A) part of Arrow 8 is nothing more than that each null set is contained in
a null Gδ and the number of such Gδ sets is no greater than 2ℵ0 while the (A) part
of Arrow 12 is just the additivity of Lebesgue measure. The (A) part of Arrows 1,
7, and 14 are immediate consequences of the deﬁnitions, as is the (A) part of
Arrow 10. Recall that in Rothberger [1938a] showed that non(M) ≥cov(N) and

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
109
non(N) ≥cov(M) or, in other words, he justiﬁed the (A) parts of Arrow 2 and
Arrow 15. But, of course, this was not Rothberger’s primary goal since, in fact, he
was concerned with the Continuum Hypothesis. The result he was able to prove
with the use these two inequalities is that the Continuum Hypothesis is equivalent
to the existence of Lusin and Sierpi´nski sets at least one of which has cardinality
2ℵ0. However, this is simply a convoluted way of expressing his key result which,
from the modern perspective seems more elegant than the equivalence: If there
are both Sierpi´nski and Lusin sets then they both have cardinality ℵ1.
As well, as Miller [1984b, page 205] has observed, Rothberger’s result has direct
implications for forcing constructions. For example, adding κ Cohen reals will
yield a Lusin set of size κ consisting of the Cohen reals themselves. The same
is true of random reals. Iteratively adding a pair of reals, one Cohen and the
other random, to a model of 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 will yield both a Lusin and a Sierpi´nski
set. Rothberger’s argument shows that there is no way of modifying the support
or iteration strategy to get one of the sets to have cardinality greater than ℵ1.
What can be said of the other arrows? Part (A) of Arrow 3 is essentially due
to Sierpi´nski [1939] who showed that a subset of the irrationals is ≤∗-bounded if
and only if it is σ-compact. It is important to recall that the representation of
the irrationals as sequences of integers was already known to Lusin and Baire, but
that the deﬁnition of the cardinal invariants associated with the meagre and null
ideals are not speciﬁc to the metric space involved and, indeed, it can be shown
that this is irrelevant for these invariants. For a result relating unboundedness to
σ-compactness though, the role of the irrationals is, of course, crucial.
It has already been mentioned that in the same article Sierpi´nski established the
coﬁnality preserving mappings between NN and the family of open sets containing
the rationals. Using this, it is easy to establish the (A) part of Arrow 11. However,
it is also worth observing that the nature of the map allows the deﬁnition of a Tukey
function [Tukey, 1940]. A Tukey function between partial orders is any function,
not necessarily order-preserving, which sends unbounded sets to unbounded sets.
John Tukey deﬁned these functions within a year or two of Sierpi´nski’s results,
but for quite diﬀerent purposes. However it was to be only much later that the
relevance of Tukey functions to cardinal invariants would become apparent, indeed,
would become a guiding principle in their further study. Their relevance to the
study of the continuum was realized by Peter Vojtas [1993] who called them Galois-
Tukey functions, but some of the ideas are already apparent in the paper of Fremlin
[1984] which gave Cicho´n’s diagram its name. For example, a dual argument using
the Tukey function established by Sierpi´nski yields the (A) part of Arrow 9.
Excluding the arrows involving the coﬁnality invariants, this leaves only Ar-
rows 13 to discuss, the theorem of Tomek Bartoszynski. Certainly the notions
involved were familiar long before Inequality 13 was proved; one need look no
further than Question 4 to see this. In order to discuss Bartoszynski’s Theorem
in its historical context, it is worthwhile using the same notation he did, notation
borrowed from Miller [1981]. A(m) represents the statement that all families of
less than 2ℵ0 null sets have null union and similarly for A(c) and category and

110
Juris Stepr¯ans
B(m) for covering. Earlier Miller [1981] had shown that add(N) ≤d, an inequal-
ity that Cicho´n’s diagram reveals was later reﬁned. Also, Kunen had shown that
add(N) ⪇add(M)) is possible.
Bartoszynski starts his [1984] by showing that A(m) is equivalent to the state-
ment that for any family of less than 2ℵ0 convergent series there is a single conver-
gent series dominating all of the members of the family; he calls this last property
hD. It is interesting to recall, in this context, that Hausdorﬀhad been interested
in classifying the convergent series by ﬁnding a cut in a pantachie. The critical
lemma then is one which establishes that hD is equivalent to a statement about
what, in three years time, Bartoszynski [1987] would be calling slaloms. Part of
this lemma establishes that hD is equivalent to:
STATEMENT 13. For every F ⊆NN of size less than 2ℵ0 there exist sets In ⊆N
such that |In| < n2 and for every f ∈F there is some M such that f(m) ∈Im for
all m ≥M.
The key point here is that such statements are similar to combinatorial char-
acterizations of the meagre ideal.
The role of n2 is simply that it produces a
convenient convergent series P∞
n=1 n−2.
John Truss [1977] and Miller [1982b] had shown that add(M) = c if and only
cov(M) = b = c. Indeed, the arguments show that add(M) is the minimum of
cov(M) and b, as might be conjectured by considering Arrows 9 and 14 of Cicho´n’s
diagram. Miller [1982b] also shows that if b = c then the equality cov(M) = c
can be characterized combinatorially by the statement:
STATEMENT 14. For every F ⊆NN of cardinality less than 2ℵ0 there is a g ∈NN
such that for every f ∈F there are inﬁnitely many n ∈N such that f(n) = g(n).
Slightly earlier, Michel Talagrand had found a similar combinatorial approach
to category in his study [1980] of measurable and non-measurable ﬁlters. A set
X ⊆2N is meagre if and only if there is y : N →2 and an increasing sequence of
natural numbers {ni}∞
i=0 such that for every x ∈X there are only ﬁnitely many i
such that x ↾[ni, ni+1) = y ↾[ni, ni+1).
Bartoszynski uses Statement 14 by adopting a diﬀerent perspective on functions
from N to N in order to show that Statement 13 implies Statement 14. Given a
family of functions F ⊆NN of size less than 2ℵ0 he associates to f ∈F the function
f ′ which maps n to the ﬁnite partial function f ↾[n3, (n+1)3). Statement 13 then
allows the selection of a family In of size n2 of functions deﬁned on the interval
[n3, (n + 1)3) such that for every f ∈F eventually f ↾[n3, (n + 1)3) belongs to
In. Since the domains of the functions in In are larger than |In| it is easy to ﬁnd
a single gn : [n3, (n + 1)3) →N which agrees with each member of In on at least
one point in [n3, (n+1)3). Stringing together the gn produces the desired function
g witnessing that Statement 14 holds. The argument for c then converts without
diﬃculty to a proof that Arrow 13 holds.
It is interesting that the same result along with strengthenings were obtained
by Jean Raisonnier and Jacques Stern [1983; 1985] as well as Pawlikowski [1985]
but in a much diﬀerent spirit. Whereas Bartoszynski’s arguments would have been

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
111
comprehensible to Sierpi´nski or Rothberger, even the statement of Pawlikowski’s
result would have required considerable explanation: Let M be a standard model
of ZFC. If the union of all Borel sets of measure (Lebesgue) zero coded in M has
measure zero then the union of all Borel sets of ﬁrst category coded in M is of
ﬁrst category. What has become evident by the 1980’s is that even combinatorial
statements that could have been considered and even proved in the 1930’s are
often more proﬁtably viewed from the perspective of adding a generic real over a
certain model of set theory.
It is instructive to look a bit more closely at Pawlikowski’s results. In his [1985]
his arguments are typical of this approach. He ﬁrst recasts Bartoszynski’s Theorem
in the following form: If M is a standard model of ZFC then Statement 13 holds
for F = NN ∩M if and only if the union of all Borel sets of measure zero in M
has measure zero. He then shows that if M is a standard model of ZFC such that
Statement 13 holds for F = NN∩M then the union of all meagre Borel sets in M is
meagre. Bartoszynski’s Theorem follows from this by realizing that if κ < add(N)
and X is a family of κ meagre sets then one can take a model of suﬃciently much
set theory containing X yet still having cardinality κ. It follows from the recast
version of Bartoszynski’s Theorem that Statement 13 holds for the functions of
this model and hence the union of all meagre sets in the model is meagre. In
particular, the union of X is meagre.
Moreover, the techniques used in Pawlikowski’s argument lend themselves to
arguments providing a deeper explanation of some of the inequalities of Cicho´n’s
diagram. For example, in Section 2.3 of [Bartoszy´nski and Judah, 1995] it is shown
that there is a Tukey function from (M, ⊆) to (N, ⊆). It follows directly from
the existence of this Tukey function that add(N) ≤add(M), namely the (A)
part of Arrow 13 holds. Moreover, a duality argument using the Tukey function
establishes that cof(N) ≤cof(M) or, in other words, that the (A) part of Arrow 6
holds.
It was mentioned that the cardinal invariants related to the coﬁnality of the
ideals N and M did not receive much attention before the forcing era, but this is
not entirely true. An important counterexample is the Sierpi´nski-Tarski duality
theorem assuming the Continuum Hypothesis. This uses coﬁnality as a key part
of an argument — although under the Continuum Hypothesis, of course, many of
these invariants become diﬃcult to distinguish — to construct a function from M
to N somewhat in the spirit of a Tukey function. The idea behind the result is
that measure and category are, in many senses, very similar so it would be very
useful if information about one structure could be transferred to the other. Which
direction is more useful depends on your point of view though. John C. Oxtoby
[1980] takes the view that, since “the theory of measure is more extensive and
“important” than that of category, the service (of such a transfer) is mainly in the
direction of measure theory.” On the other hand, Shelah [2000b] comments that,
“Mathematicians who are not set theorists generally consider “null” as senior
to “meagre”, that is, as a more important case; set theorists inversely, as set-
theoretically Cohen reals are much more manageable than random reals . . . ” The

112
Juris Stepr¯ans
two points of view diﬀer not only in bias, but also in perspective. For Shelah
measure and category are the study of random and Cohen reals, whereas Oxtoby’s
perspective is more traditional.
The duality was ﬁrst formulated and proved by Sierpi´nski [1934b] and then later
strengthened by Erd˝os [1943]. The basic idea of the proof is that, assuming the
Continuum Hypothesis , there are coﬁnal families of order type ω1 under inclusion
in both N and M. Constructing a bijection which respects annuli of these coﬁnal
families will be the required mapping. Sierpi´nski concludes that, assuming the
Continuum Hypothesis, any property of sets mentioning only the notions of null
and meagre can be dualized by interchanging the roles of “meagre” and “null” and
the dual statement will have the same truth value.
The question naturally arises of how similar the properties, meagre and null,
actually are. One indication that full duality does not hold has already been seen
in the inequalities add(N) ≤add(M), although consistency arguments for the
(B) part of Arrow 13 are needed to make this more credible. A slightly earlier hint
at this phenomenon was Shelah’s proof [1984a] that the consistency of having all
sets of reals exhibit the Baire Property did not require a large cardinal, whereas the
analogous result for measure, due to Solovay [1970], does require an inaccessible.
But it would be very wrong to leave the impression that the role of inaccessible
cardinals in the study of measure and category began to be appreciated only in the
forcing era. This idea is quickly dispelled by considering Kuratowski’s Question 7
about whether a set which is nowhere meagre can be partitioned into two disjoint
sets, both of which are nowhere meagre. Stanis law Ulam [1933] had shown that
if all weakly inaccessible cardinals are greater than c then any second category
set contains uncountably many disjoint second category sets. Assuming the same
hypothesis Sierpi´nski [1934c] was then able to answer Question 7 in the positive.
However, only a bit later, Lusin [1934] discovered an even more ingenious argument
that dispensed with the extra hypothesis entirely.
While there are a few results — such as Zbigniew Piotrowski and Andrzej
Szyma´nski’s inequality establishing t ≤add(M) — that link the cardinal in-
variants of measure and category with others, it is worth taking a bit of a detour
to consider the coﬁnalities of some of these invariants. Two results deserve special
attention in this context. The ﬁrst is Miller’s [1982a] proof that the coﬁnality of
cov(M) is uncountable. In stark contrast to this, Shelah [2000a] showed that the
coﬁnality of cov(N) can be countable in some models. It is interesting to spec-
ulate whether such questions were ever considered by Baire or Lebesgue. When
Baire showed that cov(M) is uncountable the notion of coﬁnality had not yet been
properly formulated. Within ﬁve years though, it had been clariﬁed in response
to the Bernstein and K¨onig controversy after the 1904 International Congress of
Mathematicians mentioned in §4 and so it may have occurred to Baire whether
he could improve his result in the way Miller eventually did. The same may have
occurred to Lebesgue but the answer would certainly have surprised him, as it
does even those who ﬁrst encounter it today.
Even though this will be the topic of the next section, it is not possible to

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
113
end this section without mentioning the great body of work on ﬁnding models
exhibiting the entire spectrum of behaviour allowed by the various cardinal invari-
ants related to measure and category that are not ruled out by Cicho´n’s diagram.
Indeed, it is certainly true that much of the advances in developing forcing tech-
niques were spurred on by the goal of trying to ﬁnd a complete understanding of
the possible relations among the invariants of Cicho´n’s diagram. The reader inter-
ested in the details of this development is encouraged to consult [Bartoszy´nski and
Judah, 1995] or [Blass, 2010] which devote considerable space to the this topic.
Part of the story will be examined in §7.
7
WHAT FORCING ARGUMENTS REVEAL ABOUT THE CONTINUUM
The discussion in §6 focused entirely on condition (A) in the explanation of the
meaning of the arrows in Cicho´n’s diagram. The use of forcing to obtain indepen-
dence results, thereby establishing the (B) component of the arrows in Cicho´n’s
diagram, is the goal of this section. The tremendous eﬀect that Cohen’s intro-
duction of forcing techniques in the 1960’s had on the development of the study
of the continuum has been mentioned several times already. However, Cohen’s
motivation for his work seems to have been equally based on establishing the inde-
pendence of the Axiom of Choice from the other axioms of set theory as it was for
showing that the negation of the Continuum Hypothesis is consistent. As it turns
out, the same reals used to establish the failure of the Axiom of Choice could be
used to control the size of the continuum; indeed, the arguments in this case are
somewhat simpler.
Cohen’s original arguments on the general framework of forcing were soon dis-
covered to be more cumbersome than necessary, but the combinatorial arguments
on adding κ Cohen reals to a model of the Continuum Hypothesis are essentially
the same as those used today. A diﬀerence that is inessential from the combinato-
rial point of view is that, instead of ﬁnite functions from κ to 2, Cohen’s original
argument uses ﬁnite collections of forcing statements. In order to show that new
countable subsets of the ground model are contained in old countable subsets of
the ground model Cohen shows that his partial order has what is now known as
the countable chain condition, namely every family of pairwise incompatible ele-
ments is countable. Cohen’s Lemma 2 on page 131 of [Cohen, 1966] states exactly
this and the proof can be recognized as a proof of what is now known as the
∆-system lemma. However, it would be Solovay [1970] who would realize that
Cohen’s partial order is equivalent, for the purposes of forcing, to the partial order
of equivalence classes of Borel sets modulo the ideal of meagre sets. This is done
as an afterthought in the context of proving the analogous result for random reals.
But before considering this it is worth noting that Cohen’s interest in the Axiom
of Choice resulted in him producing various models in [Cohen, 1966] exhibiting
diﬀerent types of failures of the Axiom of Choice. One of these is a model where
ω1 is the union of countably many countably ordinals. This is not of great interest
from the point of view of the continuum, but it is of interest to note that the

114
Juris Stepr¯ans
method of proof relies on collapsing cardinals with ﬁnite conditions. Cohen clearly
saw this as a generalization of the original Cohen partial order. Around the same
time as Cohen’s proof became available, Azriel Levy produced generalizations, one
of them being to apply this collapsing partial order to inaccessible cardinals. The
resulting partial order collapses all uncountable cardinals below the inaccessible,
but not the inaccessible itself.
Solovay realized that this partial order has important homogeneity and embed-
ding properties that can be used to control the appearance of reals in the generic
extension. His key innovation, already appearing in [Solovay, 1969], was the deﬁ-
nition of what he called a “random real” over a model M as a real which does not
belong to any null set belonging to M. In order to have this deﬁnition make any
sense at all, Solovay had had to develop the theory of codes for Borel sets. With
the notion of a code for a Borel set it is possible to understand the notion of a
real x not belonging to a null set in M as meaning that there is no Gδ set with a
code in M which contains x. Establishing absoluteness for the concepts involved
is a critical step in developing the theory of codes for Borel sets. In other words,
Solovay had to show that if x does not belong to a Borel set with code c in some
model containing both x and c then x does not belong to that Borel set in any
other model containing both x and c.
Solovay [1970] describes his intuition for arriving at the deﬁnition for a random
real as follows:
Let x be a real random over M. An observer stationed in M cannot
have total knowledge about x (since x is not in M).
However, he
can have partial knowledge about x. For example, if B is a Borel set
rational over M, then a natural question the observer can ask about x
is “Is x ∈B?” If µ(B) = 0, then the answer is certainly no. On the
other hand, if µ(B) > 0, it is possible for x to be in B . . . . A similar
discussion shows that if B1 and B2 are Borel sets rational over M, and
µ((B1∆B2) = 0 (i.e., B1 and B2 are equal almost everywhere), then
for x random over M, the questions “Is x ∈B1?” and “Is x ∈B2?”
are equivalent.
With this discussion as motivation, Solovay then goes on to provide the now stan-
dard deﬁnition of random forcing as equivalence classes of Borel sets modulo the
null ideal with the natural ordering. He notes that an analogue of a random real is
obtained by replacing the null ideal by the ideal of meagre sets and he realizes that
the associated partial order is precisely the forcing Cohen had used for his origi-
nal consistency results on the failure of the Continuum Hypothesis. However, the
random partial order plays a secondary role in Solovay’s argument to the notion
of a random real as one which avoids ground model null sets. It is this deﬁnition
that plays a key role in establishing the consistency of all sets being Lebesgue
measurable.
A precise discussion of Solovay’s arguments in [1970] establishing the measura-
bility of all sets, thus contradicting the Axiom of Choice, would lead a bit too far

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
115
away from the main theme of this article, but some key points must be mentioned.
Kanamori [1994, page 132] remarks that Cohen had hinted at the possibility of
using forcing to obtain the measurability of all sets of reals but, given the com-
plexity and sophistication of Solovay’s argument, even by modern standards, it
is hard to imagine that Cohen was relying on anything other than intuition. In
exploiting Levy’s inaccessible version of the collapsing functions considered by Co-
hen, Solovay observes that if the continuum is collapsed to be countable then the
total number of codes for null sets in the ground model is also countable after the
collapse and hence their union is also null. In other words, all but a null set of
reals in the generic extension are random reals. (The same argument, of course,
works for Cohen reals and the meagre ideal and this leads to the consistency of
all sets having the Baire property.) Solovay would later in [1969]29 establish that
this would yield the measurability of all Σ1
2 if it was true with respect to all L[a].
The properties of the Levy collapse allowed precisely this.
Solovay [1969] showed that the measurability of all Σ1
2 sets is equivalent to
the statement that for any real a the set of reals not random over L[a] is null
and, similarly, that all Σ1
2 sets having the Baire property is equivalent to the
statement that for any real a the set of reals not Cohen over L[a] is meagre. These
ideas developed by Solovay eventually lead to the result of Raisonnier and Stern
[1983; 1985] that if all Σ1
2 sets are measurable then all Σ1
2 sets have the Baire
property. That the converse is false was established by Shelah and this will be
discussed in a bit greater detail soon. This result is noteworthy in several ways,
but it should be remarked here that it provided the ﬁrst evidence that the duality
hinted at by the results of Sierpi´nski [1934b] and Erd˝os fails. This has already
been discussed in the section of Bartoszynski’s work on additivity and this is closely
related to the work of Raisonnier and Stern.
The work of Solovay and Tennenbaum and Martin on iterations of forcing partial
orders will be discussed in §8 but the same ideas were critical for the Levy collapse.
In particular, Solovay showed that given any real a in the generic extension by the
Levy collapse it is possible to ﬁnd a small partial order completely embedded in
the collapse such that a already belongs to the generic extension by this partial
order. In a sense, this was the reverse of the problem considered in the work of
Solovay and Tennenbaum and Martin. The second key observation is that the
quotient of the Levy collapse by the the small algebra is again a Levy collapse in
this intermediate model. In other words, the observation about almost all reals
being random over this model is valid in this intermediate extension.
It is signiﬁcant that Solovay’s focus is on the measurability question and the
parallel result for the Baire Property is treated almost as a footnote. It is inter-
esting in this context to recall the views of Oxtoby and Shelah on the relative
importance of the meagre and null ideals.
Shelah’s comment that the meagre
ideal is more natural and tractable was likely based, in part, on its appearance in
Cohen’s original forcing arguments. But Solovay’s introduction to his paper lists
29Even though the results of [Solovay, 1969] were obtained later, this article was published
before [Solovay, 1970]. See [Kanamori, 1994].

116
Juris Stepr¯ans
several consequences of the measurability of all sets to problems in analysis, such
as Newtonian capacity, but none for having the Baire Property for all sets.
Given the very similar proofs for the two results, it came as a great surprise
when Shelah [1984a] showed that the consistency of all sets having the Baire
property could be established without assuming the existence of an inaccessible
cardinal. The argument employs a similar strategy to Solovay’s but the critical
stumbling block is to obtain the embedding and homogeneity properties of the
Levy collapse of an inaccessible without actually resorting to assuming that there
is an inaccessible cardinal.
The argument relies on a careful analysis of when
countable partial orders can be completely embedded into a larger, homogeneous,
partial order in such a way that all but a meagre set of later reals are Cohen
over the countable partial order.
As in Solovay’s argument, the abundance of
Cohen reals will guarantee the Baire Property for all sets of reals deﬁnable in a
generic extension by the smaller order. The key point is the argument allowing
the homogeneity arguments in the Levy collapse to be simulated. Shelah’s ideas
here allow various generalizations and lead to a large class of forcing partial orders
known as “sweet”. For example, the article of Andrzej Ros lanowski and Shelah
[2004] combines these ideas with norms on possibilities to provide a classiﬁcation of
countable chain condition partial orders according to whether they are Cohen-like
or random-like.
While the notion of a random real played a central role in Solovay’s work on the
measurability question, the random algebra which generates random reals was of
less signiﬁcance to this argument. However, in work following on the heels of his
[1970], Solovay [1971] showed that, assuming the consistency of a measurable car-
dinal it is consistent that the continuum is real-valued measurable. This provided
answers to questions with roots in the work of Ulam [1930]. Ulam had shown that
if κ is not a weakly inaccessible cardinal then there is no κ-complete measure that
measures all subsets of κ. This did not exclude the possibility that there might be
such a measure on the continuum though. On the other hand, Solovay [1971] also
showed that if there is a real-valued measurable cardinal then there is an inner
model with a measurable cardinal. This result, in combination with work of Dana
Scott [1961], showing that measurable cardinals do not exist if V = L points the
direction in which to look for models where measurable cardinals do exist.
Solovay’s consistency result relied on forcing with the measure algebra of size
κ where κ is a 2-valued measurable cardinal. The continuum then becomes κ and
the κ-complete ultraﬁlter on κ becomes a κ-complete ﬁlter on R. However, there
are new subsets of κ not measured by the ground model ultraﬁlter. Solovay was
able to exploit the measure on the forcing algebra by analyzing the names for sets
of reals and assigning a measure to such names according the average probability
that a real belongs to it. The probability is calculated in the forcing algebra, using
its measure, while the average is calculated using the κ-complete measure on κ.
The generic model obtained by forcing with the measure algebra on 2κ is usually
known as the random real model. Since Solovay showed that the reals added are
random, these are sometimes referred to as Solovay reals. Aside from producing

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
117
a real-valued measure, the random real model is useful as an example exhibiting
an interesting selection of values for various cardinal invariants. Moreover, the
real-valued measurable cardinal imposes severe restrictions on the possible combi-
natorics at c, such as that ♦c holds. The article [Fremlin, 1993] can be consulted for
more information. Even before Solovay’s work, Petr Vopˇenka and Karel Hrb´aˇcek
[1967] had shown that if there is a Lusin set of size 2ℵ0 then there can be no real-
valued measure on the reals. The signiﬁcance of this is that it points to the fact
that Lusin sets can be considered as sets of Cohen reals. Indeed, it follows from
the characterization of Cohen reals as those not belonging to any ground model
meagre set — which was remarked on by Solovay, but even earlier also noticed
by Vopˇenka and Hrb´aˇcek [1967] — that an uncountable set of Cohen reals is a
Lusin set. The Vopˇenka–Hrb´aˇcek result shows that something very much like the
measure algebra needs to be used to get a real-valued measure since no Cohen
reals can be added, at least not coﬁnally.
Before continuing to look at other methods of adding generic reals it is worth
pausing to consider the two models, Cohen and random (sometime known as Solo-
vay). These are already suﬃcient to display a contrasting range of possibilities
for b and d and the other invariants of Cicho´n’s diagram. In the model obtained
by adding κ Cohen reals to a model of the Continuum Hypothesis, Vopˇenka and
Hrb´aˇcek showed that cov(M) = κ while non(M) = ℵ1. One therefore has that
all the values of cardinals on the left half of Cicho´n’s diagram are ℵ1 while those
on the right hand side are all κ = 2ℵ0. In particular, this establishes the (B)
component of Arrows 4, 10 and 14 in Cicho´n’s diagram. In the analogous model
for random reals, Mathias showed that cov(N) = κ while non(N) = ℵ1. One
therefore has that all the values of cardinals on the bottom row of Cicho´n’s dia-
gram are ℵ1 while those on the top row are all κ = 2ℵ0. Moreover b = ℵ1 and
d = ℵ1. Hence, Arrows 1, 3, 5 and 7 in Cicho´n’s diagram are also fully justiﬁed.
A model where both b and d are the continuum but the Continuum Hypoth-
esis fails can be obtained by Hechler’s work, which has already been mentioned
in the discussion of the structure of (NN, ≤∗). Indeed there is a simple version
of Hechler’s result, which corresponds to adding a κ-scale, that is very useful in
distinguishing the behaviour of various cardinal invariants of the continuum. The
partial order for adding a single real dominating all the ground model functions is
usually referred to as the Hechler order or, simply, the partial order for adding a
dominating real. In the generic extension obtained by iterating with ﬁnite support
the Hechler partial with length κ, Hechler’s results show that b = κ. Hechler did
not have the general iteration techniques of Martin and Solovay [1970] available to
him and, in any case, the general results he obtained yielding a wide spectrum of
possible structures on NN required methods beyond the linear iteration considered
by Martin and Solovay. Results of Truss [1977] establish that in the linearly iter-
ated Hechler model add(M) = cof(M) = κ. It is interesting to note what Truss
says of the motivation for his work, “We ﬁrst became interested in these properties
on reading the paper by K. Kunen and F. D. Tall (Between Martin’s axiom and
Suslins’s hypothesis, to appear), and in particular, in the case of calibre, on learn-

118
Juris Stepr¯ans
ing of R. M. Solovay’s result that, assuming Aℵ1 (Martin’s axiom), the measure
algebra has calibre ℵ1.”30 In other words, he was lead to studying properties of
the continuum, in part, by work with its roots in set-theoretic topology. Other
examples of this phenomenon are discussed in §9 and §8.
Further investigations revealed that arguments of Miller, Truss and Solovay
combine to show that add(N) ̸= add(M) in Hechler’s model, thereby establishing
that Bartoszynski’s inequality, Arrow 13, cannot be reversed. It has already been
mentioned that Truss and Miller had shown that add(M) is the minimum of
cov(M) and b. Iterating Hechler reals and Cohen reals — this is not realy needed,
since the ﬁnite support iteration will add Cohen reals itself — with ﬁnite support
ω2 times over a model of the Continuum Hypothesis then produces a model in
which both b and cov(M) have value ℵ2. Hence add(M) = ℵ2 also. Once it is
shown that no random reals have been added, Solovay’s characterization of these
reals yields that cov(N) = ℵ1 in this model and the (A) part of Arrow 1 then
implies that add(N) ̸= add(M). The details can be found in [Miller, 1982b].
Duality of a Tukey function argument yields that Arrow 6 of Cicho´n’s diagram is
also justiﬁed. Similar reasoning establishes that the (B) component for Arrows 2
and 15 is also justiﬁed by Hechler’s model.
With the landscape of possibilities for values of the cardinal invariants hav-
ing been revealed to be remarkably broad by the models of Cohen, Solovay and
Hechler, the seventies witnessed a tremendous interest in exploring this landscape
and determining its exact boundaries. A wealth of new forcing structures was
developed in this period, most of them motivated as probes of the possibilities of
cardinal invariants, but not all.
A notable exception is the Sacks real which was based on recursion theoretic
arguments for constructing a minimal degree. Adding a Sacks real to G¨odel’s con-
structible universe produces a model that has exactly two degrees of constructibil-
ity. The behaviour of Sacks forcing [Sacks, 1971] is at the opposite end of the
cardinal invariant spectrum from Hechler forcing. While increasing the size of the
continuum with Hechler forcing will increase most invariants along with the contin-
uum, Sacks forcing increases the continuum by keeping most other invariants small.
In particular, the side-by-side Sacks model establishes that Arrow 8 of Cicho´n’s di-
agram is also fully justiﬁed; indeed, Miller attributes the inequalities non(M) < c
and non(N) < c to Gerald Sacks. While, the behaviour of most invariants is the
same in both constructions, Baumgartner and Laver [1979] showed how to iterate
Sacks reals in based on Laver’s earlier [1976] work on the Borel Conjecture. They
point out that while many researchers had realized that Sacks reals could be added
“side-by-side” or simultaneously, the iteration is a more delicate construction. It
is shown in [Stepr¯ans, 1999] that there are invariants distinguishing the two types
of forcing.
An important realization of Miller is that the iterated Sacks model enjoys a
certain type of homogeneity and he was able to exploit this in [Miller, 1983] to
show that every set of reals of size ℵ2 can be mapped continuously onto the reals.
30The article cited by Truss did appear later as [Kunen and Tall, 1979].

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
119
This shows that Sierpi´nski’s Property C5 mentioned in §4 is consistently false.
Somewhat earlier, Miller [1980] had used a modiﬁcation of Sacks forcing to get a
partition of the reals into ℵ1 closed sets together with the equality c = ℵ2.
The notion of forcing now referred to as “Laver forcing” was introduced quite
early as part of Laver’s work on the Borel Conjecture, even before the work with
Baumgartner on iterating Sacks forcing.
Recall from §5 that Borel had been
concerned with an analysis of null sets based on the rates of convergence of the size
of intervals and that Laver had provided a model where there are no uncountable
sets with Property C, in the terminology of Rothberger. Noteworthy about Laver’s
argument is that it is the ﬁrst instance of a countable support iteration used to
iterate partial orders that add reals at each stage of the iteration.
It became
apparent that the strategy used by Laver was far more widely applicable and this
was crystallized by Baumgartner into an axiomatic form. A class of partial orders
satisfying a property Baumgartner [1983] called Axiom A has turned out to be
a very useful source of examples. As it turns out though, the iteration strategy
devised by Laver was soon to be eclipsed by the far more general strategies for
iterating proper partial orders, a class of partial orders including those satisfying
Axiom A.
However, Laver reals continued to play a signiﬁcant role in studying the contin-
uum beyond the Borel Conjecture result. It was shown already in Laver’s original
article that b = ℵ2 in the iterated Laver model. Haim Judah and Shelah [1990]
showed that non(N) = ℵ1 in this model as well, thus establishing even more than
is needed for (B) of Arrows 9 and 11. The crucial contribution of this work was
to the theory of iteration of proper partial orders, since knowing that adding a
single Laver real preserves the outer measure of the ground model reals does not,
by itself, yield the desired result.
Woodin [1990] showed that adding any number of random reals to Laver’s model
preserves the Borel conjecture. The signiﬁcance here is that countable support
iterations can only be used for iterations of length ω2 without collapsing cardinals.
This is the the key source of diﬃculties in trying to establish the consistency of
p < t. Recall from §5 that Rothberger has shown that if p = ℵ1 then, in fact, p = t.
Hence a model where p < t would require that ℵ3 ≤t, putting this outside the
realm of models constructed with countable support. Woodin’s result provides at
least some alternate method of creating models with 2ℵ0 > ℵ2 in situations where
countable support iterations seem to be essential, as is the case with the Borel
Conjecture.
A variant of Laver forcing, due to Miller [1984a], has played a central role in
furthering our understanding of forcing and the continuum. The partial order in-
troduced by Miller is “intermediate between Sacks perfect set forcing and Laver
forcing”. While deﬁned originally as the partial order of perfect subsets of the
real line in which the rationals are dense, it is equivalent to forcing with inﬁnitely
branching trees. Unlike Laver’s partial order though, the conditions in Miller’s
partial order do not have to branch at every node, this is only required to happen
coﬁnally often. In the paper introducing this notion, Miller shows that the generic

120
Juris Stepr¯ans
real added is not dominated by the ground model and is of minimal degree. More-
over, any new real in the extension is either dominated by a ground model real
or is itself generic with respect to Miller’s partial order. A key property is shared
with Sacks forcing: Every subset of N in the extension either contains or is disjoint
from some inﬁnite subset of N in the ground model. This last property implies
that ultraﬁlters are generated by ground model sets and so, it allows much more
control of these objects in forcing extensions.
This sort of property is extremely useful when dealing with problems such as
destroying P–points. What was missing from Miller’s construction though, was
an iteration lemma, an iteration lemma which would soon be supplied by Shelah
[1987]. In that paper Blass and Shelah introduce a proper forcing notion which has
the property that P–points31 in the ground model generate P–points in the generic
extension.
The key point though is the iteration lemma asserting that in any
countable support proper forcing iteration, if a ground model ultraﬁlter generates
a P–point at every intermediate step of the iteration then it continues to do so at
the limit. This then yields that iterating the partial order constructed by Blass and
Shelah with countable support provides a model without P–points. However, not
long after this construction was discovered, it was realized that Miller’s rational
perfect set forcing would also ﬁt into the iteration scheme, considerably simplifying
the argument.
This incident points to the critical role of iteration lemmas in sophisticated forc-
ing arguments starting from the mid-1980’s. A good illustration of this is provided
in [Mathias, 1977] by the forcing now known as the Mathias partial order. It is
designed to add a generic ultraﬁlter and then diagonalize it — or at least, this
is modern perspective — and it was introduced by Adrian Mathias to deal with
questions on Ramsey theory without the Axiom of Choice. Among the things he
proves are that by collapsing a Mahlo cardinal one obtains a model where Depen-
dent Choice holds yet there are no maximal almost disjoint families. (These are
discussed in more detail in §9.) The questions Mathias considered did not require
an elaborate iteration theory since he was able to extract a great deal of informa-
tion by insightful arguments applied to a single stage forcing. However, Mathias
forcing has become one of the standard partial orders in the theory of countable
support iterations and the collection of cardinal invariant values in the iterated
Mathias model are important for delineating the boundaries of the possible.
For example, recall from §5 that Rothberger had shown that t ≤add(M) and
that the inequality t ≤h is discussed in §9. This raises the obvious question of
whether these results can be improved to show that h ≤add(M), but this fails
in the Mathias model. In particular, t = add(M) = ℵ1 in that model [Dordal,
1982], yet h = ℵ2.
The Mathias forcing is also signiﬁcant in that it is a prototype for the single
stage forcing in the 1982 construction by Shelah [1984b], of a model for s > b.
This is the ﬁrst instance of norms on possibilities and creature forcing which has
31A P–point is an ultraﬁlter U on the integers such that for every countable subset of C ⊆U
there is a pseudo-intersection X ∈U; in other words, X ⊆∗Y for each Y ∈C.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
121
had a profound inﬂuence on the theory of forcing. The memoir [Ros lanowski and
Shelah, 1999] describes the further developments along this line of research, while
an excellent example of the strength of these methods can be found in the article
[Ros lanowski and Shelah, 2006] in which it is shown to be consistent that every
real-valued function agrees with a continuous function on a non-measurable set.
However, it is not the purpose of this section to provide a full account of the
developments in forcing techniques since their introduction by Cohen in the early
sixties. However, the far more modest goal of justifying the arrows in Cicho´n’s
diagram has almost been achieved. All that remains to be shown is that condition
(B) for Arrow 12 holds. This is the topic of §8 in which this and far more will be
discussed.
8
THE BAIRE CATEGORY THEOREM AND MARTIN’S AXIOM
Perhaps the longest and most remarkable chain of related ideas in the history
of the continuum is that leading from Baire’s work on continuous functions to
Martin’s Maximum. In his doctoral thesis [1899b] Baire provides a completely
abstract deﬁnition of the notion of function, one based simply on existence rather
than rules for calculating values. Moreover, he explains that he is interested in
examining which properties of these abstract functions imply others. An example
he provides foreshadows in a surprising way the uses to which the methods he
developed in his thesis would be put. He reminds his readers of the existence of
continuous functions without derivatives. In other words, continuous functions
with derivatives are an exceptional subset of the family of all continuous functions
and the one property does not imply the other.32
Baire’s work on classifying
pointwise limits of continuous functions falls squarely into this quite modern, non-
constructive view of functions.
His thesis contains what is now known as the Baire Category Theorem, that
no interval in the real line is the union of countably many closed nowhere dense
sets. While Baire makes very eﬀective use of this result and was clearly aware of
its signiﬁcance, it would take some thirty years before Banach would distill the
constructive essence of Baire’s Theorem into a method for proving the existence
of mathematical objects. In 1931 Banach [1931] and Stefan Mazurkiewicz [1931]
independently employed the Baire Category Theorem to show how to prove the
existence of a continuous but nowhere diﬀerentiable function from the reals to the
reals. The key idea is that Baire’s Theorem is true in a much broader context
than just the real numbers since his proof can easily be modiﬁed to apply to
any separable, complete metric space.
Banach then exploits the fact that the
32Par example, on a reconnu, contrairement `a ce qui avait ´et´e longtemps admis, qu’il existe des
fonctions continues n’admettant pas de d´eriv´ee. Ce r´esultat doit ˆetre entenda de la mani`ere suiv-
ante: le fait d’imposer `a une fonction la continuit´e n’entraˆıne pas comme cons´equence l’existence
d’une d´eriv´ee; il en r´esulte que les fonctions continue qui admettent une d´eriv´ee ne forment
qu’une classe particuli`ere dans l’ensemble des fonctions continue; autrement dit, c’est par excep-
tion qu’une fonction continue admet une d´eriv´e. (Page 2 of [Baire, 1899b])

122
Juris Stepr¯ans
continuous functions on the unit interval form a separable, complete metric space
with respect to the uniform norm.
Banach’s idea has since been used countless times to construct examples of
what are now known as generic objects. The term “generic” refers to the fact
that the Baire Category Theorem provides more information than just existence,
it actually shows that most objects have the desired property. For example, not
only is there a continuous nowhere diﬀerentiable function, but most continuous
functions are nowhere diﬀerentiable in the sense that all but a meagre subset of
the space of continuous functions with respect to the uniform norm will be nowhere
diﬀerentiable. This method of proof is often described as non-constructive, but
it should be realized that any such proof can be transformed into a constructive
argument by suitably enumerating the dense open sets used in the argument and
tracing the steps to create an inductive construction. The usefulness of Banach’s
approach is that it allows one to ignore these bookkeeping details in favour of the
conceptual. However, some forty years later Banach’s ideas began to be used in
the context of Martin’s Axiom in a way that is essentially non-constructive.
Before examining these ideas though, it is necessary to take what may seem to
be a digression and return to the year 1920 in which the ﬁrst issue of Fundamenta
Mathematicae appeared, the one in which Suslin asked Question 1. The motivation
for the question is clear. Suslin was aware that the real line could be characterized
as the unique separable, complete, linear order with neither end points nor isolated
points. So Suslin is asking whether the separability condition can be replaced by
the seemingly weaker one that all disjoint families of open sets are countable. The
question of why Suslin was interested in this particular weakening can only be
guessed at, but the future development of the subject was to reveal that it is a
central concept and so it may well be correct to say that it was a natural question
for him to ask.
However the methods available to Suslin and his contemporaries were far from
adequate for making much progress on the problem. The one bit of early progress
worth noting is a reformulation of the problem due to Kurepa. He [1935] realized
that by considering the set of intervals of a putative counterexample to Suslin’s
question one can create a tree structure capturing the relevant combinatorics. To
be precise, Kurepa showed that the following are equivalent:
• The real line is not the only complete, linear order without endpoints or
isolated points in which all disjoint families of intervals are countable.
• There is a tree of height ω1 in which all nodes split, yet all incomparable
sets of nodes are countable.
Trees satisfying the second alternative are called Suslin trees.
It is interesting to note that there is a tree structure similar to a Suslin tree
that was studied for diﬀerent reasons. It is easy to check that a Suslin tree can
have no branches of length ω1. However, trees satisfying just this weaker property
are known as Aronszajn trees and the earliest recorded construction appears in

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
123
[Kurepa, 1938]. The point to remark on is that this construction has been shown
by Todorˇcevi´c to be equivalent to Hausdorﬀ’s construction of an (ω1, ω∗
1)–gap.
This construction itself is similar to Lusin’s construction of an almost disjoint
family no two uncountable subsets of which can be separated as described in §9.
So, even though Hausdorﬀhad described his construction in 1908 it seems that 30
years later the subject had matured to the point that similar constructions were
now being discovered by various researchers.
The status of Suslin trees, however, would not be resolved until forcing tech-
niques became available. In 1967 Tom´aˇs Jech [1967] proved the consistency of the
existence of a Suslin tree using an argument which could be rephrased as forcing
with a countably closed partial order. The reviewer of the article for the AMS,
Michael Morley makes the following comment in his review of this article:
The author notes that he has heard that S. Tennenbaum had obtained
similar results in 1964. The facts known to the reviewer are as fol-
lows: (1) Tennenbaum announced the main result of this paper in a
lecture at Harvard in January,1964; (2) his proof has been presented
at numerous seminars; (3) it has never been published even as an ab-
stract (excluding mimeographed notes); and (4) the author’s proof is
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from Tennenbaum’s.
Indeed, Tennenbaum did subsequently publish [1968] another proof of the consis-
tency of the existence of a Suslin tree and, as Morley suggests, his proof is quite
diﬀerent from Jech’s, relying on ﬁnite conditions rather than Jech’s countable ones.
About the same time, Ronald Jensen showed that V = L also implies that there
is a Suslin tree. In his memorial address at a conference in honour of Tennen-
baum, Kanamori [2007] includes a letter from Solovay recalling the consistency of
a Suslin tree having actually been obtained in 1963. Indeed, Solovay’s letter oﬀers
a detailed recollection of his collaboration with Tennenbaum on the key result in
the opposite direction.
Solovay and Tennenbaum proved that it is consistent that there are no Suslin
trees, thus showing that Suslin’s question was not answerable by the methods
available at the time he asked it. It is here that this seeming digression on Suslin’s
problem becomes relevant to the development stemming from the Baire Category
Theorem. The important point to emphasize is that Solovay and Tennenbaum’s
proof relied on the new technique of iterated forcing. Tennenbaum had realized
that thinking of the Suslin tree itself as a partial order allowed one to force with it.
The result of this forcing is an ω1 length path through the tree and it has already
been noted that no Suslin tree can have such a path. In other words, forcing with
a Suslin tree destroys that tree.
The critical property of a Suslin tree that allows it to be used as a forcing
partial order without collapsing cardinals is its deﬁning feature: There are no
uncountable pairwise incompatible sets of elements of the tree considered as a
partial order. This is the same condition Cohen had used to show that cardinals are
not collapsed when increasing the size of the continuum. Solovay and Tennenbaum

124
Juris Stepr¯ans
then developed the strategy of iteratively destroying each tree in turn. The new
concept introduced here was that of creating a partial order which has the same
eﬀect as forcing to destroy one Suslin tree and then forcing over the resulting
model to destroy the next Suslin tree and so on.
The next step was for Martin and Solovay to realize that the new iteration
strategy allowed any partial order with the countable chain condition to be forced
with in an iteration scheme. In its ultimate form, this meant that one could line
up all partial orders with the countable chain condition and force with each in
turn. Martin and Solovay [1970] explain:
Martin observed that the construction of N depended only on very
general properties of the Cohen extensions M →MT . He and, in-
dependently Rowbottom, suggested an ”axiom” which asserts that all
Cohen extensions having these very general properties can be carried
out inside the universe of sets: that the universe of sets is — so to
speak — closed under a large class of Cohen extensions.
Here N denotes the model constructed by Martin and Solovay.
The result is a strengthening of the Baire Category Theorem that applies to un-
countably many dense sets and is valid in topological spaces satisfying the count-
able chain condition. Diﬀerent variants of the countable chain condition deﬁne
diﬀerent classes of topological spaces to each of which correspond diﬀerent versions
of Martin’s Axiom. The realization of the signiﬁcance of the axiom to topological
questions crystallized in the work of early researchers such as Franklin D. Tall
[1969] and Istv´an Juh´asz [1970]. Of course, the work of Jensen on Suslin’s Hy-
pothesis can also be considered to be topological in nature.
An important step in unravelling the connections between various versions of
the Baire Category Theorem was obtained by Murray Bell [1981], who showed that
the intersection of less that c dense open sets in σ-centred spaces being non-empty
is equivalent to p being equal to the continuum. Once again the motivation for
Bell was topological since the main application of his result is the existence of
ﬁrst countable Dowker spaces assuming that p = c. However, the combinatorial
equivalent of his theorem has proved to be very useful: Martin’s Axiom restricted
to σ-centred partial orders holds if and only if p = c.
The usefulness of this
equivalence stems from the the fact that there is a broad range of σ-centred partial
orders and these can be designed according to the application in which one is
interested. Bell’s Theorem allows the general techniques of Martin’s Axiom to be
applied in the situation where one knows only that p = c.
It was the set-theoretic topologists who most vigorously applied Martin’s Axiom
in the early years after its appearance. Indeed, it can be said that, like the problems
of analysis that drove set theoretic developments in the early years of the century,
in the 1970’s it was topological problems that provided the impetus for many new
developments.
Central among these were the questions concerned with normality and metriz-
ability. Recall from §3 that Jones [1937] had used the hypothesis that 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
125
to show that every separable, normal Moore space is metrizable. Bing [1951] had
shown that a certain topological space constructed from an uncountable set of reals
is a separable, normal, non-metrizable Moore space provided that the uncountable
set of reals used is a Q–set. Recall also that Rothberger had shown that if there
are no ω1–limits, or equivalently that p > ℵ1, then there is a Q–set. It would
then seem a natural progression to conclude that Martin’s Axiom implies there is
a separable, normal, non-metrizable Moore space. Indeed, this was announced by
Jack Silver (cf. [Tall, 1969]) and the proof was based on Bing’s result, but with
no reference to Rothberger’s work. It was only later pointed out by David Booth
(cf. [Tall, 1969]) that Silver’s result follows immediately from Rothberger’s and
Bing’s work. However, it is clear that the set-theoretic researchers of Europe and
the general topologists of Texas had been unaware of each others work throughout
the middle decades of the twentieth century. (A curious counterexample is pro-
vided by ´Emile Borel’s address at the inauguration of Rice University in Houston,
Texas in 1912 in which he developed some of the ideas leading to the Borel Con-
jecture.) The renewed interest in these questions resulting from the availability
of the new forcing techniques provided by Cohen and Solovay as well as Tall’s
thesis [1969] on the normal Moore space problem ﬁnally rectiﬁed this situation
and resulted in a lengthy period of intense activity.
The study of convergence properties as well as of βN \ N proved to be par-
ticularly amenable to the newly available methods. Perhaps the most inﬂuential
and far reaching development though, was the solution of the S–space problem by
Todorˇcevi´c [1989] using innovative proper forcing techniques. The problem had
been the object of intense study by various authors and several partial results had
been available earlier. For example, Kunen [1977] showed that Martin’s Axiom and
the failure of the Continuum Hypothesis implied that there are no regular spaces
all of whose ﬁnite products are S–spaces. However, the hypothesis used by Kunen
is especially amenable to Martin’s Axiom since it lends itself to countable chain
condition partial orders. The case of an arbitrary S–space, however, required the
use of Todorˇcevi´c’s techniques and this focused attention on the Proper Forcing
Axiom described by Baumgartner [1984].
Cohen, in his concluding remarks in [1966] says of the problem of determining
the value of the continuum,
It is unreasonable to expect that any description of a larger cardinal
which attempts to build up that cardinal from ideas deriving from the
Replacement Axiom can ever reach c. Thus c is greater than ℵn, ℵω, ℵα
where α = ℵω etc. This point of view regards c as an incredibly rich set
given to us by one bold new axiom, which can never be approximated
by any piecemeal process of construction.
As it turns out, there are versions of Martin’s Axiom suﬃciently strong to estab-
lish the value of ℵ2 for the continuum. However, as will be seen, while this does
contradict Cohen’s view that the continuum must be very large, it does not con-
tradict his view that the continuum “can never be approximated by any piecemeal

126
Juris Stepr¯ans
process of construction.”
While many of the questions concerning cardinal invariants are settled by Mar-
tin’s Axiom, indeed they are all equal to 2ℵ0, other questions are not. For example,
Martin’s Axiom does not settle the question of whether there are (c, c∗)–gaps as
was shown by Kunen [1975]. Even less is determined by assuming the following
consequence of Martin’s Axiom and 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 which is often referred to as MAℵ1:
Given ℵ1 dense open sets in a countable chain condition partial order, there is ﬁlter
meeting each of them. Kunen and Tall [1979] consider variations on Martin’s Ax-
iom and remark on two diﬀerent types of consequences of Martin’s Axiom. They
distinguish between what they call “combinatorial” consequences and “Souslin
type” consequences. They point out that the combinatorial consequences “readily
imply that 2ℵ0 > ℵ1, while the Souslin type consequences do not.” However, even
the full MAℵ1 does not determine the value of the continuum as is immediate from
the construction of Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971].
In [1997] Todorˇcevi´c explains the signiﬁcance of this question.
The increasing sophistication in the area of iterated forcing resulted in
a profusion of models of Set Theory built for the purpose of proving
the independence of statements like Souslin’s Hypothesis, Borel’s Con-
jecture, and so on. It turns out that many such proofs, especially the
deeper ones involving other than the ﬁnite support iterations, could not
produce models where the continuum would have value diﬀerent from
ℵ2 . . . It is therefore natural to ask whether the statements in question
do pose some restriction on the continuum such as c = ℵ2. This kind
of question is especially interesting when the considered statements are
some kind of maximality principles, such as, for example, various forc-
ing axioms asserting that we can have a suﬃciently generic ﬁlter for
every member of a certain class of posets.
Therefore it was very surprising when Todorˇcevi´c was able to show that the
strengthening of MAℵ1 known as the Proper Forcing Axiom actually implies that
2ℵ0 = ℵ2. It will be seen that the argument here does indeed have two distinct
parts that might be seen as corresponding to Kunen and Tall’s division of Martin’s
Axiom into “combinatorial” and “Souslin type” consequences. However, the story
is not quite so simple and the two parts of Todorˇcevi´c’s argument involve several
new ingredients that were not yet available at the writing of [Kunen and Tall,
1979].
An early step in this direction was taken in [Todorˇcevi´c, 1993]. Rado’s Con-
jecture is a reﬂection type statement about linear orders: A family of intervals of
a linearly ordered set is the union of countably many disjoint subfamilies if and
only if every subfamily of size ℵ1 has this property. Todorˇcevi´c [1993] studies this
conjecture and shows that it implies that the size of continuum is at most ℵ2.
However, further progress in this direction hinges on an axiom that might be
viewed as being at the core of the “Souslin type” consequences mentioned by Kunen
and Tall in their [1979], an axiom now commonly known as OCA. However, there

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
127
is room for considerable confusion here since a related family of axioms was studied
earlier by Uri Abraham, Matatyahu Rubin and Shelah in [Abraham et al., 1985].
The semi-open colouring axiom (SOCA) states that for any second countable
space X with |X| = ℵ1 and any open set U ⊆[X]2 — this can be identiﬁed
with a symmetric open subset of X × X — there is A ⊆X with |A| = ℵ1 such
that either [A]2 ⊆U or [A]2 ∩U = ∅. However, another axiom Abraham, Rubin
and Shelah call OCA is also deﬁned. An open colouring of a second countable
Hausdorﬀspace X with |X| = ℵ1 is a ﬁnite cover U of [X]2. A set A ⊆X is
said to be U-homogeneous if [A]2 is contained in one member of U. The open
colouring axiom (OCA) states that for every such X and U, X can be partitioned
into countably many U-homogeneous sets.
The axiom currently known as OCA was introduced by Todorˇcevi´c [1989] and is
actually a strengthening of SOCA: If X is a separable metric space and G ⊆[X]2
is open then either there is a decomposition of X into countably many pieces
{Xi}i∈ω such that [Xi]2 ∩G is empty for each i or there is an uncountable H ⊆X
such that [H]2 ⊆G. Observe that the two alternatives are not symmetric as they
are in SOCA.
The ﬁrst component of Todorˇcevi´c’s argument was to show that OCA, as formu-
lated by him, implies that b = ℵ2. A crucial step in the argument in [Todorˇcevi´c,
1989] is to show that every gap in (NN, <∗) is either of type (ω1, ω∗
1) or of type
(ω, ω∗
1) or of type (ω1, ω∗). (As discussed in §5 the ﬁrst type of gap was ﬁrst con-
structed by Hausdorﬀ, while the other two were analyzed by Rothberger.) On the
other hand, in [Todorcevic, 1988] it is shown that if b > ℵ2 then there is a gap in
(NN, <∗) which is neither of the Hausdorﬀnor Rothberger type. It is interesting to
note that this argument depends on choosing a maximal linear order in (NN, <∗),
in other words the pantachies as deﬁned and studied by Hausdorﬀhad not yet
outlived their usefulness almost a century later.
The other essential step in the argument is to use the value of b to code reals
and put an upper bound on c. In this coding a well-ordered, unbounded subset
of NN plays a central role and, of course, this set must have cardinality b.
A
scheme for having certain subsets of this well-ordered set code reals is described
in [Todorˇcevi´c, 1997] and this coding has the property that sets coding distinct
reals have distinct suprema. Hence showing that each real is coded will establish
that b is a bound on the number of reals. Showing that each real actually is coded
requires a relatively weak extension of Martin’s Axiom, namely Martin’s Axiom
for partial orders of the form P ∗Q where P is σ-closed and Q has the countable
chain condition.
Before leaving the topic, it is interesting to note that Justin Moore [2002] has
shown that the conjunction of two versions of OCA — the original OCA as deﬁned
by Abraham, Rubin and Shelah and the later version of OCA deﬁned by Todorˇcevi´c
and strengthening SOCA — also implies that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. It must be remarked
though, that ﬁnding bounds on the continuum using variations of Martin’s Axiom
are not an isolated phenomenon, but should really be placed within the context of
discoveries, many of them quite unexpected, about combinatorial implications of

128
Juris Stepr¯ans
variations of Martin’s Axiom whose consistency is obtained by assuming some large
cardinal hypothesis. As examples, one can mention Todorˇcevi´c’s proof [1984] that
the Proper Forcing Axiom implies the failure of □κ for all uncountable κ and the
applications of Martin’s Maximum in [Foreman et al., 1988a; Foreman et al., 1988b;
Foreman et al., 1989]. A very diﬀerent approach to these axioms is provided by
Woodin’s Pmax [1999] which is a canonical model for the failure of the Continuum
Hypothesis. However, providing more detail here would require too long a diversion
for the scope of this article.
9
CARDINAL INVARIANTS OF THE CONTINUUM ASSOCIATED WITH
βN \ N
The discussion of the structure of NN, the invariants associated to measure and
category and the development of Baire Category like theorems have brought us
to consider b, d, the invariants of the ideals N and M as well as p and t. Little
mention so far has been made of the combinatorial invariants such as a, i, s and
r. Indeed, all of these seem to have escaped the attention of set theorists and
topologists for considerably longer than the invariants discussed in §5. Certainly
part of the explanation for this must be found in the fact that these later invariants
are much less closely connected to the notion of rate of convergence which were
of interest to du Bois-Reymond and Hausdorﬀafter him.
The interest in the
invariants studied in §6 is motivated by very diﬀerent considerations of course.
The cardinal a is deﬁned to be the least cardinality of a maximal, inﬁnite family
A ⊆P(N) such that any two elements of A are almost disjoint, in the sense that
their intersection is ﬁnite. The notion of an almost disjoint family was considered
already in 1928 by both Sierpi´nski [1928b] and Tarski [1928] in considerable gener-
ality and Sierpi´nski established the result — a result he viewed as paradoxical —
that in any inﬁnite set of cardinality κ it is possible to ﬁnd more than κ pairwise
almost disjoint sets. In the case that κ = ℵ0 there are, in fact, c almost disjoint
sets. As a result, until the era of forcing and the ability to construct models where
c is large it would not have made much sense to consider the question of the car-
dinality of maximal almost disjoint families of subsets of the integers. It was only
in 1972, just shortly after the Martin–Solovay paper introducing Martin’s Axiom,
that articles of Stephen Hechler [1972] and Solomon [1977] appeared considering
this question.
It is worth noting that Hechler’s paper appeared in a topology journal and that
the cardinal a was looked at as the least cardinal of a maximal, inﬁnite family of
disjoint clopen sets in βN \ N. Moreover, in Eric van Douwen’s very inﬂuential
article [1984] the discussion of a highlights the Ψ space constructed from an almost
disjoint family. Given an almost disjoint family A, the Ψ–space has as points N∪A
and the neighbourhoods of A ∈A are of the form A\k while each n ∈N is isolated.
The study of the topological properties of this space has motivated much of the
developments in studying a and almost disjoint families in general.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
129
Hechler noted that Martin’s Axiom implies that a = c but, of course, the def-
inition would not have been of much interest had he not been able to show that
it is consistent that a ̸= c. And, indeed, he was able to show that it is consistent
that c > ℵ1 and there are maximal almost disjoint families of each uncountable
cardinality not greater than the continuum. By keeping the continuum smaller
than the ﬁrst singular, Hechler was able to avoid the question of singular car-
dinality for a. Much later, J¨org Brendle [2003a] was able to use a modiﬁcation
of a forcing technique due to Shelah to obtain the consistency of a = ℵω. The
argument of Shelah which Brendle modiﬁed was originally used in 1999 to show
that it is consistent that a > d, but the paper [Shelah, 2004] appeared only ﬁve
years later. The fact that a ≥b was noted by Solomon [1977] and a model where
a ̸= b was obtained by Shelah in 1982, along with several other inequalities, in
[Shelah, 1984b], a paper whose inﬂuence on forcing constructions was discussed at
the end of §7. However, obtaining a model where a ̸= d seemed to be beyond the
capabilities of the techniques whose development was initiated in [Shelah, 1984b].
And, in fact, the methods used to ﬁnally obtain such a model where entirely novel,
but their inﬂuence on future developments is yet to be determined. It is worth
noting though that the following question [Miller, 1993] of Judith Roitman is still
open: If there is a dominating family in NN of size ℵ1 does it follow that a = ℵ1?
The appearance of ℵ1 here is not as a place holder for c as it might have been in
the questions posed in the early issues of Fundamenta Mathematicae, but because
of a fundamental problem in modifying Shelah’s argument to handle this cardinal.
In discussing the cardinal a it is worth remarking that in the same year that
Hausdorﬀpublished his second paper on constructing Hausdorﬀgaps — the paper
which ﬁnally got set theorists to take notice of a result Hausdorﬀhad obtained
close to thirty years earlier — Lusin [1947] produced a very similar argument
constructing an unusual almost disjoint family. What he did was to construct an
almost disjoint family A such that no two disjoint, uncountable subfamilies can
be separated: In other words, if B ⊆A and C ⊆A and B ∩A = ∅then there is no
X ⊆N such that B ⊆∗X for all B ∈B and C ∩X is ﬁnite for all C ∈C. While
it seems that Lusin was unaware of Hausdorﬀ’s work at the time — at least van
Douwen expresses this opinion in his [1984] — it is at least clear that the work
of du Bois-Reymond had motivated Lusin’s interest in these questions, as it had
Hausdorﬀ’s much earlier construction. Indeed, Lusin attributes the non-existence
of non-separable countable families to du Bois-Reymond. In one sense, this is a
stronger result than Hausdorﬀ’s gap construction because it yields 2ℵ1 pairs that
can not be separated.
On the other hand, the pairs consist of almost disjoint
sets rather than ⊆∗-increasing towers as in Hausdorﬀ’s gaps. And, of course, the
connection to the invariant a is quite weak because there is no claim that Lusin’s
almost disjoint family is maximal. Moreover, using the Axiom of Choice to extend
it to a maximal almost disjoint family is likely to destroy the key property of the
Lusin family.
This very brittle behaviour of almost disjoint families is at the heart of some key
questions still open in set theory. For example, Hechler [1971] raises the question

130
Juris Stepr¯ans
of whether there is a completely separable maximal almost disjoint family.
An
almost disjoint family A is said to be completely separable if for every X ⊆N
either X is almost contained in the union of ﬁnitely many members of A or there
is A ∈A such that X ⊇A. While this is still an open question, if the requirement
of maximality is removed a solution was obtained by Petr Simon (cf. [Balcar and
Simon, 1989]). The argument used by Simon has its roots in methods developed by
Bohuslav Balcar, Jan Pelant and Simon in [Balcar et al., 1980] in which a cardinal
invariant quite diﬀerent in nature to those studied by Rothberger or Sierpi´nski
is examined. The notation for the cardinal now known as h was introduced in
[Balcar and Simon, 1989], but Balcar, Pelant and Simon designated it as κ — or,
to be precise, κ(N∗) — in the earlier paper. It is deﬁned to be the least cardinal
of a shattering matrix, which is deﬁned in [Balcar et al., 1980] to be a collection of
almost disjoint families {Aξ}ξ∈h such that for each inﬁnite X ⊆N there is some
ξ ∈h such that there are at least two A ∈Aξ intersecting X on an inﬁnite set.
The motivation behind the deﬁnition was ﬁrmly rooted in the study of βN \ N,
the study of the number of nowhere dense sets required to cover βN \ N to be
precise. It did not take long, though, to realize that there is a close connection
to distributivity properties of Boolean algebras. In the course of their analysis
Balcar, Pelant and Simon show that h is also the same as the minimal height of a
tree π-base for βN \ N.
By the time of the survey article which revisited some of the results from [Balcar
et al., 1980] the article of van Douwen [1984] had already made its mark on the
community of set-theoretic topologists and the position of h among the cardinals
considered in §5 seemed a natural question to answer.
The following diagram
describes the answer:
as
/ c
s
/
O
d
ω1
/ p
/ h
/
O
b
/
O
a
O
Here, as usual, an arrow signiﬁes that the cardinal invariant at the tail of the
arrow is less than or equal to the invariant at its tip and that it is consistent that
inequality holds. The invariants b, d, h and p are treated in more detail in §5 but
the invariants s and as have not yet been mentioned.
The invariant a has a great many variants, some of which are known to be
diﬀerent from a itself and others are not. The invariant as is one of these and is
deﬁned to be the least cardinal of an almost disjoint family consisting of partial
functions from N to N. Therefore the inequality a ≤as is immediate even though
it is not indicated in the diagram. The cardinal s is implicitly due to Booth in
[1974] where he studies the sequential compactness of products of the two point

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
131
discrete space. He shows that 2λ is sequentially compact if and only if for every
family A of subsets of N of size λ there is some inﬁnite X ⊆N such that for
each A ∈A either X ⊆∗A or X ∩A is ﬁnite. The cardinal invariant is now
usually deﬁned as the least cardinal for which this combinatorial equivalence of
the sequential compactness of 2λ fails; namely s is the least cardinal of a family A
of subsets of N such that for every inﬁnite X ⊆N there is some A ∈A such that
X \A and X ∩A are both inﬁnite. Moreover, Booth also showed that non(N) ≥s
which can be compared to the inequality t ≤add(M) established much earlier by
Rothberger and discussed in §5.
The inequalities ω1 ≤p ≤h are immediate, but more interesting are h ≤b and
s ≤as. Since it involves b, it should be no surprise that the ﬁrst of the last two
inequalities is established by appealing to arguments used by Rothberger, but a
structure similar to a shattering matrix also plays a role. The argument for the
second inequality is quite subtle and can be found in [Balcar and Simon, 1989].
The problem of showing that none of these inequalities is actually an equality
is the work of several authors. However, it is worth noting the simple fact that
the invariant t studied by Rothberger is bounded by h. The fact that t < h is
consistent is proved in [Dordal, 1982] so this yields the consistency of p < h. The
consistency of s < b is obtained by adding ℵ1 of Solovay’s random reals to a model
of Martin’s Axiom and c = ℵ2 while arguments in a similar spirit (cf. [Balcar and
Simon, 1989]) yield all the other arrows except for d < a and a < s. However, the
consistency of d < a has already been discussed as a result of Shelah [2004] using
techniques developed expressly for the purpose of obtaining this strict inequality.
It had taken some twenty years to achieve this since the time of his seminal paper
[Shelah, 1984b] in which he showed the consistency of a ̸= b. In fact, in the same
paper the consistency of a < s was also proved. Noting that s < as, this also
establishes the consistency of a < as, a quite unexpected result.
While it would not be correct to attribute the notion of an ultraﬁlter to Marshall
Stone — indeed, Stanislaw Ulam [1929] showed how the Axiom of Choice can be
used to construct these objects in 1932 and even before him, in 1909, Frederic Riesz
[1909] had introduced the notion to little acclaim— it is certainly true that his
work in [Stone, 1937] was a critical point in bringing to the attention of topologists
the importance of this notion. While Stone’s work on what is now known as the
ˇCech–Stone compactiﬁcation was motivated by his earlier research on the spectral
theory of linear operators, Eduard ˇCech’s seminal paper [1937] on the subject grew
out of earlier work of Andrei Nikolaevich Tychonov in this direction, even to the
extent of continuing to use Tychonov’s β notation for the compactiﬁcation. While
ˇCech’s construction, unlike Stone’s, was not based on prime ideals in Boolean
algebras, he was certainly aware of the connections to set theory as the following
remark from [ˇCech, 1937] makes clear:
Let I denote an inﬁnite countable isolated space (e.g. the space of all
natural numbers). It is an important open problem to determine the
cardinal m of β(I). All I know about it is that 2ℵ0 ≤m ≤22ℵ0

132
Juris Stepr¯ans
It would not be long before this question was answered though. Published in the
same year, an article [1937] by Bedˇrich Posp´ıˇsil showed that in fact m = 22ℵ0 .
However, had he used Stone’s construction, Posp´ıˇsil’s answer would have been
immediately clear to ˇCech if he had also been aware of the following result of
Gregory Fichtenholz and Leonid Kanterovich [1935]: There is an independent
family of subsets of N of cardinality c. It follows that each function from c to
2 corresponds to a distinct ultraﬁlter.
These very early results on βN were a
clear signpost for set theorists to follow in the era of independence results. It
has already been mentioned that Hechler’s results on a as well as the later work
of Balcar, Pelant and Simon were clearly focused on βN \ N.
It was perfectly
natural, therefore, to consider some of the earliest constructions through the lens
of independence results.
For example, given that there is an independent family of cardinality c, in
analogy with the deﬁnition of a one can ask for the least cardinal of a maximal
independent family. This appears for the ﬁrst time in an appendix to the survey
article [Vaughan, 1990] which provides a proof due to Shelah that d ≤i and that
it is consistent that d ̸= i.
Another cardinal invariant found in [Vaughan, 1990] that has shown itself to be
quite closely connected to various notions is u, the least cardinal of a base for a
non-principal ultraﬁlter on N. Of course, the nature of points in βN \ N was one
of the ﬁrst and most obvious questions to be considered by topologists, but, one
might argue that the structure of this space is really not that closely related to
the continuum since even the cardinalities of the two objects are diﬀerent. While
this is true to some degree, the cardinal u has played an important role in the
development of our understanding of the cardinal invariants associated with the
continuum. Already Posp´ıˇsil [1939] had considered the question of showing that
there is an ultraﬁlter on N with no base of cardinality smaller than c. However,
the results of [Baumgartner and Laver, 1979] already yielded that it is consistent
that u is less than the continuum. This is quite surprising since u seems as if it
should be quite a large cardinal. Indeed there is no upper bound known for it
other than c.
While a great deal of the interest in ultraﬁlters comes from topologists study-
ing the ˇCech–Stone compactiﬁcation there are other ﬁelds that have inﬂuenced
development in this area as well. The study of abelian groups is one of them. Mo-
tivated by very diﬀerent questions than du Bois-Reymond, Ernst Specker [1950]
deﬁned growth types as ideals of non-decreasing functions from N to N. By an
ideal he meant a family of non-decreasing functions closed under pointwise sums
and dominated functions. R¨udiger G¨obel and Burkhard Wald [1979; 1980] deﬁned
an ordering on equivalence classes of these growth types and raised the question of
their number. In providing answers to some of the questions raised by G¨obel and
Wald, Andreas Blass and Claude Laﬂamme [1989] found it useful to introduce a
new cardinal invariant known as g.
A family S of inﬁnite subsets of N which is downwards closed under the ⊆∗
relation is known as groupwise dense if for every inﬁnite family of pairwise disjoint

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
133
ﬁnite subsets of N there is an inﬁnite subfamily whose union belongs to S. The
cardinal g is deﬁned to be the least cardinal of a family of groupwise dense families
whose intersection is empty. Comparing this deﬁnition to the deﬁnition of h using
shattering matrices will reveal several similarities. Indeed, Blass and Laﬂamme
[1989] remark that the inequality h ≤g is immediate. Not too much more diﬃcult
is the fact that g ≤d which establishes a connection to growth types as considered
more than a century earlier by du Bois-Reymond. In order to obtain the con-
sistency of there being only four growth types, Blass and Laﬂamme employ the
following hypothesis: u ≤g. Furthermore, they actually show that their hypoth-
esis implies that for any two ultraﬁlters U and V there is a ﬁnite-to-one function
f such that f(U) = f(V), a hypothesis known as NCF, the Near Coherence of
Filters.
NCF was introduced in [Blass, 1986], which dealt with models of arithmetic.
However, it soon turned out to be applicable to a wide variety of problems. For
example it is shown under this assumption that the ideal of compact operators
on the separable Hilbert space is the sum of two smaller ideals.
In a similar
fashion, the ˇCech–Stone compactiﬁcation of the half line is shown to have only one
composant and applications to the same sort of questions about abelian groups
— dealt with later [Blass and Laﬂamme, 1989] together with Laﬂamme — are
addressed here as well.
The consistency of NCF, however, was only established in by Blass and Shelah
in their [1987], with a simpler proof provided soon after that in their [1989]. It
is interesting to note that a key step on the road to this result was Shelah’s
construction [1982] of a model where there are no P–points. This is yet another
example of a forcing model devised to answer a topological question, but the
implications of whose techniques have had far reaching consequences on the study
of independence results about the continuum.
Specker [1950] studied the group ZN, the direct product of countably many
copies of the integers. Letting {en}∞
n=0 be the natural generators for this group,
Specker showed that for any homomorphism H : ZN →Z the value of H(en) is 0
for all but ﬁnitely many of the generators en. Moreover, he also showed that this
holds for many subgroups of ZN, all of which have cardinality c. The question then
arose of whether the cardinality of any such group must be maximal. However,
Katsuya Eda [1983] showed that this question cannot be decided in the absence of
some extra set-theoretic axioms since he could show that the minimal cardinality
of a subgroup of ZN satisfying Specker’s condition can be no less than p and no
greater than d. Later, Blass [1994] was able to improve this to show that the lower
bound p could be replaced by add(N) and the upper bound could be replaced by
b. In the course of studying the cardinal invariants associated with the Specker
phenomenon Blass introduced the notion of evasion and prediction.
A predictor consists of an inﬁnite D ⊆N and functions πd : Nd →N for d ∈D.
Such a predictor is said to predict a function f : N →N if and only if for all but
ﬁnitely many d ∈D the predictor guesses f(d) in the sense that πd(f ↾d) = f(d).
Otherwise f has evaded the predictor. For any function g : N →N — to avoid

134
Juris Stepr¯ans
trivialities we require that g(i) > 2 for all i — Blass deﬁnes eg to be the least
cardinality of a family E ⊆Q∞
i=0 g(i) such that for any predictor there is a function
in E evading it. This cardinal has inspired a great deal of subsequent work by Blass
as well as others such as Laﬂamme [1997], Brendle [1995; 2003b] and Brendle and
Shelah [2003; 1996].
An interesting aspect of these evasion cardinals is that they are parametrized by
the function g, which can be thought of as bounding the growth rates of the func-
tions being predicted. This raises the possibility of inﬁnite, indeed uncountable,
families of cardinal invariants. The fact that this many invariants can actually
be realized is a result due to Martin Goldstern and Shelah [1993] who considered
invariants deﬁned in a spirit similar to the evasion numbers of Blass. As with
the evasion numbers, the invariants of Goldstern and Shelah are parametrized by
growth rates and they show that it is consistent that uncountably many of these
parametrized invariants are all diﬀerent. Of course, this requires the continuum to
be at least ℵω1 in order to accommodate the uncountably many diﬀerent cardinal
values. Moreover, it is possible to exercise some control over the values of the
invariants providing a vast landscape of models of set theory which diﬀer for very
concrete reasons, namely the value of certain cardinal invariants of the continuum.
10
EPILOGUE
Since this history began with a list of questions occupying set-theoretic researchers
just after the ﬁrst world war, it is ﬁtting to provide a glimpse into the questions
considered important at the end of the 20th century. We are fortunate to have a
record of those questions considered important in the eyes of one of the foremost
contributors to the study of the continuum in the last half of the last century,
Saharon Shelah. In an issue of Fundamenta Mathematicae devoted to his work,
Shelah provided an introductory article [2000b] listing questions he would have
liked to have seen solved at that time. Some have been solved since then, but
others persist.
Among those is the question of the consistency of p < t. It is interesting, and
quite revealing, to see why Shelah would consider this seemingly technical question
suﬃciently important to include on his millennium list.
Indeed, he provides a
detailed discussion of this matter but, before seeing what he has to say on this it
is worth recalling that Rothberger had shown that if p = ℵ1 then t = ℵ1. Shelah
explains further:
. . . the advances in proper forcing make us “rich in forcing” for 2ℵ1 =
ℵ2, making the higher values more mysterious. . . . So, because we know
much more how to force to get 2ℵ0 = ℵ2, the independence results on
the problems of the interrelation of cardinal invariants of the continuum
have mostly dealt with relationships of two cardinals, as their values
are ∈{ℵ1, 2ℵ0}. Thus, having only two possible values {ℵ1, ℵ2}, among
any three two are equal; the Pigeonhole Principle acts against us. As

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
135
we are rich in our knowledge to force 2ℵ0 = ℵ2, naturally we are quite
poor concerning ZFC results. . . . We are not poor concerning forcing
for the Continuum Hypothesis (and are rich in ZFC). But for 2ℵ1 ≥ℵ3
we are totally lost: very poor in both directions. We would like to have
iteration theory for length ≥ω3. I tend to think good test problems
will be important in developing such iterations.
So, by Rothberger’s Theorem, the consistency of p < t is a good test problem
for iteration theory. Rephrased to avoid mention of consistency, the question of
whether p ≥t would have seemed natural and, very likely, have been an attractive
problem to the early contributors to Fundamenta. The motivation of course, even
if comprehensible, would have seemed entirely foreign. The questions these early
set-theoretic researchers dealt with could mostly be motivated by their connection
to problems in analysis. Eighty years later, though, motivation comes from a very
diﬀerent source.
Shelah mentions several other test problems. Among them is the very general
question of ﬁnding relationships between triples of the well studied cardinal invari-
ants. Certainly the iteration problem will need to be solved to have a general tool
for dealing with independence results along these lines. However, Shelah believes
that there are outright theorems waiting to be discovered, but that they “are cam-
ouﬂaged by the independent statements”. Emphasizing once more the source of
his motivation, he goes on to say that, “cardinal invariants from this perspective
are excellent excuses to ﬁnd iteration theorems”.
However, it is perhaps true that the major set-theoretic question waiting to
be resolved at the end of the twentieth century is the same one as at the start,
the value of 2ℵ0. The fact that this value can be calculated to be ℵ2 under the
Proper Forcing Axiom has already been discussed and there is a suggestion of
Hugh Woodin [2001a; 2001b; 2002] that related types of arguments might be used
to establish a true value for the continuum. A further discussion along these lines
would be far from the topic of this history, but it may be worth reﬂecting on an
earlier failed attempt in this direction by G¨odel (cf. [1995]).
G¨odel’s idea, discussed in much greater detail in [Brendle et al., 2001], was that
the conjunction of four statements would imply that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. The ﬁrst two of
these axioms have to do with a generalization of the cardinal invariant d to the
context of the cardinals ℵn. In particular he asserted the existence of a family of
functions from ωn to ωn of cardinality ℵn+1 which dominates all such functions
with respect to the partial order of domination on a coﬁnal subset of ωn, yet all of
whose initial segments form a set of cardinality ℵn. While this structure is reminis-
cent of that studied by Hausdorﬀ, Lusin, Sierpi´nski, Rothberger, Hechler and all
those that followed this line of enquiry, its behaviour, in fact, is quite diﬀerent. A
discussion of this diﬀerence would lead too far away from the continuum, but the
interested reader might consult [Koszmider, 2000] as a starting point for further
investigation.
The last axioms G¨odel invoked are familiar from the early work of Hausdorﬀ
on pantachies mentioned in §5. G¨odel hypothesized a complete scale in Rω with

136
Juris Stepr¯ans
no increasing or decreasing ω2 sequences with what G¨odel called the “Hausdorﬀ
Continuity Axiom”. The exact meaning of this is not clear, but Brendle, Larson
and Todorˇcevi´c provide three axioms, too technical to be included here, and show
that these follow from G¨odel’s hypotheses under the correct interpretation. Along
with the complete scales mentioned, sets of strong measure zero play a central
role. So does the assertion, in the spirit of Baire’s Category Theorem, that any
set of reals of cardinality ℵ3 which is the intersection of ℵ1 open sets contains a
perfect set. Brendle, Larson and Todorˇcevi´c then show that the three axioms —
axioms which would have been recognizable to Hausdorﬀ, Lusin and Sierpi´nski,
but perhaps not to Baire — imply that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2.
While G¨odel’s plan for proving that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2 must be considered a failure,
it may well be that more sophisticated arguments eventually succeed with the
more ambitious goal of establishing that some form of the Proper Forcing Axiom
is actually true.
The eﬀect of this on the study of cardinal invariants of the
continuum would be profound since all these invariants would take on the value
2ℵ0 = ℵ2. Even most questions regarding Hausdorﬀgaps, special sets of reals
and related structures would be settled if this were to be the case. Of course,
it could not be denied that the study of the cardinal structures associated with
the continuum would have been crucial in coming to this new understanding.
Nevertheless, it is possible that their study would likely become no more than a
footnote in the history of set theory — and perhaps this article will serve as that
footnote.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Research for this paper was partially supported by NSERC of Canada. The author
is grateful to Francisco Kibedi for proofreading and providing valuable comments
on a draft version of this article.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abraham and Todorˇcevi´c, 1997] U. Abraham and S. Todorˇcevi´c.
Partition properties of ω1
compatible with CH. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 152(2):165–181, 1997.
[Abraham et al., 1985] U. Abraham, M. Rubin, and S. Shelah.
On the consistency of some
partition theorems for continuous colorings, and the structure of ℵ1-dense real order types.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 29(2):123–206, 1985.
[Alexandroﬀ, 1916] P. Alexandroﬀ.
Sur la puissance des ensembles mesurables B.
Comptes
Rendus des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences. S´erie I. Math´ematique, 162:323–325, 1916.
[Avraham et al., 1978] U. Avraham, K. J. Devlin, and S. Shelah.
The consistency with CH
of some consequences of Martin’s axiom plus 2ℵ0 > ℵ1.
Israel Journal of Mathematics,
31(1):19–33, 1978.
[Baire, 1899a] R. Baire.
Sur la th´eorie des ensembles.
Comptes Rendus des S´eances de
l’Acad´emie des Sciences. S´erie I. Math´ematique, 129:946–949, 1899.
[Baire, 1899b] R. Baire. Sur les fonctions de variables r´eelles. Annali di matematica pur ed
applicata, 3:1–123, 1899.
[Baire, 1992] R. Baire.
Th´eorie des nombres irrationnels, des limites et de la continuit´e.
´Editions Jacques Gabay, Sceaux, 1992. Reprint of the 1905 original.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
137
[Balcar and Simon, 1989] B. Balcar and P. Simon. Disjoint reﬁnement. In Handbook of Boolean
algebras, Vol. 2, pages 333–388. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1989.
[Balcar et al., 1980] B. Balcar, J. Pelant, and P. Simon. The space of ultraﬁlters on N covered
by nowhere dense sets. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 110(1):11–24, 1980.
[Banach, 1931] S. Banach. ¨Uber die Bairesche Kategorie gewisser Funktionenmengen. Studia
Mathematica, 3:174–179, 1931.
[Bartoszy´nski and Judah, 1995] T. Bartoszy´nski and H. Judah. Set Theory. On the Structure
of the Real Line. A K Peters Ltd., Wellesley, MA, 1995.
[Bartoszy´nski, 1984] T. Bartoszy´nski.
Additivity of measure implies additivity of category.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 281(1):209–213, 1984.
[Bartoszy´nski, 1987] T. Bartoszy´nski. Combinatorial aspects of measure and category. Funda-
menta Mathematicae, 127(3):225–239, 1987.
[Baumgartner and Laver, 1979] J. E. Baumgartner and R. Laver. Iterated perfect-set forcing.
Annals of Mathematical Logic, 17(3):271–288, 1979.
[Baumgartner, 1976] J. E. Baumgartner. Almost-disjoint sets, the dense set problem and the
partition calculus. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 9(4):401–439, 1976.
[Baumgartner, 1983] J. E. Baumgartner. Iterated forcing. In Surveys in set theory, volume 87 of
London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, pages 1–59. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1983.
[Baumgartner, 1984] J. E. Baumgartner. Applications of the proper forcing axiom. In Handbook
of set-theoretic topology, pages 913–959. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Bell, 1981] M. G. Bell.
On the combinatorial principle P(c).
Fundamenta Mathematicae,
114(2):149–157, 1981.
[Bernstein, 1905] F. Bernstein. Die Theorie der reellen Zahlen. Deutsche Mathematische Vere-
inigung, 14:447–449, 1905.
[Bernstein, 1908] F. Bernstein.
Zur Theorie der trigonometrischen Reihe.
Berichte ¨uber
die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich-S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physische Klasse, 60:325–338, 1908.
[Besicovitch, 1934a] A. S. Besicovitch. Concentrated and rariﬁed sets of points. Acta Mathe-
matica, 62:289–300, 1934.
[Besicovitch, 1934b] A. S. Besicovitch. Correction. Acta Mathematica, 62:317–318, 1934.
[Besicovitch, 1942] A. S. Besicovitch. Relations between concentrated sets and sets possessing
Property C.
Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 38:20–23,
1942.
[Bing, 1951] R. H. Bing. Metrization of topological spaces. Canadian Journal of Mathematics.
Journal Canadien de Math´ematiques, 3:175–186, 1951.
[Blass, 2010] A. Blass. Combinatorial cardinal characteristics of the continuum. In Handbook of
Set Theory, M. Foreman and A. Kanamori, eds. Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[Blass and Laﬂamme, 1989] A. Blass and C. Laﬂamme. Consistency results about ﬁlters and
the number of inequivalent growth types. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54(1):50–56, 1989.
[Blass and Shelah, 1987] A. Blass and S. Shelah. There may be simple Pℵ1- and Pℵ2-points and
the Rudin-Keisler ordering may be downward directed. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
33(3):213–243, 1987.
[Blass and Shelah, 1989] A. Blass and S. Shelah.
Near coherence of ﬁlters. III. A simpliﬁed
consistency proof. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 30(4):530–538, 1989.
[Blass, 1986] A. Blass. Near coherence of ﬁlters. I. Coﬁnal equivalence of models of arithmetic.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 27(4):579–591, 1986.
[Blass, 1994] A. Blass.
Cardinal characteristics and the product of countably many inﬁnite
cyclic groups. Journal of Algebra, 169(2):512–540, 1994.
[Booth, 1974] D. Booth. A Boolean view of sequential compactness. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
85(2):99–102, 1974.
[Borel, 1914] ´E. Borel. Le¸cons sur la th´eorie des fonctions. Deuxi`eme ´edition. Paris, Gauthier-
Villars , 1914.
[Borel, 1919] ´E. Borel. Sur la classiﬁcation des ensembles de mesure nulle. Bulletin de la Soci´et´e
Math´ematique de France, 47:97–125, 1919.
[Brendle and Shelah, 1996] J. Brendle and S. Shelah. Evasion and prediction. II. Journal of the
London Mathematical Society. Second Series, 53(1):19–27, 1996.

138
Juris Stepr¯ans
[Brendle and Shelah, 2003] J. Brendle and S. Shelah. Evasion and prediction. IV. Strong forms
of constant prediction. Archive for Mathematical Logic, 42(4):349–360, 2003.
[Brendle et al., 2001] J. Brendle, P. Larson, and S. Todorˇcevi´c. Revisiting G¨odel’s argument for
the true power of the continuum. Circulated notes, January 2001.
[Brendle, 1995] J. Brendle. Evasion and prediction—the Specker phenomenon and Gross spaces.
Forum Mathematicum, 7(5):513–541, 1995.
[Brendle, 2003a] J. Brendle.
The almost-disjointness number may have countable coﬁnality.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 355(7):2633–2649 (electronic), 2003.
[Brendle, 2003b] J. Brendle. Evasion and prediction. III. Constant prediction and dominating
reals. Journal of the Mathematical Society of Japan, 55(1):101–115, 2003.
[Brendle, 2006] J. Brendle. Cardinal invariants of the continuum and combinatorics on uncount-
able cardinals. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 144(1-3):43–72, 2006.
[Burke, 1997] M. R. Burke. A proof of Hechler’s theorem on embedding ℵ1-directed sets coﬁnally
into (ωω, <∗). Archive for Mathematical Logic, 36(6):399–403, 1997.
[Cantor, 1884] G. Cantor. On the power of perfect sets of points. (De la puissance des ensembles
parfaits de points.). Acta Mathematica, IV, 1884.
[Cantor, 1895] G. Cantor. Sui numeri transﬁniti. Estratto di una lettera a G. Vivanti. Rivista
di Matematica Pura ed Applicata, V, 1895.
[ˇCech, 1937] E. ˇCech. On bicompact spaces. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 38(4):823–
844, 1937.
[Cohen, 1966] P. J. Cohen. Set theory and the continuum hypothesis. W. A. Benjamin, Inc.,
New York-Amsterdam, 1966.
[Cohen, 1971] P. J. Cohen.
Comments on the foundations of set theory.
In Axiomatic Set
Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, University of California, Los Angeles,
Calif., 1967), pages 9–15. American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Dauben, 1979] J. W. Dauben. Georg Cantor: His mathematics and philosophy of the inﬁnite.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1979.
[Davies, 1974] R. O. Davies. Representation of functions of two variables as sums of rectangular
functions. I. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 85:177–183, 1974.
[Devlin and Johnsbr˙aten, 1974] K. J. Devlin and H. Johnsbr˙aten.
The Souslin problem.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1974. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 405.
[Devlin and Shelah, 1978] K. J. Devlin and S. Shelah. A weak version of ♦which follows from
2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 29(2-3):239–247, 1978.
[Dordal, 1982] P. L. Dordal. Independence results concerning some combinatorial properties of
the continuum. PhD thesis, Harvard University, 1982.
[du Bois-Reymond, 1870-71] P. du Bois-Reymond. Sur la grandeur relative des inﬁnis des fonc-
tions. Annali di matematica pur ed applicata, 4:338–353, 1870-71.
[du Bois-Reymond, 1872] P. du Bois-Reymond.
A general theorem concerning the relative
growth of the inﬁnities of functions and of their derivatives. (Th´eor`eme g´en´eral concernant la
grandeur relative des inﬁnis des fonctions et de leurs d´eriv´ees.). Journal f¨ur die Reine und
Angewandte Mathematik, 1872.
[Eda, 1983] K. Eda. A note on subgroups of ZN. In Abelian group theory (Honolulu, Hawaii,
1983), volume 1006 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 371–374. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
[Eisworth and Roitman, 1999] T. Eisworth and J. Roitman. CH with no Ostaszewski spaces.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 351(7):2675–2693, 1999.
[Erd¨os, 1943] P. Erd¨os. Some remarks on set theory. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series,
44:643–646, 1943.
[Farah, 2007] I. Farah. A proof of the Σ2
1-absoluteness theorem. In Advances in logic, volume
425 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 9–22. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
RI, 2007.
[Fichtenholz and Kantorovitch, 1935] G. Fichtenholz and L. Kantorovitch. Sur les op´erations
lin´eaires dans l’espace des fonctions born´ees. Studia Mathematica, 5:69–98, 1935.
[Foreman et al., 1988a] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Martin’s maximum, saturated
ideals, and nonregular ultraﬁlters. I.
Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 127(1):1–47,
1988.
[Foreman et al., 1988b] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Martin’s maximum, saturated
ideals and nonregular ultraﬁlters. II. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 127(3):521–545,
1988.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
139
[Foreman et al., 1989] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Correction to: “Martin’s maxi-
mum, saturated ideals, and nonregular ultraﬁlters. I” Annals of Mathematics. Second Series,
129(3):651, 1989.
[Fremlin, 1984] D. H. Fremlin. Cicho´n’s diagram. Publications Math´ematiques de l’Universit´e
Pierre et Marie Curie, S´emin. Initiation Anal., 66(5), 1984.
[Fremlin, 1993] D. H. Fremlin.
Real-valued-measurable cardinals.
In Set theory of the reals
(Ramat Gan, 1991), volume 6 of Israel Math. Conf. Proc., pages 151–304. Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat Gan, 1993.
[Gispert, 1995] H. Gispert. Set theory in France before the crisis of 1905: Baire, Borel, Lebesgue
. . . and all the others. (La th´eorie des ensembles en France avant la crise de 1905: Baire, Borel,
Lebesgue . . . et tous les autres.). Revue d’Histoire des Math´ematiques, 1(1):39–81, 1995.
[G¨obel and Wald, 1979] R. G¨obel and B. Wald. Wachstumstypen und schlanke Gruppen. In
Symposia Mathematica, Vol. XXIII (Conf. Abelian Groups and their Relationship to the
Theory of Modules, INDAM, Rome, 1977), pages 201–239. Academic Press, London, 1979.
[G¨obel and Wald, 1980] R. G¨obel and B. Wald. Martin’s axiom implies the existence of certain
slender groups. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 172(2):107–121, 1980.
[G¨odel, 1940] K. G¨odel. The Consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis. Annals of Mathematics
Studies, no. 3. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1940.
[G¨odel, 1995] K. G¨odel. Collected works. Vol. III. The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press,
New York, 1995.
Unpublished essays and lectures, With a preface by Solomon Feferman,
Edited by Feferman, John W. Dawson, Jr., Warren Goldfarb, Charles Parsons and Robert M.
Solovay.
[Goldstern and Shelah, 1993] M. Goldstern and S. Shelah.
Many simple cardinal invariants.
Archive for Mathematical Logic, 32:203–221, 1993. math.LO/9205208.
[Hadamard, 1894] J. Hadamard. On the characters of convergence of series with positive terms
and on indeﬁnitely decreasing functions. (Sur les caract`eres de convergence des s´eries `a termes
positifs et sur les fonctions ind´eﬁniment croissantes.). Acta Mathematica, XVIII, 1894.
[Hardy, 1910] G. H. Hardy. Orders of inﬁnity: The ‘Inﬁnit¨arcal¨ul’ of Paul du Bois-Reymond.
Cambridge: University Press. V u. 62 S. (Nr. 12 of the Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and
Mathematical Physics.) , 1910.
[Hardy, 1924] G. H. Hardy. Orders of inﬁnity. The “Inﬁnit¨arcalc¨ul” of Paul du Bois-Reymond.
Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics. Nr. 12. Second edition. Cam-
bridge, 77 S. 8◦, 1924.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1906] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Untersuchungen ¨uber Ordnungstypen.
Berichte ¨uber die
Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich-S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physische Klasse, 58:106–169, 1906.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1907] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Untersuchungen ¨uber Ordnungstypen.
Berichte ¨uber die
Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich-S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physische Klasse, 59:84–159, 1907.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1909] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Die Graduierung nach dem Endverlauf.
Abhandlungen
der Mathematisch-Physischen Klasse der K¨oniglich-S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wis-
senschaften, 31:297–334, 1909.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1916] F. Hausdorﬀ. Die M¨achtigkeit der Borelschen Mengen. Mathematische An-
nalen, 77:430–437, 1916.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1936] F. Hausdorﬀ. Summen von ℵ1 Mengen. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 26:241–
255, 1936.
[Hausdorﬀ, 2005] F. Hausdorﬀ. Hausdorﬀon ordered sets, volume 25 of History of Mathematics.
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005. Translated from the German, edited
and with commentary by J. M. Plotkin.
[Hechler, 1971] S. H. Hechler. Classifying almost-disjoint families with applications to βN −N.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 10:413–432, 1971.
[Hechler, 1972] S. H. Hechler. Short complete nested sequences in βN\N and small maximal
almost-disjoint families. General Topology and Applications, 2:139–149, 1972.
[Hechler, 1974] S. H. Hechler. On the existence of certain coﬁnal subsets of ωω. In Axiomatic set
theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part II, University of California, Los Angeles,
Calif., 1967), pages 155–173. American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1974.
[Hilbert, 1901] D. Hilbert. Mathematische Probleme. Vortrag, gehalten auf dem internationalen
Mathematiker-Kongreß zu Paris 1900. Archiv der Mathematik und Physik, 1:213–237, 1901.

140
Juris Stepr¯ans
[Hilbert, 1902] D. Hilbert.
Mathematical problems.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 8:437–479, 1902. Translation by Maby Winton Newson.
[Hilbert, 1926] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber das Unendliche. Math. Ann., 95(1):161–190, 1926.
[Hruˇs´ak, 2001] M. Hruˇs´ak. Another ♦-like principle. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 167(3):277–
289, 2001.
[Jech, 1967] T. Jech. Non-provability of Souslin’s hypothesis. Commentationes Mathematicae
Universitatis Carolinae, 8:291–305, 1967.
[Jensen and Solovay, 1970] R. B. Jensen and R. M. Solovay. Some applications of almost dis-
joint sets. In Mathematical Logic and Foundations of Set Theory (Proc. Internat. Colloq.,
Jerusalem, 1968), pages 84–104. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
[Jones, 1937] F. Burton Jones. Concerning normal and completely normal spaces. Bull. Am.
Math. Soc., 43:671–677, 1937.
[Judah and Shelah, 1990] H. Judah and S. Shelah. The Kunen-Miller chart (lebesgue measure,
the baire property, laver reals and preservation theorems for forcing). The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 55:909–927, 1990.
[Judah et al., 1990] H. Judah, S. Shelah, and W. H. Woodin. The Borel conjecture. Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 50(3):255–269, 1990.
[Juh´asz, 1970] I. Juh´asz. Martin’s Axiom solves Ponomarev’s problem. Bulletin de l’Acad´emie
Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques,
18:71–74, 1970.
[Kanamori, 1994] A. Kanamori.
The higher inﬁnite.
Perspectives in Mathematical Logic.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994. Large cardinals in set theory from their beginnings.
[Kanamori, 1996] A. Kanamori. The mathematical development of set theory from Cantor to
Cohen. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 2(1):1–71, 1996.
[Kanamori, 2007] A. Kanamori.
Tennenbaum and set theory.
Expanded version of invited
memorial address., August 2007.
[Kanovei and Koepke, 2000] V. Kanovei and P. Koepke.
Gaps in partially ordered sets and
related problems. Draft, November 2000.
[Katˇetov, 1960] M. Katˇetov. Remarks on characters and pseudocharacters. Commentationes
Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 1(1):20–25, 1960.
[Komj´ath and Shelah, 1993/94] P. Komj´ath and S. Shelah. On uniformly antisymmetric func-
tions. Real Analysis Exchange, 19(1):218–225, 1993/94.
[K¨onig, 1905] J. K¨onig. Zum Kontinuumproblem. Math. Ann., 60:177–180, 1905.
[Koszmider, 2000] P. Koszmider. On strong chains of uncountable functions. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 118:289–315, 2000.
[Kunen and Tall, 1979] K. Kunen and F.
D. Tall.
Between Martin’s Axiom and Souslin’s
Hypothesis. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 102:173–181, 1979.
[Kunen, 1975] K. Kunen. (κ, λ∗)-gaps under MA. Unpublished notes, August 1975.
[Kunen, 1977] K. Kunen. Strong S and L spaces under MA. In Set-theoretic topology (Papers,
Inst. Medicine and Math., Ohio Univ., Athens, Ohio, 1975-1976), pages 265–268. Academic
Press, New York, 1977.
[Kunen, 1987] K. Kunen. Partitioning Euclidean space. Mathematical Proceedings of the Cam-
bridge Philosophical Society, 102:379–383, 1987.
[Kuratowski, 1948] C. Kuratowski. Topologie. I. Espaces M´etrisables, Espaces Complets. Mono-
graﬁe Matematyczne, vol. 20. Warszawa-Wroc law, 1948. 2d ed.
[Kurepa, 1935] D. Kurepa.
Ensembles ordonnes et ramiﬁes.
Publications math´ematiques de
l’Universit´e de Belgrade, 4:1–138, 1935.
[Kurepa, 1938] D. Kurepa. Ensembles lin´eaires et une classe de tableaux ramiﬁes (tableaux ram-
iﬁes de M. de Aronszajn). Publications math´ematiques de l’Universit´e de Belgrade, 6/7:129–
160, 1938.
[Laﬂamme, 1997] C. Laﬂamme. Combinatorial aspects of Fσ ﬁlters with an application to N-
sets. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 125(10):3019–3025, 1997.
[Laver, 1975] R. Laver.
On strong measure zero sets.
In Inﬁnite and ﬁnite sets (Colloq.,
Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday), vol. II, pages 1025–1027. Colloq.
Math. Soc. Jan´os Bolyai, Vol. 10. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Laver, 1976] R. Laver. On the consistency of Borel’s conjecture. Acta Mathematica, 137(3-
4):151–169, 1976.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
141
[Laver, 1979] R. Laver. Linear orders in (ω)ω under eventual dominance. In Logic Colloquium
’78 (Mons, 1978), volume 97 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages
299–302. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.
[Lebesgue, 1972] H. Lebesgue.
Oeuvres scientiﬁques (en cinq volumes). Vol. I.
Institut de
Math´ematiques de l’Universit´e de Gen`eve, Geneva, 1972.
[Lusin and Sierpi´nski, 1923] N. Lusin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un ensemble non mesurable B.
Journal de Math´ematiques Pure et Appliqu´ees, 9:2:53–72, 1923.
[Lusin, 1914] N. Lusin.
Sur un probl`eme de M. Baire.
Comptes Rendus des S´eances de
l’Acad´emie des Sciences. S´erie I. Math´ematique, 158:1268–1261, 1914.
[Lusin, 1921] N. Lusin.
Sur l’existence d’un ensemble non d´enombrable qui est de premi`ere
cat´egorie dans tout ensemble parfait. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 2:155–157, 1921.
[Lusin, 1934] N. Lusin. Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles. Comptes Rendus des S´eances de
l’Acad´emie des Sciences. S´erie I. Math´ematique, 198:1671–1674, 1934.
[Lusin, 1935] N. Lusin. Sur les ensembles analytiques nuls. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 25:109–
131, 1935.
[Lusin, 1947] N. Lusin. On subsets of the series of natural numbers. Izvestiya Akademiya Nauk
SSSR, Seriya Matematicheskaya, 11:403–410, 1947.
[Mahlo, 1913] P. Mahlo. ¨Uber Teilmengen des Kontinuums von dessen M¨achtigkeit. Leipz. Ber.,
65:283–315, 1913.
[Martin and Solovay, 1970] D. A. Martin and R. M. Solovay. Internal Cohen extensions. Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 2(2):143–178, 1970.
[Mathias, 1977] A. R. D. Mathias. Happy families. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 12(1):59–
111, 1977.
[Mazurkiewicz, 1931] S. Mazurkiewicz. Sur les fonctions non derivables. Studia Mathematica,
3:92–94, 1931.
[Miller, 1980] A. W. Miller. Covering 2ω with ω1 disjoint closed sets. In The Kleene Symposium
Proceedings, Madison, Wisconsin 1978, volume 101 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations
of Mathematics, pages 415–421. North-Holland, 1980.
[Miller, 1981] A. W. Miller.
Some properties of measure and category.
Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, 266:93–114, 1981.
[Miller, 1982a] A. W. Miller. A characterization of the least cardinal for which the Baire category
theorem fails. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 86(3):498–502, 1982.
[Miller, 1982b] A. W. Miller. Corrections and additions to ”Some properties of measure and
category”. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 271:347–348, 1982.
[Miller, 1983] A. W. Miller. Mapping a set of reals onto the reals. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 48:575–584, 1983.
[Miller, 1984a] A. W. Miller. Rational perfect set forcing. In Axiomatic set theory (Boulder,
Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 143–159. American Mathemat-
ical Society, Providence, RI, 1984.
[Miller, 1984b] A. W. Miller. Special subsets of the real line. Handbook of set-theoretic topology,
201-233 (1984)., 1984.
[Miller, 1993] A. W. Miller. Arnie Miller’s problem list. In Set theory of the reals (Ramat Gan,
1991), volume 6 of Israel Math. Conf. Proc., pages 645–654. Bar-Ilan Univ., Ramat Gan,
1993.
[Moore, 2002] J. Moore. Open colorings, the continuum and the second uncountable cardinal.
Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 130(9):2753–2759 (electronic), 2002.
[Moore et al., 2004] J. Moore, M. Hruˇs´ak, and M. Dˇzamonja. Parametrized ♦principles. Trans-
actions of the American Mathematical Society, 356(6):2281–2306 (electronic), 2004.
[Moore, 1989] G. H. Moore. Towards a history of Cantor’s continuum problem. In The history
of modern mathematics, Vol. I (Poughkeepsie, NY, 1989), pages 79–121. Academic Press,
Boston, MA, 1989.
[Morayne, 1987] M. Morayne. On diﬀerentiability of Peano type functions. I, II. Colloquium
Mathematicum, 53(1):129–132, 133–135, 1987.
[Osofsky, 1968] B. L. Osofsky. Homological dimension and the continuum hypothesis. Transac-
tions of the American Mathematical Society, 132:217–230, 1968.
[Ostaszewski, 1976] A. J. Ostaszewski. On countably compact, perfectly normal spaces. Journal
of the London Mathematical Society. Second Series, 14:505–516, 1976.

142
Juris Stepr¯ans
[Oxtoby, 1980] J. C. Oxtoby. Measure and category. A survey of the analogies between topolog-
ical and measure spaces. 2nd ed. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 2. New York - Heidelberg
- Berlin: Springer-Verlag. X, 106 p. , 1980.
[Pawlikowski, 1985] J. Pawlikowski. Lebesgue measurability implies Baire property. Bulletin
des Sciences Math´ematiques. 2e S´erie, 109(3):321–324, 1985.
[Posp´ıˇsil, 1937] B. Posp´ıˇsil.
Remark on bicompact spaces.
Annals of Mathematics. Second
Series, 38(4):845–846, 1937.
[Posp´ıˇsil, 1939] B. Posp´ıˇsil. On bicompact spaces. Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk, 270:1–16,
1939.
[Raisonnier and Stern, 1983] J. Raisonnier and J. Stern.
Mesurabilit´e et propri´et´e de Baire.
Comptes Rendus des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences. S´erie I. Math´ematique, 296(7):323–
326, 1983.
[Raisonnier and Stern, 1985] J. Raisonnier and J. Stern. The strength of measurability hypothe-
ses. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 50:337–349, 1985.
[Riesz, 1909] F. Riesz. Stetigkeitsbegriﬀund abstrakte Mengenlehre. In Atti del IV Congresso
Internazionale dei Matematici (Roma, 6-11 Aprile 1908), volume 2, pages 18–24. Interna-
tional Congress of Mathematicians, 1909.
[Rogers, 1970] C. A. Rogers. Hausdorﬀmeasures. Cambridge University Press, London, 1970.
[Ros lanowski and Shelah, 1999] A. Ros lanowski and S. Shelah. Norms on possibilities. I. Forcing
with trees and creatures. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, 141(671):xii+167,
1999.
[Ros lanowski and Shelah, 2004] A. Ros lanowski and S. Shelah. Sweet & sour and other ﬂavours
of ccc forcing notions. Archive for Mathematical Logic, 43(5):583–663, 2004.
[Ros lanowski and Shelah, 2006] A. Ros lanowski and S. Shelah. Measured creatures. Israel Jour-
nal of Mathematics, 151:61–110, 2006.
[Rothberger, 1938a] F. Rothberger. Eine ¨Aquivalenz zwischen der Kontinuumhypothese und der
Existenz der Lusinschen und Sierpi´nskischen Mengen. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 30:215–
217, 1938.
[Rothberger, 1938b] F. Rothberger. Une remarque concernant l’hypoth`ese du continu. Funda-
menta Mathematicae, 31:224–226, 1938.
[Rothberger, 1939] F. Rothberger. Sur un ensemble toujours de premiere categorie qui est de-
pourvu de la propri´et´e λ. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 32:294–300, 1939.
[Rothberger, 1941] F. Rothberger. Sur les familles indenombrables de suites de nombres naturels
et les probl`emes concernant la propri´et´e C.
Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society, 37:109–126, 1941.
[Rothberger, 1948] F. Rothberger. On some problems of Hausdorﬀand of Sierpi´nski. Funda-
menta Mathematicae, 35:29–46, 1948.
[Rothberger, 1952a] F. Rothberger. On the property C and a problem of Hausdorﬀ. Canadian
Journal of Mathematics. Journal Canadien de Math´ematiques, 4:111–116, 1952.
[Rothberger, 1952b] F. Rothberger.
A remark on the existence of a denumerable base for a
family of functions. Canadian Journal of Mathematics. Journal Canadien de Math´ematiques,
4:117–119, 1952.
[Sacks, 1971] G. E. Sacks. Forcing with perfect closed sets. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, University of California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967),
pages 331–355. American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Scheepers, 1993] M. Scheepers. Gaps in ωω. In Set theory of the reals (Ramat Gan, 1991),
volume 6 of Israel Math. Conf. Proc., pages 439–561. Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 1993.
[Scott, 1961] D. Scott.
Measurable cardinals and constructible sets.
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie
Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques,
9:521–524, 1961.
[Shelah, 1974] S. Shelah. Inﬁnite Abelian groups, Whitehead problem and some constructions.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 18:243–256, 1974.
[Shelah, 1982] S. Shelah. Proper forcing, volume 940 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1982.
[Shelah, 1984a] S. Shelah. Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 48:1–47, 1984.
[Shelah, 1984b] S. Shelah. On cardinal invariants of the continuum. In Axiomatic set theory
(Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 183–207. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1984.

History of the Continuum in the 20th Century
143
[Shelah, 2000a] S. Shelah. Covering of the null ideal may have countable coﬁnality. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 166(1-2):109–136, 2000. Saharon Shelah’s anniversary issue.
[Shelah, 2000b] S. Shelah. On what I do not understand (and have something to say). I. Fun-
damenta Mathematicae, 166(1-2):1–82, 2000. Saharon Shelah’s anniversary issue.
[Shelah, 2004] S. Shelah. Two cardinal invariants of the continuum (d < a) and FS linearly
ordered iterated forcing. Acta Mathematica, 192(2):187–223, 2004.
[Sierpi´nski, 1919] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un th´eor`eme ´equivalent `a l’hypoth`ese du continu. Bulletin
international de l’Acad´emie des sciences de Cracovie, Classe des sciences math´ematiques et
naturelles., 1919:1–3, 1919.
[Sierpi´nski, 1924] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur l’hypoth´ese du continu (2ℵ0 = ℵ1). Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 5:177-187, 1924.
[Sierpi´nski, 1928a] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un ensemble non d´enombrable dont toute image continue
est de premiere cat´egorie. Bulletin de l’Academie Polonaise des Sciences (A), 1928:455–458,
1928.
[Sierpi´nski, 1928b] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une d´ecomposition d’ensembles. Monatshefte f¨ur Mathe-
matik, 35:239–242, 1928.
[Sierpi´nski, 1928c] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une ensemble non d´enombrable, dont toute image continue
est de mesure nulle. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 11:302–304, 1928.
[Sierpi´nski, 1934a] W. Sierpi´nski.
Hypoth`ese du continu.
Monogr. mat. 4. Warszawa-Lwow:
Subwencji Funduszu Kultur. Narodowej. V, 192 S. , 1934.
[Sierpi´nski, 1934b] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur la dualit´e entre la premiere categorie et la mesure nulle.
Fundamenta Mathematicae, 22:276–280, 1934.
[Sierpi´nski, 1934c] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur les ensembles partout de deuxi`eme categorie. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 22:1–3, 1934.
[Sierpi´nski, 1935] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une hypoth´ese de M. Lusin. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
25: 132–135, 1935.
[Sierpi´nski, 1937] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une propri´et´e additive d’ensembles. Comptes Rendus de
la Soci´et´e des Sciences de Varsovie, 30:257–259, 1937.
[Sierpi´nski, 1938] W. Sierpi´nski. Remarque sur le probl`eme de l’invariance topologique de la
propri´et´e (C). Fundamenta Mathematicae, 30:56–58, 1938.
[Sierpi´nski, 1939] W. Sierpi´nski.
Sur les ensembles concentres.
Fundamenta Mathematicae,
32:301–305, 1939.
[Sierpi´nski, 1965] W. Sierpi´nski.
Cardinal and ordinal numbers. (Monograﬁe Matematyczne.
Tom 34.) 2nd ed. revised. Warszawa: Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe. 491 p. , 1965.
[Solomon, 1977] R. C. Solomon.
Families of sets and functions.
Czechoslovak Mathematical
Journal, 27(102)(4):556–559, 1977.
[Solovay and Tennenbaum, 1971] R. M. Solovay and S. Tennenbaum. Iterated Cohen extensions
and Souslin’s problem. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 94:201–245, 1971.
[Solovay, 1969] R. M. Solovay. On the cardinality of P1
2 sets of reals. In Foundations of Math-
ematics (Symposium Commemorating Kurt G¨odel, Columbus, Ohio, 1966), pages 58–73.
Springer, New York, 1969.
[Solovay, 1970] R. M. Solovay. A model of set-theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue
measurable. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series, 92:1–56, 1970.
[Solovay, 1971] R. M. Solovay. Real-valued measurable cardinals. In Axiomatic set theory (Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, University of California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967),
pages 397–428. American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Specker, 1950] E. Specker. Additive Gruppen von Folgen ganzer Zahlen. Portugaliae Mathe-
matica, 9:131–140, 1950.
[Stepr¯ans, 1999] J. Stepr¯ans.
Decomposing Euclidean space with a small number of smooth
sets. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 351(4):1461–1480, 1999.
[Stone, 1937] M. H. Stone.
Applications of the theory of Boolean rings to general topology.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 41(3):375–481, 1937.
[Talagrand, 1980] M. Talagrand. Compacts de fonctions mesurables et ﬁltres non mesurables.
Studia Mathematica, 67:13–43, 1980.
[Tall, 1969] F. D. Tall. Set-theoretic consistency results and topological theorems concerning the
normal Moore space conjecture and related problems. PhD thesis, University of Wisconsin,
1969.
[Tarski, 1928] A. Tarski. Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles en sous-ensembles presque dis-
joints. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 12:188–205, 1928.

144
Juris Stepr¯ans
[Tennenbaum, 1968] S. Tennenbaum. Souslin’s problem. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 59:60–63, 1968.
[Todorˇcevi´c, 1984] S. Todorˇcevi´c. A note on the proper forcing axiom. In Axiomatic set theory
(Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 209–218. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1984.
[Todorcevic, 1987] S. Todorcevic. Partitioning pairs of countable ordinals. Acta Mathematica,
159:261–294, 1987.
[Todorcevic, 1988] S. Todorcevic. Oscillations of real numbers. In Logic colloquium ’86, (Hull,
1986), volume 124 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 325–331.
North-Holland, 1988.
[Todorˇcevi´c, 1989] S. Todorˇcevi´c. Partition problems in topology, volume 84 of Contemporary
Mathematics. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1989.
[Todorˇcevi´c, 1993] S. Todorˇcevi´c. Conjectures of Rado and Chang and cardinal arithmetic. In
Finite and inﬁnite combinatorics in sets and logic (Banﬀ, AB, 1991), volume 411 of NATO
Advanced Science Institutes Series C: Mathematical and Physical Sciences, pages 385–398.
Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1993.
[Todorcevic, 1998] S. Todorˇcevi´c. Oscillations of sets of integers. Advances in Applied Mathe-
matics, 20(2):220–252, 1998.
[Todorˇcevi´c, 1997] S. Todorˇcevi´c.
Comparing the continuum with the ﬁrst two uncountable
cardinals. Dalla Chiara, Maria Luisa (ed.) et al., Logic and scientiﬁc methods. Volume one of
the proceedings of the tenth international congress of logic, methodology and philosophy of
science, Florence, Italy, August 19–25, 1995. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Synth.
Libr. 259, 145-155 (1997)., 1997.
[Truss, 1977] J. Truss. Sets having calibre ℵ1. In Logic Colloquium ’76 (Oxford, 1976), vol-
ume 87 of Studies in Logic and Found. Math., pages 595–612. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1977.
[Tukey, 1940] J. W. Tukey. Convergence and Uniformity in Topology. Annals of Mathematics
Studies, no. 2. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1940.
[Ulam, 1929] S. Ulam. Concerning functions of sets. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 14:231–233,
1929.
[Ulam, 1930] S. Ulam. Zur Maßtheorie in der allgemeinen Mengenlehre. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 16:140–150, 1930.
[Ulam, 1933] S. Ulam.
¨Uber gewisse Zerlegungen von Mengen.
Fundamenta Mathematicae,
20:221–223, 1933.
[van Douwen, 1984] E. K. van Douwen. The integers and topology. In Handbook of set-theoretic
topology, pages 111–167. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Vaughan, 1990] J. E. Vaughan. Small uncountable cardinals and topology. In Open problems in
topology, pages 195–218. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1990. With an appendix by S. Shelah.
[Vojt´aˇs, 1993] P. Vojt´aˇs. Generalized Galois-Tukey-connections between explicit relations on
classical objects of real analysis. In Set theory of the reals (Ramat Gan, 1991), volume 6 of
Israel Math. Conf. Proc., pages 619–643. Bar-Ilan Univ., Ramat Gan, 1993.
[Vopˇenka and Hrb´aˇcek, 1967] P. Vopˇenka and K. Hrb´aˇcek.
The consistency of some theo-
rems on real numbers. Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences
Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques, 15:107–111, 1967.
[Woodin, 1999] W. Hugh Woodin. The axiom of determinacy, forcing axioms, and the nonsta-
tionary ideal, volume 1 of de Gruyter Series in Logic and its Applications. Walter de Gruyter
& Co., Berlin, 1999.
[Woodin, 2001a] W. Hugh Woodin.
The continuum hypothesis. I.
Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 48(6):567–576, 2001.
[Woodin, 2001b] W. Hugh Woodin. The continuum hypothesis. II. Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 48(7):681–690, 2001.
[Woodin, 2002] W. Hugh Woodin. Correction: “The continuum hypothesis. II”. Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, 49(1):46, 2002.

INFINITE COMBINATORICS
Jean A. Larson
CONTENTS
1
INTRODUCTION
146
1.1
Overview of the history of orderings
148
1.2
Overview of the history of Ramsey theory
153
2
1900–1930: BEGINNINGS
156
2.1
Hausdorﬀ
159
2.2
1910–1920: Emerging schools
163
2.3
1920–1930: Early structural results
168
2.4
Ramsey and van der Waerden
175
3
1930–1940: EARLY RAMIFICATIONS
177
3.1
Extensions
179
3.2
Erd˝os and Rado
181
3.3
Jones
184
3.4
Kurepa
186
4
1940–1950: PIONEERING PARTITION RESULTS
193
4.1
Combinatorial tools
194
4.2
Ordered sets and their structure
195
4.3
Around Suslin’s Problem
200
4.4
Ramsey theory
204
5
1950–1960: FOUNDATION OF THE PARTITION CALCULUS
210
5.1
The partition calculus
212
5.2
Applications of Suslin lines
221
5.3
Ordered sets, structure and mappings
224
5.4
The Regressive Function Theorem
225
6
1960–1970: FORCING, TREES AND PARTITIONS
227
6.1
The Halpern–L¨auchli theorem
231
6.2
Countable height trees
233
6.3
Suslin’s Problem revisited
237
6.4
Martin’s Axiom and diamond principles
241
6.5
More on uncountable trees
245
6.6
Transversals and decidability
248
6.7
Partition calculus classics
249
6.8
Inﬁnitary partition relations
253
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2011 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

146
Jean A. Larson
7
1970–1980: STRUCTURES AND FORCING
258
7.1
Combinatorial principles
259
7.2
Transversals and cardinal arithmetic
262
7.3
Partition relations on cardinals and ordinals
263
7.4
Ramsey theory for trees
272
7.5
Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem
273
7.6
Inﬁnitary partition relations
276
7.7
Structure of trees
277
7.8
Linear and quasi-orders
283
8
1980–1990: CODIFICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS
288
8.1
Set-theoretic topology
290
8.2
Partition relations
292
8.3
Structural partition relations
297
8.4
Partial order, not trees
302
8.5
Tree results
302
8.6
Linear orders
308
8.7
Other combinatorial results
308
9
1990–2000: A SAMPLING
310
9.1
Partition calculus results
311
9.2
Linear and partial orders
320
9.3
Trees
321
9.4
Combinatorial principles
323
10
POSTSCRIPT
324
1
INTRODUCTION
There is a tension in mathematics between generalization and description in con-
crete terms.
Cantor’s extension of number to the transﬁnite is an example of
generalization, and the pull of generalization and the counterbalancing forces are
described in the passage that concludes with a famous declaration [Cantor, 1883,
545], “das Wesen der Mathematik liegt gerade in ihrer Freiheit.”1
These principles, I think, do not represent a danger for science as some
have suggested: ﬁrst, the conditions under which new numbers can be
generated leave little space for arbitrariness; second, every mathemat-
ical construct comes with a natural corrective; if it is impractical or
uninspiring it will be dropped due to lack of impact. Conversely, any
unnecessary constraint on the mathematical research impetus carries
the far greater risk—the more so since there is no scientiﬁc justiﬁcation
for it; for the essence of mathematics is its lack of constraints.2
1The quote has been variously translated, e.g. “the essence of mathematics resides in its
freedom.” This version is the one I ﬁrst encountered as part of a mural by art students at the
University of Florida, and is the one I will be using in the postscript.
2(The above translation of the following paragraph was made by J¨urg Peters of the University
of Florida. When asked why he had translated Freiheit as lack of constraints rather than freedom
he said he felt that Cantor’s notion of free was like that of free groups and that lack of constraints
better captured that sense.) Es ist, wie ich glaube, nicht n¨othig in diesen Grunds¨atzen irgendeine

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
147
Concrete structure may be sought through classiﬁcation schemes, in basis prob-
lems, in universal structures, and especially in the search for and expectation of
local uniformity, regions of simplicity, and inescapable structure. This aspect is
captured by the following quote, most often used in connection with Ramsey the-
ory: “complete disorder is impossible”. This short sentence is embedded in the
following quote from Motzkin [1967]:3
The inﬂuence on mathematics of its two neighbors, physics and logic, is
sometimes opposite or, at least, complementary. Whereas the entropy
theorems of probability theory and mathematical physics imply that, in
a large universe, disorder is probable, certain combinatorial theorems
show that complete disorder is impossible. Already the “pigeon-hole
principle” —out of t + 1 objects of t kinds, at least two must be of the
same kind—can be interpreted as saying that, while no 2-set (set of
two objects) in the given (t + 1)-set needs to be composed of objects
of diﬀerent kind (however probable that may be), at least one 2-set of
objects of the same kind must occur. A sophisticated generalization of
this principle was initiated in [7] by the mathematical logician Ramsey.
The neighbors most relevant to our study are logic and other areas of mathematics.
From logic we see that opposite or complementary results may be obtained by
extending our basic set-theoretic assumptions in diﬀerent ways to get consistency
results for diﬀerent aspects of the combinatorial enterprise.
Motivated by the
Todorcevic paper Basis problems in combinatorial set theory [1998a], we shall be
especially interested in what he calls critical members of classes S of interest,
of which Todorcevic wrote: “Critical objects are almost always some canonical
members of S simple to describe and visualize.”
The Pigeonhole Principle,4 which was mentioned in the Motzkin quote, is our
ﬁrst example of an assertion of the lack of disorder. It is a fundamental idea that
Gefahr f¨ur die Wissenschaft zu bef¨urchten, wie dies von Vielen geschieht; einerseits sind die
bezeichneten Bedingungen, unter welchen die Freiheit der Zahlenbildung allein ge¨ubt werden
kann, derartige, dass sie der Willk¨ur einen ¨aussertst geringen Spielraum lassen; dann aber tr¨agt
auch jeder mathematische Begriﬀdas n¨othige Correctiv in sich selbst einher; ist er unfruchtbar
oder unzweckm¨assig, so zeigt er es sehr bald durch seine Unbrauchbarkeit und er wird alsdann,
wegen mangelnden Erfolgs, fallen gelassen. Dagegen scheint mir aber jede ¨uberﬂ¨ussige Einengung
des mathematischen Forschungstriebes eine viel gr¨ossere Gefahr mit sich zu bringen und eine um
so gr¨ossere, als daf¨ur aus dem Wesen der Wissenschaft wirklich keinerlei Rechtfertigung gezogen
werden kann; denn das Wesen der Mathematik liegt gerade in ihrer Freiheit.
3Hans J¨urgen Pr¨omel [2005, 3] used the short quote as a theme in the life of Walter Deu-
ber. Theodore S. Motzkin (1908 – 1970) spent the later part of his career at the University of
California, Los Angeles.
4An early use of the English “pigeonhole principle” occurs in Raphael Robinson’ paper [1941]
and the ﬁrst mention found by searching MathSciNet on December 8, 2010 for the word “pigeon”
is the Erd˝os-Rado paper [1956], where “pigeon-hole principle” is oﬀered as a translation of “the
box argument” or “the chest of drawers argument” with “Schubfachprinzip” in parenthesis,
and attributed (incorrectly) to Dedekind.
Those familiar with pigeon hole desks, sometimes
used for sorting letters, recognize the image that almost surely inspired this translation, but
those unfamiliar with them may think of the pigeon houses of Iran and Egypt, with their many
entrances, as is suggested by one Italian translation, principio da casa dos pombos, which appears

148
Jean A. Larson
has been around for a long time, and the principle itself is attributed to Dirichlet
in 1834, where he used the name Schubfachprinzip.5
These themes play out in this decade-by-decade review of inﬁnite combinatorics
in the 20th Century. The foci are the study of orderings, especially trees, and Ram-
sey theory, especially the partition calculus. Along the way, results about almost
disjoint sets, set mappings, transversals, and regressive functions are discussed,
and a wide variety of combinatorial tools are mentioned as they come into play.
Lists of a variety of results are brieﬂy described to capture the breadth and ﬂavors
of diﬀerent decades. Occasionally, conferences and applications to or from inﬁnite
combinatorics are described to indicate some of the ways in which the ﬁeld has
beneﬁted by interactions with communities of mathematicians in ﬁnite combina-
torics, model theory, topology, and other aspects of set theory, including large
cardinals and forcing.
My goal in writing this chapter was to be inclusive, that is, to acknowledge
multiple discoveries, rediscoveries,6 and inventions of ideas. I apologize in advance
for the omissions and incorrect statements that surely appear in this wide ranging
survey. I have not concerned myself greatly about who had the ﬁrst seed leading to
each discovery, nor with assessing the quality of the variety of contributions. Let
me state my criteria for attribution of results: (1) they must be directly stated;
(2) they must be proved and published in a reputable journal, or in rare cases
vetted by someone other than the author or explicitly ascribed by others, usually
when the idea of proof has been generalized. This approach is informed by having
listened to Paul Erd˝os describe how he decided at what point and to whom money
should be awarded for the solutions to certain of his problems.
1.1
Overview of the history of orderings
A broad overview of the history of orderings starts with foundational work on
cardinal and ordinal numbers, including the Schr¨oder-Bernstein Equivalence theo-
rem, fundamentals of cardinal and ordinal arithmetic, and Zermelo’s Well-Ordering
Theorem. An early treatment in English was Huntington’s book on the continuum
as a type of order [1905c].
on Miller’s site (see the next footnote). It would not be surprising if a perusal of British popular
articles on mathematics and mathematical puzzles turned up much earlier references. Literary
references to the concept go back still further, with an example dating to the 1600s appearing
on http://pballew.blogspot.com/2009/06/updating-history-of-pigeon-hole-theorem.html.
5It is diﬃcult to ascertain the ﬁrst usage of any idea, symbol or word. The web page for letter
P http://jeﬀ560.tripod.com/p.html of JeﬀMiller’s site on Earliest Known Uses of Some of the
Words of Mathematics, downloaded on December 9, 2010 makes a case for Dirichlet’s priority.
6At the Scottish Book conference held in Denton, Texas in 1979, Paul Erd˝os [1981, 36] shared
his perspective on rediscovery: “Ulam and I settled many of these questions long ago, but we
never got around to publishing our results. These results were rediscovered and published by
the Indian mathematician B. V. Rao; when Rao sent me a preprint I urged him to publish.
Naturally, I did not tell him that Ulam and I had already done the work. Eventually he found
out, however, and asked me why I hadn’t said anything about it. I replied that this was the
one respect in which I did not want to imitate Gauss, who had a nasty habit of ‘putting down’
younger mathematicians by telling them he had long ago obtained their supposedly new results.”

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
149
The ﬁrst systematic study of linear and partial orderings was carried out by
Hausdorﬀ, who set the stage at the beginning of century with his ﬁrst mathematical
paper [1901] in which he generalized ordinals. He investigated the family αM of
functions from an ordinal number α into a linearly ordered set M under various
orderings including the lexicographic ordering and eventual domination. Hausdorﬀ
identiﬁed critical elements, found bases, generating sets, universal linear orders7
for scattered linear orderings of bounded cardinality, showed every partial order
has a maximal well-ordered subset, and set up and studied a classiﬁcation scheme
for linear orders that led him to identify critical types, such as what have come to
be known as Hausdorﬀand Rothberger gaps.8
In the decade 1910–1920, the Moscow school, founded by Egorov and Lusin,
was put on the map by results like Lusin’s CH construction of an uncountable set
of reals whose intersection with every meager set is countable, Alexandroﬀ’s proof
that every uncountable Borel set includes a perfect set (independently found by
Hausdorﬀ), and Suslin’s construction of a non-Borel analytic set. Moore developed
postulates for analysis-situ or point-set theory that led to the development of the
Texas school of topology. They were the initial source of the axioms he used in
his distinctive teaching style: he doled out axioms, a few at a time, and guided
the students to deduce consequences from them. Sierpi´nski published An Outline
of Set Theory [1912], an early systematic treatment of set theory, and worked on
consequences and equivalences of the Continuum Hypothesis. Hausdorﬀwrote an
inﬂuential set theory book, Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre [1914], which included
some of his work on linear and partial orders and introduced topology in terms of
neighborhoods. Subsequent editions omitted most of the material on orderings in
favor of Borel sets, analytic sets and Baire functions, and his pioneering work on
ordered sets faded into obscurity for a time.
In the 1920’s, mathematics ﬂourished in Poland with schools in Lw´ow (Ba-
nach, Steinhaus, Ulam) and Warsaw, where Janiszewski, Mazurkiewicz, Sierpi´nski
founded Fundamenta Mathematicae, an international journal which focused on
foundations, point sets and functions and whose ﬁrst issue appeared in 1920.
That issue included a problem (rephrased below in modern language) that was
inﬂuential in the theory of order and allied areas across the century.
Suslin’s Problem:
Must every complete, dense linearly ordered set
without endpoints for which every pairwise disjoint set of intervals is
countable be a copy of the real line?
Also in the 1920’s, D´enes K˝onig, working within a graph-theoretic perspec-
tive, proved the ﬁrst result about inﬁnite trees, now known as K¨onig’s Lemma
or K¨onig’s Inﬁnity Lemma.9 Moore constructed his automobile road space essen-
tially using the complete binary tree of sequences of zeros and ones of length ≤ω.
7A linear order (P, <) is universal for a class K of linear orders if (P, <) belongs to K and
every element of K is order-embeddable into (P, <).
8See the chapters by Kojman and Stepr¯ans for more on gaps.
9K¨onig’s Theorem refers to the cardinal inequality of D´enes K˝onig’s father Gyula, who pub-
lished under the name Julius K˝onig.

150
Jean A. Larson
Urysohn proved that every ordered set whose increasing chains and decreasing
chains are at most countable has power at most the continuum. Sierpi´nski intro-
duced almost disjoint sets which he and Tarski investigated, and von Neumann
introduced his representation of Cantor’s ordinal numbers and put transﬁnite re-
cursion on a ﬁrm foundation.
In the 1930’s, Marczewski proved that all partial orders can be extended to total
(linear) orders; and Mostowski constructed a denumerable partial order universal10
for countable partial orderings. Kurepa made a systematic study of uncountable
partial orders, especially trees in the wider framework of ramiﬁed sets. He iden-
tiﬁed the key parameters for a structural analysis of uncountable trees: height,
supremum of the sizes of the levels, and cardinality of the set of branches whose
length is the height of the tree. In his thesis, he developed the framework within
which Aronszajn constructed the ﬁrst Aronszajn tree.11 Rather than include Aron-
szajn’s construction, Kurepa gave his own construction of an Aronszajn tree as a
subtree of σQ, the non-empty bounded well-ordered sets of rationals under end-
extension. He extracted the combinatorial content of Suslin’s Problem when he
showed that a negative answer was equivalent to the existence of a Suslin tree.12
He constructed the ﬁrst special Aronszajn tree, i.e. one which is a countable union
of antichains. The distinction was later recognized as a critical one. Kurepa also
showed that Aronszajn trees are special if and only if they have a strictly in-
creasing map into the rational numbers. With his First Miraculous Problem, he
started the study of isomorphism types of Aronszajn trees. He studied partial
order more generally, in particular monotone functions on them, and proved his
Fundamental Relation, an inequality for partial orders bounding the cardinality
of the underlying set in terms of the powers of their chains and antichains.
A special Aronszajn tree is implicit in the 1933 construction by Jones of a
Moore space which is not metrizable, but this construction was not announced or
published until much later. Jones proved his metrization theorem and introduced
the Normal Moore Space Conjecture in [1937], which stimulated research related
to trees by topologists.
In the 1940’s, Dushnik and Miller introduced a notion of dimension for par-
tial orders, investigated endomorphisms of linearly ordered sets, constructed an
uncountable rigid set of real numbers, and gave conditions that guarantee that a
partial order has a large linearly ordered subset. Kurepa proved that every un-
countable subset of σQ includes an uncountable antichain. Sierpi´nski constructed
a family of 2c many pairwise non-isomorphic linear orderings each of the cardinality
c of the continuum. Erd˝os and Tarski generalized the notion of almost disjointness
to partial orders and applied their results to questions related to Kurepa’s work.
The ﬁrst steps were taken toward the development of a theory of well-quasi-orders
10A partial order (P, <) is universal for a class K of partial orders if (P, <) belongs to K and
every partial order in K has an order and incomparability preserving embedding into (P, <).
11An Aronszajn tree is a tree of height ω1, all of whose levels are countable which has no
uncountable branch.
12A Suslin tree is a tree of height ω1 in which every branch and every antichain is countable.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
151
(wqos). Fra¨ıss´e’s conjecture that there is no inﬁnite strictly decreasing sequence
of denumerable order types under the relation of order embeddability became a
motivating question in this area. Specker generalized the work of Aronszajn and
Kurepa by using GCH to construct κ+-Aronszajn trees for regular κ. Kurepa fo-
cused attention on trees of height ω1 with more than ℵ1 branches, now known as
Kurepa trees, and continued the study of subtrees of σQ and monotone mappings
into Q and R. Knaster introduced what has come to be known as the Property
of Knaster and proved that for topological spaces this property is equivalent to
being separable,13 while Marczewski asked if the countable chain condition im-
plies the Property of Knaster. Miller and Sierpi´nski came up with equivalences
in terms of partial orders to the existence of a Suslin line, seemingly unaware of
Kurepa’s equivalence with the existence of Suslin trees, and Maharam used the
existence or non-existence of Suslin continua in her investigation of the existence
or non-existence of measures on countably complete Boolean algebras, in essence,
constructing a Suslin tree from a Suslin continuum as part of one of her arguments.
In the 1950’s, interest in Suslin lines and their applications continued: Rudin
constructed a Dowker space from a Suslin line; Kurepa showed that the Cartesian
square of a Suslin line (level-wise product) is not the countable union of antichains,
i.e. does not have the countable chain condition. Sierpi´nski, Shepherdson, Gins-
burg and Johnston, among others, investigated the structure of linear and partial
orderings under embeddability. Bing made progress on the Normal Moore Space
Conjecture by proving that if there is a Q-set, then there is a separable non-
metrizable Moore space.
In the 1960’s, the introduction of forcing, Martin’s Axiom and the combinatorial
principle ♦and its variants led to an explosion of results, as did the detailed
analysis of the ﬁne structure of the constructible universe.
By the end of the
decade, there were consistency and independence results for Kurepa and Suslin
trees, and it was known that, under CH, there are many isomorphism types of
Aronszajn trees. The decade featured a catalog of examples of well-quasi-orders
(wqos), the invention of better-quasi-orders (bqos) and the study of their closure
properties. In particular, the following families of structures were shown to be wqos
under structure-preserving embeddings: trees (Kruskal for ﬁnite, Nash-Williams
for inﬁnite) and σ-scattered linear orders (Laver).
Hanf, building on work by
Erd˝os, showed that the generalization to regular uncountable cardinals of K¨onig’s
Lemma, i.e. the tree property, is equivalent to a partition property. Halpern and
L¨auchli proved a partition theorem for products of ﬁnite trees, and an analogous
theorem for inﬁnite perfect trees was proved independently (and later) by Laver.
In the 1970’s, questions about rigidity, automorphisms and other structural
properties of Aronszajn trees and Suslin trees were investigated under various
hypotheses. While the concept of special tree dates back to the 1930’s, the use of
the word “special” for this concept entered the language in the 1970’s. Consistency
and independence results were proved on the existence or non-existence of special
Aronszajn trees and their generalizations to successor cardinals; such results were
13A space is separable if it has a countable dense subset.

152
Jean A. Larson
also proved for trees which have a strictly increasing map into the reals, and for
combinations of the various trees under consideration, including Kurepa trees.
Milliken proved a Ramsey theorem for ﬁnitely branching trees. Basis questions
for uncountable linear orders were studied and consistency was shown for the
statement that all ℵ1-dense sets of reals are isomorphic. A linear order of size ℵ1
universal for orders of size ℵ1 was shown to be consistent with 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. Shelah
constructed a Countryman line, an important example of an uncountable linear
order.
In the 1980’s, Todorcevic surveyed work on trees from combinatorial and set-
theoretic perspectives.
The elegance of his presentation drew a wide audience
for this work.
Work continued on exploring consistent possibilities for various
types of trees, now looking for results for trees on multiple cardinals, or with
required or forbidden types of subtrees.
The structure of trees was examined
through a variety of lenses: a notion of base, club isomorphism, club embeddability,
nearness, existence of a universal Aronszajn tree for club embeddability. Shelah
used a complex combinatorial argument to show that adding a Cohen real also
adds a Suslin tree; Todorcevic later came up with an elegant construction as
part of his introduction of a family of trees constructed from coherent mappings
that have become standard examples in the subject. Existence and non-existence
of κ+-Suslin trees were proved for a variety of values of κ in the presence of
diﬀerent values for the continuum. Baumgartner surveyed work on uncountable
linear orders, prompting further work in this area. For example, two ℵ1-dense sets
of reals were constructed for which provably there is no C1 isomorphism.
In the 1990’s, several consistency results for the existence and non-existence of
λ-Aronszajn trees for λ ≥ω2 were found. Cardinality conditions and combinatorial
assumptions were found that entail the existence of Suslin trees on successor car-
dinals larger than ℵ1 which are immune to specialization in cardinal and coﬁnality
preserving extensions. A Suslin tree was constructed from ♣and the assumption
that the meager idea M has a base of size ℵ1. The tree σQ of all non-empty
bounded well-ordered subsets of Q was shown to be universal (as a partial order)
for all Hausdorﬀtrees with strictly increasing embeddings into the reals. Todor-
cevic and V¨a¨an¨anen studied the quasi-order of all trees of cardinality ω1 with no
uncountable branches under the relation S ≤T if and only if there is a strictly
increasing map from S to T (it need not preserve the tree structure). Todorcevic
announced a Ramsey-theoretic reformulation, under the Proper Forcing Axiom,14
for the existence of a two-element basis for the class of Aronszajn lines. Abraham,
Rubin and Shelah investigated consistent ﬁnite possibilities for the structure of
order types of ℵ1-dense homogeneous subsets of the reals under the embeddability
relation. Kojman and Shelah investigated the existence problem for universal lin-
ear and partial orders in various cardinalities;15 Todorcevic and V¨a¨an¨anen proved
14The Proper Forcing Axiom (PFA) is a generalization of Martin’s Axiom which will be intro-
duced in §8.
15A linear (partial) order (P, <) is universal in power λ (alternatively in cardinality λ) if it
has cardinality λ and is universal for the class of linear (partial) orders of cardinality ≤λ.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
153
that the class of linear orderings without uncountable well-ordered or conversely
well-ordered subsets has no universal element. The possibilities for order types of
the form R ∩M for M a model of set theory were investigated.
1.2
Overview of the history of Ramsey theory
Now let us turn to an overview of the history of Ramsey theory in the 20th Cen-
tury with a focus on the partition calculus. Conventionally the history is started
with Ramsey’s famous theorem proved in the late 1920’s and published in 1930.16
In the latter half of the 20th Century, the inﬂuence of the habit of thinking “com-
plete disorder is impossible” has spread beyond the communities of combinatorial
mathematicians, set theorists, and those studying order whether algebraically,
combinatorially or as a special case of binary relations to include set-theoretic
topology, semi-groups, dynamical systems, ergodic theory, and Banach space the-
ory. It makes sense to include some of the historical roots of those directions, albeit
with only cursory attempts to describe their mathematical interconnections, which
can be quite complicated.17
Following Hindman in his article [2006] on the mathematics of Rothschild and
Graham, we give a short prehistory of Ramsey theory, starting with the result of
Hilbert [1892] that for any positive integer n, if the positive integers are partitioned
into ﬁnitely many cells, there is a natural number a and a ﬁnite sequence ⃗m =
⟨m1, m2, . . . , mn⟩of n positive integers such that all integers of the form a +
b where b is a ﬁnite sum of some or all of the integers in ⃗m are in the same
cell of the partition.18 Next, we state Schur’s Theorem [1917] which is Hilbert’s
Theorem without the a and with n = 2: whenever the positive integers are ﬁnitely
colored, there are positive integers x and y with x, y and x + y all the same
color. We conclude the pre-history with van der Waerden’s Theorem [1927] that
whenever the positive integers are ﬁnitely colored, there are arbitrarily long (ﬁnite)
monochromatic arithmetic progressions.
We start the history in the 1920’s with Ramsey’s own work by stating the theo-
rem for which he is known by set theorists, and which we call Ramsey’s Theorem:
for ﬁnite r and any ﬁnite partition of the r-element subsets of an inﬁnite set, there
is an inﬁnite subset all of whose r-element subsets belong to the same cell of the
16I remember hearing in the 1970’s that Ramsey’s paper was one of the most cited works in
the mathematical literature.
17See, for example, the second chapter of Combinatorics: the Rota way [Kung et al., 2009]
on matching theory, which discusses some of the mathematical connections between K˝onig’s
Theorem of 1916, Hall’s Marriage Theorem, and more of Rado’s work on ﬁnite systems than
is included in this chapter.
Kung, Yan and Rota connect matching theory to graph theory,
matroids, linear algebra, submodular functions, and transversal theory. It is the latter which
is of particular interest in this chapter which includes beautiful work by Milner and Shelah
on inﬁnite and uncountable transversal theory and the deep theorem of Galvin and Hajnal on
almost disjoint transversals and cardinal arithmetic which was one of the precursors of Shelah’s
pcf theory.
18This overview is the only place where Hilbert’s result is mentioned since it predates the 20th
Century.

154
Jean A. Larson
partition. He actually used a ﬁnite version, which we include as well, naming it
Finite Ramsey’s Theorem. Urysohn and Alexandroﬀproved that every regressive
function on the countable ordinals is constant on an uncountable set, which can
be regarded as partition theorem for the singletons of ω1 for a special type of
partition.
In the 1930’s, Dushnik generalized the Alexandroﬀ-Urysohn result to succes-
sor cardinals; Skolem rediscovered the Finite Ramsey’s Theorem in [1933]; and
Erd˝os and Szekeres rediscovered it on their way to proving a theorem in geometry.
Rado introduced the concept of k-regular linear systems, and, in what we call
Rado’s Theorem for Linear Systems with Positive Integer Coeﬃcients, he gener-
alized Schur’s Theorem and van der Waerden’s Theorem.
In the 1940’s, Rado generalized his analysis of k-regularity of linear systems to
ones with coeﬃcients from a ring of complex numbers. We discuss the generaliza-
tions of Ramsey’s Theorem to the uncountable in terms of graphs, the pairs being
represented as edges. Dushnik and Miller, with help from Erd˝os for singular cardi-
nals, proved that for every graph on κ vertices, either there is independent subset
of size κ (i.e. no pairs joined) or it has an inﬁnite complete subgraph (i.e. every
pair is joined in the subgraph). This theorem grew out of their work on partial
orders. Erd˝os proved that if the edges of the complete graph on more than κκ
many vertices are colored with κ many colors, then there is a complete subgraph
on κ+ many vertices all of whose edges have the same color. He used GCH to
prove that any graph on κ++ many vertices either has complete subgraph of size
κ++ or has an independent set (no edges) of size κ+. Kurepa proved a related
result in 1950 which is implicit in his [1939]: any graph on more than κλ vertices
either has a complete subgraph on κ+ vertices or an independent set of λ+ on
vertices. Neither [Erd˝os, 1942] nor [Kurepa, 1939] received much attention in the
1940’s, due to disruptions of World War II and because of the likely related fact
that the Erd˝os paper was published in an obscure Latin American journal. The
connection between partition relations and ramiﬁcation methods (tree methods)
was made explicit in a paper of Erd˝os and Tarski [1943] but proofs did not follow
until much later.
In the 1950’s, Erd˝os and Rado initiated Ramsey theory for equivalence relations
by identifying families of canonical partitions for the n-element subsets of N. Erd˝os
and Rado published a series of papers on what became the partition calculus,
summarizing their ﬁndings in their joint paper [1956], the ﬁrst systematic study
of the area. This paper delineated the main lines of study, detailed a wide variety
of partial results, and provided the important Positive Stepping Up Lemma for
transferring results for r-element sets to ones for (r+1)-element sets. The modern
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem follows from this lemma. Investigation of variations such as
ordinal and polarized partition relations were initiated. Rado’s Rectangle Reﬁning
Theorem is a canonical polarized partition relation. Specker proved interesting
partition relations for ordinals of the form ωn for ﬁnite n ≥2. With multiple
individuals contributing, the Regressive Function Theorem reached its standard
form. In 1958, Mostowski and Tarski had a seminar that revisited the problems

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
155
and results for inaccessible cardinals from [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1943]. By the end
of the 1950’s the peripatetic Hungarian Erd˝os and German born Rado, whose
academic career was spent in England, were joined by Hungarian Hajnal and by
London born Milner who spent most of his career in Calgary, Canada. The group
formed the core of a powerful collaborative team that welcomed the participation
of a wide group of mathematicians around the world in the study of what was
sometimes called “Hungarian” set theory.
In the 1960’s, the Canonization Lemma and the Negative Stepping Up Lemma
for the partition calculus joined the Positive Stepping Up Lemma in the “Giant
Triple Paper” of Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado. Years in the making, this classic pa-
per included a nearly complete description, under GCH, of partition relations for
cardinals for pairs, and major results for larger r-tuples.
It introduced square
bracket partition relations for strong counter-examples to ordinary partition rela-
tions. The visit by Hajnal to Berkeley in 1964, the appearance of the triple paper
in 1965, and the ﬁrst international meeting after the development of forcing held
in 1967 at the University of California, Los Angeles, introduced problems in the
partition calculus to an audience with new techniques to apply. The Milner-Rado
Paradoxical Decomposition showed that for any uncountable ordinal β < ω2 there
is a partition of β into countably many pieces so that no piece has a set of ordinals
of order type ω1ω.
The Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem, a beautiful partition theorem about ﬁnite prod-
ucts of ﬁnitely branching trees, appeared in 1967, making a new connection be-
tween two themes, trees and Ramsey theory. The Hales-Jewett Theorem on vari-
able words generalized van der Waerden’s Theorem. Nash-Williams, in his quest
to prove that the collection of inﬁnite (height at most ω) trees have no inﬁnite
antichains and no inﬁnite descending sequences under embeddability, proved a
lemma which became known as the Nash-Williams Partition Theorem. Square
bracket and polarized partition relations were proved for η, the order type of the
rationals. At the end of the 1960’s, theorems for Borel and analytic partitions of
the inﬁnite subsets of ω were proved, and relative to the existence of an inaccessible
cardinal, a Ramsey Theorem for all inﬁnite subsets of ω was shown consistent.
In the 1970’s, further extensions, alternate proofs, and applications of theorems
on partitions of inﬁnite subsets of ω proliferated, with Ellentuck giving a partic-
ularly nice topological approach. Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem published in
1974 was the beginning of the exploration by Hindman of semi-group colorings
and another example of a theorem that grew from a result in ﬁnite combinatorics,
namely the Graham-Rothschild Parameter Sets Theorem. Techniques pioneered
in the 1960’s and early 1970’s were applied to questions about partition relations,
with singular cardinals and ordinal partition relations receiving increased atten-
tion. The Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem is a spectacular case: for any coloring
of the edges of a graph on ω1 with red and blue and any countable ordinal α,
there is a monochromatic subgraph (all edges red or all edges blue) whose set of
vertices has order type α. Chang proved that ωω is a partition ordinal, i.e. every
triangle-free graph has an independent subset of the full order type, and Hajnal

156
Jean A. Larson
proved that under the Continuum Hypothesis (CH), ω12 and ω1·ω are not. Shelah
proved a canonization theorem useful for proving partition theorems for singular
cardinals, and Milliken and Blass proved partition theorems for trees.
In the 1980’s, Erd˝os, Hajnal, M´at´e and Rado published a compendium of results
in the partition calculus, the culmination of decades of work. Strengthenings and
generalizations of the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem for ω1 were proved consistent,
and progress was made on partition relations for triples with a meta-mathematical
proof. The Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem for order types was generalized to trees
and partial orders in general. Consistency results were proved for cardinal and
ordinal partition relations, including the determination whether certain ordinal
products κ · λ for ω ≤λ < κ were or were not partition ordinals under a variety of
assumptions. Todorcevic proved a startling square bracket partition result for the
uncountable and introduced new technology whose ramiﬁcations are still unfolding,
and proved a stepping up lemma for negative square bracket partition relations.
Extensions of the results of Galvin, Prikry, Silver, Mathias, Ellentuck, Hindman
and Graham and Rothschild were established. Laver published his proof that the
perfect subtree version of the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem holds for the product of
inﬁnitely many trees building on work that dated back to 1969.
In the ﬁnal decade of the 20th Century, Schipperus proved that there is an un-
countable family of countable partition ordinals. There were new results for triples
in both ordinary and square bracket partition relations. Moreover continuous col-
orings witnessing negative square bracket partition relations were found.
The
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem was strengthened to the Baumgartner-Hajnal-Todorcevic
Theorem in both balanced and unbalanced formulations, and consistency results
about possible extensions for the Dushnik-Miller Theorem (Komj´ath) and the
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem (Foreman and Hajnal) were explored. The inequality κ∗=
ℵω < 2ℵ1 for the least cardinal κ∗satisfying a surprisingly simple looking polarized
partition relation was show to be equiconsistent with the existence of a measurable
cardinal.
The introduction concludes with the remark that the next section covers three
decades. This decision has the pleasant eﬀect that the 1930’s occur in Section 3,
the 1940’s in Section 4, and so forth. Moreover, subsections, for example of the
1970’s, are numbered 7.1, 7.2. For an introduction to the history of order prior to
1900, see [Alvarez, 1999, 185-188].
2
1900-1930: BEGINNINGS
Fundamental understanding of functions and of “nice” sets (Borel sets, Borel and
Baire functions, nowhere dense sets, perfect sets, measurable sets and measurable
functions) was developed at the end of the 19th Century and the beginning of the
20th Century as detailed in Kanamori’s ﬁrst chapter.
Georg Cantor had introduced the order type of a linearly ordered set A by
abstraction to A, which denotes what remains when the set is considered only

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
157
with respect to the order of its elements.19 Cantor used A to denote what remains
when even the order of the elements is no longer considered.20 Cantor’s choices of
η to symbolize the order type of the rationals and ω to symbolize the order type
of the non-negative integers were in place, as was the notion of everywhere dense
set.
In the ﬁrst decade of the 20th Century, David Hilbert [1900] enumerated his
famous list of problems, including Cantor’s Continuum Problem, which is of par-
ticular relevance for inﬁnite combinatorics, and Ernst Zermelo [1904] published his
Well-Ordering Theorem, the foundation for myriad recursive constructions in set
theory. Henri Lebesgue published his classic work [1905] in the theory of deﬁn-
ability, described by Moschovakis [2009, 1] as follows:
It introduced and studied systematically several natural notions of de-
ﬁnable functions and sets and it established the ﬁrst important hierar-
chy theorems and structure results for collections of deﬁnable objects.
Edward Huntington21 [1905d] developed postulates for the order type of the
continuum and wrote two expository papers [1905a], [1905b] which were reprinted
by Harvard University Press as a short text [1905c] with a new title, presumably
for use by students and other researchers.22 Veblen opened his review of this work
with the following statement [1906, 302]:
The Annals of Mathematics has for some time followed a plan of print-
ing articles expository of subjects which are little known or not easily
accessible in the English language. Reprints of these articles are then
placed on sale with the double and laudable purpose of making the cir-
culation of the article wider than it would otherwise be and of helping
solve the diﬃcult problem of ﬁnancing a mathematical journal.
19With this notation, two ordered sets A and B have the same order type, A = B, if and only
if there is an order-isomorphism between them. Thus A may be regarded as the class of linear
orders which are order isomorphic to A. In modern notation, the order type of a set A is usually
denoted by one of the following: ot(A), otp(A), tp(A). In the classiﬁcation of orderings, it is
useful to work up to equivalence under the relation of being order-isomorphic, i.e. having the
same order type.
20With this notation, for two sets A and B, the relation A = B holds if and only if there is a
bijection between A and B. In modern notation we write |A| = |B|.
21Edward Vermilye Huntington (April 26, 1874 – November 25, 1952) earned an A.B. in 1895
and an A.M. in 1897, both from Harvard University. He was an instructor in mathematics at
Williams College 1897–1899, then studied in Europe, receiving his doctorate in 1901 from the
University of Strasbourg (at the time it was part of Germany). He spent the remainder of his
academic career at Harvard University, returning in 1901 as an instructor of mathematics. He
was promoted to assistant professor in 1905, to associate professor in 1915, and became a full
professor of mechanics in 1919. He retired in 1941. He was elected to the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences in 1913. To learn more about his life and his work in the foundations of
mathematics, see Michael Scanlan’s biography [1999].
22There was suﬃcient demand that Huntington updated his brief book on order in [1917].

158
Jean A. Larson
Veblen praised the clear style and balance between generality and detail, enumer-
ated the main contents (ordinal theory of integers, rational numbers, and the con-
tinuum, with an appendix on the transﬁnite numbers of Cantor), and mentioned
the price, ﬁfty cents. He noted that the text was intended for non-mathematical
readers as well as for mathematicians, and pointed out that while it assumes lit-
tle background knowledge, “it requires for complete comprehension a considerable
maturity in abstract reasoning.”
Strides were made in working out cardinal arithmetic. Felix Bernstein,23 as a
gymnasium student, participated in Cantor’s Halle seminar, and his interaction
with Cantor led to his proof of what we shall call the Schr¨oder-Bernstein Equiva-
lence Theorem:24 If there is an injection from a set A into a set B and an injection
from B into A, then there is a bijection between them. In his dissertation [1901]25
at G¨ottingen under Hilbert, Bernstein gave two proofs that the set of countable
order types has power the continuum and gave what Plotkin [2005, 8] speculates is
the ﬁrst proof that the order type of the rationals is universal in the sense that all
countable order types embed in it. Bernstein [1908] also proved that any Euclidean
space may be decomposed into two disjoint totally imperfect sets (i.e. uncountable
sets which have no perfect subsets).
An early result in the theory of partial orders introduced the study of chains in
partial orders. Gerhard Hessenberg26 [1906] considered subfamilies of power sets
ordered by inclusion and studied general ways to construct well-ordered subsets of
them. He stated and proved a ﬁxed point theorem in this connection.27
23Felix Bernstein (February 24, 1878 – December 3, 1956) became an extraordinary profes-
sor at the University of G¨ottingen in 1911, received a medical exemption for military service
during World War I, and was made head of the statistical branch of the Oﬃce of Rationing
in Berlin. After the war he continued in government service, and in 1921 became both Com-
missioner of Finance and ordinary (full) professor at G¨ottingen, where he founded the Institute
of Mathematical Statistics. He visited Harvard University in 1928, and after he lost his posi-
tion at G¨ottingen in 1934 during the Nazi regime, he emigrated to the United States, where he
taught at a number of diﬀerent institutions until his retirement in 1948, when he returned to
G¨ottingen where he was appointed professor emeritus. In the United States his research input
was reduced, his own employment irregular, and he sought to help other scientists who had ﬂed
Europe in the face of Nazi policies ﬁnd jobs. While his early work was in set theory, his later
work was in applied mathematics, especially statistics, and included work in the mathemati-
cal theory of genetics. For more information, see the biography at http://www-history.mcs.st-
andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Bernstein Felix.html by J. J. O’Connor and E. F. Robertson and the
brief article by M. Frewer [1981] which includes a bibliography of Bernstein’s work.
24The Schr¨oder-Bernstein Equivalence Theorem is sometimes called the Cantor-Bernstein The-
orem (e.g. see [Sierpi´nski, 1965, 34], [Jech, 2003, 28]). See [Kanamori, 2004, Section 4] to learn
more about this theorem, and see Dedekind [1968, 447–449] for an early unpublished proof.
25A memorable mistake in Bernstein’s thesis led to trouble for Julius (Gyula) K˝onig at the 1904
International Congress of Mathematicians as detailed in Kanamori’s ﬁrst chapter and Kojman’s
chapter.
26Gerhard Hessenberg (August 16, 1874 – November 16, 1925) received his 1899 doctorate
from the University of Berlin where he studied under Hermann Schwarz and Lazarus Fuchs.
He is known for a proof in projective geometry that Desargues’ Theorem follows from Pascal’s
Theorem, and, in linear algebra, Hessenberg matrices are named for him.
27This ﬁxed point theorem was rediscovered by Bourbaki [1939, 37] for ordered sets in general
with essentially the same proof. For details see [Felscher, 1962].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
159
Hessenberg deﬁned the natural sum and natural product of ordinals which are
sometimes called the Hessenberg sum and Hessenberg product. These operations
are commutative and associative and the product distributes over the sum. So for
example, the natural sum of 2 and ω is ω + 2 which is larger than 2 + ω = ω,
and the natural product of 2 and ω is ω · 2 > 2 · ω = ω.
Hessenberg proved
a division algorithm for arbitrary ordinals and proved that every ordinal can be
expressed uniquely in Cantor normal form. The Cantor normal form of an ordinal
α is its unique representation as α = ωβ0c0 + ωβ1c1 + · · · + ωβk−1ck−1 where
β0 > β1 > · · · > βk−1 ≥0 and k, c0, . . . , ck−1 are positive integers.
2.1
Hausdorﬀ
Felix Hausdorﬀ28 analyzed order types in the early part of his mathematical
career29 and touched on many themes that will recur: generalizations of well-
orderings, bases for order types, order types universal for nicely deﬁned families,
and the study of well-ordered sequences of real numbers.
Hausdorﬀ’s ﬁrst paper [1901] on order types examines a generalization of well-
orderings called graded order types, where a linear order is graded if no two of its
initial segments are similar 30 to each other. He analyzes types through decompo-
sitions of ordered sets into initial, middle and ﬁnal pieces, a theme he returns to in
later papers. In particular, he generalizes the result he calls the Cantor-Bernstein
Theorem, namely that the collection of countable order types has the cardinality
of the continuum,31 to show that the collection of all graded types of cardinality
m where m2 = m has cardinality 2m. On his way to the proof, Hausdorﬀnotes
that given a set M of cardinality m, the power 2m is the cardinality of the set of
all two-valued functions (Cantor’s “coverings”) with domain M (Hausdorﬀuses
+1 and −1) and is also the cardinality of the set of all subsets of M, via the cor-
respondence matching a function f with the subset of points where f takes value
+1.
28Felix Hausdorﬀ(November 8, 1868 – January 26, 1942) completed his 1891 doctorate in ap-
plications of mathematics to astronomy at Leipzig University, and his Habilitation thesis was in
the same area. He was also a writer with interests and a wide range of friends in art, literature,
and philosophy, and had plays performed and published under the pseudonym Paul Mongr´e.
Hausdorﬀbegan working in pure mathematics around the turn of the century, became an ex-
traordinary professor at Leipzig in 1902, and moved to Bonn in 1910 where the mathematical
environment was richer and he became friends with Eduard Study. Hausdorﬀbecame an ordi-
nary professor in 1913 at Greifswald where Study had formerly been an ordinary professor. His
ﬁnal professional move was back to Bonn in 1921 where he worked until 1935 when he was forced
to retire by the Nazi regime. With his suicide in 1942 in the face of a forced move to Endenich,
the world lost a remarkable man.
29Hausdorﬀ’s beautiful work on order types has been made more accessible by a careful trans-
lation by Jacob Plotkin [2005].
30Two ordered sets are similar if there is an order-isomorphism from one to the other, i.e. they
have the same order type.
31Cantor provided a suﬃciently large collection of examples, and Bernstein, in his thesis,
showed there are at most continuum many, which by the Schr¨oder-Bernstein Equivalence Theo-
rem gives the desired equality.

160
Jean A. Larson
In a ﬁve-part series of articles sharing the title Investigations into order types
[1906], [1907], Hausdorﬀbegins a systematic study of ordered sets, moving beyond
the study of ordinal numbers, cardinal numbers, their powers, and the order types
of subsets of the reals. In the ﬁrst part, The powers of order types, he develops
a formal notion of power formation with a base µ and exponent α via sequences
indexed by α of elements of µ (“coverings”), where α and µ are arbitrary order
types. He studies subsets of these powers under various orderings, especially in
the case that the exponent is a well-ordered set. One special case is ordering by
ﬁrst diﬀerence, i.e. lexicographic ordering. To ensure a linear order, Hausdorﬀ
ﬁxes a principal element m in the base M (of type µ) and looks at the collection
of sequences from the representative set A of type α that diﬀer only ﬁnitely from
m to get powers of the ﬁrst class. He observes that if the exponent set A has no
last element, the resulting type is everywhere dense, and that if the base M and
exponent A are ordinal numbers and the principal element m is the least element
of the base, then the result is the same as Cantor’s power. He generalizes to higher
order powers, by replacing the condition that the sequences have all but ﬁnitely
many places taking value the principal element m to the requirement that the
sequences have all but a well-ordered subset of power ≤ℵv for some ﬁxed ν that
speciﬁes how much higher the power is; ordering by ﬁrst diﬀerences is a linear
order on such collections. He matches the collection of subsets of a well-ordered
set A with their characteristic functions in a suitably high power with base 2 and
exponent A which is linearly ordered by ﬁrst diﬀerences. He concludes the ﬁrst
part of the series with transﬁnite sums and products where not all the factors are
the same.
In the second part, The higher continua [1906], he focuses on ordered sets
of fundamental sequences, i.e. sequences with domain an initial ordinal number,
ordered by ﬁrst diﬀerence. He analyzes these powers by looking at properties of
the base, e.g. being dense, and identiﬁes a variety of types. He introduces the
critical notions of coﬁnal32 and coinitial, characteristics of segments that became
fundamental to the classiﬁcation scheme he eventually developed.33
Hausdorﬀ
proved that a type cannot be coﬁnal with two diﬀerent initial ordinals. Another
concept introduced was of a type being homogeneous if all its segments are similar.
In the third part of the series, Homogeneous types of the second inﬁnite car-
dinality [1906], Hausdorﬀsets out a classiﬁcation scheme for homogeneous types
of cardinality ℵ1 based on the coﬁnality and coinitiality of the segments, types of
gaps, and occurrence or non-occurrence of uncountable well-ordered or converse-
well-ordered subsequences.
In the fourth part of the series, Homogeneous types of the cardinality of the
continuum [1907], Hausdorﬀcontinues his construction of examples ﬁtting his
32Hausdorﬀused conﬁnal for what in English is coﬁnal.
33In a note at the end of his introduction to Hausdorﬀ’s paper [1906], Plotkin (cf. [Hausdorﬀ,
2005, 42]) pointed out that Hessenberg [1906] had introduced a related notion when he called a
set M a Kern of an ordinal µ if the set of ordinals less than µ was the same as the set of ordinals
for which there is an ordinal in M at least as large. Every Kern of µ is coﬁnal in µ.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
161
classiﬁcation scheme with the constraint that they have cardinality at most the
continuum, but in the ﬁnal part, Pantachie types, this constraint is lifted. In Sec-
tion 1 of this last part, he looks at monotonically increasing functions on ω which
go to inﬁnity, and shows that the cardinality of this collection is the cardinality
of the continuum ([Hausdorﬀ, 1907, 111] or [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 133]). Hausdorﬀ
investigates ﬁnal rank ordering ([Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 137]) of increasing sequences,
i.e. ordering under eventual domination. He introduces generalizations of the or-
der type of the rationals, denoted η, and uses the corresponding upper case Greek
letter H for them. In Section 3 [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 145], he focuses on H-types,
specifying that an η1-type is unbounded, everywhere dense, neither coﬁnal with ω
nor coinitial with ω∗; no fundamental sequence in it has a limit; and it contains
no (ω, ω∗)-gaps ([Hausdorﬀ, 1909, 323]).34
He proves the universality of an η1-type for linearly ordered types of cardinality
at most ℵ1 and the uniqueness of an η1-type of cardinality ℵ1, if it exists. He gen-
eralizes the notion to ην-types for ﬁnite ν.35 In Section 6, he introduces the scale
problem and uses the Continuum Hypothesis (CH) to construct a scale [Hausdorﬀ,
2005, 167]: a sequence of ω1 increasing functions in ωω which is increasing in the
ﬁnal rank order and has the property that each function in ωω is less than some
member of the sequence.
Hausdorﬀin his Fundamentals of a theory of ordered sets [1908] streamlined
and extended his earlier work on order. He worked out the basic properties of coﬁ-
nality in [1908, 440–444], introduced the distinction between regular and singular
cardinals, and included a proof in Theorem IV that each set without a last element
is coﬁnal with one and only one regular initial number. He described dense and
scattered linear orderings,36 gave {ω, ω∗} as a basis37 for the denumerable linear
orders, {1, ω, ω∗, η} as a generating set for all countable linear orders, and dis-
cussed type rings and the preservation of properties from the base of such a ring
to all its elements (see [Hausdorﬀ, 1908, 454–456], [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 213–215]).
Here is a quote in which Hausdorﬀdescribed linearly ordered sets of cardinality
less than a ﬁxed ℵα [Hausdorﬀ, 1908, 458]:
Satz XII. Jede Menge ist entweder selbst zerstreut order eine Summe
zerstreuter Mengen mit dichtem Erzeuger.
Die zerstreuten Mengen
34For an order type λ, λ∗denotes its converse (reversed) order type.
A (κ, λ∗)-gap in an
ordered set (P, <) is a pair A, B ⊆P such that A is linearly ordered with order type κ, B is
linearly order with order type λ∗, for all a ∈A and b ∈B, a < b; and there is no x ∈P with
a < x < b for all a ∈A, b ∈B. [Scheepers, 1993] is a very readable survey on gaps in ωω through
the early 1990’s which is described as “an invitation to study gaps” (see page 441) and has an
extensive bibliography. See also the memoir by Farah [2000].
35Chang and Keisler [1973, 522], in notes for Chapter 5, date the notions of α-saturated and
saturated models back to the ηα-sets of Hausdorﬀ, citing the 1914 text. Plotkin (cf. [Hausdorﬀ,
2005, 109]) quotes from an email of Michael Morley in which he indicated that 1954 was about
the time when he set out to generalize the “eta set construction” to other algebraic structures.
36A scattered linear order is one that does not embed the order type of the rationals.
37A basis B for a class C of linear orders is a set of linear orders in the class which has the
property that for any element (L, ⋖) of C there is some (K, <) in B which is order-embeddable
into (L, ⋖).

162
Jean A. Larson
der M¨atigkeit < ℵα) (ℵα regul¨ar) bilden einen Ring, dessen Basis aus
allen regul¨aren Anfangszahlen < ωα) (inklusive der Zahl 1) and deren
Inversen besteht.38
The “dichtem Erzeuger” [dense generator] may be thought of as an index set. The
ring in the above quote is a type ring, which is a system of types closed under sum of
two types and by sums of types in the ring indexed by a type in the ring. On page
456, Hausdorﬀlisted several collections that form a ring, including unbounded
types, types with a last element, and types that are coﬁnal with a ﬁxed type.
Using transﬁnite recursion, one can transform the type ring of scattered sets of
cardinality < ℵα into a hierarchy of sets that has become known as the Hausdorﬀ
hierarchy.
In Theorem XIV [1908, 472], Hausdorﬀproved that any sequence of length
ων under the lexicographic order on the ων-sequences of elements of σ for an
ordered set σ will have a coﬁnal subsequence of one of two types: one with initial
segments that form a strictly increasing chain or one where all share a common
initial segment and diﬀer on the ﬁrst place not in this common initial segment.
In a substantial part of the paper, Hausdorﬀdetailed his classiﬁcation of dense
types from [1907] and provided existence proofs. He used collections of functions
deﬁned on well-ordered domains in interesting ways.
Speciﬁcally, in Theorem
XVIII ([Hausdorﬀ, 1908, 488], [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 243]), he identiﬁed a type univer-
sal for ordered sets of cardinality at most ℵπ and in Theorem XIX proved that
there is at most one such type of cardinality ℵπ. He also showed that there are at
least ℵ1 distinct types of power at most the continuum ([1908, 505, footnote]).
Hausdorﬀ[1909] continued his exploration of powers of the alephs, i.e. collections
of functions deﬁned on a well-ordered set partially ordered by ﬁnal rank order, and
maximal well-ordered subsets of this partial order. He constructs an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap
inside ωω ordered by eventual diﬀerence using the Axiom of Choice but not the
Continuum Hypothesis. He also shows that under eventual domination, any subset
of ωω has a maximal linearly ordered set.39
In the summer of 1910, Hausdorﬀmoved to the University of Bonn, where he
gave a course on set theory. He gave a revised and expanded course in the sum-
mer of 1912 and at the same time began work on his set theory book Grundz¨uge
der Mengenlehre [1914], [2002] which was completed in 1913, and appeared in
April 1914, shortly before the outbreak of World War I.40 In 1920, Henry Blum-
berg [1920, 116] gave the book a glowing review in the Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society:
38Theorem XII. Every set is either scattered or a sum of scattered sets with a dense generator.
The scattered sets of cardinality < ℵα (ℵα regular) form a ring whose basis consists of all
regular initial numbers < ωα (including the number 1) and their inverses (translation by Plotkin
(cf. [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 216])).
39See Sections 2 and 5 of Stepr¯ans’ chapter on the continuum for more on Hausdorﬀ’s work
on gaps in maximal linear orderings of sequences of integers under eventual domination.
40Purkert’s
An
introduction
to
Hausdorﬀ
(downloaded
from
http://www.hausdorﬀ-
edition.de/wp/?page id=20 on February 5, 2011) for the HausdorﬀEdition included these details
on the timing of Hausdorﬀ’s work and a broad overview of his life and mathematical work.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
163
Its most striking feature is that it is the work of art of a master.
No one thoroughly acquainted with its contents could fail to withhold
admiration for the happy choice and arrangement of subject matter,
the careful diction, the smooth, vigorous and concise literary style,
and the adaptable notation; above all things, however, for the highly
pleasing uniﬁcations and generalizations and the harmonious weaving
of numerous original results into the texture of the whole.
In Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre, there are chapters on basic set operations (sum
or union, section or intersection, diﬀerence used to get complements), functions and
their usage in products and powers, cardinal numbers (Zermelo’s Well-Ordering
Theorem, non-denumerability of the continuum, existence of a one-to-one corre-
spondence between the real line and the Euclidean plane), ordered sets and their
types, well-ordered sets and the ordinal numbers (including a proof Blumberg calls
elegant of the fact that ℵαℵα = ℵα), Hausdorﬀ’s own work on partially ordered
sets, topological spaces (axiomatically described in terms of neighborhoods,41 in-
cluding the requirement that the space be what is now called Hausdorﬀ), special
topological spaces, metric spaces, and Lebesgue measure.
This text and its subsequent editions were inﬂuential in shaping the direction
of set theory in the coming decades. Plotkin (cf. [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 111]) asserts
that the “1914 text made back-and-forth part of the mathematical mainstream.”42
Hausdorﬀincluded his ηα sets, patterned on the rationals. In Chapter VI, §1,
Hausdorﬀconsidered partially ordered sets and proved the existence of maximal
linearly ordered subsets in them. Many of the results on order were omitted from
this important book, including the work on gaps and the type ring with its sums
over arbitrary elements of the class. As a consequence, a number of Hausdorﬀ’s
pioneering results on order were rediscovered later in the century.
2.2
1910–1920: Emerging schools
In the decade 1910–1920, Poland and Russia developed schools active in set theory
and function theory; R. L. Moore initiated the study of analysis-situ or point-set
topology that led to the development of the Texas school of topology; and Schur
had an early result in what is now known as Ramsey Theory. The work of Baire
became more widely known through the book [1916] by de la Vall´ee Poussin.
Wac law Sierpi´nski43 published Zarys teorii mnogo´sci (An Outline of Set The-
41Gregory H. Moore [2008a] observed that Hausdorﬀ’s neighborhoods are what today would
be called a neighborhood base for the topology. Moore’s article on the emergence of open and
closed sets situates Hausdorﬀ’s “neighborhood spaces” in historical context.
42See [Plotkin, 1993] for more on the history of the back-and-forth construction, and see [1907]
for Hausdorﬀ’s earlier usage.
43Wac law Franciszek Sierpi´nski (March 14, 1882 – October 21, 1969) graduated from the
University of Warsaw in 1903 and became a school teacher in Warsaw. He earned his doctorate
in Krak´ow with Stanis law Zaremba at the Jagiellonian University in 1908 and was appointed to
the University of Lw´ow (now Lviv, Ukraine) in 1910, and at that point his interests turned to
set theory according to the entry on him in [Gowers et al., 2008]. After a period in Russia during

164
Jean A. Larson
ory) [1912], which Kuratowski [1972, 2] described as “one of the ﬁrst synthetic
formulations of this theory in the world,” and was based on systematic lectures on
set theory by Sierpi´nski in 1909 at University of Lw´ow.
Investigations of the Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Problem continued.
An especially elegant application of the Continuum Hypothesis from this period
is the construction from a well-ordering <Ωof the real numbers of the subset
S ⊆R2 of the plane deﬁned by S = {(r, s) : r <Ωs}; it has the property that
every vertical section is co-countable and every horizontal section is countable.
Sierpi´nski44 [1919] published a proof that the existence of a set with these prop-
erties is equivalent to the Continuum Hypothesis.45
Results of Alexandroﬀ, Lusin and Suslin put the emerging Moscow school46
founded by Dimitri Egorov47 and Nikolai Nikolaevich Lusin48 on the map. Egorov
[1911] proved that if a sequence of measurable functions converges pointwise in
an interval except for a set of measure zero, then it converges uniformly on the
interval except for a set of arbitrarily small measure. This result became known as
Egorov’s Theorem and then as the Severini-Egorov Theorem, when it was realized
World War I, he returned in 1918 to Lw´ow, and in 1919 became a professor at the University of
Warsaw, where he spent the remainder of his professional life. For further background, see
http://www.hpm-americas.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/04/PSMatHPMcorrected 2.pdf,
an extended version of the paper by Roman Sznajder entitled 90th anniversary of emergence of
the Polish School of Mathematics; Polish mathematics between the world wars presented at the
2010 East Coast meeting of the History and Pedagogy of Mathematics: Americas Section.
44Kuratowski [1972, 2], in his obituary of Sierpi´nski, wrote “the outbreak of the war in 1914,
interrupted Professor Sierpi´nski’s didactic work. He was interned by the Tsarist authorities, ﬁrst
in Vyatka, and later in Moscow. There, the excellent Russian mathematicians Egorov and Luzin
extended a most cordial reception to him and created very convenient conditions for his scientiﬁc
work. This period brought important joint works by professors Sierpi´nski and Luzin which laid
the foundations for their long co-operation in the domain of analytic and projective sets as well
as the theory of real functions.”
45Erd˝os [1981, 41] called this result a “very beautiful theorem” and commented that it was
“very startling” when he ﬁrst saw it. In Section 2 of the chapter on the continuum, Stepr¯ans
brieﬂy discusses this result.
46See [Shields, 1987] and [Paul, 1997] for more information about the Moscow school.
47Dimitri Fedorovich Egorov (December 22, 1869 – September 10, 1931) became a Privat
Docent in 1893, spent 1902-1903 abroad on paid leave visiting Berlin, Paris and G¨ottingen, and
became a professor at Moscow University in 1903. Alan Shields [1987, 1] speculated that Egorov
was one of the ﬁrst foreign mathematicians to embrace the theory of Lebesgue.
Egorov was
director of the Institute of Mathematics and Mechanics at Moscow University from 1921 to 1930.
48Nikolai Nikolaevich Lusin (December 9, 1883 – January 1950) was a student of Egorov,
entering Moscow University in 1901 when his family moved to Moscow from Tomsk. He started
study under Bugaev, but it was Egorov, with whom he shared a religious outlook, who invited
him to his home and gave him challenging problems that stimulated his creativity.
Another
inﬂuence on Lusin was P. A. Florensky, a fellow student in mathematics at Moscow University,
who shifted his studies to theology and became a priest and spiritual advisor to Lusin. Lusin
completed his undergraduate studies in the fall of 1905 and went to Paris for further education. He
underwent a spiritual crisis in 1905–1906, studied medicine and theology as well as mathematics,
and eventually focused on mathematics. He worked on a master’s thesis with Egorov, but civil
war disrupted his studies, and he spent 1910 to 1914 in G¨ottingen, continuing to correspond with
Egorov and talking with Edmund Landau. He returned to Moscow and received his doctorate in
1915.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
165
that Carlo Severini had independently and earlier published a proof [1910] of this
result in a paper on sequences of orthogonal functions.
Lusin [1914] used the Continuum Hypothesis to construct what is now known
as a Lusin set: an uncountable set of reals whose intersection with each meager
set is countable, or equivalently, an uncountable set such that every uncountable
subset is non-meager.
Lusin also worked on the Continuum Problem and on ordinals.49 In a review of
the book Naming Inﬁnity [2009]50 Cooke [2010, 63] gave the following description
of some Lusin’s work:
His notes, which are now in the archives of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, are full of attempts to get a complete description of all the or-
dinals at once. In one valiant attempt, for example, he tried to imitate
the method Dedekind had used to deﬁne real numbers as equivalence
classes of cuts in the rational numbers. He took the class of subsets
of the rational numbers between 0 and 1 that are well-ordered in their
natural ordering, and introduced the natural order-equivalence relation
on this class. Could one then deﬁne a countable ordinal number to be
one of these equivalence classes? Certainly any such equivalence class
will be order-isomorphic to a countable ordinal. But how could it be
known that every countable ordinal is order-isomorphic to one of these
equivalence classes? Luzin struggled with this problem of naming the
countable ordinals for decades. One can almost hear him sigh as he
wrote in one plaintive note that he left behind, “How many times must
I write out the set of all ordinals numbers of types I and II?”
Pavel Sergeyevich Alexandroﬀ51 recalled reading Cantor in his ﬁrst year (1913)
at Moscow University [1979, 281]:
In the comfortable round reading room of the university library I found
Cantor’s memoirs on set theory and I began to read them with de-
light. One of the last mathematics books Eiges had given to me was
49See Roger L. Cooke’s survey [1993] of unpublished work and miscellaneous items in the Lusin
archive.
50Graham and Kantor [2006], [2009] proposed that Lusin’s religious practice of name-
worshipping inspired his mathematics.
51Pavel Sergeyevich Alexandroﬀ(November 1896 – May 1982) who grew up in a cultured
family was a student of both Egorov and Lusin at Moscow University. He traveled to Europe in
the summers from 1923 through 1932, visiting G¨ottingen, Bonn, Paris and Holland. He obtained
his doctorate in 1927 and went on to a successful career in topology at Moscow University, had
several students, including Tychonoﬀ, and was elected to membership in a number of academies,
including the Russian Academy of Sciences, the G¨ottingen Academy of Sciences, the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States, the London Mathematical Society, and the Polish
Academy of Sciences. A. N. Arhangels′kii and A. N. Dranishnikov [1997]: “Alexandroﬀplaced
a value on a result not according to technical diﬃculty of its proof, but, ﬁrst of all, according to
its position in a mathematical theory, according to the new harmony and beauty which it brings
into the theory.”

166
Jean A. Larson
Kowalewsky’s course in analysis, and it had acquainted me, to some ex-
tent, with the rudiments of set-theoretical thinking. But when I began
to read Cantor in the original and learned what transﬁnite numbers
are, a new world opened up before me, just as had once happened when
I ﬁrst learned about non-Euclidean geometry, and I was in a state of
excitement.
I was in the same state of excitement when in Baire’s
book, which was given to me by V. V. Stepanov, I became acquainted
with the Cantor perfect set, which I immediately saw and still see to
this day as one of the greatest wonders (and I mean a wonder, nothing
less) discovered by the human mind.52
Both Hausdorﬀ[1916] and Alexandroﬀ[1916] proved that every uncountable
Borel set has a perfect subset. Thereafter, Lusin encouraged Alexandroﬀto work
on proving that the collection of sets which included the Borel sets and whose
uncountable members he showed all included perfect sets are exactly the Borel sets
and set Mikhail Yakovlevich Suslin53 to study the work of Henri Lebesgue [1905].
This assignment by Lusin is described by Alexandroﬀin his chatty autobiography
[1979, 375].
In summer 1916, Suslin found an error in Lebesgue’s work, and constructed a
counter-example. He went on to construct an A-set which is not a B-set and the
following year, he [1917] published his work on the these sets, which have variously
been called A-sets, analytic sets, and Suslin sets.
In this work he introduced
operation A, also known as the Suslin operation,54 extracting a key combinatorial
aspect of Alexandroﬀ’s proof. The collection of analytic sets is the closure of the
closed sets under the Suslin operation.
Lusin introduced an alternate approach to analytic sets called the method of
sieves. In a modern formulation by Moschovakis [2009, 203], a sieve is a map
r 7→Fr which assigns to each rational number r a subset Fr of a space X. The
52Kowalewsky possibly refers to the German mathematician Gerhard Kowalewski rather than
Sonia Kovalevskaya.
53In his short biography of Suslin, Igoshin [1996] wrote that Suslin (November 1894 – October
1919), the only child of landowning peasants in the Saratov province of Russia, was recognized
as special by his primary school teacher who persuaded some of the more wealthy people in the
village to send him to a nearby city for grammar school. By tutoring children of the wealthy,
Suslin eventually was able to pay for his studies himself, and ﬁnished in spring 1913. He then
went to Moscow University where he attended Egorov’s seminar, and in 1914, Lusin’s seminar,
and was awarded a Diploma of the ﬁrst degree in 1917. He was given permission to stay an
additional two years to prepare for a professorship. During the Russian Civil War, after a period
of failing health, he returned to his home village, where he died in 1919 of typhus less than
a month prior to his twenty-ﬁfth birthday.
His brief mathematical career included a stint of
teaching at the Ivanovo-Voznesensk Polytechnic Institute as an Extraordinary Professor starting
in 1918. His students appreciated him enough to petition for his return, when he asked for a
leave of absence because of poor health.
54A modern description of a Suslin scheme is a family P = {Ps : s ∈ω>ω} of subsets of a set
X indexed by ﬁnite sequences of non-negative integers. The Suslin operation applied to such a
scheme produces the set AP = S
x∈ωω
T
n∈ω Px↾n.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
167
set sifted by the sieve is deﬁned by
x ∈Siever Fr ←→{r : x ∈Fr is not well ordered},
where the standard ordering on the rationals is used. The Suslin operation A and
the method of sieves appear in the study of partitions later in the century. We
close this brief aside on analytic sets by noting that the paper by Suslin [1917]
discussed above, one by Lusin [1917] which included work of Suslin, and a pair of
papers by Lusin and Sierpi´nski [1918] and [1923] were important early papers in
the theory of analytic sets.
Egorov and Lusin gathered an increasingly active group of mathematicians
around them, and Lusin became a Professor of Pure Mathematics at Moscow
University in 1917 prior to the Russian Civil War and the ensuing economic disrup-
tion. Lusin and Suslin, among others, moved to Ivanovo-Voznesensk Polytechnic
Institute. Lusin returned to Moscow in 1920 and worked together with Egorov to
revitalize the Moscow school, and the group of students and collaborators around
Lusin came to be called the Lusitania.
In [1916] R. L. Moore55 developed the postulates for what he [1916, 132] called
“plane analysis situs or what may be roughly termed the non-metrical part of plane
point-set theory”. It marked his entry in the emerging ﬁeld of point set topology.
He used point and region as his basic (undeﬁned) concepts; the concept of region
evolved into open sets. He wrote the paper while at the University of Pennsylvania
and only in 1920 moved back to the University of Texas at Austin, where he did
his undergraduate work. David Zitarelli [2004, 471] has asserted that this paper
“ﬁrmly solidiﬁed his reputation as a ﬁrst-rate researcher and later formed the
basis for the Moore Method.” Sometimes called the father of the school of Texas
topologists, he had 50 graduate students, the ﬁrst completing his degree in 1916
and the last in 1969; on September 10, 2010, the Mathematics Genealogy Project
site listed 2,661 descendants. In his Math Review MR2103548 (2006a:01005) of
Parker’s biography [2005] of Moore, Ivan Reilly highlights an interesting measure
of the success for graduate students of Moore’s teaching methods in which he gave
his students axioms (starting with those from his [1916]) and asked them to prove
theorems from them in an orchestrated way:
One measure of this success is described in the Albert Report “A sur-
vey of research potential and training in the mathematical sciences”,
55Robert Lee Moore (November 14, 1882 – October 4, 1974), a student of Oswald Veblen
and E. H. Moore, earned his degree at the University of Chicago in 1905.
He was a ma-
jor ﬁgure in the mathematical life of the USA in the middle of the 20th Century, noted for
his mathematics, his teaching style, and his service to the professional community (he was
president of the American Mathematical Society in 1938).
From the many resources avail-
able about his work and life, one learns that he was a tall Texan, opinionated, racist (see
http://www.math.buﬀalo.edu/mad/special/RLMoore-racist-math.html, accessed September 10,
2010, especially quotes by Vivienne Malone), and a charismatic and inspiring teacher. One of
many resources on him is a book by Parker [2005] published by the Mathematical Association of
America, an organization that Moore once called the “Salvation Army of Mathematics.”

168
Jean A. Larson
produced in 1957 for the National Science Foundation (page 238). Data
was gathered from a very large number of people who received their
Ph.D.s in mathematics between 1915 and 1954. This survey collated
the work of Ph.D. students after graduation and categorized them by
the amount of published mathematical research. Of the top 15 per
cent, 25 per cent were graduates from UT (made up almost entirely of
Moore students), 20 per cent from Princeton, 16 per cent from Harvard,
and 8 per cent from Chicago.
Issai Schur56 [1917] proved an early result in Ramsey theory.
Schur’s Theorem:
When one divides the numbers 1, 2, . . . , S(k) into
k (color) classes for suﬃciently large S(k), there is always in one of the
classes a triple of the form a, b, a + b, i.e. a monochromatic solution to
the homogeneous linear system x + y = z.
Note that the triple a, b, a+b can be thought of as a rather short monochromatic
arithmetic progression as well as a monochromatic solution to a linear system.
Schur used this result to prove that, for all m, if p is a suﬃciently large prime,
then the equation xn + yn = zn has a non-zero solution in the integers if you
compute all the values modulo p.
2.3
1920–1930: Early structural results
The 1920’s saw the ﬂourishing of the Warsaw and Lw´ow schools and the founding
of Fundamenta Mathematicae, whose ﬁrst volume included Suslin’s Problem. The
decade saw the publication of Sierpi´nski’s book on transﬁnite numbers and the
second edition of Hausdorﬀ’s seminal text. New concepts for the decade included
von Neumann ordinals and almost disjoint families. Two results related to inﬁ-
nite trees appeared, K¨onig’s Lemma (it was expressed graph theoretically) and
Moore’s road space, a topological example with a tree implicit in its construction.
Alexandroﬀand Urysohn proved their Regressive Function Theorem and van der
Waerden proved his theorem on arithmetic progressions.
The Warsaw group in set theory, topology, and their applications prospered
under the direction of Zygmunt Janiszewski, Stefan Mazurkiewicz and Wac law
Sierpi´nski, founders of Fundamenta Mathematicae57 (see [Kuratowski, 1980]).
A concept introduced by Sierpi´nski [1928b], that of an almost disjoint fam-
ily58 would become important in the study of partitions of inﬁnite subsets of ω.
Sierpi´nski proved that for any inﬁnite set of cardinality κ, there is an almost
56Issai Schur (January 10, 1875 – January 10, 1941) was a student of Frobenius. He worked
at the University of Berlin until 1935, and a few years later moved to Palestine.
For more
details on his life and mathematics see the biography by J. J. O’Connor and E. F. Robertson at
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Schur.html.
57See [Kuzawa, 1970] on the founding and signiﬁcance of Fundamenta Mathematicae.
58Sierpi´nski called a family F almost disjoint if for every two distinct sets M, N ∈F, the
cardinality of the intersection M ∩N is less than |M| and less than |N|.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
169
disjoint family of its subsets of cardinality 2λ where λ is the least cardinal with
2λ > κ. Alfred Tarski [1928] reﬁned Sierpi´nski’s notion by deﬁning the degree of
disjunction δ(F) of an almost disjoint family F to be the minimum cardinal δ such
that for all distinct M, N ∈F, |M ∩N| < δ. Tarski [1928], [1929] used the GCH
to prove various theorems on the existence of almost disjoint families of large size
with speciﬁed cardinality of the subsets involved and speciﬁed maximal degree of
disjointness.
The ﬁrst volume of Fundamenta Mathematicae included the posthumous pub-
lication of Suslin’s Problem [Suslin, 1920] on linear orders which, like Cantor’s
Continuum Problem, became a motivating force for a signiﬁcant body of work in
the 20th Century (Probl`eme 3, page 223):
Un ensemble ordonn´e (lin´eairement) sans sauts ni lacunes et tel
que tout ensemble de ses intervalles (contenant plus qu’un ´el´ement)
n’empi´etant pas les uns sur les autres est au plus d´enombrable, est-il
n´ecessairement un continu lin´eaire (ordinare)?59
Here is a modern take on the problem. A linear order satisﬁes the countable
chain condition (alternatively, it has countable cellularity) if every collection of
pairwise disjoint non-empty open intervals is countable.60 Suslin asked if every
linearly ordered set without endpoints whose order is (1) dense, (2) complete in
the sense that every non-empty bounded subset has a greatest lower bound and
a least upper bound, and (3) has the countable chain condition (i.e. countable
cellularity) is isomorphic to the real line. If the requirement that the linear order
have the countable chain condition is replaced by the requirement of having a
countable dense set (being separable), then such a linear order is isomorphic to
the real line. Call a linearly ordered set without endpoints satisfying the three
conditions but not isomorphic to the real line a Suslin continuum. Call a dense
linear order without endpoints which satisﬁes the countable chain condition but
is not separable a Suslin line. Note that the existence of a Suslin line implies the
existence of a Suslin continuum by passage to the completion of the line. Suslin’s
Hypothesis (SH) asserts the non-existence of Suslin lines.
Sierpi´nski published his book Le¸cons sur les Nombres Transﬁnite [1928a]. ´Emile
Borel wrote the preface, lauding the work of the author, welcoming the inclusion of
Lusin’s work, and calling attention to the modern material featured in Fundamenta
Mathematicae. Borel remarked (cf. [Sierpi´nski, 1928a, VI]): “Ce qui le distingue
surtout, c’est le fait que M. Sierpinski croit eﬀectivement `a la r´ealit´e de tous les
nombres transﬁnis, et admet sans restriction les raisonnements tels que celui par
59Must a (linearly) ordered set which has neither jumps nor gaps and in which every set of dis-
joint [non-encroaching] intervals (all containing more than one element) is at most denumerable,
must it, of necessity, be a (ordinary) linear continuum [copy of the real line]?
60Recall that the countable chain condition for a partial order P is the condition that every set
of pairwise incompatible elements is countable. The countable chain condition in the restatement
of Suslin’s Problem is applied to the partial order of open intervals of order by inclusion.

170
Jean A. Larson
lequel M. Zermelo a ≪d´emontr´e ≫que le continu peut ˆetre bien ordonn´e.”61 In
Chapter VII Sierpi´nski discussed order types and in the very last section, §64,
he listed three properties (1o no end points, 2o continuous,62 3o has a countable
dense set) that characterize the order type λ of the continuum. At the end of the
section, he noted that ordered sets which have a countable dense subset also have
the property 4o that all sets of non-empty pairwise disjoint intervals are at most
denumerable, and concluded [1928a, 153]:
Or, on ne sait pas si tout ensemble ordonn´e, jouissant des propri´et´es
1o, 2o and 4o, est n´ecessairement du type λ, et ce probl`eme [dˆu `a M.
Souslin (2)] semble tr`es diﬃcile.63
The Lw´ow school of mathematics grew around Hugo Steinhaus64 and his bril-
liant student, Stefan Banach.65
At the end of the decade (in 1929 to be pre-
cise), Stefan Banach and Hugo Steinhaus founded the journal Studia Mathemat-
icae in Lw´ow accepting papers in international languages, playing a role for the
Lw´ow school comparable to that of Fundamenta Mathematicae for the Warsaw
school. Among those publishing in the ﬁrst year were Banach, Stanis law Mazur,
W ladys law Orlicz, Juliusz Schauder and Steinhaus. Other notable members of the
Lw´ow school were Stanis law Ulam, Mark Kac, Antoni  Lomnicki, Herman Auer-
bach and Stanis law Ruziewicz.
Banach and Kazimierz Kuratowski66 looked at generalizations of Lebesgue’s
Measure Problem, and it was a question of Banach in their [1928] that led Ulam67
61What most distinguishes it [the book] is the fact that Mr. Sierpinski actually believes in
the reality of all transﬁnite numbers, and allows, without restriction, reasoning such as that by
which Mr. Zermelo has shown that the continuum can be well ordered.
62We would say complete where Sierpi´nski said continuous.
63However, we do not know if any ordered set, having the properties 1o, 2o and 4o, is necessarily
of type λ, and this problem [due to Mr. Souslin (2)] seems very diﬃcult. The reference (2) is to
the statement of Suslin’s problem [1920].
64Steinhaus was a student of Hilbert who earned his degree in 1911 in G¨ottingen.
65The book [Kuratowski, 1980, 43] includes a quote from Stanis law Mazur to the eﬀect that
Banach’s thesis, presented in June 1922 for the Ph.D. at University of Lw´ow and published in
Fundamenta Mathematicae [Banach, 1922], was the beginning of functional analysis as a ﬁeld.
Kuratowski’s book gives delightful descriptions of the mathematicians of the day and some of
their ways of working. To learn more about the intellectual atmosphere of the time, see the
wide variety of problems recorded in a notebook in the Scottish cafe in Lw´ow and recollections
recorded from a conference on the this notebook [Mauldin, 1981].
66Kazimierz Kuratowski (February 2, 1896 – June 18, 1980) studied for one year at the Univer-
sity of Glasgow in Scotland before the outbreak of World War I in August 1914. He then moved
to Warsaw University in 1915 and received his doctorate in 1921. On the Mathematics Genealogy
Project site, Mazurkievic and Janiszewski are listed as his advisors; note that Janiszewski died
before the thesis was awarded. Kuratowski taught at Warsaw University 1925–1927 and was then
appointed to a professorship at Lw´ow University. In 1934, after the closure of the mathematics
department in Lw´ow, he became a professor at Warsaw University where he remained until 1952,
when he became a member of the Polish Academy of Sciences.
67Stanislaw (Stan) Marcin Ulam (April 13, 1909 – May 13, 1984), was born in Lw´ow, Poland.
He received his bachelor’s degree in 1931, his master’s in 1932 and his doctoral degree in 1933,
all from the Lw´ow Polytechnic Institute. He visited Princeton for three months in 1935 at the
invitation of John von Neumann and returned the following year for a longer period. He was

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
171
to invent what are now called Ulam matrices in his ground-breaking paper [1930].
The deﬁnition of measurable cardinal traces back to this seminal work of Ulam;
their properties as cardinals and their utility in combinatorial arguments took
awhile to be fully recognized. See Kanamori’s two chapters and Mitchell’s chapter
on inner model theory and large cardinals for more on the impact of this discov-
ery. For more on the history of this accomplishment, see Chapter 1, Section 2 of
[Kanamori, 1994].
Hausdorﬀpublished a second edition of his text under the new title of Mengen-
lehre in 1927, where he expanded the treatment of Borel sets, Suslin sets, Baire
functions, continuous mappings and homeomorphisms. To keep the length reason-
able, he had to cut material from the ﬁrst edition and found it “easiest to sacriﬁce,
of the topics treated in the ﬁrst edition, most of the theory of ordered sets, a sub-
ject that stands somewhat by itself” (translation by John Aumann in [Hausdorﬀ,
1957, 5]). The growing familiarity of the theory of ordered sets, as witnessed by
Sierpi´nski’s 1928 book, may have been one of the reasons that Hausdorﬀomitted
this theory from the second and third editions of his textbook.
Next we turn to results related to trees. In 1925 D´enes K˝onig submitted Sur
les correspondences multivoques des ensembles which includes a version of K¨onig’s
Lemma68 described in terms of sequences and relations [1926, 120]:
E) Soit E1, E2, E3, . . . une suite d´enombrable, d’ensembles ﬁnis, non
vides, et soit R une relation telle qu’`a chaque ´el´ement xn+1 de chaque
ensemble En+1 corresponde au moins un ´el´ement xn de En, li´e ´a xn+1
par la relation R, c’est ce que nous ´ecrivons sous la forme xn R xn+1
(n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ).
Alors on peut choisir dans, chaque ensemble En
un ´el´ement an de sorte que, pour la suite inﬁnie a1, a2, a3, . . . , on ait
an R an+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ).69
a Harvard Junior Fellow and then a lecturer at Harvard during 1936–1940, visiting Poland
in the summers until he left Poland in 1939 to return to the United States a mere month
before World War II arrived in Poland. He was on the faculty of the University of Wisconsin,
Madison 1941–1944, and then went to Los Alamos Laboratories 1944-1967, and remained a
consultant for the remainder of his life.
He continued his academic career 1965–1977 at the
University of Colorado and at the University of Florida 1974–1984. His mathematical interests
were broad, including set theory and abstract measures at the beginning of his career, topology,
ergodic theory, computational approaches to mathematics, and bio-mathematics.
He enjoyed
conversations with mathematicians, physicists, and biologists. He held von Neumann in high
regard, and valued their close association which lasted many years.
He used to joke during
visits by Erd˝os that the two had known each other since before I was born. I was privileged
to enjoy the hospitality of Stan and his wife Fran¸coise in Santa Fe where other guests and
visitors included Gian-Carlo Rota, Dan Mauldin, Richard Laver, and the Mycielskis. For more
information on Ulam, including further references, see his autobiography [1976], selected works
[1974], the biography at http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Ulam.html by
J. J. O’Connor and E. F. Robertson and the brief article by Ciesielski and Rassias [2009].
68See [Franchella, 1997] for information of the history of this important result.
69E) Let E1, E2, E3, . . . be a countable sequence of ﬁnite non-empty sets, and let R be a relation
such that to each element xn+1 of each set En+1 there corresponds at least one element xn of En
which is linked by the relation to xn+1, which we will write as xn R xn+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ). Then
one can choose in each set En an element an such that, for a1, a2, a3, . . . , one has an R an+1

172
Jean A. Larson
K˝onig remarked in a footnote to his paper that the proof is based on an idea he
owes to M. St. Valk´o.70
The modern formulation of K¨onig’s Lemma is for trees considered as partial
orders: (T, <) is a tree if < is a partial order such that for each element t ∈T,
the set of predecessors of t is well-ordered by <. By a common abuse of notation
the tree is often referred to by the underlying set T alone. For an ordinal α, the
αth level of the tree is the set of all elements t ∈T whose set of predecessors is
order-isomorphic to α. The height of a tree T is the least α for which the αth level
is empty. A branch is a maximal linearly ordered subset. With this terminology
in hand, we can give the now usual formulation of K¨onig’s Lemma: If T is a tree
of height ω such that all levels of T are ﬁnite, then T has an inﬁnite branch.
In the late 1920’s, Moore started to revise his axioms and in the process con-
structed his famous road space. Moore presented a paper at the annual meeting
of the American Mathematical Society in December, 1926 and his abstract [1927]
gave a brief commentary on Axioms 1, 2, and 4 and Theorem 4 of his early work
[1916], including a list of types of spaces in which either Axiom 1 or Axiom 4 failed
to hold, together with a proposed Axiom 1’. He gave a series of four colloquium
lectures on point set theory (we would call it point set topology) for the Summer
Meeting of the American Mathematical Society in August, 1929 in Boulder, Col-
orado. The synopsis he passed out to the participants gave a variation of Axiom
1’ which he further modiﬁed in the course of his lectures; he eventually ended up
with a version that allowed him to prove what is known as the Moore Metrization
Theorem [1935]. On his way home from the meeting, Moore discovered his auto-
mobile road space [1942].71 Mary Ellen Rudin [1975b], in her personal survey on
the metrizability of normal Moore spaces, described road spaces in terms of trees
where a connecting road or copy of an interval of the real line is added between
a node and each of its immediate successors, and any terminal nodes are also ex-
tended. The Moore automobile road space is then the space obtained from the
complete binary tree of sequences of length ≤ω.
Important tools for the understanding of the inﬁnite were developed. John von
Neumann72 developed what are now known as the von Neumann ordinals and put
(n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ).
70Stephan Valk´o who was his co-author in [K˝onig and Valk´o, 1926], a paper which was received
by the journal in December 1924.
71See [Jones, 1997, 99–1000] for the timing, a description of the road space, and a graphical
illustration. See [Fitzpatrick, 1997] for a carefully documented history of these lectures, their
part in the development of the axioms for a Moore space, and their connections to the Moore
metrization theorem and road spaces.
72John (J´anos) von Neumann (December 28, 1903 – February 8, 1957), while at the Lutheran
Gymnasium, was tutored by professors at the University of Budapest at the behest of his math-
ematics teacher L´aszl´o R´atz. In 1920, as a teenager, von Neumann submitted his ﬁrst mathe-
matical paper for publication. He studied chemistry at the University of Berlin 1921–1923 and
then went to Zurich where he received his diploma in chemical engineering in 1926.
He had
an ongoing interest in mathematics, had been admitted to the University of Budapest in 1921,
and did well on mathematics examinations there without taking any courses there. In Zurich
he talked with Weyl and P´olya about mathematics. In the same year he received his chemical
engineering degree he was awarded his doctorate with a thesis in set theory from the University

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
173
transﬁnite recursion on a ﬁrm foundation in the 1920’s as detailed in Kanamori’s
ﬁrst chapter. With concrete representatives of Cantor’s ordinal numbers, the order
types of well-orderings now had canonical representatives, and Hausdorﬀ’s initial
ordinals received the names ω = ω, ω1, . . . . Speciﬁcally, the order type of the non-
negative integers, which Cantor denoted by ω, was now the order type of the von
Neumann ordinal ω, which minimized the distinction between the order type of
an ordinal number and its representative as a von Neumann ordinal.
In response to a question of Sierpi´nski about the size of an ordered set whose in-
creasing chains and decreasing chains are known to be at most denumerable, Pavel
Urysohn73 [1924] built on work of Hausdorﬀ[1914] to prove that the cardinality
of such an ordered set is at most that of the continuum. The proof generalizes to
the inequality |S| ≤2U(S) where U(S) is the supremum over the cardinalities of
increasing and decreasing well-ordered chains, which we will call the Hausdorﬀ-
Urysohn Inequality.
Alexandroﬀand Urysohn, in the supplemental material of [1929],74 made a
simple but fundamental observation about regressive functions75 which we will
call the Regressive Function Theorem (its generalizations will be indexed under
this name):76
of Budapest. The Mathematics Genealogy Project site lists the harmonic analyst Lip´ot Fej´er (he
is particularly well known for Fej´er’s Theorem on convergence of Fourier series) as his doctoral
advisor.
von Neumann held a Rockefeller Fellowship 1926–1927 which enabled him to study
with Hilbert in G¨ottingen. He lectured at the University of Berlin 1926–1929, and in Hamburg
from 1929–1930. He became a visiting lecturer at Princeton University in 1930, was appointed
professor there in 1931, and in 1933 became one of the ﬁrst six mathematics professors in the
newly founded Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. This remarkable man contributed
to many ﬁelds of pure and applied mathematics, physics, computer science and received wide
recognition for his work. Since the work of von Neumann related to the topics of this chapter
occurred when he was young, we have restricted this brief sketch of his academic career to the
early years.
73Pavel Samuilovich Urysohn (February 3, 1898 – August 17, 1924) started studying physics
at the age of ﬁfteen under the direction of P. Lasareft, a member of the Academy of St. Pe-
tersburg, and Urysohn already had a publication in 1915.
Inﬂuenced by courses taken with
Egorov and Lusin, he switched to mathematics and ﬁnished his undergraduate degree at Moscow
University where his focus was analysis. Lusin persuaded him to continue with graduate stud-
ies, and Urysohn was awarded a doctorate in 1921 under Lusin’s direction, after which he be-
came an assistant professor there. He is perhaps best known for his work in topology, specif-
ically for Urysohn’s Lemma and the metrization theorem bearing his name.
He died after
swimming in stormy seas oﬀthe coast of Brittany near Batz-sur-Mer, and is buried in the
cemetery there. For more information, see the brief biography at http://www-history.mcs.st-
andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Urysohn.html by J. J. O’Connor and E. F. Robertson, and the obit-
uary by Alexandroﬀ[1925]. Another resource of possible interest to those reading Russian is a
memoir entitled Joy of Discovery written by his sister, Lina Neiman, which discusses his life,
and includes articles by mathematicians on his mathematics.
74See Kojman’s chapter for more on the Alexandroﬀand Urysohn paper.
75A function f on ordinals into ordinals is regressive if f(α) < α for all non-zero α.
76In the preface to [Alexandroﬀand Urysohn, 1929], Alexandroﬀnoted that the research was
done in the summer of 1922, written up in winter 1922-1923, and accepted in 1923 by the editors
of Fundamenta Mathematicae, but did not appear there for technical reasons.
Math Review
MR0370492 (51 #6719) of a reissue in Russian of the monograph noted that its ﬁrst appearance
was delayed for six years “mainly because its length posed problems for the editors of Fundamenta

174
Jean A. Larson
Th´eor`eme: Supposons qu’on ait d´eﬁni, pour tout nombre ordinal a
de la seconde classe, un nombre ordinal µ(α) sous la seule condition
µ(α) < α.
Il existe alors un ensemble ind´enombrable de nombres ordinaux
α1, α2, . . . , αn, . . . , αω, . . . , αλ, . . .
|Ω
tels que les µ(α) correspondant sont tous identiques:
µ(α1) = µ(α2) = · · · = µ(αn) = · · · = µ(αω) = · · · = µ(αλ) = . . . |Ω77
In modern language, every regressive function on ω1 \ ω is constant on an un-
countable set. They show that there cannot be a function ν with the property that
for all α, ν(α) is the least ordinal number greater than α such that µ(β) > α when
β > ν(α). Thus there is some α such that for unboundedly many β, µ(β) ≤α
and, by cardinality considerations, uncountably many of these β have the same
value for µ(β). They used this theorem to prove that ω1 with the order topology
is a non-metrizable topological space.
The Regressive Function Theorem can be regarded as a generalized pigeon-
hole principle in which one is required to distributes items in a list into indexed
pigeonholes so that each item is placed in a pigeonhole with a smaller index.
Mathematicae, and it was the intervention of L. E. J. Brouwer that led to its publication, some
years after the appearance of the six articles in which the results ﬁrst appeared in print.”
77
Theorem: Suppose one has deﬁned for every ordinal number α of the second number
class, an ordinal number µ(α) satisfying the sole condition µ(α) < α.
Then there exists an uncountable set of ordinal numbers of the second class
α1, α2, . . . , αn, . . . , αω, . . . , αλ, . . .
|Ω
such that the corresponding µ(α)[s] are all identical:
µ(α1) = µ(α2) = · · · = αλ = . . .
|Ω
Todorcevic, after noting that for limit ordinals α < ε0, there is a natural recursive way to choose
an increasing sequence of ordinals with limit α, made the following comment about this result of
Alexandroﬀand Urysohn in a footnote [2007b, 19]: “one is tempted to believe that the recursion
can be stretched all the way up to ω1 and this is probably the way P. S. Alexandroﬀdiscovered
the phenomenon that regressive mappings on ω1 must be constant on uncountable sets.”

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
175
2.4
Ramsey and van der Waerden
Bartel Leendert van der Waerden78 was an algebraist, whose textbook Modern
Algebra [1930]79 has been translated into English and Russian, was reissued in
1991, and is cited to this day. Van der Waerden [1927] (cf. [Graham et al., 1990])
used a double induction argument to prove that for every partition of the positive
integers into ﬁnitely many pieces there are arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions
(a + b, a + 2b, a + 3b, ..., a + ℓb) in one of the cells, and thereby solved a conjecture
he attributed to a Dutch mathematician Baudet.80 Van der Waerden wrote an
account81 of how he came to prove the theorem. It started with a lunch time
conversation with Emil Artin and Otto Schreier, continued in Artin’s oﬃce, where
the trio exchanged questions and ideas, with lots of diagrams on the board, and
ended with van der Waerden having an insight into a method for ﬁnding the
arithmetic progressions based on an example about which he said [1927, 259]:
“This ﬁnal idea was accompanied by a feeling of complete certainty. I felt quite
sure that this method of proof would work for arbitrary k and ℓ. I cannot explain
this feeling; I can only say that mathematicians often have such conviction. When
a decisive idea comes to our mind, we feel that we have the whole proof we are
looking for: we have only to work it out in detail.”
A critical theorem in inﬁnite combinatorics is Ramsey’s Theorem.
In 1928
Frank P. Ramsey82 submitted a paper [1930] addressing a problem in formal logic
78Bartel Leendert van der Waerden (February 2, 1903 – January 12, 1996) started studying
mathematics at the University of Amsterdam in 1919 when he was sixteen, where Brouwer was
the teacher he most respected. Most of his graduate study was at the University of Amsterdam
where, in 1925, he defended his doctoral thesis written with Hendrik de Vries, and he also studied
in G¨ottingen where he shifted to algebra after contact with Hellmuth Kneser and Emmy Noether.
After a postdoctoral visit to G¨ottingen, he went to Hamburg for a semester with Hecke, Artin
and Schreier and started work on the ﬁrst volume of Moderne Algebra [1930] (in German) based
on lectures by Artin and Noether. Van der Waerden held positions in Groningen and G¨ottingen
before becoming a professor at the University of Leipzig in 1931, where he continued working
during the war until his house was bombed in 1943. He and his family stayed in various places
with friends and relatives and in 1945 returned to the Netherlands. Van der Waerden visited
Johns Hopkins University in 1947, returned in 1948 to a chair in mathematics at the University
of Amsterdam, and in 1951 moved to the University of Zurich where he spent the remainder of
his academic career.
79Moderne Algebra. Teil 1 was published as volume 33 in the ﬁrst Springer series of higher
mathematics texts, started by Richard Courant in 1920. In the preface to the translation of the
second edition, van der Waerden shared his attitude toward set theory in [1937], translated to
English in [1953, v–vi]: “I have tried to avoid as much as possible any questionable set-theoretical
reasoning in algebra. . . . I completely omitted those parts of the theory of ﬁelds which rest on
the axiom of choice and the well-ordering theorem. Other reasons for this omission were the
fact that, by the well-ordering principle, an extraneous element is introduced into algebra, and
furthermore, the consideration that for virtually all applications the special case of countable
ﬁelds, in which the counting replaces the well-ordering, is wholly suﬃcient.”
80Schur independently made the conjecture and shared it with his students (cf. Soifer [2009]).
81For van der Waerden’s account, see [1954], reprinted in [1998] and, in English, see [1971].
82Frank Plumpton Ramsey (February 22, 1903 – January 19, 1930) was the son of Arthur
Ramsey, President of Magdalene College, Cambridge and a mathematics tutor. He completed
his undergraduate work at Trinity College in 1923 and was elected a fellow of King’s College in
1924. The Mathematical Genealogy Project site lists him as having a University of Cambridge

176
Jean A. Larson
which included a proof of his oft-cited theorem as a lemma.83 For a photograph
of Ramsey and a discussion of the beginnings of ﬁnite Ramsey theory, see Harary
[1983] and Spencer [1983]. Below is his statement of what he labeled Theorem A
[1930, 264].
Ramsey’s Theorem:
Let Γ be an inﬁnite class, and µ and r positive in-
tegers; and let all those sub-classes of Γ which have exactly r members,
or, as we may say, let all r-combinations of the members of Γ be divided
in any manner into µ mutually exclusive classes Ci (i = 1, 2, . . . , µ), so
that every r-combination is a member of one and only one Ci; then,
assuming the Axiom of Selections, Γ must contain an inﬁnite sub-class
∆such that all the r-combinations of the members of ∆belong to the
same Ci.84
Ramsey’s Theorem is an example of a balanced partition theorem, since the
size (inﬁnite) of the set all of whose r-combinations belong to the same cell of the
partition does not depend on which cell it is.
Ramsey’s proof uses induction on the number of cells µ in the partition, with
the critical case being µ = 2, and induction on the size r of the combinations. He
observed that the theorem is clearly true for r = 1 and for µ = 1. Fixing µ = 2,
he assumes the statement is true for r = ρ −1, and proceeds to the induction step
with r = ρ. Having ﬁxed a partition C1 and C2 of the ρ-combinations of Γ, he
deﬁnes as long as possible sequences x1 < x2 < . . . and (Γ ⊇)Γ1 ⊇Γ2 ⊇. . . so
that x1 ∈Γ, xi ∈Γi−1 for i > 1 and every ρ-combination obtained by adding xi
to ρ −1 members of Γi is in C1. If the process goes on inﬁnitely, he concludes
that ∆= {x1, x2, . . . } is the desired set. If the process stops after ﬁnitely many
steps, say with the deﬁnition of Γn, then he initiates a new process of choosing
y1 < y2 < . . . and Γn−1 ⊇∆1 ⊇∆2 ⊇. . . with y1 ∈Γn−1, yi ∈∆i−1 for i > 1,
and every ρ-combination obtained by adding yi to ρ −1 members of ∆i is in the
same Ci, which can be arranged by applying the induction hypothesis for ρ −1.
Since the ﬁrst process stopped after ﬁnitely many steps, it must be the case that
Ci = C2 at every stage in the second process, so that ∆= {y1, y2, . . . } is the
desired set. He then completes the induction on r. He reduces the case for µ > 2
many cells to at most µ −1 cells, by combining the last two cells together to get a
new partition and applying the induction hypothesis to it to get an inﬁnite set ∆
and a speciﬁed cell containing all r-combinations from it. If the speciﬁed cell is not
doctorate with no mention of date or advisor. With his ﬁrst major work (The Foundations of
Mathematics) published in 1925, it is likely that his doctorate was awarded after he became a
fellow of King’s College and prior to being appointed a university lecturer in mathematics at
King’s College in 1926. His interests ranged widely and included foundations, philosophy and
economics.
83Ramsey’s paper was published posthumously.
84The Axiom of Selections is presumably another name for the Axiom of Choice. Bertrand Rus-
sell discussed the “theory of selections” in Chapter XII of his book Introduction to Mathematical
Philosophy [1920, 117ﬀ], including Zermelo’s Theorem.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
177
the new cell obtained by joining two old ones, ∆is the desired set, and otherwise
he applies the theorem again with µ = 2 to get the required inﬁnite ∆′ ⊆∆.
We will call a sequence {z1, z2, . . . } where the combination of any element zi
with any ρ−1 later elements lands in the same cell Ci begin-homogeneous.85 With
this language, Ramsey’s basic induction step argument starts with an to attempt
to construct a sequence begin-homogeneous for which all the ρ-combinations end
in the ﬁrst cell, and if it does not work, repeat starting from the point of failure
to get a sequence begin-homogeneous and verify that all the ρ-combinations end
in the second cell.
Corresponding to the theorem discussed above, sometimes also called the In-
ﬁnite Ramsey’s Theorem, Ramsey proved a ﬁnite version quoted below [1930].
Finite Ramsey’s Theorem:
Given any r, n and µ we can ﬁnd an m0
such that, if m ≥m0 and the r-combinations of any Γm are divided in
any manner into µ mutually exclusive classes Ci (i = 1, 2, . . . , µ), then
Γm must contain a sub-class ∆n such that all the r-combinations of
the members of ∆n belong to the same Ci.86
Ramsey followed the statement of the theorem with the following remarks:
“This is the theorem which we require in our logical investigations, and we should
at the same time like to have information as to how large m0 must be taken for
any given r, n, and µ. This problem I do not know how to solve, and I have little
doubt that the values for m0 obtained below are far larger than is necessary.” The
study of this question and its generalizations is the core of ﬁnite Ramsey theory.
3
1930-1940: EARLY RAMIFICATIONS
In the 1930’s Erd˝os and Rado, two pioneers in the partition calculus, forged their
initial results; Sierpi´nski constructed a key example which shows that there is no
direct uncountable analog of Ramsey’s Theorem; Jones proved his metrization the-
orem and constructed a special Aronszajn tree87 but did not publish the work until
later; and Kurepa made the ﬁrst systematic study of uncountable trees, giving an
equivalent formulation of Suslin’s Problem in terms of trees. Partial orders were
shown to be extendible to linear orders, and a denumerable partial order universal
for countable partial orders was constructed. The Regressive Function Theorem
was generalized, and large families of almost disjoint sets were constructed. Equiv-
alence relations became part of the tool kit for analysts;88 graph theory became
85The use of begin-homogeneous here is designed to parallel end-homogeneous used in later
constructions.
86Here Γm denotes a class with m members.
87Recall that a special Aronszajn tree is a tree of height ω1 all of whose levels are countable
and which is the union of countably many antichains.
88Equivalence relations were one of the topics in [Bourbaki, 1939], a 51-page overview of set
theory designed to prepare individuals for the study of analysis.

178
Jean A. Larson
a subject in its own right89 with the publication of Theorie der endlichen und
unendlichen Graphen [K˝onig, 1936], [1990], the ﬁrst book to present graph theory
as a subject.
There were ups and downs in mathematical publishing. Zentralblatt f¨ur Math-
ematik was founded in 1931 by Springer Verlag in cooperation with the Prus-
sian Academy of Science.90 The Journal of Symbolic Logic was founded in 1936
(cf. [Ducasse and Curry, 1962]), and Alonzo Church included a bibliography of
symbolic logic in the ﬁrst issue. However, on September 1, 1939 Germany invaded
Poland and volume 33 of Fundamenta Mathematicae was not published.91
Hausdorﬀpublished the third edition of his set theory text; Moore [1932] pub-
lished his monograph Foundations of Point Set Theory with the revised version of
his axioms that he had been working toward in the 1920’s.92
Sierpi´nski published a monograph [1934] on the Continuum Hypothesis. It nat-
urally included his own work, and also included that of Lusin, Tarski, Kuratowski
and others of the Polish school. It started with equivalences of the statement and
continued with discussions, all the while assuming CH, of Lusin sets, the duality
between sets of measure zero and sets of ﬁrst category, the proof that there is no
measure on all subsets of the real numbers which is (1) not identically zero; (2)
zero on singletons; (3) countably additive.
The founders of the Moscow school, Egorov and Lusin, fell on hard times in the
1930’s. In September 1930 Egorov was arrested for his religious beliefs, Name Wor-
shipping, and exiled to a camp near Kazan on the Volga River, and he died after
a hunger strike initiated because the prison guards would not let him practice his
religious beliefs.93 The Moscow Mathematical Society had elected Kolman, a loyal
Bolshevik, as president. Lusin was alarmed by what happened to Egorov, so he left
Moscow University for the Steklov Institute of the Central Aero-Hydrodynamics
Institute in Leningrad, but kept his position as the head of the mathematical
group of the Russian Academy of Sciences. Kolman’s denunciation of Lusin in
print prevented Lusin from attending the International Congress of 1932. The
Russian Academy of Sciences and the Steklov Institute were moved to Moscow in
1934. In July 1936, articles in Pravda appeared accusing Lusin, in particular, of
claiming results of his students as his own and of publishing his best papers in the
West. These articles led to a series of meetings of the Moscow Mathematical So-
ciety which drafted a resolution against Lusin that led to the loss of his university
position and loss of good will from some of his colleagues, but not his position as
89See the AMS Math Review by Robin Wilson [1991].
90See the History of Zentralblatt page whose url follows:
http://www.zentralblatt-math.org/zmath/en/about/history/ downloaded September 7, 2010.
91See [Kuzawa, 1970, 489–490] for an overview of the loss of life and property of the mathe-
matical community of Poland during the war period 1939–1945.
92Jones [1997, 97], in his article The beginning of topology in the United States and the Moore
school, assessed this work of Moore and Topology by Solomon Lefschetz [1930] as follows: “While
deﬁnitely limited, these books were of considerable help in formulating the knowledge and tools
necessary for research.”
93See [Graham and Kantor, 2007] for details.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
179
an academician. Lusin made a statement in response to the resolution promising,
in part, to publish primarily in the Soviet Union. What became known as the
Lusin Aﬀair had a chilling eﬀect: mathematicians in the Soviet Union basically
stopped publishing their results abroad.94
The study of transversal theory was launched when Philip Hall [1935] proved
his celebrated theorem on matching:
Hall’s Marriage Theorem:
Given n boys, if, for each positive k ≤n,
any k of the boys between them know at least k girls, then it is possible
to marry each boy to a girl that he knows.
The result can also be formulated as an existence theorem for a system of distinct
representatives: For each boy b, there is a set Gb of girls he knows, and a selection
of distinct girls from each of these sets yields the desired outcome.
D. K˝onig
[1931] had an equivalent but initially lesser known result published in Hungarian.
Transversals are regarded in a variety of ways: as injective choice functions for a
sequence of sets; as sets whose intersection with every set in a family is a singleton;
as systems of unique representatives.
3.1
Extensions
This section includes extensions of results from earlier decades for linear and partial
orderings, almost disjoint families and regressive functions. Also included is the
following result which discusses an extension of a diﬀerent kind.
Edward Marczewski95 [1930] proved a theorem that is known in the literature
by his birth name:
Szpilrajn’s Theorem:
Every partial order has an extension to a total
(linear) order.
For Marczewski, a linear order was a transitive, irreﬂexive, trichotomous binary
relation. Marczewski ﬁrst proved a lemma that any partial order with an incom-
parable pair can be extended to a partial order in which the pair has a speciﬁed
order.
He next observed that the union of an increasing well-ordered chain of
partial orders under extension is a partial order. He concluded that there must be
a maximal extension, hence one which is a linear order, citing [Kuratowski, 1922]
and [Hausdorﬀ, 1914]. In his paper, he remarked that the theorem was already
known, citing the third edition of Sierpi´nski’s book, Zarys teorji mnogo´sci, but
that the proofs of Banach, Kuratowski and Tarski had not yet been published.
94See [Demidov and Levshin, 1999] and the Math Review MR1790419 (2001k:01066) by F.
Smithies of it for more information.
95Marczewski had the surname Szpilrajn until 1940.
Kuratowski directed his thesis at the
University of Lw´ow. Other inﬂuential colleagues there included Mazurkiewicz and Sierpi´nski.

180
Jean A. Larson
Andrzej Mostowski96 [1938] constructed a denumerable partial order universal
for denumerable partial orders,97 extending the Bernstein result for countable
linear orders which Hausdorﬀhad extended under CH to larger size linear orders.
Hausdorﬀ[1936] revisited ordered sets and constructed an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap inside
the “dyadic number sequences.” He commented on its relationship to his earlier
work in a footnote [Hausdorﬀ, 1936, 244, footnote 1]:
F¨ur Folgen reeler order rationaler Zahlen habe ich dies bereits 1909
gemacht (Graduierung nach dem Endverlauf, Abh. S¨achs. Ges. d. Wiss.
31). Da dieser Arbeit wohl wenig bekannt is und die Konstruktion f¨ur
dyadische Folgen, die zum vollen Beweis des Satzes I erforderlich ist,
doch einige Modiﬁkationen velangt, m¨ochte ich die Sache vollst¨andig
darstellen.98
Sierpi´nski [1931] investigated the collection of all subsets of a denumerable set
D partially ordered by the subset relation. He proved that an order type ϕ is
realizable as a family of subsets of D linearly ordered by the subset relation if and
only if it is a denumerable real type, where a real type is the order type of some
set of real numbers with their usual order. At the end of his paper he asked the
following question.
Question:
What are necessary and suﬃcient conditions for an order
type ϕ to be realizable as a family of denumerable sets linearly ordered
by the subset relation?
He concluded with the comment that all such types are necessarily realizable as
subsets of (1 + λ) ω1, where λ is the order type of the set of real numbers.
Sierpi´nski [1937], who had introduced the notion of almost disjoint families in
[1928b], published his proof that for any cardinal κ there is a family of cardinality
96Andrzej Mostowski (November 1, 1913 – August 22, 1975) wrote up his doctoral thesis, On
the Independence of the Deﬁnition of Finiteness in the System of Logic in 1938 and defended it
at Warsaw University in February 1939 (recall that Poland was invaded in September 1939).
Kuratowski was the oﬃcial supervisor, but Mostowski counted himself a student of Tarski.
Lindenbaum had suggested that he work on the method of independence proofs sketched by
Fraenkel (cf. [Crossley, 1975, 44]). This conversation was the starting point of the main content
of Mostowski’s dissertation, namely, what came to be known as Fraenkel-Mostowski permuta-
tion models. In conversation with Crossley [1975], Mostowski shared some memories of his three
escapes during World War II, and his decision to take some bread instead of his “nice, very big,
wonderful notebook with all these discoveries” which subsequently was burned. For more on his
life and his interactions with mathematicians inside and outside of Poland, see [Ehrenfeucht et
al., 2008].
97Recall that a partial order (P, <) is universal for a class K of partial orders if (P, <) belongs
to K and every partial order in K has an order and incomparability preserving embedding into
(P, <). I only know of this result from the reference to it in [Johnston, 1956].
98I already did this in 1909 for sequences of real or rational numbers (Graduierung nach dem
Endverlauf, Abh. S¨achs. Ges. d. Wiss. 31). Since this work is undoubtedly little known and
since the construction for dyadic sequences, which is necessary for the full proof of Theorem 1,
needs some modiﬁcations, I would like to present the matter completely. (Translation by Plotkin
cf. [Hausdorﬀ, 2005, 307])

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
181
at least κ+ of increasing κ-sequences which, pairwise, have disjoint tails, i.e. there
is an almost disjoint family of size 2λ of subsets of κ where λ is the least cardinal
µ with 2µ > κ.
Ben Dushnik99 [1931] extended the Regressive Function Theorem of Alexandroﬀ
and Urysohn to non-limit [successor] cardinals κ using the well-foundedness of the
ordinals and basic cardinal arithmetic to ﬁnd a subset of size κ on which the
function is constant. He gave the example of the function F : ℵω →ω deﬁned by
F(α) = 0 if α is ﬁnite and otherwise F(α) = n if and only if |α| = ℵn to show
some limitation was necessary.
3.2
Erd˝os and Rado
Now we turn to Ramsey-theoretic results of Erd˝os, Rado and Sierpi´nski.
Richard Rado100 was a student of Schur in Berlin. Rado in his thesis [1931] (see
also his [1933]) studied partitions of positive integers into ﬁnitely many classes
and homogeneous systems of linear equations with positive integer coeﬃcients.
He called such a system of linear equations k-fold regular (now shortened to k-
regular) if for every partition of the positive integers into k classes, there is one
class which has a solution to the system.
Homogeneous systems which are k-
regular for all k are called partition regular, and Rado classiﬁed partition regular
systems, generalizing van der Waerden’s Theorem [1927] and Schur’s Theorem
[1917]. We will call this Rado’s Theorem for Linear Systems with Positive Integer
Coeﬃcients.
Here is a modern take on the theorem (see Hindman [2006, 4] for example). Say
that an n×n matrix A with rational entries and columns A = [⃗c0,⃗c1, . . . ,⃗cn] satis-
ﬁes the columns condition if and only if there is a partition I = {I0, I1, . . . , Im−1}
of the indices such that
1. P
k∈I0 ⃗ck = ⃗0; and
2. for all j < m, if j is positive, then the sum P
k∈Ij ⃗ck is a linear combination
of the vectors in S
ℓ<j{⃗cm : m ∈Iℓ}.
99In the middle 1920’s, Ben Dushnik joined the faculty of the University of Michigan (see [Ka-
plan, 1971, 184-185]). He received his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan under Theophil H.
Hildebrandt in 1931.
100Richard Rado (April 28, 1906 – December 23, 1989), son of Leopold Rado, a Hungarian from
Budapest, was born in Germany, and met and married Luise Zadek there. Since opportunities
for those of Jewish descent were slim under Hitler, they went to Cambridge, England to study
further. After earning a second doctorate under Hardy in 1935 (see [Richards, 1971] for details),
he was a lecturer at Cambridge and then at the University of Sheﬃeld.
He was appointed
Reader in Mathematics at King’s College, London, before becoming a Professor of Mathematics
at Reading in 1954. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1978. He worked in a variety of
ﬁelds and was particularly known for his work in combinatorics, including abstract independence
structures, transversal theory, and Ramsey theory, especially the partition calculus. For more on
his life and work, see [Rogers, 1998].

182
Jean A. Larson
Call a matrix A with rational entries partition regular over N if and only if for
any ﬁnite coloring of N, there is a solution ⃗e to A⃗x = ⃗0 such that all entries of ⃗e
receive the same color. Here is Rado’s Theorem reformulated this terminology.
Rado’s Theorem for Linear Systems with Positive Integer Coeﬃcients:
A is partition regular if and only if A satisﬁes the columns condition.
At a celebration of his 65th birthday, Richard Rado spoke of his beginning steps
in mathematics ([Richards, 1971]):
Having been registered as a research student at Berlin University for
some time, I was in the habit of staring gloomily at a blank sheet
of paper wondering how I could ever cover it with any worthwhile
mathematics. One day I attended a seminar conducted by a group of
distinguished mathematicians. A fellow research student gave a lecture
on van der Waerden’s theorem on arithmetical progressions. To me the
theorem sounded quite incredible and the proof a string of fallacies. I
went away determined to shatter whatever belief there could exist in
the truth of such a theorem. But on studying the matter more closely
I had to admit that the theorem was true and the proof sound. This
gave me my start in mathematics and I have never looked back.
In 1931, Rado’s future collaborator, Paul Erd˝os101 was a ﬁrst-year undergradu-
ate taking a graph theory course from D´enes K˝onig, when he proved a generaliza-
tion of Menger’s Theorem102 for inﬁnite graphs, which only appeared in 1936 at
the end of [K˝onig, 1936]. While at the university, Erd˝os interacted with a dozen or
so young mathematicians, including Gy˝orgy Szekeres and Eszter Klein. S´os [2002,
88] speculated:
It might be that this intensive collaboration, which was quite unusual
at the time, has been inﬂuential in shaping the future character of the
mathematical life in Hungary.
Erd˝os received his Ph.D. from P´eter P´azma´any University103 in 1934. About his
university professors, Erd˝os said in an interview:104 “I learned a lot from Lip´ot
101Paul Erd˝os (March 26, 1913 - November 9, 1996) moved out of Hungary because of World
War II and eventually became an itinerant mathematician whose travels knit together a world-
wide community of mathematicians. See [Bollob´as, 1997] for a short biography; see [Graham and
Neˇsetˇril, 1997] for personal memories of many close to him, and [Hajnal, 1997] for a discussion
of his work in the partition calculus by a close collaborator.
102Menger’s Theorem [Menger, 1927] says that for any vertices x and y in a graph, the minimum
number of vertices that need to be removed from a graph to end up with x and y not connected
by a path is the same as the maximum size of a family of paths from x to y with no two paths
sharing an edge. For a strong version of Menger’s Theorem that answers a question of Erd˝os,
see [Aharoni and Berger, 2009].
103The university was renamed Lor´and E¨otv¨os University in 1948.
104The interview was published in 1979 in Hungarian [Staar, 1979] in the monthly Term´eszet
Vil´aga and quoted by S´os [2002] in an English translation.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
183
Fej´er, but very probably, I learned the most from L´aszl´o Kalm´ar.”
However,
Erd˝os had learned the basics of set theory from his father, who was a high school
teacher, and Erd˝os “soon became fascinated with ‘Cantor’s paradise’ ” according
to Andr´as Hajnal [1997, 352]. Erd˝os and Szekeres [1935]105 (see also [Spencer,
1973]) rediscovered the Finite Ramsey’s Theorem.106 They comment that Thoralf
Skolem published a proof of the Finite Ramsey’s Theorem [1933].
Erd˝os and
Szekeres developed what Graham and Neˇsetˇril [2002] called an ordered pigeonhole
principle.
Ordered Pigeonhole Principle: Let m, n be positive integers.
Then
every sequence of (m −1)(n −1) + 1 distinct integers contains either a
monotone increasing m-set or monotone decreasing n-set.
They then used their version of the Finite Ramsey’s Theorem for quadruples to
prove a Euclidean partition property.
After his doctoral degree, Erd˝os went to Manchester, England at the invitation
of Mordell, where he met Rado and Ulam, among others. Erd˝os’ interest in gen-
eralizing Ramsey’s Theorem began early, as is illustrated in the obituary of Rado
by Rogers which included a sentence from a letter to Rado from early in 1934
[1998, 190]: “Erd˝os asked: ‘Is it true that when S is a set of inﬁnite cardinal[ity],
and the countable subsets of S are split into two classes, then there is always an
inﬁnite subset S∗of S all of whose countable subsets are in the same class?’ Rado
replied with a counterexample almost immediately.” In 1938 Erd˝os was oﬀered
a fellowship at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, where he spent a
year and a half, and after that he became an itinerant mathematician, fostering
collaborations everywhere he went. For more on his life, including passport and
visa troubles with Hungary and the United States and the story of how he became
a dual citizen of Israel, I recommend the article by Bollob´as [1997].
Ramsey’s Theorem is called a positive result, since it guarantees the existence
of an inﬁnite set whose n-element subsets are indistinguishable with respect to a
given partition, coloring, or n-ary symmetric relation. An important early negative
result (published in 1933) is the Sierpi´nski partition which shows that there is no
direct uncountable analog of Ramsey’s Theorem. Bronis law Knaster107 had asked
the following question (cf. [Sierpi´nski, 1933, 285]):
Existe-t-il une relation sym´etrique R, dont le champ E est non
d´enombrable, telle que dans tout sous-ensemble non d´enombrable
de E existent deux ´el´ements diﬀ´erents α et β, tels que αRβ, et
deux ´el´ements diﬀ´erents γ et δ, tels que γ non Rδ.108
105The paper was submitted December 7, 1934.
106In [Erd˝os, 1942, 363] and [Erd˝os, 1996, 113] the rediscovery of the Finite Ramsey Theorem
is attributed to Szekeres.
107Knaster (May 22, 1893 – November 3, 1990) received his Ph.D. degree from the University of
Paris in 1925 under the supervision of Stefan Mazurkiewicz. He was a professor in Lw´ow starting
in 1939, and in Wroc law from 1945.
108Is there a symmetric relation R, of which the domain E is uncountable, such that in every

184
Jean A. Larson
For the domain E, Sierpi´nski selected the set of ﬁnite and denumerable ordi-
nals.109 He applied the Axiom of Choice to obtain a one-to-one function r : E →R,
and deﬁned αRβ if and only if r(min(α, β)) < r(max(α, β)). The symmetric bi-
nary relation R may be cast as a graph (without loops) by letting E be the set
of vertices and letting the edges be the unordered pairs {α, β} for which αRβ
(and βRα). Thus this example shows that Ramsey’s Theorem cannot be directly
extended to the uncountable.
3.3
Jones
F. Burton Jones,110 in a one-page abstract for a paper presented at the October
28, 1933 meeting of the American Mathematical Society at Columbia University,
included the statement of a metrization theorem [Jones, 1933]: “a separable normal
space satisfying the ﬁrst three parts of Axiom 1 of R. L. Moore’s Foundations of
Point Set Theory is completely separable and therefore metric, provided that in
this space every uncountable point set contains a subset of power c.” The reference
is to Moore’s book [1932]. Spaces which satisfy Axiom 0 and the ﬁrst three parts
of Axiom 1 were named Moore spaces by Jones [1937, 675]. A space is normal if
disjoint closed sets P and Q can always be separated by disjoint open supersets
U ⊇P and V ⊇Q.
After a four-year gap, Jones published the proof of his Theorem 5 [1937, 676]:
Jones Metrization Theorem:
If 2ℵ1 > 2ℵ2, then every separable metric
space M is completely separable and metric.111
Below this theorem and on the same page, Jones commented: “The author has
tried for some time without success to prove that 2ℵ1 > 2ℵ0.” He then stated what
has come to be known as the Normal Moore Space Conjecture: “Is every normal
Moore space M metric?”
Jerry Vaughan [1980] asked Jones why he thought that 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 was true, and
here is the response Vaughan recorded from their October 12-13, 1979 conversation
[1980, 40]: “Think of a countable sequence, say ω, as being an initial segment of
an uncountable set, say ω1. Well, it is perfectly obvious to even the most stupid
uncountable subset of E there are two diﬀerent elements α and β, such that αRβ and two
diﬀerent elements γ and δ such that not γRδ (translation by the author).
109Formally, he let E be the set of all ordinal numbers of the ﬁrst and second class of Cantor.
110Floyd Burton Jones (November 22, 1910 – April 15, 1999) was a student of R. L. Moore who
received his degree at the University of Texas at Austin in 1935, where he taught until 1950 with
the exception of a couple years during the war at the Harvard Underwater Sound Laboratory.
For information on Burton Jones, see the dedication by Jones’ ﬁrst doctoral student [Transue,
1969] and the overview of Jones’ work in the conference proceedings [McAuley and Rao, 1981].
Both were recommended by M. E. Rudin [1997]. Other resources include [Rogers, 1999] and the
brief biography at http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Jones Burton.html by
J. J. O’Connor and E. F. Robertson.
111Peter Nyikos [1980a] pointed out that Jones and Moore used completely separable for second
countable, i.e. there is a countable family of open sets such that every open set can be represented
as a union of some of them.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
185
person, and I guess maybe it helps to be a little stupid, if you take all the sequences
which run through the ﬁrst inﬁnity of ordinals, which gives a set of cardinality 2ℵ0,
look how many more you can get by running the rest of the way through ω1 with
uncountable sequences. It is clear that there ought to be a whole lot more of them.
I thought surely that I could prove that overnight, maybe even in an hour, but
I could not get anywhere on it. I remember one week I worked on that problem
pretty hard and could not see it. I happened to run into Moore walking across
campus and told him that I was losing my mind: I could not prove 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1
even though it ought to be true. Well, he just laughed and said ‘Neither could
Sierpinski.’ It had not occurred to me to look in Sierpinski’s book; so I looked in
there and found some things equivalent to this. He did not do much with it, but
he did enough to convince me that I was wasting my time.” Peter Nyikos [1980a,
28] completes the story: “The real cause of the delay, as Jones has informed us, is
that he was hoping to settle the entire normal Moore space problem · · · .”
Jones [1980]112 shared reactions of his thesis advisor Moore to this work:
When I was a student at Texas, Moore apparently didn’t consider
work in abstract spaces very highly. · · · I think he just felt there was
more substance and beauty in other less abstract kinds of problems -
- continua, decompositions, etc. So when I proved that if 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1
then every separable, normal Moore space was metrizable [1], I wasn’t
asked to present the proof in class but rather to the Mathematics Club
(as it was called). And when I wanted to use it together with other
things for a thesis, Moore didn’t like the idea at all but chose instead
a couple of embedding theorems I had gotten. With hindsight he was
certainly right. Since I thought that one ought to be able to prove
2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1, I might still be there!
Jones made a presentation entitled A false proposition of logic to the Mathe-
matics Club of the University of Texas in the spring of 1933 (see footnote 6 of
[1953]) in which he presented the construction/example of an Aronszajn tree as
he much later recounted for the American Mathematical Society on December 29,
1952 [1953].113 A modern description of his example follows [1953, 32–33]:
Jones’ Example 1: There exists a well-ordered family F of collections
H1, H2, . . . , Hz, . . . (z < ω1) such that (1) for each ordinal x, x < ω1,
Hx is a countable collection of mutually exclusive sets, (2) if x < y <
ω1, each set of Hy is a proper subset of Hx, (3) if x < y < ω1, and
hx is an element of Hx, there exists a sequence hx, hx+1, hx+2, . . . , hy
112The paper [Jones, 1980] appeared in a volume dedicated to his mathematical work and
inﬂuence and containing some of the papers presented at a conference held in Greensboro, North
Carolina, in October, 1979.
113While Jones’ example was published two decades after its construction (the paper included
suitable references to related work that had been published in the meantime), it is included here
because of its inﬂuence on students in the Texas school of topology, who heard him talk about
it and the related road spaces constructed from it.

186
Jean A. Larson
such that hx ⊃hx+1 ⊃hx+2 ⊃· · · ⊃hy, and for each z, x ≤z ≤y, Hz
contains exactly one of the sets hx, hx+1, hx+2, . . . , hy, but (4) there
exists no sequence h1, h2, h3, . . . such that h1 ⊃h2 ⊃h2 ⊃. . . and for
each x, x < ω1, Hx contains exactly one of the sets h1, h2, h3, . . . .
Jones used his example to construct a non-metrizable Moore space [1954, 31–33].
He compared his example with the one in Kurepa’s thesis, and described it as
follows [1954, 34]: “Aronszajn’s example is similar to the one I have constructed.
It yields Example 1 but is not as suitable for the application to Moore spaces.”
3.4
Kurepa
¯Duro Kurepa114 made a systematic study of uncountable partial orders, especially
trees in the wider framework of ramiﬁed sets, starting in his thesis, Ensembles et
Tableaux Ramiﬁ´ees. This section starts with a detailed review of his thesis which
includes the deﬁnition of a Suslin tree;115 the equivalence of Suslin’s Problem with
the non-existence of a Suslin tree; the construction of an Aronszajn tree as a
subtree of the tree of all non-empty bounded well-ordered sequences of rationals
under end-extension; and the deﬁnition of the key parameters for the structural
analysis of uncountable trees: height, supremum of the sizes of the levels, and
cardinality of the set of branches whose length is the height of the tree.
The
review of his thesis is followed by an overview of results from the 1930’s beyond
the thesis: his construction of a special Aronszajn tree; his initial results on Q-
embeddable and R-embeddable116
Aronszajn trees; his Fundamental Relation
114¯Duro Kurepa (August 16, 1907 – November 2, 1993) was a proud, tall, energetic individual
from a region known for tall people. He spent a substantial portion of his career at the University
of Zagreb, an ethnic Serb in Croatia. Speciﬁcally, he got his diploma there in 1931 and became an
assistant in mathematics there. He spent 1932-1935 in Paris at the Facult´e des Sciences and the
Coll`ege de France. He obtained his doctoral degree at the Sorbonne in 1935 where the president
of his committee was Paul Montel, his supervisor (we would say advisor) was Maurice Fr´echet,
and whose third member was Denjoy. Knaster was one of the reviewers of his thesis (cf. Kurepa’s
Math Review MR0423284 (54 #11264)). He spent some postdoctoral time in Paris and Warsaw.
Then he returned to the University of Zagreb, where he became an assistant professor in 1937,
was promoted to associate professor 1938, and full professor in 1948. According to Hrovje ˇSiki´c,
a Professor at the University of Zagreb and currently editor-in-chief of Glasnik Matematiˇcki,
Kurepa was interested not only in mathematics, but also in languages, and would sometimes
include in his lectures comments about idiosyncrasies in Serbian and Croatian word formation.
An example ˇSiki´c recalled was the words for curve, which is krivulja in Croatian and kriva in
Serbian. They came up a semi-popular seminar, about which Kurepa said neither should be
used since they failed to follow the rule of names ending in “un”, and he recommended that
krivun be used instead to great laughter in his audience. Kurepa moved to the University of
Belgrade in 1965 and remained there until his retirement in 1977.
Kurepa was instrumental
in the introduction in 1966 of Glasnik Matematiˇcki Series 3 as the mathematical successor to
Glasnik matematiˇcko-ﬁziˇcki i astronomski Series 2. He died tragically in the time of Miloˇsevi´c
and rampant inﬂation after being beaten by thugs and hidden from view under stairs.
115Recall that a Suslin tree is a tree of height ω1 in which every branch and every antichain is
countable.
116A partially ordered set is Q-embeddable, respectively R-embeddable, if it has a strictly in-
creasing map into Q, R respectively.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
187
bounding the size of a partial order in terms of the sizes of its well-ordered and
conversely well-ordered subsets and the sizes of its antichains; and his use of a
super-position of two linear orders to deﬁne a witness to the sharpness of the
bound in his Fundamental Relation.
In the opening paragraph of the published version of his thesis, Kurepa [1935,
1] listed two logical problems that the theory of ordered sets had run up against:
(1) the existence of a well-ordering of an arbitrary set,117 and (2) the existence
of a cardinal number between any cardinal κ and its power 2κ.118 They shaped
much of the research in set theory in the 20th Century, and provided a context for
Suslin’s problem [1920], the motivating force in Kurepa’s thesis.
While working on his thesis, Kurepa shared his progress in a series of four
announcements in Comptes Rendus: [1934a], [1934b], [1934d], [1934c].119 Kurepa
[1934a] announced a positive solution to Suslin’s Problem in February with a
theorem asserting the equivalence of seven statements about a linearly ordered set
E, the ﬁrst of which posits that E is a continuum isomorphic to each of its intervals
and not the product of two sub-continua and the last of which asserts that the set
E is dense, it has neither a ﬁrst nor a last element, is metrizable and is complete.
This note introduced the notion of the development or atomization of a linearly
ordered set.
In modern language this is the process of repeatedly partitioning
into subintervals to end up with a family of intervals which are pairwise either
disjoint or have one a subset of the other, and so that the family forms a tree
under the subset relation. Kurepa discussed developments in §12 of his thesis, and
the development of a Suslin line led to the equivalence of the existence of a Suslin
line and the existence of a Suslin tree.
The second announcement, [1934b] in March, also claimed a positive solution
to Suslin’s problem, and as a step toward the proof introduced the two cardinals:
• p1E = inf{|F| : F ⊆E is a dense subset of E}, and
• p2E = inf{|F| : F is a family of disjoint and non-empty open intervals of E}.
Now p1E is written d(E) and called the density, and p2E is written c(E) and
called the cellularity. These cardinals represent the beginning of Kurepa’s gener-
alization of the Suslin problem to a wider context, and they ﬁgure in Kurepa’s
Fundamental Relation discussed at the end of this section. In §7 [1996, 58–64] of
his thesis, Kurepa deﬁned and investigated p1E and p2E for a linearly ordered set
E. He focused on the relationship between these cardinals and proved in Lemma
10 that to prove p1E = p2E it suﬃced to prove it for linearly ordered continua.
He also explored when the supremum of p2E is attained, and proved in Lemma
10′ that if the supremum p2E is attained for every linearly ordered continua, then
it is attained for every linearly ordered set. In §12.C.3, Theorem 2, Kurepa proved
117This problem was addressed by Zermelo and Fraenkel as discussed in Kanamori’s ﬁrst chap-
ter.
118On this problem, Kurepa wrote [1935, 1, footnote 2], [1996, 11, footnote 2] “La r´esponse
pr´esum´ee negative `a cette probl`eme est appel´ee l’Hypoth`ese de Cantor.”
119Carlos Alvarez [1999] has written on the history Suslin’s Problem, and his discussion of these
announcements is particularly interesting and detailed.

188
Jean A. Larson
that p2E ≤(p1E)+.120 In §12.C.4, Lemma 5, he proved that if the density p1E
is singular, then the cellularity p2E = p1E is attained. Todorcevic (cf. [Kurepa,
1996, 299]) combined Lemma 4 of §12.C.3, Lemma 5 of §12.C.4 and Theorem 3 of
§11.4 [Kurepa, 1935, 110], [Kurepa, 1996, 100] to point out that Kurepa showed
that if the cellularity c(E) = p2E is singular then it is attained.
In footnote
11 [1935, 131]121 (the degree of) cellularity is extended to abstract spaces as the
supremum of the sizes of disjoint families of open sets.
Now we turn to Kurepa’s systematic study of set-theoretic trees122 (ramiﬁed
tables) within the context of ramiﬁed sets and ramiﬁed tables. Since the deﬁnition
of a ramiﬁed table essentially ﬁlled six pages of the published version of the thesis
as printed in [1996], we look at an important family of examples.
Suppose that (P, <) is a strict partial ordering and that the relation > is deﬁned
from it in the usual way. Let ∥be deﬁned on P by a ∥b if and only a ̸< b, b ̸< a
and a ̸= b. Let ≡be the relation of identity. Then ∗= (≡, <, >, ∥) is a ramiﬁcation
relation if for all points a, b, c ∈P, if a < c and b < c, then a and b are comparable,
i.e. the set of predecessors of any point forms a chain.123 Since all pairs are related
by one of ≡, <, > and ∥, the set P is a ramiﬁed set with respect to this ramiﬁcation
relation.
Kurepa gave, as his ﬁrst example of a ramiﬁed set, a genealogical tree [1996,
67], and his ﬁrst example of a ramiﬁed table was the genealogical tree again [1996,
70], so it is clear that he intended to generalize the notion of tree.
For Kurepa, a ramiﬁed table was the result of the process of ramiﬁcation applied
to a partial order P, i.e. the stratiﬁcation of the elements of the partial order into
levels, by identifying a ﬁrst level, removing the ﬁrst level, letting the second level
be the ﬁrst level of the reduced set, and continuing in this fashion. Some partial
orders fail to be suitable for ramiﬁcation. A set E ⊆P has a ﬁrst level [premi`ere
rang´ee] if for every point a ∈E, the set of predecessors of a in E has a least
element; in such a case, the ﬁrst level of E is the set of the least elements of
the sets of predecessors of elements of E. Kurepa attributed this version of the
deﬁnition to Fr´echet; his original deﬁnition of ﬁrst level was that it was the unique
set F, if it existed, such that every element of E \F was preceded by one and only
one element of F.
A ramiﬁed set is a ramiﬁed table if each of its non-empty subsets has a ﬁrst level.
In the lemma immediately following the deﬁnition, he showed that it is equivalent
120Todorcevic [1996, 299] called this the ﬁrst important result on the relationship between
density d(E) = p1E and cellularity c(E) = p2E.
121Unfortunately, the supplementary material in pages 127–135 of [Kurepa, 1935] entitled
Compl´ement des r´esultats pr´ec´edents were omitted from the version of Kurepa’s thesis in
[Kurepa, 1996].
122Arthur Cayley studied ﬁnite trees, especially rooted ﬁnite trees, coming up with the gener-
ating function to list the number of rooted trees with n nodes in [1857], made connections with
isomers in chemistry in [1875], and counted the number of distinct rooted trees with n nodes in
[1881].
123The notation and splitting of all pairs recalls the formal splitting by Hausdorﬀ[1909, 300],
[2005, 273] of real-valued functions with a common ordered domain by ﬁnal rank ordering into
f < g, f = g, f > g, f ∥g.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
189
to require that each linearly ordered subset be well-ordered and commented in
footnote 10 (see [1996, 70]) that Fr´echet used this statement as the deﬁnition and
that part of the proof of the lemma of equivalence of these deﬁnitions is due to
Fr´echet. Thus in the example we are considering, the deﬁnition is equivalent to
and, in the alternate form, remarkably close to, the current standard deﬁnition
of a set-theoretic tree as a partially ordered set in which the predecessors of each
point are well-ordered.
Immediately after the discussion of the deﬁnition of ramiﬁed table T, Kurepa
recursively deﬁned the αth level [rang´ee], which he denoted RαT, and used the
levels to deﬁne the height [rang] as the order type of the set of α for which RαT
is non-empty, the length [longeur] as the cardinality of the height, the coﬁnality
[longeur r´eduite] (the coﬁnality of the height), and the width [largeur] as the upper
bound of the cardinalities of the RαTs.
The name ramiﬁed table suggests that Kurepa envisioned a distribution of the
elements of T into levels, with boxes to contain the elements at each level and
immediate successor boxes all stacked above the box that is their common imme-
diate successor, as might be drawn to illustrate the atomization of a linear order
by intervals into a tree. Indeed, in the opening paragraph of the second chapter of
his thesis Kurepa cited the idea of subdivision as motivation for his generalization
of the relation of order to the relation of ramiﬁcation. He used this approach to
the construction of ramiﬁed tables and thus was able to show that if all ramiﬁed
tables of cardinality ω1 have either a chain or an antichain of cardinality ω1, then
there is no Suslin line.
Many graduate students have been challenged by their dissertation advisors to
give examples that show that their theoretical approaches are substantive, and
Kurepa was not the only one who received help from a fellow graduate student in
producing a desired example. Nachman Aronszajn,124 also a student of Maurice
Fr´echet, constructed the ﬁrst tree of uncountable height with all levels countable.
The Aronszajn construction was announced in an abstract of Kurepa [1934c] and
is brieﬂy described in a footnote to Theorem 6 of §9 of Kurepa’s thesis [1935, 96],
[1996, 88]. Essentially, he built a suitable subtree of the set of one-to-one sequences
of countable ordinal length of rationals in Q ∩(0, 1) whose sums are ﬁnite and
partially ordered them by end-extension. Aronszajn may have constructed such
124Nachman Aronszajn was born July 26, 1907 in Warsaw and died February 1980 in Corvallis,
Oregon (cf. [Aronszajn, 2011], [Mardeˇsi´c, 1999]). He received a University of Warsaw doctorate in
1930 under the direction of Stefan Mazurkiewicz, and a second doctorate [1935] from Universit´e
de Paris in 1935 where Fr´echet was his advisor. In his Math Review MR0746781 (85m:01086a),
Gerlach describes Aronszajn’s working life as follows: 1930–1940 in France, 1940–1945 in Eng-
land, 1945–1948 in France again, and the United States after 1948. He spent time at Oklahoma
Agricultural and Mechanical University, leaving after the university ﬁred Ainsley Diamond for
failing to sign a loyalty oath (cf. [Magill, 1996]), and moved to the University of Kansas where
he was a professor from 1951 until his retirement in 1977. He then moved to Corvallis where he
was appointed an adjunct professor. Aronszajn was an analyst known for the Aronszajn-Smith
Theorem that every compact operator on any Banach space of dimension at least two has an
invariant subspace [1954] and for his work in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces [1950]. For more
on his life see [Szeptycki, 1983]. For a list of his publications, see [Szeptycki, 1980].

190
Jean A. Larson
a tree prior to Kurepa, but Kurepa came up with his own construction of what
is now known as an Aronszajn tree125 inside the tree σQ of bounded well-ordered
subsets of the rationals ordered by end-extension. He started with an initial level
consisting of all rational singletons. At successor levels of the construction, he
extended every node on the immediately preceding level in all possible ways. At
limit levels α, he took any denumerable subset F of the collection of well-ordered
subsets of Q all of whose initial segments were in levels already constructed which
had the property that it and the tree up to that point were dense in each other.
More generally, one can build trees inside the ramiﬁed table σE, which consists
of the collection of non-empty bounded well-ordered subsets of a ordered set E
ordered by end-extension.
In §10.1, Kurepa [1935, 98], [1996, 89] introduced the notion of similarity for
ramiﬁed tables and called the similarity classes types of ramiﬁcation. He showed
that if E and F are similar linearly ordered sets, then so are the ramiﬁed tables
σE and σF of the well-ordered bounded non-empty subsets of E, respectively
F, ordered by end-extension.
In §10.2, Kurepa sketched the proof that σQ is
homogeneous, i.e. that for every element s ∈σQ, the set of t ∈σQ properly
extending s is similar to σQ.
In §10.3, Kurepa introduced distinguished ramiﬁed suites [suites ramiﬁ´ees dis-
tingu´ees]. A ramiﬁed table T is a ramiﬁed suite if for every a ∈T, the set of
t ∈T for which either t <T a or a <T t has cardinality |T| (see §8.12 [1935, 76],
[1996, 82]). A distinguished ramiﬁed suite is a ramiﬁed table S whose height κ
is a regular initial ordinal and satisﬁes additional conditions, which, in the case
κ = λ+ is a successor cardinal may be phrased as follows: S has width λ [ambigu,
i.e. ambiguous, neither narrow, nor wide]; S does not have a coﬁnal branch [de-
scente monotone] and for every element s ∈S, the set of all x ∈S with the same
set of predecessors as s has cardinality λ. Let us call S uniformly branching if the
last condition together with the condition that every element s has successors on
every larger level both hold. Then in modern language, the distinguished ramiﬁed
suites of height λ+ are the uniformly branching λ+-Aronszajn trees.126 At the end
of §10.3, he asserted the existence of uniformly branching ωβ+1-Aronszajn trees
without stating the hypotheses (GCH and ωβ regular) that would make his proof
generalize. He also raised the question of the existence of a κ+-Aronszajn tree for
an inaccessible cardinal.127
Kurepa opened §10.4 with the statement that we do not know if every uniformly
branching Aronszajn tree is necessarily similar to a subset of σ0 = σQ, and then
stated the following questions:
125According to Aronszajn’s colleague Pawel Szeptycki [1983] at the University of Kansas,
Aronszajn constructed the tree associated with his name “in an attempt to ﬁll a gap in a work
of G. Kurepa.”
126For regular κ, a κ-tree is a tree of height κ all of whose levels have cardinality < κ, and a
κ-Aronszajn tree is a κ-tree with no branch of length κ.
127Kurepa’s deﬁnition of inaccessible is regular limit cardinal [1996, 22]. He does not mention
GCH, under which these cardinals and the (strongly) inaccessible cardinals coincide.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
191
Kurepa’s First Miraculous Problem: Must every two uniformly
branching Aronszajn trees necessarily be isomorphic?128
He pointed out that the problem is equivalent to showing that every uniformly
branching Aronszajn tree is homogeneous, and in [1935, 100, footnote 4], [1996,
91, footnote 26] posed the question of the existence of a homogeneous uniformly
branching Aronszajn tree.
Next we examine results of Kurepa beyond his thesis.
Recall that a tree is
special if it is the union of countably many antichains.
Kurepa constructed a
special Aronszajn tree inside σQ not long after his thesis in [1937a, 147–156], [1996,
130–138] introducing a class of trees that has resonated through the century.129
Note that any Suslin tree is an Aronszajn tree, but since any countable collection of
antichains whose union is uncountable must include an uncountable antichain, no
Suslin tree can be special. To construct his special Aronszajn tree, Kurepa started
with a function g : ω1 →R with the property that for all β < ω1, the restriction of
g to the interval of ordinals [ω2β, ω2(β+1)) is one-to-one and has range dense in R.
He used recursion to deﬁne ϕ : ω1 →σQ so that for all α < ω1, g(α) = sup ϕ(α),
and so that for each β < ω1, the image under ϕ of [ω2β, ω2(β +1)) is the βth level
of the tree he is building, requiring essentially the same properties he required in
his thesis, with the additional constraint imposed by g, and the requirement that
for all ξ < ζ, if ϕ(ξ) is an initial segment of ϕ(ζ), then g(ξ) < g(ζ).130 Most of
the work in the proof is to ensure that the values assigned by g to limit levels are
attained and are assigned so that the last mentioned inequality is always satisﬁed.
At the end of the proof he considers two alternative restrictions on the functions:
(a) for all β, the range of g restricted to [ω2β, ω2(β + 1)) is the same as the range
restricted to [0, ω2); and (b) g is one-to-one. In case (a) with the range being the
set of rational numbers, his proof gives a strictly increasing map into the rationals,
i.e. it is Q-embeddable, but he does not mention this fact explicitly. Instead he
observes that for any x the set of elements of his tree whose sup is x is an antichain,
so in this case the tree is a countable union of antichains. He also proved (see the
discussion of [1996, 118] and Th´eor`eme 3bis of Section 29 [1996, 140]) that there
is an R-embeddable Aronszajn tree, that is, one with a strictly increasing mapping
into the set of real numbers. The paper also includes a proof by Aronszajn of
the existence of an Aronszajn tree whose elements are closed subsets of a compact
subset of a metric space ordered by the superset relation (see Th´eor`eme 2 [Kurepa,
1937a, 135],131 [1996, 121]).
128For the original statement of the “probl`eme miraculeux 1,” see [1935, 100] or [1996, 91].
129Kurepa only noted in passing (see [Kurepa, 1996, 138]) that he was able to construct an
Aronszajn tree which is a denumerable union of antichains; that is, this fact is not one of the
numbered theorems, corollaries and lemmas in the paper.
130It is known today that care must be taken at the limit levels to ensure that such a tree is
special. See [Devlin, 1972] discussed in §7.7.
131Unfortunately, pages 135-138 are omitted from the copy of this paper posted on the site
http://elib.mi.sanu.ac.rs/ of the eLibrary of the Mathematical Institute of the Serbian Academy
of Sciences and Arts.

192
Jean A. Larson
Kurepa [1940a, 837] proved that a partially ordered set admits a strictly in-
creasing mapping into the rationals if and only if it is the union of countably
many antichains. Let us expand the scope of the concept of special to apply to
partially order sets in general. Then Kurepa’s result may be restated as follows:
a partial order is Q-embeddable if and only if it is special.
Kurepa announced in December [1937b] an upper bound on the cardinality of a
partially ordered set E. He used pE to denote the cardinality of E (p for puissance,
power). For a non-empty E, he denoted the supremums of the cardinalities of
several families of subsets of E as follows: pcE is the sup of sizes of well-ordered
subsets (c for croissant, increasing); pdE is the sup of sizes of conversely well-
ordered subsets (d for decroissant, decreasing); and psE is the sup of sizes of
subsets of pairwise incomparable elements. He then set p0E = max(pcE, pdE)
and bE = max(p0E, psE), prior to introducing his fundamental relation [1937b,
1196], [1996, 387]:
Kurepa’s Fundamental Relation:
bE ≤pE ≤(2psE)p0E.
Kurepa also showed that any well partial order in which all well-ordered subsets
and all subsets of pairwise incomparable elements are countable must itself be
countable [Kurepa, 1937b, Section V].
The proof of Kurepa’s Fundmental Relation [1939] was published just before
World War II, overlooked by reviewing journals, and reprinted in [1959b] in order
to distribute it more widely.
Note that the Fundamental Relation for partial
orders generalizes the Hausdorﬀ-Urysohn Inequality [Urysohn, 1924] for linearly
ordered sets (i.e. those with psE = 1): pE ≤2p0, using the notation given above.
The proof is divided into two cases. In case A, Kurepa proved the theorem for
partial orders in which all linearly ordered subsets are well-ordered, and in case
B, Kurepa considered an arbitrary partial order, superimposed a well-order of the
underlying set on it to get a new partial order in which all linearly ordered subsets
are well-ordered, and applied case A to conclude the inequality held in general.
To show the sharpness of the bound in his Fundamental Relation, Kurepa gave
the example of the lexicographic ordering on the set E of sequences of 0’s and 1’s
of length |n| since for any cardinal n (which we may assume is an initial ordinal),
one has p0E = n, psE = 1 and pE = 2n. Thus the partial order considered in
case B to prove the Fundamental Relation is the superposition of a lexicographic
order and a well-order, which is now known as the Sierpi´nski poset.132
In his Math Review MR0058687 of [Erd˝os and Rado, 1953], Kurepa asserted
that “the idea of using superposition of orderings of a same set was, as far as
we know, ﬁrst introduced in 1937 by the reviewer.” He referred the interested
reader to the paper discussed above and to the announcement in [1937c] of a two-
part paper [1940a], [1941], speciﬁcally pointing to page 487 in the latter (see also
132For example, Fra¨ıss´e [2000, 47] deﬁned the Sierpi`nski poset to be the superposition of the
usual ordering on the countable ordinals with an order induced from the real numbers via an
injection of the set of countable ordinals into the set of real numbers. Recall that Sierpi´nski
[1933] used this approach to deﬁne a symmetric binary relation, which via translation is now
known as the Sierpi´nski partition, but it is not a partial order.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
193
footnote 28 on page 179 of [1996]), where he had given the superposition of a
well-order on another partial order.
Kurepa was a pioneer in the study of uncountable partial orders and what have
come to be called trees, and, as with many pioneers, his ground-breaking work
was not immediately recognized.
4
1940-1950: PIONEERING PARTITION RESULTS
The 1940’s featured pioneering results in the Ramsey theory of the uncountable
and the development and reﬁnement of some basic tools of the trade. Progress was
made on understanding the structure of partial orders and trees, and Maharam
used a Suslin line in her exploration of the theory of measure algebras. Speciﬁc
combinatorial results for this decade include the ∆-system lemma, the ﬁrst unbal-
anced generalization of Ramsey’s Theorem to the uncountable, and foundational
results in partitions of pairs from a set. K¨onig’s Lemma was generalized to mea-
surable cardinals, and generalizations of Aronszajn trees to cardinals above ω1
were made. Questions were raised that stimulated interest in quasi-orders and in
ω1-trees with many branches.
In this decade, G¨odel [1940] published his monograph on the constructible uni-
verse, establishing the consistency of the Axiom of Choice and the Generalized
Continuum Hypothesis with the axioms of set theory. Garrett Birkhoﬀ’s Lattice
Theory [1940] became an oft-cited reference in the theory of orders. Mostowski
and Tarski [1949] announced that the ﬁrst-order theory of well-ordered sets is
decidable.133
World War II had a devastating eﬀect on mathematical life with many mathe-
maticians killed outright or sent to concentration camps, and others decamping:
Erd˝os left Hungary; Rado emigrated to England; and Tarski emigrated to the
United States. After Germany invaded Poland and disrupted intellectual life there,
an underground university sprang up in Warsaw, and Kuratowski, Mostowski and
Sierpi´nski were among those who taught in it. After the end of the war, they rebuilt
the group in logic and set theory. Publication of journals and books were slowed
or disrupted as in the case of Fundamenta Mathematicae, and authors shifted to
journals they had not used before and did not return to after the war. With the
German occupation of France during World War II, the publication of the treatise
L’´Enum´eration transﬁnite, Livre I [1946] by Arnaud Denjoy134 was postponed
133Slomson in his Math Review MR0519800 (80d:03027a) observed that the decidability of the
ﬁrst-order theory of well-ordered sets was ﬁrst obtained by Mostowski and Tarski in 1938–1941.
It was one of the items in Mostowski’s notebook that was burned during World War II. The
proof via an axiomatization and quantiﬁer elimination argument appears in a paper joint with
John E. Doner, a student of Tarski, in [1978]. Slomson noted that he had an essentially similar
axiomatization in [1972].
134Arnaud Denjoy received his doctorate in 1909 from ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure Paris, where
Baire was his advisor. His main focus was the theory of functions of a real variable.

194
Jean A. Larson
to 1946.135 This book included a bibliography compiled by Gustave Choquet136
(cf. [Denjoy, 1946, xxv–xxxvii]) consisting mainly of references appearing after
1920 and organized by topics, including the following most closely related to the
subject of this chapter: (a) linearly ordered sets; the general case; (b) character-
ization of the linear continuum; Suslin’s Problem; (c) well-ordered sets; ordinal
numbers; (d) ordinals of the second number class; enumeration; (e) inaccessible
ordinal numbers. It included Erd˝os’ paper of [1942] with the foundational results
in the partition calculus and papers by Dushnik and Miller prior to their [1941],
and listed Kurepa’s work.
4.1
Combinatorial tools
Before we get into the speciﬁcs for order and Ramsey theory, we review advances
in the basic tools of combinatorial set theory in a short subsection for ease of
reference. A collection of sets is a ∆-system if there is a set K such that any two
distinct sets in the collection have K as their intersection. Nikolaˇı ˇSanin137 [1946]
proved the following lemma, which I have restated in modern terminology.
The ∆-System Lemma for Finite Sets: Any uncountable collection of
ﬁnite sets has an uncountable subcollection which is a ∆-system.
Another tool in combinatorial set theory is the use of equivalence relations,
which were discussed by Stoll [1949] in an American Mathematical Monthly article,
particularly in connection with the study of algebra. We quote from page 377: “we
mention that the set E of all possible equivalence relations deﬁnable over a given
set S has been made an object of study,” and note his examples: [Birkhoﬀ, 1940]
and [Ore, 1942].
Rado [1949a] introduced a useful principle, which he called “a combinatorial
lemma” in his article extending Whitney’s notion of rank for ﬁnite sets to rank for
sets of arbitrary cardinality. Below is a modern formulation using functions.
Rado Selection Principle:
Let F = {Fi : i ∈I} be a ﬁnite family of
sets and for each ﬁnite J ⊆I, let gJ : J →S F be such that gJ(j) ∈Fj
for all j ∈J. Then there is a function h : I →S F such that for all
ﬁnite M ⊆I there is a set N with M ⊆N ⊆I so that for all n ∈M,
h(n) = gN(n).
135In a footnote to the preface dated March 1946, Denjoy [1946, vi] wrote “Les conditions cr´e´ees
par l’occupation allemande en France de 1940 `a 1944 ont fait que de ce Trait´e le Livre I, compos´e
typographiquement en premi`ere ´epreuve d`es les premier mois de 1942, n’a pu ˆetre ´edit´e qu’en
1946.
136Choquet earned his doctorate at ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure Paris in 1946 with Arnaud Denjoy
as his advisor.
137Nikolaˇı Aleksandroviˇc ˇSanin (May 25, 1919 – ) was a student of A. A. Markov at
Leningrad State University.
His Ph.D. dissertation Extensions of Topological Spaces was
defended in 1942 and his D.Sci. dissertation was defended in 1946.
(See G. Mints,
http://logic.pdmi.ras.ru/˜shanin/biogr2.html downloaded on August 11, 2009.)

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
195
The Rado Selection Principle was the compactness principle of choice for combi-
natorialists of his day and played an important role in transversal theory.
4.2
Ordered sets and their structure
We start this section with a result of Rothberger which is pertinent to the Normal
Moore Space Conjecture, followed by two questions of Erd˝os and Tarski.
The pseudointersection number p is the minimal cardinality of a family of sub-
sets of ω with the strong ﬁnite intersection property (all intersections of its ﬁnite
subfamilies are inﬁnite) which has no inﬁnite pseudointersection, i.e. no single set
that is almost contained in every member of the family. Fritz Rothberger [1948]
proved that if the pseudointersection number is greater than ℵ1, then there is a
Q-set, i.e. an uncountable subset of the real line every subset of which is a Gδ138
in the relative topology.
The last part of the paper [1943] by Erd˝os and Tarski is subtitled General
remarks on inaccessible numbers and included a list of six problems concerning a
cardinal n, of which the last two (see [1943, 327–328]) are most pertinent to this
section.
Problem 5. (The Ordering Problem.) Is it true that every ordered set
N of power n contains a subset X of power n, which is either well
ordered, or becomes well ordered if we invert the ordering relation?
Problem 6. (The Ramiﬁcation Problem.) Let ν be the smallest ordinal
number such that the power of all ordinals ξ < ν is n. Is it true that
every ramiﬁcation system of the νth order has power < n for every
ξ < ν, contains a well-ordered subset of the type ν. (By a ramiﬁcation
system S we understand a partially ordered set which has the property
that, for every x ∈S, the set S(x) of all elements y ≤x is well ordered;
If the set S(x) is of the type ξ the element x is said to be of the ξth
order. The order of the whole set S is the smallest ordinal number
greater than the order of all elements of S.)
For the Ordering Problem, Erd˝os and Tarski noted that the answer is obvious for
n = ℵ0, and for uncountable n which are not inaccessible they credited Hausdorﬀ
[1914, 145–146] with the solution, noting [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1943, 328]: “he does
not state the solution explicitly, but it can be deduced easily from his results.”
For the Ramiﬁcation Problem, the authors noted that a solution for n = ℵ0 was
given by D´enes K˝onig [1927]. Erd˝os and Tarski continued: “for numbers n > ℵ0
which are not inaccessible it was given by Aronsajn” (sic). It is surprising that
the authors did not mention Kurepa, who brought the word ramiﬁcation into
mathematics for this type of system.
Tarski presumably was acquainted with
Kurepa’s work after Kurepa’s visit to Warsaw in 1937 (see [Kurepa, 1937a]), but
138A set is a Gδ if it is the countable intersection of open sets.

196
Jean A. Larson
Erd˝os was not. In his prior [1942], Erd˝os had already used the approach he came
to call the ramiﬁcation method without using this name.
Disjointness
In a paper received by the journal in 1946, Rado [1949b] investigated the circum-
stances under which it is possible to divide a system of intervals ⟨Iν | ν ∈N⟩
into k (k is ﬁnite) pairwise disjoint families, where N is an abstract index set. At
the beginning of Section 2 on page 510, he sets the scene: “Sets occurring in this
note may have any arbitrary cardinality. Zermelo’s axiom will be used freely.”
He proved that a necessary and suﬃcient condition is that no k + 1 intervals Iν
belonging to k + 1 distinct indices have a point in common. He gave a diﬀerent
characterization in the following proposition.
Rado’s Disjoint Interval Theorem: If any subsystem of k + 1 distinct
interval Iν0, Iν1, . . . , Iνk can be subdivided into k groups of pairwise
disjoint intervals, then the same kind of subdivision is possible for the
whole system.
Erd˝os and Tarski in [1943] generalized almost disjointness to partial orders and
investigated sizes of mutually exclusive subsets of a partial order (P, ≤). They
declared y and z from (P, ≤) to be disjoint if there is no non-null element x with
x ≤y and x ≤z, and called a subset of P mutually exclusive if its elements
are pairwise disjoint in this generalized way. For F ⊆P, they set d(F) to be
the least cardinal greater than the power of every mutually exclusive subset of
F. Deﬁne a closely related notion by setting m(F) to be the least upper bound
of the set of cardinalities of mutually exclusive subsets of F. Erd˝os and Tarski
showed that for any partial order P, if m(P) is not an uncountable inaccessible
cardinal, then P contains a mutually exclusive set of power m(P). Their proof
involved an analysis of non-decreasing functions from P to the cardinal numbers.
They applied their results to Boolean algebras, rings of sets and ﬁelds of sets.
In particular, they showed that if F is a ﬁeld of sets and m(F) is not a regular
uncountable inaccessible cardinal, then there is a mutually exclusive subset of
power m(P); and if κ is a regular uncountable inaccessible cardinal, then there
is a ﬁeld G with m(G) = κ which does not contain a mutually exclusive subset
of power κ. Erd˝os and Tarski also showed in Corollary 3 and its proof that in
a topological space X with uncountable cellularity which is not a regular limit
cardinal, the supremum c(X) is realized as the size of a pairwise disjoint family of
c(X) many open sets of X. This result extends Kurepa’s result [1935] for spaces
with singular cellularity.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
197
Dushnik and Miller
Dushnik and Edwin Miller139 [1940] examined linearly ordered sets and order-
preserving embeddings. Recall that every inﬁnite well-ordering is order-isomorphic
to a proper subset. The ﬁrst question that Dushnik and Miller asked was if the
same is true for every inﬁnite linear order, and they proved that it is true for
denumerable linear orders. They observed that for a well-ordering (A, <), every
order-preserving embedding f : A →A has the property that f(a) ≥a for all
a ∈A, and asked if this property characterizes well-orderings among linear order-
ings. They show that this property does characterize the well-orderings among
the denumerable linear orderings.
In the same paper, they go on to construct, using the Axiom of Choice, an
uncountable subset E of the reals which is rigid, i.e. the only order-endomorphism
is the identity. They appear not to be aware of the type ring for scattered linear
order types discussed in [Hausdorﬀ, 1908] or the fact that he showed that every
type is either scattered or a sum over a set of dense order type of scattered types.
In a subsequent paper, Dushnik and Miller [1941] introduced a notion of di-
mension for partial orders, namely the minimal size of a family of linear orderings
whose intersection results in the partial order. They constructed examples show-
ing that for every cardinal κ, there is a partial order whose underlying set has
cardinality κ and whose dimension is κ. They revisited their rigidity result from
[1940] by constructing an example N that has the property that for any uncount-
able subset M ⊆N, M is not similar to any proper subset of itself which diﬀers
from M in more than a denumerable inﬁnity of points.
In Theorems 5.24 and 5.25, Dushnik and Miller showed that in a inﬁnite partial
order P, on the one hand, if every subset of power |P| has two incomparable
elements, then P has a denumerable linearly ordered subset, and on the other
hand, if every denumerable subset has two incomparable elements, then P has a
linearly ordered subset of power |P|. Note that the above results of Dushnik and
Miller for uncountable partial orders follows from the approach Kurepa took to
showing that any partial order in which all well-ordered subsets and all subsets of
pairwise incomparable elements are countable must itself be countable in [1937b,
Section V], and from his proof that any narrow tree has a linearly ordered subset of
cardinality the power of the entire tree in Th´eor`eme 5 [1935, 80], [1996, 76]. A proof
appears in [Kurepa, 1948a, 30, Lemma 5], [1996, 209] that every uncountable well-
founded partial order with all ﬁnite levels in its stratiﬁcation has an uncountable
chain.
139Edwin Wilkinson Miller and Dushnik were fellow students at the University of Michigan:
Miller received his Ph.D. from Raymond Wilder in 1930 (Raymond Wilder’s doctorate was from
the University of Texas at Austin, where he was student of R. L. Moore).
In a letter dated
October 15, 1929 (parts of this letter are quoted in [Fitzpatrick, 1997, 47]), Hildebrandt [1929]
wrote to Moore about Miller’s work on whether two of Moore’s axioms from his 1929 Colloquium
Lecture for the Summer Meeting of the AMS in Boulder deﬁne a metric space. Thus Miller was
familiar with families of sets which were nested or disjoint. In 1934, when Hildebrandt, began
a term as chair of the department, Miller became a member of the department and continued
there until his death of a heart attack in 1942 (see [Kaplan, 1971, 184–185]).

198
Jean A. Larson
Further work of Miller on order is discussed in §4.3, and additional Ramsey
related work of Dushnik and Miller is discussed §4.4.
Order types
Sierpi´nski [1946] showed there are at least 2c many real types by deﬁning a family
of that many pairwise incomparable order types of sets of real numbers of power
c = 2ℵ0 (he did not use the Continuum Hypothesis).
Philip Carruth [1942] showed that the maximum order type of the union of sets
of ordinals A and B of order type α and β respectively is the Hessenberg sum of
α and β.
Noberto Cuestra Dutari [1943, 243] showed in Theorem 15 that the collection of
dyadic sequences of length ωα which are eventually zero, ordered lexicographically,
is universal for linearly ordered sets of cardinality ℵα, reproving a result known to
Hausdorﬀ. Recall that in the case of countable linear orders, the set of rationals
is a countable linear order universal for all countable linear orders.
Kurepa [1948b] characterized in [1996, 200, Th´eorem I] the denumerable scat-
tered linear order types as the denumerable order types that do not embed the
order type of some countable ordinal. He noted that the supremum of the order
types of the well-ordered subsets of η, the order type of the rationals, is ℵ1, citing
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914, 99].
We continue the discussion of order types in the next section with Fra¨ıss´e’s
paper which includes results for order types so as not to split the discussion of it
between two subsections.
Well-quasi-order theory
First steps toward the development of a theory of well-quasi-orders140 were taken.
Roland Fra¨ıss´e,141 in his paper [1948] on the comparison of order types, wrote
S < T to indicate there is a subset of T of type S and S ≪T for S < T and
not T < S, and called a type T poor (pauvre) if T ≪η, i.e. T is countable
and scattered. He used Sierpi´nski [1928a] as a reference and announced several
results, a few of which are listed below, including an independent discovery of the
characterization of countable non-scattered ordinals given by Kurepa above:
140A quasi-order is a reﬂexive transitive binary relation ≤Q on a set A; it is a well-quasi-order
(wqo) if for every inﬁnite sequence ⟨ai : i < ω⟩of elements of A, there are i < j such that
ai <Q aj.
141Roland
Fra¨ıss´e
(1920
–
March
30,
2008)
received
his
doctorate
from
Uni-
versit´e
de
Paris
in
1953
under
Ren´e
de
Possel
(cf.
http://www-history.mcs.st-
andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Possel.html).
Denjoy
was
de
Possel’s
advisor
(cf.
[Pouzet,
1992]). In his thesis Fra¨ıss´e [1953], [1954] used the back-and-forth method to determine whether
two model-theoretic structures are isomorphic. He introduced amalgamation and developed a
method for constructing countable homogeneous models from ﬁnite structures via amalgamation
(see his inﬂuential book [2000]). Fra¨ıss´e held a chair of mathematics in Algiers 1941–1959, and
then spent most of his career at Universit´e de Provence in Marseille, France. He was one of the
founders of Bourbaki (cf. [Delsarte, 2000]).

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
199
1. A necessary and suﬃcient condition for a type to be non-scattered is that it
embeds every denumerable well-ordered set.
2. For every ﬁnite or denumerable set of scattered types Ti, there corresponds
a scattered type T with Ti ≪T for all i.
3. Every scattered type T is the sum of a ﬁnite sequence, an ω-sequence or an
ω∗-sequence of scattered types Ti with Ti ≪T.
Here are the four Fra¨ıss´e Conjectures he made in [1948, 1331]:
Hypoth`eses. – Nous consid´erons comme vraisemblables les propositions
suivantes:
I. Il n’existe pas de suite inﬁnie de types d´enombrables T1, T2, . . . , Ti, . . . avec
Ti+1 ≪Ti pour tout i.
II. Si T est pauvre, le nombre des classes d’´equivalence d´eﬁnies par la relations
≈sur l’ensemble des types < T est au plus d´enombrable.
III. Soient E une famille, ﬁnie ou d´enombrable, de types d´enombrables t; T(E)
un type quelconque > t quel que soit t de E; T un type inf´erieur `a tout
T(E); alors T est inf´erieur `a l’un des types t.
IV. Tout type ind´ecomposable pauvre T est similaire au type d’une ω-suite ou
d’une ω∗-suite de types Ti ≪T, ces types Ti ´etant soit ind´ecomposables,
soit de puissance 1.142
Erd˝os [1949] asked the following problem in the American Mathematical Monthly
that is related to the ﬁrst Fra¨ıss´e Conjecture:
If a set A of integers has the divisor property (i.e. for every sequence
⟨ai : i < ω⟩of elements of A, there are i < j such that ai|aj), then
does it follow that the set of all products of n-elements from A has the
divisor property.
142Conjectures. – We consider the following propositions plausible:
I. There is no inﬁnite sequence of denumerable types T1, T2, . . . , Ti, . . . with Ti+1 ≪Ti for
all i.
II. If T is poor [T ≪η], the number of equivalence classes deﬁned by ≈of the set of types
< T is at most denumerable.
III. Let E be a family, ﬁnite or denumerable, of denumerable types t; let T(E) be an arbitrary
type > t for every t in E; let T be a type strictly below T(E); then T is below one of the
types t.
IV. Every indecomposable poor T is similar to the type of an ω or ω∗sequence of type Ti
strictly below T, with the types of the Ti being indecomposable or of power 1.

200
Jean A. Larson
This question stimulated interest in the notions of well-quasi-order (wqo) and
well partial order.143
Eric C. Milner [1985] attributes the ﬁrst development of
wqo theory to Graham Higman [1952], in his analysis of divisibility in algebras.
Higman used the equivalent notion of having the ﬁnite-basis property.144He proved
the equivalence of the ﬁnite-basis property with the non-existence of both inﬁnite
antichains and inﬁnite descending sequences, and referred to parallel work by Erd˝os
and Rado (see [1952b], [Rado, 1954b]145).
4.3
Around Suslin’s Problem
The deﬁnitions of Aronszajn and Kurepa trees grew out of Kurepa’s investigation
of Suslin’s Problem.
Aronszajn and Kurepa trees
Kurepa [1940b] revisited the family σ0 = σQ of all (non-empty bounded) well-
ordered subsets of the rationals introduced in his thesis and proved (see Lemma
1 on page 148) that every uncountable subset of this tree under end-extension
includes an uncountable antichain. On the same page, in footnote 7, he commented
that we do not know if there is a Suslin line which is universal for Suslin lines.
He also proved that every R-embeddable uncountable ramiﬁed table T has an
antichain of cardinality |T|.
Note that the result described in §3.4 for partial orders of the equivalence of
being the countable union of antichains and being Q-embeddable applies to Aron-
szajn trees: they are special if and only if they are Q-embeddable.
Kurepa continued his work on the classiﬁcation of trees with a paper [1942]146
that focused on suites T 147 of height ω1 in which every level is countable and has
the further property that if the set of predecessors of an element is a successor
ordinal or empty, then there are denumerably many elements with this set of
predecessors; while if its set of predecessors has limit order type, then it is the
unique element with this set of predecessors. That is, he focused on those T which
are a denumerable forest of uniformly branching ω1-trees. As Kurepa’s earlier work
was missed by many, we note that in this paper Kurepa referred to his thesis and
the proof of the existence of an Aronszajn tree and the equivalence of a negative
answer to Suslin’s Problem to the existence of a Suslin tree. He formulated an
143A well partial order is a well-founded antisymmetric partial order (P, <) with no inﬁnite
antichains.
144The closure of a subset A of a quasi-order (P, <) is the set cl(A) of all q ∈P for which there
is some a ∈A with a ≤q. A closed subset of P is a set which is its own closure. A quasi-order
has the ﬁnite-basis property if every closed subset is the closure of a ﬁnite subset.
145Rado [1954b] used the concept of partial well-order, a well-founded relation with the ﬁnite-
basis property but not necessarily transitive.
146Todorcevic (cf. [Kurepa, 1996, 8]) referred to [Kurepa, 1942] as “one of Kurepa’s best written
and most frequently cited papers.”
147Recall that for Kurepa, a suite is a particular kind of ramiﬁed table.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
201
equivalence of the Continuum Hypothesis in terms of a particular kind of ramiﬁed
suite.
Kurepa proved that every denumerable forest T of normal ω1-trees with the
property that every element of T is in an uncountable branch must have uncount-
ably many uncountable branches, and pointed out that we do not know how to
evaluate the cardinality of the set of uncountable branches. The existence of an
ω1-tree with more than ℵ1 branches is now known as Kurepa’s Hypothesis, abbre-
viated KH and such trees are called Kurepa trees. Kurepa constructed an example
µ of a denumerable forest of ω1-trees in which every element is in an uncountable
branch as follows: the elements of µ are ﬁnite sequences of countable ordinals
ordered by ⟨α0, α1, . . . , αn⟩< ⟨β0, β1, . . . , βk⟩if and only if n ≤k, αn < βn and
for all i < n, αi = βi. Note that s and s⌢⟨0⟩are incomparable and have the same
set of predecessors, so each element has inﬁnitely many companions with the same
set of predecessors. Also, the sequence of all s⌢⟨ξ⟩for ξ < ω1 is a branch, so that
every node is on an uncountable branch. Kurepa proved that every denumerable
forest of ω1-trees contains a copy of µ.
While Ernst Specker148 was a graduate student, Roman Sikorski visited and
asked the following question. For a regular cardinal κ, suppose collections Dα for
α < κ of sequences of length α of 0’s and 1’s are given which enjoy the following
four properties: (1) D1 is non-empty; (2) if α < β < κ, then every element of
Dβ is an extension of an element of Dα; (3) if α < β < κ, then every element
of Dα has an extension in Dβ; and (4) for all α < κ, |Dα| < κ; must there be
a sequence of length κ which, for all α < κ, extends an element of Dα?
The
condition that the sequences be binary was dropped to make the question more
interesting. Henry Helson [1949] had already shown the existence of a family of
sets of sequences with the ﬁrst three properties and no sequence of length κ whose
initial segments all appear in the appropriate Dα. Specker set himself the task
of constructing a counter-example, that is, the levels of a κ-Aronszajn tree for κ
the successor of a regular cardinal. He succeeded by assuming the GCH and using
increasing functions (see [Specker, 1949]).
Suslin Problem variations
Suslin’s Problem continued to stimulate and inﬂuence research. During this decade
various topological questions related to Suslin’s problem were investigated; Miller
and Sierpi´nski came up with equivalences in terms of partial order; and Ma-
haram used Suslin’s Problem in her investigation of measure for Boolean algebras.
The lack of references to Kurepa by Miller, Maharam, and Sierpi´nski show that
Kurepa’s [1935] formulation in terms of a ramiﬁed table (Suslin tree) was not
148Specker was born February 11, 1920 in Zurich, received his doctorate from Eidgen¨ossische
Technische Hochschule (ETH) in 1949, and spent his professional life there. He worked on Quine’s
set theory New Foundations, and is perhaps best known for the Kochen-Specker Theorem in
quantum mechanics.
On August 14, 2009, the Mathematics Genealogy Project site listed 42
students for him, including Walter Deuber and Hans L¨auchli, and selected works have been
collated in [Specker, 1990].

202
Jean A. Larson
well-known at the time.
We note in passing that Y. S. Ochan149 [1941] investigated two strengthenings of
a topological variation of Suslin’s problem and showed that they were equivalent.
Say a topological space T has the Property of Knaster if every uncountable
family of open sets of T contains an uncountable subfamily of sets which pairwise
have non-empty intersection.
In April 1941,150 Knaster [1945] proved that for
complete linearly ordered sets, the Property of Knaster is equivalent to separability,
i.e. having a countable dense set.
Thus Suslin’s Problem is equivalent to the
question of whether, every Suslin continuum has the Property of Knaster. In May
1941, Knaster and Marczewski (under the name of Szpilrajn) asked in problem
192 of the Scottish Book [Mauldin, 1981, 265–266] if there is a topological space
with the countable chain condition which does not have the Property of Knaster.
Marczewski went on to ask whether the product of two partial orders with the
countable chain condition necessarily has the countable chain condition.
Both
questions turned out to be independent of set theory; for details see [Mauldin,
1981] and Marczewski [1945], [1947].
Edwin Miller [1943]151 described a partial order whose existence is equivalent to
the existence of a Suslin line: P has power ℵ1; every subset of power ℵ1 contains
two comparable elements and two non-comparable elements; and if x and y are
non-comparable elements, then there exists no z such that x < z and y < z.
To prove the existence of such a partial order from a Suslin line, Miller recur-
sively deﬁned a sequence of non-overlapping (closed) intervals of length ω1 and
ordered them by reverse inclusion.152
To prove the existence of a Suslin line from such a partial order, he used two
results that follow from the Dushnik-Miller Theorem (see below) to build a tree
where each node has denumerably many successors; he linearly ordered the suc-
cessors in type ω∗+ ω; he passed to the lexicographic order, noted that there are
no jumps, and ﬁlled any gaps by adding new elements to get a complete linear
order.
Sierpi´nski [1948, 165] also gave an equivalence to the existence of a Suslin line in
terms of families of inﬁnite subsets partially ordered by the subset relation, which
is, in essence, another description of a Suslin tree:
Probl`eme P. Soit F une famille inﬁnie d’ensembles jouissant de trois
propri´et´es suivantes:
1. X et Y ´etant deux ensembles de la famille F, on a ou bien X ⊂Y ,
ou bien Y ⊂X, ou bien XY = 0.
149Yuri Semyonovich Ochan is perhaps best known for his book of problems in mathemati-
cal physics [1967].
His name has been variously transliterated as Ju. S. Oˇcan, Y. S. Ochan,
G. Otchan.
150The date for Knaster’s proof is in the Scottish Book [Mauldin, 1981].
151A footnote in Miller’s paper noting that the paper was received July 10, 1942 also notes that
the author died on July 23, 1942.
152The idea of using a sequence of non-overlapping intervals to study a space is natural to those
familiar with Moore spaces.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
203
2. Chaque sous-famille de F form´ee d’ensembles disjoints est au plus
d´enombrable.
3. Chaque sous-famille F1 de F telle que, dans chaque couple de ses
´el´ements, il existe un ´el´ement qui est contenu dans l’autre, est au
plus d´enombrable et a un ensemble maximal (c. `a d. contenant
tous les autres ensembles de F1).
La famille F est-elle n´ecessairement d´enombrable?153
On the one hand, Sierpi´nski appeared unaware of Kurepa’s work on Suslin’s
Problem, while on the other, he referenced [Denjoy, 1946] for literature on the
problem, and this reference includes a bibliography complied by Choquet, as men-
tioned at the beginning of Section 4, which listed Kurepa’s work. Sierpi´nski, in a
note added in proof, cited work of Miller [1943] and Maharam [1947] on Suslin’s
Problem.
Dorothy Maharam154 [1947] provided a set of necessary and suﬃcient conditions
for a countably complete Boolean algebra to have a measure.155 In a discussion
of whether one of her conditions for the existence of a continuous outer measure
can be replaced by the countable chain condition, she indicated the thinking of
the times about Suslin’s hypothesis [1947, 164]: “We now show that an aﬃrmative
answer is unlikely—or at all events can hardly have an easy proof—by showing
153Problem P. Let F be an inﬁnite family of sets enjoying the following three properties:
1. If X and Y are two sets of the family F, then one has pairwise X ⊂Y , or Y ⊂X, or
X ∩Y = ∅.
2. Each subfamily of F of pairwise disjoint sets is at most denumerable.
3. Each subfamily F1 of F such that, in each pair of its elements, there is one element which
is contained in the other, is at most denumerable and has a maximal set (that is to say,
containing all the other sets in F1).
Is the family F necessarily denumerable?
154Dorothy Maharam was born in West Virginia in 1917. She did her undergraduate work at
Cornell University and obtained her doctorate at Bryn Mawr College under the supervision of
Anna Pell Wheeler in 1940 with a dissertation titled On Measure in Abstract Sets. Next she held
a postdoc at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, where she met Arthur H. Stone,
whom she married in April 1942. Stone was at Princeton University during 1941–1942 and held a
series of short appointments (Purdue 1942–1944, Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Insti-
tute in Washington, D.C., Trinity College) before becoming a lecturer at Manchester University
1948–1957, where Maharam joined the staﬀin 1952. They both obtained professorships at the
University of Rochester in 1961 where they stayed until retirement (cf. [Cohn, 2000]). For a
brief biography of Maharam, see [Oxtoby, 1989] and for an overview of her work, especially on
measure theory, see [Choksi et al., 1989]. David Fremlin [1989] declared her “the chief architect
of the present theory of measure algebras” in his masterful exposition of measure algebras in the
Handbook of Boolean Algebras. A recent paper of Boban Veliˇckovi´c includes a survey of recent
work on Maharam algebras, i.e. complete Boolean algebras that admit probability measures.
Arthur Stone described working with her in an interview with W. Wistar Comfort [1997].
155She thanked Arthur H. Stone in a footnote at the bottom of the ﬁrst page, where she noted
that the paper is based in part on work done during 1941-1942 when she held the Alpha Delta
Xi Fellowship of the American Association of University Women and that she had presented a
preliminary version of the paper to the American Mathematical Society in November 1942.

204
Jean A. Larson
that it would imply the truth of a well-known hypothesis of Souslin.” She called
a family of sets A a Souslin system if
1. every pair is either comparable under ⊆or disjoint,
2. every subfamily whose sets are pairwise disjoint is countable,156 and
3. every subfamily whose sets are pairwise comparable is countable.
Maharam stated that “it was conjectured by Souslin that every Souslin system
is countable.” By suitable thinning and selection of maximal disjoint families a
level at a time, Maharam transformed an uncountable Souslin system into a Suslin
tree (or forest of trees) under the subset relation. She used this tree to construct
a Boolean σ-algebra with no non-trivial outer measure (see Theorem 5).
The following year, Maharam [1948] proved that all Souslin subsystems of
Boolean algebras are countable if and only if on each non-atomic Boolean al-
gebra satisfying the countable chain condition there exists a real-valued function
f such that (1) f is monotone non-decreasing, (2) f vanishes only at 0 and (3)
every non-zero element contains non-zero subelements on which f is arbitrarily
small. She further showed that for a ﬁxed non-atomic Boolean algebra E with the
countable chain condition, to show that all its Souslin subsystems are countable
it is suﬃcient to have such functions satisfying the three conditions for every such
subsystem, but it is not suﬃcient to have a single function for E since under the
assumption that Suslin’s Hypothesis is false, she gave a counter-example.
In setting the context for the paper, Maharam recalled her result that Suslin’s
Hypothesis is implied by the existence of a non-trivial outer measure satisfying
certain conditions and in a footnote on the ﬁrst page attributed the implication
from the existence of such a measure to G¨odel. She asserted that the equivalence
of Suslin’s Hypothesis to the statement that all Souslin systems are countable was
well-known, citing [Miller, 1943] together with some results from [Dushnik and
Miller, 1941].
4.4
Ramsey theory
Marshall Hall [1948] extended Philip Hall’s Marriage Theorem to an inﬁnite system
of ﬁnite subsets of a given set. Independently, C. J. Everett and G. Whaples [1949]
extended Hall’s Marriage Theorem to inﬁnite sets.157 Other versions include one
due to Paul Halmos and Herbert Vaughan [1950] using Tychonoﬀ’s Theorem, and
another due to Walter Helbig Gottschalk [1951], who derived it as a corollary to
the Rado Selection Principle (see Subsection 4.1).
Rado [1943] extended his classiﬁcation of which systems of linear equations
with positive integer coeﬃcients are k-regular to systems of homogeneous linear
equations whose coeﬃcients are in a ring of complex numbers.
156Maharam [1948] called this constraint the countable chain condition where Kurepa [1935]
used countable degree of cellularity.
157In a footnote, Everett and Whaples credit the basic idea of the proof to Erd˝os.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
205
We now turn to the ﬁrst steps in extending Ramsey’s Theorem for partitions
of pairs to the uncountable, and we will look at three papers: the Dushnik and
Miller paper [1941] discussed above for its results on order types, a less well-known
paper [1942] by Erd˝os published in a Latin American journal, and a related paper
[1953] by Kurepa who obtained the results in 1950, extending previous work from
1939. We discuss the mathematics of Kurepa’s paper here and postpone comment
on its publication date in 1953 to the section on the 1950’s.
Dushnik and Miller [1941] formulated a positive generalization of Ramsey’s
Theorem for pairs from an uncountable set of power κ partitioned into two color
sets, K0 and K1, by weakening the conclusion to ask for either a set of size κ all
of whose pairs are in K0 or a countable set all of whose pairs are in K1. They
discussed graphs and partitions of sets of pairs in terms of the structure theory
for order, having observed that any partial order gives rise to a graph (binary,
symmetric relation) under the relation of comparability. Here is the statement of
their Theorem 5.22 [1941, 606] under the name by which it is now known.158
Dushnik-Miller Theorem:
If G is a graph of power m, where m is a
transﬁnite cardinal, and if every subset of G of power m contains two
connected elements, then G contains a complete subgraph of power ℵ0.
Dushnik and Miller acknowledge help from Erd˝os [1941, 606, footnote 6]:
We are indebted to P. Erd˝os for suggestions in connection with The-
orems 5.22 and 5.23. In particular, Erd˝os suggested the proof of 5.22
for the case in which m is a singular cardinal.159
The above result is the ﬁrst unbalanced generalization of Ramsey’s Theorem.
Theorem 5.23 is dual of 5.22; it showed that if every subset of G of power ℵ0
contains two connected elements, then G contains a complete graph of power m.
These two theorems are translations to the language of graphs of Theorems 5.24
and 5.25 discussed in §4.3.
Dushnik and Miller [1941, 608] exhibit a counter-example to a possible extension
of these theorems in the case when m = ℵ1, namely the comparability graph of the
superposition, on a set of cardinality ℵ1, of a linear order obtained by mapping it
into the reals and a linear order obtained by mapping it into “the well-ordered series
consisting of all the ordinals of the ﬁrst and second class” [ﬁnite and countable
ordinals]. That is, they used the comparability graph of what is now known as the
Sierpi´nski poset.
Soon after his work for [Dushnik and Miller, 1941],160 Erd˝os [1942] stated and
proved some of the foundational results of what has become known as the partition
calculus. Here he used, as was common at the time, “sum” for “union” [1942, 364]:
158This theorem is sometimes called the Erd˝os-Dushnik-Miller Theorem.
159In [Hajnal, 1997] the proof by Erd˝os is described as requiring a good technical knowledge of
the set theory of the time.
160Baumgartner [1997, 71] also used “soon after” to indicate when Erd˝os proved the results of
[1942].

206
Jean A. Larson
Theorem I:
Let a and b be inﬁnite cardinals such that b > aa. If we
split the complete graph of power b into a sum of a subgraphs at least
one of them contains a complete graph of power > a.
In particular: If b > c (the power of the continuum) and we split the
complete graph of power b into a countable sum of subgraphs; at least
one subgraph contains a non-denumerable complete graph.
Theorem I is best possible. As a matter of fact, if b = aa = 2a we can
split the complete graph of power b into the sum of a subgraphs, such
that no one of them contains a triangle. For the sake of simplicity we
show this only in the case b = c = 2ℵ0.
Erd˝os described the example161 as the complete graph G on points of the interval
(0, 1) and for each positive integer k, the edges of Gk are those pairs {x, y}< such
that
1
2k−1 ≥y −x = 1
2k .
Erd˝os, in his Theorem II, assumed the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis and
supposed that the complete graph on m = ℵα+2 many points is the sum G =
G1 + G2, and proved that if G1 does not contain a complete graph of power m,
then G2 contains a complete graph of power ℵα+1.
Prior to his proofs of the two theorems, he wrote “Tukey and I have shown
by a result of Sierpi´nski that the complete graph of power ℵ1 can be decomposed
into the countable sum of trees. Without assuming the continuum hypothesis we
can not decide whether this also holds for the complete graph of power ℵ2.” (See
[1942, 365]; the result that Tukey and Erd˝os used is in [Sierpi´nski, 1924].)
Both proofs used a construction process that used a graph G to build a tree or
ramiﬁcation system, as it was called in his paper [1943] with Tarski; we describe
only the proof for Theorem I. If G is a graph on b > aa points and the edges
of a G are partitioned into a subgraphs enumerated as ⟨Gα : α < |a|⟩, then the
process starts by choosing an arbitrary p, splitting the remaining points into sets
Qα where q ∈Qα if α is the least index such that the pair {p, q} is in Gα. At
successor stages ξ = η + 1, this approach is repeated; if s : η →|a| is the index
of a non-empty set Qs, then ps is chosen as an arbitrary element of Qs and the
remaining points are split into sets Qs⌢⟨α⟩where q ∈Qs⌢⟨α⟩if α is the least index
such that the pair {ps, q} is in Gα. At limit stages, intersections are taken. The
construction stops when all the points have taken on the role of being the chosen
point. By cardinality considerations, the number of chosen points whose index is
a sequence of length less than |a|+ is at most |a| · |a|+ = |a|+, so there must be a
point r not chosen at any level of the construction of ordinal height < |a|+. Since
at the ηth level, every point of G has either been chosen or is in one of the sets
with an indexing sequence of that length, it follows that r is in the intersection
G of the level sets Qs to which it belongs. For some α∗there must be |a|+ many
161Hajnal [1997, 354] reported that Erd˝os mentioned that the example was pointed out to him
by G¨odel.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
207
sequences s with G ⊆Qs⌢⟨α∗⟩and the set of points ps for which this is true is a
complete subgraph of Gα∗of order type |a|+. Erd˝os did not point out that r may
be added to get a sequence of length |a|+ + 1.
Erd˝os [1942] attributed the result that there is a graph on 2ℵα which does not
have a complete subgraph of power ℵα+1 nor an independent162 subset of that
power to Sierpi´nski, who proved it for graphs of size ℵ1.
The last part of Erd˝os-Tarski [1943], subtitled General remarks on inaccessible
numbers, included a list of six problems, of which problems 5 and 6 were discussed
in §4.3. The following is a problem for an inaccessible cardinal n.
Problem 4. (The Graph Problem.) Is it true that if a complete graph
G of power n is split into two graphs G1 and G2, at least one of the
contains a [complete] subgraph of power n? (A graph is to be deﬁned
as an arbitrary set of non-ordered couples (x, y) with x ̸= y. By a
complete graph of power n we mean the set of all such couples formed
from the elements of a set N of power n.)
In the footnote (page 328) with information on the Graph Problem, the authors
cited Ramsey’s Theorem for n = ℵ0 (where the answer is positive), and a paper
by Erd˝os to appear in Revista de Tucum´an163 for uncountable n which are not
inaccessible (where the answer is negative).
The ﬁnal paragraph of the footnote listed implications of the form positive
solution to problem a implies positive solution to problem b. Of particular note
is the fact that a positive solution of the Ramiﬁcation Problem discussed in §4.3
leads to a positive solution of the Graph Problem. Proofs of these implications
were postponed.
Some connections between graphs and partial orders were investigated. Mar-
czewski [1945, 307] had shown that every graph can be represented by the dis-
junction relation164 on some collection of sets.
Kazimierz Zarankiewicz [1947]
connected Marczewski’s representation of graphs via the disjunction relation to
symmetric relations.165
At some point in the late 1940’s and early 1950’s, Kurepa expanded his focus be-
yond ramiﬁed tables, partial orders and the study of monotone functions of them,
to include graphs. Since a disjunction relation was one of the constituent parts
of Kurepa’s relation ∗= (<, >, ≡, ∥) of ramiﬁcation,166 as explicated in his thesis
162An independent subset of a graph is one in which no pair of points is joined by an edge of
the graph.
163The paper by Erd˝os mentioned here is his [1942] discussed above.
164Given a graph represented as G = (V, E), Marczewski observed that the collection D of
non-empty sets Dx = {{x, y} /∈V | y ∈V \ {x}} has the property that {a, b} ∈E if and only if
Da ∩Db = ∅.
165Kurepa cited Zarankiewicz’ paper in [Kurepa, 1959a]. Erd˝os, in Math Review MR0023047
(9,297c), translated the Zarankeiwicz results for symmetric relations into the language of ﬁnite
graph theory and noted that the author’s results can be deduced from [Tur´an, 1941].
166Kurepa used ∥as the incomparability relation; ≡was an equivalence relation, i.e. equality
in the case of trees; and > was the converse of <.

208
Jean A. Larson
[1935], the paper [Marczewski, 1945], cited in the paper of Kurepa discussed below,
may have been the one that led Kurepa to think about applying his Fundamental
Relation (see the end of §3) to graphs.
In May 1950 Kurepa proved the following theorem for a binary symmetric re-
lation167 G = (G; ρ), where kG is the cardinality of the vertex set, kcG is the
supremum of the sizes of connected subsets of G,168 and ksG is the supremum
of the sizes of disconnected subsets of G.169 We will call this theorem Kurepa’s
Graph Relation ([1953], [1996, 399]):
Theorem 0.1 For any graph G = (G; ρ) one has
(0.4)
kG ≤(2ksG)kcG.
For any ℵα and any cardinal number n ≤2ℵα there is a graph g =
g(ℵα, n) such that
(0.5)
kcg ≤ℵα, ksg ≤ℵα, kg = n;
in particular (for n = 2ℵα) there is a graph Mα such that
(0.6)
kcMα = ℵαksMα, kMα = 2ℵα.
With his orientation toward the study of partial order and the fact that he
was updating his proof of the Fundamental Relation from [1939], Kurepa referred
to the totally disconnected sets as antichains and the pairwise connected sets as
chains.
Toward an overview of Kurepa’s proof, for α < (kcG)+, let Tα = αG be the
set of functions (sequences) from α into G. Note that T = S
α Tα is a tree under
end-extension. Let δ(X) denote a maximal disconnected subset of X. Kurepa
used δ to deﬁne sets Dα ⊆Tα (see below) by recursion on α such that D =
S{Dα : α < (kcG)+ ∧Dα ̸= ∅} is a subtree of T closed under initial segments that
has the properties that (1) each element is an enumeration of a chain (complete
subgraph) in G, and (2) each element with domain a limit ordinal is the union of
its initial segments. It follows that each branch through D may be thought of as
an enumeration of a chain of G, and hence has cardinality at most kcG. Moreover,
for each non-terminal element s ∈D, the set of a ∈G such that s⌢⟨a⟩∈D is
an antichain (disconnected subset, independent subset) of G. Thus for all ξ with
Dξ ̸= ∅, the subtree S
η≤ξ Dη is injectively embeddable into the tree ξ≥(ksG).
Consequently, for positive ξ < (ksG)+, | S
η≤ξ Dη| ≤(ksG)|ξ| ≤(2 · (ksG))(kcG).
Since D ⊆T has no branches of length (kcG)+ and (kcG)+ ≤2(kcG), it follows that
|D| ≤(2 · (ksG))(kcG). Kurepa ensured that for each a ∈G there are α < (kcG)+
167Kurepa followed Sierpi´nski [1933] in his usage of binary symmetric relations.
168The connected subsets may be regarded as pairwise related subsets, complete subgraphs, or
cliques.
169The disconnected subsets may be regarded as pairwise unrelated subsets, subgraphs in which
no pairs are joined by an edge, or independent subsets.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
209
and a element s ∈Dα+1 with s(α) = a. Therefore |G| ≤|D| and the theorem
follows.
For the interested reader, we describe the construction of the sets Dα from
G = (G; ρ) where ρ is a reﬂexive symmetric relation.
It uses a function E :
℘(G) →℘(G) deﬁned by E(X) = {y ∈G | ∀x ∈Xρ(x, y)}. Note that since ρ
is symmetric, X ⊆E(X). By an abuse of notation, for s ∈T, write E(s) for
E(ran(s)) and E(s) \ s for E(ran(s)) \ ran(s). To start the recursion, D0 = {∅}.
For ξ = η + 1 successor, Dξ is the set of all s⌢⟨a⟩for s ∈Dη and a ∈δ(E(s) \ s).
For ξ limit, Dξ is the set of all s ∈Tξ such that E(s) \ s ̸= ∅and all proper initial
segments of s are in S{Dη | η < ξ}.
Kurepa showed that his graph inequality is sharp for graphs of size 2ℵα as
follows. He let Mα be the collection of all ωα-sequences of rational numbers, and
deﬁned a partial order ≤on Mα as the superposition of a well-ordering of Mα and
the lexicographic ordering. His example is the comparability graph of this partial
order, (Mα, ≤).170
Kurepa used Hausdorﬀ’s language for the ordering “by ﬁrst diﬀerence” to de-
scribe the lexicographic order, and used Hausdorﬀ’s Theorem XIV [1908, 472]
in the proof of the lemma that states that the subsets of the collection of ωα-
sequences of rationals which are well-ordered or converse well-ordered under the
ﬁrst diﬀerence order have power at most ωα, and that there is a subset S of such
sequences which either has order type ωα or has order type ω∗
α.
Kurepa derived two corollaries and applied his results to a question of Sierpi´nski
[1933]. Kurepa’s Corollary 0.1 [1953, 400] is the assertion that if a graph has cardi-
nality at least
 2ℵ0+, then either it contains an uncountable connected (complete)
induced subgraph or it contains an uncountable totally disconnected induced sub-
graph (independent set), which is an independent rediscovery of part of Theorem
I by Erd˝os [1942].171
The corollary may be obtained by expressing the graph relation as an impli-
cation and taking the contrapositive. That is, the graph relation is equivalent to
the following conditional statement: for any graph G = (V, E), if the supremum
of the cardinalities of its complete subgraphs is κ and the supremum of the car-
dinalities of its independent subsets is λ, then |V | ≤(2κ)λ. While Kurepa did
not do so, the modern reader, taking the contrapositive of the above conditional
statement in the case where κ and λ are inﬁnite cardinals and using basic cardinal
arithmetic, derives the statement that if a graph (G, ρ) has at least
 κλ+ points,
then either there is a complete subgraph of size κ+ or there is an independent set
of size λ+. For the situation of Erd˝os’ Theorem II [1942] (and others like it with
diﬀerent size goals), this modern interpretation does not require the GCH which
170Ginsburg, in his Math Review MR0071485 (17,135b) noted that (Mα; ≤) given on page 91 of
[Kurepa, 1953] is a generalization of an example in [Dushnik and Miller, 1941]. Recall that at the
end of §3, we discussed the fact that in the late 1930’s Kurepa used a partial order obtained as
the superposition of a well-order and the lexicographic order on ω2 to show that his Fundamental
Relation for partial orders is sharp.
171Apply the Erd˝os result to the partition of the complete graph, i.e. the set of all pairs of
vertices, into K0, the set of connected ones, and K1, the set of disconnected ones.

210
Jean A. Larson
Erd˝os used, instead the guarantee that any graph on at least (ℵα+1
ℵα)+ vertices
will have either a complete subgraph on ℵα+2 vertices or an independent set of
size ℵα+1. On the other hand, for the situation with equal size outcomes of size
κ+, neither Kurepa nor Erd˝os used GCH; both start with the same size set but
Erd˝os’ Theorem I [1942] works for κ many colors.
Kurepa applied his theorem to a question of Sierpi´nski on a problem of Knaster.
Kurepa’s description of Knaster’s problem appears below, translated by the au-
thor:
Does there exist a non-denumerable inﬁnite graph G so that each in-
ﬁnite nondenumerable subgraph of G contains both: two distinct con-
nected points and two distinct disconnected points.
Sierpi´nski came up with an example of a graph on ℵ1 points meeting Knaster’s re-
quirement, and asked if one could have an example with ℵ2 points. Kurepa pointed
out that the graph relation means that the cardinality of any graph satisfying
Knaster’s condition has power at most the continuum, giving a negative answer
to Sierpi´nski’s question if the Continuum Hypothesis holds. Since his counter-
example M0 (essentially the generalization of Sierpi´nski’s example to the contin-
uum) is a graph of cardinality the continuum in which every uncountable subset
contains both connected and disconnected pairs, a positive answer to Sierpi´nski’s
question is equivalent to the negation of the Continuum Hypothesis.172
Kurepa’s Corollary 0.2 is the inequality for partial orders corresponding to the
graph relation, i.e. equation (0.4) in Theorem 0.1. It is an updated version of
the Fundamental Relation for partial orders announced by Kurepa in [1937b] and
published in [1939], obtained by using the supremum of the cardinalities of all
chains rather than restricting attention to increasing and decreasing well-ordered
chains.
To place Kurepa’s paper [1953] in context, note that the results on graphs are
closely related to those of Dushnik and Miller [1941] and Erd˝os [1942], discussed
above.
Moreover, the proof of the Fundamental Relation that Kurepa gave in
[1939] can be immediately adapted to prove his graph relation (0.4). Kurepa had
the tools in hand early, but missed the opportunity to be the ﬁrst to state and
prove these fundamental results in Ramsey theory.
5
1950-1960: FOUNDATION OF THE PARTITION CALCULUS
In the 1950’s, a systematic study of partitions of ﬁnite subsets of an ordered set
was initiated, the main lines of study delineated, and the useful arrow notation for
partition relations was introduced. In a classic paper, Erd˝os and Rado proved a
Positive Stepping Up Lemma from which the modern Erd˝os-Rado Theorem follows.
Erd˝os and Rado generalized partition relations from cardinals to ordinals, from
172Ginsburg, in his Math Review MR0071485 (17,135b) noted that Erd˝os [1942] already an-
swered the question of Sierpi´nski.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
211
colorings of r-element sets to products of them, and introduced canonical partition
relations as a way to treat partitions with potentially many classes. Kurepa gave an
extended treatment of his approach to graphs and hypergraphs. Late in the decade,
a seminar of Mostowski and Tarski revisited the Erd˝os and Tarski results for
inaccessible cardinals which had been announced in 1943. By the end of the decade,
all the members of the synergistic group consisting of Erd˝os, Hajnal, Milner and
Rado had met one another and were working on partition relations.
The Regressive Function Theorem reached its modern form, and general ∆-
system lemmas were proved.
Interest in Suslin lines and objects that can be
derived from them continued. Progress was made on the Normal Moore Space
Conjecture: Bing proved that the existence of a Q-set implies the existence of
a separable non-metrizable normal Moore space.
Investigations into the basic
structure of partial orders and their mappings were made and a partial order of
size 2κ universal for partial orders of size κ was constructed.
Sierpi´nski published Cardinal and Ordinal Numbers [1958], an expanded version
his Le¸cons sur les Nombres Transﬁnis [1950]. In his Math Review MR650095787,
Gillman commented “Professor Sierpi´nski writes in his usual kindly, patient style
which makes reading a pleasure.” Rodolfo A. Ricabarra published Ordered and
Ramiﬁed Sets (Contribution to the Study of Suslin’s Problem) [1958]. This book
is an extended look at trees and linear order types related to them using Kurepa’s
ramiﬁed sets and tables, and has a chapter on equivalences and implications of
Suslin’s Problem.
We conclude this introduction with some results about combinatorial tools.
In answer to a question of Tarski, Robert Vaught [1952] showed that the state-
ment “every family of sets has a maximal disjointed family” is equivalent to the
Axiom of Choice.
The statement can be derived by an application of Zorn’s
Lemma, and Vaught gave a simple argument that from it, one can ﬁnd a transver-
sal for any family of pairwise disjoint non-empty sets. Kurepa [1953], [1996, 401]
used Vaught’s result to show that the statement “every graph contains a maximal
disconnected subgraph” is equivalent to Zermelo’s axiom.
In 1958, Erd˝os and Rado submitted the paper [1960] in which they prove the
general ∆-system lemma, with an interesting bound in the case of ﬁnite collections
of ﬁnite sets. That year, Ernest Michael [1962] submitted his independently proved
result equivalent to the general ∆-system lemma:173 he generalized the result of
ˇSanin [1946] to higher cardinals. In a footnote added in proof, Michael indicated
that Erd˝os had alerted him to the equivalent Erd˝os-Rado result and its longer
proof. It may be that Michael’s paper alerted Erd˝os to the existence of ˇSanin’s
paper as well. It is unsurprising that such a useful result would be discovered
multiple times.
Andr´as Hajnal174 met Erd˝os in 1956 and in [1997, 361–362] recounted the de-
173Michael used quasi-disjoint for ∆-system. Michael is best known for the Michael Selection
Principle [1956]; see also volume 155 of Topology and its Applications, a special issue dedicated
to the theory of continuous selections of multivalued mappings and Michael’s 80th birthday.
174Andr´as Hajnal (May 13, 1931 – ) was awarded his doctorate in 1957 at J´oszef Attila Uni-

212
Jean A. Larson
lightful story of how they came to starting working together on set mappings at
that very ﬁrst meeting (it included climbing 300 odd stairs to the top of the local
cathedral). The resulting paper is [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1958]. Set mappings are an
important part of inﬁnite combinatorics and useful for proving partition relations,
so I take this opportunity to quote a result by Hajnal under the name by which it
is now known [1961, 123]:
Hajnal’s Set Mapping Theorem:
Assume κ is an inﬁnite cardinal,
κ > λ, and let f : κ →P(κ) be a set mapping with the property that
|f(α)| < λ for every α < κ. Then there is a set X ⊆S of cardinality κ
free with respect to f.175
5.1
The partition calculus
This subsection details chronologically the work of Erd˝os, Hajnal, Kurepa, Rado,
and others as they explored a variety of approaches to ﬁnding subsets with uniform
behavior in graphs, binary symmetric relations, and in distributions, partitions and
colorings of r-tuples. A chronological presentation was chosen to place in historical
context the May 1950 results of Kurepa [1953] whose mathematical context was
discussed in §4.4.
The Erd˝os-Rado paper [1950] has been frequently cited as the beginning of
the study of canonical partitions.176 Any decomposition or coloring function f
deﬁned on r-tuples of a set A induces the “same color” equivalence relation on the
r-tuples of A. This equivalence relation is deﬁned even when the number of colors
is inﬁnite. Erd˝os and Rado proved that for each ﬁnite r, there is a ﬁnite set Cr of
equivalence relations on the r-element subsets of N with the property that for every
equivalence relation E on the r-tuples of A there is some inﬁnite B ⊆N and some
F ∈Cr such that the restrictions of E and F to the r-tuples of B are identical. We
will call such a collection Cr a canonical basis for the equivalence relations on the
r-tuples of A. For concreteness, we note that for pairs, the canonical equivalence
relations are s ≡min t iﬀmin(s) = min(t); s ≡max t iﬀmax(s) = max(t) and
s ≡= t iﬀs = t; and the equivalence relation in which all s and t are equivalent.
For each ﬁnite positive r and each I ⊆r, let EI be the equivalence relation on the
versity in Szeged, Hungary where his advisor was L´aszl´o Kalmar, a logician. His thesis was on
relative constructibility (see Kanamori’s ﬁrst chapter for more on Hajnal’s thesis work). The
Mathematical Genealogy Project site lists 1956 for the year of his doctorate, but a curriculum
vitae accessed September 9, 2010 from Hajnal’s Hungarian website at http://www.renyi.hu/ aha-
jnal/hajn2006.pdf lists 1957.
175A set mapping is a function f : S →P(S) so that f(s) /∈s for every s ∈S.
A subset
X ⊆S is free with respect to a set mapping f on S if for all x, y ∈X, x /∈f(y). See [Komj´ath
and Shelah, 2000] for the history of problems on set mappings and for some set mapping results
about ℵn at the end of the century. The history dates back to the thirties and a question of Paul
T´uran, and includes results by Sophie Piccard and Stanis law Ruziewicz, one of the founders of
the Lw´ow School.
176The seminal paper [Ramsey, 1930] has an earlier classiﬁcation of r-ary relations.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
213
r-element subsets of N deﬁned by
{x0, x1, . . . , xr−1}< EI {y0, y1, . . . , yr−1}< ⇐⇒xi = yi for all i ∈I.
Here is a precise statement of Erd˝os and Rado’s oft-quoted canonical partition
relation for r-tuples of natural numbers:
Canonical Partitions for N: For every positive r < ω and every equiv-
alence relation E on the r-element subsets of N, there is an inﬁnite set
M ⊆ω and an index set I ⊆{0, 1, . . . , k −1} such that the restrictions
of E and EI to r-tuples from M are identical.
In [Erd˝os and Rado, 1952a], the authors looked at partitions of order types and
proved (cf. Theorem 4, pp. 428-9) that if the set of pairs of rational numbers is
partitioned into two pieces, then either there is an inﬁnite monotonic sequence
whose pairs are in the ﬁrst cell or there is a subset dense in an open interval all
of whose pairs are in the second cell.177 Rado,178 in his joint work with Erd˝os
[1952a], used the Axiom of Choice to deﬁne a partition of the collection T of all
inﬁnite subsets of an inﬁnite set S into two classes, T = K0 ∪K1, so that there is
no inﬁnite set all of whose inﬁnite subsets are in the same class as follows. Start
with a well-ordering < of T. Let K0 be the set of all A ⊆T for which there is
an A′ < A with A′ ⊆A. Set K1 = T \ K2. Observe that if S′ is in T and A is
its <-least inﬁnite subset, then A is in K2. Since A is inﬁnite, using the Axiom
of Choice, we may partition A = {bi | i < ω} ∪C, where the bj are all distinct,
none of them is in C, and C is inﬁnite. Let Bj = {bi | i < j} ∪C. Then for some
m0, Bm0 is the <-least among the Bj’s. In particular, Bm0+1 is a proper subset
of Bm0 with Bm0 < Bm0+1, so Bm0+1 is in K1.
Erd˝o and Rado called attention to the following problem [1952a, 418]:
All Finite Subsets Problem:
Given an inﬁnite set S, is it possible to
divide all ﬁnite subsets of S into two classes in such a way that every
inﬁnite subset of S contains two ﬁnite subsets of the same number of
elements but belonging to diﬀerent classes?
They indicate that such partitions exist if |S| ≤2ℵ0,179 but indicate that nothing
is known for sets of larger cardinality. We conclude with the comment that Erd˝os
and Rado proved early results for polarized partitions in this paper, since we will
refer to that fact later.
Kurepa gave several talks on his results about graphs from May 1950:180 his
September 6, 1952 talk in Munich at the Kongress der Deutschen Mathematiker-
Vereinigung was entitled ¨Uber bin¨are symmetrische Relation; his December 3, 1952
177Erd˝os mentioned this result in his paper [1996, 120] on his favorite theorems.
178The attribution of this result to Rado was made in [Hajnal, 1997, 354], and it dates back to
1934, as discussed in §3.2.
179In Example 2 [1952a, 435], Erd˝os and Rado showed there is such a partition of the ﬁnite
subsets of a denumerable set S, which shows in modern terminology that ℵ0 is not a Ramsey
cardinal.
180The details given in this paragraph were found in [Kurepa, 1954] and [Kurepa, 1959a].

214
Jean A. Larson
talk for a Colloquium of the Society of Mathematicians and Physicists of Croatia
in Zagreb was entitled O simetriˇcnim relacijama i grafovima; and his February 24,
1953 talk for the Faculty of Sciences in Paris was entitled Sur les relations binaires.
We learn later that Kurepa had intended to submit his work on graphs to Journal
f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik after his talk in Munich, but postponed
publication in the expectation that he would be able to generalize the results.
He submitted a preliminary report [1953] prior to the talk in Paris, probably in
connection with his December 3, 1952 talk.181
He learned from G. Riguet182
during his visit to Paris about the work of others in Ramsey theory, citing in his
preliminary report (1) Ramsey’s seminal paper [1930], (2) Erd˝os’ follow-up [1942]
to the Dushnik-Miller Theorem, (3) the joint paper of Erd˝os and Rado [1953]
discussed below, and (4) a paper of F. Burton Jones [1952].
In a paper with Erd˝os, Rado introduced the basic version of the arrow notation,
“relation (5) a →(b1, b2)2.”
He called it the decomposition relation between
cardinals a, b1, b2, and deﬁned it as follows [1953, 427]:
For any set S we denote by Ω2(S) the set of all sets S′ ⊂S such that
|S′| = 2.
Then we say that (5) holds if, and only if, the following
statement is true. Whenever
|S′| = α;
Ω2(S) = K1 + K2,
then there is S′ ⊂S and λ ∈{1, 2} such that
|S′| = bλ;
Ω2(S′) ⊆Kλ.
The relation (5) is fundamental in many investigations in set theory.
The authors hope to deal in another paper with its numerous interest-
ing properties and generalizations. In the present note it only serves
as a convenient abbreviation.
The partition approach turned out to be remarkably well-suited to general-
ization, and Erd˝os spoke on his work with Rado [1956, 427] on some of these
generalizations on October 24, 1953 in New York during his invited hour address,
Combinatorial problems in set theory, for the Eastern Sectional Meeting of the
American Mathematical Society (cf. [Cohen, 1954, 21]).
Rado [1954a] tackled the question of canonical polarized partition relations and
proved two theorems, using his joint work with Erd˝os [1950] on canonical partitions
and the approach to polarization in their [1952a]. Rado used the notation [N]n
for the n-element subsets of a set N, which has been widely adopted. He wrote
[A1, A2, . . . , Aℓ]n1,n2,...,nℓfor the collection of all sequences (X1, . . . , Xℓ) where
each Xi is in [Ai]ni. The simplest case of the second theorem is Proposition B
181Kurepa described the December 1952 talk in a footnote [1953, 65] as a presentation “during
the session of 23.10.1952 of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Art.”
182Almost surely Kurepa is referring to Jacques Riguet, who used order in his study of binary
relations, closures, and Galois correspondences [1948].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
215
from page 74, which states that every inﬁnite matrix all of whose elements are
either 0 or 1 contains an inﬁnite submatrix equal to one of the following four
matrices: the matrix of all zeros; the matrix with zeros on and below the main
diagonal and ones above it; the matrix of all ones on and below the main diagonal
with zeros above it; and the matrix of all ones. Below, I have stated Rado’s ﬁrst
theorem with a descriptive name for easy reference:
Rectangle Reﬁning Theorem: Given positive integers ℓ, n1, . . . , nℓ, p,
there is a positive integer f = fℓ(n1, . . . , nℓ, p) which has the following
property. If ∆is any partition of [N, Nf, Nf, . . . , Nf]n1,...,nℓthen there
are sets N ′
λ, such that N ′
1 is inﬁnite, and N ′
λ ∈[Nf]p for 1 ≤λ ≤ℓ,
and
∆(X1, X2, . . . , Xℓ) =
λ
Y
λ
∆λ(Xλ)
(Xλ ∈[N ′
λ]nλ),
where each ∆λ is a canonical partition.183
The displayed equation means that two sequences ⃗X = (X1, X2, . . . , Xℓ) and ⃗X′ =
(X′
1, . . . , X′
ℓ) are in the same cell of the partition ∆of [N, Nf, Nf, . . . , Nf]n1,...,nℓ
if and only if for each index λ, the components Xλ and X′
λ are in the same cell of
∆λ.
In May 1954, Kurepa published his Math Review MR0058687 (15,410b) of
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1953], in which the ﬁrst half delineated the contents of the paper,
and the second half listed references he felt should have been included, citing ﬁve
of his own papers and Theorem 14 of [Hausdorﬀ, 1908]. Of relevance to the parti-
tion calculus, he wrote “especially the proof and the result in the reviewer’s paper
[his Fundamental Relation proved in [1939]] · · · are connected with lemmas 3 and
4 of the paper under review.” For inﬁnite m, n, the contrapositive of the implica-
tion derived from the inequality for graphs in Kurepa’s Theorem 0.1 of May 1950
([1953], [1996, 399]) expressed in Rado’s notation is (mn)+ →(m+, n+)2. This
partition relation is closely related to the Erd˝os-Rado lemmas, since Lemma 3 is
a →(b, a)2 for a regular limit cardinal a and b < a; and Lemma 4 is a+ →(b, a+)2
if a is inﬁnite and b is the least cardinal such that ab > a.
On November 11, 1954, Kurepa added a short note to [1953], [1996, 409]: “The
results were obtained in [M]ay 1950 (and were to be presented in a talk in USA)
when the author was anxious to give a new proof of a theorem he published earlier
[v. Kurepa C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 205 (1937), 1196-1198 “la relation fondamentale
(1)” and Kurepa [1], [3, §20].”184 That is, Kurepa added the announcement of his
Fundamental Relation to the references and emphasized the starting point of the
article was Corollary 0.2, his chain-antichain inequality for partial orders, as he
183See [Rado, 1954a, 76]. The notation Nf denotes a ﬁxed set with f many elements; N denotes
an inﬁnite set, not necessarily the natural numbers.
184The references are to [Kurepa, 1939] and his book on set theory, Teorija skupova, published
in 1951. Kurepa did make a lecture tour in the United States of America in 1950, as one can
learn from [Kurepa, 1952, 97, footnote 1], but spoke on a diﬀerent topic.

216
Jean A. Larson
had noted in the body of the paper. Recall that the ﬁrst theorem of [Kurepa,
1953] gives an inequality on the cardinality of a graph in terms of the supremum
of the cardinalities of the sizes of its complete subgraphs and the supremum of the
cardinalities of the sizes of its independent subsets, and addresses the sharpness of
this inequality. Kurepa prefaced its statement with the remark that the purpose
of the paper was to prove the ﬁrst theorem.
Notice the shift in the way Kurepa presented his work and its connection with
graphs: Kurepa described the ﬁrst theorem of May 1950 as new at the time he
found it [1953], but in the Math Review of [Erd˝os and Rado, 1953], Kurepa has,
in essence, said it is implicit in his Fundamental Relation.
Erd˝os and Rado [1956]185 generalized the decomposition relation of their [1953]
paper from cardinals to order types, from partitions into two cells into many cells,
and from 2-tuples to r-tuples for ﬁnite values of r. They even mentioned, but did
not treat, “more general partition relations referring to partial orders” [Erd˝os and
Rado, 1956, 430]. In this seminal paper, Rado introduced, in full generality, the
paradigm shifting deﬁnition of the ordinary partition symbol [1956, 429]:186
Fundamental throughout this paper is the partition relation a →(b, d)2
introduced in [6]. More generally, for any a, bν, r the relation
(1)
a →(b0, b1, . . . )r
k
is said to hold if, and only if, the following statement is true. The
cardinals bν are deﬁned for ν < k. Whenever |S| = a; [S]r = P
ν<k Kν,
then there are B ⊂S; ν < k such that |B| = bν; [B]r ⊂Kν.
When discussing a →(b0, b1, . . . )r
k, let us call a the resource and the bi’s the
goals, and call a set homogeneous for color i or monochromatic for color i if all
its r-tuples are in the ith cell of the partition.
Erd˝os and Rado abbreviated
a →(b0, b1, . . . )r
k to a →(b)r
k in the special case with bν = b for all ν < k. Partition
relations in which all the goals are the same have come to be called balanced; if not
all the goals are the same, they are called unbalanced. This distinction, already
mentioned in special cases earlier, proved useful since proof techniques varied for
185The paper was received by the editors on May 17, 1955. The authors did not mention the
results of Kurepa [1953] which appeared very late in 1954 or possibly in 1955. A later paper,
[Erd˝os et al., 1965], reported that Erd˝os and Rado were unaware of Kurepa’s work when they
submitted their paper.
186As Hajnal said in [Hajnal and Larson, 2010], “There are cases in mathematical history when
a well-chosen notation can enormously enhance the development of a branch of mathematics
and a case in point is the ordinary partition symbol.” A contrasting view is provided by Rudin
[1975a, 7], who, after starting a section entitled Ramiﬁcation arguments and partition calculus
with eight statements, the ﬁrst four of which are arrow relations and the second four of which
are inequalities: “The gibberish above is a set of really quite important theorems, the ﬁrst four
from the partition calculus and the last four from topology. The topological theorems are proved
using partition calculus theorems or techniques which often means using tree type proofs.” In
the next paragraph, she continues: “In this chapter we ﬁrst introduce the partition calculus
notation. This notation is a stone wall barrier which must be crossed in order to make the rich
literature of partition calculus available.”

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
217
the two types. They reviewed previous results, proved monotonicity results for
the ordinary partition symbol and delimited the trivial cases (see Theorem 22,
page 438). For example, with the arrow notation, Ramsey’s Theorem is reduced
to the compact statement ω →(ω)r
γ for ﬁnite r and 1 ≤γ < ω. Sierpi´nski’s
partition generalizes easily to 2ℵ0 ↛(ℵ1, ℵ1)2. Theorem I from [Erd˝os, 1942] is
the statement that if b > aa, then b →(a+)2
a. The core of Rado’s result from
his paper with Erd˝os [1952a] on decompositions of the inﬁnite subsets into two
classes may be written κ ↛(ℵ0)ℵ0
2 , and their All Finite Subsets Problem may be
written κ →(κ)<ω
2
, where here we are introducing a generalization of the ordinary
partition relation that appears in [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1958], which will be discussed
below.
Erd˝os and Rado [1956] explored the partition calculus using the ramiﬁcation
method. They proved the following ordinal partition relation for m, n, ℓ≥2: if
ℓ→(m, n)2, then ω·ℓ→(m, ω·n)2 (see Theorem 25, page 440). They investigated
the partition properties of λ, the order type of the set of real numbers, and proved
that λ →(α, n)3 for every n < ω and α < ω1 (see Theorem 31, page 447). They
proved that the same is true for any uncountable order type Φ such ω1 ̸≤Φ and
ω∗
1 ̸≤Φ, i.e. neither ω1 nor its converse order ω∗
1 is order-embeddable into Φ, and
conjectured that every positive partition relation for λ generalized to such Φ, but
in footnote 7 on page 443 they note that Specker disproved this conjecture. They
also proved ω1 →(ω + m, 4)3. Partition relations for triples would turn out to
be particularly challenging. They focused attention on the question of whether
ω1 →(ω · 2, ω · 2)2 after proving for α < ω · 2 that ω1 →(α, α)2. In Theorem 44,
they reproved the Dushnik-Miller Theorem by reproving that ω1 →(ω1, ω + 1)2
(see [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956, 459]), and more generally if κ is regular of uncountable
coﬁnality, by proving that κ →(κ, ω + 1)2.
A key result of this paper is their Theorem 39 (i) quoted below with the name
by which it has come to be known ([Erd˝os and Rado, 1956, 467–468]):
Positive Stepping Up Lemma: If
(81)
ℓ→(α0, α1, . . . )r
k,
(82)
|m| > P
λ<ℓ|k||λ|r,
then
(83)
m →(α0, α1, . . . )r+1.
One corollary of Theorem 39, which includes various consequences of the Posi-
tive Stepping Up Lemma is the fact that for every positive r and ﬁnite sequence
of ordinal goals β0, β1, . . . , βm−1, there is a resource α suﬃciently large so that
α →(β0, β1, . . . , βm−1)r (see page 470).
The proof of the Positive Stepping Up Lemma involved a new concept. An
end-homogeneous set for a partition g : [m]r+1 →k is a set on which the color

218
Jean A. Larson
assigned by g to an (r + 1)-element set does not depend on the largest element of
the set.187
Let us assume m is a cardinal, or more precisely, the inital ordinal of that
cardinality.
For each ordinal x < m, deﬁne a sequence ⟨fβ(x)⟩by recursion:
f0(x) = 0, and if fβ(x) has been deﬁned for β < γ, then fγ(x) is the least element
y of x\{fβ(x) : β < γ} with the property that for all r-element u ⊆{fβ(x) : β < γ}
one has g(u ∪{y}) = g(u ∪{x}), if there is such a y < x, and otherwise fβ(x) = x
and the recursion stops. Let ρ(x) be the index of the ﬁnal element of the sequence.
Note that by construction, the sequence is end-homogeneous for g.
Erd˝os and Rado use an induction argument to show that if ρ(x) = ρ(z) and for
all indices β0 < · · · < βr−1, g(fβ0(x), . . . , fβr−1(x), x) = g(fβ0(z), . . . , fβr−1(z), z),
then x = z. Note that if η = fβ(x), then the same argument shows the sequence
⟨fζ(η) : ζ ≤β⟩is an initial segment of ⟨fζ(x) : ζ ≤ρ(x)⟩. That is, these sequences
form a tree under end-extension and the argument here is essentially a ramiﬁcation
argument.
A consequence of the induction arguments is that the number of such sequences
of length σ is bounded by the cardinal of the set of functions h : [σ]r →k, which
is at most |k||σ|r. By the cardinality hypothesis that |m| > P
λ<ℓ|k||λ|r, for some
x0 one has ρ(x0) ≥ℓso the induction hypothesis may be applied to S0 = {fβ(x0) :
β ≤ℓ} and the coloring g′ : [S0]r →k deﬁned by g′(u) = g(u ∪{x0}), to get a
subset S1 of size αi monochromatic for color i for g′, and S1 ∪{x0} is the required
witness to the partition relation for the original coloring g.
In [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] two special cases of what has come to be called
the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem were derived, using weakenings of GCH to get around
their lack of good notation for iterated exponentiation. From the assumptions
that 2ℵν ≤ℵn for ν < n and ωn →(α0, α1, . . . )r
k, they derived ωn+1 →(α0 +
1, α1 + 1, . . . )r+1
k
(note that n, k need not be ﬁnite). From the assumptions that
|k| < cf(ℵm), r ≥0 and 2ℵν ≤ℵn for m ≤n < m + r and ν < n, they derived
ωm+r →(α0 + r, α1 + r, . . . )r+1
k
.
The Positive Stepping Up Lemma is the key ingredient in the proof of the
modern version of the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem. For non-triviality, let us assume that
k ≥2 and each αi ≥3. If ℓ= ω, then the assumption that ℓ→(α0, α1, . . . )r
k
means each αi ≤ω, k < ω, and in this case, Ramsey’s Theorem already yields
ℓ= ω →(α0, α1, . . . )r+1
k
. So assume ℓ> ω. Then |k| < ℓ, else, since ℓr = ℓ, there
would be a one-to-one mapping from [ℓ]r into k. Also P
λ<ℓ|k||λ|r = P
λ<ℓ|k||λ| =
P
λ<ℓ2|λ| = 2<ℓ. Note that P
n<ω 2n = ω yielding the following theorem.
Positive Stepping Up Lemma (modern form): For all inﬁnite cardinals
κ, all γ with 2 ≤γ < κ, all ﬁnite r, and all cardinals ⟨λν : ν < γ⟩, if
κ →(λν)2
ν<γ, then (2<κ)+ →(λν + 1)r+1
ν<γ.
187The concept of an end-homogeneous set appears in the proof of the Positive Stepping Up
Lemma, but the name appears only later e.g. in Chapter IV, Section 15 of the Erd˝os-Hajnal-
M´at´e-Rado compendium [1984]. The idea also goes under the name pre-homogeneous which was
used by Kunen [1977].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
219
Let expn(κ) denote n-times iterated exponentiation, that is, exp0(κ) = κ and
expn+1(κ) = 2 expn(κ). With this and the cardinal arithmetic above, we state below
the modern version of their Theorem 39, obtained using the Positive Stepping Up
Lemma repeatedly and starting from the clear fact that exp0(κ) = κ →(κ)1
γ for
γ < cf(κ).
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem (modern form): For every inﬁnite cardinal κ,
every ﬁnite r ≥2, and all γ < cf(κ), (expr(2<κ))+ →(κ + (r −1))r
γ.
Since κ+ →(κ+)1
κ, by the Positive Stepping Up Lemma, (2<κ+)+ →(κ+)2
κ.
Use 2<κ+ = 2κ = exp0(κ) to rewrite this partition relation as (exp0(κ))+ →
(κ+)2
κ. Repeated application of the Positive Stepping Up Lemma yields the most
frequently quoted version of the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem: (expn(κ))+ →(κ+)n+1
κ
.
Erd˝os and Rado used the notation [S0, S1, . . . , St−1]r1,r2,...,rt−1 for the Cartesian
product of the t sets [Si]ri from Rado’s paper [1954a] and introduced the polarized
partition relation (see [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956, 480]), denoted





a0
a1
...
at−1




−→





b0,0
b0,1
. . .
b1,0
b1,1
. . .
...
bt−1,0
bt−1,1
. . .





r0,r1,...,rt−1
k
for the assertion that whenever |Si| = ai for i < t, and [S0, . . . , St−1]r1,...,rt−1 is
partitioned into k classes, then there is some j < k and sets Bi ⊆Si of cardinality
bi,j so that [B0, . . . , Bt−1]r1,...,rt−1 is a subset of the jth cell of the partition. They
noted on page 480 that “the passage from our former type of partition relation
i.e. the case t = 1, to the more general kind . . . bears a certain resemblance to the
process of polarization used in the theory of algebraic forms, which accounts for
the name polarized partition relation.” They go on to prove some results expressed
with this notation but do not give an extended study of it.
On a trip to Israel, Erd˝os stopped in Switzerland where he visited Specker and
shared some of the partition problems with him. During the visit Specker was
able to prove that for all m < ω, the ordinal partition relation ω2 →(ω2, m)2
holds. Erd˝os continued to Israel and on his return learned that Specker had a
counter-example witnessing ω3 ↛(ω2, 3)2 (see [Specker, 1957] for both results).
In a paper [1958] received by the journal in 1957, Erd˝os and Hajnal proved the
ﬁrst positive result in the study of partitions of all ﬁnite subsets of a set.188 They
introduced the notation κ →(α)<ω
2
which means that for any coloring of the ﬁnite
subsets of κ with two colors, there is a subset A of order type α such that for all
n < ω, f is monochromatic on the collection of all n-element subsets of A. They
proved that if κ is a measurable cardinal, then κ →(κ)<ω
2
. Thus if there is a
measurable cardinal, then there is a set S for which the answer to the All Finite
188Erd˝os and Hajnal used [S]<ℵ0 to denote the collection of all ﬁnite subsets of S, where [S]<ω
is now used.

220
Jean A. Larson
Subsets Problem of Erd˝os and Rado [1952a] is negative. Erd˝os and Hajnal also
include in their paper [1958] a proof of a result due to Fodor that for all cardinals
κ smaller than the least inaccessible cardinal, κ ↛(κ)<ω
2
holds.
Erd˝os and Hajnal met Eric Milner189 at the International Congress of Math-
ematicians held in Edinburgh in 1958.
Hajnal [1997, 374] recalled that Rado
interested Milner in partition problems at the meeting and Milner settled a prob-
lem about countable ordinals which he [1969] only published much later. Erd˝os
then visited him and starting working with him in Singapore, and they continued
to work together throughout his career. At the suggestion of Erd˝os, Milner spent
a sabbatical year 1958–1959 at the University of Reading working with Rado, and
moved to Reading in 1961.
The ﬁnite powers of ω are all additively indecomposable, i.e. they cannot be
written as the sum of two strictly smaller ordinals. It is well-known that the addi-
tively indecomposable ordinals are exactly those of the form ωγ.190 For speciﬁed
indecomposable β and ﬁnite m, it is possible to determine an upper bound for the
resource α needed to ensure that the positive partition relation holds. In particu-
lar, Erd˝os and Milner showed that ω1+µm →(ω1+µ, 2m)2. This result dates back
to 1959 and a proof appeared in Milner’s thesis in 1962. See also [Williams, 1977,
165–168] where the proof is given via the following stepping-up result:
Ordinal Stepping Up Lemma: Suppose that γ and δ are countable and
k is ﬁnite. If ωγ →(ω1+δ, k)2, then ωγ+δ →(ω1+δ, 2k)2.
Corollary [Erd˝os and Milner [1972]]: If m < ω and µ < ω1, then
ω1+µ·ℓ→(ω1+µ, 2ℓ)2.
During the 1958-1959 academic year, Andrzej Mostowski and Alfred Tarski191
gave a seminar on the foundations of set theory at the University of California,
189Eric Charles Milner (May 17, 1928 – July 20, 1997) had an irregular start to his mathematical
career, having gone from an undergraduate degree at the University of London to Malaysia in
1951 where he worked as a tin assayer for the Straits Trading Company, before joining the
mathematics department of the University of Malaya in Singapore. Milner earned his doctorate
as an external student at the University of London in 1963, with Richard Rado and Roy Davies
serving as his examiners. Richard Guy, a former colleague from Singapore, became head of the
department at the University of Calgary, where Milner became a professor in 1967 and continued
for the remainder of his career, where, in addition to working on his own mathematics, he served
as chair of the department, organized meetings and colloquia, and was a genial host for visits by
the Hajnals and Erd˝os among many others. For more on his life and work, see [Nash-Williams,
2000] and [Hajnal, 1997].
190See Exercise 5 on page 43 of Kunen [1983].
191Tarski facilitated the expansion of the logic group at the University of California, Berkeley,
in the 1950’s. Leon Henkin was hired in 1953, having refused an earlier oﬀer due to a loyalty
oath previously required by the University of California; Robert Vaught arrived in 1958 (he
had been a student of Alfred Tarski, receiving his doctorate in 1954). The interdepartmental
graduate degree program in Logic and Methodology was established in 1959. Anil Nerode, who
visited Berkeley 1958-1959 spoke of the state of logic in the United States in the 1950’s in his
preface [2004] to a volume for a Tarski centennial conference, and [Feferman, 2004] described the
expansion of the logic group at Berkeley in the same volume.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
221
Berkeley.
Among the topics were the results announced by Erd˝os and Tarski
in [1943], i.e. ﬁve problems involving inaccessible cardinals and other structures
including the partition property κ →(κ)2
2, the tree property (every tree with
height κ all of whose levels have size less than κ has a branch), the existence of
non-principal κ-complete prime ideal in the set algebra P(κ) (the measurability of
κ), and a representation problem for certain Boolean algebras. Erd˝os proved that
if κ →(κ)2
2, then κ is inaccessible (see [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961, 59, footnote 5],
where the result is attributed to [Erd˝os, 1942], in which it is implicit). Later they
[1961] published proofs, in part based on the seminar, noting (pp. 51-52) “some
of the proofs are in the form in which they were reconstructed by some members
of the seminar, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, James D. Halpern, and Donald Monk, and
may diﬀer from those originally found by the authors”.192
Near the end of the decade, Kurepa [1959a] gave a full exposition of his distinc-
tive approach to the partition calculus. Conceived in 1952 when he submitted a
preliminary report [1953] discussed earlier in this section, he had postponed the
completion until well after [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] since he [1996, 411] “thought
that the same result should hold for n-ary symmetrical relations”.
His paper
started from his thesis and his Fundamental Relation, whose proof he arranged to
have reprinted in [Kurepa, 1959b]. It gave a gentle introduction to his approach to
trees and ramiﬁcation. In §7, Kurepa proved that if |S| > 2ℵα and f is a coloring
of the pairs of S with ﬁnitely many colors, then there is an X ⊆S with |X| > ℵα
on which f is constant. In the arrow notation,
 2ℵα+ →(ℵα+)2
n for n < ω.
The proof is by induction on n. In a brief remark at the end of §7, Kurepa said
he had expected this positive argument to generalize to larger tuples, which he
then treated in §8 and §9 using a diﬀerent approach. He introduced a compact
notation for exponentiation that allowed him to state theorems with iterated use
of exponentiation in a compact way. The results up to and including §7 appear
to predate the appearance of [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956], while those after, that is,
results for larger tuples, appear to be inﬂuenced by it. He reported learning from
Erd˝os in 1959 that Hajnal had shown that the positive results were optimal, and
Kurepa had decided to publish his recent work together with a reprinting of his
[1939].
5.2
Applications of Suslin lines
Interest in Suslin’s Problem and ordered sets continued in the 1950’s, and new
equivalences and applications of Suslin lines were found.
Ricabarra published
a book on the subject described brieﬂy at the beginning of §5; Bourbaki added
material on Suslin sets to the second edition of Elements of Mathematics. Yesenin-
Volpin [1954] showed that Suslin’s Hypothesis cannot be deduced in an axiom
system which was used by Mostowski [1939].193
192Hajnal [1997, 356] reported that Monk wrote [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961].
193Mostowski used his axiom system to show the independence of the Well-Ordering Principle
from the Ordering Principle.
This axiom system is closely related to the axiom systems of

222
Jean A. Larson
Kurepa [1950] announced his result [1952] that the Cartesian square of a Suslin
line (a level-wise product) does not have the countable chain condition. In fall
1950, Kurepa spoke on his work on Suslin’s Problem at Harvard University, the
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, and the University of California, Berkeley.
The following January, he spoke on it in Lausanne [1952, 97, footnote 1]. Josef
Nov´ak194 [1950] investigated Suslin’s Problem with closed dyadic [binary] parti-
tions195 seemingly unaware of Kurepa’s work on such partitions. He [1952] also
showed that a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a linear continuum of cardi-
nality κ to have a “an element of character c00” (limit both from below and above
of sequences of length ω) is that κ < 2ℵ1.196
Mary Ellen Rudin, publishing under her maiden name of Estill,197 investigated
E spaces, that is, Moore spaces which do not have a countable dense set and do not
contain uncountably many disjoint domains, i.e. open sets. In her thesis, Rudin
[1950] constructed the ﬁrst example of an E space satisfying the countable chain
condition. Then she [1951] constructed an example which, in addition, is locally
connected. Next she [1952] proved that the existence of a nonseparable locally
connected Moore space satisfying the countable chain condition in which any two
points can be separated by a countable set198 if and only if there is a Suslin line.199
Bernays and G¨odel. Jech [1967] described it as G¨odel-Bernays set theory without the axioms of
regularity and of choice.
194Josef Nov´ak (April 19, 1905 – August 12, 1999) was a noted Czech topologist. He studied
with Karl Menger in Vienna 1935–1936.
He was a member of the Czechoslovak Academy of
Sciences from its inception in 1952. For more on his life and work, see [Frol´ık and Z´ıtek, 1975],
[Frol´ık and Koutn´ık, 1985], [Friˇc and Kent, 2000].
195A closed dyadic partition of a linearly ordered set C is a family P of closed intervals with the
following properties: (1) the intersection of any pair of intervals is either empty, a singleton, or
one of the intervals; (2) C ∈P; (3) for every interval X ∈P there are X1 and X2 in P such that
X = X1 ∪X2 and X1 ∩X2 is in P; and (4) the intersection of every decreasing set of intervals
from P is either in P or a single element of C. That is, a dyadic partition gives a binary tree of
intervals of the original linear order.
196However, as Bagemihl pointed out in his Math Review MR0056049 (15,17e), Hausdorﬀ[1907]
had already proved suﬃciency.
197Mary Ellen Rudin (December 7, 1924 – ) received her Ph.D. from the University of Texas at
Austin in 1949. Her dissertation, supervised by R. L. Moore, was entitled Concerning Abstract
Spaces.
See [Albers and Reid, 1988] to learn more about her graduate student experience.
Another early inﬂuence was F. Burton Jones, who had studied with Moore and was a professor
at the University of Austin when Mary Ellen Rudin was a student. He moved to the University
of North Carolina (UNC) the year after she moved to Duke University, and she attended weekly
colloquia at UNC and talked frequently with Jones (see [Jones, 1993] for a description of their
interaction and a glimpse of her working methods as she constructed a Dowker space from a
Suslin line). It was at Duke that she met her husband Walter, a prominent analyst who was an
instructor at the time in a neighboring cubical. Walter Rudin is known, for example, for his proof
under CH there are 2c many P-points (a type of ultraﬁlter), and for his textbook Principles of
Mathematical Analysis [1953] with second and third editions in 1964 and 1976.
198Two points a and b are separated by a countable subset S of a space X if X \ S can be
partitioned into two disjoint clopen sets X \ S = U ∪V with a ∈U and b ∈V .
199This brief description of the early work of M. E. Rudin is informed by articles [Tall, 1993] and
[Watson, 1993] from a conference in honor of Mary Ellen Rudin held June 26–29, 1991 in Madison,
Wisconsin. Watson gives modern versions of some of her proofs and makes connections between
this early work and Skolem functions, MAD families, the Pixley-Roy topology, and asserts that

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
223
Rudin had learned about Suslin’s Problem from Moore.200
R. H. Bing201 [1951] strengthened the notion of normal to collectionwise nor-
mal202 and proved that a space is metrizable if and only if it is a collectionwise
normal Moore space. He also showed that if there is a Q-set (deﬁned in §4.2),
then there is a separable non-metrizable normal Moore space (see Example E
[1951, 182]).
C. Hugh Dowker203 [1951] introduced the concept of countable paracompact-
ness (every covering by countably many open sets has a locally ﬁnite reﬁnement)
and proved that for a topological space X, the property of X being countably
paracompact and normal is equivalent to X × I being normal, where I = [0, 1]
is the unit interval. In footnote 4 [1951, 221], he asserted: “it would be inter-
esting to have an example of a normal Hausdorﬀspace which is not countably
paracompact.”
Rudin [1955] showed that if there is a Suslin line, the answer is negative by
constructing from a Suslin space204 a Dowker space, i.e. a normal space X whose
product with the unit interval, X × [0, 1], is not normal.
John L. Kelley205 [1959] investigated the regular open algebra of a Suslin line
[Watson, 1993, 175] her use of an uncountable almost increasing family F of functions from ω to ω
as a combinatorial structure each uncountable family of which is likely to possess “bad” behavior
is an early ancestor of Todorcevic’s Theorem 1.1 in [8] · · · .” The reference is to [Todorcevic,
1989].
200Tall [1993, 3] reported that the one time Moore lectured to Rudin’s class was when he
(mistakenly) thought that he had solved Suslin’s Problem.
201R. H. Bing (October 20, 1914 – April 28, 1986) earned his Ph.D. in 1945 as a student
of R. L. Moore. In 1979, Jones [1980, 2] recalled returning to Texas after the war as Bing was
ﬁnishing his degree, and described him as “solving all the topological world’s unsolved problems.”
Jones showed Bing his tin can example [a special Aronszajn tree with the tree topology], and
told him about the metrization problem he could not solve.
202A collection D of subsets of a topological space X is discrete if every set D ∈D is a subset
of an open set disjoint from S (D \ {D}). A space X is collectionwise normal if every discrete
collection D of closed sets expands to a disjoint collection U of open sets, i.e. each D ∈D is in
one and only one U ∈U.
203Cliﬀord Hugh Dowker (March 2, 1912 – October 14, 1982) grew up in Canada, earned his
doctorate in 1938 with Lefschetz at Princeton University, and held a variety of academic jobs
before working for the MIT Radiation Laboratory 1943–1946. Afterwords he held short-term
positions at Tufts, Princeton and Harvard, then decided to leave North America during the
period of McCarthyism, when several of his mathematical friends were harassed. He joined the
faculty of Birkbeck College in London in 1950 where he remained until his retirement in 1979.
For more on his life and work, see [Strauss, 1984].
204Rudin’s deﬁnition of a Suslin space is a linearly ordered space S in which neighborhoods
are segments which has the properties that S is not separable but every collection of disjoint
segments is countable. Her only references were the paper of Dowker [1951] for the question and
Suslin’s statement of the problem [1920].
205John Kelley (December 6, 1916 – November 26, 1999) did his undergraduate work and earned
his master’s degree at the University of California, Los Angeles, and obtained his doctorate in
1940 at the University of Virginia under the direction of Gordon T. Whyburn. He spent most
of his career at the University of California, Berkeley. His textbook, General Topology [1955],
based on lectures given at the University of Chicago 1946–1947, the University of California,
Berkeley, 1948–1949 and Tulane University 1950–1951, has served generations of students. His
autobiographical sketch [1989] is humorous and includes sketches both personal and mathematical

224
Jean A. Larson
and developed some Boolean algebraic equivalents of the existence of a Suslin line.
His work built on that of [Maharam, 1947].
5.3
Ordered sets, structure and mappings
A question of Fra¨ıss´e [1948] inspired Sierpi´nski [1950] to work on the structure
of subsets of the reals under order embeddability. He developed a technique for
identifying a subset H of a continuum-size linear order E such that no order-
preserving map from E to H is onto. He proved that the class of uncountable
linear orders has a decreasing chain of length the continuum, an increasing chain
of length the continuum, and an antichain of size the continuum. He indicated in
a footnote that the construction of a rigid real type by Dushnik and Miller [1941,
Theorem 3, p. 325] was an inspiration for his ﬁrst key lemma.
John C. Shepherdson206 [1951a] examined the structure of ordered sets by com-
puting the index, the least ordinal number strictly greater than the ordinals of all
well-ordered subsets. He was able to give a recursive characterization of the gen-
eral form of an order type except when the index is a regular cardinal. He showed
that if the index of an ordered set is not of the form ωβ or ωβ + 1, then it can
be expressed as the sum of ordered sets with smaller indices. The representation
for sets whose index has normal form P
i<k ωβini is quite complex. In Theorem
3.2, he proved that among ordered sets of which every proper initial segment has
index greater than ωβ, there is a minimal order, Zβ, which is the lexicographic
order on the set of functions from ω to ωβ which are non-zero only ﬁnitely often.
His analysis built on work of Hausdorﬀ[1908] and Gleyzal [1940].
Shepherdson [1954] published his construction of a denumerable ramiﬁed set F
with the properties that no maximal antichain of F meets every maximal chain
of F and that no maximal chain of F meets every maximal antichain of F. This
example provided an answer to two questions of Kurepa at the end of his paper
giving the following statement equivalent to a non-empty partially ordered set
(S, ≤) being ﬁnite: in every ramiﬁcation T(S) of S, every maximal antichain has
non-empty intersection with every maximal chain.
Seymour Ginsburg,207 a student Dushnik at University of Michigan, studied
real types and interpolation theorems for them in the 1950’s (see [1953a], [1953b],
[1955]). He investigated partitions of real types into various nice sets, and proved
[1953b, 531, Theorem 3.3] that if f is an order-preserving map of E into itself with
no ﬁxed points, then E is the union of countably many pairwise disjoint sets all of
which are mutually embeddable in one another. Ginsburg [1953b, 516] noted that
he knew of no order type other than λ, the order type of the real numbers, that
of his education and work.
206J. C. Shepherdson was on the faculty of the University of Bristol from 1946–1991, when he
reached emeritus status. He was elected to fellowship in the philosophy section of the British
Academy in 1990 and became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1999. Set theorists may know him
best for his work on inner models [1951b], [1952], [1953], and those in computability for his work
with Howard Sturgis on the unlimited register machines.
207Ginsburg (1928-2004) became a well-known computer scientist.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
225
had a similarity decomposition, i.e. a partition of a set of that type into continuum
many (pairwise disjoint) subsets all mutually embeddable with one another and
with the original set.208
For every inﬁnite cardinal κ, John B. Johnston [1956] constructed a partial
order of cardinality 2κ universal for partial orders of cardinality κ and dimension
κ in his Theorem 3. Theorem 3 has an additional part generalizing the result of
Mostowski [1938] that there is a countable partial order universal for countable
partial orders.
Bjarni J´onsson [1956] gave a list of six axioms, which suﬃced with the Contin-
uum Hypothesis, to guarantee that structures satisfying the axioms have universal
structures in all uncountable powers.
In a preliminary report [1957], Andrzej Ehrenfeucht209 formulated two-player
games as an organizing strategy,210 inspired by Fra¨ıss´e’s back-and-forth strategy
for proving elementary equivalence of models.211 Ehrenfeucht [1961] applied the
technique to the analysis of properties of the arithmetic of ordinals.
The Dilworth [1950] chain decomposition theorem is the statement that if every
antichain in a ﬁnite partially ordered set P has size ≤k, then P is the union of
≤k many chains. In the proceedings of a symposium on combinatorial analysis
held at Columbia University in 1958, Dilworth [1960] made connections between
his decomposition theorem and Hall’s Marriage Theorem [1935].
5.4
The Regressive Function Theorem
The seminal 1929 Alexandroﬀ–Urysohn Regressive Function Theorem was steadily
extended, getting to Fodor’s 1956 widely applied version for stationary sets. We
had already noted that Alexandroﬀand Urysohn [1929] showed that functions
regressive on the set of inﬁnite countable ordinals are constant on an uncountable
set, and that Dushnik [1931] extended the result to regressive functions on the set
of inﬁnite ordinals smaller than a successor cardinal κ.
In a paper [1950, 140–141] received by the editors in November 1948, Erd˝os
revisited Dushnik’s version of the Regressive Function Theorem [1931] and proved
that if Ωk is an (uncountable) initial ordinal which is not coﬁnal to ω and f is a
regressive function on the set of ordinals less than Ωk, then there exists an ordinal
208Harzheim [2008] constructed a subset of the real numbers which does not order embed the
real numbers but does have a similarity decomposition.
209Andrzej Ehrenfeucht (August 8, 1932 – ) was a student of Andrzej Mostowski at the Univer-
sity of Warsaw, where he earned his master’s degree in 1955. In 1961, he received his doctorate
from the Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sciences in Warsaw. After being
an assistant professor at the University of California, Berkeley, and Stanford University, and
an associate professor at the University of Southern California, he joined the Department of
Computer Science at the University of Colorado in Boulder.
210For more on the early work of Ehrenfeucht on model theory, see [Vaught, 1997].
211Ehrenfeucht may have heard about Fra¨ıss´e’s work from the mathematical logic colloquium
in Paris in 1952 by Fra¨ıss´e titled Sur les rapports entre la th´eorie des relations et la seman-
tique au sens de A. Tarski, since it is in the bibliography of [Ehrenfeucht, 1961] but otherwise
unreferenced. The games Ehrenfeucht formulated are now called Ehrenfeucht-Fra¨ıss´e games.

226
Jean A. Larson
β and a sequence αi coﬁnal with Ωk such that f(αi) ≤β. He noted that for
regular Ωk it is immediate from Dushnik’s Theorem, and if Ωk is coﬁnal with ω it
does not hold for all such f. He pointed out that Dushnik’s proof is easily adapted
to prove the result for singular cardinals of uncountable coﬁnality, citing an oral
communication, but he provided his own short proof.
As a tool for his investigation of Suslin continua with dyadic partitions, Nov´ak
[1950] proved a generalization of the Alexandroﬀ–Urysohn Regressive Function
Theorem:
B being an uncountable closed subset of the set C of all countable
ordinal numbers, let f(x) be a single-valued transformation of B onto
A ⊂C having the property that f(x) < x for all x ∈B. Then there
exists a countable ordinal number α ∈A and an uncountable subset
B∗⊂B such that f(x) = α for all x ∈B∗.212
Walter Neumer213 [1951] published a generalization of the Regressive Function
Theorem that stated in modern language asserts that for all regular cardinals κ,
any function regressive on a stationary214 subset of κ is constant on an set of size
κ. For Λ an initial ordinal, he wrote W(Λ) for the set of ordinals smaller than
Λ. He called a subset M ⊆W(Λ) a full part [Vollteil] if it is similar to W(Λ); he
called it closed if it contained all limits of well-ordered sequences; and a closed,
full part of W(Λ) was called a band [Band]. In particular, he proved that if the
complement of M contains no band and f is regressive on M, then there is a value
that f takes Λ many times. Moreover, he showed the necessity of this condition,
proving that if the complement of M does contain a band, then there is a regressive
function for which every value is realized fewer that Λ many times. Together these
results of Neumer characterize stationary sets of a regular uncountable cardinal Λ
as those for which every regressive function is constant on a subset of cardinality
Λ.215 He went on to explore basic features of stationary sets, such as the fact that
stationary co-stationary sets exist for regular cardinals greater than ω1.
G´erard Bloch216 also investigated stationary sets.
He independently proved
Neumer’s Theorem for ω1 in his Theorem I: A necessary and suﬃcient condition for
212Denjoy [1953] independently proved Nov´ak’s result.
213Walter Neumer (March 9, 1906 – January 25, 1981) received his doctorate in 1929 From
Justus-Liebig-Universit¨at Giessen where his advisors were Friedrich Engel (primary) and Ludwig
Schlesinger (secondary). Most of his academic career was at Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at
Mainz.
214A subset of κ is stationary if every closed unbounded subset of κ meets it; Bloch [1953]
is credited with the ﬁrst use of the term in connection with the Regressive Function Theorem;
Kanamori [2009, Chapter 1] credits Mahlo with the ﬁrst use of this concept.
The word stationnaire was used by Lusin [1934] to mean a sequence which is eventually
constant, in a monograph where he extended the result of R´ene Baire that all decreasing sequences
of closed sets are countable to show that all decreasing sequences which are continuous at limits
of sets which are countable unions of closed sets are eventually constant.
215Hajnal and Hamburger [1999] refer to this characterization as Neumer’s Theorem, give two
diﬀerent proofs of it, and discuss its relationship with the Regressive Function Theorem of Fodor
(see below).
216His note was presented by Denjoy, and is the only item by him listed in Math Reviews.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
227
a subset to be stationary is that every closed subset of its complement be at most
denumerable (translated from the original French). Given a set A of countable
limit ordinals, he used suite distingu´ee for a sequence of regressive functions fn(x)
(n ∈N) deﬁned on A such that, for all x ∈A, f1(x) ≤f2(x) ≤· · · ≤fn(x) ≤. . .
and limn fn(x) = x. He used this concept to prove that stationary sets can be
split into disjoint stationary sets. In a brief postscript, he reported that Walter
Neumer had some of the results for stationary sets (a reference to Neumer’s paper
[1951] was included), and that he, Bloch, had not known of Neumer’s article when
he submitted his note.
G´eza Fodor,217 published in [1955] his rediscovery of Dushnik’s generalization
of the Alexandroﬀ–Urysohn Regressive Function Theorem.218 The very next year,
Fodor [1956] proved that for any regular uncountable cardinal κ, every function
regressive on a stationary subset of κ is constant on a stationary subset. This
result is known by various names, including the Regressive Function Theorem,
Fodor’s Lemma or Fodor’s Theorem (see [Jech, 2003, 93], [Hajnal and Hamburger,
1999, 151]), and the Pressing-Down Lemma (see [Kunen, 1983, 80]). The special
case for κ = ℵ1 of this useful result also appeared in Spanish in 1958 in [Ricabarra,
1956].219 Neumer [1958], apparently unaware of Fodor’s [1956], also published a
proof of this important theorem.
6
1960-1970: FORCING, TREES AND PARTITIONS
The 1960’s saw a sea-change in set theory with interactions with the growing ﬁeld of
model theory, the introduction of forcing, Martin’s Axiom and diamond principles
with multiple applications to combinatorial problems, and the development of
217G´eza Fodor (May 6, 1927 – September 28, 1977) was born in Szeged, Hungary, educated at
the University of Szeged, and received a degree in 1954 equivalent to the American doctorate
under the supervision of B. Sz¨okefalvi-Nagy in the ﬁeld of combinatorial set theory. Starting in
1954 he was a research associate and then an associate professor for Professor Laszlo Kalm´ar
at the University of Szeged. He became a full professor in 1967 after receiving his Academy
Doctor degree (like the Habilitation degree in German universities) and led the Department of
Set Theory and Mathematical Logic from its creation in 1971. He was elected a corresponding
member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in 1973 and served as Rector of the University
of Szeged 1973 – 1967. This brief biography is based on [Editors, 1977], which also noted that
Fodor was the originator of the question of whether a stationary subset of size κ could be split
into κ disjoint subsets. For an overview of his mathematics in Hungarian, see Komj´ath [1982/86].
218F. Bagemihl, in Math Review MR0076000, said Dushnik’s result generalizes one in [Bach-
mann, 1955, 43].
219The international journal Revista de Matem´aticas Cuyana was started by Mischa Cot-
lar who became director of the Instituto de Investigaciones Mathematicas de Cuyo, new at
the time he arrived after earning his Ph.D. under Zygmund in 1953.
In 1955, the insti-
tute was closed down by a military administration which claimed that it was a Commu-
nist organization ﬁnanced by another Communist organization, UNESCO, according to tes-
timony by Cora Sadowsky in conjunction with a conference honoring Mischa Cotlar held
October 12,
2007 at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque,
New Mexico (see
http://www.math.unm/conferences/10thAnalysis/resources/cotlar/sadosky.pdf accessed August
17, 2007). Ricabarra’s paper was in an issue of the journal nominally for the year 1956, but only
appeared in 1958.

228
Jean A. Larson
wqo and bqo theory.
Cohen’s proofs that set theory was consistent with the
negation of the Continuum Hypothesis and also with the negation of the Axiom
of Choice set oﬀa wave of new results. We mention Easton’s work on the values
the exponentiation function could have on regular cardinals, and Solovay’s proof
of the consistency of “all sets of reals are Lebesgue measurable” with Dependent
Choice (DC).
Classical results for the partition calculus of cardinals were published in the
middle of the decade in a massive paper that had been years in the making, and
open questions about them were shared with the wider logic and set theory com-
munity. Suslin’s Hypothesis was shown to be both consistent and independent of
the usual axioms of set theory, and one might say a new section of Cantor’s par-
adise was opened where realms were to be found representing diﬀerent possibilities
for Aronszajn, Kurepa, and Suslin trees.
The San Francisco Bay Area was a nexus for research during this decade with
a wealth of graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and visitors in addition
to the regular faculties of Stanford University and the University of California,
Berkeley.
Dana Scott was ﬁrst on the Berkeley faculty and then the Stanford
one.220 Paul Cohen, Harvey Friedman,221 and Ehrenfeucht were on the faculty at
Stanford, where Jensen visited in the late 1960’s with his student Adrian Mathias,
who took a course with Scott. The following individuals (listed with their advisors)
earned doctorates at Stanford:
1966
Platek
(Kreisel)
1968
Kunen
(Scott)
1967
Barwise
(Feferman)
1970
Mansﬁeld
(Scott)
The mathematical life in Berkeley was enriched by the following visitors. L´evy
was a visiting assistant professor 1959–1961; Jerzy  Lo´s visited 1959–1960 and 1962–
1963;222 and Hajnal visited for the calendar year 1964, lecturing on the partition
calculus.223 Fred Galvin held a post-doctoral position 1965–1968.224 after ﬁnish-
ing the research for his 1967 doctorate from the University of Minnesota under
J´onsson.225 The individuals listed below with their advisors earned doctorates at
Berkeley:
220Dana Scott was a Miller Institute Fellow and assistant professor in 1960, was promoted to
associate professor in 1962, and moved to Stanford University in 1963.
221Harvey Friedman was at Stanford 1967–1973, arriving as an assistant professor of Philosophy
and promoted to associate professor in 1969. He spent 1970–1971 at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, and 1972–1973 as a Visiting Professor at the State University of Buﬀalo, where he was
a Professor from 1973–1977. He has since been a professor at Ohio State University.
222 Los [2000] gave a seminar jointly with Tarski in 1959–1960 and a seminar jointly with Jo´nsson
1962–1963.
223Hajnal noted [1997] that the persistent attendees of his 1964 lectures were Donald Monk,
William Reinhardt and Jack Silver.
224From Berkeley, Galvin moved to the University of California, Los Angeles, and then in 1974
to the University of Kansas.
225Bjarni J´onsson moved to Vanderbilt University in 1966.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
229
1962
Gaifman
(Tarski)
1967
Reinhardt
(Vaught)
1962
Halpern
(L´evy, Scott)
1967
Prikry
(Silver)
1966
Silver
(Vaught)
1969
Laver
(McKenzie)
1966
Malitz
(Vaught)
1970
Baumgartner
(Vaught)
1966
McAloon
(Solovay)
1970
Mitchell
(Silver)
1967
Hechler
(Solovay)
The Prague Set Theory Seminar was founded by Petr Vopˇenka after the death
in 1963 of his advisor Ladislav S. Rieger,226 the ﬁrst Czech mathematician to work
in the foundations of set theory. Petr H´ajek [1971] listed members of the seminar:
Bohuslav Balcar, Lev Bukovsk´y, Karel Hrb´aˇcek, Thomas Jech, Anton´ın Sochor,
Petr ˇStˇep´anek, Petr Vopˇenka, and H´ajek himself. H´ajek closed his paper with a
55-item bibliography of the Prague seminar.227
The decade included the ﬁrst international set theory conference after the in-
troduction of forcing. Oﬃcially it was the Fourteenth Annual Summer Research
Institute sponsored jointly by the American Mathematical Society and the As-
sociation for Symbolic Logic, with ﬁnancial support from the National Science
Foundation. In the preface to the proceedings, Scott [1971, v] reported that the
four-week conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA),
July 10 - August 5, 1967, featured tutorials by himself and Joseph Shoenﬁeld (10
lectures each), together with individual contributions (usually in hour talks) at the
rate of four per day but by the last week reduced to three per day, “as the strength
of the participants had noticeably weakened.” Two other conferences of the decade
were the International Symposium on Topology and its Applications in Herceg-
Novi in 1968, whose organizing committee was chaired by Kurepa, and the ﬁrst
British Combinatorial Conference held in Oxford in 1969, whose invited speakers
included Erd˝os and Marc Kac, which signaled the growing sense of community
among British combinatorial mathematicians.
We mention in passing that in this decade Rado [1964] constructed the Rado
graph (the denumerable random graph), which is universal for countable graphs.228
Michael Morley and Robert Vaught [1962] extended J´onsson’s work on the exis-
tence of universal structures, and Brian Rotman [1971] showed that most of Rado’s
results about the Rado graph can be deduced from the general model-theoretic
framework of J´onsson, Morley and Vaught.
Cardinal transfer questions raised in this decade in model theory would turn
out to be pivotal for questions about trees and about the partition calculus. Say a
226Ladislav Svante Rieger (1916–1963) received his doctorate from Charles University, Prague
and in 1959 defended his Habilitation thesis, where the referee was Mostowski. Rieger founded
the ﬁrst seminar in Prague on mathematical logic in 1953 with a focus on G¨odel’s work on the
consistency of the Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis. For more on Rieger, see
[H´ajek et al., 2008] and the thesis of E. Kozk´ıkov´a, which is described as “a detailed monograph
on L. S. Rieger (in Czech)”.
227Karel Prikry is listed as participant in the Prague seminar by H´ajek, Marek and Vopˇenka in
[2008].
228Rado’s graph started a line of research which extends beyond the scope of this paper, for
example with work by Shelah [1984b], [1990b], joint work with Komj´ath [1995] and by Kojman
[1998].

230
Jean A. Larson
theory in a countable language with identity and distinguished unary predicate R
admits a pair (α, β) if there is a model M = ⟨A, U, · · · ⟩of T such that |A| = α and
|U| = β, where U is the interpretation of R. Morley and Vaught [1962] proved that
if T admits (κ, λ), then T admits (ℵ1, ℵ0). Vaught restated the result as Theorem
14 and raised the following question in [1963, 308–309]:
Cardinal Transfer Question:
If T admits (κ, λ), what other pairs
(κ′, λ′) must T admit?
Chang asked if Theorem 14 could be improved to the following question (see
Vaught [1963, 309]): Does every model A of T with R
A
0 ̸= A have an elementary
submodel B with B = ℵ1 and R
B0 = ℵ0?
The assertion that the answer to
Chang’s question is “yes” is now known as Chang’s Conjecture. Vaught went on
to connect the question with one in set theory: “A negative answer to the problem
is an easy consequence of a positive answer to the following question: Does there
exist a family W of subsets of a set A of power ℵ1 such that W = ℵ2 while, for
any countable B ⊆A, {X ∩B | B ∈W} is countable?” Vaught pointed out that
this question was a version of one raised by Kurepa [1942] (i.e. the questions of
existence of a Kurepa tree) and quoted Ricabarra [1958, 344] as indicating it was
still unresolved.
Chang proved the following theorem giving a partial answer under the Gener-
alized Continuum Hypothesis [1965]:
Chang’s Cardinal Transfer Theorem:
Assume GCH. If α > β ≥ω are
cardinals and a theory T in a countable language with a distinguished
unary predicate R admits (α, β), then for all regular inﬁnite cardinals
δ, T admits (δ+, δ).
We denote the cardinal transfer property “if T, R admits (α, β), then it admits
(δ+, δ)” by (α, β) →(δ+, δ).
We conclude this introduction with a brief discussion of the Normal Moore Space
Conjecture. Robert Heath [1964] showed that there is a separable non-metrizable
normal Moore space if and only if there is a Q-set, a result which some describe as
the solution to the Separable Normal Moore Space Conjecture. During his 1967–
1968 visit to the University of Wisconsin, encouraged by graduate student Franklin
Tall, Silver showed the consistent existence of a Q-set (cf. [Tall, 1969], [Tall, 1977]).
Recall that Rothberger [1948] proved that if the pseudointersection number is
greater than ℵ1, then Q-sets exist. Thus the combination of the work of Bing
[1951] and Rothberger [1948] gives a consistency result. However, Rothberger’s
result had been forgotten in the sixties, and was rediscovered in the seventies by
David Booth.
Tall, in his 1969 thesis, part of which is published in [1977],229
focused attention on the “real question .. when is a normal space collection-wise
229Eric van Douwen reported in his Math Review MR0454913 (56 #13156) that the material in
Tall’s monograph is unchanged from his thesis except for some brief mentions of results obtained
after the thesis. van Douwen went on to assert that this paper changed the general feeling of
topologists that results proving consistency and independence from ZFC are not really part of

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
231
normal?” According to Nyikos [2001, 1196], Tall, while a graduate student, proved
the consistency of the statement that every ﬁrst countable normal space is ℵ1-
collection-wise Hausdorﬀ. His advisor, Rudin, observed that a corollary of Tall’s
result is the consistency of no Aronszajn tree being normal in the tree topology,
so that in particular, it is consistent that the road spaces of Jones are not normal.
6.1
The Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem
We start with the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem, a fundamental Ramsey-theoretic re-
sult for partitions of ﬁnite products of trees that generalized the rectangle reﬁning
theorem of Rado [1954a]. James D. Halpern230 and Hans L¨auchli231 [1966] ex-
pressed their ground-breaking combinatorial result in terms of trees following a
suggestion of a referee of their paper. The result was a key piece in the plan of
Halpern and L´evy [1964], which they [1971] successfully carried out, to prove that
in ZF, the Boolean Prime Ideal Theorem does not imply the Axiom of Choice.
Halpern and L´evy [1971, 97] use Theorem 2 [Halpern and L¨auchli, 1966, 362] in
their proof, which is stated below in modern language, where a tree is rooted if
there is a single element, called the root, in level 0:
Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem:
For any ﬁnite sequence ⟨(Ti, <i) | i < d⟩
of ﬁnitely branching rooted trees without treetops of height ω and any
positive q < ω there is a positive integer n such that for any q-ary
partition of the product Q
i<d (Ti↾n) = Q0 ∪· · ·∪Qq−1 there are j < q,
h < n, ⟨xi | i < d⟩and ⟨Ai ⊆(Ti↾n) | i < d⟩such that Q
i<d Ai ⊆Qj
and for all i < d, xi is on level h of Ti and every immediate successor
of xi has an extension in Ai.
Included below, in modern language, is their immediate corollary [1966, 363] about
level products which may look more familiar to some readers.
topology, toward recognition that they are with the discovery of consistency and independence
results about “down-to-earth objects like ﬁrst countable normal spaces,” the subject of the
monograph.
230James Daniel Halpern was a student at the University of California, Berkeley, in the late
1950’s and early 1960’s. In his thesis, Halpern [1962] proved the independence of the Axiom of
Choice from the Boolean Prime Ideal Theorem (BPI) over the theory ZF minus the Axiom of
Foundation by showing BPI holds in a Fraenkel-Mostowski model in which the Axiom of Choice
did not. The result was announced in an abstract in the Notices of the American Mathematical
Society in 1961; a revised version was published in [Halpern, 1964]. His dissertation work was
done under the direction of L´evy, who was visited Berkeley 1959-1961, and written up under the
supervision of Dana Scott. See page 58 of [Halpern, 1964] for Halpern’s remarks on the super-
vision of his work. See [Kanamori, 2004] for more information about L´evy, and, in particular,
his interactions with Halpern.
The proof uses a combinatorial lemma that Halpern calls the
Rado Corollary (Scott is credited with the proof included in the paper) and is a generalization
of Ramsey’s Theorem which may be simply expressed as a ﬁnitary polarized partition relation.
Halpern spent 1965–1966 at the Institute for Advanced Study, and 1974–1981 at the University
of Alabama, Birmingham.
231Hans L¨auchli (1933 - August 13, 1997) was a student of Ernst Specker at Eidgen¨ossische
Technische Hochschule Z¨urich (ETH) and received his degree in 1962 with a dissertation on
Auswahlaxiom in der Algebra.

232
Jean A. Larson
Halpern-L¨auchli Corollary: For any ﬁnite sequence ⟨(Ti, <i) | i < d⟩
of ﬁnitely branching rooted trees without treetops of height ω and any
positive q < ω there is a positive integer n such that for any q-ary
partition of the product of the nth levels of the trees, Q
i<d Ti(n) =
Q0 ∪· · · ∪Qq−1, there are j < q, h < n, ⟨xi | i < d⟩and ⟨Ai ⊆Ti(n) |
i < d⟩such that Q
i<d Ai ⊆Qj and for all i < d, xi is on level h of Ti
and every immediate successor of xi has an extension in Ai.
Most of the work to prove the above results is in the proof of Theorem 1, which
I have relabeled but otherwise quote from [Halpern and L¨auchli, 1966, 361–362].
Halpern-L¨auchli Core: Let Ti = ⟨Ti, ≤i⟩, 1 ≤i ≤d be ﬁnitistic trees
without tree tops and let Q ⊆Qd
1 Ti. Then either
a. for each k, Q includes a k-matrix or
b. there exists h such that for each k,
Qd
1 Ti

−Q includes an
(h, k)-matrix.
A ﬁnitistic tree without tree tops is a ﬁnitely branching tree of height ω and no
terminal nodes. An (h, k)-matrix is a product Qd
1 Ai where for each 1 ≤i ≤d,
Ai ⊆Ti and for some ⟨x1, x2, . . . , xd⟩∈Qd
1 Ti(h), for each y ∈Ti(k), if xi ≤i y,
then there is some z ∈Ai with y ≤i z. A k-matrix is a (0, k)-matrix, i.e. the
special vector lists the roots of the trees.
In their proof of the Halpern-L¨auchli Core Theorem, Halpern and L¨auchli used
metamathematical, heavily syntactic techniques. They comment “We have tried
to eliminate the use of metamathematics without success and would welcome a
simpliﬁcation in this direction” [1966, 360].
In the late 1960’s, Galvin (cf. [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974, 275]) proved that if you
color the rationals with ﬁnitely many colors, then there is a subset of the same order
type η which is at most bi-colored, i.e. realizes at most 2 colors. He conjectured
that if you color r-element sequences of rationals with ﬁnitely many colors, then
there are subsets X0, X1, . . . , Xr−1, each of order type η so that Q
i<r Xi receives
at most r! colors. He proved this conjecture for r = 2,232 and showed that for
every positive r, the bound r! cannot be improved. This conjecture, proved by
Richard Laver in 1969 (cf. [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974, 275]), is expressed using a
generalization of the polarized partition relation as follows:





η
η
...
η




−→





η
η
...
η





1,1,...,1
| {z }
r
<ω,r!
232The Sierpi´nski partition restricted to the rationals is a partition in which every subset of the
rationals of full order type meets both cells of the partition.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
233
As Laver later recalled, he [1984] proved the polarized partition relation essentially
by identifying the rationals with the dyadic rationals which can be regarded as
represented by the complete binary tree (<ω2, <q) of all ﬁnite sequences of 0’s
and 1’s under a suitable ordering <q, and proving the theorem in this alternative
setting. More generally, Laver showed that there is a function f : nω →ω so
that for any ⃗r = ⟨r0, r2, . . . , rn−1⟩, and any ﬁnite coloring of Q
i<n[Q]ri, there
is an ⟨X0, X1, . . . , Xn−1⟩with each Xi a subset of Q of order type η, such that
Q
i<n[Xi]ri realizes at most f(⃗r) colors.
Laver was unaware of the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem at the time, so in order
to prove the polarized partition theorem, he proved a perfect subtree version of
the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem which I name and state below using QA ⃗T as an
abbreviation for S
n∈A
Q
i<d Ti(n):
Laver HLd Theorem:
If ⃗T = ⟨Ti : i < d⟩is a ﬁnite sequence of rooted
ﬁnitely branching perfect trees of height ω and Qω ⃗T = G0 ∪G1, then
there are δ < 2, an inﬁnite subset A ⊆ω and downwards closed perfect
subtrees T ′
i of Ti for i < d with QA ⃗T ′ ⊆Gδ.
Call ⃗X = ⟨Xi : i < d⟩n-dense in ⃗T = ⟨Ti : i < d⟩if there is some m ≥n
such that Xi ⊆Ti(m) for all i < d and for each i < d and t ∈Ti(n), there is
some u ∈Xi with t ≤i u. For ⃗x ∈Qω ⃗T, call ⃗X ⃗x-n-dense in ⃗T if ⃗X is n-dense
in the sequence ⟨(Ti)xi : i < d⟩where (Ti)xi is the subtree of Ti of all elements
comparable with xi. Most of the work of proving HDd for d < ω is in the following
result, which I have named for easy reference and appears as Theorem 1 in [Laver,
1984, 386]:
Laver HLd Core:
Suppose that ⃗T = ⟨Ti : i < d⟩is a ﬁnite sequence
of ﬁnitely branching tress of height ω with no terminal nodes, and
Qω ⃗T = G0 ∪G1. Then either
a. for all n < ω there is an n-dense ⃗X with Qω ⃗X ⊆G0, or
b. for some ⃗x ∈Qω ⃗T and for all n < ω there is an ⃗x-n-dense ⃗X with
Qω ⃗X ⊆G1.
6.2
Countable height trees
In 1960 Joseph B. Kruskal233 published his celebrated tree theorem in an expanded
version of his doctoral dissertation [1954] under the direction of Roger Lyndon at
Princeton University:234
233Joseph Bernard Kruskal (January 29, 1928 – September 19, 2010) was an instructor at
Princeton and the University of Wisconsin at Madison before becoming an assistant professor at
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor in 1958. In 1959 he joined the technical staﬀat Bell
Telephone Labs. He has held visiting positions at Yale, Columbia and Rutgers.
234Erd˝os is listed as a second advisor for Kruskal at the Mathematics Genealogy Project site.

234
Jean A. Larson
Kruskal’s Tree Theorem [1960]: If X is a wqo, then T(X), the collection
of ﬁnite trees with labels from X, is a wqo under tree embeddings
f : S →T which respect the labels in the sense that for all s ∈S, the
label of s is less than or equal to the label of f(s).
Independently, S. Tarkowski [1960] proved a theorem from which the above
result follows. Tadashi Ohkuma announced [1960] and proved [1961] that under
order-preserving maps, scattered trees235 are linearly ordered under order preserv-
ing maps (they need not be injective). He also showed that every scattered tree is
comparable with every tree under this ordering. He showed under CH that there
are non-comparable trees.
Kruskal [1954] proved the closure of the family of wqos under ﬁnite unions and
Cartesian products (quasi-ordered componentwise). He conjectured at the end of
the paper that the set of all (connected) trees, ﬁnite or inﬁnite, is a wqo.
Kruskal was motivated by a conjecture of V´azsonyi236 that for any inﬁnite
sequence Ti of (ﬁnite) trees, there are two Tk and Tℓsuch that Tℓcontains a
homeomorphic image of Tk, or equivalently, Tℓis a subdivision of Tk.237 Kruskal
heard about the problem from Erd˝os.238
Connections between graphs and partial orders were investigated in the 1960’s.
Elliot S. Wolk [1962] came up with a characterization of when a graph is the
comparability graph of a tree: on each path in between two vertices there is a
vertex adjacent to both the initial and terminal vertex of the path. In 1962 Paul C.
Gilmore and Alan J. Hoﬀman announced their characterization of when a graph
is the comparability graph of a partial order [1964] at the International Congress
of Mathematicians held in Stockholm in 1962: G is a comparability graph if and
only if each of its odd cycles has at least one triangular cord (an edge which joins
two consecutive edges of the cycle to form a triangle). Alain Ghouila-Houri [1962]
gave an alternate description (and a proof for the ﬁnite case). Wolk [1965] proved
that a graph is the comparability graph of a partial order if and only if all of its
ﬁnite induced subgraphs are. Tibor Gallai [1967] gave a characterization in terms
of forbidden subgraphs, which has proved very useful.
235A tree is scattered if it does not embed the tree of all ﬁnite sequences of zeros and ones.
236Erd˝os dates V´azsonyi’s Conjecture to 1937 in Math Review MR0123491 (23 #A816).
237We say S is a subdivision of T if S can be obtained from T by changing some of the edges
of T into ﬁnite paths by insertion of vertices of degree two.
238Erd˝os is listed as a second advisor to Kruskal on the Mathematics Genealogy Project site.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
235
Crispin St. J. A. Nash-Williams239 became interested in quasi-orders in 1957, on
learning of V´azsonyi’s Conjecture. He set out to extend Kruskal’s Tree Theorem
to inﬁnite trees, and, as a side beneﬁt, he [1963] came up with a simpler proof of
it. He generalized Ramsey’s Theorem to the Nash-Williams Partition Theorem.
In his notation, P stands for the set of positive integers and A(I) stands for the set
of ascending ﬁnite sequences of elements of I ⊆P, including the empty sequence.
A subset of A(P) is thin if it does not include two distinct sequences s, t such that
one is a proper initial segment of the other. With this notation in hand, we are
ready to quote his theorem [1965b, 33]:
Nash-Williams Partition Theorem: Let m ∈P and I be an inﬁnite
subset of P and {T1, . . . , Tm} be a partition of a thin subset T of A(I)
into m disjoint subsets. Then there exists an inﬁnite subset K of I
such that T ∩A(K) is contained in a single Tj.
Lemma 4, which is the statement for partitions into two parts, is the heart of
the theorem, which then follows from a simple induction. Nash-Williams included
a note that Erd˝os sketched an alternate proof using a ﬁnitely additive probability
measure µ on the subsets of P that can be constructed using the Axiom of Choice
so that µ(X) = 0 if X is ﬁnite and µ(Y ) = 1 if Y is coﬁnite.
While the paper is particularly well-known for the Nash-Williams Partition
Theorem, the main objective of the paper, according to the author, was the proof
of the conjecture of Rado [1954b] that given a well-quasi-order Q, the collection
R(Q) of sequences with domain an ordinal and range a ﬁnite subset of Q form
a well-quasi-order under the ordering f ≤g if and only if there is a one-to-one
order-preserving function µ : dom(f) →dom(g) such that for all α ∈dom(f),
f(α) ≤f(µ(α)). Nash-Williams noted that Higman [1952] had proved that the
collection of ﬁnite sequences from a wqo form a wqo; Rado [1954b] proved it for
sequences of length less than ω3; and both Kruskal (unpublished) and Erd˝os and
Rado in their joint work [1959] proved it for sequences of length less than ωω.
Nash-Williams [1965b, 34] also indicated that the proof used an idea underlying
Theorem 3 of [Rado, 1954b], and that he was “indebted to Prof. R. Rado for some
improvements in the presentation of this paper.”
239Crispin St. J. A. Nash-Williams earned his Ph.D. from Cambridge University in 1959. The
obituary by Welsh [2003] lists as his advisors Shaun Wylie and Davis Rees of Cambridge, and
N. E. Steenrod of Princeton University, whom he met while on a fellowship at Princeton in
1956-57. Richard Rado was one of the readers of his 500 page dissertation. Welsh recounted
Luise Rado’s dismay at the amount of time her husband spent during a walking vacation reading
Nash-Williams’s dissertation. When Rado formally retired in 1975 (he remained active math-
ematically), Nash-Williams moved into his chair at the University of Reading.
For a further
introduction to the life and work of Nash-Williams, this obituary is warmly recommended, espe-
cially for the overviews of Nash-Williams’s work on decompositions of inﬁnite graphs, which is
outside the scope of this paper. Nash-Williams liked both ﬁnite and inﬁnite graph theory, and
introduced one of his survey articles as follows: “One of my own reasons for becoming interested
in graph theory was that I was intrigued by the possibility of developing non-trivial and fairly
deep mathematics from a very simple concept. The ultimate illustration of this might be set
theory, since sets are presumably the simplest and most basic of all mathematical structures and
yet some aspects of set theory are both deep and substantial” [Welsh, 2003, 177].

236
Jean A. Larson
Nash-Williams [1965a] went on to prove that inﬁnite trees form a wqo, but to
do so, he invented the notion of better-quasi-order or bqo, which have nice closure
properties. The deﬁnition of better-quasi-order is involved. Maurice Pouzet240
and Norbert Sauer241 set the concept of better-quasi ordering in historical context
as follows [2006, §1.3]:
A basic result due to G.Higman, see [10], asserts that a poset P is wqo
if and only if I(P), the set of initial segments of P, is well-founded. On
the other hand, Rado [24] has produced an example of a well-founded
partial order P for which I(P) is well-founded and contains inﬁnite
antichains. The idea behind the bqo notion is to forbid this situation:
I(P) and all its iterates, I(I((I(P))) up to the ordinal ω1, have to be
well-founded and hence wqo.242
In 1968, as part of his thesis work with Ralph McKenzie,243 Laver [1969], [1971]
proved Fra¨ıss´e Conjecture I [1948] (stated near the end of §4.2) when he proved
that if (A0, ≤), (A1, ≤), . . . is a sequence of countable ordered sets, then for some
i < j (Ai, ≤) isomorphically embeds in (Aj, ≤).
To prove this celebrated re-
sult, Laver used the Hausdorﬀhierarchy [1908], [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1962a],244 the
foundational work on bqo theory by Nash-Williams [1965b], and a characteriza-
tion of σ-scattered linear order types245 by Galvin to prove that the σ-scattered
types form a bqo. In the same paper, he proved Fra¨ıss´e Conjecture II that for
any countable scattered order type τ there are most countably many order types
up to equivalence under mutual embeddability that are embeddable in but not
equivalent to τ.
In his thesis, Pierre Jullien [1969] gave a counter-example to Fra¨ıss´e Conjecture
III: the set E = {ω · ω∗, ω∗· ω} has the property that ω + ω∗is embeddable in
every order type which embeds both members of E, but ω +ω∗is not embeddable
in either of the elements of E.
A positive answer to Fra¨ıss´e Conjecture IV follows from work of Laver [1973].
See Chapter 10 of [Rosenstein, 1982, 178, 179, 196, 197] for a discussion of the
solution to this conjecture.
240Maurice Andre Pouzet received his doctorate from Universit´e Claude Bernard, Lyon 1 in
1978 with Ernest Corominas as his advisor.
He is known for his work in order, lattices and
ordered algebraic structures.
241Nobert Werner Sauer received his doctorate in 1966 from the University of Vienna.
A
professor and long-time colleague of Eric Milner at the University of Calgary, Sauers interests
range over set theory and universal algebra, especially Ramsey theory of partial orders and
homogeneous structures.
242The citations [10] and [24] refer to Higman [1952] and Rado [1954b] respectively.
243Laver reputedly spent more time rock-climbing with McKenzie than talking mathematics
with him. For Laver, rock climbing and mathematics were compatible. For example, he admitted
to having proved a small theorem during an afternoon and overnight wait for a few minutes of
assistance on a small ledge in Yosemite valley in the 1970’s.
244Erd˝os and Hajnal [1962a] turned Hausdorﬀ’s type rings for scattered sets into a hierarchy.
245Recall that a scattered linear order is one that does not embed the order type of the rationals;
σ-scattered linear orders are countable unions of scattered linear orders.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
237
Galvin [1968b] explored partitions of the n-element subsets of the tree C = ω2
ordered lexicographically and with the topology that comes from identifying it
with a subset of Cn, the n-fold product with the product topology. He proved
what we will call Galvin’s Partition Theorem for Perfect Sets: for 2 ≤n ≤3 and
for any perfect set P ⊆C, if [P]n is partitioned into ﬁnitely many open sets, then
there is a perfect set (perfect subtree) Q ⊆P so that [Q]n meets at most (n −1)!
of the open sets. He conjectured that the theorem was true for all larger n.
Gerald Sacks spoke at the 1967 UCLA set theory conference on forcing with
perfect closed sets. In his paper for the conference volume [1971, 335], he used
the forcing to show the consistency of there being precisely two degrees of non-
constructibility. He placed the origin246 of the method in Cohen’s forcing with
ﬁnite conditions and Spector’s [1956] construction of a minimal Turing degree.
Sacks called the critical lemma which he used for proving that cardinals are pre-
served the sequential lemma, but noted in the footnotes that Mathias formulated
the lemma more abstractly and called the result the fusion lemma.247 Sacks noted
that Shoenﬁeld in an appendix to the 1967 Recursion theory seminar notes in-
voked the term “splitting” to describe the proof. Sacks cites the result in [Kleene
and Post, 1954] of a minimal pair of upper bounds for the degrees of the arith-
metic sets as the “germ of forcing with perfect conditions” and he references his
joint paper with Robin Gandy [1967] where he used forcing with hyperarithmetic
perfect closed sets to prove the existence of a minimal hyperdegree.
6.3
Suslin’s Problem revisited
In the early days of forcing, Tennenbaum adapted Cohen’s forcing to prove the
relative consistency of the existence of a Suslin tree; Jech, working independently,
gave an alternate proof; and Solovay and Tennenbaum proved the relative consis-
tency of Suslin’s Problem, i.e. the non-existence of Suslin trees.
According to Morley in his Math Review MR0215729 (35 #6564)), as early as
1964 Stanley Tennenbaum248 announced that he was able to construct a model
with a Suslin tree; Tennenbaum presented his proof in numerous seminars, but
did not publish even an abstract prior to 1968, when his result appeared in [Ten-
nenbaum, 1968]. In that paper, Tennenbaum, in his acknowledgment of support,
246See also the recursion-theoretic memories article [1999, 368–369] where he discusses the
connections between forcing and recursion theory.
247Sacks expected Mathias’s survey to appear in the second volume of the proceedings of 1967
UCLA set theory conference. It was distributed in 1968 as a preprint A survey of recent results
in set theory from Stanford, and was later updated and published as [Mathias, 1979].
248Stanley Tennenbaum (April 11, 1927 – May 4, 2005) received a University of Chicago
Ph.B. (an undergraduate degree) in 1945, and took graduate courses at the University of Chicago
without earning a further degree. His academic career included many moves. Melvyn Nathanson
[2008] recalled meeting Tennenbaum in fall 1964 when he was a visiting professor in the Depart-
ment of Philosophy. Nathanson went to the University of Rochester for graduate work because
Tennenbaum was teaching there at that time. In addition to his work in set theory, he is known
for Tennenbaum’s Theorem [1959]: there is no nonstandard recursive model of Peano arithmetic.
A conference in his memory was held April 7, 2006 at the Graduate Center of the City University
of New York.

238
Jean A. Larson
mentioned summer 1963 support at Cornell University and listed two lecture se-
ries at which he presented the proofs of Theorems 1 and 2: Harvard University,
January 27–29, 1964 and Symposium on Foundations of Set Theory, International
Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Hebrew University,
September 1, 1964. In Theorem 1 he proved the consistency of the existence of
a Suslin tree together with GCH, and in Theorem 2 he proved the consistency
of the existence of a Suslin tree with ¬CH. His reference for an equivalence of
Suslin’s Problem is [Miller, 1943].
Tennenbaum deﬁned a tree to be a partial
order in which the set of elements preceding any given element forms a chain.
He listed Miller [1943] as his reference for the deﬁnition of Suslin tree and cited
the original statement of the Suslin’s Problem, Dowker’s paper [1951] in which he
posed the question of the existence of what have become known as Dowker spaces,
Rudin’s paper [1955], in which she showed the existence of a Suslin line implies
the existence of a Dowker space, Cohen’s article introducing forcing, and a forth-
coming paper with Solovay, Souslin’s Problem II, which is listed “to be submitted
to Fundamenta Mathematicae.”
Jech [1967] independently constructed a proof of the consistency of the existence
of a Suslin continuum using ∇-models249 of Vopˇenka [1965] and ideas from Yesenin-
Volpin’s paper [1954].
Next, background material on Solovay is given to set the stage for a discussion
of the consistency of the non-existence of Suslin trees by Solovay and Tennenbaum.
Robert Solovay250 [2010b] recalled his explorations in logic and set-theory prior
to his hearing of Cohen’s work. He went to the University of Chicago with the
clear idea that he wanted to be a theoretical physicist.
Kaplansky did my entrance interview and I rattled oﬀsome 20 to
30 graduate texts I had worked through on my own. He clearly was
unsure if I really had mastered the material in question but put me in
two graduate courses with the comment that “if you really understand
all that, these should be easy.” I did, and they were.
Kaplansky went on to recommend that Solovay ﬁrst get a Ph.D. in mathematics
and then pursue his interest in physics. Solovay recalled how he came to know
more logic than a mathematician should know [2010b]:
249Mostowski in his Math Review MR0182571 of Jech’s paper indicated how to translate the
proof from ∇-models to forcing.
250Robert Martin Solovay received his doctorate in 1964 from the University of Chicago where
Saunders Mac Lane was his advisor. He was a lecturer at Princeton University 1962–1964, and
a visiting member of the Institute for Advanced Study 1964–1965. Then he moved to the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, where he spent most of his academic career until retirement from
teaching in 1994. He was at the Rockefeller University 1967–1968, at the IBM Thomas J. Wat-
son Research Center in New York 1974–1976, and a Sherman Fairchild Scholar at the California
Institute of Technology 1976–1977. His mathematical interests include set theory, new founda-
tions, algorithms, and quantum computing. He became a member of the National Academy in
1986. In 2003 Solovay received jointly with Gary Miller, Michael Rabin and Volker Strassen the
2003 Association for Computing Machinery Paris Kanellakis Theory and Practice Award for the
Solovay-Strassen and Miller-Rabin randomized algorithms for testing primality.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
239
Somehow, or other, the senior faculty got the impression that (though
obviously not completely lacking in talent) I didn’t quite know what a
proof was. . . .
Mac Lane was my thesis advisor and he gave me the “sage advice” that
it would help if I studied some logic to help with this supposed defect.
And I retorted to him that “I know more logic than it is decent for a
mathematician to know.”
At the time, I had worked through much of Kleene’s Introduction to
Metamathematics and certainly knew the G¨odel Completeness and In-
completeness Theorems as well as the Orange Monograph presentation
of the results on V = L. I knew more than this since I ﬁgured out on my
own that the Skolem-Lowenheim theorem was at the root of G¨odel’s
proof of GCH in L, but there certainly were signiﬁcant gaps in my
knowledge that I ﬁlled in later.
Solovay had ﬁnished the research for his dissertation around June 1962 and
that fall became lecturer at Princeton University. He attended Cohen’s general
audience lecture on forcing in Princeton on May 3, 1963, a critical turning point
in his mathematical career. Here is his description [2010a] of how he became a set
theorist:
I had been interested in set theory (and in particular the question of
whether V = L was a theorem of ZFC) from my (brief) undergraduate
career at Harvard. (I dropped out during my sophomore year.) Cohen’s
talk (which I attended) got me intensely interested in it again. Either
at that talk or his subsequent talk at Berkeley (on July 4, 1963) he
posed the question of proving the consistency with ZF of “All sets
Lebesgue Measurable”. (I don’t think he mentioned DC. I actually
independently rediscovered that (and the name!) by reading through
Halmos’ book on measure theory and seeing what forms of choice were
needed for the positive results. For the most part, countable choice
suﬃces. But it seemed to me at the time that DC was needed for the
proof of the Radon-Nikodym theorem. (I certainly had no proof that
it was, in fact needed.)) After many twists and turns, I did, of course,
indeed succeed in solving that problem. And by that point I was deep
into set-theory.251
By July 1964, Solovay [1964], [1970] had solved the problem described above
and spoke on it at a July meeting in Bristol,252 as he recalled in [Jan 2011]:
251Based on an interview with Solovay in July 1981, G. Moore [1988] reported that Cohen posed
the problem of the consistency of ZF with every set of reals being Lebesgue measurable on July
4, 1963.
252Solovay announced the results in an abstract [1965] received by the editors in October 1964
and, in [1970], noted that the main results of the paper were proved March–July, 1964, and were
presented at the July meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic at Bristol, England.

240
Jean A. Larson
At the time when I had to submit the abstract of my talk for the Bris-
tol meeting I only had the weaker result that there was a model of
ZF + countable axiom of choice + “There is a translation invariant
countably additive measure deﬁned on the power set of the reals and
which extends Lebesgue measure”. But in the interval between sub-
mitting the abstract and going to Bristol, I derived the full result. As a
minor point, I knew that the measure described in the earlier abstract
deﬁnitely was not Lebesgue measure.253
The model he created in which all sets of reals are Lebesgue measurable had many
other nice properties and became known as Solovay’s model.
During the academic year 1964–1965, Tennenbaum visited to discuss set theory,
and in particular, his attempts to prove the consistency of SH, the non-existence
of Suslin trees. Solovay recalled their discussions and his role in the proof in an
email to Kanamori [2011a] (below, c.c.c. is an abbreviation for the countable chain
condition introduced in §2.3).
His [Tennenbaum’s] attempt/plan for the consistency of SH had the
following ingredients:
1. it was to be an iteration in which at each step another Souslin
tree would be killed.
2. The steps in the iteration were to be forcing with Souslin trees,
. . .
3. Stan knew that forcing with a Souslin tree killed it and that the
forcing was c.c.c.
For much of the year, Stan was trying to prove that the iteration did
not collapse cardinals. And he was considering iterations of length 2
and 3. My role was to passively listen to his proofs and spot the errors
in them. With unjustiﬁed prescience, I kept saying that I was worried
about “killing the same tree twice”. Of course, there are now examples
due to Jensen that show that forcing with the product of a Souslin tree
with itself can collapse cardinals. But these weren’t available then.
At one of those meetings one of us (probably Stan) made progress and
ﬁnally found reasonable conditions under which a two stage iteration
did not collapse cardinals.
Somehow this got me seriously thinking about the problem and by the
time of our next meeting I had a proof of the theorem. This proof had
the following ingredients which were new:
253G. Moore [1988], drawing on four interviews with Solovay in the period 1981–1984, reported
that Solovay regarded the two weeks prior to the Bristol meeting as the most productive in his
life. For more history of this result, see Moore’s article.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
241
(a) deﬁning a transﬁnite sequence of forcing notions Pα where Pα+1 =
Pα ∗Qα.
This involves:
(a1) deﬁning the operation ∗where P ∗Q is deﬁned if Q is a poset
in V P ;
(a2) deﬁning what to do at limits.
(b) proving that if the component forcings are c.c.c. then the limit
forcing is c.c.c.;
(c) exploiting the c.c.c.ness to see that if the length of the iteration
has coﬁnality greater than ω1 then all subsets of ℵ1 in the ﬁnal
model appear at some proper intermediate stage;
(d) setting up the bookkeeping so that all Souslin trees are killed.
Solovay and Tennenbaum [1971] obtained the main results of their paper in June
1965, as they report in a footnote on the ﬁrst page of their published paper.
At the end of the paper, a brief note indicates that the paper was received by
November 21, 1969. In footnote 2 on the ﬁrst page of their article, Tennenbaum
expressed regret that he had not mentioned, in [1968], Jech’s work [1967].
In
footnote 1, Solovay and Tennenbaum noted that Suslin’s Problem had been studied
by others leading to various formulations in terms of Boolean algebras and trees.
In this discussion, they single out three papers: [Kurepa, 1952], [Miller, 1943],
and [Sierpi´nski, 1948]. Solovay and Tennenbaum used a reformulation in terms of
trees of the version of Suslin’s Hypothesis due to Miller. They used the deﬁnition
of tree used by Tennenbaum in [1968], but for the deﬁnition of Suslin tree, they
extended the deﬁnition from Tennenbaum’s [1968] by adding the condition that
each element x has ℵ1 elements in the tree above it, and in a brief appendix, in
which they acknowledge that their reference to Miller is “not quite accurate,” they
show that if there is a tree without the additional condition, then there is one with
it.
6.4
Martin’s Axiom and diamond principles
The groundbreaking proofs of Tennenbaum [1968] and Solovay and Tennenbaum
[1971] led to the extraction of combinatorial principles which opened the door to
the application of set-theoretic methods to a wide variety of problems in set theory
and set-theoretic topology.

242
Jean A. Larson
Martin’s Axiom
Around 1967, D. Anthony Martin254 extracted the axiom which has become known
as Martin’s Axiom from work of Solovay for the Solovay-Tennenbaum paper. Row-
bottom had independently suggested a similar axiom, but Solovay speciﬁed Martin
in his paper with Tennenbaum and used the name Martin’s Axiom for the following
statement on page 233:
Martin’s Axiom:
Let P be a reﬂexive partially ordered set satisfying
c.a.c. Let F be a family of subsets of P. Suppose that
max (card(P), card(F)) < 2ℵ0.
Then there is an F-generic ﬁlter, G on P.
Here c.a.c. is the countable anti-chain condition, i.e. the assertion that every an-
tichain is at most countable, which is now universally referred to as the c.c.c. (some-
times written ccc), even though the terminology is less accurate. In what follows,
we will write MA as an abbreviation for Martin’s Axiom, and write MAκ for
Martin’s Axiom restricted to families of dense sets of size ≤κ together with the
assumption that c > κ.
In the footnote to page 232, Solovay and Tennenbaum report on Martin’s work:
In addition to formulating his axiom, Martin observed that it could be
proved consistent by the same techniques used by the authors to get
a model of SH. He also noted that his axiom, in the presence of the
inequality 2ℵ0 > ℵ1, implied SH. This material is included here with
his kind permission.
In their §7.2 they indeed observe that MA + ¬CH implies SH, and in the remainder
of the paper they establish the consistency of MA + ¬CH.
Martin and Solovay [1970] made a case that an alternative to CH is needed in
the presence of Cohen’s proof that CH cannot be proved in ZF and the result of
L´evy and Solovay [1967] that it cannot be proved even with the assumption of
the existence of a measurable cardinal. Martin and Solovay pointed to Sierpi´nski’s
book Hypoth`ese du Continu [1934] with many consequences of CH which are not
known to be decided by ¬CH. Then they proposed “axiom” A, now Martin’s
Axiom. Rowbottom is acknowledged as independently suggesting such an axiom,
and some of Kunen’s255 results from his thesis are included in this substantial
report on the ﬁrst consequences of the new axiom. The main results of the paper
[1970, 144] are collected into the following multipart statement:
254Donald Anthony Martin (December 24, 1940 – ) received a bachelor’s degree from the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, was a Harvard Junior Fellow, but never earned a doctorate.
He taught at Rockefeller and now has a joint appointment in mathematics and philosophy at the
University of California, Los Angeles.
255Kenneth Kunen received his doctorate in 1968 from Stanford University where his advisor
was Scott. He has spent his career at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, with Keisler, Miller
and the Rudins.
Proofs of a number of his results were published by others.
See Kanamori
[2011b] to learn more about his set-theoretic work.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
243
Theorem.
If A then
1. 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 →Souslin’s hypothesis [22];
2. If ℵis an inﬁnite cardinal number < 2ℵ0, then 2ℵ= 2ℵ0;
3. If 2ℵ0 > ℵ1, every set of real numbers of cardinality ℵ1 is Π1
1 if
and only if every union of ℵ1 Borel sets is Σ1
2 if and only if there
is a real t with ℵ1L[t] = ℵ1;
4. The union of < 2ℵ0 sets of reals of Lebesgue measure zero (re-
spectively, of the ﬁrst category) is of Lebesgue measure zero (of
the ﬁrst category);
5. If 2ℵ0 > ℵ1, every Σ1
2 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable and has
the Baire property;
6. 2ℵ0 is not a real-valued measurable cardinal (see also [8]).256
Diamond principles
Tennenbaum’s construction of a Suslin tree sparked others to work on related ques-
tions. In particular, Ronald Jensen, Jack Silver and Solovay analyzed his proof,
according to Jensen in a private conversation with Larson and Mitchell in Septem-
ber 2008. Jensen [1968] announced the incompatibility of Suslin’s Hypothesis with
V = L. Here is a report from Larson’s notes [2008]:
While still at Bonn, Jensen thought that there must be a Suslin tree
in L.
His proof of the existence of a Suslin tree in L came out of
Tennenbaum’s forcing with ﬁnite trees, where the thing that made it
work was that whenever you cut oﬀat a limit α, every branch was
generic over that and would hit every anti-chain in that model. Like
many other proofs, this one occurred to him at night when he was
trying unsuccessfully to fall asleep. He reported that he knew enough
to think out the proof before falling asleep, and was able to get up the
next morning and just write it up.
Jensen analysed the Tennenbaum proof to see just what was needed
combinatorially to construct such a tree and formulated his Diamond
Principle ♦, which he then showed consistent by proving it held in L.
Kunen independently extracted ♦from Tennenbaum’s proof, and Sil-
ver extracted ♦∗, a stronger principle. The principle ♦+ was extracted
from Solovay’s construction of a Kurepa family.
Jensen was an Assistent at the University of Bonn from the time of his Ph.D. in
1964, through the time of his Habilitation in 1967, and until some point in 1969
when he became a professor at University of Oslo and simultaneously started
256The citation [22] refers to the Solovay-Tennenbaum paper, and [8] refers to Kunen’s thesis
[1968].

244
Jean A. Larson
periodically lecturing at Rockefeller University. (See [Jensen, 1969b] for details of
work on versions of the Diamond Principle and on Kurepa’s Hypothesis asserting
the existence of a Kurepa tree.) In an abstract outlining results on automorphism
properties of Suslin continua, Jensen included an early published statement of his
Diamond Principle [1969a, 576]:257
♦: There exists Γ ⊂S
α<ω1 ω1α such that Γ∩ω1α is countable for each
α and if f ∈ω1ω1, then W
α f↾α ∈Γ.
In other words, there is a family Γ of functions into ω1 whose domains are countable
ordinals such that for each α < ω1, there are only countably many functions with
domain α, and for every f : ω1 →ω1, there is some α so that the restriction of f
to α is in the family Γ.
This version of ♦looks quite diﬀerent from the general version introduced by
Jensen [1972] in his master work on the constructible universe for each stationary
subset E ⊆κ:
♦κ(E): there is a sequence ⟨Sα : α ∈E} such that Sα ⊆α and for
each X ⊆κ, the set {α : X ∩α = Sα} is stationary in κ.
Jensen published a proof that if V = L and κ is regular, then ♦κ(E) holds for
every stationary set E ⊆κ, and today we write ♦for ♦ℵ1(ω1).
To complete the overview of the basic diamond principles, we include the deﬁ-
nitions of ♦+ and ♦∗
κ(E) for a stationary subset E ⊆κ.
♦+: There is a sequence ⟨Sα ⊆P(α) : α ∈ω1⟩of countable sets such
that for all A ⊆ω1, there is a closed unbounded set C ⊆κ such that
the following properties hold:
a. for all α ∈C, A ∩α ∈Sα;
b. for all α ∈C, C ∩α ∈Sα.
♦∗
κ(E): There is a sequence ⟨Sα ⊆P(α) : α ∈E⟩with |Sα| ≤α for all
but a bounded set of α ∈E such that for all A ⊆κ, there is a closed
unbounded set C ⊆κ with A ∩α ∈Sα for all α ∈C ∩E.
Kunen, in work with Jensen [1969b], proved that ♦+ implies ♦by proving that
♦is equivalent the following principle ♦′.
♦′: There is a sequence ⟨Sα : α < ω1⟩with each Sα a countable set
of P(α) such that for each X ⊆ω1 the set {α < ω1 : X ∩α ∈Sα} is
stationary.
257The abstract was received by the Notices of the American Mathematical Society on December
2, 1968.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
245
The version of ♦of the Jensen abstract can be made to look more like ♦′ if
one replaces the functions by their ranges, and shrinks to a closed unbounded
set E of α where the ranges of functions in Γ with domain α are also subsets of
α. Alternatively, think of the functions as subsets of ω1 × ω1 and use a bijection
between ω1 × ω1 and ω1 to obtain the function version from the usual one.
It is clear that ♦+ implies ♦∗= ♦∗
ℵ1(ω1), which in turn implies ♦′, so ♦follows
from all of the other variations listed. Presumably it was known to Kunen and
Jensen in 1969 that ♦does not imply Kurepa’s Hypothesis (KH), that there is
a Kurepa tree, since the model of ¬KH constructed by Silver in the 1960’s (see
[1971b]) from an inaccessible cardinal satisﬁes ♦. These diamond principles were
analyzed in notes [1969b] prepared by Jensen when he was at Rockefeller University
in 1969. Most of the results from the notes appeared in Devlin [1973], although the
deﬁnition of ♦+ was changed from asserting the existence of a closed unbounded
set C for whose elements C ∩α and A ∩α in Sα, to asserting the existence of an
unbounded set B for whose limit points α one has C ∩α and A ∩α in Sα. The
principle ♦∗was not mentioned in Devlin’s book, but it is of little import, since
the implications ♦+ =⇒♦∗and ♦∗=⇒♦′ follow from the deﬁnitions of these
principles. There is a remark in the Jensen notes [1969b] that ♦+ is stronger than
♦∗since the former implies that there are Kurepa trees and the latter does not.
Jensen’s proof that ♦+ implies KH appears later in the notes, but a proof ♦∗does
not imply KH only appears in the 1970’s (see §7.1 where the discussion of diamond
principles continues).
6.5
More on uncountable trees
We start by discussing terminology, mainly from [Kunen, 1983], to facilitate our
discussion of results for Aronszajn, Suslin and Kurepa trees. Recall that for regular
κ, a κ-tree (T, <) is a tree of height κ all of whose levels have cardinality < κ; in
particular, an ω1-tree is a tree of height ω1 all of whose levels are countable. With
this terminology for regular κ, a κ-Aronszajn tree is a κ-tree with no branches
of length κ, a special κ-Aronszajn tree is a κ-Aronszajn tree which is the union
of fewer than κ antichains, and a κ-Suslin tree is a κ-Aronszajn tree with no
antichains of size κ (it is deﬁnitely not a special κ-Aronszajn tree since special
κ-Aronszajn trees have antichains of size κ).
If s, t ∈T and s < t, then we say that s is a predecessor of t and t is a
successor of s. Call T well-pruned if it is rooted and every element of the tree
has successors on all higher levels. Any subset of a tree is a subtree under the
induced partial order, though we note that the height, width, and level structure
need not be retained. One can show that every κ-tree has a well-pruned subtree
which is a κ-tree. A tree is Hausdorﬀif diﬀerent nodes on the same limit level
have diﬀerent sets of predecessors. A tree is full if every non-maximal element has
inﬁnitely many immediate successors, and λ-full if every non-maximal element
has λ-many immediate successors.
Note that the concept due to Kurepa that
we called uniformly branching has been reﬁned to full and we have imposed the

246
Jean A. Larson
requirements that the trees of interest in this case be rooted and Hausdorﬀ. Note
that the notion of normal ω1-tree from [Jech, 2003] is the same as full well-pruned
Hausdorﬀω1-tree.
Haim Gaifman258 and Specker [1964] proved that there are at least 2κ+ many
isomorphism types of κ-full well-pruned Hausdorﬀκ+-Aronszajn trees if κλ = κ
for all λ < κ.259 In their introduction they mention Kurepa’s probl`eme miraculeux
1 (First Miraculous Problem stated in §3.4), i.e. whether or not any two uniformly
branching ℵ1-Aronszajn trees are isomorphic, which they solve in the negative.
Gaifman and Specker showed that κ-full well-pruned Hausdorﬀκ+-Aronszajn trees
could be represented by sequential trees, which are trees of transﬁnite sequences
closed under initial segment and ordered by end-extension. They referred to both
Aronszajn’s construction (cf. [Kurepa, 1935]) and Specker’s construction [1949]
of these trees.
The proof of existence of many non-isomorphic trees used the
formation of new trees from known ones via a process much like a shuﬄe of their
underlying sequences.
Toward the end of the decade, conferences and surveys helped share the growing
body of results about trees.
Kurepa [1969] surveyed results related to Suslin’s Problem, from its statement
through the independence results of Tennenbaum and Jech, at the International
Symposium on Topology and its Applications held in Herceg-Novi in the summer
of 1968.
Rudin [1969] popularized the use of Aronszajn, special Aronszajn and Suslin
trees with her American Mathematical Monthly article. In this expository arti-
cle, she described the Suslin problem as sounding easy (see page 1113): “Anyone
who understands countable and uncountable can ‘work’ on it.” She went on to
point out that there are standard patterns, standard errors and “there are stan-
dard not-quite-counter-examples which almost everyone who looks at the problem
happens upon.” After noting the growing collection of results about Suslin trees,
she described her goals for the paper: describe the standard pattern (develop-
ment as a way to construct a tree from a linear order), prove an elementary result
(the construction of a Suslin line from a Suslin topological space) and give one of
the not-quite-counter-examples (the construction of an Aronszajn tree). She con-
cluded her article with a brief review of recent research, which in part documents
some results of Jensen on the existence of a variety of Suslin trees of cardinality κ
in the constructible universe.
Jech [1971] expanded a May 1969 talk on trees given at a conference in Ober-
258Haim Gaifman earned a master’s degree at Hebrew University in 1958 and a doctorate at
the University of California, Berkeley, in 1962, where Tarski was his advisor. He directed the
program in History and Philosophy of Science at the Hebrew University while a professor of
mathematics prior to moving to Columbia University in 1990 as a professor of philosophy.
259Gaifman and Specker call the trees of interest normal κ-trees, but for κ = ℵ0, their deﬁnition
matches the deﬁnition of normal ω1-tree in [Jech, 2003, 114] except that they have added the
condition that there is no branch of length κ+. This paper may well be the source of the word
normal as used by Jech. I have stayed away from normal for trees because of its use in topology,
and because diﬀerent authors have diﬀerent deﬁnitions.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
247
wolfach into a survey article. He included brief proofs of classical as well as recent
results, so his paper gives a snapshot of what was known at the end of the 1960’s
about uncountable trees.
He straightforwardly pointed out in footnote 1 that
Kurepa’s [1968] assertion260 that κ+-Aronszajn trees exist for every κ is false.
Jech showed how to generalize the construction of ω1-Aronszajn trees to larger
cardinals, and in his footnote 2, pointed out that Rowbottom and Silver observed
that the existence of κ+-Aronszajn trees follows immediately from the existence
of ω1-trees using Chang’s cardinal transfer property (ω1, ω) →(κ+, κ), which is
known to be true for regular κ assuming GCH. Jech showed the necessity of the
assumption of GCH. He brieﬂy discussed the tree property, the generalization of
K¨onig’s Lemma to trees with small levels and large heights, and reported that
Tarski and his school had shown that for inaccessible cardinals, the tree property
is equivalent to several other properties including κ →(κ)2
2 and Π1
1-indescribability
and being weakly compact [Keisler and Tarski, 1964]. In terms of trees, κ has the
tree property exactly when there are no κ-Aronszajn trees.
Jech noted that Silver [1966] (see also [1971b]) observed that every real-valued
measurable cardinal has the tree property, gave a sketch of the proof, and con-
cluded that since the statement that 2ℵ0 is real-valued measurable is consistent
relative to some large cardinal assumption, so is the statement that the continuum
has the tree property. This result also showed the consistency of the statement
that not all cardinals with the tree property are weakly compact. Jech pointed out
that a κ-complete λ-saturated non-principal ideal on κ for some λ < κ is suﬃcient
to get the tree property at κ.
Jech reported that Prikry [1968] proved the consistency of the statement that
ℵω+1 does not have the tree property relative to a large cardinal assumption. He
started with a measurable cardinal κ in the ground model, thus starting with a
κ+-Aronszajn tree T built from bounded increasing sequences from Q = <κκ, and
constructed a generic extension in which κ = ℵω and all cardinals above κ are
preserved. In this extension T is an ℵω+1-tree whose levels have power at most
ℵω, and there is no ℵω+1 branch in T, since otherwise there would be an increasing
sequence of that length in Q which has cardinality |Q| = κ = ℵω in the extension.
Next, Jech turned to the question of the existence of a Suslin tree. He cited
Kurepa [1937b], Miller [1943], and Specker [1949] as having made translations of
the problem to one about trees. Jech discussed the model of [Tennenbaum, 1968]
for the existence of a Suslin tree and his own construction [1967].
Jech sketched the Solovay-Tennenbaum proof of the consistency of non-existence
of Suslin trees we discussed in §6.3, noting that the continuum in their model is
2ℵ0 = ℵ2. Jech announced the remarkable proof by Jensen of the consistency of
non-existence of Suslin trees with the Continuum Hypothesis discussed in §7.7.
260In his Math Review MR0255410 (41 # 72) of Kurepa’s paper entitled On A-trees, N. C. A.
da Costa, noted that the A-trees of the title of have been considered by the author on several
occasions, speciﬁcally in [Kurepa, 1937a]. Hence the title reference is clearly to Aronszajn trees.
In the review, da Costa states that Kurepa proved the existence of an Aronszajn tree on every
successor cardinal without the use of the Continuum Hypothesis.

248
Jean A. Larson
His citation of mimeographed notes at the very end of his bibliography for this
landmark result suggests that the announcement was a last minute addition.
In his discussion of Kurepa trees, Jech singled out as the ﬁrst result that if ω1
is inaccessible in L and if no ordinal between ω1 and ω2 is a cardinal in L, then
there is a Kurepa tree; Jech indicated that several people found this result and
mentioned L´evy, Rowbottom [1964],261 and Bukovsk´y [1966]. Later, Rowbottom
and Stewart262 [1966] proved the consistency of the existence of a Kurepa tree
relative to ZFC. Next, Jech sketched the proof by Silver [1971a], only published in
1971, that the non-existence of Kurepa trees is consistent relative to the existence
of an inaccessible cardinal. Jech then noted “recently,” Solovay proved that there
is a Kurepa tree whenever V = L[X] for some X ⊆ω1; Silver observed that from
this result it follows that if ω2 is not inaccessible in L, then there is a Kurepa tree,
so that the assumption of inaccessibility in Silver’s proof cannot be dropped.
In the fourth and ﬁnal section, Jech presented what he called the “cream of
the article”, namely the proof that if V = L both Suslin and Kurepa trees exist.
We have already discussed the existence of Suslin trees in L due to Jensen; Jech
credited Solovay with the construction of a Kurepa tree.
Like a spring that bubbles up from many tiny sources building up to a river,
many independently generated ideas and approaches ﬁrmed up into our notions of
ω1-tree, Aronszajn tree, special Aronszajn tree, Suslin tree and Kurepa tree.
6.6
Transversals and decidability
Micha Perles [1963] showed that Dilworth’s chain decomposition theorem (see the
end of §5.3) does not generalize to the inﬁnite, using ω1 × ω ordered coordinate-
wise as his example of a partial order in which all antichains are countable but it
is not the union of countably many chains.
H. A. Jung and Rado [1967] generalized Hall’s Marriage Theorem to families
of subsets of a set E which include a single inﬁnite subset. They proved that a
necessary and suﬃcient condition for a family ⟨Ai : i ∈I⟩⌢⟨B⟩of subsets of E
with each Ai ﬁnite and B inﬁnite to have a transversal is that ⟨Ai : i ∈I⟩have
a transversal and B is not a subset of the union of all sets A[T] := S
i∈T Ai over
ﬁnite T ⊆I for which |A[T]| = |T|.
There were extensions of the generalization of Jung and Rado to allow ﬁnitely
many inﬁnite sets by several authors in the late 1960’s and early 1970’s.
For
example, here is the condition by Jon H. Folkman [1970] for a family A = ⟨Ai | i ∈
I⟩of subsets of a set E having a transversal: A has a transversal if and only if the
following condition is satisﬁed where for J ⊆I, A(J) = ⟨Aj : j ∈J⟩: for all n ∈ω
and K ⊆J ⊆I such that A(J) −A(K) is ﬁnite and |J −K| ≥n + |A(J) −A(K)|,
there is a ﬁnite set S ⊆K such that |A(T)| ≥n + |T| for all sets T such that
S ⊆T ⊆K. Folkman gave the example of the set of denumerable ordinals each
regarded as the set of its predecessors as an example of an uncountable family
261The reference to Rowbottom also includes a cryptic “(notes for 1967)” [Jech, 1971, 14].
262Stewart’s proof is sketched in Jech’s paper [1971].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
249
which has no transversal (apply the Regressive Function Theorem). All three,
[Brualdi and Scrimger, 1968], [Folkman, 1970] and [Woodall, 1972], gave equivalent
characterizations, as shown in [Bry, 1981].
Milner became interested in transversals in the 1960’s and wrote a series of
papers on them, some coauthored with Erd˝os or Hajnal263 or both. Of particular
note is the triple paper [1968] in which they proved that given a sequence of κ+
many disjoint sets, each of cardinality κ, there is a collection of κ+ many almost
disjoint transversals. L. Mirsky [1971] codiﬁed what was known about transversal
theory up through the 1960’s in his book of that name, with attention to inﬁnite
combinatorial problems using the Rado Selection Principle.
Next we consider an application of the classiﬁcation of order types. L¨auchli and
John J. Leonard [1966] proved the decidability of the elementary theory of order
through the analysis of the class M of order types such that 1 ∈M, M is closed
under pairwise sum, multiplication by ω and by ω∗, and the shuﬄing operation
σF for ﬁnite F ⊆M, where σF is a linearly ordered set which can be partitioned
into order type η many segments such that every segment has a type in F and
between any two diﬀerent types there are parts in each type from F.
L¨auchli
and Leonard credit Skolem [1920], [1970, 132, Satz 2] with the uniqueness of the
shuﬄing operation, i.e. between any two sets A and B with witnessing partitions
⟨Cξ ∈F : ξ ∈η⟩and ⟨Dξ ∈F : ξ ∈η⟩showing that A and B ﬁt the deﬁnition of
σF, there is an order-preserving map Φ : A →B so that each Cξ is taken to some
Dζ where Cξ and Dζ represent the same type from F. They contrasted their proof
with that of Ehrenfeucht [1959], [1961] and note that a proof similar to theirs had
been found independently by Fred Galvin. The L¨auchli-Leonard approach recalls
Hausdorﬀ’s analysis of countable linear order types in [1908], and Skolem cited
this paper for terminology.
6.7
Partition calculus classics
The late 1950’s and early 1960’s were a fruitful time for those working in the par-
tition calculus, particularly with the appearance of the landmark paper, Partition
relations for cardinal numbers by Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado [1965], and the proof of
the Hales-Jewett Theorem, a result from ﬁnite combinatorics that would impact
both ﬁnite and inﬁnite combinatorics.
Let A be a ﬁnite alphabet (i.e. a set) and let v be a “variable” not in A. Let
Σ∗A be the set of all “words” over the alphabet A. A “variable word” is a word
over A ∪{v} in which v actually occurs. Alfred Hales and Robert Jewett [1963]
used variable words to investigate partitions of H-fold products of an n-element
set, a dimensional approach to partition theory. Their theorem implies van der
Waerden’s Theorem.
Hales-Jewett Theorem:
If Σ∗A is ﬁnitely colored, there must exist a
variable word w(v) such that {w(a): a ∈A} is monochromatic.
263Hajnal [1997, 374–375] recalled that his ﬁrst joint paper with Milner was on transversals.

250
Jean A. Larson
Before turning to a discussion of partition relations for cardinals, ordinals, and
the reals, we remind the reader that partition results of Galvin for real types and
rationals and of Laver for the rationals were discussed earlier in §6.1, since they
will not be repeated in this section.
Early ﬁnite exponent results
Hajnal used the Continuum Hypothesis to show that the sharpening of Erd˝os and
Rado of the Erd˝os-Dushnik-Miller Theorem could not be improved for κ = ω1
from ω1 →(ω1, ω + 1)2 [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956, Theorem 39] to ω1 →(ω1, ω + 2)2
[Hajnal, 1960, 283, Theorem 5]. The proof actually yields a bit more, namely
ω1 ↛(ω1, ω : 2)2, i.e. there is a coloring of the pairs of ω1 which has no independent
set of size ω1 and also has no complete bipartite graph consisting of ω points in a set
B all of which are below two points in a set C with all pairs between them joined.
The main tool was a set mapping theorem (Theorem 1 [1960, 278]) he had proved
using the Continuum Hypothesis in order to answer negatively a question of Erd˝os
and Fodor. Hajnal also proved positive partition relations for ω1 and for λ, the
order type of the real numbers. For example, he proved that for any uncountable
order type φ which embeds neither ω1 nor ω∗
1 (e.g. λ) that φ →(ω · n, α)2 for any
n < ω and any countable ordinal α. Moreover, he proved (see Theorem 8 on page
290) that ω1 →(ω · n, ω · 2)2 for every ﬁnite n and stated as the simplest unsolved
problems: Does ω1 →(ω2, ω · 2)2? Does ω1 →(ω · 3, ω · 3)2? His method of proof
gives more (see [1960, 294]): ω1 →(ω · n, (ω : ω1)<)2,264 where the (ω : ω1)<
stands for a complete bipartite graph on a pair of sets B, C ⊆ω1with B < C,
where B has type ω and C is uncountable, i.e. the graph of all pairs meeting both
B and C.
Erd˝os and Hajnal took the approach of their [1958] a step further in [1962b] to
prove that the least inaccessible cardinal κ satisﬁes the negative partition relation
κ ↛(ℵ1)<ω
2
, which we would now describe by saying the least inaccessible cardinal
is not an ℵ1-Erd˝os cardinal.
Building on the work of the late 1950’s seminar organized by Mostowski and
Tarski that led to [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961], William Hanf265 [1964] showed that
κ →(κ)2
2 implies the tree property on κ, and hence by [Erd˝os, 1942] (the attribu-
tion is given in [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961, 59, footnote 5]), the two properties are
equivalent for regular uncountable κ.
Hajnal [1964], responding to this work, proved that if κ is a regular cardinal
264The notation ω1 →(ω · n, (ω : ω1)<)2 comes from [Erd˝os et al., 1984, 62].
265William P. Hanf worked for IBM 1958–1968. He was supported by IBM during the year
he completed his degree in 1963 as a student of Tarski with a dissertation titled Some Fun-
damental Problems Concerning Languages with Inﬁnitely Long Expressions. He was a visiting
lecturer at the University of California, Berkeley, for two years before joining the faculty at the
University of Hawaii in 1970, where the William P. Hanf Memorial Fund now supports cash
awards for winners of the Problem of the Month for Manoa Undergraduates, according to the
website http://www.math.hawaii.edu/home/ProblemMonth Hanf.html downloaded August 17,
2010. For more information on Hanf, see the eulogy by Dale Meyers [1991].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
251
which supports a linear ordering with no well-ordered or conversely well-ordered
subset of length κ, then for all r ≥3, κ ↛(κ, r + 1)r. As he pointed out, it is
enough to prove this for r = 3, since if f witnesses the relation for 4 and r > 4, then
the function g given by g(α0, . . . , αr−1) = g(α0, α1, α2) witnesses the relation for
r. He gave a simpler proof of Hanf’s result266 and noted that the four statements
from [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961] that inspired Hanf’s work are equivalent, which he
attributed to Hanf [1964] with prior work by [Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961] and [Monk
and Scott, 1964].
Erd˝os and Hajnal [1962a] proved a partition relation for countable order types:
θ →(θ, ω)2 if and only if θ = ω, θ = ω∗(the converse well-ordering) or θ is not
scattered. A major tool was a hierarchy, the stratiﬁcation of countable scattered
order types into ranked layers as they are built up from 0 and 1 by sums indexed
by ω or ω∗over sets of lower rank. In a footnote, Erd˝os and Hajnal shared their
belief that this approach must be in the literature, but that they have not found
it.
Indeed, this hierarchy is a repackaging of a type ring of Hausdorﬀ[1908],
now known as the Hausdorﬀhierarchy. While the Hausdorﬀtype rings were for
scattered sets of cardinality less than ℵα, the modern Hausdorﬀhierarchy includes
scattered sets of every cardinality.
Milner and Rado [1965] investigated an inﬁnitary generalization for ordinals of
the Pigeonhole Principle. In terms of the arrow notation introduced by Rado, given
ordinals α0, α1, . . . , they sought the least ordinal α for which α →(α0, α1, . . . )1
holds. Of particular note was the discovery of what came to be called the Milner-
Rado Paradoxical Decomposition of ordinals β < ω2 witnessing the surprising fail-
ure of β →(ω1, ω12, . . . , ω1n, . . . )1
ω, More generally, for any uncountable cardinal
κ and every β < κ+, the negative relation β ↛(κω)1
ω holds.
The Giant Triple Paper
The triple paper [1965] of Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado, ﬁnally appeared.267 As Hajnal
recounted in his paper Paul Erd˝os’ set theory [1997, 363]: “Starting around 1957 or
58, we decided to write a triple paper with Rado on the partition calculus and the
three of us set aside everything which we thought belonged there. Already in 1960
I visited Rado in Reading to work on the triple paper, carrying with me an almost
completed manuscript.” They succeeded in giving an almost complete discussion
of the partition relation κ →(λ, µ)r for cardinal numbers in this massive paper
under the assumption of GCH (theorems marked with (*) used this assumption).
The Positive Stepping Up Lemma of [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] was joined by the
Negative Stepping Up Lemma: if r ≥2, κ ≥ω and κ ↛(λ)r
ν<γ, then 2κ ↛
(λν + 1)r+1
ν<γ, provided one of several situations holds as in the various parts of
Lemma 5. Sections 13 and 14 (pages 118–129) include an analysis of counter-
examples. The Canonization Lemma (Lemma 3 on page 110) was used to get
positive results for singular strong limit cardinals using GCH. A sample is Theorem
266In a footnote Hajnal remarked that the original form of the proof was simpliﬁed by Hanf.
267Erd˝os reported that Hajnal used to refer to it as the “Giant Triple Paper” [Erd˝os, 1996, 121].

252
Jean A. Larson
6 from page 114 (GCH): Let a be a singular cardinal of coﬁnality a′ = b+ and
c < a′. Then for b′ the coﬁnality of b, a →(a, (b′)c)2.
Among the variations of the partition symbol introduced in the Erd˝os-Hajnal-
Rado classic paper is the square bracket partition relation (see 18.1, 18.2, 18.3
on page 144 of [1965]) κ →[λ]n
ν, often used to express the existence of strong
counter-examples. This partition relation holds if for every set S of cardinality κ
and every f : [S]n →ν, there is a subset X ⊆S of size λ so that the restriction of
f to [X]n does not map onto ν; colloquially, f omits a color on [X]n. For example,
the Sierpi´nski partition [1933] may be expressed with this notation as ω1 ↛[ω1]2
2.
Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado assume GCH to prove in [1965, Theorem 17, 141] that
for κ = λ+, κ ↛[κ]2
κ.
Erd˝os and Hajnal quickly found an application of Theorem 17 to the problem of
J´onsson in their [1966],268 where they show that under the assumption of GCH no
successor cardinal is J´onsson. A J´onsson algebra is an algebra without a proper
subalgebra of the same cardinality and a cardinal κ is J´onsson if there are no
J´onsson algebras with universe of size κ. Keisler and Rowbottom [1965] proved
that κ is J´onsson if and only if every structure for a countable ﬁrst-order language
with universe of size κ has a proper elementary substructure whose universe also
has size κ. They showed that under the assumption of V = L, no cardinal is
J´onsson.
In Theorem 4 of [1966], Erd˝os and Hajnal prove that every algebra
whose universe has cardinality a measurable cardinal has a proper subalgebra
with universe of the same cardinality, i.e. every measurable cardinal is a J´onsson
cardinal. They went on to use a set mapping theorem from the joint paper [1958]
that came out of their ﬁrst meeting to prove in Theorem 5 that for every inﬁnite
cardinal λ there is a J´onsson algebra of cardinality λ with one ω-ary operation.
This brief overview gives only a taste of this paper about which one of the
authors (Erd˝os) [1996, 120] said: “Hajnal, Rado and I nearly completely settled
m →(n, q)2 but the results are very technical and can be found in our joint triple
paper [69] and in our book [68].”
All Finite Subsets Problem
Results related to the All Finite Subsets Problem of Erd˝os and Hajnal discussed
in §5.1 were proved in the 1960’s.
Frederick Rowbottom [1964] received his doctorate from University of Wiscon-
sin, Madison, and in his thesis he used partition properties of the form α →
(β)<ω
2
269 to investigate the constructible universe. Speciﬁcally he showed that the
existence of a cardinal κ such that κ →(ω1)<ω
2
implies V ̸= L. He also showed
that measurable κ are Ramsey cardinals in the sense that κ →(κ)<ω
2
but are
268The paper by Erd˝os and Hajnal comes with the notation that it was “presented by A.
Mostowski on August 27, 1965”.
269Recall that the partition relation α →(β)<ω
2
holds if and only if for every coloring c :
[α]<ω →{0, 1} of the ﬁnite subsets of α with two colors there is a subset X ⊆α of order type
β and a function f : ω →{0, 1} such that for all n < ω, for all n-element subsets A ⊆X,
c(A) = f(n).

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
253
not the least cardinals with this property. The proof involved showing that for
a normal ultraﬁlter U over a measurable cardinal κ, κ →(U)n
2 for all n < ω by
induction and using the closure of U under countable intersections to get the de-
sired result.270 Rowbottom showed that, in the presence of a cardinal κ satisfying
κ →(κ)<ω
2
, the reals of the constructible universe are countable.
Jack Silver271 in Chapter 4 of his thesis [1966], [1970b] showed that κ →(ω)<ω
2
is consistent with V = L. He further proved that if κ →(α)<ω
2
and α < ω1L, then
the statement κ →(α)<ω
2
is true in L. He drew as a corollary the conclusion that if
κ →(α)<ω
2
for all countable α, then the same is true in the constructible universe.
Silver, in his thesis [1966] and [1971b] showed the existence of 0# (named in
[Solovay, 1967]) follows from the existence of a cardinal κ for which κ →(ω1)<ω
2
.272
6.8
Inﬁnitary partition relations
During the academic year 1967–1968 (including the summer of 1968), Mathias,
Silver, and the team of Galvin and Prikry proved seminal results on partitions of
inﬁnite subsets of ω. Adrian Mathias273 proved the consistency of ω →(ω)ω in the
absence of the Axiom of Choice and introduced what is now known as Mathias
forcing. Galvin and Prikry274 proved a remarkable generalization of the Nash-
Williams Partition Theorem, subsequently generalized by Silver in the beginning
of a chain of results that have led to a wide variety of applications. What follows
is a mainly chronological account of how these theorems were proved.
Recall that Erd˝os and Rado, as early as 1935 and in their Example 1 of [1952a,
431], had looked at generalizations of Ramsey’s Theorem to partitions of the inﬁ-
nite subsets of a set: they used a well-ordering of the collection of inﬁnite subsets
of an inﬁnite set, say ω for concreteness, to construct a partition P(ω) = K0 ∪K1
such that neither cell contains all the subsets of an inﬁnite subset of ω. Let us say
family F of inﬁnite subsets of ω has the Ramsey property or is Ramsey if there is
an inﬁnite subset M ⊆ω such that either [M]ω ⊆F or [M]ω ∩F = ∅.
In fall 1967, Jensen was visiting Stanford and Scott had arranged for Mathias,
270Drake singled out this property and its generalization to n-tuples for special attention in his
book Set Theory [1974, 189]: “The most important property of normal measures for us is usually
called the Ramsey property, by analogy with Ramsey’s Theorem of ch. 2 §8.”
271Jack Howard Silver completed his doctoral thesis at the University of California, Berkeley,
in 1966 with Vaught, spent a year at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and like his advisor,
came to be a member of the faculty at Berkeley where he had earned his degree.
272See Kanamori’s second chapter and Mitchell’s chapter for information on 0#.
273Adrian Mathias graduated from the University of Cambridge in 1965 and wrote his fellowship
and Ph.D. dissertation in 1968, for which the bulk of the work was done in Bonn and Stanford
University under Jensen’s supervision. He taught at Cambridge for twenty years without obtain-
ing tenure; he then spent ten years teaching and researching in various places [Berkeley, Warsaw,
Oberwolfach, Caen, the CRM at Barcelona, and Bogota], and ﬁnally was elected to a tenured
position in R´eunion in 2000.
274Karel Prikry studied at Charles University in Prague, and went to the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, in fall 1965 with what he [2010a] described as the equivalent of a master’s degree
including a short publication. He earned his doctorate with Jack Silver at Berkeley in 1968. He
has spent most of his career at the University of Minnesota.

254
Jean A. Larson
as Jensen’s student, to be a research associate. Here is how Mathias described the
initial impetus to his work on partitions of the inﬁnite subsets of ω [1977, 110]:
The author’s interest in the problem of refuting the relation ω →(ω)ω
without the axiom of choice was aroused by [Harvey] Friedman during
Scott’s seminar on partition theorems conducted at Stanford in 1967.
In a letter to Odell dated November 11, 1997, Mathias listed a sequence of
events as he recalled them on the question of refuting ω →(ω)ω without choice.
The ﬁrst two items of the list are omitted since their core content is covered by
the above quote, to which we add the remark that the seminar was held in the fall
quarter.
3. In response to Friedman’s enthusiasm, Paul Cohen and, indepen-
dently, Ehrenfeucht ﬁnd proofs that all open sets are Ramsey.
Cohen uses this result to answer another question of Friedman by
building an inﬁnite subset X of ω not recursive in any Y ⊆X
with X \ Y inﬁnite.
4. Whilst searching the literature in another connection, I ﬁnd Nash-
Williams’ proof of a similar result.
5. Friedman gives a talk at Berkeley, with Silver, then an associate
professor, and Prikry, then a graduate student, in the audience,
describing his attempts to build a non-Ramsey set without using
choice.
He sketches a proof that if one Sacks real is added to
a model of ZFC, every new inﬁnite subset of ω contains or is
disjoint from an old inﬁnite subset of ω. In a discussion after his
talk, Prikry points out that Friedman’s argument is erroneous,
and I give a correct proof.275
Next we turn to Galvin and Prikry [1973] who apparently proved their theorem
immediately on hearing Scott’s idea that inﬁnitary partition theorems should be
possible for nicely deﬁnable partitions, which they may have learned from the
above described lecture of Friedman. In an email to Galvin and Larson, Prikry
[2010a] recalled that he and Galvin “came up with the proof the same day or
night,” and described the circumstances.
Fred did it while he was brushing his teeth before going to bed (plus
the few minutes before he fell asleep). I spent the whole night writing
up the proof in my oﬃce in T4 since I never liked claiming a theorem
before I wrote it up completely. I think it would have been in the fall
1967. My motivation was Scot[t]’s talk. The notion of Ramseyness
for inﬁnite sets has been around – it has to do with inﬁnitary Jonsson
algebras and so forth.
275The Nash-Williams Partition Theorem [1965b] is the likely candidate for what Mathias found
in the literature. I have omitted an unmatched [ from this item.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
255
Galvin and Prikry both had arrived at the University of California, Berkeley,
in fall 1965, Prikry as a graduate student and Galvin as an instructor.276 Prikry
[2010b] recalled that he had gotten to know Silver during the year that they had
overlapped in graduate school. Silver had ﬁnished his degree in 1966 and had
spent a year at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Already in the summer
of 1967, Prikry had came up with his coﬁnality changing forcing, now known as
Prikry forcing.
Galvin and Prikry identiﬁed the collection of subsets of ω with the product space
2ω with the product topology. Their one-page proof that open sets are Ramsey
is elegant and uses the following deﬁnition. Given a subset S ⊆2ω, say M ⊆ω
accepts X if every N ⊆M for which X < N has X ∪N ∈S, and M rejects X if
there is no N ⊆M such that N accepts X.277
Galvin and Prikry introduced the notion completely Ramsey for subsets S ⊆2ω
with the property that for every continuous function f : 2ω →2ω, the set f −1(S)
is Ramsey. They showed that the collection of completely Ramsey subsets of 2ω
includes all open sets and is closed under complements and countably unions, con-
cluding that Borel sets are completely Ramsey. After deriving several corollaries
including Ramsey’s Theorem and the Nash-Williams Partition Theorem, they con-
cluded with counter-examples to possible extensions, including a nowhere dense
set of measure zero which is not Ramsey.
In January, Galvin [1968a]278 had already stated a generalization of the Nash-
Williams Partition Theorem which can be translated to “open sets are Ramsey”.
Recently Galvin [2010] commented on this abstract:
Of course, I was reinventing the wheel in that abstract; “open sets are
Ramsey” had already been proved . . . Also, at the time I submitted
the abstract, I wouldn’t have recognized it in the form “open sets are
Ramsey”.
Galvin and Prikry [1973] noted that their initial proofs that Borel sets are
Ramsey used induction on the ordinals. Their published proof in [1973] instead
uses ideas of Nash-Williams [1965b], “as they were explained to us by Richard
Laver”.279 Documentably by the end of March, Galvin and Prikry had proved
that Borel sets are Ramsey, since Robert Soare quoted this result in an abstract
[1968a] received April 1, 1968, and in the paper [1969], Soare expressed gratitude
to Galvin for the prompt reporting of his results.280
276Prikry recalled getting to know Galvin: “We had oﬃces next to each other and had some-
what similar schedules, so we ended each day together around 1 am at a pizza place on Euclid
[Avenue].”
277Galvin and Prikry noted that the fact that open sets are Ramsey was independently dis-
covered by Ehrenfeucht and Cohen among others (cf.
Mathias’ point 3 above), but was not
published prior to their paper [1973] in The Journal of Symbolic Logic.
278Galvin’s abstract [1968a] was received January 26, 1968.
279Galvin and Laver played speed chess as well as talking mathematics together.
280Soare submitted a preliminary report [1968b] which was received February 8, 1968 (it men-
tioned Galvin for the proof of a combinatorial result formulated by Jockusch) and published

256
Jean A. Larson
Silver [1970a], building on work of Galvin and Prikry, proved that analytic sets
are completely Ramsey, and showed that under the assumption of the existence
of a measurable cardinal that every Σ1
2 set is Ramsey. For X ⊆ω and S ⊆[X]ω,
the family S is called X-Ramsey if there is an inﬁnite set Y ⊆X such that either
[Y ]ω ⊆S or [Y ]ω ∩S = ∅. A family S ⊆[ω]ω is completely Ramsey if, for every
ﬁnite F ⊆ω and every X ⊆ω \ F, the set {Z ⊆X : F ∪Z ∈S} is X-Ramsey.281
Silver’s proof started with the formula ∃rφ(r, s, t) deﬁning an analytic family, used
forcing to extend a given model of a fragment of set theory to one in which MAω2
holds, proved that the family deﬁned by the same formula in the extension is
completely Ramsey, and applied an absoluteness argument to conclude that the
original family was completely Ramsey.282
Mathias [1997, items 14–15] recalled an important step in his proof:
Somewhere around the end of June 1968 I realise that there would be
a good chance of proving that in Solovay’s model all sets are Ramsey,
provided that the Jensen-Friedman adaptation of Prikry forcing had
the property that every inﬁnite subset of a generic set is also generic.
This is my main claim to originality: that such a phenomenon might
be possible had never previously been suggested. . . .
Two weeks later, I ﬁnally reach the concept that I called capturing, and
with its help establish my “all subsets generic” property, prove that in
Solovay’s model all sets are Ramsey, prove that my notion of forcing
has the strong Cohen-type property that a Mathias-generic set X of
integers is not constructible from any Y ⊆X with X \ Y inﬁnite, and,
as easy corollaries, give new proofs of Silver’s theorems.
I write all this up in four weeks, and the resulting document, nearly
170 pages of A4, mainly in manuscript, is submitted in August 1968
to Trinity College, Cambridge in the (unfulﬁlled) hope of obtaining a
Fellowship there under Title A.
Prior to the submission of the above document, Mathias sent in an abstract
[1968] to the Notices of the American Mathematical Society which was received
July 18, 1968. He gave a description of the forcing, now known as Mathias forcing:
a condition is a pair ⟨s, S⟩where s ∪S ⊆ω, s is ﬁnite and S inﬁnite, and n ∈
s ∧m ∈S →n < m; a condition (t, T) is stronger than (s, S) if s ⊆t ⊆s ∪S and
T ⊆S. He included the statement of a lemma that subsets of a generic set are
themselves generic, but did not mention the Solovay model, about which nothing
in the April issue of the Notices of the American Mathematical Society.
Soare spoke on his
results for the April 16–20, 1968 meeting of the American Mathematical Society in Chicago, so
he welcomed the timely update by Galvin which allowed him to strengthen his theorem from
continuous partial functions to Borel measurable functions.
281In their paper [1973], Galvin and Prikry indicated that they were the authors of both notions
of completely Ramsey, and that every family satisfying the version they used in their paper also
satisﬁes the version used by Silver.
282Mathias [1997, 2] noted that Silver had these results prior to Mathias’ departure from Cali-
fornia to Germany at the end of the winter quarter, in March or April of 1968.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
257
had been published at the time. Here is how Mathias stated his theorem in the
abstract:
Theorem:
Con(ZFC + there is an inaccessible cardinal) implies
Con(ZF + DC + ω →(ω)ω
2 ).
He included a note that his work yielded easy proofs of Silver’s results.
Mathias spent 1968–1969 as a visiting lecturer at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, where he interacted with Kunen, his student Booth, and M. E. Rudin.
Ultraﬁlters, especially on ω, were a topic of discussion and Mathias also thought
about MAD families. In June he traveled to Australia where, in a very productive
spurt, he proved several theorems and came up with the notion of happy family283
for families A ⊆P(ω) whose complement P(ω) −A is a free ideal (i.e. it contains
{n} for all n)284 and for any decreasing sequence ⟨Xn : n ∈ω⟩of elements of
A there is X ∈A such that, for all n, if n ∈X then X −Xn ⊆{0, 1, · · · , n}.
Examples of happy families include the family of all inﬁnite subsets of ω, the
complement of the ideal generated by a maximal family of almost disjoint sets,
and a selective ultraﬁlter.285 Mathias generalized Silver’s result, and we present
below a formulation by Andreas Blass [2009, 2583, Theorem 7]:286
If U is a selective ultraﬁlter and if [ω]ω is partitioned into an analytic
piece and a co-analytic piece, then there is a set X ∈U such that [X]ω
is included in one piece.
While Silver [1970a] published his result that analytic sets are Ramsey reason-
ably promptly, the publication of the work of Galvin and Prikry [1973] took longer
to appear.287 As noted above, Mathias submitted an extended version of his ini-
tial proofs to Cambridge University for his fellowship and Ph.D. dissertation. The
above results were included in the published version [1977], but includes additional
results, including a 1971 proof modeled on the classical proof that all analytic sets
283The name happy family was suggested by Crossley.
284This formulation of free comes from Math Review MR0491197 (58 #10462) by Baumgartner.
Todorcevic [2010] calls such families non-principal co-ideals.
285A non-principal ultraﬁlter U on ω is selective if every partition of ω into disjoint sets not
in U has a selector (transversal) in U. Equivalently, U is selective if every function f : ω →ω
becomes one-to-one or constant when restricted to some set in U. Kunen (cf. [Booth, 1970])
showed that selective ultraﬁlters are Ramsey, i.e. whenever [ω]2 is partitioned into two pieces,
there is a set X ∈U included in one piece. Booth and Kunen (cf. [Booth, 1970]) showed several
conditions on ultraﬁlters were equivalent, including selective and Ramsey. Mathias used Ramsey
in his paper.
286The Blass statement is very close to one direction of the theorem stated but not proved
by Mathias in [1972, 210] which appears in a volume whose preface by Hodges was written
November 1971, and a proof of the theorem may be extracted from Section 4 of his [1977].
Mathias’ Theorem 2.2 [1973, 412] is similar to the Blass statement but in the context of Prikry
sequences and ultraﬁlters on measurable cardinals; it was proved during a June 1969 stay at
Monash University, and the resulting paper was received by the journal in September 1969, and
revised the following August. Mathias mentioned in [1977] that these two theorems were proved
at the same time.
287The Galvin-Prikry paper [1973] was received by the journal on October 12, 1971.

258
Jean A. Larson
of real numbers are Lebesgue measurable, which he was inspired to seek after a
conversation with Moschovakis at the Cambridge Summer School in Logic.288
7
1970-1980: STRUCTURES AND FORCING
The talented individuals who passed through the San Francisco Bay Area in the
1960’s enriched mathematical life there and took away new perspectives and tech-
niques to share around the world. Kunen moved to the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, joining M. E. Rudin and graduate students Tall and Booth.
Galvin
moved to the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1968 and to the Univer-
sity of Kansas in 1974. Laver had a post-doctoral position at the University of
Bristol and spent time at UCLA before moving to the University of Colorado,
Boulder, where he joined a large and friendly working group with Malitz, Monk,
Mycielski, Reinhardt, and Walter Taylor.
Mathias moved to the University of
Cambridge with a fellowship at Peterhouse, and Jensen spent time in Oslo, Rock-
efeller, and Oxford. Baumgartner moved to Dartmouth College as a John Wesley
Young Instructor, and joined the faculty at Dartmouth with a one-year leave of
absence spent at Caltech. Mitchell had a post-doctoral position at the University
of Chicago and spent a few years at Rockefeller with Hao Wang and Martin, before
moving to Pennsylvania State University with its longstanding logic group, which
included Jech and Mansﬁeld.
The two problem papers by Erd˝os and Hajnal [1971b], [1974] were valuable
both for their problems and for their comments indicating what had been proved.
The papers grew out of the presentation by Erd˝os at the 1967 UCLA set the-
ory conference, and were circulated in preprint form. The results from the late
1960’s on partitions of inﬁnite subsets of ω by Galvin, Prikry, Mathias, and Sil-
ver ﬁnally appeared and were extended by Ellentuck and others in the 1970’s.
A version of the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem was used to prove a Ramsey theo-
rem for trees. Partition relations with ordinal goals received increased attention,
with a meta-mathematical approach yielding the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem,
that ω1 →(α)2
2 holds for all α < ω1. Interesting ordinal partition relations were
proved, i.e. ones where the resource or set being partitioned has order type a non-
initial ordinal. A series of results about square bracket partitions provided strong
counter-examples to ordinary partition relations and revealed additional structural
information about partitions.
The word “special” entered the language of mathematics for trees and partial
orders which are countable unions of antichains. Consistency was shown for com-
binations of existence and non-existence of various kinds of trees. Embeddings
of trees into the rationals and into the reals were studied, adding to the under-
standing of their fundamental structure. The structure of Suslin trees in terms
of their order was examined in terms of their order embeddings. Milliken proved
288The Cambridge Summer School in Logic (Mathias was the secretary of the organizing com-
mittee, i.e. the main organizer) was my ﬁrst international meeting. There I met Erd˝os, Hajnal,
Kunen, Milner, Prikry, Shelah, Silver and many others for the ﬁrst time.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
259
a partition theorem for strongly embedded trees. Shelah constructed a Country-
man line and increased understanding of linear orders arising as the lexicographic
orderings of Aronszajn trees. Basis questions were examined for linear orderings
which are not a countable union of well-orderings. The statement that all ℵ1-dense
sets of reals are isomorphic was shown to be consistent as was the statement that
2ℵ0 = ℵ2 and there is a linear order of cardinality ℵ1 universal for linear orders of
size ℵ1.
M. E. Rudin [1975b], in a history of attempts to prove the Normal Moore
Space Conjecture through the mid-1970’s, highlighted connections between Aron-
szajn trees and Moore spaces, a thread explored by William Fleissner [1975],289
Devlin and Shelah [1979a], [1979b], Taylor [1981]290 and others. In 1980, Peter
Nyikos [1980b] used the Product Measure Extension Axiom (PMEA) to prove the
consistency of the Normal Moore Space Conjecture. Kunen had shown that the
consistency of PMEA follows from the consistent existence of a strongly compact
cardinal (see [Fleissner, 1984] for a proof). There is more to the history of the
Normal Moore Space Conjecture but at this point the story moves away from our
main themes. We encourage the interested reader to continue the history with the
excellent paper by Peter Nyikos [2001] and learn about further consistency and
independence results there.
7.1
Combinatorial principles
John Truss observed that K¨onig’s Lemma is equivalent to the principle that every
countable set of ﬁnite sets has a choice function, in a paper exploring consequences
of further restriction on the type of branching allowed.
In addition to diamond principles, Jensen [1972] introduced square principles
for the “purpose of carrying out inductions which would otherwise breakdown”
(see page 271) for inﬁnite cardinals κ:291
□κ: There is a sequence ⟨Cλ : λ < κ+⟩deﬁned on limit ordinals λ < κ+
such that
(i). Cλ is a closed unbounded subset of λ;
(ii). if cf(λ) < κ, then |Cλ| < κ;
(iii). if γ is a limit point of Cλ, then Cγ = γ ∩Cλ.
289The topologist Reed, in his Math Review MR0394583 (52 #15384) of Fleissner’s paper
[1975], discussed Jones’ road space S [1953] which he said was introduced as a potential example
of a normal, non-metrizable Moore space. Reed noted “The construction of S was discovered
independently by N. Aronszajn, and it is known to set-theorists as a special Aronszajn tree,”
providing evidence that topologists were more familiar with the version of this construction from
Jones.
290Taylor’s article [1981] was received by the journal in 1979.
291I have changed the notation for cardinality of a set from C to |C| in the statement of □κ for
typographical simplicity.

260
Jean A. Larson
Jensen proved in Theorem 5.2 that if V = L, then □κ holds for every κ. Moreover,
he proved that if V = L and κ is regular, then the weak compactness of κ is
equivalent to stationary reﬂection: if A ⊆κ is stationary in κ, then A ∩β is
stationary in β for some β < κ (see [1972, 287]). Combinatorial consequences of
the existence of a non-reﬂecting stationary subset of κ, i.e. a stationary subset
A ⊆κ such that A ∩β is non-stationary for all β < κ, were quickly found.
For example, under the assumption of V = L, Shelah292 used a non-reﬂecting
stationary set to prove in Lemma 3.1 of [1975] that if λ is a regular uncountable
non-weakly compact cardinal, then there is a graph G on λ so that the coloring
number 293 of the restriction of G to any bounded set is ≤ℵ0 but the coloring
number of G is uncountable.
The remainder of §7.1 is devoted Jensen’s Diamond Principle and its variants,
and many of the results were found by Keith Devlin.294
Devlin [1979b] proved that ♦∗is strictly stronger than ♦. Recall there was a
remark in the handwritten notes of Jensen [1969b] that ♦+ was stronger than ♦∗
since the former implied the existence of a Kurepa tree and the latter did not, but
it was somewhat cryptic, since no proof was given that ♦∗failed to guarantee the
existence of Kurepa trees. The missing piece was ﬁlled in by Devlin [1978]. Using
an idea of Jensen and starting from an inaccessible cardinal, Devlin gave a forcing
construction of a model of ♦∗which has no Kurepa trees. He said on page 292
that Jensen had used the idea to “convince himself that ♦∗does not imply KT,
[the existence of a Kurepa tree], but never wrote up the proof.”
In the 1970’s two variants weaker than ♦were introduced.
Adam J. Os-
taszewski295 [1976] published his proof of the existence of a non-compact, hered-
itarily separable, locally compact, perfectly normal, countably compact space.
While he said in the introduction to his paper that the construction was based
292Saharon Shelah received his 1969 doctorate from Hebrew University where Michael O. Rabin
was his advisor. He is a professor at Hebrew University and also at Rutgers University. While his
main mathematical interests are in logic, especially model theory and set theory, he has broad
interests. Combinatorial set theory has beneﬁted from his deep knowledge of the behavior of
singular cardinals, his development of myriad forcing techniques, and his powerful problem solv-
ing capabilities. His output is dauntingly prodigious, with gems that sparkle for many diﬀerent
groups of mathematicians, including his more that 200 co-authors. He was the ﬁrst recipient of
the Erd˝os Prize in 1977; he received the Israel Prize for Mathematics in 1998, the Bolyai Prize
in 2000 and the Wolf Prize in Mathematics in 2001.
293The coloring number of a graph G on λ is the minimal cardinal µ such that we can order
the vertices of G as ⟨ai : i < ℓ0⟩such that each ai is joined to fewer than µ many aj’s for j < i.
294Keith J. Devlin received his Ph.D. from the University of Bristol in 1971, where his advisor
was Frederick Rowbottom. He was an assistant professor at the University of Bonn 1974–1976, a
reader in mathematics at Lancaster University 1977–1987, visiting associate professor at Stanford
University 1987–1989, chair of the Department at Colby College in Maine 1989–1993, dean at
Saint Mary’s College 1993-2001, and has been at Stanford University since 2001. In addition
to his academic mathematics, he is widely known for sharing mathematics with the public, was
winner of the 2007 Carl Sagan Award for Science Popularization, and is known as “the Math
Guy” on National Public Radio.
295Adam J. Ostaszewski received his doctorate in 1973 from the University of London where
his advisor was Claude Ambrose Rogers. He is a reader in the Department of Mathematics at
the London School of Economics where his current research focuses on mathematical ﬁnance.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
261
on Jensen’s ♦, he actually introduced an ostensibly weaker principle, ♣, which
suﬃced for his proof (see [1976, 507]):
♣: There is an increasing sequence of countable limit ordinals λα in-
dexing a sequence ⟨s(λα) : ω ≤α < ω1⟩where s(λα) is an ω sequence
coﬁnal in λα, such that every uncountable subset of ω1 contains one of
them.
His paper includes a proof that ♦is equivalent to CH + ♣, which he attributes to
Devlin in private correspondence (see also Devlin [1974]296). Ostaszewski stated
that it was not known whether ♣was consistent with the negation of the Contin-
uum Hypothesis, and he pointed out that it is not diﬃcult to show that it is false
in the presence of MA + ¬CH.
At the end of the 1970’s, Baumgartner and Shelah gave diﬀerent proofs that ♣
is weaker than ♦by forcing over models of V = L to get a model in which ♣holds
but CH does not. Shelah [1980c, §5],297 [1998, Chapter 1 §7] ﬁrst added ℵ3 Cohen
subsets of ω1 and then used ﬁnite conditions to collapse ω1 to ω. Baumgartner,
in an unpublished note,298 added many Sacks reals side-by-side with countable
support. See [Hruˇs´ak, 2001] for a proof of that ♣holds in this model.
Devlin and Shelah [1978] introduced the Weak Diamond Principle,299 which
states that for each f : ω1>2 →2 there is a g ∈ω12 such that for any h ∈ω12,
the set {α ∈ω1 : f(h↾α) = g(α)} is stationary. This principle is a consequence of
Jensen’s ♦, and Devlin and Shelah showed it follows from the inequality 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1.
Their motivating application was Whitehead’s problem on abelian groups, and
they also applied it to ladder systems.
Several people, including Baumgartner, independently showed that the Weak
Diamond Principle is equivalent to the cardinal inequality 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 from which
it had been derived. A proof appears in a paper by Taylor [1981, §3] which was
received by the journal in 1979 and discusses weak diamond type statements and
the Normal Moore Space Conjecture.
Next, the discussion turns to the diamond variations that live on stationary
sets. Recall that for a cardinal λ and a stationary subset E ⊆λ, ♦∗(E) is the
statement that there is a sequence ⟨Wα ⊆P(α) : α ∈E⟩with |Wα| ≤α for all but
a bounded set of α ∈E such that for all X ⊆λ, there is a closed unbounded set
C ⊆λ with X ∩α ∈Wα for all α ∈C ∩E. John Gregory [1976, 666] in Lemma
2.1 proved the following:
296Shelah [1980c] credits both Burgess and Devlin with the equivalence of ♦with ♣+ CH.
297The paper [Shelah, 1980c] was received by the journal December 24, 1978 and, in revised
form, December 16, 1979. In an email of January 13, 2011, he recalled that he proved the result
in 1977 shortly after learning of the problem from a list by Fleissner.
298Shelah and Dˇzamonja [1999] brieﬂy discuss the history of the problem, noting that Baum-
gartner’s proof was given shortly after Shelah’s. They list further extensions and answer questions
of S. Fuchino and M. Rajagopalan on variants of ♣.
299The principle, denoted Φ in [1978], was named the Weak Diamond Principle in Devlin’s
survey [1979b].

262
Jean A. Larson
Gregory’s Theorem:
For regular cardinals κ and µ, if κµ = κ and
2κ = κ+, then for the stationary set E = E(κ+, µ) of all ordinals less
than κ+ of conﬁnality µ, the principle ♦∗(E) holds.300
Speciﬁcally, if GCH holds and cf(κ) > µ for µ regular, then ♦∗(E(κ+, µ)). Thus,
if GCH holds, for all regular uncountable cardinals κ, ♦(κ+) holds.
In his survey article [1979b], Devlin reported on Shelah’s result [1977] that it is
consistent with GCH to have disjoint stationary sets E, F ⊆ω1 such that ♦(E) is
true and ♦(F) is false.
7.2
Transversals and cardinal arithmetic
At the 1974 International Congress of Mathematicians in Vancouver, individu-
als mentioned in this history were well-represented among the invited speakers:
Barwise, Hajnal, J´onsson, Milner (plenary), Rado, Shelah, Silver. In addition,
Yiannis Moschovakis was an invited speaker, and Leo Harrington, Martin and
Prikry attended (see [Shelah, 1976]).
Milner [1975] spoke on transversals and included a discussion on various inﬁnite
extensions of Hall’s Theorem. Milner had started working on transversals in the
1960’s. He and Shelah [1975] extended transversal theory to regular uncountable
cardinals in a paper for the proceedings of the colloquium held at Lake Balat´on
in 1973 dedicated to Erd˝os on his 60th birthday. They showed that if κ is weakly
compact, F is an indexed family of κ sets each of cardinality less than κ, and every
subsequence of F of smaller cardinality has a transversal, then so does F. They
also proved that the converse of this statement holds in L. They went on to prove
a negative stepping up theorem for transversals.
Shelah [1975], in the same volume, tackled the case for strong limit cardinals.
For example, he showed (see Theorem 4.6) that if κ is a strong limit cardinal of
coﬁnality ℵ0 and λ < κ, and if F = ⟨Fi : i ∈I⟩is a system of κ sets each of
cardinality < λ, and if every subsystem of < κ sets has a transversal, then so does
F. Shelah also gave a criterion of an inductive kind which provided necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for an arbitrary family of countable sets to have a transversal.
At the Vancouver meeting, Silver [1975] spoke on his groundbreaking new result
on the singular cardinals problem, that if 2ν = ν+ holds on a stationary set of
cardinals below κ, a singular cardinal of uncountable coﬁnality, then it also holds
at κ. Since this result is discussed in Kojman’s chapter, we only include here a few
remarks about connections with individuals working in combinatorial set theory.
Several mathematicians were involved in ﬁnding alternative proofs and gener-
alizations of Silver’s result. An elegant and purely combinatorial proof was found
independently by Prikry, Baumgartner, and Jensen. The proof by Baumgartner
and Prikry [1976], [1977] used a result of Erd˝os, Hajnal, Milner [1968] as the base
case.
300Note that Gregory is using conﬁnality as Hausdorﬀdid, rather than the now standard coﬁ-
nality.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
263
Galvin and Hajnal301 [1975], working independently of one another, proved
what has become known as the Galvin-Hajnal Theorem.
Galvin-Hajnal Theorem [1975, 492, Corollary 5]: Let ℵα be a singular
strong limit cardinal of uncountable coﬁnality. Then 2ℵα < ℵγ where
γ =
 2|α|+.
This result is a corollary of their Theorem 1, which relied on the notion of
a family F of almost disjoint transversals of a sequence ⟨Aα : α < κ⟩, where
transversals f and g are almost disjoint if {α : f(α) = g(α)} is bounded. Their
Theorem 2 is a stronger result, obtained by replacing the ideal of bounded subsets
with the non-stationary ideal to deﬁne a well-founded partial order, f <NSκ g
iﬀ{α : f(α) ≥g(α)} is non-stationary. The rank function associated with this
partial order is now known as the Galvin-Hajnal rank.
Theorem 2 has as corollaries Silver’s result and its immediate generalizations. It
stimulated further work302 by Shelah [1980b, 56], who wrote that he was continuing
[Galvin and Hajnal, 1975].
Shelah [1978b] applied the Galvin-Prikry ideas to
J´onsson algebras, and he [1994, xi] said the following:
My interest in cardinal arithmetic started in 1975, having heard the
theorems of Silver, Galvin, Hajnal and others, on bounds, proved in
ZFC, for cardinal exponentiation, and Jensen’s discovery of the cover-
ing theorem. I felt then that I had come too late to the game (later I
have felt to be alone actively interested in it.)
This story is continued in Kojman’s chapter on cardinal arithmetic.
7.3
Partition relations on cardinals and ordinals
This section starts with a discussion of the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem and
related results. Then the following topics are discussed in turn: ordinary partition
relations in which the resource is a cardinal, ordinal partition relations, and square
bracket partition relations.
The Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem
We begin with a special case:
301The Galvin-Hajnal paper was received September 25, 1974, a mere month after the August
21-29, 1974 Vancouver meeting at which Silver spoke. Galvin and Hajnal thanked Silver and
Prikry for communicating their results to them, and point out that they use Prikry’s ideas (see
[Baumgartner and Prikry, 1976]). For a nice exposition of their work, see the teaching blog of
Andr´es Caicedo or his forthcoming book.
302See [Jech, 1995], Kojman’s chapter on cardinal arithmetic, and the ﬁnal chapter of [Holz et
al., 1999] for more on the relationship between the Galvin-Hajnal theorems and Shelah’s work
on cardinal arithmetic.

264
Jean A. Larson
Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem for ω1: For all α < ω1 and k < ω,
ω1 →(α)2
k.
The full Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem solved a series of questions raised by Erd˝os,
Hajnal and Galvin303 about partitions of pairs from ω1 and partitions of pairs from
λ, the order type of the real numbers. Before stating the full theorem, we review
these problems and partial results leading up to it.
Problem 10 of [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1971b] asks, under the assumption of GCH,
whether ωρ+1 →(ξ, ξ)2 for all ξ < ωρ+1 and all ρ, and Problem 11 asks a parallel
partition relation for λ, the order type of the reals: does λ →(α)2
k hold for all
ﬁnite k and countable α? In addition, Problem 10/A asks three speciﬁc instances
of ω1 →(αi)2
k for ordinals αi ≤ω2 and ﬁnite k, and Problem 11/A asks a parallel
series of speciﬁc questions about instances of λ →(αi)2
k.
Hajnal [1960, Theorem 8] had shown that, in the presence of CH, ω1 →(ω ·
2, ω ·k)2 for every ﬁnite k. In a letter to Erd˝os and Hajnal cited in a note added in
proof to [1971b], Galvin informed them that he had proved ω1 →(ω · 3)2
2. Prikry
[1972] proved ω1 →(ω2, α)2 for α < ω1, which completely solved Problem 10/A,
since for any ﬁnite sequence ⟨αi : i < k⟩of countable ordinals, there is a countable
ordinal α such that α →(αi)2
k.
Laver [1975], during his time at Bristol 1969-1971, used MAℵ1 to prove a par-
tition relation equivalent to
ω1 →(ω1, (ω : ω1))2.
This means that every graph on ω1 either has an uncountable independent set or
has a pair of sets B and C where B has type ω, C has type ω1, and all pairs
{x, y}̸= with x ∈B and y ∈C are joined.
Laver’s proof was the ﬁrst use of
Martin’s Axiom to prove a partition relation, and a forerunner of the proof of the
Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem.
Prikry [1972] in the Corollary on page 78 proved (in ZFC) a partition relation
closely related to Laver’s result from MAℵ1. Below I have named it and restated
it in an equivalent form.
Prikry’s Theorem:
For all countable ordinals α, ω1 →(α, (ω : ω1))2.
By the time Erd˝os and Hajnal were correcting the proofs of their problem paper
[1971b], Galvin had already shown that for every real type ϕ, the partition relation
ϕ →(α)2
2 holds for all countable α. Erd˝os and Hajnal, after stating Galvin’s result,
commented that all the known results for λ, the order type of the reals, hold for
order types in which neither ω1 nor ω1∗is embeddable (let us temporarily call
303In a November 2010 telephone call, Baumgartner recalled visiting Galvin in his Berkeley
oﬃce in the 1960’s where he had three boxes of papers on the ﬂoor. Galvin would occasionally
open one of the boxes and reveal a paper on Erd˝os type problems. Baumgartner said that for
many years, Galvin was the one he went to in order to learn the status of such problems.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
265
such types pseudo-real types). Erd˝os and Hajnal asked in Problem 12 if one can
prove a partition relation of the form λ →(θ1, θ2)2 which does not hold for some
uncountable pseudo-real type ψ and some order types θ1 and θ2.
Erd˝os and Hajnal review some of the history of the generalization of the question
to order types in their follow-up problem paper [1974, 272], noting that the topic
was extensively studied by Galvin, “and it is fair to say that even the general
conjecture is due to him.” Among Galvin’s “old theorems” they list the implication
that if ϕ ↛(ω)1
ω, then ϕ ↛(ω, ω+1)2. Consequently, the order types ϕ satisfying
ϕ →(α)2
2 for all countable α, must satisfy ϕ →(ω)1
ω.
This property of order types, singled out by Galvin, turned out to be the key:
Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem for order types:
For all α < ω1 and
k < ω, if ϕ →(ω)1
ω, then ϕ →(α)2
k.
Since λ satisﬁes the partition property λ →(ω)1
ω, these results provided solutions
to Problems 10/A and 11 of the Erd˝os-Hajnal problem paper [1971b].
Baumgartner and Hajnal [1973] used a meta-mathematical argument.
They
started by using Martin’s Axiom to prove the desired partition relation and then
used an absoluteness argument to show that the use of MA is inessential. Baum-
gartner and Hajnal cited Silver [1966], [1970b] as the source of the absoluteness
argument. Baumgartner and Hajnal did not use MA directly, but instead cited
two lemmas. Lemma 1 [1973], due to Solovay (cf. [1971]), is the fact that under
MAβ, for any ﬁnite k and any indexed family {A(i, ξ) : i < k∧ξ < β} of partitions
S
i<k A(i, ξ) = ω of ω, there are an inﬁnite set X ⊆ω and a function f : β →k
so that X is almost included in every A(f(ξ), ξ). Lemma 2 [1973], due to Kunen
[1968], is the fact that under MAβ, any family of at most β many functions from
ωω can be eventually dominated.
Galvin [1975] presented a combinatorial proof of the Baumgartner-Hajnal The-
orem for ω1 in the clear and elegant style for which he is known. He ﬁrst isolated
in his Theorem 1 a combinatorial statement about a ﬁxed partition of 2-element
chains of a partially ordered set stating that there is a family of its subsets with
suﬃcient closure properties to derive the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem in both
its cardinal and order type forms. In the same paper he used Theorem 1 to prove
that if ϕ is a partial order type and ϕ →(η)1
ω, where η is the type of the ratio-
nals, then ϕ →(α)2
k for all k < ω and α < ω1. Note that the partitions under
consideration are partitions of 2-element chains, rather than arbitrary 2-element
subsets. This result led to increased interest in order types with this property.
Galvin stated some open problems, including the question of whether ϕ →(ω)1
ω
implies ϕ →(α)2
k for all k < ω, all α < ω1 and all partial order types ϕ. He also
generalized the result of Erd˝os and Rado [1956, 472] that ω1 →(ω + 1)r
k for ﬁnite
r, k, by replacing ω1 by a partial order P such that P →(ω)1
ω.
Cardinal resources
While the classical work on ordinary partition relations for cardinals was essentially
done in the sixties [Erd˝os et al., 1965] and the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem came

266
Jean A. Larson
in the ﬁrst half of the decade, additional results appeared in the 1970’s.
Shelah [1973] used GCH to partially extend the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem
to successor cardinals by showing that if |γ|+ < κ and κ is regular, then κ+ →
(κ+γ)2
2. Rebholz [1974] applied morasses to show that Shelah’s result was optimal
for successors of successor cardinals under GCH by demonstrating that
ℵα+2 ↛(ℵα+1 + ℵα)2 holds if V = L.
Consistently, the continuum may have rather diﬀerent partition properties from
ω1. Kunen [1971] announced that if κ is real-valued measurable, then κ →(κ, α)2
for all α < κ. Thus, since Solovay [1971] established the consistency of the con-
tinuum being a real-valued measurable cardinal, 2ℵ0 ↛(2ℵ0, α) cannot be proved
for ω + 2 ≤α < ω1 without some hypothesis on the size of the continuum.
Ideals were used to prove other partition relations of the form 2κ →(2κ, α)2 for
some α < κ. A κ-ideal is a non-trivial ideal of subsets of κ which is κ-complete.
Laver called a κ-ideal I (λ, µ, ν)-saturated if every family of λ many I-positive
sets (i.e. ones not in the ideal) has a subfamily of size µ such that the intersection
of any subset of the subfamily of size at most ν is also I-positive. Laver [1978b]
proved that if there is a (κ, κ, γ)-saturated κ-ideal and βγ < κ for all β < κ, then
κ →(κ, α)2 for every α < γ+.
He further showed how to force the existence
of such ideals starting with a measurable cardinal, with a sample consequence
being the consistency, relative to a measurable cardinal, of the partition relation
2ω1 →(2ω1, α) for all α < ω2.
Laver [1975, 1936] proved that if there is a Mahlo cardinal κ, then there is a
forcing extension in which 2ℵ0 = κ is weakly Mahlo and 2ℵ0 ↛(2ℵ0, (ω : 2))2.
Baumgartner [1976a, 434, Theorem 7.1] started with a model in which κ and
λ are regular cardinals with κ ≤λ, and ♦κ if κ is not inaccessible, and forced to
get 2κ ≥λ while preserving coﬁnalities and arranging that in the extension the
following partition relation holds for all regular µ ≥κ++ and every β0 < κ+:
µ →(stationary µ, (β0 : stationary µ))2.
Note the close relationship with Prikry’s Theorem.
Recall that Hajnal [1960] had shown with CH that ω1 ↛(ω1, (ω : 2))2, a
refutation of a possible extension of the Dushnik-Miller Theorem. Baumgartner
[1976a, 436, Theorem 7.2] used forcing to prove the consistency of κ+ ↛(κ+, (ν :
2))2, where 2ν = κ+. Laver [1975, 1033] proved that if Martin’s Axiom holds and
2ℵ0 = ℵ2, then 2ℵ0 ↛(2ℵ0, (ω : 2))2 (this result was later and independently found
by Hajnal).
Stephen G. Simpson304 [1970] came up with a model-theoretic proof of the
Erd˝os-Rado theorem which was incorporated into the classic text Model Theory
304Stephen George Simpson (1945 – ) received his doctorate in 1971 from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology where his advisor was Gerald Sacks.
He is currently a professor at
Pennsylvania State University.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
267
by C. C. Chang305 and H. Jerome Keisler306 [1973].
Baumgartner [1975a] updated the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem by proving a canonical
version of the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem: Write κ →∗(λ)n if for every f deﬁned on
[κ]n, there is a ﬁnite set ∆⊆n and a subset B ⊆κ of order type λ such that
f(x) = f(y) for all subsets x = {x0, x1, . . . , xn−1}< and y = {y0, y1, . . . , yn−1}<
of B for which xi = yi for all i ∈∆. Baumgartner proved that
 expr(2<κ)
+ →∗(κ + (r −1))r,
using regressive functions together with ideas from the proof of the Erd˝os-Rado
Theorem [1956].
Shelah [1975] solved Problem 3 of [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1971b] by showing that
if n(i) (i < ω) is a sequence of integers such that ℵω < κ0 < κ1 < · · · , where κi =
2ℵn(i), then P{κi : i < ω} →(ℵω, ℵω)2. To do so, Shelah proved a Canonization
Lemma, a special case of which is given below in a modern formulation.
Shelah’s Canonization Lemma: Suppose that ⟨κξ : ξ < µ⟩is an expo-
nentially increasing sequence307 of inﬁnite cardinals with κ0 ≥τ, µ, ω
for a cardinal τ ≥2. Then for any disjoint union A = ˙S{Aν : ν < µ},
any sequence ⟨Fν ⊆P(Aν) : ν < µ⟩, and any coloring f : [A]2 →τ,
if |Aν| > 2κν and Fν sustains308 Aν over κν for all ν < µ, then
there is a sequence ⟨Bν ∈Fν : ν < µ⟩weakly canonical with re-
spect to f with |Bν| = κν+ for all ν < µ, i.e. f(u) = f(v) whenever
u, v ∈[S{Bν : ν < µ}]2 and |u ∩Bν| = |v ∩Bν| ≤1 for every ν < µ.
Given a disjoint union A = ˙S{Aν : ν < µ}, a coloring f : [A]2 →2 and an
exponentially increasing sequence ⟨κξ : ξ < µ⟩with κ0 ≥µ, ω and |Aν| > 2κν for
all ν < µ, the sequence ⟨Fν : ν < µ⟩where Fν is the set of X ⊆Aν of size κν+
which are homogeneous for f has the property that each Fν sustains Aν, so by
Shelah’s Canonization Lemma, there are Bν ⊆Aν of size κν+ for ν < µ such that
⟨Bν : ν < µ⟩is weakly canonical with respect to f. Moreover it is canonical with
305Chen Chung Chang (October 13, 1927 – ) received his doctorate from the University of
California, Berkeley, in 1955 where his advisor was Tarski.
The title of his dissertation was
Cardinal and Ordinal Factorization of Relation Types. He spent a postdoctoral year 1955–1956
at Cornell University where a spring seminar by J. Barkley Rosser led him to work on MV-
algebras, moved to University of Southern California in Los Angeles the following academic year
where he was an assistant professor, and in July 1958, joined the faculty of the University of
California, Los Angeles, retiring in 1990. For more on his early career and working habits, see
[Chang, 1998].
306Howard Jerome Keisler (December 3, 1936 – ) received his doctorate from the University
of California, Berkeley, in 1961 where his advisor was Tarski. He is now an emeritus professor
at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. He is known for his work in model theory and non-
standard analysis, especially for his calculus text book [1976] using non-standard analysis, which
is currently available from his homepage.
307A sequence ⟨κξ : ξ < µ⟩is exponentially increasing if ξ < ν < µ implies 2ξ < 2ν.
308We say G ⊆P(C) sustains C over κ if for every subset X of C of cardinality (2κ)+, there
is a Y ∈G so that Y ⊆X and |Y | = κ+.

268
Jean A. Larson
respect to f since f(u) = f(v) whenever u, v ∈S
ν<µ Bν and |u ∩Bν| = |v ∩Bν|
for all ν < µ.
Since µ is a cardinal, there is some subset M ⊆µ of full cardinality such
that B′ = S
ν∈M Bν has the property that every 2-element subset of B′ with two
elements from a single block among {Bν : ν ∈M} receive the same color. With
this ﬁnal reduction, the same color equivalence relation has a nice description with
respect to the block structure: a 2-element set has the same block color if both
elements come from the same block, and have the (ξ, ζ)-block color if one element is
from the ξth block and the other from the ζth block. Clearly this approach can be
extended to more colors, and one could ask that the coloring of pairs across blocks
be induced by a canonical equivalence relation on µ, if that makes sense. It does
not have the simplicity of the Erd˝os-Rado canonization of equivalence relations
on 2-element subsets of ω, where any same color equivalence relation was equal to
one on their list when restricted to some inﬁnite subset of ω.
However, the point of the canonization lemma was not simply to show that
the partition could be made canonical. Below we mildly paraphrase the theorem
Shelah derived from his canonization lemma [1975] to make the names of the
cardinals better match our statement of his canonization lemma:
Shelah’s Singular Cardinal Partition Relation:
If µ →(µ)2
2, µ = cf λ,
⟨2κ : κ < λ⟩is not eventually constant, but is eventually ≥λ, and
χ = P
κ<λ 2κ, then χ →(λ)2
2.
Ordinal partition relations
In the late sixties and early seventies, a variety of partition results of the form
ωn →(ωm, k)2 for ﬁnite values of n, m, k were found by Galvin, Hajnal,309 Milner,
and Labib Haddad and Gabriel Sabbagh [1969b], [1969a], [1969c]. The article by
Milner [1971] gave a good exposition of this work including its history, and even
included a proof of ω5 →(ω3, 6)2, which was then unknown. While open questions
remain, Milner’s student, Eva Nosal settled more cases [1974], [1979]]:
Theorem:
1. If 1 ≤ℓ< ω, then ω2+ℓ→(ω3, 2ℓ)2 and ω2+ℓ̸→(ω3, 2ℓ+ 1)2.
2. If 1 ≤ℓ< ω and 4 ≤r < ω, then ω1+r·ℓ→(ω1+r, 2ℓ)2 and
ωr+r·ℓ̸→(ω1+r, 2ℓ+ 1)2.
Galvin exploited Specker’s counter-example ω3 ̸→(ω3, 3)2 to the full.
For
ordinals α and β, α can be pinned to β, in symbols, α →β, if there is a mapping
π : α →β such that for every X ⊆α of order type α, its image, f[X], has order
309Erd˝os and Hajnal, in their problem paper [1971b, 21–22], attribute to Galvin and Hajnal
independently a uniformization result which implies that for all 3 ≤k, n < ω, there is a least
f(k, n) such that ωn ↛(ωk, f(k, n))2.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
269
type β.310 Using pinning onto ω3 in a paper with Jean Larson, he [1975] proved
that α = ωβ satisﬁes the relation α ̸→(α, 3)2 for every decomposable countable
ordinal β ≥3.
The ﬁrst additively indecomposable countable ordinal not covered by the Specker
and Galvin results is ωω. Chang proved [1972] that ωω satisﬁes the partition rela-
tion ωω →(ωω, 3)2. This was the ﬁrst major breakthrough in partition relations
for countable ordinals since Specker’s initial positive result for ω2 and negative
result for ω3 in the mid-1950’s. Chang’s result was reported in the Erd˝os-Hajnal
problem paper [1971b, 22] in a note added in proof and dated May 1970. Chang’s
58-page paper [1972] in which this result appeared included a note that Milner had
generalized the proof to show ωω →(ωω, m)2 for all m < ω and, added in proof,
that Larson had a much shorter proof.311 The $250 dollars that Erd˝os awarded for
this result was the highest he had awarded to that time; Chang used the money
to purchase a motorcycle.
Erd˝os and Hajnal [1971a] stimulated interest in partition relations for uncount-
able ordinals with a paper in which they investigated partition relations for small
ordinal powers of uncountable cardinals. They asked in Problem 13 of their prob-
lem paper [1971b] whether the following partition relations hold in the presence
of GCH:
ω1
2 →(ω1
2, 3)2 and ω1 · ω →(ω1 · ω, 3)2.
Hajnal [1971] published elegant proofs from the Continuum Hypothesis that the
answer is no by proving that
ω1
2 ↛(ω1
2, 3)2 and ω1 · ω ↛(ω1 · ω, 3)2.
Larson312 [1998] showed the partition relation is consistent with the failure of CH
by proving it from the assumption that the dominating number 313 d is ω1. More
generally, Hajnal showed that if κ = λ+ is the successor of a regular cardinal and
2λ = λ+ = κ, then κ2 ↛(κ2, 3)2 and κ · λ ↛(κ · λ, 3)2.
Baumgartner [1975b] then extended the ﬁrst result to the successor κ of a
singular cardinal λ for which 2λ = λ+ = κ by proving κ2 ↛(κ2, 3)2. He also
showed that for a strong limit cardinal κ, the partition relation κ2 →(κ2, m)2 for
ﬁnite m holds if and only if (cf κ)2 →((cf κ)2, m)2 holds.
310Rotman [1970] introduced this notation for the notion used by Specker [1957] to transfer
his negative partition result for the resource ω3 to ωn for all ﬁnite n ≥3. Rotman proved that
no countable ordinal pinned to a larger countable ordinal and conjectured that no ordinal could
be pinned to a larger ordinal. In a surprising result on the structure of ordinals, Carlson [1984]
showed that in the presence of the Continuum Hypothesis, ωω+2
1
pins to coﬁnally many ordinals
in ω2.
311See Larson’s thesis [1972], [1973], and, for a particularly nice exposition, Neil Williams’s
book [1977, Chapter 7, Section 3].
312Larson remembers hearing Hajnal’s beautiful proof from Galvin at UCLA in the early 1970’s.
313A family Y ⊆ωω is dominating if for every function f ∈ωω there is a function g ∈Y such
that f ≤∗g. The dominating number d is the minimum size of a dominating subfamily of ωω
and can consistently be less than 2ℵ0. For more on this cardinal invariant, see §5 of the chapter
by Stepr¯ans.

270
Jean A. Larson
Kunen (cf. [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974, 274]) proved that if κ is real-valued mea-
surable, then κ2 →(κ2, 3)2.
Baumgartner and Larson (cf. [Larson, 1975]) proved that if κ is weakly compact
and α < κ satisﬁes α →(α, m)2, then κ · α →(κ · α, m)2.
Square bracket partition relations
While square bracket partition relations were introduced in the 1960’s,314 we have
postponed discussion of this relation to the 1970’s to consolidate the results of the
two decades.
A nice positive result by Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado is Theorem 22 (iii) [1965,
149] of which we state a special case that introduces a useful variant of the basic
notation: For κ a singular strong limit cardinal of coﬁnality ω and 2 < γ < ω,
κ →[κ]r
γ,2, i.e. for any coloring of the pairs of κ with γ colors, where 2 < γ < ω,
there is a subset of size κ so that all but at most two colors are omitted.
Recall that we introduced, in §6.7, the following GCH negative result by Erd˝os,
Hajnal and Rado Theorem 17 [1965, 145]:
ℵα+1 ↛[ℵα+1]2
ℵα+1.
Hajnal [1997, 365] called Theorem 17 a test result and noted that they later
discovered that this “was known to Sierpi´nski in a diﬀerent context.”
Erd˝os,
Hajnal and Rado also proved stronger Theorems 17a, 18 [1965, 145–146].
In the proceedings of the 1967 UCLA set theory conference, Solovay [1971]
proved a result with a square bracket consequence: every stationary subset of a
regular cardinal κ can be split into κ many pairwise disjoint stationary sets. Thus
if κ > ℵ0 is regular then a witness that κ ↛[κ]ω
κ can be obtained by taking a
partition S = S{Sα | α < κ} of a stationary set S into disjoint stationary sets,
and deﬁning the coloring f : [κ]ω →κ by letting f(s) be the unique α such that
sup(s) ∈Sα.315
Erd˝os and Hajnal asked, in Problem 15 of their problem paper [1971b], if one can
prove without the Continuum Hypothesis that 2ℵ0 →[ℵ1]2
3. Blass [1972]316 and
Laver317 independently proved, without using CH, that ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
3. The Blass
counter-example, in essence, superposed three linear orders of size ℵ1: a well-
ordering of length ω1, the lexicographic ordering of the elements of an Aronszajn
tree, (T, <lex), and the usual ordering < of the reals on a subset A of size ℵ1
chosen such that (A, <) is order-isomorphic to (A, >) and such that every subset
Y ⊆A has a countable subset X ⊆Y for which X ∩[a, b) ̸= ∅for all a < b from
Y . Blass noted that subsequently Galvin and Shelah [1973] improved the result to
314See §6.7 for the deﬁnition of the basic square bracket partition relation.
315This idea is used in Theorem 2 of the paper [1976, 370] by Galvin and Prikry who attribute
it to Solovay and list it as unpublished.
316The paper was received April 25, 1971, and in revised form, February 25, 1972.
317Laver proved this partition relation in 1969 but did not publish it; it is attributed to him by
Dow in his review [1989, 637] of several articles of Todorcevic.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
271
ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
4, using the same partition. He also generalized the result to show that
if κ is regular and accessible and there is a κ-Aronszajn tree, then κ ↛[κ]2
3.
Recall that for a regular cardinal κ, a κ-Suslin tree is a tree of height κ all
of whose chains and antichains have cardinality < κ. Jensen [1972, Lemma 6.6,
296] reported that Soare (corrected to Shore in the erratum) proved that if κ is
a regular uncountable cardinal and there is a κ-Suslin tree, then κ ↛(κ)2
r,γ for
r < γ < κ, and attributed the case r = 2 and γ = 3 to Martin.
Erd˝os and
Hajnal [1974, 274] reported that Richard Shore [1974] proved that if κ is regular
and there is a κ-Suslin tree, then κ ↛[κ]2
κ.318 Since Jensen showed that if V = L,
then for regular uncountable cardinals κ, there is a κ-Suslin tree if and only if κ is
not weakly compact, Shore’s result gives a characterization, under the assumption
of V = L, of the regular uncountable cardinals for which κ ↛(κ)2
r,γ holds for
r < γ < κ. Erd˝os and Hajnal [1974, 274] also reported that Shore proved that
ω2 ↛[ω2]3
ω1 holds in L.
Baumgartner [1975b] proved that for regular κ, if κ2 →(κ2, 3)2, then there is
no κ-Suslin tree.
Galvin and Prikry [1976] gave a short proof of the equivalence of a cardinal κ
being J´onsson and the square bracket partition relation κ →[κ]<ω
κ , updating the
result of Erd˝os and Hajnal [1966].
Galvin [1971] (see also [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974, 275]) proved that if ϕ ≥ωω is
an order type which embeds neither ω1 nor the order type η of the rationals, then
ϕ ↛[ω, ω2, ω2, ω3, ω3, . . . ]2
ω.
All the order types in question are scattered, so Galvin used Hausdorﬀ’s result that
the scattered order types are the closure of {0, 1} under well-ordered and converse
well-ordered sums. Galvin came up with an especially nice representation in terms
of sets of ﬁnite sequences of non-negative integers and negative ordinals under the
lexicographic order, with an additional property of being good, which will not be
deﬁned here. Then he used the coloring that is now known as the oscillation map:
it takes a pair of sequences ⃗a = ⟨a0, a1, . . . , ak−1⟩, ⃗b = ⟨b0, b1, . . . , bℓ−1⟩}, to the
number of alternations between blocks of elements from {ai : i < k} \ {bj : j < ℓ}
and blocks of elements from {bj : j < ℓ} \ {ai : i < k} as they occur in the list in
increasing order of the union of these two sets. He proved that for ﬁnite positive
n and k with 1 ≤k ≤2n −1, any good subset of type ωn contains a pair with
k alternations. As reported in [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974, 275], the above partition
relation negatively solved Problem 18 [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1971b, 26], which asked
if ωω →[ωω]2
ℵ0 holds. Given that both η and ω1 embed all countable ordinals,
Galvin’s result displayed above is optimal.
The discussion of square bracket relations is continued in the next subsection
where we turn our attention to structural partitions, where the underlying set is
318In the book [Erd˝os et al., 1984, 318], Jensen [1972] and Shore [1974] are both given credit
for κ ↛[κ]2
κ. Shore [1974] also credits Martin for the proof that for regular κ, κ →[κ]2
3 implies
Suslin’s Hypothesis, and in a footnote remarks that after Martin’s discovery, both Jensen and
Silver independently discovered the implication as well as the implication due to Shore that
κ →[κ]2
κ implies Suslin’s Hypothesis.

272
Jean A. Larson
either a tree or the set of rational numbers or real numbers, which have natural
tree representations.
7.4
Ramsey theory for trees
While it was known in the 1960’s that every real in a model obtained by adding
a single Sacks real either contains or is disjoint from a ground model real, Baum-
gartner (cf. [Laver, 1984]) used HLd for ﬁnite d (see §6.1) to show that the same is
true when d side-by-side Sacks reals are added. He asked whether a theorem like
HLd is true for a product of inﬁnitely many trees, because he was able to get the
forcing consequence from such a statement.
In the late 1970’s, Harrington (unpublished, see [Laver, 1984, 386] for the tim-
ing) gave an elegant proof of the Laver HLd Core using forcing. Todorcevic [1995,
54–55] used Harrington’s proof in showing that the appropriate forcing statement
is equivalent to the Laver HLd Core.
In his thesis [1979a], Denis Devlin generalized Galvin’s result η →[η]2
<ω,2 to the
result η →[η]r
<ω,tr and η ↛[η]r
tr, where ⟨tn | n ∈ω⟩is the sequence of tangent
numbers, tn = tan(2n−1)(0), which starts t1 = 1, t2 = 2, t3 = 16, t4 = 272.319
Keith Milliken320 [1975b], [1979] developed a very useful tool in partition theory
for countable structures in his Ramsey theorem for strongly embedded subtrees.
Suppose that (T, <T ) is a rooted, ﬁnitely branching tree whose levels have order
type α and S ⊆T is such that (S, <S) is a rooted tree where <S is the restriction
of <T to S. Let β be the order type of the levels of S. Then S is strongly embedded
in T if there is an order-preserving embedding ℓ: β →α such that (1) if s ∈S is
on level γ in S, then s is on level ℓ(γ) in T; and (2) if u is an immediate successor of
s ∈S when s is regarded as a node of T, then there is a v, an immediate successor
in S of s, such that u = v or u <T v. For (uniformly) d-branching trees of limit
ordinal height α, this is equivalent to the existence of a level preserving map from
the d-branching tree all of whose branches have order type γ.
Milliken’s Ramsey Theorem for Trees:
If (T, <T ) is a ﬁnitely branch-
ing tree of height ω and, for some 1 ≤k < ω, the height k strongly
embedded subtrees of T are partitioned into ﬁnitely many pieces, then
there is a strongly embedded tree S ⊆T all of whose strongly embed-
ded height k subtrees are in the same cell of the partition.
Milliken’s proof used a pigeonhole principle which he described as a reformula-
tion of the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem due to Laver in about 1969. He included a
319A sketch by Todorcevic of the proof of Devlin’s result with some details for n = 2, n = 3
appeared in [1995, 45-47]. Vojkan Vuksanoviˇc [2002] published a beautiful proof of it using Mil-
liken’s Ramsey Theorem for Trees (discussed later in the section). Devlin’s result was generalized
by Dˇzamonja, Larson and Mitchell [Dˇzamonja et al., 2009] to κ-dense linear orders for suitably
chosen uncountable cardinals κ.
For n > 2, the critical numbers rn for these κ-dense linear
orders are larger than those for η.
320Keith Milliken received his doctorate from the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1975
where he was advised by Chang.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
273
proof of it from the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem.
Milliken Pigeonhole Principle: Suppose that d and r are positive in-
tegers and ⟨Ti : i ∈d⟩is a sequence of ﬁnitely branching trees each
branch of which has order type ω. If
[
n∈ω
 Y
i∈d
Ti(n)
!
=
[
j<r
Cj,
then there must be a k ∈r and a sequence ⟨Si : i ∈d⟩of subtrees with
Si strongly embedded in Ti for i < d for which
[
n∈ω
 Y
i∈d
Si(n)
!
⊆Ck.
The Laver HLd Theorem (see §6) is about perfect subtrees rather than strongly
embedded trees. Both versions follow from the Laver HLd Core, and, if starting
from perfect trees, one can obtain perfect strongly embedded trees as well.
Blass [1981] used the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem to verify a conjecture of Galvin
[1968b] by proving the following theorem (due to Galvin for n ≤3):321
Blass Perfect Set Partition Theorem: If P is a perfect subset of Cantor
space and [P]n is partitioned into ﬁnitely many open pieces, then there
is a perfect set Q ⊆P such that [Q]n intersects at most (n−1)! pieces.
Blass noted that the result generalizes to partitions of perfect subsets of the
real line. He ﬁt his result into a wider context by pointing out that Mycielski
[1964], [1967] had shown that any meager set or any set of measure zero in [R]n
is disjoint from [P]n for some perfect set P ⊆R and derived the corollary that if
[R]n is partitioned into ﬁnitely many pieces that all have the Baire property or are
all measurable, then there is a perfect set Q ⊆R such that [Q]n meets at most
(n −1)! pieces. Blass noted that some limitation on the partitions is necessary by
the Galvin and Shelah result [1973] that there is a partition of the pairs of real
numbers into ω many pieces such that the set of pairs of every subset isomorphic
to R meets all the pieces (in the partition calculus notation, λ ↛[λ]2
ω, where λ is
the order type of the set of real numbers).
7.5
Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem
A Ramsey theorem for ﬁnite sums of a ﬁnite set was independently proved in the
late 1960’s by Jon Folkman (unpublished, see [Graham and Rothschild, 1971]),
Rado [1970], and Jon Sanders [1968] which I will call the FRS Finite Sums Theo-
rem, but in the textbook Ramsey Theory [1990] whose statement of the theorem
I paraphrase, it is called Folkman’s Theorem.
321Blass presented his perfect set theorem at a meeting on combinatorial set theory in Aachen
in June 1976.

274
Jean A. Larson
FRS Finite Sums Theorem:
If N is ﬁnitely colored, then there are
arbitrarily large ﬁnite sets S such that the set of all non-repeating
sums from S is monochromatic.322
This theorem is a corollary to Rado’s Theorem for Linear Systems with Posi-
tive Integer Coeﬃcients discussed in §3.2. It is also a corollary of the Graham-
Rothschild323 Parameter Sets Theorem [1971] for which I give a simpliﬁed version
rephrased from [2006].
Graham-Rothschild Parameter Sets Theorem:
Suppose A is a non-
empty ﬁnite alphabet. For all m < k < ω and positive r, there is a
positive n such that whenever [A](n
m) is colored with r colors, there is
a word w ∈[A](n
k) such that {w⟨u⟩: u ∈[A](k
m)} is monochromatic.
Here, for k = 0, [A](n
k) is simply nA and, for k > 0, [A](n
k) is the set of all words
w of length n over the enlarged alphabet A ∪{v0, v1, . . . , vk−1} such that each
variable vi for i < k occurs in w and the ﬁrst occurrence of vi precedes the ﬁrst
occurrence of vi+1 if i + 1 < k. Given a word w in [A](n
k) and a word u of length
k on the alphabet A ∪{v0, . . . , vk}, let w⟨u⟩be the word of length n such that for
all i < n, w⟨u⟩(i) = w(i) if w(i) ∈A, and w⟨u⟩(i) = u(j) if w(i) = vj. Pr¨omel
and Voight [1990] in their discussion of parameter sets point out that the formal
calculus of words, which we used in the above presentation, was introduced by
Klaus Leeb [1973].
Graham and Rothschild [1971] gave many corollaries of their theorem includ-
ing Schur’s Theorem, Rado’s Theorem for Linear Systems with Positive Integer
Coeﬃcients, Ramsey’s Theorem, van der Waerden’s Theorem, the Hales-Jewett
Theorem, the FRS Finite Sums Theorem, and various theorems for aﬃne and vec-
tor spaces. Graham and Rothschild were motivated by a problem of Rota about
vector spaces and in a paper with Leeb [1972] they solve Rota’s problem. In a sur-
vey of developments in Ramsey theory, Graham and Rothschild [1974] attribute
to Leeb the notion of a category having the Ramsey property, extending the range
of structures to which Ramsey theory is applied.
This brief account was informed by Hindman’s account [2006] and the paper of
Pr¨omel and Voigt [1990]. For extensions and other perspectives, Todorcevic’s book
[2010] and the paper [2006] by Carlson, Hindman and Strauss are recommended.
At the end of their paper [1971, 290–291], Graham and Rothschild asked (see §9
Concluding Remark (ii)) if the various inﬁnite versions of certain of their corollaries
322For S = {1, 2, 5}, the non-repeating sums are 1, 2, 5, 1 + 2, 1 + 5, 2 + 5, 1 + 2 + 5.
323Ronald Lewis Graham (October 31, 1935 – ) received his 1962 doctorate from the University
of California, Berkeley, where his advisor was Derrick Lehmer. He had nearly 30 joint papers
with Erd˝os. In addition to being a mathematician of broad interests, he is juggler and a person
who learned to ﬂip a quarter so that it comes up heads on demand. There is a comprehensive
archive of his papers at http://www.math.ucsd.edu/∼ronspubs/ which also includes copies of
some articles about him, including [Kolata, 1981] which was my source for his birth date.
Bruce Lee Rothschild (1941 – ) received his doctorate from Yale University in 1967 where his
advisor was ¨Oystein Ore. He is a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. To learn
more about his mathematics, see [Hindman, 2006].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
275
are valid, and speciﬁcally asked if the positive integers are 2-colored, does there
always exist an inﬁnite subset A such that the sums of all (non-empty) ﬁnite
subsets of A are the same color? Hindman proved the inﬁnite version and the
remainder of this section is focused on Hindman’s solution.
Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem:
For any positive integer k and any
partition of the natural numbers into k classes, N = S
i<k Ai, there are
i < k and an inﬁnite subset X ⊆N such that the sum of every ﬁnite
set of distinct members of X is in Ai.
Hindman gave a delightful account in [2005] of how he came to prove his the-
orem.324 He reported that around 1971, Galvin asked Erd˝os whether there were
any (downward) almost translation invariant ultraﬁlters on N. Erd˝os asked the
question of W. Wistar Comfort, who had been Hindman’s dissertation advisor,325
and Comfort passed the question on to Hindman. Along the way, (downward)
almost translation invariant ultraﬁlter became (upward) almost translation invari-
ant, a simpler problem, which Hindman tackled when he heard that Erd˝os would
be visiting the Claremont Colleges at a time when Hindman was teaching at Cal
State Long Beach. Hindman learned from Erd˝os that the question originated with
Galvin, so Hindman telephoned Galvin to share the proof. Galvin congratulated
him and let him know that he had answered a question diﬀerent from the one orig-
inally asked. The point of the original question was that a positive answer would
provide a simple proof of the truth of a conjecture of Graham and Rothschild
which is now Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem. Hindman then proved that under
GCH, the Graham-Rothschild conjecture implied the existence of a (downward)
almost translation invariant ultraﬁlter, and “with a great deal more eﬀort” [2005,
322] he established the validity of the conjecture by “an elementary but very com-
plicated proof” [2005, 322] (see [Hindman, 1974] for Hindman’s original proof of
the ﬁnite sums theorem). Hindman continues [2005, 323]:
At . . . the end of 1972 . . . Galvin’s (downward) almost translation in-
variant ultraﬁlters were ﬁgments of the continuum hypothesis. Galvin
wanted to know if they really existed, that is, whether their existence
could be proved in ZFC. In 1975 he [Galvin] encountered Steven Glazer
and asked him whether such ultraﬁlters could be shown to exist. Glazer
immediately answered “yes”.
Glazer went on to explain that (1) any compact right topological semi-group has
idempotents; (2) βN326 has a natural operation + extending addition on N which
makes (βN, +) a right topological group; and (3) for p, q ∈βN and A ⊆N,
A ∈p + q if and only if {x ∈N | −x + A ∈q} ∈p. Thus an idempotent in βN is
324The account is part of a printed lecture presented at the international meeting of the Japanese
Association of Mathematical Science on the receipt of its 2003 International Prize.
325Comfort reminisced about Hindman’s graduate student days and their times together over
the years in [Comfort, 2005].
326βN is the Stone-ˇCech compactiﬁcation of N, identiﬁable with the space of ultraﬁlters on N.

276
Jean A. Larson
a (downward) almost translation invariant ultraﬁlter. Galvin told Hindman this
proof in fall 1975, which Hindman identiﬁed in [2005] as the time he fell in love
with the algebraic structure of the Stone-ˇCech compactiﬁcation of a discrete semi-
group, whose structure and applications to Ramsey theory have been the focus of
the remainder of his mathematical career.
Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem received multiple proofs. In addition to the
original proof and the Galvin-Glazer proof (see [Comfort, 1977]) described above,
Baumgartner [1974] published a short proof of Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem
in the same journal and the same year as Hindman’s original proof, and proved
an equivalent version in terms of ﬁnite sets and their unions: if f : [N]<ω →k is
partition into ﬁnitely many parts, there is an i < k and an inﬁnite family S of
disjoint non-empty ﬁnite subsets so that all ﬁnite unions of members of S receive
color i. This theorem is sometimes call the Finite Unions Theorem.
7.6
Inﬁnitary partition relations
We start this subsection with results on inﬁnitary partition relations by Kleinberg
and Kunen and those partition relations growing out of the work of Nash-Williams,
Galvin-Prikry, Silver and Mathias.
Eugene Kleinberg327 studied partition relations for inﬁnite exponents, particu-
larly those of the form κ →(κ)α for κ a cardinal and α an ordinal in his thesis
(see [1970] based on his thesis). By a result of Kunen quoted in Kleinberg’s paper
in a note apparently added in proof, the Axiom of Determinacy (AD) implies that
ℵ1 →(ℵ1)α for all α < ℵ1. Moreover Kleinberg proved that if λ is a regular cardi-
nal smaller than κ and κ →(κ)λ+λ, then κ has a normal ultraﬁlter concentrated
on ordinals of coﬁnality λ. The ultraﬁlter in this case is generated by the subsets
of κ that are unbounded and closed under sups of increasing λ-sequences. Klein-
berg went on to investigate the conditions under which inﬁnite-exponent partitions
admit homogeneous sets of measure one for these measures.
Kleinberg wrote a monograph [1977] on inﬁnitary combinatorics in the theory
ZF + AD + DC with an emphasis on inﬁnite exponent partition relations, the
measures these generate, and ultraproducts by such measures. For more on the
story of inﬁnitary partitions see the chapter by Paul Larson.
Erik Ellentuck [1974] gave a topological proof of Silver’s result that analytic
sets are completely Ramsey, a result that he incorrectly attributed to both Math-
ias and Silver,328 by characterizing completely Ramsey sets as those having the
Baire property with respect to a certain topology on [ω]ω, now called the Ellentuck
topology329 or the exponential topology, and is also known as the Vietoris topol-
327Kleinberg was a student of Martin and graduated from Rockefeller University in 1969. He
was on the faculty of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and then of the State University of
New York, Buﬀalo, where he is now emeritus.
328Recall Mathias [1977] gave new proofs and generalized Silver’s work.
329A neighborhood (s, A) in the Ellentuck topology for ﬁnite part s ⊆ω and inﬁnite part
A ⊆ω with max s < min A is the collection of inﬁnite subsets X ⊆ω with the property that
s ⊆X ⊆s ∪A.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
277
ogy (cf. Todorcevic [2010]). Ellentuck characterized the Silver and Mathias proofs
as using “relatively deep metamathematical notions involving forcing,” while he
characterized his own proof as “using nothing more than the methods of Galvin-
Prikry.” The paper includes a postscript in which the observation of Galvin that
the proof actually shows that all sets in the classical Lusin hierarchy are com-
pletely Ramsey. Independently, Louveau [1974] gave a similar topological proof of
the theorems of Silver and Mathias; Louveau used a Ramsey ultraﬁlter to show
analytic sets are Ramsey.
Milliken [1975a] proved a theorem that generalized both Silver’s analytic sets
are completely Ramsey theorem and Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem. He also
gave a short proof of the theorem of Mathias that if U is a selective ultraﬁlter on ω
and R ⊆[ω]ω, then R is completely U-Ramsey. Taylor [1975], [1976] independently
generalized Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem in the Finite Unions Theorem form
and found canonical equivalence relations for the “same color” equivalence relation.
Here is a modern statement of what has come to be known as the Milliken-Taylor
Theorem. For ﬁnite sets A, B ⊆ω, let us write A ≪B if and only max A < min B.
Milliken-Taylor Theorem:
For any ﬁnite partition [N]r = C0 ∪· · · ∪
Cℓ−1, there is an inﬁnite sequence ⟨an : n < ω⟩of natural numbers
such that for some i < ℓ,






X
i∈I0
at, . . . ,
X
i∈Ir−1
ai


: I0 ≪· · · ≪Ir−1 ∈[N]<ω


⊆Ci.
Jacques Stern [1978] proved an extension of Silver’s result to colorings of the
inﬁnite chains of a complete binary tree and applied his result to a problem of
Brunel and Sucheston for real Banach spaces.
Hillel Furstenberg and Benjamin Weiss [1978] applied dynamical theorems to
product spaces of countably many copies of a ﬁnite set to give new proofs of a
series of combinatorial results including Rado’s generalization of van der Waerden’s
Theorem and Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem.
Taylor [1978] investigated partitions of the pairs from the Cantor space ω2.
He ascribed to Galvin, Mycielski and Silver the statement that every partition
of [ω2]2 into two pieces having the property of Baire has a homogeneous perfect
set. He had learned about it from Baumgartner who proved it independently from
Galvin, Mycielski and Silver, and Taylor noted that Burgess rediscovered it still
later. Taylor proved that if f : [ω2]2 →ω is a coloring for which f −1{i} has the
property of Baire for all i < ω, then there is a perfect set P ⊆ω2 such that either
f is constant on [P]2 or else f induces the same equivalence relation on [P]2 as
the discrepancy partition δ : [ω2]2 →ω deﬁned by δ(⃗x, ⃗y) = min{n : ⃗x(n) ̸= ⃗y(n)}.
7.7
Structure of trees
The structure of trees of height ω1 with countable levels and their embeddings
continued to be an area of intense interest in the 1970’s.

278
Jean A. Larson
Embedding trees in the reals
Baumgartner, Jerome Malitz, and William Reinhardt330 [1970] carried out an iter-
ated c.c.c. forcing with ﬁnite conditions to prove the consistency of the statement
that every Aronszajn tree and every tree-like order of size ℵ1 is embeddable in the
rationals, i.e. is Q-embeddable. Baumgartner, Malitz and Reinhardt had shown
in particular that MA + ¬CH implies that all Aronszajn trees are special.331
While they cited the paper [1937a] in which Kurepa constructed a special Aron-
szajn tree as an example of a paper on embeddings of trees into linear orders, they
seemed unaware that he had shown the equivalence between being special and
having an embedding into the rationals (see §3.4 for details). Most of the work
for their consistency result is in Theorem 3 in which they show that their forc-
ing satisﬁes the countable chain condition. In Theorem 4 they show under the
assumption of MA + ¬CH that every tree-like partial order332 T of cardinality
less than the continuum in which every chain is countable is Q-embeddable. The
paper included announcements of a result by Laver of the existence of a tree of
power the continuum which is R-embeddable but not Q-embeddable such that each
uncountable subset contains an uncountable antichain, and a result by Galvin of
the existence of such a tree which is not R-embeddable (Baumgartner’s thesis is
given as a reference). Baumgartner, Malitz and Reinhardt pointed out that these
examples show the independence of their result over ZFC, since in ZFC + ¬CH,
it is not the case that every tree-like partial order without an uncountable chain
is Q-embeddable. Laver’s example showed that one cannot hope to prove the con-
sistency of the parallel embedding result for tree-like orders of size the continuum,
and the Sierpi´nski poset (see §3.4) showed that one cannot hope to extend the
embedding consistency result to arbitrary partial orders. The paper ended with a
trio of open problems [1970, 1753]:
1. Is it consistent with ZFC to assume that for any partial order P, if card P =
ℵ1 and every uncountable subset of P contains an uncountable antichain,
then P can be embedded in the rationals?
2. (Galvin, unpublished) Is it consistent with ZFC to assume that for any par-
tial order P, if card P = ℵ2 and if every P ′ ⊆P with card P ′ ≤ℵ1 can be
embedded in the rationals, then P can be embedded in the rationals?
3. (Baumgartner) Is it consistent with ZFC + 2ℵ0 = ℵ1 to assume that every
Aronszajn tree is embeddable in the rationals?
330Baumgartner, Malitz and Reinhardt were all students of Vaught, and Malitz and Reinhardt
both had careers at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
331M. E. Rudin [1975b, 513] credited Kunen with having shown that MA + ¬CH implies that
all Aronszajn trees are embeddable in the rationals, and the same is true for tree-like partial
orders. This result is credited to Baumgartner in [Devlin, 1972]. In [Devlin and Shelah, 1978, p.
289], both Baumgartner and Kunen are given credit for proving that under MA + ¬CH, every
Aronszajn tree is embeddable in the rationals.
332A partial order T is tree-like if the set of predecessors of each element is linearly ordered.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
279
For future reference, we note that one can easily use their forcing to arrange for
every Aronszajn tree to have a continuous strictly increasing embedding into the
rationals.
Baumgartner [1970] announced two structural theorems (paraphrased below).
The ﬁrst theorem is that under MA + ¬CH, for every pair of full well-pruned
Hausdorﬀtrees (S, ≤S) and (T, ≤T ) of power ℵ1, there are countable sequences
⟨Sn | n ∈ω⟩and ⟨Tn | n ∈ω⟩of coﬁnal subtrees whose unions give back the
original trees and which are term-by-term isomorphic. The second theorem is that
if V = L[A] for some A ⊆ω1, then there are non-Suslin Aronszajn trees (a) which
are R-embeddable but not Q-embeddable and (b) which are not R-embeddable.333
Devlin, then a student at University of Bristol, heard about Baumgartner’s
results from Laver, who visited Bristol 1969-1971. After stating Theorem 1 with
a review of some known results, in Theorem 2 [1972, 256], Devlin characterized
what he called ω1-trees (but we call full well-pruned Hausdorﬀω1-trees) that have
strictly increasing embeddings into the rationals as the Aronszajn trees that are
the union of countably many antichains, i.e. special Aronszajn trees. This result
is a reiteration of one from [Kurepa, 1940a]. In the same theorem, he proved that
if a full well-pruned Hausdorﬀω1-tree is R-embeddable, then every uncountable
subset contains an uncountable antichain. The proof used the fact that the union
of the successor levels of any R-embeddable tree is Q-embeddable, which was
also observed by Kurepa [1940a]. Devlin generalized both Baumgartner’s result
on the consistent existence of R-embeddable non-Q-embeddable Aronszajn trees
and the Gaifman-Specker [1964] result that under CH there are 2ℵ1 many non-
isomorphic Aronszajn trees by proving that under ♦there are 2ℵ1 non-isomorphic
R-embeddable non-Q-embeddable Aronszajn trees.
Devlin (see pages 256–257)
described his own approach as an adaptation of Baumgartner’s argument “at the
cost of some messy combinatorics” under the inspiration of arguments from Jech’s
paper [1972].
Jech [1972] investigated the automorphism group of ω1-trees and used ♦to
proved the existence of 2ℵ1 pairwise non-isomorphic Suslin trees. He also proved
that it was consistent to assume the existence of 2ℵ1 many pairwise non-isomorphic
Kurepa trees.
Jensen on Suslin trees
Devlin and H˚avard Johnsbr˚aten334 wrote on Jensen’s work on Suslin’s Problem in
their [1974]. In the introduction, the authors noted that the ﬁrst ﬁve chapters were
based on a set of lecture notes written by Jensen in Kiel in 1969. The remaining
ﬁve chapters were based on a set of notes written by Devlin in 1972, which were
based on a set of notes written by Jensen some years earlier.
333Kunen [1980, 90] cited this abstract in his remark that ♦implies that there is an Aronszajn
subtree of the tree of one-to-one functions from countable ordinals into ω which is not special.
334Johnsbr˚aten was a student of Fensted and studied with Jensen but did not complete his
doctoral degree. He is now on the faculty of Telemark University College, in Norway.

280
Jean A. Larson
The ﬁrst half details Suslin’s Problem, the connection with trees, and Jensen’s
♦and gives the construction of a Suslin tree ﬁrst in L using the canonical well-
ordering and then from ♦.
Then ♦is shown consistent both via forcing and
via holding in the constructible universe. Various consistency results are proved
assuming the consistency of ZF, including ZFC + GCH + ¬SH and ZFC + ¬CH
+ ¬SH.
In Chapters 4 and 5, the possible structure of Suslin trees was explored. Under
♦there is a homogeneous Suslin tree, there is one with exactly ω1 automorphisms,
there is a non-reversible (i.e. not isomorphic to its converse) homogeneous Suslin
tree with exactly ω1 automorphisms, a reversible (i.e. isomorphic to its converse)
homogeneous Suslin tree with exactly ω1 automorphisms, a rigid335 Suslin tree,
and a rigid Suslin tree which is reversible. Jensen’s proof that from ♦+ there is a
Kurepa tree is sketched.
In Chapter 6,336 work of Solovay and Tennenbaum on the consistency of Suslin’s
hypothesis is given, along with an introduction to Martin’s Axiom.
The remainder of the book is devoted to the remarkable proof of the consistency
of Suslin’s Hypothesis with CH. Jensen used a method of iterated forcing with
conditions which were not countably closed but did not collapse cardinals and did
not add reals. Todorcevic (cf. [Kurepa, 1996, 8]) called this result “one of the
deepest applications of the method of forcing since its original invention”.
Mix and match
Early in the decade, Jech [1972] asked about the existence of a rigid Aronszajn
tree.
We discussed the results of Jensen on rigid Suslin trees above.
At the
end of the decade, Uri Abraham337 published his ZFC construction of a rigid
Aronszajn tree338 using non-isomorphic Aronszajn trees constructed by Gaifman
and Specker [1964]. The same year, motivated by a question in Kurepa’s thesis
[1935], Todorcevic published his construction of a rigid Aronszajn tree.
By the end of the decade, the consistency of combinations of existence or non-
existence of Suslin trees, existence or non-existence of Kurepa trees, together with
either CH or MA + ¬CH were established.
Devlin had asked whether V = L implies the existence of such a tree in 1969
(see [1983]). In 1971 Jensen (cf. Theorem 4 in [Devlin, 1974]) proved that if V = L,
then there exists a Kurepa tree without an Aronszajn subtree. In the summer of
1980, while at the University of Toronto, Devlin [1983] came up with a simpler
335A structure is rigid if it has no non-trivial automorphism.
336Chapter 6 is essentially the only place where results appear that are not due to Jensen
337Uri Abraham, whose name is sometimes transliterated Avraham, received his 1979 doctorate
[1979b] from Hebrew University where his advisors were L´evy and Shelah. Abraham has a joint
appointment split between Computer Science and Mathematics at Ben Gurion University, Be’er-
Sheva. His interests in set theory and logic include Boolean algebras, forcing and axiomatics
as well as a variety of combinatorial topics. For a sample publication in computer science, see
[1999].
338Baumgartner [1975c] knew of the existence of such a tree already in 1975, but the work was
neither published nor widely publicized.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
281
proof after talking with Fleissner about his work and Kunen’s work on the Normal
Moore Space Conjecture.
The weak Kurepa Hypothesis (wKH) asserts that there is a tree of height ω1
of cardinality ℵ1 which has more than ℵ1 uncountable branches. Mitchell [1972]
proved that the failure of the weak Kurepa Hypothesis is equiconsistent with the
existence of an inaccessible cardinal. In his 1978 Master’s Thesis, Stevo Todorcevic
used techniques of [Mitchell, 1972] and [Devlin, 1978] to construct a model of
MA + ¬wKH and did so in a way that allowed him to make the continuum any
regular cardinal (see [Todorcevic, 1981c]). Todorcevic went on to derive a variety
of topological consequences of MA + ¬wKH.
In a 63-page paper, Devlin [1978] reviewed known work and noted that models
of CH had been constructed (a) with a Suslin tree but no Kurepa tree, (b) with a
Kurepa tree but no Suslin tree, (c) with both a Suslin tree and a Kurepa tree, and
that models of MA + ¬CH for the above possibilities had also been constructed.
The two remaining possibilities were simultaneous non-existence of Suslin trees
and Kurepa trees, either with CH or with MA + ¬CH. As for the latter, Devlin
started with Silver’s model of no Kurepa trees and iterated over it in such a way
so as to produce a model of MA + ¬CH, adapting Silver’s proof that σ-closed
forcing does not add branches to control the addition of branches in this process,
so that no Kurepa trees are added. As in any model of MA + ¬CH, all Aronszajn
trees are special, so there are no Suslin trees. The last half of the paper is devoted
to getting a model of CH with neither Suslin nor Kurepa trees, and Devlin used
an idea of Jensen’s for forcing the consistency of ♦∗and adapted Jensen’s proof
of the consistency of no Suslin trees with CH.
Larger trees
Starting with a Mahlo cardinal, William Mitchell339 [1972] constructed a model
of set theory with no special ℵ2-Aronszajn trees. He introduced the term special
for κ+-Aronszajn trees which are subtrees of the collection of one-to-one functions
into κ whose domain is an ordinal < κ+ ordered by end-extension.
Mitchell’s
deﬁnition diﬀers from our use of special for κ+-trees that are the union of κ many
antichains, which was introduced for κ = ω in §3.4 in the discussion of Kurepa’s
construction of a special Aronszajn tree.340
Mitchell [1972] proved that the non-existence of special ℵ2-Aronszajn trees is
equiconsistent with the existence of a Mahlo cardinal. He used a result, indepen-
dently due to Silver and Rowbottom, which asserted the existence of a sentence
339William J. Mitchell (December 30, 1943 – ) received his doctorate from the University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley, where Silver was his advisor. In [Mitchell, 1972, 22], where he published revised
versions of his thesis work, he also thanked Baumgartner and Solovay for “helpful discussions
and suggestions.”
340Mitchell’s deﬁnition of special recalls the original Aronszajn construction of a subtree of
the one-to-one functions into ω. Such trees need not be special by the modern deﬁnition. Our
deﬁnition (also used by Kunen [1980]) is based on Kurepa’s initial construction of a special
Aronszajn tree; the equivalence of being an ω1-tree which is Q-embeddable is used by Jech
[2003].

282
Jean A. Larson
which has a model of type (κ+, κ) if and only if there is a special κ+-Aronszajn
tree. Since κ+-Aronszajn trees are known to exist for regular κ with 2<κ = κ, it
follows that any model of ZFC which has no special κ+-Aronszajn tree fails to sat-
isfy the cardinal transfer property (ℵ1, ℵ0) →(κ+, κ). Silver extended Mitchell’s
result by showing that for regular κ, there are no κ+-Aronszajn trees if and only
if κ is weakly compact in L. Mitchell’s construction involved a mixed iteration of
length κ adding Cohen reals, so that eventually 2ℵ0 = κ, and collapsing cardinals
below κ to ℵ1, so that eventually κ = ℵ2, but κ retains enough of its weak com-
pactness to guarantee that every tree on ω2 of height ω2 with all levels of size ≤ℵ1
has a branch. For a model created in the presence of a weakly compact cardinal
with iterated Sacks forcing and with no ω2-Aronszajn trees, see [Baumgartner and
Laver, 1979].
In his [1976], Gregory combined work of Jensen and Solovay with Gregory’s
Theorem discussed in §7.1 to construct higher Suslin trees. After stating Theorem
1.3 attributed to Solovay, Gregory included commentary which concluded with
the assertion of the existence of a non-reﬂecting stationary subset of κ from the
existence of a □κ sequence. The commentary was followed with a proof of the result
of Solovay “given in place of a reference.” Gregory stated a multipart Theorem
1.10, attributed to Jensen,341 which among other things says that if κ<κ = κ
and there is a non-reﬂecting stationary set E ⊆κ+ for which ♦(E) holds, then
there is a κ+-Suslin tree and it may be constructed with additional properties
as well. Speciﬁcally, Gregory constructed an ℵ2-Suslin tree using a non-reﬂecting
stationary set consisting of ordinals of coﬁnality ω.
In his doctoral thesis [1979a], [1981d, Theorem 4.1, 240], Todorcevic342 used
CH + □to construct an ω2-Aronszajn tree with no ω1-Aronszajn subtrees and
no Cantor subtrees.343
Devlin asked if CH or GCH was suﬃcient. Todorcevic
showed the answer was no by proving the consistency, relative to the existence of
a weakly compact cardinal, of GCH holds and every ω2-Aronszajn tree contains a
complete binary ω1-tree. He also showed that the proof of Theorem 4.1 generalized
to show that under the assumption of □κ, there is a κ+-Aronszajn tree with no
λ-Aronszajn subtrees for every λ ̸= κ and no ν-Cantor trees for every ν. Moreover,
in Theorem 5.5 [1981d, 249] he showed the consistency, via forcing over a model of
V = L, that for every regular uncountable non-weakly compact cardinal κ, there is
a κ-Suslin tree and there is a κ-Kurepa tree with no λ-Aronszajn subtrees for any
λ and no ν-Cantor subtrees for any ν. Istvan Juh´asz and William Weiss [1978] had
shown that a question of Sikorski344 [1950] of the existence of a κ-metrizable κ-
341See the top of page 667 of [Gregory, 1976] for the attribution of Theorem 1.10 to Jensen.
342Stevo B. Todorcevic earned his doctoral degree in 1979 at the University of Belgrade with
Kurepa as advisor and K. Devlin as outside reader. Devlin attended the defense; his encourage-
ment led Todorcevic to visit Jerusalem where he sat in on Shelah’s lectures on forcing.
343A tree is a κ-Cantor tree if it has height λ + 1 for some cardinal λ ≤κ, the ﬁrst λ levels have
size ≤κ, and the last level has size > κ.
344Roman Sikorski (July 11, 1920 – September 12, 1983) was a student of Mostowski, receiving
his doctorate in 1949 and habilitation in 1950 at Warsaw University.
He was a professor at
Warsaw University 1952–1982, became a corresponding member of the Polish Academy of Sci-

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
283
compact space of power µ was equivalent to the existence of a κ-Kurepa tree with
µ branches and no κ-Aronszajn subtree. Their result combined with Todorcevic’s
Theorem 5.5 gives a consistently positive answer to Sikorski’s question.
7.8
Linear and quasi-orders
We start with a review of results about wqos and bqos. Dick H. J. de Jongh and
Rohit Parikh345 [1977] proved that the ordinal length of a well-quasi-ordered set346
can always be realized in a linear extension.
In a series of papers, Laver [1971], [1973], [1976], [1978a] explored the theory of
bqos.347 In an early example, Laver [1971] proved there are ℵ1 many countable
scattered linear orders with respect to bi-embeddability.348 In a later example,
Laver [1978a] extended the Nash-Williams [1965a] result that inﬁnite trees form
a bqo.
Laver [1978a] called a tree (T, ≤) σ-scattered if it is representable as
T = S
n<ω Tn where each Tn is a scattered349 downwards closed subtree of T,
and denoted the class of these trees by M.350 He proved that M is a bqo under
order-preserving and meet preserving maps (the meet of two elements of a tree is
the largest element which is less than or equal to both of them). He observed that
Aronszajn trees do not form a wqo under ♦and raised the question of whether
it is consistent that Aronszajn trees form a wqo.351 Galvin had shown that the
class of trees of height ω + 1 is not well-quasi-ordered, which led him to ask the
of whether σ-scattered trees are a wqo. Laver proved closure properties for bqos,
proving that if Q is a bqo, then the collection of Q-labeled M-trees is a bqo.
ences in 1962 and a full member in 1967. He was president of Polish Mathematical Society from
1965–1977. He is known for the Rasiowa-Sikorski Lemma. For more on his life, see [Anonymous,
1984].
345Dick de Jongh received his Ph.D. at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, with Kleene as
advisor, and and Rohit Parikh received his Ph.D. at Harvard University with Hartley Rogers,
Jr. and Burton S. Dreben as advisors.
346The ordinal length of a well-quasi-ordered set is the maximum of the order types of its linear
extensions.
347Larson gave a graduate course on Laver’s bqo work at UCLA when she was a Hedrick
Assistant Professor (1972-1974), and remembers enjoyable conversations with him about bqo
theory in the botanical garden.
348Arnold Beckmann, Martin Goldstern and Norbert Preining [2008] generalize Laver’s method
to extend this result of Laver by showing that there are only ℵ1 many countable closed linear
orders with respect to bi-embeddability with continuous monotone maps and apply their result
to show there are only denumerably many G¨odel logics. More speciﬁcally, they show that the
set of countable closed linear orderings is better-quasi-ordered by strictly monotone continuous
embeddability, and the result extends to the case in which the orders are labeled. They deﬁned
“countable closed linear order” as a countable closed subset of the real line.
349Recall from §6.2 that a tree T is scattered if it does not embed the tree of all ﬁnite sequences
of zeros and ones. Note that Laver’s deﬁnition departs from the usual usage of σ as a preﬁx to
denote countable unions taken freely.
350Todorcevic [2007a] writes S for the class of scattered trees and Sσ for the class of countable
unions of scattered trees, which he calls σ-scattered trees.
351Todorcevic answered Laver’s question negatively in [2007a] in which he showed that there is
an inﬁnite, strictly decreasing sequence of Aronszajn trees (he used Lipschitz trees) under the
weaker notion where S ≤T if and only if there is a strictly increasing map from S into T.

284
Jean A. Larson
The theory of wqos and bqos has a wide variety of applications. For example,
Dexter Kozen [1988] used one of Laver’s wqo results [1976] to establish the ﬁnite
model property for the µ-propositional calculus. Montalb´an [2007] used theorems
from [Laver, 1971] in his analysis, mainly from the viewpoints of computability
theory and reverse mathematics, of equimorphism types352 of linear orders.
Laver [1979] examined the question of which linear orders can be embedded
in (ωω, <∗),353 i.e. the functions with domain and codomain ω under eventual
domination, in the absence of the Continuum Hypothesis. CH implies that every
linear order of power continuum is embeddable in (ωω, <∗). Laver pointed out
that it was well-known that one can force the continuum to be large and ω2 not
embeddable in (ωω, <∗). Kunen however noted that MA is consistent with the
existence of a linear order of power 2ℵ0 which is not embeddable in (ωω, <∗).354
Laver [1979, 299] pointed out that “the problem with trying to inductively embed,
using Martin’s Axiom, any linear ordering of power 2ℵ0 into (ω)ω, is the possibility
of creating in the course of construction a ‘Hausdorﬀgap’.” In connection with his
work with W. Hugh Woodin on homomorphisms of Banach algebras, Solovay had
asked if it is consistent that the continuum is large and every linear order of power
continuum is embeddable in (ωω, <∗). Laver answered the question positively by
showing that if κ<κ = κ > ω, then there is a c.c.c. generic extension in which
2ω = κ and the saturated linear ordering of power 2ω is embeddable into ⟨ωω, <⟩.
As in the consistency proof for MA, generic functions fα : ω →ω for α < κ are
added iteratively so that all cuts in their ordering via <∗are eventually ﬁlled.
Mitchell [1972] used trees to answer negatively a question of Malitz [1968]
whether for regular cardinals κ, the existence of a linear ordering of power 2κ
with a dense subset of cardinality κ is true in ZFC.
In answer to a question of Erd˝os and Hajnal [1974, 281–282], Devlin [1974]
proved that if GCH holds and there is a Kurepa tree with no Aronszajn subtree,
then the following statement Φ holds: there is an order type of cardinality ω2 which
embeds neither ω2 nor ω2∗, for which every subtype of cardinality ω1 embeds one
of ω1 and ω1∗. Hence Φ is true in L, by this theorem combined with Jensen’s
construction in L of a Kurepa tree with no Aronszajn subtree, mentioned above in
§7.7. In his thesis [1979a], [1981d], Todorcevic reduced Devlin’s use of V = L to □.
Recall that he had used □to construct an ω2-Aronszajn tree with no ω1-Aronszajn
subtrees and no Cantor subtrees, as mentioned above in the subsection of §7.7 on
larger trees. He showed in Theorem 7.1 [1981d, 254] that Φ is equivalent to the
existence of either a Kurepa tree with no Aronszajn subtree or an ω2-Aronszajn
tree with no ω1-Aronszajn subtrees and no Cantor subtrees. Thus he reduced the
use of V = L to the hypothesis □in Devlin’s result. He also showed one can use
forcing to construct a Kurepa tree with no Aronszajn subtree.
In 1971 Baumgartner announced his result [1973] that it is consistent that all
352Two linear orders are equimorphic if each can be embedded in the other.
353Laver used (ω)ω to represent this collection of functions. Currently, this work would be cast
as a question about P(ω)/ﬁn.
354To learn more about Kunen’s result, see the chapter by Stepr¯ans.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
285
subsets of the real numbers of cardinality ℵ1 which are ℵ1-dense355 have the same
order type. Under the assumption of CH, given a pair of ℵ1-dense sets A and
B, he used diagonal arguments like those of Sierpi´nski [1950] and back-and-forth
arguments to construct partitions of A and B into continuum many countable
sets each dense in the appropriate one of A, B so that the following partial order
satisﬁes the countable chain condition: P is the set of ﬁnite, order-preserving
functions from A to B which send elements of the αth cell of the partition of A to
elements of the αth cell of the partition of B, ordered by inclusion.
Baumgartner iterated this forcing to build a model in which all pairs of ℵ1-dense
subsets of the reals are isomorphic and 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. He then observed that in this
model, a singleton whose only element is an ℵ1-dense set of reals is a basis for the
set of all uncountable real types.
Baumgartner [1973] also posed the following two questions:
• Is it consistent to have all ℵ2-dense subsets of the reals isomorphic?
• Does the statement that all ℵ1-dense subsets of the reals are isomorphic
follow from the assumption of Martin’s Axiom and 2ℵ0 > ℵ1?
Shelah [1980a] used oracle forcing to establish the consistency of 2ℵ0 = ℵ2
together with the existence of a linear order universal in power ℵ1.356
In
his paper Shelah recalled the Baumgartner [1973] proof of the consistency of all
ℵ1-dense sets of reals being isomorphic with a quick sketch and compared and
contrasted his own proof with it. Shelah noted, without proof, that in a model in
which 2ℵ0 Cohen reals have been added, no such linear order universal in power
ℵ1 exists. These results complement the CH construction of a universal linear
order of power ℵ1 by Hausdorﬀin [2005]; see also [1908, 488], [2005, 243]. Shelah’s
consistency result should also be situated with earlier work of model theorists who
had shown that saturated models are universal and that such models of cardinality
λ exist for theories of cardinality < λ when λ = λ<λ. (See Chapter 5 of [Chang
and Keisler, 1973]), and Shelah’s Theorem 0.6 in Chapter VIII [1978a]: T has a
saturated model of cardinality λ if and only if λ<λ + |D(T)| or T is λ-stable.)
In a paper received by the journal in January of 1972, Baumgartner [1976b]
discussed basis problems357 for the class Φ of linear orderings which cannot be
represented as the countable union of well-orderings. He set Φ1 = {ω1∗}, and let
Φ2 be the collection of uncountable real types. Baumgartner noted that Erd˝os and
Rado [1956, 443] had asked if there were uncountable order types which embed
neither ω1 nor ω1∗and do not embed an uncountable real type, and pointed
355A linearly ordered set (P, <) is ℵ1-dense if it has no ﬁrst or last element and between any
pair of points there are exactly ℵ1 elements.
356Recall that a linear (partial) order U is universal in power λ if it is a linear (partial) order
of cardinality λ that homomorphically embeds all linear (partial) orders of cardinality λ.
357Recall that a basis B for a class C of linear orders is a set of linear orders in the class
which has the property that for any element (L, ⋖) of C there is some (K, <) in B which is
order-embeddable into (L, ⋖).

286
Jean A. Larson
out that Specker had answered the question in the positive.358
Baumgartner
called types with these properties Specker types and let Φ3 be the class of them.
Baumgartner showed that every ordering witnessing a Specker type embeds a
linear ordering obtained from an Aronszajn tree under a suitable ordering (such
linear orderings are now called Aronszajn lines, or A-lines). Baumgartner reported
that Galvin had asked whether or not Φ1 ∪Φ2 ∪Φ3 constitutes a basis for Φ, and
Baumgartner identiﬁed a collection he called Φ4 of order types ϕ such that every
uncountable subtype embeds ω1 but ϕ is not the union of countably many well-
orderings.
He answered Galvin’s question negatively when he proved that Φ4
is non-empty. Baumgartner also proved that Φ4 is not a well-quasi-order, does
not have a ﬁnite basis, and contains dense rigid types.
Baumgartner pointed
out a partition calculus application which was likely the motivation for Galvin’s
question: there is an ordering ϕ diﬀerent from both ω1 and λ (any ψ∗with ψ ∈Φ4
works) such that ϕ →(ω)1
ω. If ϕ is such a type, then, by the Baumgartner-Hajnal
Theorem for order types, ϕ →(α)2
k for all α < ω1 and k < ω, so the extra work for
that theorem is justiﬁed. Baumgartner noted out that Φ1∪Φ2∪Φ3∪Φ4 is a basis for
Φ. Let N be the class of all continuous ordinal-valued strictly increasing functions
whose domains are countable successor ordinals, and for f, g ∈N, write f ⊏lex g
if either f has g as a proper end-extension or f precedes g in the lexicographic
order. His main technique was to represent order types as subsets of N under
⊏lex. In Theorem 2.1, he showed that every type ϕ which fails to embed ω1∗can
be represented by (S, ⊏lex) for some S ⊆N such that the tree T(S) := {f ∈N :
(∃g ∈S)(f ⊏lex g)} contains no path of length ω1, and that if |ϕ| is a cardinal
of uncountable coﬁnality, then the desired S may be chosen as a subset of <ω1|ϕ|.
In Proposition 1.4, he showed that if T(S) contains an Aronszajn tree, then the
order type of (S, ⊏lex) contains a Specker type. The paper closed with a list of
problems, of which we give one below [1976b, 221]:
Problem 5:
1. Is ZFC + “Φ3 has a ﬁnite basis” consistent?
2. Is ZFC + “Φ2 ∪Φ3 has a ﬁnite basis” consistent?
Note that the ﬁrst of these problems asks for the consistent existence of a ﬁnite
basis for Specker types, and implicitly asks for a ﬁnite basis for Aronszajn lines,
since, as noted above, every ordering witnessing a Specker type embeds an Aron-
szajn line. Since any uncountable linear order which is the union of countably
many well-orderings must embed ω1, and by deﬁnition every linear order in Φ4
embeds ω1, the addition of ω1 and its converse ω1∗to a ﬁnite basis for Φ2 ∪Φ3
would give rise to a ﬁnite basis for all uncountable linear orderings. So the second
of the above questions implicitly asks if it is consistent that there is a ﬁnite basis
for uncountable linear orders.
358As discussed earlier, in footnote 7 on page 443, Erd˝os and Rado [1956] noted that Specker
had disproved their conjecture after the submission of their paper. Baumgartner listed Specker’s
work as unpublished, and likely the Erd˝os-Rado paper was the source.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
287
In 1974 during the International Congress in Vancouver, Shelah [1976] con-
structed what is now known as a Countryman line,359 namely an uncountable
linearly ordered set, whose square, ordered lexicographically, is the union of count-
ably many chains. Shelah ﬁrst carefully and inductively constructed an Aronszajn
subtree T of the tree S = ω1>Q of all sequences of rationals, partially ordered
by end-extension, which satisﬁed suitable constraints and then passed to a linear
order imposed on T essentially by lexicographically ordering its nodes to obtain a
Countryman line.
Shelah closed his paper with several observations, a sample of which follows.
He noted that if λ = λ<λ, then one could lift his result with λ and λ+ in place of
ℵ0 and ℵ1 by a similar construction. He observed that one can construct the tree
so that it will be special. He commented that any uncountable linear order whose
square is a countable union of chains is a Specker order (i.e. an Aronszajn line).
Consequently it has cardinality ℵ1, something Shelah reported that Countryman
already knew.
Prior to Shelah’s construction of a Countryman line, Galvin had observed that
if I is Countryman, then for all n > 2, the set In can also by covered by countably
many chains deﬁned from those used to cover I2 (Shelah and the referee observed
this later), and that I cannot contain two anti-isomorphic uncountable subsets
(Shelah and Abraham observed this later).
Shelah reported that Harvey Friedman360 asked “for the existence of an inﬁnite
complete order I, such that any open interval of I is isomorphic to I, but I is
not anti-isomorphic to itself.” He then indicated how, with some care, one could
construct a completion of his example with these properties.
Shelah called two linear orders near if they have isomorphic uncountable subsets
and noted that one can use ♦to prove that there are 2ℵ1 pairwise not near orders
each of which is uncountable and whose square can be covered by countably many
chains.
In his ninth and ﬁnal observation, Shelah conjectured the consistency of the
following pair of statements [1976, 114]:
(A) For every Specker order I there is a J near to it which is an uncountable
order whose square is the union of countably many chains.
(B) If I and J are both uncountable orders whose squares are the union of
countably many chains, then I is near to J or its converse order J∗.
Shelah [2000b] later reﬂected back on his mid-seventies interest in the consistent
existence of a ﬁnite basis for the uncountable linear orders, the necessity of such a
basis having ω1, ω1∗, a representative real type, and at least two Aronszajn lines
because of his construction of a Countryman line which is not isomorphic to its
359The name Countryman line refers to R. S. Countryman, Jr., whose unpublished typescript,
dated to 1970 in [Todorcevic, 1984c], included the question of the existence of such a type.
360Shelah included in his references the problem paper [Friedman, 1975], but did not cite it in
the body of the paper.

288
Jean A. Larson
reverse. This problem has become known as Shelah’s Finite Basis Problem or
Shelah’s 5-Element Basis Problem.
8
1980-1990: CODIFICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS
New perspectives were reached in the 1980’s. Shelah [1980a], [1982b] introduced a
generalization of countable chain condition forcings called proper forcing. A partial
order P is proper if it preserves stationary subsets of [λ]≤ω361 for all uncountable
cardinals λ.362 The use of iterated forcing spread, helped in part by a survey article
by Baumgartner [1983a]. In particular, set-theoretic topologists used forcing in an
increasing number of ways. Foreman, Magidor and Shelah [1988] introduced a
maximal form of Martin’s Axiom, called Martin’s Maximum, and proved new
consistency results that led to a paradigm shift in the understanding of large
cardinal strength.
Todorcevic and Boban Veliˇckovi´c363 [1987] reinterpreted many questions in com-
binatorial language leading to new perspectives, including giving an equivalence
of MAℵ1 to a statement about c.c.c. partitions. Abraham, Rubin and Shelah and,
separately, Todorcevic, introduced distinct open coloring axioms. New ways of ob-
taining Suslin trees were discovered, and partition theorems for products of trees
moved into the transﬁnite.
Conferences promoted interactions between set theorists and the communities
built around set-theoretic topology, order theory and (ﬁnite) combinatorics. For
example, the survey by Baumgartner [1982] on uncountable linear order types,
based on a talk at the Ordered Sets conference held in Banﬀin 1981,364 consol-
idated understanding of an area that had been spread out in the literature; an-
other new resource for people interested in order was the book Linear Orderings
by Joseph Rosenstein [1982].
Boolean algebras as a ﬁeld of study matured with the appearance of the three-
volume Handbook of Boolean Algebras: Sabine Koppelberg edited the ﬁrst volume
361The the set of all countable subsets of λ is variously denoted in the literature by [λ]≤ω, Pω1(λ)
and Pℵ1(λ). See [Jech, 2003] for the concepts of closed unbounded subsets and stationary subsets
of [λ]≤ω.
362See [Jech, 2003] and [Abraham, 2010] for more on proper forcing.
363Boban Veliˇckovi´c received his doctorate in 1986 from the University of Wisconsin, Madison,
where his advisor was Kunen. He was a Bateman Research Instructor at Caltech 1986–1987, a
C. Morrey Assistant Professor at the University of California 1988–1989 and 1990–1991, with
the intervening year as a postdoctoral fellow at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
in Berkeley, was an NSERC International Fellow at York University 1992–1994, an associate
professor 1994–1995 before becoming a professor at University of Paris VI, where he is the head
of the logic group.
364This two-week conference organized by Ivan Rival was, as Duﬀus [2003] pointed out in his
obituary of Rival, a “signiﬁcant point in the creation of an ‘order theory community’... with
links to lattice theory, combinatorics, set theory, and computer science”. Subsequent conferences
included Graphs and Order, a NATO Advanced Study Institute held in Banﬀin 1984, Combi-
natorics and Ordered Sets, an AMS-IMS-SIAM Joint Summer Research Conference in Arcata,
California in 1985.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
289
[Koppelberg, 1989], and Monk and Robert Bonnet edited the second and third
volumes [1989a], [1989b]. Connections were made between the study of Boolean
algebras and pcf theory in the following decade (see Kojman’s chapter).
Fra¨ıss´e published Theory of Relations [1986], bringing together work on or-
der and work on relational structures. It included in the ﬁrst eight chapters a
brief review of set theory, fundamental results for the theory of linear, partial
and quasi orders, especially well-quasi-orders, widely applied results in Ramsey
theory including Ramsey’s Theorem, the Nash-Williams Partition Relation, the
Dushnik-Miller Theorem, the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem and Galvin’s work on canon-
ical partitions for pairs of rationals. The second half of the book was devoted to
relational structures and included Fra¨ıss´e’s method of building countable univer-
sal structures through a process of amalgamation of ﬁnite structures that leads to
what is now known as the Fra¨ıss´e limit.
The Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology, edited by Kunen and Vaughan [1984],
popularized many techniques and results of set theory in the set-theoretic com-
munity and made them more readily available to young researchers in both areas.
Juh´asz, in his article on cardinal functions, encouraged other topologists to follow
him in using forcing directly rather than combinatorial consequences in their work.
Baumgartner, in his expository article on applications of proper forcing aimed at
set-theoretic topologists, facilitated the spread of this powerful technique and in-
troduced the Proper Forcing Axiom (PFA), a generalization of Martin’s Axiom in
which the role of c.c.c. partial orders is taken on by proper partial orders. Models
of PFA are non-CH models which have nice combinatorial structure.365 Kunen
focused on ideals in his handbook article on random and Cohen reals and showed
that their eﬀects diﬀer markedly on the meager ideal and the null ideal. Weiss
discussed versions of Martin’s Axiom, its inﬂuence on partial orders, and variants
of the axiom where the partial orders considered are restricted, an area of research
that continued. The volume also presented problems and results of set-theoretic
topology in a way that invited others to work in the area. For example, there were
reports on the Normal Moore Space Conjecture and work coming out of that line
of research (see the chapters by Fleissner, Nyikos, and Tall). Judith Roitman’s
article, Basic S and L, was designed to introduce the reader to an area she de-
scribed as one of the most active in set-theoretic topology for the preceding ten
years, whose key questions are the following.
(S) Is every hereditarily separable space hereditarily Lindel¨of?
(L) Is every hereditarily Lindel¨of space hereditarily separable?
A space is separable if it has a countable dense subset and hereditarily separable if
every subspace is separable. A space is Lindel¨of if every open cover has a countable
subcover and hereditarily Lindel¨of if every subspace is Lindel¨of.
Roitman was
the ﬁrst to formulate these questions in terms of partitions [Roitman, 1978], and
counter-examples will be soon discussed below.
365Todorcevic showed in [1984b] that PFA implies c = ℵ2.

290
Jean A. Larson
Of particular signiﬁcance for this chapter is the survey by Todorcevic [1984c] of
work on trees and linearly ordered sets from set-theoretic, topological and algebraic
perspectives. Elegantly written and comprehensive for its time, it included many
results from Kurepa’s thesis and later works that had been largely inaccessible due
to their appearing in journals not widely distributed.
8.1
Set-theoretic topology
In the 1970’s, set-theoretic topology as a discipline became increasingly visible.
Rudin was an invited speaker at the 1974 International Conference of Mathemati-
cians366 in Vancouver where she spoke on the normality of products,367 and she
gave a series of expository talks at the CBMS Regional Conference held in Laramie,
Wyoming in August 1974 (see Rudin [1975a]).
Rudin [1972] used a Suslin tree to produce the ﬁrst example of an S-space, a
hereditarily separable space which is not hereditarily Lindel¨of. It was well-known
that a Suslin line is an example of an L-space, a hereditarily Lindel¨of space which
is not hereditarily separable.
In 1980, W. Weiss arranged for Todorcevic to come to North America for the
six-week summer school called Settop held in Toronto during July and the ﬁrst half
of August. The summer school featured three two-week sessions each with a ten-
lecture series by a single speaker: Baumgartner spoke on forcing (see his Handbook
of Set-Theoretic Topology exposition of proper forcing [1984]); Devlin spoke on the
constructible universe and combinatorial principles derived from L; Juh´asz spoke
on topology.
Todorcevic shared a room with Abraham.
Both had proved the
existence of rigid Aronszajn trees (see [Abraham, 1979a] and [Todorcevic, 1979b])
in response to a question by Jech [1971].
While they were at the conference,
Abraham and Todorcevic [1984] proved the consistency of MA + ¬CH + there
exists a ﬁrst countable S-space.368 This theorem answered a question of Hajnal
and Juh´asz that the existence of a ﬁrst countable S-space does not imply the
existence of a ﬁrst countable L-space, since by a result of Szentmikl´ossy, none
exist in models of MA.
After the Settop conference, Todorcevic visited Dartmouth College for a few
months during the academic year 1980-1981.369
During that time he [1981a],
366Tall attributed the invitation to Rudin’s construction [1971] of a Dowker space without using
a Suslin tree. See [Rudin, 2008] for recollections of this discovery.
367Rudin [2008] expressed her perspective on normality as follows: “I admit I most enjoy tearing
down structures: proving that reasonable sounding conjectures are false: constructing counter-
examples. Normality is my thing since it seldom has the strength to guarantee your space is not
miserable is some other way.”
368Footnote 1 of [Abraham and Todorcevic, 1984] locates this result in time and space. Roitman
[1984] referenced handwritten notes by Abraham and Todorcevic titled MA and strong properties
of S-spaces and dated 1980. Justin Moore [2006b] constructed a ZFC example of an L-space,
showing that the S-space and L-space problems are surprisingly diﬀerent.
369See the note of gratitude to Baumgartner and thanks to Galvin for a “stimulating corre-
spondence concerning a class of problems about strong partition relations on ω1, a small part of
which is considered in this paper” in [Todorcevic, 1983a, 705].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
291
[1983a] showed the consistency with MAℵ1 of the statement “every regular heredi-
tarily separable topological space is Lindel¨of”, i.e. the consistency of “there are no
S-spaces”, which fulﬁlled the expectations of Hajnal and Juh´asz [1974, 837] who
asserted that “it is quite likely that the existence of such spaces is independent of
the usual axioms of set theory. In fact, Martin’s axiom + the negation of CH is a
candidate to imply that no such spaces exist.”370
At the end of the decade, Todorcevic published a monograph, Partition Prob-
lems in Topology [1989]. He observed that proof techniques developed for solving
the S-space problem and the L-space problem turn out to be useful in many other
problems in general topology, writing “this is so because Ramsey-type theorems
are basic and so much needed in many parts of mathematics and (S) and (L) hap-
pen to be Ramsey-type properties of the uncountable most often needed by the
topologist” [Todorcevic, 1989, 1].
A key part of Suslin’s Problem is the chain condition, an important concept for
the 20th Century with many close ties with inﬁnite combinatorics, so the book
Chain Conditions in Topology [1982] by Comfort and Negrepontis was a welcome
new resource. They gave background in inﬁnite combinatorics, in particular, ex-
amined generalized chain conditions useful for products of spaces among other
topological concepts. Speciﬁcally, the book includes a proof of Kurepa’s result
that the product of two Suslin continua does not satisfy the countable chain con-
dition, and the Galvin construction, under the assumption of 2κ = κ+, of pairs of
partial orders on κ+ with all antichains of size at most κ but whose product has
an antichain of size κ+. Comfort and Negrepontis worked largely in ZFC, with
occasional use of the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis.371
In 1941, Marczewski and Knaster wrote in the Scottish Book what it means for
a topological space T to have the property (S) (of Suslin): every family of disjoint
sets, open in T, is at most countable. Then, under his original name of Szpilrajn,
he inscribed a problem in the Scottish Book (see [Mauldin, 1981, 265–266]) which
I have named and quoted below:
The Szpilrajn Problem:
Is the property (S) an invariant of the Carte-
sian product of two factors?
Recall that Kurepa [1952] showed that the square of a Suslin line fails to have
the countable chain condition. Thus, if the product of two c.c.c. partial orders is
370Gary Gruenhage, in his 1981 Math Review MR0588816 (81j:54001) of A survey of S- and
L-spaces by Juh´asz [1980], stated “The question of the existence of S- and L-spaces is one of the
most important open problems in set-theoretic topology.” Rudin also surveyed the subject in
[1980]. In her article for the Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology, Roitman [1984, 297] referred
to the S-space and L-space existence problems as “a natural outgrowth of Suslin’s hypothesis
and of investigations of properties of metric, semi-metric, and Fr´echet spaces,” and attributes the
modern form independently to Countryman and to Hajnal and Juh´asz, without giving references.
Todorcevic [1989, 12–13] brieﬂy discussed the history of the problem, and pointed to a series of
papers by Hajnal and Juh´asz [1967], [1968], [1969] from which an early modern statement of the
problem may have arisen.
371In his Math Review MR0665100 (84k:04002), Blass expressed regret that the book did not
discuss independence results.

292
Jean A. Larson
always c.c.c., then there are no Suslin trees.
Galvin [1980] proved that if λ is a regular cardinal and the square bracket
partition relation λ →[λ]2
3 holds, then for any two partially ordered sets satisfying
the λ-chain condition, their product also satisﬁes the λ-chain condition.372 MAℵ1
implies that the product of c.c.c. partially ordered sets is also c.c.c. (see Theorem
2.24 in [Kunen, 1980, 61].) Galvin also proved that if κ is an inﬁnite cardinal such
that 2κ = κ+, then there are two partially ordered sets satisfying the κ+-chain
condition whose product does not. The two papers of Todorcevic [1985b], [1986b]
contain the ﬁrst ZFC examples of pairs of partial orders which satisfy the κ-chain
condition but whose product does not, in particular for κ = cf(2ℵ0), κ = b (the
bounding number373) and κ = (2ℵ0)+ω+1. Shelah [1988a] gave such examples for
every successor cardinal > ℵ1.
8.2
Partition relations
The authors, Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado, of the classic paper [1965] on the partition
calculus were joined by Attila M´at´e in writing a compendium [1984] on the topic. It
is the place to go for the deﬁnitions of the various partition symbols; care was taken
to use modern notation and to express what is known without the assumption of
the GCH. In the preface, the authors delimit the scope [Erd˝os et al., 1984, 6]:
There are many interesting assertions that are consistent with set the-
ory without the axiom of choice but contradict this latter, and there
are many important theorems of set theory plus some interesting ad-
ditional assumptions, e.g. the axiom of determinacy, that is known
to contradict the axiom of choice. We did not include any of these;
unfortunate though this may be, we had to compromise; we attempted
to discuss inﬁnity, but had to accomplish our task in ﬁnite time.
Cardinal resources
Todorcevic [1983a] proved the consistency of a strong partition relation for ω1, of
which ω1 →(ω1, α)2 for all α < ω1 is a special case. More speciﬁcally, Todorcevic
introduced the partition relation ω1 →(ω1, (ω1; ﬁn ω1))2, used forcing to prove the
consistency of this partition relation with MAℵ1 + 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. He derived multiple
consequences, the most well-known of which is the consistency of the non-existence
of S-spaces. More pertinent to this chapter is that fact that from the assumption
of MAℵ1 and ω1 →(ω1, (ω1; ﬁn ω1))2, he proved in Theorem 4 [1983a, 716] that
for every partition [ω1]2 = Ko ∪K1, either there is an uncountable subset A ⊆ω1
all of whose pairs are in K0 or for every α < ω1, there are B, C ⊆ω1 such that
372Recall that Galvin and Shelah [1973] had shown that λ →[λ]2
3 does not hold for λ ∈
{ℵ1, 2ℵ0, cf(2ℵ0)}.
373A family Y ⊆ωω is unbounded (under eventual domination) if for every function f ∈ωω
there is a function g ∈Y such that g ̸≤∗f. The bounding number b is the minimum size of
an unbounded subfamily of ωω. For more on this cardinal invariant, see §5 of the chapter by
Stepr¯ans.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
293
B has order type α, C is uncountable, and all pairs {β, γ}< with β ∈C and
γ ∈B ∪C are in K1. This consistent partition relation is considerably stronger
than its easily stated consequence ω1 →(ω1, α)2 for all α < ω1. These results
shed light on possible consistent extensions of the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem
for ω1, that ω1 →(α)2
k for all α < ω1 and k < ω.
Laver [1982], starting from a huge cardinal, forced to get a model in which
ω1 carries an (ℵ2, ℵ2, ℵ0)-saturated ideal (cf. §7.3) and derived interesting conse-
quences for the partition calculus, including the consistency of
ω2 →(ω1 + ω1 + 1, α)2.
Kanamori [1986] surveyed partition relations of the form κ+ →(α)2
δ for regular
cardinals κ, with an emphasis on δ = 2. First he reported that Donder [1982] had
used Jensen’s covering lemma to show that if κ > ω2 is a successor cardinal with
κ−as its cardinal predecessor, 2κ−= κ and 0# does not exist, then κ+ ↛[κ : κ−]2
κ
(recall the colon notation in a partition relation was deﬁned in §6.7). Next, given a
weakly compact cardinal κ, Kanamori [1986] noted the ordinary partition relation
κ+ →(κ : η)2
2 holds by applying the square bracket polarized partition relation
 κ+
κ

→
 η
κ

,
which was stated without proof by Chudnovsky [1975], with proofs supplied by
[Wolfsdorf, 1980], Shelah, and [Kanamori, 1982]. Kanamori [1986, 156] then asked:
Question 2.2:
If κ is weakly compact, does κ+ →(κ + κ)2
2?
Kanamori also considered successors of measurable cardinals, but found that the
existence of a suﬃciently saturated ideal suﬃced for his purposes. Building on
a deﬁnition in the Cardinal resources subsection of §7.3, call a κ-ideal I a Laver
ideal if every family of κ+ many I-positive sets has a subfamily of size κ+ such
that the intersection of any subset of the subfamily of fewer than κ sets is also
I-positive. Then, if κ<κ = κ and there is a Laver κ-ideal, then for every α < κ:
κ+ →(κ + κ + 1, α)2.
Since measurable cardinals carry such ideals, they satisfy the positive partition
relation. Laver [1982] had only outlined a proof in his paper of the consistency of
the existence of such ideals; Kanamori [1986] rediscovered the proof, and included a
proof with permission from Laver. At the end of the paper, Kanamori noted that
the positive partition relation could consistently hold at a non-weakly compact
inaccessible cardinal, since it can be veriﬁed that a saturated ideal constructed by
Kunen [1978] on such a cardinal is a Laver ideal. Kanamori [1986, 161] focused
attention on the boundary of knowledge about these partition properties:
Question 2.5:
If κ is measurable, does κ+ →(κ + κ + 2)2
2?374
374Foreman and Hajnal have proved that the answer is yes in Theorem 39 of their [2003], which
gives κ+ →(ρ)2
m for ﬁnite m and ρ below a large bound.

294
Jean A. Larson
Todorcevic [1986a] showed the consistency relative to the existence of a weakly
compact cardinal of the partition relation 2ℵ0 →(2ℵ0, α)2 for all α < ω1, and in-
dicated how to modify the argument to obtain the consistency of 2ℵ1 →(2ℵ1, α)2
for all α < ω2. He also gave a forcing argument for cardinals κ of uncountable
coﬁnality that κ →(κ, ω + 2)2 may hold. The context for this relation includes
Hajnal’s proof [1960] that under CH, 2ℵ0 ↛(2ℵ0, (ω: 2))2 and consistency re-
sults in [Baumgartner, 1976a], [Laver, 1975] that this result holds under stronger
hypotheses, for various values of the continuum.
Milner and Prikry [1986] used MA + ¬CH to prove
ω1 →(ω + m, 4)3.
By absoluteness arguments like those used in the metamathematical proof of the
Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem, the use of MA + ¬CH may be eliminated. This
positive partition relation was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant progress on partitions of triples
of countable ordinals since the paper of Erd˝os and Rado [1956].
Ordinal partition relations
Erd˝os continued to focus attention on partition relations of the form α →(α, m)2
through oﬀering money. In 1985, he [1987] oﬀered $1000 for a complete character-
ization of those countable ordinals α for which α →(α, 3)2. Ordinals α, countable
or not, which satisfy this partition relation have come to be called partition ordi-
nals (see [Schipperus, 1999]).
Larson [1980] used the combinatorial structure of a lexicographic representation
of the ordinal ω1ω+1 to prove a partition relation for an ordinal with inﬁnite
exponent:
ω1
ω+1 ↛(ω1
ω+1, 3)2
In connection with a 1985 meeting held at Humboldt State University, Baum-
gartner and Hajnal [1987] proved a variety of ordinal partition relations involving
simple ordinal products of cardinals, some of which are listed below:
• If κ is a regular cardinal and 2κ = κ+, then (κ+)2 ↛(κ+ · κ, 4)2.
• If κ is a singular cardinal of coﬁnality τ and 2κ = κ+, then κ+·τ ↛(κ+·τ, 3)2
(i.e. κ+ · τ is not a partition ordinal).
• If κ is a regular cardinal and κ<κ = κ, then (κ+)2 →(κ+ · κ, 3, 3)2.
In a 1987 meeting held in Toronto, Baumgartner [1989] focused attention on
partition ordinals by showing that the existence of uncountable partition ordinals
is consistent. Under the assumption of MA + ¬CH, he proved two simple products
were partition ordinals and asked the simplest open question suggested by these
results:

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
295
• ω1 · ω →(ω1 · ω, 3)2.
• ω1 · ω2 →(ω1 · ω2, 3)2.
• Question:
Is it consistent that ω12 →(ω12, 3)2?
Shelah and Lee J. Stanley [1987] gave proofs of several partition relations for
ordinal products of cardinal numbers and we list some representative examples.
• Assume CH. Then ω2 · ω →(ω2 · ω, 3)2.
This is a solution to Problem 13 [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1971b, 24].
• It is consistent to have ¬CH + ω2 · ω ↛(ω2 · ω, 3)2.
The proof used forcing with ﬁnite conditions.
• It is consistent to have GCH + ω3 · ω1 ↛(ω3 · ω1, 3)2.
The proof used historic forcing.375
• Assume that the existence of a weakly compact cardinal is consistent. Then
so is GCH + ω3 · ω1 →(ω3 · ω1, k)2 for all k < ω.
• Question:
Does c · ω →(c · ω, 3)2?
In his thesis, Tadatoshi Miyamoto [1988, 67-94] gave a morass construction
of a partition witnessing ω3 · ω1 ↛(ω3 · ω1, 3)2, which had earlier been proved
by forcing by Shelah and Stanley [1987]. The existence of such a construction
had been conjectured by Stanley and Daniel Velleman among others. Miyamoto’s
morass was a simpliﬁed morass, but had some extra structure, similar to linear
limits. During a July 1988 meeting in Oberwolfach, Stanley and Velleman tried
to understand Miyamoto’s proof and, in the process, they came up with their
own construction of a witness to the negative partition from a simpliﬁed (ω2, 1)-
morass with linear limits, but used a complete amalgamation system in place of
the rest of Miyamoto’s extra structure. Later they learned that Charles Morgan
had independently found essentially the same proof which they published together
in [1991]. Assuming 2ℵ1 = ℵ2, it is known that if both ℵ2 and ℵ3 are successor
cardinals in L, then there is such a simpliﬁed (ω2, 1)-morass with linear limits. It
follows that, assuming 2ℵ1 = ℵ2, the positive partition relation ω3·ω1 →(ω3·ω1, 3)2
holds only if either ℵ2 or ℵ3 is inaccessible in L.
Square bracket partition relations
Todorcevic [1981d] developed methods for constructing uncountable trees while
controlling the type of their subtrees and applied his tree results to prove con-
sistency results for the partition calculus. In particular, he proved from □κ the
375The process of historicization of na¨ıve conditions was introduced in [Baumgartner and Shelah,
1987] to prove consistency results for superatomic Boolean algebras, without use of the name.
The Shelah-Stanley paper was the ﬁrst to introduce it oﬃcially according to Ros lanowski and
Shelah [2001].

296
Jean A. Larson
stepping up negative square bracket partition relations as given below when κ > ω
is regular, 2 ≤r < ω, r < λ0 ≤κ, ω < λξ ≤κ and λξ regular for 0 < ξ < ν:
κ ̸→[λξ]r
ξ<ν
implies
2κ ̸→[λξ + 1]r+1
ξ<ν .
The statement of this square bracket result was added in proof to the Erd˝os,
Hajnal, M´at´e, Rado [1984, 323] compendium.
In the early 1980’s the expectation was that ZFC results like the Galvin-Shelah
result [1973] that λ ↛[λ]2
ω for λ the order type of the reals and ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
4
discussed above would not extend all the way to a GCH result that ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
ℵ1
(see Theorem 17 in [Erd˝os et al., 1965, 145]). Thus the proof of the partition
relation ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
ℵ1 by Todorcevic [1987] was a wonderful shock that introduced
a wide audience to the walks on ordinals and the oscillation function.
Todorcevic was a Miller Fellow at the University of California, Berkeley, when in
May 1984 his came up with a new proof of the existence of a Countryman line.376
A key ingredient was the method of walks on ordinals, which Todorcevic devised
walking on stairs in one of the libraries on the Berkeley campus, trying to think
of a way to attach something ﬁnite to a pair of countable ordinals. We think of
ladders as a way to climb up. Imagine having a nice ladder system on ω1, say a
♦-sequence ⟨Sα : α < ω1 ∧α limit⟩. Descending sequences of ordinals are ﬁnite.
One can “walk down” from a large δ to a smaller γ in stages δ0 = δ, δ1, . . ., δk = γ,
where at each stage i + 1, you move from δi to the least ordinal δi+1 in Sδi \ γ.
But if δ = γ + ω, the set Sδ \ γ is a subset of {γ + n : n < ω}, and if γ /∈Sδ, then
the recursive deﬁnition breaks down in an easily ﬁxable way: from η + 1, walk to
η. Todorcevic called a sequence ⃗C = ⟨Cξ : 0 < ξ < κ⟩a c-sequence if each Cξ is a
closed unbounded subset of ξ. In practice, Cη+1 = {η} for every successor ordinal.
If the coﬁnal subsets for limit ordinals consist of successor ordinals, then the walk
from a limit ordinal to a smaller one has at least one intermediate step.
Todorcevic obtained the partition relation ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
ℵ1 in September 1984,
lectured on it in the Berkeley seminar that fall, wrote up the notes of his lectures
and circulated them in January 1985.
Todorcevic produced colorings of the pairs of countable ordinals with countable
ordinals that had large range on every uncountable set, for three notions of large:
contains a club, contains a cobounded set, is all of ω1.
He showed that from
one such mapping, one could deﬁne mappings of the other kinds, and the same
interdeﬁnability was true for mappings from [ω1]2 to ω whose range on every
uncountable set is all of ω.
To deﬁne a function from pairs of countable ordinals into ω that realizes all
colors on every uncountable subset, Todorcevic used the oscillation function osc :
ωω →ω ∪{ω} deﬁned by letting osc(x, y) be the cardinality of the set of all n
for which x(n) ≤y(n) and x(n + 1) > y(n + 1). Recall that Galvin [1971] had
376Recall that the original construction of a Countryman line by Shelah [1976] also involved
construction of an Aronszajn tree. This is not an accident since given any Countryman line L,
every countably branching partition tree (development) of intervals under ⊆whose leaves are
singletons must be an Aronszajn tree. See Baumgartner’s survey [1982] to be discussed in §8.6.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
297
used an instance of this mapping as discussed in the subsection of §7.3 on square
bracket partition relations. Todorcevic [1984a] had used this function to deﬁne
interesting partitions of nice subsets of the Baire space ωω. His article [1988b] for
the proceedings for the Logic Colloquium 1986 held in Hull is an exposition of
the use of the oscillation function, and he proved that on any unbounded subset
of the monotonically increasing functions in ωω linearly ordered under eventual
domination, the oscillation function attains all possible values.
In his concluding remarks, Todorcevic [1987, 287] wrote: “The key idea of
our coloring can roughly be stated as follows: If the set of interesting places is
stationary then in any unbounded set we can ﬁnd α < β such that walking from β
to α along the Cξ’s we pass through at least one interesting place.” He pointed out
that several papers had already been written using the methods of his circulated
notes including [Hajnal et al., 1987], [Shelah, 1988b], [Shelah, 1990a], and [Shelah
and Stepr¯ans, 1987] (see [Todorcevic, 1987, 288]). The applications of the ideas
in this seminal paper are manifold; see the densely packed book by Todorcevic
[2007b] for some of them.
Shelah, in a paper entitled Was Sierpi´nski right? I [1988b] built on the work
of Todorcevic to show the consistency of 2ℵ0 →[ℵ1]2
3 relative to the existence of
an Erd˝os cardinal. Shelah’s result answered a question of Erd˝os and Hajnal in the
negative: the Sierpi´nski partition witnessing 2ℵ0 ↛[ℵ1]2
2 cannot be generalized
from two colors to three colors in ZFC.
Shelah [1989] proved that it is consistent that for every order type θ and cardinal
κ, there is an order type ψ such that ψ →[θ]2
κ,2.
8.3
Structural partition relations
In a paper dedicated to the celebration of the 80th birthday of Deuber, Rado [1986]
published a new proof of the the Canonical Ramsey Theorem for [N]n, showing
that it is a corollary of the original Ramsey Theorem. Deuber [1989] surveyed
results on partition regular linear systems that ﬂowed from Rado’s dissertation
[1933], keeping this research area alive. Interesting generalizations to other types
of partitions and the equivalence relations arising from them were proved, but
because they tend to be diﬃcult to state, no others will be included in this history.
Conﬁrming a conjecture of Galvin [1975],377 Todorcevic [1981b], [1985a] si-
multaneously generalized the Baumgartner-Hajnal theorem that for linear orders,
ϕ →(ω)1
ω implies ϕ →(α)2
k for all α < ω1 and k ∈ω, and the Galvin [1975]
partial order result that P →(η)1
ω implies P →(α)2
k for all α < ω1 and k ∈ω.
Todorcevic Poset Partition Theorem: P →(ω)1
ω implies P →(α)2
k for
all α < ω1 and k ∈ω.
The ﬁrst step in the proof was a reduction from partition problems for partial
orders (P, <P ) to partition relations for trees via passage to one of σP and σ∗P,
377In a brief note, Todorcevic [1985a, 4] thanked Galvin for many valuable communications
concerning the problems listed in Galvin’s paper [1975].

298
Jean A. Larson
where σP is the collection of all increasing maps from ordinals into P and σ∗P
is the collection of maps from σP whose domain is a successor ordinal. Both σP
and σ∗P are trees under end-extension. The operation σP was ﬁrst considered by
Kurepa [1935], who observed that σP is a tree and constructed his ﬁrst Aronszajn
tree as a subtree of σQ. The hypothesis P →(ω)1
ω, when P = T is a tree, becomes
the condition that T is non-special. The second step consisted of showing that for
non-special trees T of cardinality less than the pseudointersection number p, the
desired partition relation holds. The ﬁnal step is elimination of the hypothesis on
the cardinality of the trees via a forcing argument.
The paper included proofs of generalizations of classical partition relations
to higher cardinals, trees and partial orders.
For example, the Dushnik-Miller
Theorem for ℵ1 is generalized to non-special Aronszajn trees: non-special tree
→(non-special tree, ω +1)2. Also, the classical partition theorem c+ →(ω1 +2)2
ℵ0
is generalized, for partial orderings P satisfying P →(ω1)1
c, to P →(ω1 + 1)2
ℵ0.
In response to a question by Baumgartner, Laver [1984] generalized HLd for
ﬁnite d to HLω, a perfect subtree version of the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem for
inﬁnitely many trees. The notation here was introduced in §6.1.
Laver HLω Theorem:
If ⃗T = ⟨Ti : i < ω⟩is a sequence of rooted
ﬁnitely branching perfect trees of height ω and Qω ⃗T = G0 ∪G1, then
there are j < 2, an inﬁnite subset A ⊆ω, and downwards closed perfect
subtrees T ′
i of Ti for i < ω with QA T ′
i ⊆Gi.
In addition to proving this theorem, Laver showed that it is equivalent to the
following two statements:
1. If Pκ is the partial ordering for adding κ side-by-side Sacks reals with count-
able supports, then every subset of ω in the extension contains or is disjoint
from some inﬁnite subset of ω in the ground model.
2. If ⟨fi : i < ω⟩are continuous functions from the Hilbert cube [0, 1]ω into
[0, 1], then there exist non-empty perfect sets Pi ⊆[0, 1] for i < ω and an
inﬁnite subset A ⊆ω such that, on QA Pi, ⟨fi : i ∈A⟩is monotonic (and
uniformly convergent).
Continuous colorings were examined. After noting that an open coloring of pairs
from X can be regarded as a continuous function on X × X (minus the diagonal),
Abraham, Rubin and Shelah observed [1985, 153] that “it seems thus natural to
examine these partition theorems for general continuous functions. We did not
investigate these questions thoroughly . . .” and concluded with a theorem which
we omit. Suppose X and Y are topological spaces and X is Hausdorﬀand τ is
a topology on Xn.378 Let D(X) = {(x0, x1, . . . , xn−1 : (∃i < j < n)(xi = xj)}.
378A natural topology τ on Xn is the topology generated by the sets [O0, O1, . . . , On−1] =
O0 × O1 × · · · × On−1 where {O0, O1, . . . , On−1} is a family of pairwise disjoint open subsets of
X.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
299
A coloring c : [X]n →Y is continuous if, when viewed as a symmetric function
on Xn \ D, it is continuous with respect to the topology τ on Xn. We are most
interested when X is a subset of the reals or a related topological space, e.g. Q,
Baire space ωω, and Cantor space 2ω.
For colorings c of pairs of reals, being
continuous means that to determine a ﬁnite amount of information about c(x, y)
one only needs a ﬁnite amount of information about x and about y. Todorcevic
[1985b] proved the existence a continuous coloring witnessing ℵ1 →[ℵ1]ℵ0,379
strengthening a result of Galvin and Shelah [1973].
Furstenberg [1981] investigated applications of recurrence in ergodic theory and
topological dynamics to combinatorics and number theory, giving proofs of multi-
dimensional versions of van der Waerden’s Theorem on monochromatic arithmetic
progressions, Szemer´edi’s theorem on arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions in
sequences of integers with positive density, Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem and
Rado’s generalization of van der Waerden’s Theorem. Taylor [1982] gave a combi-
natorial version of the Furstenberg-Weiss topological proof of van der Waerden’s
Theorem.
For a rooted ﬁnitely branching tree T without treetops, Milliken [1981] intro-
duced a tree topology on the family Strω(T) of strongly embedded subtrees of
T. He generalized Silver’s theorem to prove what we will call Milliken’s Complete
Ramseyness for Trees Theorem by showing that if R ⊆Strω(T) is analytic in the
tree topology on Strω(T), then it is completely T-Ramsey, i.e. there is a strongly
embedded subtree S of T such that the collection of its strongly embedded sub-
trees is contained in or disjoint from R. He generalized Ellentuck’s approach to
Silver’s theorem and used his own work on strongly embedded subtrees of ﬁnite
height [1979].
In [1984], Timothy Carlson380 and Simpson proved dual Ramsey theorems, i.e.
Ramsey theorems about the set of all partitions. For k ≤ω, let (ω)k be the set of
all partitions of ω into k parts. Their Dual Ramsey Theorem is the statement that
if k < ω, (ω)k = C1 ∪· · · ∪Cn and each of the Ci’s is Borel, then there is some
i and some k-cell partition X such that all its coarsenings lie in Ci, where the
relevant topology is the product topology on 2ω×ω and the partitions are regarded
as equivalence relations on ω, i.e. subsets of ω × ω.
Their Dual Galvin-Prikry
Theorem is obtained by setting k = ω. Their Dual Ellentuck Theorem states that
a subset D of (ω)ω is Ramsey if and only if it has the property of Baire and D is
Ramsey null if and only if it is meager, where the relevant topology is the Dual
Ellentuck topology.
At the end of the introduction to their paper they included some historical re-
marks which indicate that Simpson originated the idea that dual Ramsey theorems
should be provable with a series of conjectures in August 1981 after conversations
with Leeb,381 which became their Theorem 2.2 (a generalization of the Dual Ram-
379See J. Moore [2000] for the attribution of this continuous coloring result to Todorcevic
[1985b].
380In 1978, Carlson earned his doctorate at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis where
Prikry was his advisor. Carlson is now a professor at the Ohio State University.
381Recall that in §7.5 the discussion following the statement of the Parameter Sets Theorem

300
Jean A. Larson
sey Theorem), the Dual Ellentuck Theorem, and two more theorems more technical
than I have chosen to state. Simpson was able to prove the Dual Ramsey The-
orem in the special case in which the partitions have exactly three cells and his
proof used Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem. Simpson also isolated the combina-
torial core (Lemma 2.4), which we here call the Key Lemma, that would suﬃce
to prove these theorems.382
The introductory sections lists the following theo-
rems as Simpson’s “chief” sources of inspiration: the Galvin-Prikry Theorem, The
Graham-Rothschild Parameter Sets Theorem, and the Paris-Harrington Theorem
[1977]. Simpson’s reductions of these theorems to the Key Lemma are included
in Sections 2–5. Section 2 presents the proof of the Dual Ramsey Theorem from
the Key Lemma. (See also the contemporaneous independent work by Pr¨omel
and Voigt [1985a] which strengthens the Carlson-Simpson Lemma 2.3 from Borel
partitions to partition’s with the property of Baire.) Section 3 gives corollaries of
the Dual Ramsey Theorem, including Ramsey’s Theorem, the ﬁnite version of the
Graham-Rothschild Parameter Sets Theorem, the Laver HLd Theorem and the
Laver HLω Theorem; the ﬁrst two presumably were found by Simpson, and the
last two were explicitly found by Carlson. Section 4 introduces the dual Ellentuck
topology, presents the proof of the Dual Ellentuck Theorem from the Key Lemma,
and derives the Ellentuck Theorem as a corollary. Section 5 introduces dual Math-
ias forcing and results proved with it. Section 6 is devoted to the proof of the Key
Lemma due to Carlson, who learned about Simpson’s work in July 1982 when they
met at the American Mathematical Society Recursion Theory Institute at Cornell
University and at an American Mathematical Society Meeting held in Toronto in
August 1982, and found his proof shortly thereafter along with a stronger version
which appears as Theorem 6.3.
Before we state the Key Lemma we need to introduce some additional deﬁni-
tions. For a ﬁnite alphabet A and some α ≤ω, an A-partition of α is a collection of
pairwise disjoint, non-empty blocks whose union is all of A ∪α and such that each
block has at most one element of A. The blocks with no element of A are called free.
If α < β ≤ω and X is an A-partition of β, let X[α] = {x ∩(A ∪α) : x ∈X} \ {∅}.
Observe that X[α] is an A-partition of α. If X is an A-partition of ω, let X∗
A
denote the collection of all s ∪{{n}} such that 0 < n < ω, s is an A-partition of n
with no free blocks and s = Y [n] for some A-partition Y of ω which is a coarsening
of X. With this notation in hand, we state Lemma 2.4 of [1984, 270]:
Carlson-Simpson Key Lemma:
Let A be a ﬁnite alphabet. If Y is
an A-partition of ω and Y ∗
A = C∗
0 ∪· · · ∪C∗
ℓ−1, then there exists an
A-partition Z which is a coarsening of Y such that Z∗
A ⊆C∗
i for some
i < ℓ.
The statement of the stronger Theorem 6.3 proved by Carlson in their [1984]
requires the following notation. Let ⟨ω⟩ω
A denote the family of A-partitions for
included the Graham and Rothschild [1974] report that Leeb was the one who looked at the
Ramsey property for categories.
382The conjecture that became Lemma 2.4 is described as “an inﬁnitary Hales-Jewett [13] type
conjecture” and the reference [13] is to [Hales and Jewett, 1963].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
301
which any two free blocks x and y satisfy max x < min y or x = y or max y < min x.
Theorem 6.3 states that for a ﬁnite alphabet A, if (ω)∗
A = C0 ∪· · · ∪Cℓ−1, then
there is some X ∈⟨ω⟩ω
A such that (X)∗
A ⊆Ci for some i. In Section 6 the authors
announce what they call Carlson’s Theorem:
A set C ⊆⟨ω⟩ω
A is Ramsey if and
only if it has the property of Baire with respect to the Ellentuck topology on ⟨ω⟩ω
A.
They report that Carlson found the proof of this theorem in October 1982 along
with a still stronger result which gives a common generalization of the key lemma,
Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem and the work of Milliken [1975a] and Taylor
[1976], and that Carlson has derived results for this space analogous to the Dual
Ramsey Theorem.383 A note added in proof records the March 1983 veriﬁcation
by Carlson of a conjecture by Simpson on ﬁnite Borel colorings of k-dimensional
aﬃne subspaces of the inﬁnite dimensional space F ω over a ﬁnite ﬁeld F which
appears in [Carlson, 1987].
Carlson [1988] looked at the series of Ramsey results about partitions from
the more abstract perspective of Ramsey spaces, which he described as structures
which satisfy an analog of Ellentuck’s Theorem. A Ramsey space is a space which
is a collection of inﬁnite sequences with a topology such that every set which has
the property of Baire is Ramsey and no open set is meager.
In Section 2, he
sets up a framework for this study; discusses the notion of ﬁnitization which is a
sequence of approximations; and introduces a neighborhood base deﬁned from the
approximations, which allows him to prove critical topological closure results in
his reduction of the question of whether a topological space is a Ramsey space to
a more combinatorial question. He introduces axiom-like statements (see page 125
and statements A1-A3) and proves an abstract Ellentuck Theorem. His approach
generalizes a large part of quantitative Ramsey theory. Hindman and McCutcheon
[2002, 2559] single out Carlson’s Lemma 5.9: “Experience suggests that Carlson’s
‘main lemma’ ... implies those Ramsey-theoretic corollaries of his theorem in which
a ﬁnite collection of ﬁnite objects is partitioned into ﬁnitely many classes.”
During the 1982 Prague Symposium on Graph Theory, several people suggested
collecting papers to showcase the new Ramsey theory of the time. Neˇsetˇril and
R¨odl took up the challenge, wrote an extended introduction, solicited and selected
appropriate papers and edited the volume Mathematics of Ramsey Theory [1990].
This warmly recommended survey includes Ramsey theory from a wide variety
of perspectives including many not touched upon in this chapter. Of particular
interest are the paper by Weiss titled Partitioning Topological Spaces and the
paper [1990] in which Carlson and Simpson survey topological Ramsey theory,
i.e. work related to their seminal paper [1984], the two Carlson papers discussed
above [1987], [1988] and related work of Pr¨omel and Voigt, including some of
their canonical partition theorems [1983], [1985b]. Carlson and Simpson deﬁne
a Ramsey space to be a partial ordering with approximations which satisﬁes an
Ellentuck type theorem. There is a list of eight assumptions, A1–A8. Theorem 1
(due to Carlson) states that a partial ordering with approximation which satisﬁes
383Wolfsdorf [1988] in an article received by the editors January 28, 1983, independently proved
some results of the kind found in Section 6 of the Carlson and Simpson paper [1984].

302
Jean A. Larson
A1–A7 is a Ramsey space if and only if it satisﬁes A8. The deﬁnition of partial
order with approximations and eight conditions are somewhat technical to state,
so we have omitted them, but the authors assert on page 175 that “Generally,
when proving a particular partial ordering with approximations is a Ramsey space
assumptions A1–A7 are immediate.” They describe Theorem 1 as an abstract
Ellentuck Theorem. They discuss ﬁnitary consequences, ﬁnite dimensional analogs
of Ellentuck type theorems, and canonical partitions as well.
Arnold Miller [1989] investigated Borel versions of inﬁnite combinatorial theo-
rems, and proved a parameterized version of the Galvin-Prikry Theorem.
Many more results were found in the 20th Century, but are beyond the scope
of this chapter. For a detailed look at inﬁnitary partition relations and Ramsey
spaces from a modern perspective, see Todorcevic [2010]. To learn about their ap-
plications to Banach space theory, see [Argyros and Todorcevic, 2005] and [Gowers,
2003].
8.4
Partial order, not trees
Kunen and Miller (cf. [Fra¨ıss´e, 2000, 164]) showed that the class of denumerable
partial orders includes a strictly decreasing ω1-sequence.
Abraham [1987] revisited the Perles counter-example to Dilworth’s chain de-
composition theorem holding in the inﬁnite and showed that if a partial order P
has no inﬁnite antichain and the length of the well-founded poset of antichains
ordered by reverse inclusion has height < ω12, then P is the union of countably
many chains.
In answer to a question of Galvin, Milner [1982] proved another inﬁnitary analog
of Dilworth’s theorem by showing that every partially order set P in which every
antichain has cardinality less than µ can be decomposed into fewer than µ<µ many
directed sets.
Todorcevic [1988a] proved that every σ-chain complete poset with the ﬁnite
cutset property is the union of countably many chains.384 For context, he listed
several earlier papers that studied posets with ﬁnite cutsets.
Rado [1981] conjectured that a family of intervals of a linearly ordered set is
the union of countably many disjoint subfamilies if and only if every subfamily of
size ℵ1 has this property. Todorcevic [1983b] heard about Rado’s conjecture, and
investigated its non-trivial consistency strength.
8.5
Tree results
Shelah [1984a] proved what we will call his Cohen Real to Suslin Tree Theorem:
Forcing to add a Cohen real also adds a Suslin tree. Shelah and Stanley [1982]
384A partial ordering (P, <) is σ-chain complete if every bounded countable chain in P has
both a supremum and an inﬁmum. It has the ﬁnite cutset property if for every p ∈P, there is a
ﬁnite set S with p ∈S ⊆P such that S intersects every maximal chain of P and every element
of S \ {p} is incomparable with p.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
303
generalized the result to larger successor cardinals by proving that if 2κ = κ+ and
κ++ is inaccessible in L, then there is a κ++-Suslin tree. Velleman proved that if
κ is a regular limit cardinal, 2<κ = κ, and κ+ is a regular limit cardinal in L, then
forcing to add a Cohen subset of κ also adds a κ+-Suslin tree. In his Theorem
1.11, Velleman proved that if there is a simpliﬁed (κ, 1)-morass with a complete
amalgamation system, then there is a κ+-Suslin tree. Velleman proved in [1984a]
that a simpliﬁed (ω, 1)-morass can be constructed in ZFC and in [1984b] that the
existence of a simpliﬁed (κ, 1)-morass for regular uncountable κ is equivalent to the
existence of an ordinary (κ, 1)-morass. In Theorem 2.1 of [1984c], he proved that
if κ is a regular cardinal and 2<κ = κ, then forcing over a model with a simpliﬁed
(κ, 1)-morass to add a Cohen subset of κ also adds a complete amalgamation
system to the simpliﬁed (κ, 1)-morass. With these results in hand, he derived as
corollaries Shelah’s Cohen Real to Suslin Tree Theorem and the Shelah-Stanley
results quoted above. In the introduction he commented that his proof of the
former is a “modiﬁed form of a proof by Mark Bickford,385 and his proof of the
latter was based on Shelah and Stanley’s original proof.
Todorcevic [1987] gave a diﬀerent proof of Shelah’s Cohen Real to Suslin Tree
Theorem. Call a function e : [ω1]2 →ω a coherent mapping if for all α < β < ω,
there are only ﬁnitely many ξ with e(ξ, α) ̸= e(ξ, β).
Note that in this case,
the restriction of the function e(·, β) to α is almost equal to e(·, α), in symbols,
e(·, α) =∗e(·, β)↾α. It is not diﬃcult to construct a coherent mapping by trans-
ﬁnite induction. Todorcevic observed that if e is a coherent mapping, then the
following set is an Aronszajn tree under ⊑:
T(e) := {eβ↾α : α ≤β < ω1}.
Note that if e is a coherent mapping, then the stretching e : [ω1]2 →ω of e which
Todorcevic deﬁned on page 271 of [1987] by setting
e(α, β) = 2e(α,β)(1 + 2|{ξ < α : e(ξ, α) = e(ξ, β)}|)
is coherent and each eβ is one-to-one. He used such a map to prove the following
[1987, 292–293]:
Todorcevic’s Cohen Real to Suslin Tree Construction:
If r : ω →ω is
a Cohen real and e : [ω1]2 →ω is a coherent mapping such that each
eβ is one-to-one, then T(r ◦e) is a Suslin tree.
The most common constructions of κ-Aronszajn trees to that point had been
subtrees of the collection of functions <κL for some linear order L under end-
extension. Todorcevic [1987] associated various rho functions or characteristics
with the walks on ordinals discussed in the subsection on partition properties. He
proved several “metric” properties of his rho functions, and used them to deﬁne
trees whose properties could be described in terms of features of the rho functions
385Mark Bickford received his 1983 doctorate from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, where
his advisor was Terrence Millar.

304
Jean A. Larson
from which they came. Deﬁne the right lexicographic ordering of <κL by s <0 t if
and only if s properly end-extends t or for the least α on which s and t disagree,
s(α) < t(α). Deﬁne the left lexicographic ordering of <κL similarly by s <1 t if
and only if t properly end-extends s or for the least α on which s and t disagree,
s(α) < t(α). Call an arbitrary tree T of height ω1 a coherent tree if it can be
represented as a downwards closed subtree of some tree of the form T(a), where
a : [ω1]2 →ω is a coherent mapping.386
Todorcevic’s Coherent Tree Theorem:
Suppose that e : [ω1]2 →ω is
a coherent mapping with each eβ ﬁnite-to-one. Further suppose that
⃗C = ⟨Cα : α < ω⟩is a c-sequence and ρ0 and ρ1 are deﬁned from C.
Then T(e), T(ρ0) and T(ρ1) are all coherent Aronszajn trees, T(ρ0) is
special, and T(ρ0, <0) and T(ρ1, <1) are Countryman lines.
Here ρ0 : [ω1]2 →<ωω is recursively deﬁned by
ρ0(α, β) = ⟨ot(Cβ ∩α)⟩⌢ρ0(α, min(Cβ \ α),
and ρ1 : [ω1]2 →ω is recursively deﬁned by
ρ1(α, β) = max{ot(Cβ ∩α), ρ1(α, min(Cβ \ α))}.
The deﬁnitions of ρ0 and ρ1 extend to larger successor cardinals. When working
with walks on cardinals larger than ω1, it is useful to have c-sequences with co-
herence properties like those of □κ-sequences. Todorcevic used his new approach
to revisit some results on large cardinals and about combinatorial properties of L.
For example, he generalized the notion of special tree to limit cardinals as follows.
Suppose (T, <T ) is a tree of height κ. A function f : T →T is regressive if for
all non-minimal t ∈T, f(t) <T t. T is special if there is a regressive function
f : T →T such that for every t ∈T, f −1({t}) is the union of fewer than κ many
antichains. Todorcevic [1987, 266] proved that among inaccessible cardinals κ,
there are no special κ-Aronszajn trees if and only if κ is Mahlo.
Laver [1987] proved that Shelah’s Cohen Real to Suslin Tree Theorem does not
extend to forcing with random reals. By adding many random reals to a universe
satisfying MAℵ1, Laver obtained a model of “2ℵ0 is singular with coﬁnality ω1”
with no Suslin tree.
In chapter IX of [1982b], Shelah came up with some new proper forcing tech-
niques for specializing an Aronszajn tree, including one that did not add reals,
and some that specialized an Aronszajn tree on a stationary set but not on the
rest of the tree. Thus he was able to build a model with no Suslin trees without
making all Aronszajn trees special.
Several consistency results for the existence or non-existence of Aronszajn trees
on ℵn’s were proved in the 1980’s. Note that the non-existence of κ-Aronszajn
386The deﬁnition of coherent tree given here is from Todorcevic [2007b].

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
305
trees for regular κ means that κ has the tree property, i.e. every κ-tree has a coﬁnal
branch.
Abraham [1983] used a supercompact cardinal with a weakly compact cardi-
nal above to show the consistency of having no ℵ2-Aronszajn trees and no ℵ3-
Aronszajn trees. Included in his paper is a proof by Magidor that if there are no
ℵ2-Aronszajn trees and ℵ3 is inaccessible in L (as would be the case if there were
no ℵ3-Aronszajn trees), then 0# exists, and that two weakly compact cardinal
would be insuﬃcient.387
Shelah [1982a] generalized bqo theory to uncountable cardinals and identiﬁed
the least cardinal κ such that the class of unions of ≤λ scattered orderings is κ-
well-ordered (a generalization of wqo) and called these cardinals beautiful cardinals.
He also gave a construction for rigid families of colored trees, and generalized the
method to other structures.
Laver and Shelah [1981], starting from a weakly compact cardinal, used iterated
forcing to construct a model of CH in which there are no ℵ2-Suslin trees.
Baumgartner [1983b], as an application of Axiom A forcing,388 proved that if
the existence of an inaccessible cardinal is consistent, then so is MA + 2ℵ0 = ℵ2
+ every ℵ1-tree has at most ℵ1 uncountable branches.
Shelah and Stanley [1988] proved that a successor cardinal κ = λ+ has a non-
special Aronszajn tree when either □λ holds or κ is not weakly compact in L.
Shai Ben-David and Shelah [1986] proved the consistency, relative to the ex-
istence of a supercompact cardinal, of the existence of λ+-Suslin trees for ev-
ery singular λ. Under the same assumption, they proved the consistency of the
existence of an ℵω+1-Suslin tree together with the non-existence of any special
ℵω+1-Aronszajn tree.
Chaz Schlindwein [1989], starting from an inaccessible cardinal, constructed a
model of CH + SH (no Suslin trees) + KH (there is a Kurepa tree) in which not
all Aronszajn subtrees are special.389
Masazumi Hanazawa [1982] deﬁned a non-Suslin base for an Aronszajn tree
(T, <T ) to be a collection C of uncountable antichains such that for any uncount-
able S ⊆T there is an X ∈C such that for all s ∈X there is a t ∈S with
s ≤T t. Note that if T has a non-Suslin base, no subtree of T is Suslin. Hanazawa
used Martin’s Axiom to prove that no Aronszajn tree has a non-Suslin base of
cardinality less than the continuum. He used ♦+ to prove that there is a special
Aronszajn tree which has no base of size ℵ1, and asked whether ♦+ was necessary.
Baumgartner [1985] deﬁned base for a tree T of height ω1 to be a collection
B of subtrees of T with the property that every subtree of T contains one of
the subtrees in B. Note that the antichains used by Hanazawa can be turned into
subtrees by downward closure, so the notion of Baumgartner generalizes the notion
387Recall that Mitchell and Silver [Mitchell, 1972] showed that non-existence of ℵ2-Aronszajn
trees and ℵ4-Aronszajn trees is equiconsistent with the existence of two weakly compact cardinals.
388Axiom A forcings are proper and were a precursor to proper forcings.
389In his Math Review MR1031772 (91i:03101) of this article, Di Prisco commented that models
of ZFC exist satisfying every combination of the form ± CH ± SH ± KH ± EATS that are not
ruled out by the fact that EATS (every Aronszajn tree is special) implies SH.

306
Jean A. Larson
of Hanazawa. Baumgartner answered Hanazawa’s question by showing that, in
the model obtained from the Levy collapse of an inaccessible cardinal to ω2, every
Aronszajn tree has a base of size ℵ1 and ♦holds. He deﬁned an anti-Suslin tree to
be a tree with no Suslin subtree and called a Specker order (also called Aronszajn
line) anti-Suslin if it has no Suslin suborder. Such orderings arise from anti-Suslin
trees. From the above theorem and the equivalence of bases with non-Suslin bases
for anti-Suslin trees, the following conclusion may be drawn: if it is consistent
that there is an inaccessible cardinal, then it is consistent that for every anti-
Suslin Specker order S there is a collection C of subsets of S such that C has
cardinality ≤ℵ1 and every uncountable subset of S contains an order-isomorphic
copy of an element of C.
Moreover, Baumgartner showed that if there is a Kurepa tree with at least κ
branches, then there is a special Aronszajn tree for which every non-Suslin base
has cardinality at least κ. The proof he gave, due to Todorcevic and included
with his permission, is the observation that the level-wise product of a Kurepa
tree (K, ≤K) with κ branches and a special Aronszajn tree (T, ≤T ), namely KT =
{(s, t) : s ∈K, t ∈T, and ℓ(s) = ℓ(t)}390 under the coordinate-wise ordering,
is the required special Aronszajn tree in which every base has cardinality ≥κ.
Baumgartner asked whether it is consistent that both CH holds and no Aronszajn
tree has a base of cardinality ℵ1.
Abraham and Shelah [1985]391 investigated Aronszajn trees and embeddings of
their subtrees, particularly those subtrees obtained by choosing all nodes from a
closed unbounded (club) set of levels. They strengthened some of the notions of
structure considered earlier. Recall that in [Shelah, 1976], two Aronszajn trees
were said to be near if for some club C ⊆ω1 they have Aronszajn subtrees which
are isomorphic when restricted to C. Abraham and Shelah called S and T club
isomorphic if for some club C, the subtrees S↾C and T↾C are isomorphic, and
said S is club embeddable in T, if for some club C, S↾C embeds in T↾C. Say that
two Aronszajn trees are really diﬀerent if for every club C ⊆ω1 their restrictions
to C are non-isomorphic. They deemed an Aronszajn tree to be really rigid if
for any club C its restriction to C has no order automorphisms other than the
identity. They proved a series of consistency results using forcing and cardinality
considerations:
1. It is consistent to have GCH + there is no Suslin tree, every two Aronszajn
trees are near and there is an Aronszajn tree U universal in the sense that
every Aronszajn tree is club embeddable in U.
2. If 2ω < 2ω1, then there are 2ω1 really rigid pairwise really diﬀerent Aronszajn
trees.
3. If 2ω < 2ω1, then there is no minimum Aronszajn tree P in the sense that P
is club embeddable into every Aronszajn tree.
390Here ℓ(s) is the level of s.
391The paper was received July 1, 1983; an abstract for it dates back to 1979.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
307
4. It is consistent to have GCH + “there are exactly ω1 non-isomorphic Suslin
trees and there is an Aronszajn tree U which is almost universal in the sense
that every Aronszajn tree without Suslin subtrees is club embeddable in U.”
5. MA + ¬CH is independent of “every two Aronszajn trees are isomorphic on
a club”.392
6. It is consistent to have MA + “2ω is as large as you like and no two Aronszajn
trees are really diﬀerent.”
They asked if the existence of a Suslin tree implied the existence of two really
diﬀerent Suslin trees [1985, 78], and they asked a basis problem [1985, 79]:
Problem. It is not clear whether we can get the consistency of:
(*) Any Specker order contains a suborder in K′
s.393
This is equivalent to the following consistency question.
(**) If T is an Aronszajn tree, T = A1∪A0, then there is an unbounded
B ⊆T and ℓ∈{0, 1} such that x, y ∈B =⇒g.l.b.{x, y} ∈Aℓ.394
Ingrid Lindstr¨om,395 in a paper based on her 1979 Stanford dissertation, inves-
tigated a pre-order ≤deﬁned on rooted, Hausdorﬀ, well-pruned ≥2-full ω1-trees
by S ≤T if and only if for some closed unbounded set C ⊆ω1 there is an order-
preserving and level-preserving mapping carrying the restriction of T to levels
indexed by C, brieﬂy T↾C to S↾C.
In the language of Abraham and Shelah,
S ≤T if T is club-embeddable in S. Intuitively, the relation S ≤T holds for
Suslin trees if forcing with T adjoins a branch through S. She points out that
the equivalence classes (degrees) of Aronszajn trees under ≤with the level-wise
product and disjointed union with added root operations forms a distributive lat-
tice, and uses ♦to prove that all countable linear order types embed in it and
that there is no maximal Aronszajn degree. Recall that Jech [1972] had used ♦
to proved the existence of 2ℵ1 pairwise non-isomorphic Suslin trees. Lindstr¨om
uses ♦to proved the existence of 2ℵ1 pairwise ≤-incomparable families of several
types of ω1-trees: Suslin trees, special Aronszajn trees, non-special R-embeddable
Aronszajn trees.
392Shelah proved the consistency relative to Martin’s Axiom for stable posets (see his paper
with Abraham [1982] for the deﬁnition of stable). Then Abraham used generic reals to extend the
result to the full Martin’s Axiom. Shelah constructed a proper forcing with which to force two
Aronszajn trees to be isomorphic on a club, using ﬁnite conditions. In §5 where the construction
is given, the authors [1985, 100] remark “At the present state of knowledge, we do not know how
to go with proper forcing beyond 2ℵ0 = ℵ2”.
393K′
s is the collection of the Countryman lines, so (*) may be rephrased as “every Aronszajn
line embeds a Countryman line.”
394The ordering of the indices T = A1 ∪A0 is the way it appears in [Abraham and Shelah,
1985]. The statement (**) is called the Coloring Axiom for Trees or CAT in [Todorcevic, 2007a].
In current usage one writes x ∧y for greatest lower bound of x and y.
395Ingrid Birgitta Lindstr¨om received her doctorate from Stanford University in 1979 under the
direction of Ketonen. She is currently a senior lecturer at Uppsala University.

308
Jean A. Larson
8.6
Linear orders
Baumgartner [1980] used iterated forcing to build a model of Martin’s Axiom +
2ℵ0 = ℵ2 in which (A) every uncountable subset of P(ω) contains an uncountable
chain or antichain and (C) any two ℵ1-dense sets of reals are order-isomorphic.
Then he proved that (A) + (C) implies that every uncountable Boolean algebra
has an uncountable antichain.396
Abraham and Shelah [1981] answered a question of Baumgartner [1973] (see
§7.8 for the statement of Baumgartner’s question) when they proved that Martin’s
Axiom does not imply that all ℵ1-dense sets of reals are isomorphic.
At the 1981 conference on ordered sets, Pouzet (cf. [Bonnet and Pouzet, 1982])
gave a series of lectures on what he called the most popular connection between
partial orders and linear orders, namely that every partial order can be extended
to a linear order (Szpilrajn’s Theorem [Marczewski, 1930]). One topic was the
question of whether a partial order with a given property P can be extended to a
linear order with the same property P or whether all extensions to a linear order
will have this property.
At the same conference, Baumgartner [1982] surveyed and extended known
results for uncountable linear orders. He reviewed Specker types, and proved that
every Specker order is isomorphic to a lexicographically ordered Aronszajn tree
and that there are 2ℵ1 non-isomorphic ℵ1-dense Specker types. He highlighted
the fact that the Countryman line constructed by Shelah with its converse are
incompatible, no uncountable type is below both, and asserted that under the
assumption of ♦, for any Aronszajn tree T there is an Aronszajn tree U such that
no Aronszajn tree is embeddable in both T and U. He also proved under the
stronger assumption of ♦+ that there is a Specker type ϕ which is minimal, i.e. if
ψ is embeddable in ϕ then ϕ is also embeddable in ψ.
Abraham, Matatyahu Rubin and Shelah [1985] presented a variety of consis-
tency results, including the consistency of ZF + 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 + “for any two ℵ1-
dense subsets A, B ⊆R, there is an ℵ1-dense C ⊆R which is order-embeddable
in both A and B.” They also produced a ZFC example of two ℵ1-dense sets for
which the order-isomorphism cannot be taken to be C1. Let (KH, ≤) be the set
of order types of ℵ1-dense homogeneous subsets of the reals the embeddability
relation. They prove that for every ﬁnite model (L, ≤), the statement (KH, ≤) is
isomorphic to (L, ≤) is consistent if and only if (L, ≤) is a distributive lattice.
8.7
Other combinatorial results
In the paper just discussed above, Abraham, Rubin and Shelah introduced the
Semi-Open Coloring Axiom (SOCA) and the Open Coloring Axiom, which we
here will abbreviate OCAARS, along with a variety of other axioms. For a subset
Y ⊆X of a topological space X, let D(Y ) = Y × Y \ {(y, y) : y ∈Y }.
396Maria Losada and Todorcevic [2000] showed that MAℵ1 suﬃces.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
309
Open Coloring Axiom (OCAARS): If X is a second countable space of
power ℵ1 and {U0, . . . , Un−1} is a cover of D(X) consisting of symmet-
ric open sets, then there is a partition of X = S
i<ω Xi such that for
every i < ω, there is an ℓ< n such that D(Xi) ⊆Uℓ.
The trio of authors proved, relative to ZFC, the consistency of MA + SOCA and
moreover the consistency of MA + SOCA + ¬OCAARS. They also prove that MA
+ OCAARS implies 2ℵ0 = ℵ2.
The Abraham-Rubin-Shelah paper [1985] was received by the journal March 3,
1982. That spring, Todorcevic [1989] formulated a diﬀerent open coloring axiom as
a proposition using PFA, and I have reformulated it below using coloring instead
of partitions.
Open Coloring Axiom (OCAT):
For every coloring f : [R]2 →{0, 1}
with f −1({0}) open, either there is an uncountable 0-homogeneous set
Y , or R is the union of countably many 1-homogeneous sets.397
Todorcevic listed some straightforward consequences: (1) every uncountable subset
of P(ω) contains an uncountable chain or antichain, and (2) every function f from
an uncountable set of reals into the reals is monotonic on some uncountable set.398
In remarks at the end of chapter 8, Todorcevic credited Baumgartner [1973], [1980]
with “the main advance towards the Open Coloring Axiom for sets of reals” and
continued “the discovery of Baumgartner ... is that a CH diagonalization argument
can be used in building [a] c.c.c. poset which forces homogeneous sets for certain
open partitions on sets of reals” [Todorcevic, 1989, 86–87].
Moore [2002] proved that OCAARS + OCAT implies 2ℵ0 = ℵ2.
Aharoni, Nash-Williams and Shelah [1983] devised a general criterion for the
existence of transversals. They used critical families F, indexed families (func-
tions) with a transversal that have the property that for every transversal ϕ, the
range of ϕ is the union of the range of F. They use critical families to identify
a collection of obstructions and prove that a family has a transversal if and only
if it does not have a subfamily in the collection of obstructions. In a follow-up,
the authors [Aharoni et al., 1984] gave a diﬀerent criterion based on an idea of
[Nash-Williams, 1978] that avoided use of critical families.
Shelah [1985] proved that if S is a stationary co-stationary subset of ω1, then
the Weak Diamond Principle for S does not follow from 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1.
397Moore [2002] used the following reformulation of OCAT: if X is a separable metric space
and G ⊆[X]2 is open, then either G is countably chromatic (there is a decomposition of X into
countably many pieces Xi such that each Xi ∩G = ∅) or there is H ⊆X such that [H]2 ⊆G.
That is, either X is the union of countably many independent sets or G includes an uncountable
complete subgraph.
398The Axiom OCAT has applications in analysis, e.g. Ilijas Farah [2011] used it to establish
the consistency of all automorphisms of the Calkin algebra being inner. His paper complements
a 2006 construction of Phillips and Weaver [2007] of an outer automorphism using CH. Together
these results solve a problem of Brown, Douglas and Fillmore [1977].

310
Jean A. Larson
9
1990–2000: A SAMPLING
For the ﬁnal decade of the 20th Century, I am presenting a miscellaneous collection
of results I found interesting and make no claims that they are representative for
this time. In particular, singular cardinal combinatorics became an increasingly
important part of the subject, but it is a subject of which I know little. I warmly
recommend the survey article by James Cummings [2005], a recent paper [2009] by
Todd Eisworth and his chapter [2010] for the Handbook of Set Theory, especially
Section 5 on square bracket partition relations,
Alan Dow [1992] provided a valuable update to the Handbook of Set-Theoretic
Topology [Kunen and Vaughan, 1984] in a survey paper written based on a talk at
the Symposium on Topology (Topsym) held in Prague.399 Another valuable re-
source that came out of that meeting is the compilation Open Problems in Topology
[van Mill and Reed, 1990].400
In 1998, Hindman and his frequent collaborator, Dona Strauss, made widely
available their work on Ramsey theory, especially semi-group colorings, in their
book [1998],401 which includes interesting historical remarks.
Todorcevic [1998a] spoke on Basis problems in combinatorial set theory at the
1998 International Congress of Mathematicians in Berlin. Of particular note for
this chapter was his discussion of c-sequences and their related distance functions
as critical objects for the collection of uncountable subsets of ω1.
The variety
of applications is astounding, and his recent book, Walks on Ordinals and Their
Characteristics [2007b], is an important new resource. Todorcevic focused on ﬁve
general areas: (1) uncountable subsets of ω1, (2) binary relations on ω1 under
Tukey reducibility, (3) transitive relations both on ω1 and on the reals, (4) un-
countable linear orderings, and (5) topological spaces. In each case, he identiﬁed
a list of critical objects and either indicated why it is known to be suﬃciently rich
that one can relate any object in the class to one of the critical objects or made a
conjecture to that eﬀect under the assumption of PFA. He referred readers inter-
ested in metamathematical aspects to the 1,000 page book by Woodin, saying that
they “will ﬁnd a satisfactory explanation in the recent monograph of Woodin” (see
[Woodin, 1999]).
In his examination of uncountable subsets of ω1, Todorcevic focused on the de-
lightful fact that many critical objects in families of uncountable structures whose
domain is a subset of ω1 can be deﬁned in terms of a c-sequence.402 Todorce-
vic reviewed walks on ordinals, the trace function of places visited on a walk
399The Prague Topsym conference meets every ﬁve years.
400In his Math Review MR1078636 (92c:54001) of the problem book, John Walsh noted “The
journal Topology and its Applications has agreed to provide a readily available source for de-
termining the status of the various problems. Each issue of the journal will have space devoted
to updating the status as progress is made on individual problems. A second book of problems
[Pearl, 2007] has followed.
401This book was cited in the 2003 JAMS award citation honoring Hindman’s work.
402For the general audience, Todorcevic omitted the term c-sequence in favor of describing one
on ω1 with minimal jargon as a sequence C which assigns to each ordinal α a subset cα of smaller
ordinals of minimal order type with α = sup cα.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
311
from β to α, distance functions, ρ0, and Todorcevic’s square bracket function,
[αβ] = min(Tr(ξ, β) \ α) where ξ = min {ζ : ρ0(ζ, α) ̸= ρ0(ζ, β)}. He connected an
uncountable set X ⊆ω1 with one which contains a closed unbounded subset using
the square bracket operation (see [Todorcevic, 1987]), namely
{[αβ] : α ∈X ∧β ∈X ∧α < β}.
He pointed to the utility of this approach through citation of others’ work: the
construction by Saharon Shelah and Juris Stepr¯ans [1987] of Ehrenfeucht-Faber
groups, that is, extraspecial p-groups G in which each Abelian subgroup has car-
dinality less than |G|; the construction by Shelah and Stepr¯ans [1988] of a Banach
space on which every bounded linear operator is the sum of a multiple of the
identity operator and an operator with a separable range; and the construction by
Erd˝os, R. Daniel Mauldin, and Steve Jackson [1997] of a family H of ω1 hyper-
planes in Rn, a family X of ω1 points in Rn and a coloring P : H →ω such that
any n hyperplanes of distinct colors meet in at most one point, and there is no
coloring Q : X →ω such that each hyperplane h ∈H meets X in at most n −1
points of its color, P(h).
9.1
Partition calculus results
We split the discussion of partition calculus results into the same subsections as
before, with the addition of one for polarized partitions so that this active area of
research dating back to the 1950’s has some representation in this chapter.
Cardinal resources
The earliest uncountable partition calculus result stated in the literature is the
Dushnik-Miller Theorem
κ →(κ, ω)2.
Implicit in the original proof and explicit in [Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] is the relation
κ →(κ, ω+1)2. Erd˝os and Hajnal [1971b, 22] asked in their problem paper arising
from the 1967 UCLA set theory conference the following natural question about
the limitations on the possible extension of the Dushnik-Miller Theorem:
Problem 8:
Can one prove without using the continuum hypothesis
that ω1 ↛(ω1, ω + 2)2 holds?
P´eter Komj´ath [1998], [1999] examined what was known about this foundational
theorem, derived some additional ZFC results, and clariﬁed the boundary between
what can be proved in ZFC with additional consistency results. Recall that Hajnal
[1960] used CH to prove that ω1 ↛(ω1, ω +2) and the proof gave ω1 ↛(ω1, (ω:2))
as he later pointed out in [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974]. Komj´ath [1998] showed these
two partition relations were diﬀerent by forcing to produce a model in which the
bipartite partition relation holds but the complete subgraph relation does not:

312
Jean A. Larson
ω1 →(ω1, (ω:2))2 and ω1 ↛(ω1, ω + 2)2. Recall that Baumgartner [1976a] proved
the consistency of κ ↛(κ, (κ, (ω:2))2 for every cardinal κ which is the successor
of a regular cardinal. Laver [1975] proved that if κ is Mahlo, then one can force to
make κ ↛(κ, (ω:2))2 true and preserve the fact that κ is Mahlo. Komj´ath [1999]
proved that if λ is singular, then λ →(λ, (µ:n))2 holds for µ < λ and n < ω.
Recall that Todorcevic [1983a] proved that if λ is a cardinal of uncountable
coﬁnality, there is a c.c.c. forcing for adding a witness to λ ↛(λ, ω+2)2. Komj´ath
[1999] proved that under GCH, if κ is a regular cardinal and λ is a cardinal whose
coﬁnality is greater than κ, then there is a κ-closed, κ+-chain condition forcing
which adds a witness to λ ↛(λ, κ + 2)2. Recall that Erd˝os and Hajnal [1974]
reported that Galvin had proved ω2 →(ω1, ω + 2)2 and that he had mentioned
as open problems the questions about whether the following hold without the
assumption of GCH: Does ω2 →(ω1, ω+3)2? Does ω2 →(ω1, (ω+2)2)2? Komj´ath
pointed out that Galvin’s proof generalizes to give ωn →(ω1, ω + n)2 for positive
n < ω. Komj´ath proved that for all n < ω,
ω3 →(ω1, ω + n)2.
He also showed that if the resource ω3 shrinks to ω2, then it is consistent that
ω2 ↛(ω1, ω + 3)2.
In a 1997 lecture series at Rutgers University, Shelah commented on a variety
of problems he found interesting. A sample is Question 8.6 [2000b, 61] below:
For which cardinals λ and which ordinals α with 2 ≤α < λ does the
partition relation λ++ →(λ+ + α)2
ℵ0 hold? GCH may be assumed for
simplicity.
Recall that Erd˝os and Hajnal [1971b, 23] asked the following natural question
about the limitations on possible extensions of the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem:
Problem 10:
Assume GCH. Does then ωρ+1 →(ξ, ξ)2 hold for every
ξ < ωρ+1 and every ρ?
Baumgartner, Hajnal and Todorcevic [1993, 5], all of whom had given invited talks
at the NATO Advanced Science Institute on Finite and Inﬁnite Combinatorics in
Sets and Logic which had been held in Banﬀin 1991, published their generalization
of the Erd˝os-Rado theorem, now known as the Baumgartner-Hajnal-Todorcevic
Theorem, in the conference volume using the notation log(κ) for the least cardinal
µ with 2µ ≥κ:
Balanced Baumgartner-Hajnal-Todorcevic Theorem:
If κ is a regular
cardinal and λ = 2<κ, then for k < ω and ξ < log(κ)
λ+ →(κ + ξ)2
k.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
313
Unbalanced Baumgartner-Hajnal-Todorcevic Theorem:
If κ is a regular cardinal and λ = 2<κ, then for all n < ω
λ+ →(κω+2 + 1, κ + n)2.
For κ = ω, the results follow from the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem ω1 →(α)2
k
for k < ω and α < ω1, so the main interest is for κ uncountable. The authors
note that in unpublished work, Hajnal proved for λ = 2<ω1 that λ+ →(κ + m)2
2
for m < ω “about thirty years ago” [Baumgartner et al., 1993, 5], and Shelah
proved the balanced version for k = 2 in his [1973]. The trio of authors used what
has come to be called the elementary submodel method for their proof, which was
diﬀerent from the approach of Simpson [1970] in his model-theoretic proof of the
Erd˝os-Rado Theorem. Later, Hajnal [2010] commented that this paper was the one
which introduced non-reﬂecting ideals as a tool in the study of partition relations.
Baumgartner, Hajnal and Todorcevic made use of elementary substructures of the
form (H(µ), ∈) where H(µ) is the set of all sets hereditarily of cardinality < µ,
and ideals on ordinals generated from such elementary substructures. They wrote:
“it is possible to recast our arguments in such a way as to ﬁt them under the
heading of ramiﬁcation arguments but we choose not to do so, both because the
proofs remain clearer this way, and because we believe that this may generally be
a better approach to ramiﬁcation arguments” [Baumgartner et al., 1993, 2]. They
also used the metamathematical approach taken in the proof of the Baumgartner-
Hajnal Theorem of using forcing to get the desired result in a generic extension,
and then using an absoluteness argument to prove the statement is outright true.
Milner [1994] emphasized the utility of using elementary substructures in an
expository article designed to encourage more people to use this approach, in place
of the ramiﬁcation arguments of many earlier proofs of combinatorial results.
For the proceedings of the Hajnal conference of October 1999, Baumgartner
wrote about the use of ideals in arguments involving elementary substructures,
which were a feature of Hajnal’s work. He started with a treatment of the Erd˝os-
Rado Theorem using the non-stationary ideal.
In this paper, he attributed to
Hajnal the following unbalanced extension of the Erd˝os-Rado Theorem: for regular
uncountable κ, all ξ with 2ξ < κ, and all k < ω, the following partition relation
holds:
(2κ)+ →(κ + ξ)2
k ,
whose proof appeared in [Baumgartner et al., 1993]. Baumgartner revisited the
proof using many elements of the proof from that paper, and the perspective gained
from nearly a decade.
Todorcevic [1998b] proved a common generalization of the Baumgartner-Hajnal
Theorem for ω1 [1973] and Prikry’s Theorem [1972] when he showed that for all
ﬁnite k and countable ordinals α the following partition relation holds:
ω1 →((α; ω1), (α)k)2.

314
Jean A. Larson
That is, if [ω1]2 is partitioned into k + 1 pieces, then either the ﬁrst piece includes
{{ξ, η}< : ξ ∈A ∧η ∈A ∪B} for some A of order-type α and some uncountable
B or one of the other pieces includes [A]2 for some A of order-type α.
At the end of the decade, Matthew Foreman403 and Hajnal [2003] were writing
up their results on partition properties of large successor cardinals, which gave fur-
ther insight into possibilities for Problem 10. They showed that if the Continuum
Hypothesis holds and there is an ℵ1-dense ideal on ω1, then, for α < ω2,
ω2 →(ω1
2 + 1, α)2.
At the International Congress of Mathematicians held in Berlin, Foreman [1998b]
spoke on Generic large cardinals: new axioms for mathematics?
In part of his
talk, he discussed his work with Hajnal and pointed out that the assumption of
the existence of an ℵ1-dense ideal on ℵ2 implies both hypotheses that they used
to prove their positive partition relation hold.404 Note that Foreman [1998a] had
shown the consistency of the existence of such an ℵ1-dense ideal on ω2 as well as
the consistency of the existence of an ℵ1-dense ideal on ω1.
Now we shift attention to partitions of triples. Recall that Todorcevic [1983a]
proved that under MAℵ1 + 2ℵ0 = ℵ2, the following positive partition relation
holds for all α < ω1:
ω1 →(ω1, α)2.
Using this result, Milner and Prikry [1991] proved that ω1 →(ω · 2 + 1, 4)3 also
holds, using MAℵ1 and absoluteness as in the Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem.
Albin Jones,405 in his thesis [1999], [2000b], took full advantage of the model-
theoretic approach to partition relations to prove the following partition relation
for all m, n < ω:
ω1 →(ω + m, n)3.
Open Question: Is it true that for all α < ω1 and n < ω, the following
partition relation holds:
ω1 →(α, n)3?
Ordinal partition relations
Progress was made on the problem of determining which countable ordinals are
partition ordinals.406
403Matthew Foreman received his doctorate in 1980 from the University of California, Berkeley,
where his advisor was Solovay.
404In the mid-1990’s, Woodin showed that if you have an ℵ1-dense ideal on ω2, then CH hold.
See [Foreman, 2010] for a proof.
405Albin Jones received his doctorate from Dartmouth College, where Baumgartner was his
advisor. His academic career, which included some time at the University of Kansas, was fairly
short, but mathematics remains an avocation.
406Recall that α is a partition ordinal if it satisﬁes α →(α, 3)2.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
315
Galvin, in a paper with Larson [1975], had shown that no countable ordinal
greater than ω2 which is the ordinal product of two strictly smaller ordinals is
a partition ordinal. Ordinals which do not have this property are called multi-
plicatively indecomposable, and one can show that they have the form ωα for some
additively indecomposable ordinal α. Since additively indecomposable ordinals
can be written in the form α = ωβ and Chang [1972] had shown that ωω is a
partition ordinal, ωω2 was the next test case.
Carl Darby407 and Rene Schipperus independently came up with proofs that
ωω2 is a partition ordinal in the 1990’s. I remember hearing Darby’s proof during
a visit to Boise State University, possibly as early as 1991, the year of the ﬁrst
BEST meeting. Darby’s work used Ramsey’s Theorem and the good sequences
developed by Galvin [1971] to represent the ordinal ωω2 and a careful analysis of
the avoidable and unavoidable ways two such disjoint sequences could be interlaced
to prove ωω2 is a partition ordinal, though his proof remains unpublished.
Rene Schipperus recalled enjoyable conversations with Baumgartner about par-
tition problems and partition ordinals in the 1991 meeting in Banﬀ. He worked for
a long time on his own, spent some time speaking in a seminar at the University
of Calgary with Claude Laﬂamme408 and Milner409 about this work. Eventually,
Schipperus wrote a thesis [1999; 2010] with Laver for which he won the Sacks
prize for his proof that every denumerable ordinal of the form ωωβ where β is the
sum of one or two indecomposable ordinals is a partition ordinal. In place of the
lexicographically ordered good sequences used by Darby for his underlying set,
Schipperus used ﬁnite labeled trees, carefully constructed to enable him to build
his large subsets in a highly restricted way. The heart of his argument is a Ramsey
dichotomy, proved using a game and the Nash-Williams Partition Theorem. Darby
and Schipperus independently came up with new families of examples witnessing
α ↛(α, k) for diﬀerent values of k. All the known examples use oscillation type
behavior where, for larger values, the blocks can be thought of as having a ﬁnite
number of possible weights.
Darby [1999] developed a general method to show how to build ﬁnite sets wit-
nessing a particular pattern of weighted blocks inside a large subset of an ordinal,
depending on the order types of the original set and the large subset. This allowed
him to reduce the question of counter-examples to one of ﬁnite combinatorics.
Schipperus extended the notion of having a large “free” subset (see Lemma 7.2.2
of [Williams, 1977]) to enable him to construct the necessary ﬁnite sets.
These negative results are best expressed using the additive normal form for
the exponent β for an ordinal of the form ωωβ, that is, its unique representation
as a sum of non-decreasing additively indecomposable ordinals. Larson built on
407Carl Darby was a student of Laver at the University of Colorado, who earned his doctorate
in 1990.
408In 1987, Claude Laﬂamme received his doctorate from the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, where his advisor was Andreas Blass.
409Recall that Milner was the careful reader of Chang’s proof who generalized it from 3 to all
m; Milner died in 1997 and did not see the ﬁnal version of the proof by Schipperus.

316
Jean A. Larson
their work to improve one of the results obtained by both of them.
1. (Darby unpublished) If β = ωα+1 and m →(4)3
232, then
ωωβ ̸→(ωωβ, m)2.
2. (Darby [1999] for 6; Schipperus [1999] for 6; Larson for 5 [2000]) If β ≥γ ≥1,
then
ωωβ+γ ̸→(ωωβ+γ, 5)2.
3. (Darby [1999]; Schipperus [1999]) If β ≥γ ≥δ ≥1, then
ωωβ+γ+δ ̸→(ωωβ+γ+δ, 4)2.
4. (Schipperus [1999]) If β ≥γ ≥δ ≥ε ≥1, then
ωωβ+γ+δ+ε ̸→(ωωβ+γ+δ+ε, 3)2.
The Ramsey game R(ϕ, n, ψ) is played by two players, the Builder and the
Spoiler, alternating choosing n-element subsets of a linear order L of order type
ϕ, the resource. The Builder goes ﬁrst and wins if and only if there is a set L′ ⊆L
of order type ψ, the goal, such that [L′]n is a subset of the Builder’s moves. Using
Galvin’s result from §7.3 that if ϕ is scattered and does not embed ω1, then
ϕ ↛[ω, ω2, ω3, . . . ]1
ω.
Darby and Laver [1998] showed that the Spoiler has a winning strategy in the
Ramsey game R(ωω, 3, ωω)
We conclude this section with two open questions on ordinal partition relations,
the ﬁrst asked many times by Erd˝os and the second inspired by the proof by Hajnal
[1960] of ω12 ↛(ω12, 3)2 and explicitly asked by Baumgartner.
Open Questions:
1. Characterize the set of α < ω1 for which α →(α, 3)2 holds.
2. Is it consistent that ω12 →(ω12, 3)2?
Erd˝os and Hajnal [1974] speciﬁcally asked about the consistency of the partition
relation ω12 →(ω12, 3)2 with MAℵ1 + 2ℵ0 = ℵ2.
Polarized partitions
Polarized partitions may be interpreted in diﬀerent ways. One approach is to think
of them as treating partitions of a product of two sets that can be thought of as a
rectangle for which you seek a homogeneous set which is a product of subsets of the
given factors. Another approach is to think of one of the factors parameterizing

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
317
a family of partitions. For each of the examples below, we specify the partition
relation.
Example 1: Erd˝os, Hajnal and Rado had used GCH to prove that for every inﬁnite
cardinal κ, the following partition relation holds (see Theorem 39 [1965, 172–176]):


κ+
κ+

→


κ+
κ
κ
∨
κ
κ+
κ


1,1
.
Here the partition relation asserts that if f : κ+ × κ+ →{0, 1} is a partition,
then there are sets A, B ⊆κ+ so that one of the following happens:
1. f↾A × B is constantly 0 and |A| = κ+ and |B| = κ;
2. f↾A × B is constantly 0 and |A| = κ and |B| = κ+;
3. f↾A × B is constantly 1 and |A| = κ = |B|.
Albin Jones [2000a] used elementary submodels to prove a ZFC version:


(2<κ)+
(2<κ)+

−→


(2<κ)+
2<κ
κ
∨
2<κ
(2<κ)+
κ


1,1
Baumgartner and Hajnal [2001] added a plus to get a balanced partition relation
in a paper received by the journal in 1999.


(2<κ)++
(2<κ)+

−→


κ
κ


1,1
Example 2: Di Prisco and Todorcevic [1999] considered κ∗, the least cardinal κ
satisfying the following partition relation:
κ →
 2
2
2
...
!<ω
This partition relation holds if for every f : [κ]<ω →2, there is a sequence ⟨Hn ∈
[κ]2 : n < ω⟩such that for all n < ω, the function f is constant on Q
k<n Hk).
Di Prisco and Todorcevic [1999] prove that κ∗= ℵω < 2ℵ1 is equiconsistent
with the existence of a measurable cardinal.
The proof builds on the work of
Peter Koepke [1984], [1983], who used core model arguments to prove that the
free-subset property for ωω is equiconsistent with the existence of a measurable
cardinal.410
410A subset X of a structure S is called free in S if no element x of X is in the structure
generated inside S by X \ {x}. The free-subset property for ωω is the statement that for every
structure S with ωω ⊆S which has at most countably many functions and relations there is an
inﬁnite subset X ⊆S free in S.

318
Jean A. Larson
Square bracket partition relations
Velleman, in Theorem 2 of [1990], gave a short proof of the result of Todorcevic
that ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
ℵ1 which avoided the use of walks, but which Velleman described
as “essentially the same as the one given by Todorcevic.”
Todorcevic [1994] examined square bracket relations for triples. He proved, for
example, that 2ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]3
10. This is a special case of a general phenomenon. He
showed that Chang’s Conjecture is equivalent to ℵ2 →[ℵ1]3
ℵ1. He proved that the
partition relation ℵ2 ↛[ℵ1]3
ℵ0 holds, and discussed the optimality of the result,
showing the size of the tuples cannot be reduced to 2 under GCH, and the number
of colors cannot be increased to ℵ1 by the Chang’s Conjecture result. His proof
used the same basic ingredients as those for the result ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
ℵ1 (see [1987]),
but the new setting required signiﬁcant reworking. He also proved that for every
continuous coloring f : [Q]2 →2, there is a monochromatic homeomorphic copy of
Q. On the other hand, he proved that there is a continuous coloring d : [Q]3 →Q
which is irreducible in the sense that d realizes every color on the pairs of every
subset X ⊆Q homeomorphic to Q. He used almost disjoint coding of the coloring
f : [ω1]2 →ω from his seminal [1987] which witnesses ℵ1 ↛[ℵ1]2
ℵ0 to construct
a set X ⊆R of cardinality ℵ1 and a continuous coloring g : [X]3 →X which is
irreducible.
Todorcevic’s Remark 4.3.(d) of [1994] on partitions of pairs is useful for ap-
plications of the oscillation map on pairs. A (continuous) order-preserving map
from a partial order into the rationals composed with osc will take all possible
values < 2k −1 on chains of order type ωk. Recall that in §7.7 we noted that
the Baumgartner-Malitz-Reinhardt proof of the consistency of all Aronszajn trees
being embeddable in the rationals could be modiﬁed to show that they all have
strictly increasing continuous maps into the rationals and the composition of such
a function applied to each element of a pair and followed with the oscillation map
yields a partition into ω many pieces for which every chain of order type ωω has
pairs of every color.
Justin Moore411 [2000] modiﬁed the oscillation map of Todorcevic to produce a
continuous coloring from the family P of strictly increasing functions into ω which
is irreducible in the sense that every unbounded and well-ordered subset of P
receives all the colors. He introduced an ideal N∗of measure zero sets and proved
that there is a subset X ⊆ωω of size add(N∗)412 and a coloring c : [X]2 →ω
which is both continuous and irreducible on subsets of the same size. The proof
uses lower bounds for ﬁnite Ramsey numbers.
411Justin Tatch Moore received his doctorate in 2000 at the University of Toronto under the
direction of Todorcevic, held a post-doctoral position at the University of East Anglia where
he worked with Dˇzamonja, spent some years at Boise State University and is now at Cornell
University.
412For any ideal I of subsets of a set X, the additivity of I, denoted add(I), is the smallest
number of sets in I whose union is not in I. Additivity is one of the well-studied cardinal invari-
ants of ideals. Stepr¯ans, in his chapter, pointed out that Sierpi´nski asked about the additivity of
the null and meager ideals in the ﬁrst issue of Fundamenta Mathematicae.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
319
Galvin, Hajnal and Komj´ath [1995] introduced a strengthening of λ ↛[κ]2
µ:
for cardinals λ ≥κ and µ: Q(λ, κ, µ) holds if whenever X ⊆[λ]2 is a graph on
λ which has no independent set of cardinality κ, then X can be written as the
disjoint union of µ graphs, X = ˙S{Yα : α < µ}, none of which has an independent
set of cardinality κ. They prove the following:
1. If 2κ = κ+, then Q(κ+, κ+, κ+) holds.
2. If more than ℵ1 Cohen reals are added to a model of ZFC, then Q(ω1, ω1, ω1)
holds in the resulting model.
3. It is consistent that Q(ω1, ω1, 2) fails.
4. If 2ω < ωω, then Q(2ω, 2ω, ω) holds.
5. Assuming V = L, if κ is a regular uncountable non-weakly compact cardinal,
then Q(κ, κ, κ).
Hajnal and Komj´ath [1997] show that there is a forcing of size ℵ1 which adds
an order type θ of size ℵ1 with the property that ψ ̸→[θ]2
ω1 for every order type ψ,
regardless of its size. This is in sharp contrast to the consistency result of Shelah
[1989] discussed in §8.2.
Structural results
Louveau, Shelah and Veliˇckovi´c [1993] generalized both the Galvin-Prikry Theo-
rem and the Galvin and Blass Perfect Set Partition Theorems. They deﬁned a
notion of type of a perfect tree, and showed that for any type τ if the set of all
subtrees of a given perfect tree T which have type τ is partitioned into two Borel
classes, there there is a perfect subtree S ⊆T such that all subtrees of S of type
τ belong to the same class.
Pierre Matet [1993] used games to characterize sets which are completely Ram-
sey with respect to a happy family F.
Veliˇckovi´c and Woodin [1998] use a variation of the Todorcevic oscillation func-
tion for reals to deﬁne a (partial) continuous coloring of triples of real numbers
(regarded as inﬁnite non-decreasing sequences of integers) with inﬁnite binary se-
quences, such that every inﬁnite binary sequence is obtained on the set of triples
from every superperfect set.413
Speciﬁcally, given (x, y, z), a triple of distinct
non-decreasing functions in ωω, if
d(x, y, z) = {n ∈ω : z(n −1) ≤min(x(n −1), y(n −1)) ∧max(x(n), y(n)) < z(n)}
is inﬁnite and enumerated as ⟨nk : k < ω⟩, then o(x, y, z) is the function k 7→0 if
and only if x(nk) ≤y(nk).
413Recall that a subtree of <ωω is superperfect if every node has an inﬁnitely branching successor
(it need not be an immediate successor); and a subset of ωω is superperfect if the subtree of <ωω
it generates is superperfect.

320
Jean A. Larson
9.2
Linear and partial orders
Galvin [1994] gave a short, elegant proof of the Dilworth chain decomposition
theorem. For more on the impact of this theorem see [Bogart et al., 1990].
Gary Gruenhage and Joe Mashburn continued the work of Kurepa on decom-
positions of partially order sets into chains and antichains by analyzing countable
width partial orders (X, <) which are order-separable, i.e. there is a countable set
D such that if p < q, then there is an r ∈D with p < r < q. They [1999] showed
that such partial orders can be written as a union of countably many chains under
the Open Coloring Axiom OCAT, but not if there is a 2-entangled subset.414
Kunen and Tall [2000] examined the possibilities for the order types of the
intersection of the reals with models of set theory, R ∩M. Under CH they found
there are exactly two possibilities: Q and R.
They also show the consistency
of several other possibilities, including consistency of exactly three types. If the
existence of a Ramsey cardinal is consistent, then so is the existence of 22ℵ0 many
non-order-isomorphic order types of cardinality continuum of the form R ∩M. At
the end of the paper, they recall that it is a long-standing open question whether
it is consistent that 2ℵ0 > ℵ2 and all ℵ2-dense sets of reals are order-isomorphic.
Then they pose [2000, 691]: “a potentially less demanding question: is it consistent
that with 2ℵ0 > ℵ2 that all the R ∩Ms of size ℵ2 are order-isomorphic?”
Abraham and Bonnet [1999] generalized the Hausdorﬀcharacterization of the
class of scattered linear orders to FAC partial orders, i.e. those in which every
antichain is ﬁnite. Building on work of Bonnet and Pouzet [1969], they proved
that the class of scattered FAC partial orderings may be characterized as the
closure under lexicographic sums, inverses and augmentations (keep the domain
the same but add new pairs to the partial order).
They use the natural sum
(Hessenberg sum) and introduce a Hessenberg based product and a Hessenberg
based exponentiation which make their proofs go smoothly.415
Recall that Hausdorﬀused CH to prove the existence of a linear order universal
in power ℵ1416 and Shelah [1980a] proved the consistent existence of a linear order
universal in power ℵ1 in a model of 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. Kojman and Shelah [1992] proved
the non-existence of universal orders and universal partial orders in power λ for
a variety of cardinals λ. They noted that the problem of existence of a universal
model for a ﬁrst-order theory remains “unsettled in classical model theory only
for cardinals λ < 2<λ” and cite [Chang and Keisler, 1973] and VIII.4 of [Shelah,
1978a] on saturated, special and universal models. In Theorem 3.6 they used club
guessing to prove that for every regular cardinal λ for which ℵ1 < λ < 2ℵ0, there
is no universal linear order in power λ. The ﬁrst item of Conclusions 5.7 is that
under the hypotheses on λ of Theorem 3.6 there are no universal partial orders
414Entangled subsets of partial orders were introduced by Shelah, shown to follow from CH
and to be consistent with MAℵ1 in [Abraham et al., 1985], and used by Roitman [1978] in her
combinatorial reformulation of the questions (S) and (L).
415See [Dˇzamonja and Thompson, 2006] for an extension to κ-scattered partial orders.
416Recall that a linear (partial) order (P, <) is universal in power λ (alternatively in cardinality
λ) if it has cardinality λ and is universal for the class of linear (partial) orders of cardinality λ.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
321
in power λ. In Theorem 3.10, they generalized Theorem 3.6 by showing that if λ
is a regular cardinal and there is some κ+ < λ < 2κ, then there is no universal
linear order in power λ. They start Section 4 by noting that for a strong limit
cardinal µ, any ﬁrst-order theory T with |T| < µ has a universal model in power
µ. They prove in Theorem 4.3 that if θ and κ > θ+ are regular cardinals, κ < µ
and µ∗is the minimum size of a family A ⊆[µ]≤κ which has the property that for
all X ∈[µ]≤κ there are fewer than κ members of A whose union covers A, and if
there is a binary tree T ⊆<θ2 of size < κ with more than µ∗branches of length θ,
then there is no linear order of size µ which is universal for linear orders of size κ.
They show that if µ is a ﬁxed point of the aleph function of the ﬁrst order but not
the second order417 and σ + cf(λ) < λ, then µ∗= µ in the theorem stated above.
They draw two corollaries, proving that there is no universal linear order of power
µ for a singular cardinal if (1) µ is not a second order ﬁxed point, and there is
some σ < µ such that 2<σ < µ < 2σ, and if (2) ℵµ > µ or µ is not a second order
ﬁxed point, cf(µ) = ℵ0 or 2<cf(µ) < µ, and µ ̸= 2<µ.
9.3
Trees
We discuss a variety of results, many of them consistency proofs, on existence or
non-existence of trees. Later we look at the structure of families of trees under
embeddings.
Existence results
Kojman and Shelah [1993] proved that if µ<µ = µ, 2µ = µ+, and the set {α <
µ+ : cf(α) < µ} contains a non-reﬂecting stationary set, then there is a Suslin
tree on µ+ in which every ascending chain of size < µ has an upper bound, i.e. is
closed in the tree topology. They use a principle they describe as “closely related
to club guessing”, and recalled Gregory’s result [1976] that GCH together with
the existence non-reﬂecting stationary set of ω-coﬁnal elements of ω2 implies the
existence of an ℵ2-Suslin tree (see §7.7).
Magidor and Shelah [1996] proved that if a singular cardinal κ is the limit of
strongly compact cardinals, then there are no κ+-Aronszajn trees. Recall that for
regular cardinals, Jensen proved that in L, there is no λ-Aronszajn tree if and
only if λ is weakly compact. Magidor and Shelah went on to show the consistency
relative to large cardinals of there being no ℵω+1-Aronszajn tree, shedding light on
the diﬃculty of determining whether or not successors of singular cardinals must
support Aronszajn trees.
Cummings [1997] showed that, under certain cardinal and combinatorial as-
sumptions, there are Suslin trees on successor cardinals larger than ℵ1 which are
immune to specialization in cardinal and coﬁnality preserving forcing extensions.
417A cardinal λ is a ﬁxed point of the aleph function of the ﬁrst order if λ = ℵλ. It is not a
ﬁxed point of the second order if |{ν < λ : ν = ℵν}| = σ < λ.

322
Jean A. Larson
Cummings and Foreman [1998] derived the consistency of no ℵn-Aronszajn trees
for 2 ≤n < ω from the consistency of inﬁnitely many supercompact cardinals, and
also derived the consistency of the existence of a strong limit cardinal κ of countable
coﬁnality for which there are no κ++-Aronszajn trees from the consistency of a
supercompact cardinal with a weakly compact cardinal above.
In a paper submitted in 1998, Foreman, Magidor and Ralf Schindler [2001] in-
vestigated the consistency strength of the above result of Cummings and Foreman
[1998] and from it prove the existence of sharps for inner models with n Woodin
cardinals. In their proof they use a method of induction due to Woodin.
In an unpublished manuscript from 1994, Miyamoto showed that cov(M) ≥ℵ2
and the Stick Principle418 were suﬃcient to get a complete amalgamation system
for every ω-morass which by work of Velleman in his [1990] is enough to build a
Suslin tree. Brendle [2006] adapts Todorcevic’s Cohen Real to Suslin Tree Con-
struction and Miyamoto’s proof to show that ♣together with the assumption that
the meager idea M has a base of size ℵ1 implies there is a Suslin tree.
Structure under embeddings
Taneli Huuskonen [1995] called a tree of height ω1 persistent if it has a non-empty
subtree in which each node has extensions of all countable heights.
He intro-
duced and identiﬁed the ≤-smallest persistent tree T 0 whose nodes are sequences
(t0, . . . , tn) of countable ordinals ordered by (t0, . . . , tn) ≤(s0, . . . , sm) if n ≤m,
tn ≤sn, and i < n implies ti = si.
Todorcevic and Jouko V¨a¨an¨anen [1999] studied the quasi-order (T, ≤) where T
denotes the class of all trees of cardinality ω1 with no uncountable branches, and
S < T if and only if there is a strictly increasing map from S into T. Note that
there is no requirement that the maps be one-to-one, so they are not necessarily
homomorphisms. They proved a variety of results about the structure of (T, ≤),
with one set of results for those trees below T 0 and another set for those at or above
T 0 and (T/ ≡, ≤). For example, they showed in Theorem 33 that if 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1,
then there are incomparable special Aronszajn trees under order-preserving maps.
Recall that Abraham and Shelah [1985] had a similar result for homomorphic
embeddings.
In the same paper, Todorcevic and V¨a¨an¨anen identiﬁed the tree σQ as the
universal element in the class of R-embeddable Hausdorﬀtrees.
They showed
that the class LO1 of linear orders without uncountable well-ordered or conversely
well-ordered sub-orderings has no universal element, i.e. there is no K ∈LO1
such that every element of LO1 embeds in it. They also showed that there is no
universal element for the class PO1 of all those partial orders of cardinality at
most continuum which have no increasing ω1-sequence.419
418The Stick Principle asserts the existence of a family A of ℵ1 many countable subsets of ω1
such that every uncountable subset of ω1 contains a member of A.
419Dˇzamonja and Katherine Thompson [2005] showed that the least size of a universal family
for well-founded partial orders of power λ under order preserving embeddings is the least size
of a universal family for well-orders of size λ, which is λ+. They used club guessing arguments

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
323
Todorcevic [1998a] announced a Ramsey theoretic reformulation, under PFA,
of the existence of a two-element basis for the class of Aronszajn lines.420
9.4
Combinatorial principles
In the early 1990’s, Shelah [2000a] used his pcf theory to make a remarkable
connection between instances of Jensen’s Diamond Principle for successor cardinals
and instances of the GCH:421 for cardinals λ ≥ℶω,422 2λ = λ+ if and only if
♦λ+.423
In a paper received October 19, 1998, Cummings, Foreman, and Magidor [2001]
considered, in the context of singular cardinals, implications between square and
the scales of pcf theory, and proved consistency results between relatively strong
forms of square and stationary set reﬂection.
Abraham and Todorcevic [1997] focused attention on P-ideals on ω1.424 They
introduced a new property of ideals which they called (∗): for every P-ideal, either
1. there exists an uncountable subset A ⊆ω1 such that [A]ω ⊆I; or
2. ω1 may be decomposed into countably many subsets Ai such that Ai ∩I is
ﬁnite for all i < ω and I ∈I (they say Ai is orthogonal to I).
They observed that PFA implies (∗), but in this paper, showed that (∗) is consistent
with CH. They proved that if (∗) holds, then there are no Suslin trees, and they
drew many other consequences.
In a paper [Todorcevic, 2000] submitted in November 1999, Todorcevic simpliﬁes
the statement of (∗) to get an optimal P-ideal dichotomy, also called (∗): for every
P-ideal I of countable subsets of some set S, either
1. there exists an uncountable subset A ⊆S such that [A]ω ⊆I; or
2. S can be decomposed into countably many sets orthogonal to I.
He used this version to prove, among other results, that Jensen’s □κ fails for any
regular κ > ω1. Todorcevic proved that this P-ideal dichotomy follows from PFA
and that the consistency of the existence of a supercompact cardinal gives the
consistency of (∗) + GCH.
to prove that for regular λ strictly between ℵ1 and 2ℵ0, the least size of a universal family for
well-founded partial orders of power λ under rank and order preserving embeddings is at least
2ℵ0.
420Moore [2006a] showed that under the assumption of PFA, Aronszajn lines have a two-element
basis and the uncountable linear orders have a 5-element basis. This resolved Shelah’s Finite
Basis Problem (cf. end of Section 8); see our Postscript for a discussion.
421The paper was received February 15, 1994, revised November 16, 1998, and appear in the
December 2000 issue of the Israel Journal.
422Recall that ℶω is the least strong limit cardinal.
423Shelah [2010] improved his result to all uncountable λ.
424An ideal I on ω1 is a P-ideal if all its members are countable and it is ⊆∗-σ-directed.

324
Jean A. Larson
10
POSTSCRIPT
In this ﬁnal section we look back at some threads woven through this decade-by-
decade account, and we hark back to the opening of the chapter with the quotes
by Cantor and Motzkin.
Inspired by Cantor, we look at freedom as shown in
the generalization of notions of largeness, ﬁrst examining those used in successive
versions of the Regressive Function Theorem, then in generalizations of the Pi-
geonhole Principle, and in applications to partition relations and trees. We then
examine the winnowing process mentioned by Cantor that shaped the notion of
uncountable tree from the ramiﬁed sets, tables, and suites of Kurepa to the family
of ω1-trees classiﬁed as to whether they are special Aronszajn trees, non-special
Aronszajn trees, Suslin trees, or Kurepa trees. The Motzkin quote inspired a look
at structural results more generally, and we review the possibilities for describ-
ing the structure of uncountable linear orders that appeared in this century with
a brief peek at one in the next century. We wrap up the postscript with a few
remarks on interactions with the near neighbors of logic, topology and analysis.
First we look at the freedom to generalize notions of largeness for subsets of
a given set.
Our ﬁrst lens is on the series of generalizations of the Regressive
Function Theorem of Alexandroﬀand Urysohn [1929] that any regressive function
on the set of inﬁnite countable ordinals is constant on an uncountable set. Two
aspects were generalized, the possibilities for the domain of the regressive function
and the notion of largeness of the set on which the function is constant. Dushnik
[1931] extended the family of possible domains to include the set of inﬁnite ordi-
nal numbers less than an uncountable successor cardinal κ, with cardinality κ the
notion of largeness. Erd˝os [1950] then extended the domains to include the set of
inﬁnite ordinal numbers less than a singular cardinal κ of uncountable coﬁnality
and used being coﬁnal in κ as the notion of largeness, but relaxed the constraint
that the function be constant there to only require the values of the function to be
bounded. Nov´ak [1950] proved that a closed unbounded subset of the countable
ordinals was a suitable domain and used being uncountable as the notion of large-
ness. Neumer [1951], apparently unaware of Nov´ak’s work, weakened the domain
to stationary subsets of a regular cardinal κ, and used cardinality κ as the notion
of largeness. Finally Fodor, after a rediscovery in [1955] of the work of Dushnik,
strengthened Neumer’s Theorem to show any function deﬁned on a stationary set
is constant on a stationary subset. Fodor was not alone in rediscovering work by
others related to this theorem: Bloch [1953], Denjoy [1953], and Neumer [1958]
did so as well. The history of this theorem exempliﬁes the sort of forgetting and
remembering of theorems that happens over time, the independent discovery of
generalizations and proofs with variations that evolve into an especially beautiful
theorem.
The Regressive Function Theorem has been generalized to other contexts, but
we will stop here to recall that the original theorem can be regarded as a kind of
pigeonhole principle with ℵ1 pigeons and ℵ1 pigeonholes both labeled with inﬁnite
countable ordinals but a requirement that pigeons come to roost in pigeonholes

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
325
with a smaller label than their own label and a conclusion that an uncountable
number end up in the same pigeonhole.
The generalizations may be similarly
recast.
As we turn to look at various pigeonhole principles and how they are used to
prove partition theorems, particularly for pairs, we keep in mind the slogan that
is embedded in the Motzkin quote: complete disorder is impossible.
Recall the Schubfachprinzip, known in English as the Pigeonhole Principle, was
identiﬁed as a mathematical principle by Dirichlet in the 1800s and its generaliza-
tion to the transﬁnite has proved widely applicable. Basic cardinality arguments,
with inﬁnitely many objects deposited in ﬁnitely many places with at least one
receiving inﬁnitely many, or the extension with uncountable versus countable are
now fundamental in mathematical practice.
The important concept of coﬁnality allowed more nuanced generalizations. This
concept was brought into focus when a mistake in Bernstein’s thesis lead to the
(false) “proof” by Julius (Gyula) K˝onig that the continuum cannot be well-ordered
at the 1904 International Congress in Heidelberg. Hausdorﬀintroduced the con-
cept of coﬁnality [conﬁnality] in his paper [1906], worked out the basic properties
in his paper [1908], and included this material in his book [1914]. With the notion
of coﬁnality, one can say more: if κ objects are distributed among fewer than
coﬁnality of κ many cells, then one cell must have κ objects.
Now we turn to the use of pigeonhole principles in proofs of partition relations.
Ramsey speciﬁed the Axiom of Selections as his pigeonhole principle, i.e. the Ax-
iom of Choice. Recall that he constructed a sequence begin-homogeneous in the
inner induction step of his proof.
Many proofs of Ramsey’s Theorem exist. One example is an ultraﬁlter proof.
Building an end-homogeneous set is another natural approach. In their rediscovery
of Ramsey’s Theorem, Erd˝os and Szekeres used an Ordered Pigeonhole Principle
in which a suitably long sequence was required to have either a large monotone
increasing subsequence or a large monotone decreasing subsequence.
Recall that Erd˝os, in his proof [1942] that if b > aa, then b →(a+)2
a, built
a tree of subsets of the vertices of the complete graph on his underlying set: he
built a tree of subsets and a parallel tree of representatives with the entire set
of vertices at the root of the ﬁrst and a representative at the root of the second,
and at each successive stage through the transﬁnite, selected from each set on
the highest level a representative for the tree of vertices, and split the remaining
vertices in each subset according to the color class or graph to which the vertex
and the representative belonged. The process is quite like the one used by Ramsey,
but proceeds on all fronts simultaneously to create two trees: one of nested subsets
and another of the representative vertices with the set of vertices along any branch
forming a set which is end-homogeneous. One could say that he is using color
classes determined by speciﬁc representatives as his pigeonholes.
In the proof of the Positive Stepping Up Lemma, Erd˝os and Rado [1956] es-
sentially built a tree of sequences of ordinals with a largest element, where the
recursive deﬁnition of each sequence started with its top element and was so con-

326
Jean A. Larson
structed to be end-homogeneous for r-element subsets for r ≥2. They used the
functions h : [σ]r →k for σ < ℓas pigeonholes and determined that they had
more sequences than such pigeonholes so one must be of length at least ℓand they
could use it to ﬁnish their proof.
Milner and Rado [1965] investigated the generalization of the Pigeonhole Prin-
ciple to ordinals that is encompassed in the partition relation α →(α0, α1, . . . )1,
and discovered their paradoxical decomposition: for any uncountable cardinal κ
and every β < κ+, the negative relation β ↛(κω)1
ω holds.
A variation of Laver’s generalization of the Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem was used
by Milliken as his pigeonhole principle in the proof of Milliken’s Ramsey Theorem
for strongly embedded trees.
In Galvin’s investigation of partition relations of the form ϕ →(α)2
2 for all
countable ordinals α, he (see [Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974, 272] for a discussion of
Galvin’s “old theorems”) focused attention on those uncountable linear orders
ϕ that satisfy the pigeonhole principle represented by the relation ϕ →(ω)1
ω,
where Erd˝os and Hajnal in their paper with Rado [1965] and in their problem
paper [1971b] had focused attention on order types in which neither ω1 nor ω1∗is
embeddable. The Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem for order types validated Galvin’s
conjecture that this was the right approach. Galvin then tackled partial orders
and conjectured the same condition would be critical (see [Erd˝os and Hajnal,
1974, 272]). He was able to show that the hypothesis ϕ →(η)1
ω suﬃced in [1975].
Todorcevic [1985a] validated Galvin’s conjecture with a proof that ﬁrst showed
the result was true for non-special Aronszajn trees and then used that result to
derive his Poset Partition Theorem.
At the end of the century, co-ideals (the positive sets for their corresponding
ideals) were used together with elementary submodels to prove partition relations
for pairs starting with a cardinal resource, including the Balanced and Unbalanced
Baumgartner-Hajnal-Todorcevic Theorems and the consistency result of Foreman
and Hajnal.
Next we look at winnowing to enduring concepts, especially for trees. The ﬁrst
inﬁnite trees were graph-theoretic trees used by K˝onig in his Inﬁnity Lemma. The
ﬁrst systematic study of uncountable trees was by Kurepa who introduced ramiﬁed
sets, ramiﬁed tables, and suites. His basic notion was more general than what we
use today, allowing equivalent elements. His notion of homogeneous required a
constant size across the entire ramiﬁed table for every set consisting of all elements
with the same set of predecessors.
Eventually, these special partial orders became known as trees, and the key fea-
ture that the set of predecessors be well-ordered became standard. Further win-
nowing followed. Now the most studied trees are those whose levels have smaller
cardinality than their height and for which nodes whose set of predecessors have
limit order type are the unique elements with that set of predecessors, a feature
which means that the tree topology is Hausdorﬀ. These constraints allow trees
of height ω1 in which all levels are countable to be embedded in the collection of
functions from countable ordinals into ω ordered by end-extension. This collec-

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
327
tion of trees includes Aronszajn trees, special Aronszajn trees, Suslin trees, and
Kurepa trees, with special examples such as those coming from Countryman lines
and from the rho functions of Todorcevic. For those interested in learning more
about Aronszajn trees and their structure, the survey by Moore [2008b] is warmly
recommended.
As one way to look at the interaction of logic and inﬁnite combinatorics, we
revisit the basis question for uncountable linear orders. There we ﬁnd consistency
results via forcing, new axioms, and representation theorems.
Sierpi´nski [1946] showed that under the Continuum Hypothesis, there are 2c
many pairwise incomparable order types of sets of real numbers of power c = 2ℵ0,
so consistently any basis for the uncountable linear orders is very large.
Moore [2006a] proved the consistent existence of a ﬁnite basis for uncountable
linear orders, thereby resolving Shelah’s Finite Basis Problem (cf. end of Section
8). His accomplishment oﬀers us the opportunity to review the steps leading up
to his proof.
Recall that Baumgartner [1973] had given a forcing proof of the consistency
that all ℵ1-dense sets of reals are isomorphic, and Abraham and Shelah [1981] had
shown that Martin’s Axiom does not suﬃce. However, the Proper Forcing Axiom
does suﬃce.
Baumgartner [1976b] had investigated basis questions, mostly due to Galvin,
for the class of uncountable order types which are not the union of countably many
well-orderings. Galvin had asked if the collection consisting of ω1∗together with
all real types and all Specker types, was a basis for the class of uncountable order
types which are not a union of countably many well-orderings. Baumgartner had
shown there were more, but they all embed ω1. Baumgartner had shown in [1976b]
that every Specker type embeds a lexicographically ordered Aronszajn tree, and
in [1982] had showed that every Specker type is isomorphic to a lexicographically
ordered Aronszajn tree.
Baumgartner singled out the Aronszajn lines (Specker types) for special at-
tention with his Question 5(ii) [1976b, 221] which asked for the consistency of a
ﬁnite basis for them, and asked with his fourth problem on page 275 [1982] on the
consistency of the existence of a ﬁnite basis for uncountable linear orders. Under
PFA, the questions are the same, since the union of a ﬁnite basis for the Aronszajn
lines with {ω1, ω1∗, X} where X is an ℵ1-dense set of reals, is the desired basis.
As this chapter comes to a close, we note that just as ﬁnite combinatorics
beneﬁted by interaction with probability as indicated in the Motzkin quote, inﬁnite
combinatorics beneﬁted by interaction with logic and other areas of mathematics.
From logic and other parts of set theory, the ﬁeld beneﬁted by research on forc-
ing, large cardinals, ideals, model-theoretic methods, and an axiomatic approach
that has led to a wide variety of additional axioms for consistency results.
From topology came the notion of compactness (Tychonoﬀ’s Theorem), closure
operators, notions of largeness and smallness related to measure and category,
interest in products, Suslin’s Problem, the Normal Moore Space Conjecture and
S-space and L-space problems that stimulated work in set theory. Since trees are

328
Jean A. Larson
the foundation of many interesting topological spaces, set-theoretic topologists
have motivations and intuitions that lead to results interesting to both areas.
Finite combinatorics has provided tools applied applied in many proofs and has
been a source of inspiration, with many ﬁnite results, especially partition relations,
generalized to the inﬁnite and uncountable in a variety of ways.
Dynamical systems and ergodic theory have given new approaches to Ramsey
theory and interactions between Ramsey theory and Banach spaces has beneﬁted
both areas.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I have beneﬁted greatly from the many people who reviewed papers discussed here
in the Mathematical Reviews of the American Mathematical Society. I have used
the Mathematics Genealogy Project (http://genealogy.math.ndsu.nodak.edu/) as
a resource multiple times in this chapter. I also beneﬁted from the hospitality of
the University of M¨unster in June 2010, received help from the library of the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin in summer 2010, enjoyed the excellent library of Oberwolfach
in January 2011, and beneﬁted from the hospitality of the University of California,
Berkeley, during March and April, 2011. My thanks to my husband, Bill Mitchell,
for his encouragement and advice, to Andr´as Hajnal, for friendship over the years
and all he taught me as we wrote our chapter for the Handbook of Set Theory,
and to Rich Laver for sharing his joy in doing mathematics and reading the paper
and oﬀering suggestions and comments. I thank Peter Koepke for help with Haus-
dorﬀ’s German and Yuli Rudyak for help with Russian history and language. My
thanks to Stevo Todorcevic for stimulating conversations; I respect his opinions
both expressed in person and in his writings and ﬁnd them thought-provoking,
even if in some cases we disagree. My thanks to Andr´es Caicedo, James Cum-
mings and Justin Moore for comments on earlier versions of this paper, and to the
many people who shared personal knowledge of the history. Finally, my thanks to
Aki Kanamori whose patient encouragement and numerous suggestions have been
invaluable.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abraham and Bonnet, 1999] U. Abraham and R. Bonnet. Hausdorﬀ’s theorem for posets that
satisfy the ﬁnite antichain property. Fund. Math., 159(1):51–69, 1999.
[Abraham and Shelah, 1981] U. Abraham and S. Shelah. Martin’s Axiom does not imply that
every two ℵ1-dense sets of reals are isomorphic.
Israel J. Math., 38(1-2):161–176, 1981.
Published under the transliteration Avraham.
[Abraham and Shelah, 1982] U. Abraham and S. Shelah. Forcing with stable posets. J. Symbolic
Logic, 47(1):37–42, 1982. Published under the transliteration Avraham.
[Abraham and Shelah, 1985] U. Abraham and S. Shelah. Isomorphism types of Aronszajn trees.
Israel J. Math., 50(1-2):75–113, 1985.
[Abraham and Todorcevic, 1984] U. Abraham and S. Todorcevic.
Martin’s Axiom and ﬁrst
countable S- and L-spaces. In Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology, pages 327–346. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
329
[Abraham and Todorcevic, 1997] U. Abraham and S. Todorcevic.
Partition properties of ω1
compatible with CH. Fund. Math., 152(2):165–181, 1997.
[Abraham et al., 1985] U. Abraham, M. Rubin, and S. Shelah.
On the consistency of some
partition theorems for continuous colorings, and the structure of ℵ1-dense real order types.
Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 29(2):123–206, 1985.
[Abraham, 1979a] U. Abraham. Construction of a rigid Aronszajn tree. Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc., 77(1):136–137, 1979. Published under the transliteration Avraham.
[Abraham, 1979b] U. Abraham.
Isomorphisms of Aronszajn Trees and Forcing without the
Generalized Continuum Hypothesis. PhD thesis, Hebrew University, 1979.
[Abraham, 1983] U. Abraham. Aronszajn trees on ℵ2 and ℵ3. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 24(3):213–
230, 1983.
[Abraham, 1987] U. Abraham.
A note on Dilworth’s theorem in the inﬁnite case.
Order,
4(2):107–125, 1987.
[Abraham, 1999] U. Abraham. Models for Concurrency, volume 11 of Algebra, Logic and Ap-
plications. Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 1999.
[Abraham, 2010] U. Abraham. Successors of singular cardinals. In Handbook of Set Theory, I,
chapter 5, pages 333–394. Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[Aharoni and Berger, 2009] R. Aharoni and E. Berger. Menger’s theorem for inﬁnite graphs.
Invent. Math., 176(1):1–62, 2009.
[Aharoni et al., 1983] R. Aharoni, C. Nash-Williams, and S. Shelah. A general criterion for the
existence of transversals. J. London Math. Soc.(3), 47:43–68, 1983.
[Aharoni et al., 1984] R. Aharoni, C. Nash-Williams, and S. Shelah. Another form of a criterion
for the existence of transversals. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 29(2):193–203, 1984.
[Albers and Reid, 1988] D. Albers and C. Reid. An interview with Mary Ellen Rudin. College
Math. J., 19(2):114–137, 1988.
[Alexandroﬀand Urysohn, 1929] P. Alexandroﬀand P. Urysohn.
M´emoire sur les espaces
topologiques compacts. Verh. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Afd. Natuurk. Sect. 1, 14(1):1–96,
1929. Note suppl´ementaire, pp. 95–96.
[Alexandroﬀ, 1916] P. Alexandroﬀ. Sur la puissance des ensembles mesurables B. C. R. Acad.
Sci. Paris, 162:323–325, 1916.
[Alexandroﬀ, 1925] P. Alexandroﬀ. Paul Urysohn (Notice n´ecrologique). Fund. Math., 7:138–
140, 1925.
[Alexandroﬀ, 1979] P. Alexandroﬀ.
Pages from an autobiography.
Uspekhi Mat. Nauk,
34(6(210)):219–249, 1979.
References are to the translation in Russian Math. Surveys 34
(1979), no. 6, 267–304.
[Alvarez, 1999] C. Alvarez.
On the history of Souslin’s problem.
Arch. Hist. Exact Sci.,
54(3):181–242, 1999.
[Anonymous, 1984] Anonymous. Roman Sikorski (11 July 1920–12 September 1983). Studia
Math., 78(2):105, 1984.
[Argyros and Todorcevic, 2005] S. Argyros and S. Todorcevic. Ramsey Methods in Analysis.
Advanced Courses in Mathematics. CRM Barcelona. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 2005.
[Arhangel′skii and Dranishnikov, 1997] A. V. Arhangel′skii and A. N. Dranishnikov.
P. S.
Alexandroﬀand topology: an introductory note. Topology Appl., 80(1-2):1–6, 1997.
[Aronszajn and Smith, 1954] N. Aronszajn and K. Smith.
Invariant subspaces of completely
continuous operators. Ann. of Math. (2), 60:345–350, 1954.
[Aronszajn, 1935] N. Aronszajn. Sur les d´ecompositions des fonctions analytiques uniformes et
sur leurs applications. Acta Math., 65(1):1–156, 1935.
[Aronszajn, 1950] N. Aronszajn.
Theory of reproducing kernels.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
68:337–404, 1950.
[Aronszajn, 2011] M. Aronszajn. Death Date Nachman Aronszajn. Email message to Larson
dated March 2, 2011.
[Bachmann, 1955] H. Bachmann.
Transﬁnite Zahlen.
Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer
Grenzgebiete (N.F.), Heft 1. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-G¨ottingen-Heidelberg, 1955.
[Balcerzyk et al., 2000] S.
Balcerzyk,
W.
Bartol,
E.
Or lowska,
A.
Wieczorek,
and
A. Wojciechowska-Waszkiewicz. Jerzy  Lo´s (1920–1998). Studia Logica, 65(3):301–314, 2000.
[Banach and Kuratowski, 1928] S. Banach and K. Kuratowski.
Sur une g´en´eralisation du
probl`eme de la mesure. Fund. Math., 14(1):127–131, 1928.
[Banach, 1922] S. Banach. Sur les op´erations dans les ensembles abstraits et leur application
aux ´equations int´egrales. Fund. Math., 3:131–181, 1922.

330
Jean A. Larson
[Baumgartner and Hajnal, 1973] J. Baumgartner and A. Hajnal. A proof (involving Martin’s
Axiom) of a partition relation. Fund. Math., 78(3):193–203, 1973.
[Baumgartner and Hajnal, 1987] J. Baumgartner and A. Hajnal. A remark on partition rela-
tions for inﬁnite ordinals with an application to ﬁnite combinatorics. In Logic and Combi-
natorics (Arcata, Calif., 1985), volume 65 of Contemp. Math., pages 157–167. Amer. Math.
Soc., Providence, RI, 1987.
[Baumgartner and Hajnal, 2001] J. Baumgartner and A. Hajnal. Polarized partition relations.
J. Symbolic Logic, 66(2):811–821, 2001.
[Baumgartner and Laver, 1979] J. Baumgartner and R. Laver. Iterated perfect-set forcing. Ann.
Math. Logic, 17(3):271–288, 1979.
[Baumgartner and Prikry, 1976] J. Baumgartner and K. Prikry. On a theorem of Silver. Discrete
Math., 14(1):17–21, 1976.
[Baumgartner and Prikry, 1977] J. Baumgartner and K. Prikry.
Singular cardinals and the
generalized continuum hypothesis. Amer. Math. Monthly, 84(2):108–113, 1977.
[Baumgartner and Shelah, 1987] J. Baumgartner and S. Shelah.
Remarks on superatomic
Boolean algebras. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 33(2):109–129, 1987.
[Baumgartner et al., 1970] J. Baumgartner, J. Malitz, and W. Reinhardt. Embedding trees in
the rationals. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 67:1748–1753, 1970.
[Baumgartner et al., 1993] J. Baumgartner, A. Hajnal, and S. Todorcevic. Extensions of the
Erd˝os-Rado theorem. In Finite and Inﬁnite Combinatorics in Sets and Logic (Banﬀ, AB,
1991), pages 1–17. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1993.
[Baumgartner, 1970] J. Baumgartner. Decompositions and embeddings of trees. Notices Amer.
Math. Soc., 18:967, 1970. Abstract, preliminary report.
[Baumgartner, 1973] J. Baumgartner. All ℵ1-dense sets of reals can be isomorphic. Fund. Math.,
79(2):101–106, 1973.
[Baumgartner, 1974] J. Baumgartner. A short proof of Hindman’s theorem. J. Combinatorial
Theory Ser. A, 17:384–386, 1974.
[Baumgartner, 1975a] J. Baumgartner.
Canonical partition relations.
J. Symbolic Logic,
40(4):541–554, 1975.
[Baumgartner, 1975b] J. Baumgartner. Partition relations for uncountable ordinals. Israel J.
Math., 21(4):296–307, 1975.
[Baumgartner, 1975c] J. Baumgartner. Topological properties of Specker types. Notices Amer.
Math. Soc., 22:A–219, 1975. Abstract.
[Baumgartner, 1976a] J. Baumgartner.
Almost-disjoint sets, the dense set problem and the
partition calculus. Ann. Math. Logic, 9(4):401–439, 1976.
[Baumgartner, 1976b] J. Baumgartner. A new class of order types. Ann. Math. Logic, 9(3):187–
222, 1976.
[Baumgartner, 1980] J. Baumgartner.
Chains and antichains in P(ω).
J. Symbolic Logic,
45(1):85–92, 1980.
[Baumgartner, 1982] J. Baumgartner. Order types of real numbers and other uncountable or-
derings. In Ordered Sets (Banﬀ, Alta., 1981), volume 83 of NATO Adv. Study Inst. Ser. C:
Math. Phys. Sci., pages 239–277. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1982.
[Baumgartner, 1983a] J. Baumgartner. Iterated forcing. In Surveys in set theory, volume 87 of
London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 1–59. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[Baumgartner, 1983b] J. Baumgartner. Iterated forcing. In A. Mathias, editor, Surveys in Set
Theory, pages 1–59. London Math. Soc., London, 1983. London Math. Soc. Lecture Note
Series 87.
[Baumgartner, 1984] J. Baumgartner. Applications of the Proper Forcing Axiom. In Handbook
of Set-Theoretic Topology, pages 913–959. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Baumgartner, 1985] J. Baumgartner. Bases for Aronszajn trees. Tsukuba J. Math., 9(1):31–40,
1985.
[Baumgartner, 1989] J. Baumgartner. Remarks on partition ordinals. In Set Theory and its Ap-
plications (Toronto, ON, 1987), volume 1401 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 5–17. Springer,
Berlin, 1989.
[Baumgartner, 1997] J. Baumgartner. In Memoriam: Paul Erd˝os 1913-1996. B. Symbolic Logic,
3(1):70–71, 1997.
[Beckmann et al., 2008] A. Beckmann, M. Goldstern, and N. Preining. Continuous Fra¨ıss´e Con-
jecture. Order, 25(4):281–298, 2008.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
331
[Ben-David and Shelah, 1986] S. Ben-David and S. Shelah. Souslin trees and successors of sin-
gular cardinals. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 30(3):207–217, 1986.
[Bernstein, 1901] F. Bernstein.
Untersuchungen aus der Mengenlehre.
PhD thesis, inaugu-
ral dissertation, Georg-August-Universit¨at G¨ottingen, printed in Halle, 1901. Reprinted in
Mathematsche Annalen, vol. 61 (1905), pp. 111-155.
[Bernstein, 1908] F. Bernstein.
Zur Theorie der trigonometrischen reihen.
Berichte ¨uber
die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematische-Physische Klasse, 60:325–338, 1908.
[Bing, 1951] R. H. Bing. Metrization of topological spaces. Canadian J. Math., 3:175–186, 1951.
[Birkhoﬀ, 1940] G. Birkhoﬀ. Lattice Theory. American Mathematical Society, New York, 1940.
[Blass, 1972] A. Blass. Weak partition relations. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 35:249–253, 1972.
[Blass, 1981] A. Blass. A partition theorem for perfect sets. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 82(2):271–
277, 1981.
[Blass, 2009] A.
Blass.
Homogeneous
sets
from
several
ultraﬁlters.
Topology
Appl.,
156(16):2581–2594, 2009.
[Bloch, 1953] G. Bloch. Sur les ensembles stationnaires de nombres ordinaux et les suites dis-
tingu´ees de fonctions r´egressives. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 236:265–268, 1953.
[Blumberg, 1920] H. Blumberg. Hausdorﬀ’s Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre. Bull. Amer. Math.
Soc., 3(3):116–129, 1920.
[Bogart et al., 1990] K. Bogart, C. Greene, and J. Kung. The impact of the chain decomposition
theorem on classical combinatorics. In The Dilworth Theorems: Selected Papers of Robert P.
Dilworth, pages 19–29. Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1990.
[Bollob´as, 1997] B. Bollob´as. Paul Erd˝os – life and work. In The Mathematics of Paul Erd˝os I,
pages 1–41. Springer, Berlin, 1997.
[Bonnet and Pouzet, 1969] R. Bonnet and M. Pouzet. Extension et stratiﬁcation d’ensembles
dispers´es. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. A-B, 268:A1512–A1515, 1969.
[Bonnet and Pouzet, 1982] R. Bonnet and M. Pouzet.
Linear extensions of ordered sets.
In
Ordered sets (Banﬀ, Alta., 1981), volume 83 of NATO Adv. Study Inst. Ser. C: Math. Phys.
Sci., pages 125–170. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1982.
[Booth, 1970] D. Booth. Ultraﬁlters on a countable set. Ann. Math. Logic, 2(1):1–24, 1970.
[Bourbaki, 1939] N. Bourbaki. ´El´ements de math´ematique. Part I. Les structures fondamentales
de l’analyse. Livre I. Th´eorie des ensembles (Fascicule de r´esultats). Actual. Sci. Ind., no.
846. Hermann & Cie., Paris, 1939.
[Brendle, 2006] J. Brendle. Cardinal invariants of the continuum and combinatorics on uncount-
able cardinals. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 144(1-3):43–72, 2006.
[Brown et al., 1977] L. G. Brown, R. G. Douglas, and P. A. Fillmore. Extensions of C∗-algebras
and K-homology. Ann. of Math. (2), 105(2):265–324, 1977.
[Brualdi and Scrimger, 1968] R. Brualdi and E. Scrimger. Exchange systems, matchings, and
transversals. J. Combinatorial Theory, 5:244–257, 1968.
[Bry, 1981] F. Bry. Note on a theorem of J. Folkman on transversals of inﬁnite families with
ﬁnitely many inﬁnite members. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 30(1):100–102, 1981.
[Bukovsk´y, 1966] L. Bukovsk´y. Consistency theorems connected with some combinatorial prob-
lems. Comment. Math. Univ. Carolinae, 7:495–499, 1966.
[Cantor, 1883] G. Cantor.
¨Uber unendliche, lineare Punktmannichfaltigkeiten.
Math. Ann.,
21:545–591, 1883.
[Carlson and Simpson, 1984] T. Carlson and S. Simpson. A dual form of Ramsey’s theorem.
Adv. in Math., 53(3):265–290, 1984.
[Carlson and Simpson, 1990] T. Carlson and S. Simpson. Topological Ramsey theory. In Math-
ematics of Ramsey Theory, volume 5 of Algorithms Combin., pages 172–183. Springer, Berlin,
1990.
[Carlson et al., 2006] T. Carlson, N. Hindman, and D. Strauss. An inﬁnitary extension of the
Graham-Rothschild parameter sets theorem.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 358(7):3239–3262
(electronic), 2006.
[Carlson, 1984] T. Carlson. The pin-up conjecture. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Boulder, Colo.,
1983), pages 41–62. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984.
[Carlson, 1987] T. Carlson. An inﬁnitary version of the Graham-Leeb-Rothschild theorem. J.
Combin. Theory Ser. A, 44(1):22–33, 1987.

332
Jean A. Larson
[Carlson, 1988] T. Carlson. Some unifying principles in Ramsey theory. Discrete Math., 68(2-
3):117–169, 1988.
[Carruth, 1942] P. Carruth. Arithmetic of ordinals with applications to the theory of ordered
Abelian groups. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 48:262–271, 1942.
[Cayley, 1857] A. Cayley.
On the theory of analytical forms called Trees.
Phil. Magazine,
13:172–176, 1857.
[Cayley, 1875] A. Cayley. On the analytic forms called Trees, with applications to the theory
of chemical combinations. Brit. Assoc. Report, pages 257–305, 1875.
[Cayley, 1881] A. Cayley. On the analytic forms called Trees. Amer. J. Math., 4:266–268, 1881.
[Chang and Keisler, 1973] C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler. Model Theory. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Co., Amsterdam, 1973. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Vol.
73; Second edition published in 1977; Third edition in 1990 with additional material.
[Chang, 1965] C. C. Chang. A note on the two cardinal problem. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.,
16:1148–1155, 1965.
[Chang, 1972] C. C. Chang. A partition theorem for the complete graph on ωω. J. Combinatorial
Theory Ser. A, 12(3):396–452, 1972.
[Chang, 1998] C. C. Chang. The writing of the MV-algebras. Studia Logica, 61(1):3–6, 1998.
Many-valued logics.
[Choksi et al., 1989] J. R. Choksi, S. J. Eigen, J. C. Oxtoby, and V. S. Prasad. The work of
Dorothy Maharam on measure theory, ergodic theory and category algebras. In Measure and
Measurable Dynamics (Rochester, NY, 1987), volume 94 of Contemp. Math., pages 57–71.
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1989.
[Choodnovsky, 1975] G. Choodnovsky. Combinatorial properties of compact cardinals. In Inﬁ-
nite and Finite Sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday),
Vol. I, pages 109–130, Colloq. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai, Vol. 10. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1975.
[Ciesielski and Rassias, 2009] K. Ciesielski and T. Rassias. On Stan Ulam and his mathematics.
Aust. J. Math. Anal. Appl., 6(1):Art. 1, 9, 2009.
[Cohen, 1954] L. Cohen. October meeting in New York. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 60(1):20–37,
1954. Report on the October 22–24, 1953 meeting.
[Cohn, 2000] P. N. Cohn. Obituary: Arthur Harold Stone (1916-2000). Bulletin of the London
Mathematical Society, 34:613–618, 2000.
[Comfort and Negrepontis, 1982] W. W. Comfort and S. Negrepontis.
Chain Conditions in
Topology, volume 79 of Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1982.
[Comfort, 1977] W. W. Comfort.
Ultraﬁlters: some old and some new results.
Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc., 83(4):417–455, 1977.
[Comfort, 1997] W. W. Comfort. An interview with Arthur Stone. Topological Commentary,
2(1):1–10, 1997. Posted to http://at.yorku.ca/t/o/p/c/16.htm on February 3, 1997; repro-
duced from the Handbook of the History of General Topology.
[Comfort, 2005] W. Comfort. Honoring Neil Hindman. Sci. Math. Jpn., 62(2):317–320, 2005.
[Cooke, 1993] R. Cooke. The Luzin archive. Istor.-Mat. Issled., 34:246–255, 1993. In Russian.
[Cooke, 2010] R. Cooke. Naming inﬁnity [book review]. Math. Intelligencer, 32(1):59–64, 2010.
[Crossley, 1975] J. Crossley. Reminiscences of logicians. In Algebra and Logic (Fourteenth Sum-
mer Res. Inst., Austral. Math. Soc., Monash Univ., Clayton, 1974), volume 450 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, pages 1–62. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975. Reported by J. N. Crossley,
With contributions by C. C. Chang, John Crossley, Jerry Keisler, Steve Kleene, Mike Morley,
Vivienne Morley, Andrzej Mostowski, Anil Nerode, Gerald Sacks, Peter Hilton and David
Lucy.
[Cuesta Dutari, 1943] N. Cuesta Dutari. Teoria decimal de los tipos de orden. Revista Mat.
Hisp.-Amer. (4), 3:186–205, 242–268, 1943. Decimal theory of the order types.
[Cummings and Foreman, 1998] J. Cummings and M. Foreman. The tree property. Adv. Math.,
133(1):1–32, 1998.
[Cummings et al., 2001] J. Cummings, M. Foreman, and M. Magidor. Squares, scales and sta-
tionary reﬂection. J. Math. Log., 1(1):35–98, 2001.
[Cummings, 1997] J. Cummings. Souslin trees which are hard to specialise. Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc., 125(8):2435–2441, 1997.
[Cummings, 2005] J. Cummings.
Notes on singular cardinal combinatorics.
Notre Dame J.
Formal Logic, 46(3):251–282 (electronic), 2005.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
333
[Darby and Laver, 1998] C. Darby and R. Laver.
Countable length Ramsey games.
In Set
Theory (Cura¸cao, 1995; Barcelona, 1996), pages 41–46. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht,
1998.
[Darby, 1999] C. Darby. Negative partition relations for ordinals ωωα. J. Combin. Theory Ser.
B, 76:205–222, 1999. Notes circulated in 1995.
[de Jongh and Parikh, 1977] D. de Jongh and R. Parikh. Well-partial orderings and hierarchies.
Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 80=Indag. Math., 39(3):195–207, 1977.
[Dedekind, 1968] R. Dedekind.
Gesammelte mathematische Werke. B¨ande I–III.
Heraus-
gegeben von Robert Fricke, Emmy Noether und ¨Oystein Ore. Chelsea Publishing Co., New
York, 1968.
[Delsarte, 2000] J. Delsarte. Compte rendu de la r´eunion Bourbaki du 14 janvier 1935. Gaz.
Math., 84:16–18, 2000.
[Demidov and Levshin, 1999] S. S. Demidov and B. V. Levshin, editors. Delo akademika Niko-
laya Nikolaevicha Luzina. Russki˘ı Khristianski˘ı Gumanitarny˘ı Institut, St. Petersburg, 1999.
[Denjoy, 1946] A. Denjoy.
L’´enum´eration transﬁnie, Livre I: La notion de rang.
Gauthier-
Villars, Paris, 1946.
Bibliography compiled by G. Choquet; see pages XXVII-XXVIII for
material on Suslin’s problem.
[Denjoy, 1953] A. Denjoy. L’ordination des ensembles. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 236:1393–1396,
1953.
[Deuber, 1989] Walter A. Deuber.
Developments based on Rado’s dissertation “Studien zur
Kombinatorik”. In Surveys in Combinatorics, 1989 (Norwich, 1989), volume 141 of London
Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 52–74. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1989.
[Devlin and Johnsbr˙aten, 1974] K. Devlin and H. Johnsbr˙aten. The Souslin Problem, volume
405 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1974.
[Devlin and Shelah, 1978] K. Devlin and S. Shelah. A weak version of ♦which follows from
2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1. Israel J. Math., 29(2-3):239–247, 1978.
[Devlin and Shelah, 1979a] K. Devlin and S. Shelah. A note on the normal Moore space con-
jecture. Canad. J. Math., 31(2):241–251, 1979.
[Devlin and Shelah, 1979b] K. Devlin and S. Shelah.
Souslin properties and tree topologies.
Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 39(2):237–252, 1979.
[Devlin, 1972] K. Devlin. Note on a theorem of J. Baumgartner. Fund. Math., 76(3):255–260,
1972.
[Devlin, 1973] K. Devlin. Aspects of Constructibility. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 354.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1973.
[Devlin, 1974] K. Devlin. Order types, trees, and a problem of Erd˝os and Hajnal. Period. Math.
Hungar., 5:153–160, 1974.
[Devlin, 1978] K. Devlin. ℵ1-trees. Ann. Math. Logic, 13(3):267–330, 1978.
[Devlin, 1979a] K. Devlin. Some Partition Theorems and Ultraﬁlters on ω. PhD thesis, Dart-
mouth College, 1979. James E. Baumgartner, advisor.
[Devlin, 1979b] K. J. Devlin. Variations on ♦. J. Symbolic Logic, 44(1):51–58, 1979.
[Devlin, 1983] K. Devlin. A new construction of a Kurepa tree with no Aronszajn subtree. Fund.
Math., 118(2):123–127, 1983.
[Di Prisco and Todorcevic, 1999] C. Di Prisco and S. Todorcevic. A cardinal deﬁned by a po-
larized partition relation. Israel J. Math., 109:41–52, 1999.
[Dilworth, 1950] R. Dilworth.
A decomposition theorem for partially ordered sets.
Ann. of
Math. (2), 51:161–166, 1950.
[Dilworth, 1960] R. Dilworth. Some combinatorial problems on partially ordered sets. In Proc.
Sympos. Appl. Math., Vol. 10, pages 85–90. American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.
I., 1960.
[Donder, 1982] H. Donder. Prikry’s principle for ω2 and 0#. Cited by [Kanamori, 1986], 1982.
[Doner et al., 1978] J. Doner, A. Mostowski, and A. Tarski.
The elementary theory of well-
ordering—a metamathematical study. In Logic Colloquium ’77 (Proc. Conf. Wroc law, 1977),
pages 1–54. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978.
[Dow, 1989] A. Dow. Review of ﬁve articles by Todorˇcevi´c. J. Symbolic Logic, 54(2):653–658,
1989.
[Dow, 1992] A. Dow. Set theory in topology. In Recent Progress in General Topology (Prague,
1991), pages 167–197. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1992.
[Dowker, 1951] C. H. Dowker. On countably paracompact spaces. Canadian J. Math., 3:219–
224, 1951.

334
Jean A. Larson
[Drake, 1974] F. Drake. Set Theory: An Introduction to Large Cardinals, volume 76 of Studies
in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics.
North-Holland Publishing Company, Inc.,
Amsterdam-New York, 1974.
[Ducasse and Curry, 1962] C. J. Ducasse and H. Curry.
Early history of the Association of
Symbolic Logic. J. Symbolic Logic, 27(3):255–258, 1962.
[Duﬀus, 2003] D. Duﬀus. Obituary: Ivan Rival. Order, 20(2):173–183, 2003.
[Dushnik and Miller, 1940] B. Dushnik and E. Miller. Concerning similarity transformations of
linearly ordered sets. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 46:322–326, 1940.
[Dushnik and Miller, 1941] B. Dushnik and E. Miller. Partially ordered sets. Amer. J. of Math.,
63:600–610, 1941.
[Dushnik, 1931] B. Dushnik. A note on transﬁnite ordinals. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 37(12):860–
862, 1931.
[Dˇzamonja and Shelah, 1999] M. Dˇzamonja and S. Shelah. Similar but not the same: various
versions of ♣do not coincide. J. Symbolic Logic, 64(1):180–198, 1999.
[Dˇzamonja and Thompson, 2005] M. Dˇzamonja and K. Thompson. Universality results for well-
founded posets. Sarajevo J. Math., 1(14)(2):147–160, 2005.
[Dˇzamonja and Thompson, 2006] M. Dˇzamonja and K. Thompson. A poset hierarchy. Cent.
Eur. J. Math., 4(2):225–241 (electronic), 2006.
[Dˇzamonja et al., 2009] M. Dˇzamonja, J. Larson, and W. Mitchell. A partition theorem for a
large dense linear order. Israel J. Math., 171:237–284, 2009.
[Editors, 1977] The Editors. G´eza Fodor (1927–1977). Acta Sci. Math. (Szeged), 39(3-4):203–
204, 1977.
[Egorov, 1911] D. Egorov.
Sur les suites de fonctions mesurables.
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris,
152:244–246, 1911.
[Ehrenfeucht et al., 2008] A. Ehrenfeucht, V. W. Marek, and M. Srebrny, editors.
Andrzej
Mostowski and Foundational Studies. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2008.
[Ehrenfeucht, 1957] A. Ehrenfeucht. Application of games to some problems of mathematical
logic. Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Cl. III., 5:35–37, IV, 1957.
[Ehrenfeucht, 1959] A. Ehrenfeucht. Decidability of the theory of the linear ordering relation.
Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 6(3):268, 1959. Abstract 556-38.
[Ehrenfeucht, 1961] A. Ehrenfeucht. An application of games to the completeness problem for
formalized theories. Fund. Math., 49:129–141, 1961. Received January 1, 1960.
[Eisworth, 2009] T. Eisworth.
A note on strong negative partition relations.
Fund. Math.,
202(2):97–123, 2009.
[Eisworth, 2010] T. Eisworth. Successors of singular cardinals. In Handbook of Set Theory, II,
chapter 15, pages 1229–1350. Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[Ellentuck, 1974] E. Ellentuck. A new proof that analytic sets are Ramsey. J. Symbolic Logic,
39:163–165, 1974.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1958] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal.
On the structure of set-mappings.
Acta
Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar, 9:111–131, 1958.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1962a] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal. On a classiﬁcation of denumerable order
types and an application to the partition calculus. Fund. Math., 51:117–129, 1962.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1962b] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal. Some remarks concerning our paper “On the
structure of set-mappings”. Non-existence of a two-valued σ-measure for the ﬁrst uncountable
inaccessible cardinal. Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar., 13:223–226, 1962.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1966] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal. On a problem of B. J´onsson. Bull. Acad.
Polon. Sci. S´er. Sci. Math. Astronom. Phys., 14:19–23, 1966.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1971a] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal.
Ordinary partition relations for ordinal
numbers. Period. Math. Hungar., 1(3):171–185, 1971.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1971b] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal. Unsolved problems in set theory. In Ax-
iomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., UCLA, 1967), volume 13, pages 17–48.
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1974] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal. Solved and unsolved problems in set theory.
In Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium, (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., UC Berkeley, CA,
1971), volume 25, pages 261–265. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1974.
[Erd˝os and Milner, 1972] P. Erd˝os and E. Milner. A theorem in the partition calculus. Canad.
Math. Bull., 15:501–505, 1972.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1950] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. A combinatorial theorem. J. London Math.
Soc. (2), 25:249–255, 1950.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
335
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1952a] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. Combinatorial theorems on classiﬁcations of
subsets of a given set. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 2:417–439, 1952.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1952b] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado.
Solution to problem 4358.
Amer. Math.
Monthly, 59(4):255–257, 1952.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1953] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. A problem on ordered sets. J. London Math.
Soc. (2), 28(4):426–438, 1953.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. A partition calculus in set theory. Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc., 62:427–489, 1956.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1959] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. A theorem on partial well-ordering of sets of
vectors. J. London Math. Soc., 34:222–224, 1959.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1960] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. Intersection theorems for systems of sets. J.
London Math. Soc., 35:85–90, 1960.
[Erd˝os and Szekeres, 1935] P. Erd˝os and G. Szekeres. A combinatorial problem in geometry.
Compositio Math., 2:463–470, 1935.
[Erd˝os and Tarski, 1943] P. Erd˝os and A. Tarski. On families of mutually exclusive sets. Ann.
of Math. (2), 44(2):315–329, April 1943.
[Erd˝os and Tarski, 1961] P. Erd˝os and A. Tarski.
On some problems involving inaccessible
cardinals. In Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 50–82. Magnes Press, Hebrew
Univ., Jerusalem, 1961.
[Erd˝os et al., 1965] P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, and R. Rado. Partition relations for cardinal numbers.
Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar., 16:93–196, 1965.
[Erd˝os et al., 1968] P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, and E. Milner. On sets of almost disjoint subsets of a
set. Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar, 19:209–218, 1968.
[Erd˝os et al., 1984] P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, A. M´at´e, and R. Rado. Combinatorial Set Theory:
Partition Relations for Cardinals. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1984.
[Erd˝os et al., 1997] P. Erd˝os, S. Jackson, and R. Mauldin. On inﬁnite partitions of lines and
space. Fund. Math., 152(1):75–95, 1997.
[Erd˝os, 1942] P. Erd˝os. Some set-theoretical properties of graphs. Revista de la Universidad
Nacional de Tucum´an, Serie A, Matem´atica y Fisica T´eorica, 3:363–367, 1942.
[Erd˝os, 1949] P. Erd˝os. Advanced problem 4358. Amer. Math. Monthly, 56:480, 1949.
[Erd˝os, 1950] P. Erd˝os. Some remarks on set theory. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 1:127–141, 1950.
[Erd˝os, 1981] P. Erd˝os. My Scottish Book “problems”. In The Scottish Book: Mathematics
from the Scottish Caf´e, pages 35–43. Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1981.
[Erd˝os, 1987] P. Erd˝os. Some problems on ﬁnite and inﬁnite graphs. In Logic and Combinatorics
(Arcata, Calif., 1985), pages 223–228. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1987.
[Erd˝os, 1996] P. Erd˝os. On some of my favorite theorems. In D. Mikl´os, V. S´os, and T. Sz˝onyi,
editors, Combinatorics, Paul Erd˝os is Eighty. Vol. 2, volume 2 of Bolyai Society Mathematical
Studies, pages 97–132. J´anos Bolyai Mathematical Society, Budapest, 1996. Papers from the
International Conference on Combinatorics held at Keszthely, July 19–24, 1993.
[Everett and Whaples, 1949] C. Everett and G. Whaples. Representations of sequences of sets.
Amer. J. Math., 71:287–293, 1949.
[Farah, 2000] I. Farah. Analytic quotients: theory of liftings for quotients over analytic ideals
on the integers. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 148(702):xvi+177, 2000.
[Farah, 2011] I. Farah. All automorphisms of the Calkin algebra are inner. Ann. of Math. (2),
173(2): 619–661, 2011.
[Feferman, 2004] S. Feferman. Tarski’s conception of logic. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 126(1):5–13,
2004.
[Felscher, 1962] W. Felscher. Doppelte H¨ulleninduktion und ein Satz von Hessenberg und Bour-
baki. Arch. Math., 13:160–165, 1962.
[Fitzpatrick, 1997] B. Fitzpatrick, Jr. Some aspects of the work and inﬂuence of R. L. Moore.
In Handbook of the History of General Topology, Vol. 1, pages 41–61. Kluwer Acad. Publ.,
Dordrecht, 1997.
[Fleissner, 1975] W. Fleissner. When is Jones’ Space Normal? Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 50:375–
378, 1975.
[Fleissner, 1984] W. Fleissner.
The normal Moore space conjecture and large cardinals.
In
Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology, pages 733–760. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Fodor, 1955] G. Fodor. Generalization of a theorem of Alexandroﬀand Urysohn. Acta Sci.
Math. Szeged, 16:204–206, 1955.

336
Jean A. Larson
[Fodor, 1956] G. Fodor. Eine Bemerkung zur Theorie der regressiven Funktionen. Acta Sci.
Math. Szeged, 17:139–142, 1956.
[Folkman, 1970] J. Folkman. Transversals of inﬁnite families with ﬁnitely many inﬁnite mem-
bers. J. Combinatorial Theory, 9:200–220, 1970.
[Foreman and Hajnal, 2003] M. Foreman and A. Hajnal. A partition relation for successors of
large cardinals. Math. Ann., 325(3):583–623, 2003.
[Foreman et al., 1988] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Martin’s Maximum, saturated
ideals, and nonregular ultraﬁlters. I. Ann. of Math. (2), 127(1):1–47, 1988.
[Foreman et al., 2001] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and R. Schindler. The consistency strength of
successive cardinals with the tree property. J. Symbolic Logic, 66(4):1837–1847, 2001.
[Foreman, 1998a] M. Foreman. An ℵ1-dense ideal on ℵ2. Israel J. Math., 108:253–290, 1998.
[Foreman, 1998b] M. Foreman.
Generic large cardinals: new axioms for mathematics?
In
Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. II (Berlin, 1998), pages
11–21 (electronic), 1998. Extra Vol. II.
[Foreman, 2010] M. Foreman. Ideals and Generic Elementary Embeddings. In Handbook of Set
Theory, II, chapter 13, pages 885–1147. Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[Fra¨ıss´e, 1948] R. Fra¨ıss´e.
Sur la comparaison des types d’ordres.
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris,
226:1330–1331, April 1948.
[Fra¨ıss´e, 1953] R. Fra¨ıss´e. Sur quelques classiﬁcations des syst`emes de relations. PhD thesis,
Universit´e de Paris, 1953.
[Fra¨ıss´e, 1954] R. Fra¨ıss´e. Sur quelques classiﬁcations des syst`emes de relations. C.R. Acad.
Sci. Paris S´er. A–B, 1:35–182, 1954.
[Fra¨ıss´e, 1986] R. Fra¨ıss´e. Theory of Relations, volume 118 of Studies in Logic and the Foun-
dations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1986. Translated from
the French by P. Clote.
[Fra¨ıss´e, 2000] R. Fra¨ıss´e. Theory of Relations. Revised edition with an Appendix by Norbert
Sauer, rev. ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam; London, 2000. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of
Mathematics; vol 145.
[Franchella, 1997] M. Franchella. On the origins of D´enes K¨onig’s inﬁnity lemma. Arch. Hist.
Exact Sci., 51(1):3–27, 1997.
[Fremlin, 1989] D. Fremlin. Measure algebras. In Handbook of Boolean Algebras, Vol. 3, pages
877–980. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1989.
[Frewer, 1981] M. Frewer.
Felix Bernstein.
Jahresber. Deutsch. Math.-Verein., 83(2):84–95,
1981.
[Friˇc and Kent, 2000] R. Friˇc and D. Kent. In memoriam of Professor Josef Nov´ak. Czechoslovak
Math. J., 50(125)(1):221–223, 2000.
[Friedman, 1975] H. Friedman. One hundred and two problems in mathematical logic. J. Sym-
bolic Logic, 40:113–129, 1975.
[Frol´ık and Koutn´ık, 1985] Z. Frol´ık and V. Koutn´ık. The eightieth birthday of Professor Josef
Nov´ak. Czechoslovak Math. J., 35(110)(2):338–344, 1985.
[Frol´ık and Z´ıtek, 1975] Z. Frol´ık and F. Z´ıtek. The seventieth anniversary of Professor Josef
Nov´ak. Czechoslovak Math. J., 25(100):337–342, 1975.
[Furstenberg and Weiss, 1978] H. Furstenberg and B. Weiss. Topological dynamics and combi-
natorial number theory. J. Analyse Math., 34:61–85 (1979), 1978.
[Furstenberg, 1981] H. Furstenberg. Recurrence in Ergodic Theory and Combinatorial Number
Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1981. M. B. Porter Lectures.
[Gaifman and Specker, 1964] H. Gaifman and E. Specker. Isomorphism types of trees. Proc.
Amer. Math. Soc., 15:1–7, 1964.
[Gallai, 1967] T. Gallai. Transitiv orientierbare Graphen. Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar, 18:25–
66, 1967.
[Galvin and Hajnal, 1975] F. Galvin and A. Hajnal. Inequalities for cardinal powers. Ann. of
Math. (2), 101:491–498, 1975.
[Galvin and Larson, 1975] F. Galvin and J. Larson. Pinning countable ordinals. Fund. Math.,
82:357–361, 1975. Collection of articles dedicated to Andrzej Mostowski on his sixtieth birth-
day, VIII.
[Galvin and Prikry, 1973] F. Galvin and K. Prikry. Borel sets and Ramsey’s theorem. J. Sym-
bolic Logic, 38:193–198, 1973.
[Galvin and Prikry, 1976] F. Galvin and K. Prikry. Inﬁnitary Jonsson algebras and partition
relations. Algebra Universalis, 6(3):367–376, 1976.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
337
[Galvin and Shelah, 1973] F. Galvin and S. Shelah.
Some counterexamples in the partition
calculus. J. Combin Theory Ser. A, 15:167–174, 1973.
[Galvin et al., 1995] F. Galvin, A. Hajnal, and P. Komj´ath.
Edge decompositions of graphs
with no large independent sets. Publ. Inst. Math. (Beograd) (N.S.), 57(71):71–80, 1995. ¯Duro
Kurepa memorial volume.
[Galvin, 1968a] F. Galvin. A generalization of Ramsey’s theorem. Notices Amer. Math. Soc.,
15, 1968. Abstract 68T-368, received January 26, 1968.
[Galvin, 1968b] F. Galvin. Partition theorems for the real line (abstract). Notices Amer. Math.
Soc., 15, 1968. Erratum 16 (1969), 1095.
[Galvin, 1971] F. Galvin. Lectures by Fred Galvin. UCLA Seminar Notes taken April 27, 1971
by Marcia Brown, 1971.
[Galvin, 1975] F. Galvin. On a partition theorem of Baumgartner and Hajnal. In Inﬁnite and
Finite Sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday), Vol. II,
pages 711–729. Colloq. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai, Vol. 10. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Galvin, 1980] F. Galvin. Chain conditions and products. Fund. Math., 108(1):33–48, 1980.
[Galvin, 1994] F. Galvin. A proof of Dilworth’s chain decomposition theorem. Amer. Math.
Monthly, 101(4):352–353, 1994.
[Galvin, 2010] F. Galvin. Email to Larson dated November 8. With a copy to Prikry, 2010.
[Gandy and Sacks, 1967] R. Gandy and G. Sacks. A minimal hyperdegree. Fund. Math., 61:215–
223, 1967.
[Ghouila-Houri, 1962] A. Ghouila-Houri. Caract´erisation des graphes non orient´es dont on peut
orienter les arˇetes de mani`ere `a obtenir le graphe d’une relation d’ordre. C. R. Acad. Sci.
Paris, 254:1370–1371, 1962.
[Gilmore and Hoﬀman, 1964] P. Gilmore and A. Hoﬀman. A characterization of comparability
graphs and of interval graphs. Canad. J. Math., 16:539–548, 1964.
[Ginsburg, 1953a] S. Ginsburg.
Order Types and Similarity Transformations.
PhD thesis,
University of Michigan, 1953. Ben Dushnik, advisor.
[Ginsburg, 1953b] S. Ginsburg. Some remarks on order types and decompositions of sets. Trans.
Amer. Math. Soc., 74:514–535, 1953.
[Ginsburg, 1955] S. Ginsburg.
Order Types and Similarity Transformations.
Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc., 79:341–361, 1955.
[Gleyzal, 1940] A. Gleyzal.
Order types and structure of orders.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
48:451–466, 1940.
[G¨odel, 1940] K. G¨odel. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Con-
tinuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory. Annals of Mathematics Studies, no. 3.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1940.
[Gottschalk, 1951] W. Gottschalk.
Choice functions and Tychonoﬀ’s theorem.
Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc., 2:172, 1951.
[Gowers et al., 2008] T. Gowers, J. Barrow-Green, and I. Leader, editors. The Princeton Com-
panion to Mathematics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008.
[Gowers, 2003] W. Gowers. Ramsey methods in Banach spaces. In Handbook of the Geometry
of Banach Spaces, Vol. 2, pages 1071–1097. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2003.
[Graham and Kantor, 2006] L. Graham and J. Kantor. A comparison of two cultural approaches
to mathematics: France and Russia, 1890–1930. Isis, 97(1):56–74, 2006.
[Graham and Kantor, 2007] L. Graham and J. Kantor. Religious heresy and mathematical cre-
ativity in Russia. Math. Intelligencer, 29(4):17–22, 2007.
[Graham and Kantor, 2009] L. Graham and J. Kantor. Naming Inﬁnity. The Belknap Press
of Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 2009. A true story of religious mysticism and mathematical
creativity.
[Graham and Neˇsetˇril, 1997] R. Graham and J. Neˇsetˇril, editors.
The Mathematics of Paul
Erd˝os. I, volume 13 of Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1997.
[Graham and Neˇsetˇril, 2002] R. Graham and J. Neˇsetˇril. Ramsey Theory in the work of Paul
Erd˝os. In G. Hal´asz, L. Lov´asz, M. Simonovits, and V. S´os, editors, The Mathematics of Paul
Erd˝os II, volume 11 of Bolyai Society Mathematical Studies, pages 339–365. J´anos Bolyai
Mathematical Society and Springer-Verlag, Budapest, 2002.
[Graham and Rothschild, 1971] R. Graham and B. Rothschild.
Ramsey’s theorem for n-
parameter sets. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 159:257–292, 1971.

338
Jean A. Larson
[Graham and Rothschild, 1974] R. Graham and B. Rothschild. Some recent developments in
Ramsey theory. In Combinatorics (Proc. Advanced Study Inst., Breukelen, 1974), Part 2:
Graph theory; foundations, partitions and combinatorial geometry, pages 61–76. Math. Centre
Tracts, No. 56. Math. Centrum, Amsterdam, 1974.
[Graham et al., 1972] R. Graham, K. Leeb, and B. Rothschild. Ramsey’s theorem for a class of
categories. Advances in Math., 8:417–433, 1972.
[Graham et al., 1990] R. Graham, B. Rothschild, and J. Spencer. Ramsey Theory. John Wiley
& Sons Inc., New York, second edition, 1990.
[Gregory, 1976] J. Gregory. Higher Souslin trees and the generalized continuum hypothesis. J.
Symbolic Logic, 41(3):663–671, 1976.
[Gruenhage and Mashburn, 1999] G. Gruenhage and J. Mashburn.
On the decomposition of
order-separable posets of countable width into chains. Order, 16(1):171–177, 1999.
[Haddad and Sabbagh, 1969a] L. Haddad and G. Sabbagh. Calcul de certains nombres de Ram-
sey g´en´eralis´es. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. A-B, 268:A1233–A1234, 1969.
[Haddad and Sabbagh, 1969b] L. Haddad and G. Sabbagh. Nouveaux r´esultats sur les nombres
de Ramsey g´en´eralis´es. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. A-B, 268:A1516–A1518, 1969.
[Haddad and Sabbagh, 1969c] L. Haddad and G. Sabbagh. Sur une extension des nombres de
Ramsey aux ordinaux. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. A-B, 268:A1165–A1167, 1969.
[H´ajek et al., 2008] P. H´ajek, V. W. Marek, and P. Vopˇenka.
Mostowski and Czech-Polish
cooperation in mathematical logic. In Andrzej Mostowski and Foundational Studies, pages
403–405. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2008.
[H´ajek, 1971] P. H´ajek. Sets, semisets, models. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure
Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages 67–81. Amer.
Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Hajnal and Hamburger, 1999] A. Hajnal and P. Hamburger. Set Theory, volume 48 of London
Mathematical Society Student Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999. Trans-
lated from the 1983 Hungarian original, Halmazeim´elet, by Attila M´at´e.
[Hajnal and Juh´asz, 1967] A. Hajnal and I. Juh´asz. Discrete subspaces of topological spaces.
Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 70=Indag. Math., 29:343–356, 1967.
[Hajnal and Juh´asz, 1968] A. Hajnal and I. Juh´asz. On hereditarily α-Lindel¨of and hereditarily
α-separable spaces. Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest. E¨otv¨os Sect. Math., 11:115–124, 1968.
[Hajnal and Juh´asz, 1969] A. Hajnal and I. Juh´asz. Discrete subspaces of topological spaces.
II. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 72=Indag. Math., 31:18–30, 1969.
[Hajnal and Juh´asz, 1974] A. Hajnal and I. Juh´asz. On hereditarily α-Lindel¨of and α-separable
spaces. II.
Fund. Math., 81(2):147–158, 1974.
Collection of articles dedicated to Andrzej
Mostowski on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday, II.
[Hajnal and Komj´ath, 1997] A. Hajnal and P. Komj´ath. A strongly non-Ramsey order type.
Combinatorica, 17(3):363–367, 1997.
[Hajnal and Larson, 2010] A. Hajnal and J. Larson. Partition relations. In Handbook of Set
Theory, I, chapter 2, pages 129–213. Springer, Berlin, 2010.
[Hajnal et al., 1987] A. Hajnal, A. Kanamori, and S. Shelah. Regressive partition relations for
inﬁnite cardinals. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 299(1):145–154, 1987.
[Hajnal, 1960] A. Hajnal. Some results and problems in set theory. Acta Math. Hungar., 11:227–
298, 1960.
[Hajnal, 1961] A. Hajnal. Proof of a conjecture of S. Ruziewicz. Fund. Math., 50:123–128, 1961.
[Hajnal, 1964] A. Hajnal. Remarks on the theorem of W. P. Hanf. Fund. Math., 54:109–113,
1964.
[Hajnal, 1971] A. Hajnal. A negative partition relation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 68:142–
144, 1971.
[Hajnal, 1997] A. Hajnal. Paul Erd˝os’ set theory. In R. Graham and J. Neˇsetˇril, editors, The
Mathematics of Paul Erd˝os, II, volume 14 of Algorithms and Combinatorics, pages 352–393.
Springer, Berlin, 1997.
[Hales and Jewett, 1963] A. Hales and R. Jewett.
Regularity and positional games.
Trans.
Amer. Math. Soc., 106:222–229, 1963.
[Hall Jr., 1948] M. Hall Jr. Distinct representatives of subsets. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 54:922–
926, 1948.
[Hall, 1935] P. Hall. On representatives of subsets. J. London Math. Soc., 10:26–30, 1935.
[Halmos and Vaughan, 1950] P. Halmos and H. Vaughan.
The marriage problem.
Amer. J.
Math., 72:214–215, 1950.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
339
[Halpern and L¨auchli, 1966] J. Halpern and H. L¨auchli. A partition theorem. Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc., 124:360–367, 1966.
[Halpern and L´evy, 1964] J. Halpern and A. L´evy. The Ordering Theorem does not imply the
Axiom of Choice. Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 11, 1964. Abstract.
[Halpern and L´evy, 1971] J. Halpern and A. L´evy. The Boolean prime ideal theorem does not
imply the axiom of choice. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII,
Part I, Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages 83–134. Amer. Math. Soc., Prov-
idence, R.I., 1971.
[Halpern, 1962] J. Halpern. Contributions to the Study of Independence of the Axiom of Choice.
PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 1962.
[Halpern, 1964] J. Halpern. The independence of the axiom of choice from the Boolean prime
ideal theorem. Fund. Math., 55:57–66, 1964.
[Hanazawa, 1982] Masazumi Hanazawa. On Aronszajn trees with a non-Souslin base. Tsukuba
J. Math., 6(2):177–185, 1982.
[Hanf, 1964] W. Hanf. On a problem of Erd˝os and Tarski. Fund. Math., 53:325–334, 1964.
[Harary, 1983] F. Harary. A tribute to F. P. Ramsey. J. Graph Theory, 7:1–7, 1983.
[Harzheim, 2008] E. Harzheim. A construction of subsets of the reals which have a similarity
decomposition. Order, 25(2):79–83, 2008.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1901] F. Hausdorﬀ.
¨Uber eine gewisse Art geordneter Mengen.
Berichte ¨uber
die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨asischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physiche Klasse, 53:460–475, 1901.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1906] F. Hausdorﬀ. Untersuchungen ¨uber Ordnugstypen I, II, III. Berichte ¨uber
die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨asischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physiche Klasse, 58:106–169, 1906.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1907] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Untersuchungen ¨uber Ordnugstypen IV, V.
Berichte ¨uber
die Verlhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨asischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physiche Klasse, 59:84–159, 1907.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1908] F. Hausdorﬀ. Grundz¨uge einer Theorie der geordnete Mengenlehre. Math.
Ann., 65:435–505, 1908.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1909] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Die graduierung nach dem endverlauf.
Abhandlungen der
K¨oniglich S¨asischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Mathematisch-Physiche
Klasse, 31:295–334, 1909.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914] F. Hausdorﬀ. Grunz¨uge der Mengenlehre. Verlag Veit & Co, Leipzig, Ger-
many, 1914. Reprinted by Chelsea Publishing Company, 1949, 1965.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1916] F. Hausdorﬀ. Die m¨atigkeit der Borelischen Mengen. Math. Ann., 77:430–437,
1916.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1936] F. Hausdorﬀ. Summen von ℵ1 mengen. Fund. Math., 26:241–255, 1936.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1957] F. Hausdorﬀ. Mengenlehre. Chelsea Publishing Company, New York, 1957.
third, revised edition of [Hausdorﬀ, 1914]. Translated by John R. Auman as Set Theory.
[Hausdorﬀ, 2002] F. Hausdorﬀ. Felix Hausdorﬀ—gesammelte Werke. Band II. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2002. “Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre”. [“Foundations of set theory”], Edited and with
commentary by E. Brieskorn, S. D. Chatterji, M. Epple, U. Felgner, H. Herrlich, M. Huˇsek,
V. Kanovei, P. Koepke, G. Preuß, W. Purkert and E. Scholz.
[Hausdorﬀ, 2005] F. Hausdorﬀ. Hausdorﬀon Ordered Sets, volume 25 of History of Mathemat-
ics. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005. Translated from the German,
edited and with commentary by J. M. Plotkin.
[Heath, 1964] R. W. Heath. Screenability, pointwise paracompactness, and metrization of Moore
spaces. Canad. J. Math., 16:763–770, 1964.
[Helson, 1949] H. Helson. On a problem of Sikorski. Colloquium Math., 2:7–8, 1949.
[Hessenberg, 1906] G. Hessenberg.
Grundbegriﬀe der Mengenlehre.
Vandenhoek & Rupert,
G¨ottingen, 1906. see also Abhandlungen der Fries’schen Schule, N.S. 1 (1906), 4.Heft, 487-
706.
[Higman, 1952] G. Higman. Ordering by divisibility in abstract algebras. Proc. London Math.
Soc. (3), 2:326–336, 1952.
[Hilbert, 1892] D. Hilbert. ¨Uber die irreducibilitat Ganzer rationaler functionen mit Ganzzahli-
gen coeﬃcienten. J. Reine Angew. Math., 110:104–129, 1892.

340
Jean A. Larson
[Hilbert, 1900] D. Hilbert. Mathematische Probleme. Vortrag, gehalten auf dem internationalem
Mathematiker-Kongress zu Paris. 1900. Nachrichten von der K¨oniglichen Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen, pages 253–297, 1900. Translated in the Bulletin of the Ameri-
can Mathematical Society 8 (1902), 437-479.
[Hildebrandt, 1929] T. H. Hildebrandt. Letter to R. L. Moore dated October 15, 1929. From the
R. L. Moore Collection, Archives of American Mathematics, Center for American History,
The University of Texas at Austin, 1929.
[Hindman and McCutcheon, 2002] N. Hindman and R. McCutcheon. One sided ideals and Carl-
son’s theorem. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 130(9):2559–2567 (electronic), 2002.
[Hindman and Strauss, 1998] N. Hindman and D. Strauss. Algebra in the Stone- ˇCech Compact-
iﬁcation, volume 27 of de Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics. Walter de Gruyter & Co.,
Berlin, 1998. Theory and applications.
[Hindman, 1974] N. Hindman. Finite sums from sequences within cells of a partition of N. J.
Combinatorial Theory Ser. A, 17:1–11, 1974.
[Hindman, 2005] N. Hindman. Algebra in the Stone-ˇCech compactiﬁcation and its applications
to Ramsey theory. Sci. Math. Jpn., 62(2):321–329, 2005.
[Hindman, 2006] N. Hindman. The mathematics of Bruce Rothschild. J. Combin. Theory Ser.
A, 113(1):2–20, 2006.
[Holz et al., 1999] M. Holz, K. Steﬀens, and E. Weitz.
Introduction to Cardinal Arithmetic.
Birkh¨auser Advanced Texts: Basler Lehrb¨ucher. [Birkh¨auser Advanced Texts: Basel Text-
books], Basel, 1999.
[Hruˇs´ak, 2001] M. Hruˇs´ak. Life in the Sacks model. Acta Univ. Carolin. Math. Phys., 42(2):43–
58, 2001. 29th Winter School on Abstract Analysis (Lhota nad Rohanovem/Zahr´adky u ˇCesk´e
L´ıpy, 2001).
[Huntington, 1905a] E. Huntington. The continuum as a type of order: an exposition of the
modern theory. Ann. of Math. (2), 6(4):151–184, 1905.
[Huntington, 1905b] E. Huntington. The continuum as a type of order: an exposition of the
modern theory. Ann. of Math. (2), 7(1):15–43, 1905.
[Huntington, 1905c] E. Huntington. The Continuum as a Type of Order; An Exposition of the
Modern Theory, with an Appendix on the Transﬁnite Numbers. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1905.
[Huntington, 1905d] E. Huntington. A set of postulates for real algebra, comprising postulates
for a one dimensional continuum and the theory of groups. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 6:17–41,
1905.
[Huntington, 1917] E. Huntington. The Continuum and Other Types of Serial Order: With
an Introduction to Cantor’s Transﬁnite Numbers. Harvard University Press, second edition,
1917. Dover edition, 1955.
[Huuskonen, 1995] T. Huuskonen. Observations about Scott and Karp trees. Ann. Pure Appl.
Logic, 76(3):201–230, 1995.
[Igoshin, 1996] V. I. Igoshin. A short biography of Mikhail Yakovlevich Suslin. Uspekhi Mat.
Nauk, 51(3(309)):3–16, 1996. Translation in Russian Math. Surveys, 51(3):371–383.
[Jech, 1967] T. Jech. Non-provability of Souslin’s hypothesis. Comment. Math. Univ. Carolinae,
8(2):291–305, 1967.
[Jech, 1971] T. Jech. Trees. J. Symbolic Logic, 36:1–14, 1971.
[Jech, 1972] T. Jech. Automorphisms of ω1-trees. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 173:57–70, 1972.
[Jech, 1995] T. Jech. Singular cardinals and the pcf theory. Bull. Symbolic Logic, 1(4):408–424,
1995.
[Jech, 2003] T. Jech. Set Theory. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
2003. The third millennium edition, revised and expanded, 4th printing, 2006.
[Jensen, 1968] R. Jensen.
Souslin’s hypothesis is incompatible with V = L.
Notices Amer.
Math. Soc., 15(6), 1968. Abstract 68T-E31 received August 20, 1968.
[Jensen, 1969a] R. Jensen. Automorphism properties of Soulin continua. Notices Amer. Math.
Soc., 16(3), 1969. Abstract 69T-E24 received December 2, 1968.
[Jensen, 1969b] R. Jensen. Some combinatorial principles in V and in L. Handwritten notes
posted electronically on Jensen’s web site. From the cover page: These notes presenting results
of myself and Kunen were written at the Rockefeller University in 1969. Much of the work
can be found in Frank Drake’s book on large cardinals. Ronald Jensen 2002, 1969.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
341
[Jensen, 1972] R. Jensen. The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. Ann. Math. Logic,
4:229–308; erratum, ibid. 4 (1972), 443, 1972. With a section by Jack Silver.
[Johnston, 1956] J. Johnston. Universal inﬁnite partially ordered sets. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.,
7:507–514, 1956.
[Jones, 1933] F. B. Jones. Concerning normal and completely normal spaces. Bull. Amer. Math.
Soc., 39(9), 1933. Abstract 39-9-253-t (paper presented at the October 28, 1933 meeting of
the AMS at Columbia University; and listed in the report on that meeting on page 828 of vol.
39, issue 11).
[Jones, 1937] F. B. Jones. Concerning normal and completely normal spaces. Bull. Amer. Math.
Soc., 43(10):671–677, 1937.
[Jones, 1952] F. B. Jones. On the separation of the set of pairs of a set. J. Elisha Mitchell Sci.
Soc., 68:44–45, 1952.
[Jones, 1953] F. B. Jones.
On certain well-ordered monotone collections of sets.
J. Elisha
Mitchell Sci. Soc., 69:30–34, 1953.
[Jones, 1954] F. B. Jones. On a property related to separability in metric spaces. J. Elisha
Mitchell Sci. Soc., 70:30–33, 1954.
[Jones, 1980] F. B. Jones. Metrization, non-metrization and a bit of history. In Topology Con-
ference, 1979 (Greensboro, N.C., 1979), pages 1–4. Guilford College, Greensboro, N.C., 1980.
[Jones, 1993] F. B. Jones. Some glimpses of the early years. In Papers on General Topology and
Applications (Madison, WI, 1991), volume 704 of Ann. New York Acad. Sci., pages xi–xxii.
New York Acad. Sci., New York, 1993.
[Jones, 1997] F. B. Jones. The beginning of topology in the United States and the Moore school.
In Handbook of the History of General Topology, Vol. 1, pages 97–103. Kluwer Acad. Publ.,
Dordrecht, 1997.
[Jones, 1999] A. Jones. Some Results in the Partition Calculus. PhD thesis, Dartmouth College,
1999.
[Jones, 2000a] A. Jones.
A polarized partition relation using elementary substructures.
J.
Symbolic Logic, 65(4):1491–1498, 2000.
[Jones, 2000b] A. Jones. A short proof of a partition relation for triples. Electronic Journal of
Combinatorics, 7(1):Research Paper 24, 9 pp. (electronic), 2000.
[J´onsson, 1956] B. J´onsson. Universal relational systems. Math. Scand., 4:193–208, 1956.
[Juh´asz and Weiss, 1978] I. Juh´asz and W. Weiss.
On a problem of Sikorski.
Fund. Math.,
100(3):223–227, 1978.
[Juh´asz, 1980] I. Juh´asz.
A survey of S- and L-spaces.
In Topology, Vol. II (Proc. Fourth
Colloq., Budapest, 1978), volume 23 of Colloq. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai, pages 675–688,
Amsterdam, 1980. North-Holland.
[Jullien, 1969] P. Jullien. Contribution ´a l’´etude des types d’ordre dispers´es. PhD thesis, Mar-
seilles, 1969.
[Kanamori, 1982] A. Kanamori. On Silver’s and related principles. In Logic Colloquium ’80
(Prague, 1980), pages 153–172. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982.
[Kanamori, 1986] A. Kanamori.
Partition relations for successor cardinals.
Adv. in Math.,
59(2):152–169, 1986.
[Kanamori, 1994] A. Kanamori.
The Higher Inﬁnite.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
Large
cardinals in set theory from their beginnings.
[Kanamori, 2004] A. Kanamori. Zermelo and set theory. Bull. Symbolic Logic, 10(4):487–553,
2004.
[Kanamori, 2009] A. Kanamori. The Higher Inﬁnite. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second, corrected
edition edition, 2009. Large cardinals in set theory from their beginnings.
[Kanamori, 2011a] A. Kanamori. Historical remarks on Suslin’s Problem. In J. Kennedy and
R. Kossak, editors, Set Theory, Arithmetic and Foundations of Mathematics: Theorems,
Philosophies, volume 36 of Lecture Notes in Logic, page in press. Assoc. Symbol. Logic, 2011.
[Kanamori, 2011b] A. Kanamori. Kunen and set theory. To appear in Topology and its Appli-
cations, 2011.
[Kaplan, 1971] W. Kaplan. Mathematics at the University of Michigan. In P. Duran, editor, A
Century of Mathematics in America, (Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), volume
3, Part I, pages 179–134. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Keisler and Rowbottom, 1965] H. J. Keisler and F. Rowbottom. Constructible sets and weakly
compact cardinals. Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 12:373–374, 1965. Abstract 65T-186, received
February 8, 1965.

342
Jean A. Larson
[Keisler and Tarski, 1964] H. J. Keisler and A. Tarski. From accessible to inaccessible cardinals.
Results holding for all accessible cardinal numbers and the problem of their extension to
inaccessible ones. Fund. Math., 53:225–308, 1964.
[Keisler, 1976] H. J. Keisler. Elementary Calculus: An Inﬁnitesimal Approach. Prindle, Weber
and Schmidt, 1976.
[Kelley, 1955] J. Kelley. General Topology. D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., 1955.
[Kelley, 1959] J. Kelley. Measures on Boolean algebras. Paciﬁc J. Math., 9:1165–1177, 1959.
[Kelley, 1989] J. Kelley. Once over lightly. In A Century of Mathematics in America, Part III,
volume 3, pages 471–493. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1989.
[Kleene and Post, 1954] S. Kleene and E. Post. The upper semi-lattice of degrees of recursive
unsolvability. Ann. of Math. (2), 59:379–407, 1954.
[Kleinberg, 1970] E. Kleinberg. Strong partition properties for inﬁnite cardinals. J. Symbolic
Logic, 35:410–428, 1970.
[Kleinberg, 1977] E. Kleinberg. Inﬁnitary Combinatorics and the Axiom of Determinateness,
volume 612 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977.
[Knaster, 1945] B. Knaster. Sur une propri´et´e caract´eristique de l’ensemble des nombres r´eels.
Rec. Math. [Mat. Sbornik] N. S., 16(58):281–290, 1945.
[Koepke, 1983] P. Koepke. A Theory of Short Core Models and Some Applications. PhD thesis,
Albert-Ludwigs-Universit¨at Freiburg im Breisgau, 1983.
[Koepke, 1984] P. Koepke.
The consistency strength of the free-subset property for ωω.
J.
Symbolic Logic, 49(4):1198–1204, 1984.
[Kojman and Shelah, 1992] M. Kojman and S. Shelah. Nonexistence of universal orders in many
cardinals. J. Symbolic Logic, 57(3):875–891, 1992.
[Kojman and Shelah, 1993] M. Kojman and S. Shelah. µ-complete Souslin trees on µ+. Arch.
Math. Logic, 32(3):195–201, 1993.
[Kojman, 1998] M. Kojman.
Representing embeddability as set inclusion.
J. London Math.
Soc. (2), 58(2):257–270, 1998.
[Kolata, 1981] G. Kolata. Ronald L. Graham. In Science Year, 1981: the World Book Annual
Science Supplement, pages 372–387. World Book, Inc., 1981.
[Komj´ath and Shelah, 1995] P. Komj´ath and S. Shelah. Universal graphs without large cliques.
J. Combin. Theory Ser. B, 63(1):125–135, 1995.
[Komj´ath and Shelah, 2000] P. Komj´ath and S. Shelah. Two consistency results on set map-
pings. J. Symbolic Logic, 65(1):333–338, 2000.
[Komj´ath, 1982/86] P. Komj´ath. The mathematical work of G´eza Fodor. Mat. Lapok, 33(4):235–
242 (1987), 1982/86.
[Komj´ath, 1998] P. Komj´ath.
Distinguishing two partition properties of ω1.
Fund. Math.,
155(1):95–99, 1998.
[Komj´ath, 1999] P. Komj´ath. Some remarks on the partition calculus of ordinals. J. Symbolic
Logic, 64(2):436–442, 1999.
[K˝onig and Valk´o, 1926] D. K˝onig and S. Valk´o. ¨Uber mehrdeutige Abbildungen von Mengen.
Math. Ann., 95(1):135–138, 1926.
[K˝onig, 1926] D. K˝onig. Sur les correspondances multivoques. Fund. Math., 8:114–134, 1926.
[K˝onig, 1927] D. K˝onig. ¨Uber eine schlussweise aus dem endlichen ins unendlichen. Acta Sci.
Math. (Szeged), 3:121–130, 1927.
[K˝onig, 1931] D. K˝onig. Gr´apjok ´es m´atrixok (graphs and matrices). Mat. Fiz. Lapok, 38:116–
119, 1931. In Hungarian with German summary.
[K˝onig, 1936] D. K˝onig. Theorie der endlichen und unendlichen Graphen: Kombinatorische
Topolgie der Streckenkomplexe. Akademischen Verlagsgesellschaft, Leipzig, 1936. (Reprinted:
Chelsea, New York, 1950, ix+258.).
[K˝onig, 1990] D. K˝onig.
Theory of Finite and Inﬁnite Graphs.
Birkh¨auser Boston, Inc.,
Boston, MA, 1990. Translated from the German by Richard McCoart; with a commentary
by W. T. Tutte and biographical sketch by T. Gallai.
[Koppelberg, 1989] S. Koppelberg. Handbook of Boolean Algebras. Vol. 1. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Co., Amsterdam, 1989.
[Kozen, 1988] D. Kozen. A ﬁnite model theorem for the propositional µ-calculus. Studia Logica,
47(3):233–241, 1988.
[Kruskal, 1954] J. Kruskal. Theory of Well-Quasi-Ordering. PhD thesis, Princeton University,
1954. Roger Lyndon, advisor.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
343
[Kruskal, 1960] J. Kruskal. Well-quasi-ordering, the tree theorem, and Vazsonyi’s conjecture.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 95:210–225, 1960.
[Kunen and Tall, 2000] K. Kunen and F. Tall. The real line in elementary submodels of set
theory. J. Symbolic Logic, 65(2):683–691, 2000.
[Kunen and Vaughan, 1984] K. Kunen and J. Vaughan, editors.
Handbook of Set-Theoretic
Topology. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1984.
[Kunen, 1968] K. Kunen. Inaccessibility Properties of Cardinals. PhD thesis, Stanford Univer-
sity, 1968.
[Kunen, 1971] K. Kunen.
A partition theorem.
Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 19(2):Abstract
#71T–E17, 1971.
[Kunen, 1977] K. Kunen. Combinatorics. In Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Part B, pages
371–401. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1977.
[Kunen, 1978] K. Kunen. Saturated ideals. J. Symbolic Logic, 43(1):65–76, 1978.
[Kunen, 1980] K. Kunen. Set Theory. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1980. An
introduction to independence proofs.
[Kunen, 1983] K. Kunen. Set Theory. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1983. An
introduction to independence proofs, Reprint of the 1980 original.
[Kung et al., 2009] J. Kung, G.-C. Rota, and C. Yan. Combinatorics: The Rota Way. Cam-
bridge Mathematical Library. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009.
[Kuratowski, 1922] K. Kuratowski.
Une m´ethode d’´elimination des nombres transﬁnis des
raisonnements math´ematiques. Fund. Math., 3:76–107, 1922.
[Kuratowski, 1972] K. Kuratowski.
Wac law Sierpi´nski (1882–1969).
Acta Arith., 21:1–5. (1
plate, errata insert), 1972.
[Kuratowski, 1980] K. Kuratowski. A Half Century of Polish Mathematics, volume 108 of In-
ternational Series in Pure and Applied Mathematics. Pergamon Press Inc., Elmsford, N.Y.,
1980. Remembrances and reﬂections, translated from the Polish by Andrzej Kirkor, with a
preface by S. Ulam.
[Kurepa, 1934a] ¯D. Kurepa. Sur le continu lin´eaire. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 198:703–707, 1934.
[Kurepa, 1934b] ¯D. Kurepa. Sur les ensembles ordonn´es. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 198:882–885,
1934.
[Kurepa, 1934c] ¯D. Kurepa. Tableaux ramiﬁ´es d’ensembles. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 199:112–
114, 1934.
[Kurepa, 1934d] ¯D. Kurepa. Tableaux ramiﬁ´es d’ensembles, Espaces pseudo-distanci´es. C. R.
Acad. Sci. Paris, 198:1563–1565, 1934.
[Kurepa, 1935] ¯D. Kurepa. Ensembles ordonn´ees et ramiﬁ´es. Publ. Math. Univ. Belgrade, 4:1–
138, 1935. A35.
[Kurepa, 1937a] ¯D. Kurepa. Ensembles lin´eaires et une classe de tableaux ramiﬁ´es (Tableaux
ramiﬁ´es de M. Aronszajn). Publ. Inst. Math. (Beograd), 6:129–160, 1937.
[Kurepa, 1937b] ¯D. Kurepa. L’hypoth`ese du continu et les ensembles partiellement ordonn´es.
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 205:1196–1198, December 1937.
[Kurepa, 1937c] ¯D. Kurepa. Transformations monotones des ensembles partiellement ordonn´es.
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 205:1033–1035, November 1937.
[Kurepa, 1939] ¯D. Kurepa. Sur la puissance des ensembles partillement ordonn´es. C. R. Soc. Sci.
Varsovie, Cl. Math., 32:61–67, 1939. Sometimes the journal is listed in Polish: Sprawozdania
Towarzystwo Naukowe Warszawa Mat.-Fiz. as in the Math Review by Bagemihl.
[Kurepa, 1940a] ¯D. Kurepa. Transformations monotones des ensembles partiellement ordonn´es.
Revista Ci., Lima, 42:827–846, 1940.
[Kurepa, 1940b] ¯D. Kurepa.
Une propri´et´e des familles d’ensembles bien ordonn´ees lin´eares.
Studia Math., 9:22–35, 1940.
[Kurepa, 1941] ¯D. Kurepa. Transformations monotones des ensembles partiellement ordonn´es.
Revista Ci., Lima, 43:483–500, 1941.
[Kurepa, 1942] ¯D. Kurepa.
`A propos d’une g´en´eralisation de la notion d’ensembles bien or-
donn´es. Acta Math., 75(1:2):139–150, December 1942.
[Kurepa, 1948a] ¯D. Kurepa. L’hypoth`ese du continu et le probl`eme de Souslin. Acad. Serbe Sci.
Publ. Inst. Math., 2:26–36, 1948.
[Kurepa, 1948b] ¯D. Kurepa. Sur les ensembles ordonn´es d´enombrables. Hrvatsko Prirodoslovno
Druˇstvo. Glasnik Mat.-Fiz. Astr. Ser. II., 3:145–151, 1948.

344
Jean A. Larson
[Kurepa, 1950] ¯D. Kurepa. La condition de Souslin et une propri´et´e caract´eristique des nombres
r´eels. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 231:1113–1114, November 1950.
[Kurepa, 1952] ¯D. Kurepa. Sur une propri´et´e caract´eristique du continu lin´eaire et le probl`eme
de Suslin. Acad. Serbe Sci. Publ. Inst. Math., 4:97–108, 1952.
[Kurepa, 1953] ¯D. Kurepa. On reﬂexive symmetric relations and graphs. Slovenska Akad. Znan.
Umet. Razred Mat. Fiz. Tehn. Vede. Ser. A., 4(4):65–92, 1953.
[Kurepa, 1954] ¯D. Kurepa. On symmetrical binary relations. Conseil Acad. RFP Yougoslavie
Bull. Scientiﬁque, 2(1), 1954.
[Kurepa, 1959a] ¯D. Kurepa. On the cardinal number of ordered sets and of symmetrical struc-
tures in dependence on the cardinal numbers of its chains and antichains. Glasnik Mat.-Fiz.
Astronom. Druˇstvo Mat. Fiz. Hrvatske Ser. II, 14:183–203, 1959.
[Kurepa, 1959b] ¯D. Kurepa.
Sur la puissance des ensembles partillement ordonn´es.
Glasnik
Mat.-Fiz. Astronom. (Ser. II), 14:205–211, 1959. (reprint of C39, [Kurepa, 1939]) Reproduced
from C.R.Soc. Sci. Varsovie Cl. Math. 32, 1939, 61-67.
[Kurepa, 1968] ¯D. Kurepa. On A-trees. Publ. Inst. Math. (Beograd) (N.S.), 8 (22):153–161,
1968.
[Kurepa, 1969] ¯D. Kurepa. Around the general Suslin problem. In Proc. Internat. Sympos. on
Topology and its Applications (Herceg-Novi, 1968), pages 239–245. Savez Druˇstava Mat. Fiz.
i Astronom., Belgrade, 1969.
[Kurepa, 1996] ¯D. Kurepa.
Selected Papers of ¯Duro Kurepa.
Matematiˇcki Institut SANU,
Belgrade, 1996. Edited and with commentaries by Aleksandar Ivi´c, Zlatko Mamuzi´c, ˇZarko
Mijajlovi´c and Stevo Todorˇcevi´c.
[Kuzawa, 1970] M. Kuzawa. Fundamenta Mathematicae: An examination of its founding and
signiﬁcance. Amer. Math. Monthly, 77(5):485–492, 1970.
[la Vall´ee Poussin, 1916] C. de la Vall´ee Poussin. Int´egrales de Lebesgue, fonctions d’ensemble,
classes de Baire. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1916. Second edition, 1934, 193 pp.
[Larson, 1972] J. Larson. Some Arrow Relations. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley,
1972.
[Larson, 1973] J. Larson. A short proof of a partition theorem for the ordinal ωω. Ann. Math.
Logic, 6:129–145, 1973.
[Larson, 1975] J. Larson. Partition theorems for certain ordinal products. In Inﬁnite and Finite
Sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday), Vol. II, pages
1017–1024. Colloq. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai, Vol. 10. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Larson, 1980] J. Larson. A counterexample in the partition calculus for an uncountable ordinal.
Israel J. Math., 36(3-4):287–299, 1980.
[Larson, 1998] J. Larson. An ordinal partition from a scale. In Set Theory (Cura¸cao, 1995;
Barcelona, 1996), pages 109–125. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1998.
[Larson, 2000] J. Larson.
An ordinal partition avoiding pentagrams.
J. Symbolic Logic,
65(3):969–978, 2000.
[Larson, 2008] J. Larson. Notes of private conversation with R. Jensen and W. Mitchell, Septem-
ber 2008.
[L¨auchli and Leonard, 1966] H. L¨auchli and J. Leonard.
On the elementary theory of linear
order. Fund. Math., 59:109–116, 1966.
[Laver and Shelah, 1981] R. Laver and S. Shelah. The ℵ2-Souslin hypothesis. Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc., 264(2):411–417, 1981.
[Laver, 1969] R. Laver.
Order Types and Well-Quasi-Orderings.
PhD thesis, University of
California, Berkeley, 1969. Ralph McKenzie, Advisor.
[Laver, 1971] R. Laver. On Fra¨ıss´e’s order type conjecture. Ann. of Math. (2), 93:89–111, 1971.
[Laver, 1973] R. Laver. An order type decomposition theorem. Ann. of Math. (2), 98:96–119,
1973.
[Laver, 1975] R. Laver. Partition relations for uncountable cardinals ≤2ℵ0. In Inﬁnite and
Finite Sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday), Vol. II,
pages 1029–1042. Colloq. Math. Soc. Jan´os Bolyai, Vol. 10. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Laver, 1976] R. Laver. Well-quasi-orderings and sets of ﬁnite sequences. Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc., 79(1):1–10, 1976.
[Laver, 1978a] R. Laver. Better-quasi-orderings and a class of trees. In Studies in foundations
and combinatorics, volume 1 of Adv. in Math. Suppl. Stud., pages 31–48. Academic Press,
New York, London, 1978.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
345
[Laver, 1978b] R. Laver. A saturation property on ideals. Compositio Math., 36(3):233–242,
1978.
[Laver, 1979] R. Laver. Linear orders in (ω)ω under eventual dominance. In Logic Colloquium
’78 (Mons, 1978), volume 97 of Stud. Logic Foundations Math., pages 299–302. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.
[Laver, 1982] R. Laver. An (ℵ2, ℵ2, ℵ0)-saturated ideal on ω1. In Logic Colloquium ’80 (Prague,
1980), pages 173–180. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982.
[Laver, 1984] R. Laver. Products of inﬁnitely many perfect trees. J. London Math. Soc. (2),
29(3):385–396, 1984.
[Laver, 1987] R. Laver. Random reals and Souslin trees. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 100(3):531–
534, 1987.
[Lebesgue, 1905] H. Lebesgue. Sur les fonctions repr´esentables analytiquement. J. Math. Pures
Appl. (6), 1(1):139–216, 1905. Downloaded from http://portail.mathdoc.fr/JMPA/.
[Leeb, 1973] K. Leeb.
Vorlesungen ¨uber Pascaltheorie.
Arbeitsberichte des Inst. f¨ur Math.
Maschinene and Daterveravbeitung, 6(7), 1973.
[Lefschetz, 1930] S. Lefschetz. Topology, volume 12 of American Mathematical Society Collo-
quium Publications. American Mathematical Society, New York, 1930.
[L´evy and Solovay, 1967] A. L´evy and R. Solovay.
Measurable cardinals and the continuum
hypothesis. Israel J. Math., 5:234–248, 1967.
[Losada and Todorcevic, 2000] M. Losada and S. Todorcevic. Chains and antichains in Boolean
algebras. Fund. Math., 163(1):55–76, 2000.
[Louveau et al., 1993] A. Louveau, S. Shelah, and B. Veliˇckovi´c.
Borel partitions of inﬁnite
subtrees of a perfect tree. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 63(3):271–281, 1993.
[Louveau, 1974] A. Louveau. Une d´emonstration topologique de th´eor`emes de Silver et Mathias.
Bull. Sci. Math. (2), 98(2):97–102, 1974.
[Lusin and Sierpi´nski, 1918] N. Lusin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur quelques propri´et´es des ensembles.
Bull. Internat. Acad. Sci. Cracovie Ser. A, 4:35–48, 1918.
[Lusin and Sierpi´nski, 1923] N. Lusin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une ensemble non measurable b.
J. Math. Pures Appl. (9), 12:53–72, 1923.
[Lusin, 1914] N. Lusin. Sur un probl`eme de M. Baire. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 158:1268–1261,
1914.
[Lusin, 1917] N. Lusin. Sur la classiﬁcation de M. Baire. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 164:91–94,
1917.
[Lusin, 1934] N. Lusin. Sur les suites stationnaires. Number 149 in Actualit´es Scientiﬁques et
Industrielles. Hermann et Cie., Paris, 1934. French translation of Trudy Fiz.-Mat. Inst. Mat.
Otdel. 5:125–147, 1934.
[Magidor and Shelah, 1996] M. Magidor and S. Shelah. The tree property at successors of sin-
gular cardinals. Arch. Math. Logic, 35(5-6):385–404, 1996.
[Magill, 1996] K. Magill. An interview with John Isbell. Topological Commentary, 1(2), 1996.
Posted to http://at.yorku.ca/t/o/p/c/06.htm on May 20, 1996; last revised May 10, 1996.
[Maharam, 1947] D. Maharam.
An algebraic characterization of measure algebras.
Ann. of
Math. (2), 48:154–167, 1947.
[Maharam, 1948] D. Maharam. Set functions and Souslin’s Hypothesis. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.,
54:587–590, 1948.
[Malitz, 1968] J. Malitz. The Hanf number for complete Lω1,ω-sentences. In The Syntax and
Semantics of Inﬁnitary Languages, volume 72 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 166–
181. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1968.
[Marczewski, 1930] E. Marczewski. Sur l’extension de l’ordre partiel. Fund. Math., 16(2):386–
389, 1930. Published under the name Szpilrajn.
[Marczewski, 1945] E. Marczewski. Sur deux propr´et´es des classes d’ensembles. Fund. Math.,
33:303–307, 1945. Published under the name Szpilrajn-Marczewski.
[Marczewski, 1947] E. Marczewski.
S´eparabilit´e et multiplication cart´esienne des espaces
topologiques. Fund. Math., 34:127–143, 1947.
[Mardeˇsi´c, 1999] S. Mardeˇsi´c. Absolute neighborhood retracts and shape theory. In History of
Topology, pages 241–269. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1999.
[Martin and Solovay, 1970] D. A. Martin and R. Solovay.
Internal Cohen extensions.
Ann.
Math. Logic, 2(2):143–178, 1970.
[Matet, 1993] P. Matet.
Happy families and completely Ramsey sets.
Arch. Math. Logic,
32(3):151–171, 1993.

346
Jean A. Larson
[Mathias, 1968] A. Mathias. On a generalization of Ramsey’s theorem. Notices Amer. Math.
Soc., 15, 1968. Abstract 68T-E19, received July 18, 1968.
[Mathias, 1972] A. Mathias. Solution of problems of Choquet and Puritz. In Conference in
Mathematical Logic—London ’70 (Bedford Coll., London, 1970), pages 204–210. Lecture
Notes in Math., Vol. 255. Springer, Berlin, 1972.
[Mathias, 1973] A. Mathias. On sequences generic in the sense of Prikry. J. Austral. Math.
Soc., 15:409–414, 1973.
[Mathias, 1977] A. Mathias. Happy families. Ann. Math. Logic, 12(1):59–111, 1977.
[Mathias, 1979] A. Mathias. Surrealist landscape with ﬁgures (a survey of recent results in set
theory). Period. Math. Hungar., 10(2-3):109–175, 1979.
[Mathias, 1997] A. Mathias. Letter to Odell on the historical remarks concerning Ellentuck and
others in notes for his Mons lectures. Odell delivered a series of lectures in 1997 in Mons at
the conference Analyse et Logique, October 1997.
[Mauldin, 1981] R. Mauldin, editor. The Scottish Book. Birkh¨auser Boston, Mass., 1981. Math-
ematics from the Scottish Caf´e, including selected papers presented at the Scottish Book
Conference held at North Texas State University, Denton, Tex., May 1979.
[McAuley and Rao, 1981] L. F. McAuley and M. M. Rao, editors. General Topology and Modern
Analysis, New York, 1981. Academic Press Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers]. In
honor of the retirement of Professor F. Burton Jones.
[Menger, 1927] K. Menger. Zur allgemeinen Kurventheorie. Fund. Math., 10:96–115, 1927.
[Meyers, 1991] D. Meyers. Hanf’s eulogy. Rev. Modern Logic, 1(4):355–357, 1991.
[Michael, 1956] E. Michael. Continuous selections. I. Ann. of Math. (2), 63:361–382, 1956.
[Michael, 1962] E. Michael. A note on intersections. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 13:281–283, 1962.
[Miller, 1943] E. Miller. A note on Souslin’s problem. Amer. J. Math., 65(4):673–678, 1943.
[Miller, 1989] A. Miller.
Inﬁnite combinatorics and deﬁnability.
Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
41(2):179–203, 1989.
[Milliken, 1975a] K. Milliken. Ramsey’s theorem with sums or unions. J. Combinatorial Theory
Ser. A, 18:276–290, 1975.
[Milliken, 1975b] K. Milliken.
Some Results in Ramsey Theory.
PhD thesis, University of
California, Los Angeles, 1975.
[Milliken, 1979] K. Milliken. A Ramsey theorem for trees. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A, 26(3):215–
237, 1979.
[Milliken, 1981] K. Milliken.
A partition theorem for the inﬁnite subtrees of a tree.
Trans.
Amer. Math. Soc., 263(1):137–148, 1981.
[Milner and Prikry, 1986] E. Milner and K. Prikry. A partition theorem for triples. Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc., 97(3):488–494, 1986.
[Milner and Prikry, 1991] E. Milner and K. Prikry. A partition relation for triples using a model
of Todorˇcevi´c. Discrete Math., 95(1-3):183–191, 1991. Delivered at a conference Directions
in inﬁnite graph theory and combinatorics held in Cambridge, England in 1989.
[Milner and Rado, 1965] E. Milner and R. Rado. The pigeon-hole principle for ordinal numbers.
Proc. London Math. Soc. (3), 15:750–768, 1965.
[Milner and Shelah, 1975] E. Milner and S. Shelah. Some theorems on transversals. In Inﬁnite
and Finite Sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday), Vol.
III, pages 1115–1126. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Milner, 1969] E. Milner. Partition relations for ordinal numbers. Canad. J. Math., 21:317–334,
1969.
[Milner, 1971] E. Milner. A ﬁnite algorithm for the partition calculus. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth Summer Meeting of the Canadian Mathematical Congress (Lakehead Univ.,
Thunder Bay, Ont., 1971), pages 117–128. Lakehead Univ., Thunder Bay, Ont., 1971.
[Milner, 1975] E. Milner. Transversal theory. In Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians (Vancouver, B. C., 1974), Vol. 1, pages 155–169. Canad. Math. Congress,
Montreal, Que., 1975.
[Milner, 1982] E. Milner.
On the decomposition of partially ordered sets into directed sets.
In Proceedings of the International Mathematical Conference, Singapore 1981 (Singapore,
1981), volume 74 of North-Holland Math. Stud., pages 85–90. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1982.
[Milner, 1985] E. Milner. Basic wqo- and bqo-theory. In Graphs and Order (Proceedings of
the NATO Advanced Study Institute held in Banﬀ, Alta., May 18–31, 1984), volume 147 of
NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci., pages 487–502. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1985.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
347
[Milner, 1994] E. Milner. The use of elementary substructures in combinatorics. Discrete Math.,
136(1-3):243–252, 1994.
Delivered at the conference Trends in discrete mathematics held
October 29–31, 1992 in Bielefeld.
[Mirsky, 1971] L. Mirsky. Transversal Theory. An Account of Some Aspects of Combinatorial
Mathematics. Mathematics in Science and Engineering, Vol. 75. Academic Press, New York,
1971.
[Mitchell, 1972] W. Mitchell. Aronszajn trees and the independence of the transfer property.
Ann. Math. Logic, 5:21–46, 1972.
[Miyamoto, 1988] T. Miyamoto.
Some Results in Forcing.
PhD thesis, Dartmouth College,
1988. Advisor J. E. Baumgartner.
[Monk and Bonnet, 1989a] J. D. Monk and R. Bonnet, editors. Handbook of Boolean Algebras.
Vol. 2. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1989.
[Monk and Bonnet, 1989b] J. D. Monk and R. Bonnet, editors. Handbook of Boolean Algebras.
Vol. 3. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1989.
[Monk and Scott, 1964] D. Monk and D. Scott. Additions to some results of Erd˝os and Tarski.
Fund. Math., 53:335–343, 1964.
[Montalb´an, 2007] A. Montalb´an. On the equimorphism types of linear orderings. Bull. Symbolic
Logic, 13(1):71–99, 2007.
[Moore, 1916] R. L. Moore. On the foundations of plane analysis situs. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc., 17(2):131–164, 1916.
[Moore, 1927] R. L. Moore. Abstract sets and the foundations of analysis situs. Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc., 33(2), 1927. Abstract 23 (paper presented at the December 28—30, 1926 Annual
meeting of the AMS).
[Moore, 1932] R. L. Moore. Foundations of Point Set Theory, volume 13 of American Mathe-
matical Society Colloquium Publications. American Mathematical Society, New York, 1932.
[Moore, 1935] R. L. Moore. A set of axioms for plane analysis situs. Fund. Math., 25:13–28,
1935.
[Moore, 1942] R. L. Moore. Concerning separability. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 28:56–58,
1942. [Fitzpatrick, 1997, 48] says a space homeomorphic to Moore’s road space as described
in Moore’s letter to Hildebrandt appears in this paper.
[Moore, 1988] G. Moore. The origins of forcing. In Logic Colloquium ’86 (Hull 1986), volume
124 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 143–173. North Holland,
Amsterdam, 1988. Frank R. Drake and John K. Truss, editors.
[Moore, 2000] J. Moore.
Continuous colorings associated with certain characteristics of the
continuum. Discrete Math., 214(1-3):263–273, 2000.
[Moore, 2002] J. Moore. Open colorings, the continuum and the second uncountable cardinal.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 130(9):2753–2759 (electronic), 2002.
[Moore, 2006a] J. Moore. A ﬁve element basis for the uncountable linear orders. Ann. of Math.
(2), 163(2):669–688, 2006.
[Moore, 2006b] J. Moore. A solution to the L Space Problem. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 19(3):717–
736 (electronic), 2006.
[Moore, 2008a] G. Moore. The emergence of open sets, closed sets, and limit points in analysis
and topology. Historia Math., 35(3):220–241, 2008.
[Moore, 2008b] J. Moore. Structural analysis of Aronszajn trees. In Logic Colloquium 2005,
volume 28 of Lect. Notes Log., pages 85–106. Assoc. Symbol. Logic, Urbana, IL, 2008.
[Morley and Vaught, 1962] M. Morley and R. Vaught. Homogeneous universal models. Math.
Scand., 11:37–57, 1962.
[Moschovakis, 2009] Y. N. Moschovakis. Descriptive Set Theory, volume 155 of Mathematical
Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, second edition,
2009.
[Mostowski and Tarski, 1949] A. Mostowski and A. Tarski. Arithmetical classes and types of
well-ordered systems (abstract).
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 55(65), 1949.
Abstract 5–1–78;
erratum: ibid. 55:1192, 1949.
[Mostowski, 1938] A. Mostowski. ¨Uber gewisse universelle relationen. Ann. Soc. Polonaise de
Math., 17:117–118, 1938.
[Mostowski, 1939] A. Mostowski.
¨Uber die unabh¨angigkeit des wohlordnugssatzes vom ord-
nugsprinzip. Fund. Math., 32:201–252, 1939.
[Motzkin, 1967] T. Motzkin. Cooperative classes of ﬁnite sets in one and more dimensions. J.
Combinatorial Theory, 3:244–251, 1967.

348
Jean A. Larson
[Mycielski, 1964] J. Mycielski. Independent sets in topological algebras. Fund. Math., 55:139–
147, 1964.
[Mycielski, 1967] J. Mycielski. Algebraic independence and measure. Fund. Math., 61:165–169,
1967.
[Nash-Williams, 1963] C. Nash-Williams. On well-quasi-ordering ﬁnite trees. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc., 59:833–835, 1963.
[Nash-Williams, 1965a] C. Nash-Williams. On well-quasi-ordering inﬁnite trees. Proc. Cam-
bridge Philos. Soc., 61:697–720, 1965.
[Nash-Williams, 1965b] C. Nash-Williams. On well-quasi-ordering transﬁnite sequences. Proc.
Camb. Phil. Soc., 61:33–39, 1965.
[Nash-Williams, 1978] C. Nash-Williams. Another criterion for marriage in denumerable soci-
eties. Ann. Discrete Math., 3:165–179, 1978. Advances in graph theory (Cambridge Combi-
natorial Conf., Trinity College, Cambridge, 1977).
[Nash-Williams, 2000] C. Nash-Williams. Obituary: Eric Charles Milner. Bull. London Math.
Soc., 32(1):91–104, 2000.
[Nathanson, 2008] M. Nathanson.
Tennenbaum at Penn and Rochester.
Integers, 8(2):2–5,
2008.
[Nerode, 2004] A. Nerode. Preface. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 126(1):1–2, 2004. This preface is
for a volume which contains a collection of papers presented at the Alfred Tarski Centenary
Conference, held in Warsaw, May 27-June 1, 2001.
[Neˇsetˇril and R¨odl, 1990] J. Neˇsetˇril and V. R¨odl, editors.
Mathematics of Ramsey Theory,
volume 5 of Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990.
[Neumer, 1951] W. Neumer.
Verallgemeinerung eines Satzes von Alexandroﬀund Urysohn.
Math. Z., 54:254–261, 1951.
[Neumer, 1958] W. Neumer. Kritische Zahlen und bestimmt divergente transﬁnite Funktionen.
Math. Z., 70:190–192, 1958.
[Nosal, 1974] E. Nosal. On a partition relation for ordinal numbers. J. London Math. Soc. (2),
8:306–310, 1974.
[Nosal, 1979] E. Nosal. Partition relation for denumerable ordinals. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B,
27:190–197, 1979.
[Nov´ak, 1950] J. Nov´ak. A paradoxical theorem. Fund. Math., 37:77–83, 1950.
[Nov´ak, 1952] J. Nov´ak. On partition of an ordered continuum. Fund. Math., 39:53–64 (1953),
1952.
[Nyikos, 1980a] P. Nyikos. F. Burton Jones’s contributions to the normal Moore space prob-
lem. In Topology Conference, 1979 (Greensboro, N.C., 1979), pages 27–38. Guilford College,
Greensboro, N.C., 1980.
[Nyikos, 1980b] P. Nyikos. A provisional solution to the normal Moore space problem. Proc.
Amer. Math. Soc., 78(3):429–435, 1980.
[Nyikos, 2001] P. Nyikos. A history of the normal Moore space problem. In Handbook of the
History of General Topology, Vol. 3, volume 3 of Hist. Topol., pages 1179–1212. Kluwer Acad.
Publ., Dordrecht, 2001.
[Ochan, 1941] Y. S. Ochan. Sur une question li´ee au probl`eme de Souslin.
Bull. Acad. Sci.
URSS. S´er. Math. [Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR], 5:423–426, 1941. Appeared in Mathematical
Reviews under the name G. Otchan.
[Ochan, 1967] Y. S. Ochan. Sbornik zadach po metodam matematicheskoi ﬁziki. Izdat. “Vysˇs.
ˇSkola”, Moscow, 1967. Appeared in Mathematical Reviews under the name Ju. S. Oˇcan.
[Ohkuma, 1960] T. Ohkuma. Comparability between ramiﬁed sets. Proc. Japan Acad., 36:383–
388, 1960.
[Ohkuma, 1961] T. Ohkuma. Comparability between ramiﬁed sets. Osaka Math. J., 13:75–123,
1961.
[Ore, 1942] O. Ore. Theory of equivalence relations. Duke Math. J., 9:573–627, 1942.
[Ostaszewski, 1976] A. Ostaszewski. On countably compact, perfectly normal spaces. J. London
Math. Soc. (2), 14(3):505–516, 1976.
[Oxtoby, 1989] J. Oxtoby. Biographical note. In Measure and Measurable Dynamics (Rochester,
NY, 1987), volume 94 of Contemp. Math., pages xvii–xviii. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
RI, 1989. Biographical Note (Dorothy Maharam).
[Paris and Harrington, 1977] J. Paris and L. Harrington.
A mathematical incompleteness in
Peano arithmetic.
In Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Part D, pages 1133–1142. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1977.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
349
[Parker, 2005] J. Parker. R. L. Moore: Mathematician and Teacher. MAA Spectrum. Mathe-
matical Association of America, Washington, DC, 2005.
[Paul, 1997] S. Paul.
Die Moskauer mathematische Schule um N. N. Lusin, volume 11
of Berliner Studien zur Wissenschaftsphilosophie & Humanontogenetik [Berlin Studies on
the Philosophy of Science and Human Ontogenetics].
B. Kleine Verlag GmbH, Bielefeld,
1997. Entstehungs- und Entwicklungsgeschichte. Arbeitsprinzipien. Zerfall. Unter besonderer
Ber¨ucksichtigung der Kampagne gegen Lusin im Sommer 1936. [Origin and evolution. Work-
ing principles. Disintegration. With special consideration of the campaign against Luzin in
the summer of 1936].
[Pearl, 2007] E. Pearl, editor. Open Problems in Topology. II. Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, 2007.
[Perles, 1963] M. Perles. On Dilworth’s theorem in the inﬁnite case. Israel J. Math., 1:108–109,
1963.
[Phillips and Weaver, 2007] N. C. Phillips and N. Weaver. The Calkin algebra has outer auto-
morphisms. Duke Math. J., 139(1):185–202, 2007.
[Plotkin, 1993] J. Plotkin. Who put the “back” in back-and-forth? In Logical Methods (Ithaca,
NY, 1992), volume 12 of Progr. Comput. Sci. Appl. Logic, pages 705–712. Birkh¨auser Boston,
Boston, MA, 1993.
[Pouzet and Sauer, 2006] M. Pouzet and N. Sauer. From well-quasi-ordered sets to better-quasi-
ordered sets. Electron. J. Combin., 13(1):Research Paper 101, 27 pp. (electronic), 2006.
[Pouzet, 1992] M. Pouzet. Obituary: Ernest Corominas. Order, 9(1):1–3, 1992.
[Prikry, 1968] K. Prikry. Changing Measurable into Accessible Cardinals. PhD thesis, University
of California, Berkeley, 1968. Jack Silver, advisor.
[Prikry, 1972] K. Prikry. On a set-theoretic partition problem. Duke Math. J., 39:77–83, 1972.
[Prikry, 2010a] K. Prikry. Email to Galvin and Larson. Dated November 10, 2010., 2010.
[Prikry, 2010b] K. Prikry. Email to Larson. Dated October 28, 2010., 2010.
[Pr¨omel and Voigt, 1983] H. Pr¨omel and B. Voigt. Canonical partition theorems for parameter
sets. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A, 35(3):309–327, 1983.
[Pr¨omel and Voigt, 1985a] H. Pr¨omel and B. Voigt. Baire sets of k-parameter words are Ramsey.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 291(1):189–201, 1985.
[Pr¨omel and Voigt, 1985b] H. Pr¨omel and B. Voigt. Canonical forms of Borel-measurable map-
pings ∆: [ω]ω →R. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A, 40(2):409–417, 1985.
[Pr¨omel and Voigt, 1990] H. Pr¨omel and B. Voigt. Graham-Rothschild parameter sets. In Math-
ematics of Ramsey Theory, volume 5 of Algorithms Combin., pages 113–149. Springer, Berlin,
1990.
[Pr¨omel, 2005] H. Pr¨omel. Complete disorder is impossible: the mathematical work of Walter
Deuber. Combin. Probab. Comput., 14(1):3–16, 2005.
[Rado, 1931] R. Rado. Studien zur Kombinatorik. PhD thesis, Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit¨at
zu Berlin, 1931.
[Rado, 1933] R. Rado. Studien zur kombinatorik. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 36:424–480, 1933.
Eingeganen am 15. Februar 1932.
[Rado, 1943] R. Rado. Note on combinatorial analysis. Proc. London Math. Soc. (2), 48:122–
160, 1943.
[Rado, 1949a] R. Rado.
Axiomatic treatment of rank in inﬁnite sets.
Canadian J. Math.,
1:337–343, 1949.
[Rado, 1949b] R. Rado.
Covering theorems for ordered sets.
Proc. London Math. Soc. (2),
50:509–535, 1949.
[Rado, 1954a] R. Rado. Direct decomposition of partitions. J. London Math. Soc., 29:71–83,
1954.
[Rado, 1954b] R. Rado. Partial well-ordering of sets of vectors. Mathematika, 1:89–95, 1954.
[Rado, 1964] R. Rado. Universal graphs and universal functions. Acta Arith., 9:331–340, 1964.
[Rado, 1967] R. Rado. Note on the transﬁnite case of Hall’s theorem on representatives. J.
London Math. Soc., 42:321–324, 1967.
[Rado, 1970] R. Rado. Some partition theorems. In Combinatorial Theory and its Applications,
III (Proc. Colloq., Balatonf¨ured, 1969), pages 929–936. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
[Rado, 1981] R. Rado. Theorems on intervals of ordered sets. Discrete Math., 35:199–201, 1981.
[Rado, 1986] R. Rado. Note on canonical partitions. Bull. London Math. Soc., 18(2):123–126,
1986.
[Ramsey, 1930] F. Ramsey.
On a problem of formal logic.
Proc. London Math. Soc. (2),
30(1):264–286, 1930. Reprinted in Graham, Rothschild and Spencer [1990, 19–21].

350
Jean A. Larson
[Rebholz, 1974] J. Rebholz. Consequences of morass and diamond. Ann. Math. Logic, 7:361–
385, 1974.
[Ricabarra, 1956] R. Ricabarra. Partitions in sets of ordinal numbers. Rev. Mat. Cuyana, 2:1–
27, 1956. The volume appeared in 1958.
[Ricabarra, 1958] R. Ricabarra. Conjuntos ordenados y ramiﬁcados (Contribuci´on al estudio del
problema de Suslin). Instituto de Matematica, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bah´ıa Blanca,
1958.
[Richards, 1971] C. Richards. Presentation ceremony to Professor Richard Rado at the Univer-
sity of Reading, May 7, 1971. Bull. Inst. Math. Appl., 7:237–240, 1971.
[Riguet, 1948] J. Riguet. Relations binaires, fermetures, correspondances de Galois. Bull. Soc.
Math. France, 76:114–155, 1948.
[Robinson, 1941] R. Robinson. On the simultaneous approximation of two real numbers. Bull.
Amer. Math. Soc., 47:512–513, 1941.
[Rogers, 1998] C. A. Rogers. Obituary: Richard Rado. Bull. London Math. Soc., 30(2):185–195,
1998.
[Rogers, 1999] J. Rogers, Jr. F. Burton Jones (1910–1999)—an appreciation. In Proceedings of
the 1999 Topology and Dynamics Conference (Salt Lake City, UT), volume 24, pages 2–14,
1999.
[Roitman, 1978] J. Roitman. A reformulation of S and L. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 69(2):344–
348, 1978.
[Roitman, 1984] J. Roitman. Basic S and L. In Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology, pages
295–326. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Rosenstein, 1982] J. Rosenstein. Linear orderings, volume 98 of Pure and Applied Mathematics.
Academic Press Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers], New York, 1982.
[Ros lanowski and Shelah, 2001] A. Ros lanowski and S. Shelah. Historic forcing for depth. Col-
loq. Math., 89(1):99–115, 2001.
[Rothberger, 1948] F. Rothberger. On some problems of Hausdorﬀand of Sierpi´nski. Fund.
Math., 35:29–46, 1948.
[Rotman, 1970] B. Rotman. A mapping theorem for countable well-ordered sets. Proc. London
Math. Soc., 15:750–768, 1970.
[Rotman, 1971] B. Rotman. Remarks on some theorems of Rado on universal graphs. J. London
Math. Soc. (2), 4:123–126, 1971.
[Rowbottom, 1964] F. Rowbottom. Large Cardinals and Small Constructible Sets. PhD thesis,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1964.
[Rudin, 1950] M. E. Rudin.
Concerning abstract spaces.
Duke Math. J., 17:317–327, 1950.
Published under her maiden name, Estill.
[Rudin, 1951] M. E. Rudin. Separation in non-separable spaces. Duke Math. J., 18:623–629,
1951. Published under her maiden name Estill.
[Rudin, 1952] M. E. Rudin. Concerning a problem of Souslin’s. Duke Math. J., 19:629–639,
1952. Published under her maiden name, Estill.
[Rudin, 1953] W. Rudin. Principles of Mathematical Analysis. McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc., New York-Toronto-London, 1953.
[Rudin, 1955] M. E. Rudin.
Countable paracompactness and Souslin’s problem.
Canad. J.
Math., 7:543–547, 1955.
[Rudin, 1969] M. E. Rudin. Souslin’s conjecture. Amer. Math. Monthly, 76:1113–1119, 1969.
[Rudin, 1971] M. E. Rudin. A normal space X for which X × I is not normal. Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc., 77:246, 1971.
[Rudin, 1972] M. E. Rudin.
A normal hereditarily separable non-Lindel¨of space.
Illinois J.
Math., 16:621–626, 1972.
[Rudin, 1975a] M. E. Rudin. Lectures on Set Theoretic Topology. Published for the Conference
Board of the Mathematical Sciences by the American Mathematical Society, Providence,
R.I., 1975. Expository lectures from the CBMS Regional Conference held at the University
of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyo., August 12–16, 1974, Conference Board of the Mathematical
Sciences Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, No. 23.
[Rudin, 1975b] M. E. Rudin. The metrizability of normal Moore spaces. In Studies in Topology
(Proc. Conf., Univ. North Carolina, Charlotte, N.C., 1974; dedicated to Math. Sect. Polish
Acad. Sci.), pages 507–516. Academic Press, New York, 1975.
[Rudin, 1980] M. E. Rudin. S and L spaces. In Surveys in General Topology, pages 431–444.
Academic Press, New York, 1980.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
351
[Rudin, 1997] M. E. Rudin.
The early work of F. B. Jones.
In Handbook of the History of
General Topology, Vol. 1, pages 85–96. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1997.
[Rudin, 2008] M. E. Rudin. A mathematical friendship. Topology Appl., 155(8):752–753, 2008.
[Russell, 1920] B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. G. Allen & Unwin, second
edition, 1920.
[Sacks, 1971] G. Sacks. Forcing with perfect closed sets. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos.
Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967, Dana Scott,
editior), pages 331–355. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Sacks, 1999] G. Sacks. Recursion theoretic memories 1954–1978. In Models and Computability
(Leeds, 1997), volume 259 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., pages 367–376. Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1999.
[Sanders, 1968] J. Sanders. A Generalization of a Theorem of Schur. PhD thesis, Yale Univer-
sity, New Haven, Conn., 1968. ¨Oystein Ore, advisor.
[ˇSanin, 1946] N. ˇSanin. A theorem from the general theory of sets. C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci.
URSS (N.S.), 53:399–400, 1946.
[Scanlan, 1999] M. Scanlan.
Edward Vermilye Huntington.
American National Biography,
11:534–356, 1999.
[Scheepers, 1993] M. Scheepers. Gaps in ωω. In Set Theory of the Reals (Ramat Gan, 1991),
volume 6 of Israel Math. Conf. Proc., pages 439–561. Bar-Ilan Univ., Ramat Gan, 1993.
[Schipperus, 1999] R. Schipperus.
Countable Partition Ordinals.
PhD thesis, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80302, 1999.
[Schipperus, 2010] R. Schipperus. Countable partition ordinals. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 161:1195–1215, 2010.
[Schlindwein, 1989] C. Schlindwein. Special nonspecial ℵ1-trees. In Set Theory and its Appli-
cations (Toronto, ON, 1987), volume 1401 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 160–166.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.
[Schur, 1917] I. Schur.
¨Uber die Kongruenz xm + ym = zm(mod. p).
Jahresbericht der
Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 25:114–117, 1917.
[Scott, 1971] D. Scott, editor. Axiomatic Set Theory, Part I. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Severini, 1910] C. Severini. Sulle Successioni di Funzioni Ortogonali. Atti dell’Accademia Gioe-
nia, serie 5, 3(5):1–7, 1910.
[Shelah and Stanley, 1982] S. Shelah and L. Stanley. S-forcing. I. A “black-box” theorem for
morasses, with applications to super-Souslin trees.
Israel J. Math., 43(3):185–224, 1982.
Corrigendum: 53:304–314, 1986.
[Shelah and Stanley, 1987] S. Shelah and L. Stanley. A theorem and some consistency results
in partition calculus. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 36(2):119–152, 1987.
[Shelah and Stanley, 1988] S. Shelah and L. Stanley. Weakly compact cardinals and nonspecial
Aronszajn trees. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 104(3):887–897, 1988.
[Shelah and Stepr¯ans, 1987] S. Shelah and J. Stepr¯ans. Extraspecial p-groups. Ann. Pure Appl.
Logic, 34(1):87–97, 1987.
[Shelah and Stepr¯ans, 1988] S. Shelah and J. Stepr¯ans. A Banach space on which there are few
operators. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 104(1):101–105, 1988.
[Shelah, 1973] S. Shelah. Notes on combinatorial set theory. Israel J. Math., 14:262–277, 1973.
[Shelah, 1975] S. Shelah.
Notes on partition calculus.
In Inﬁnite and Finite Sets (Colloq.,
Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd˝os on his 60th birthday), Vol. III, pages 1257–1276.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Shelah, 1976] S. Shelah.
Decomposing uncountable squares to countably many chains.
J.
Combinatorial Theory Ser. A, 21(1):110–114, 1976.
[Shelah, 1977] S. Shelah. Whitehead groups may be not free, even assuming CH. I. Israel J.
Math., 28(3):193–204, 1977.
[Shelah, 1978a] S. Shelah.
Classiﬁcation Theory and the Number of Nonisomorphic Models,
volume 92 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing
Co., Amsterdam, 1978.
[Shelah, 1978b] S. Shelah. Jonsson algebras in successor cardinals. Israel J. Math., 30(1-2):57–
64, 1978.
[Shelah, 1980a] S. Shelah. Independence results. J. Symbolic Logic, 45(3):563–573, 1980.
[Shelah, 1980b] S. Shelah. A note on cardinal exponentiation. J. Symbolic Logic, 45(1):56–66,
1980.

352
Jean A. Larson
[Shelah, 1980c] S. Shelah. Whitehead groups may not be free, even assuming CH. II. Israel J.
Math., 35(4):257–285, 1980.
[Shelah, 1982a] S. Shelah. Better quasi-orders for uncountable cardinals. Israel J. Math., 42:177–
226, 1982.
[Shelah, 1982b] S. Shelah.
Proper Forcing, volume 940 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1982.
[Shelah, 1984a] S. Shelah. Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel J. Math., 48(1):1–
47, 1984.
[Shelah, 1984b] S. Shelah. On universal graphs without instances of CH. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
26(1):75–87, 1984.
[Shelah, 1985] S. Shelah. More on the weak diamond. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 28(3):315–318,
1985.
[Shelah, 1988a] S. Shelah. Successors of singulars, coﬁnalities of reduced products of cardinals
and productivity of chain conditions. Israel J. Math., 62(2):213–256, 1988.
[Shelah, 1988b] S. Shelah. Was Sierpi´nski right? I. Israel J. Math., 62:335–380, 1988. Sh: 276.
[Shelah, 1989] S. Shelah.
Consistency of positive partition theorems for graphs and models.
In Set Theory and its Applications (Toronto, ON, 1987), volume 1401 of Lecture Notes in
Math., pages 167–193. Springer, Berlin, 1989.
[Shelah, 1990a] S. Shelah. Strong negative partition above the continuum. J. Symbolic Logic,
55(1):21–31, 1990.
[Shelah, 1990b] S. Shelah. Universal graphs without instances of CH: revisited. Israel J. Math.,
70(1):69–81, 1990.
[Shelah, 1994] S. Shelah. Cardinal Arithmetic, volume 29 of Oxford Logic Guides. The Claren-
don Press Oxford University Press, New York, 1994. Oxford Science Publications.
[Shelah, 1998] S. Shelah. Proper and Improper Forcing. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second edition, 1998.
[Shelah, 2000a] S. Shelah.
The generalized continuum hypothesis revisited.
Israel J. Math.,
116:285–321, 2000.
[Shelah, 2000b] S. Shelah. On what I do not understand (and have something to say). I. Fund.
Math., 166(1-2):1–82, 2000. Saharon Shelah’s anniversary issue.
[Shelah, 2010] S. Shelah. Diamonds. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 138(6):2151–2161, 2010.
[Shepherdson, 1951a] J. C. Shepherdson. Well-ordered sub-series of general series. Proc. London
Math. Soc. (3), 1:291–307, 1951.
[Shepherdson, 1951b] J. C. Shepherdson.
Inner models for set theory. I.
J. Symbolic Logic,
16:161–190, 1951.
[Shepherdson, 1952] J. C. Shepherdson.
Inner models for set theory. II.
J. Symbolic Logic,
17:225–237, 1952.
[Shepherdson, 1953] J. C. Shepherdson. Inner models for set theory. III. J. Symbolic Logic,
18:145–167, 1953.
[Shepherdson, 1954] J. C. Shepherdson. On two problems of Kurepa. Paciﬁc J. Math., 4:301–
304, 1954.
[Shields, 1987] A. Shields. Luzin and Egorov. Math. Intelligencer, 9(4):24–27, 1987.
[Shore, 1974] R. Shore. Square bracket partition relations in L. Fund. Math., 84(2):101–106,
1974.
[Sierpi´nski, 1912] W. Sierpi´nski. Zarys Teorii Mnogo´sci. Wydawnictwo Kasy im. Mianowskiego,
Warsaw, 1912. An Outline of Set Theory. This book was based on 1909 lectures, 1st edition
1912, 2nd edition 1923, 3rd edition in 1928.
[Sierpi´nski, 1919] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une th´eor´eme ´equivalent ´a l’hypoth´ese du continu. Bull.
Internat. Acad. Sci. Cracovie Ser. A, pages 1–3, 1919.
[Sierpi´nski, 1924] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur l’hypoth`ese du continu. Fund. Math., 5:177–187, 1924.
[Sierpi´nski, 1928a] W. Sierpi´nski. Le¸cons sur les nombres transﬁnis. Gauthiers-Villars, Paris,
1928. 512.8 S5721 at UF.
[Sierpi´nski, 1928b] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une d´ecomposition d’ensembles. Monatsh. Math. Phys.,
35(1):239–242, 1928.
[Sierpi´nski, 1931] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur les familles croissantes de sous-ensembles d’un ensemble
d´enombrable. L’Enseignement Math´ematique, 30:240–242, 1931.
[Sierpi´nski, 1933] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une probl`eme de la th´eorie des relations. Annali Scuola
Norm. Super. Pisa Ser. 2, 2(1):285–287, 1933.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
353
[Sierpi´nski, 1934] W. Sierpi´nski. Hypoth`ese du Continu. Seminarjum Matematyczne Uniwer-
sytetu Warszawskiego, Warsaw, 1934. Monografje Matematyczne, Tome 4.
[Sierpi´nski, 1937] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur les suites transﬁnies ﬁnalement disjointes. Fund. Math.,
28:115–119, 1937.
[Sierpi´nski, 1946] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur les types d’ordre de puissance du continu. Revista Ci.,
Lima, 48:305–307, 1946.
[Sierpi´nski, 1948] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un probl`eme de la th´eorie g´en´erale des ensembles equivalent
un probl`eme de Souslin. Fund. Math., 35:165–174, 1948.
[Sierpi´nski, 1950] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur les types d’ordre des ensembles lin´eaires. Fund. Math.,
37:253–264, 1950.
[Sierpi´nski, 1958] W. Sierpi´nski. Cardinal and Ordinal numbers. Polska Akademia Nauk, Mono-
graﬁe Matematyczne. Tom 34. Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1958.
[Sierpi´nski, 1965] W. Sierpi´nski. Cardinal and Ordinal Numbers. PWN-Polish Scientiﬁc Pub-
lishers, Warszawa, 1965. Second edition revised.
[Sikorski, 1950] R. Sikorski. Remarks on some topological spaces of high power. Fund. Math.,
37:125–136, 1950.
[Silver, 1966] J. Silver. Some Applications of Model Theory in Set Theory. PhD thesis, Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley, 1966.
[Silver, 1970a] J. Silver. Every analytic set is Ramsey. J. Symbolic Logic, 35:60–64, 1970.
[Silver, 1970b] J. Silver. A large cardinal in the constructible universe. Fund. Math., 69:93–100,
1970.
[Silver, 1971a] J. Silver. The independence of Kurepa’s conjecture and two-cardinal conjectures
in model theory. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I,
Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages 383–390. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence,
R.I., 1971.
[Silver, 1971b] J. Silver. Some applications of model theory in set theory. Ann. Math. Logic,
3(1):45–110, 1971.
[Silver, 1975] J. Silver. On the singular cardinals problem. In Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians (Vancouver, B. C., 1974), Vol. 1, pages 265–268. Canad. Math.
Congress, Montreal, Que., 1975.
[Simpson, 1970] S. Simpson. Model-theoretic proof of a partition theorem (abstract). Notices
Amer. Math. Soc., 18, 1970. Abstract.
[Skolem, 1920] T. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber die Erf¨ulbarkeit oder
Beweisbarkeit mathematischer S¨atze nebst einem Theorem ¨uber dichte Mengen. Krist. Vid.
Selsk. Skr. I, 4:1–36, 1920. published in 1922; reprinted in van Heijenoort, 1967, third printing
1977.
[Skolem, 1933] T. Skolem. Ein kombinatorischer Satz mit Anwendung auf ein logisches Entschei-
dungsproblem. Fund. Math., 20:1–36, 1933.
[Skolem, 1970] T. Skolem. Selected Works in Logic. Edited by J. Fenstad. Universitetsforlaget,
1970.
[Slomson, 1972] A. B. Slomson. Generalized quantiﬁers and well orderings. Arch. Math. Logik.
Grundlagenforsch., 15:57–73, 1972.
[Soare, 1968a] R. Soare. Sets with no subsets of higher arithmetic degree. Notices Amer. Math.
Soc., 15, 1968. Abstract 68T-478, received April 1, 1968.
[Soare, 1968b] R. Soare.
Sets with no subsets of higher degree, preliminary report.
Notices
Amer. Math. Soc., 15, 1968. Abstract 656-37, received February 8, 1968.
[Soare, 1969] R. Soare. Sets with no subsets of higher degree. J. Symbolic Logic, 34:53–56, 1969.
[Soifer, 2009] A. Soifer. The Mathematical Coloring Book. Springer, New York, 2009. Mathe-
matics of coloring and the colorful life of its creators, With forewords by Branko Gr¨unbaum,
Peter D. Johnson, Jr. and Cecil Rousseau.
[Solovay and Tennenbaum, 1971] R. Solovay and S. Tennenbaum. Iterated Cohen extensions
and Souslin’s problem. Ann. of Math. (2), 94:201–245, 1971.
[Solovay, 1964] R. Solovay. The measure problem. J. Symbolic Logic, 29:227–228, 1964. Abstract
for the Association of Symbolic Logic meeting of July 13–17, 1964 held at the University of
Bristol; received July 6, 1964.
[Solovay, 1965] R. Solovay.
The measure problem.
Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 12:217, 1965.
Abstract 65T-62, received October 26, 1964.
[Solovay, 1967] R. Solovay. A nonconstructible ∆1
3 set of integers. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
127:50–75, 1967.

354
Jean A. Larson
[Solovay, 1970] R. Solovay. A model of set-theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue mea-
surable. Ann. of Math. (2), 92:1–56, 1970.
[Solovay, 1971] R. Solovay. Real-valued measurable cardinals. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages
397–428. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Solovay, 2010a] R. Solovay. 1963–66. Memo of November 13, 2010 sent to J. Larson, November
2010.
[Solovay, 2010b] R. Solovay. My cv, etc. Memo of November 6, 2010 sent to J. Larson, November
2010.
[S´os, 2002] V. S´os. Turbulent years: Erd˝os in his correspondence with Tur’an. In Simonovits
Lal´asz, Lov´asz and S´os, editors, The Mathematics of Paul Erd˝os I, volume 11 of Bolyai Society
Mathematical Studies, pages 85–146. J´anos Bolyai Mathematical Society and Springer-Verlag,
Hungary, 2002.
[Specker, 1949] E. Specker. Sur un probl`eme de Sikorski. Colloquium Math., 2:9–12, 1949.
[Specker, 1957] E. Specker. Teilmengen von Mengen mit Relationen. Comment. Math. Helv.,
31:302–314, 1957.
[Specker, 1990] E. Specker. Selecta. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 1990. Edited and with a preface
by Gerhard J¨ager, Hans L¨auchli, Bruno Scarpellini and Volker Strassen, With a biography of
Ernst Specker by Jonas Meon.
[Spector, 1956] C. Spector. On degrees of recursive unsolvability. Ann. of Math. (2), 64:581–592,
1956.
[Spencer, 1973] J. Spencer. Paul Erd˝os: The Art of Counting. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1973.
[Spencer, 1983] J. Spencer. Ramsey theory and Ramsey theoreticians. J. Graph Theory, 7:15–
23, 1983.
[Staar, 1979] G. Staar. ´Elete a matematika (his life in mathematics). Term´eszet Vil´aga, 3, 1979.
[Stanley et al., 1991] L. Stanley, D. Velleman, and C. Morgan. ω3ω1 →(ω3ω1, 3)2 requires an
inaccessible. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 111(4):1105–1118, 1991.
[Stern, 1978] J. Stern. A Ramsey theorem for trees, with an application to Banach spaces. Israel
J. Math., 29(2-3):179–188, 1978.
[Stewart, 1966] D. Stewart. (title unknown). Master’s thesis, University of Bristol, 1966. Master
of Science Thesis.
[Stoll, 1949] R. Stoll. Equivalence relations in algebraic systems. Amer. Math. Monthly, 56:372–
377, 1949.
[Strauss, 1984] D. Strauss.
Obituary:
Cliﬀord Hugh Dowker.
Bull. London Math. Soc.,
16(5):535–541, 1984.
[Suslin, 1917] M. Suslin. Sur une d´eﬁnition des ensembles mesurables B sans nombres transﬁnis.
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 164:88–91, 1917.
[Suslin, 1920] M. Suslin. Probl`eme 3. Fund. Math., 1, 1920.
[Szeptycki, 1980] P. Szeptycki. Introduction to this issue. Rocky Mountain J. Math., 10(1):1–6,
1980.
[Szeptycki, 1983] P. Szeptycki. Nachman Aronszajn (1907–1980). Wiadom. Mat., 25(1):89–96,
1983.
[Tall, 1969] F. Tall. Set-Theoretic Consistency Results and Topological Theorems Concerning
the Normal Moore Space Conjecture and Related Problems. PhD thesis, University of Wis-
consin, Madison, 1969. Advisor Mary Ellen Rudin.
[Tall, 1977] F. Tall. Set-theoretic consistency results and topological theorems concerning the
Normal Moore Space Conjecture and related problems.
Dissertationes Math. (Rozprawy
Mat.), 148:53, 1977.
[Tall, 1993] F. Tall, editor. The Work of Mary Ellen Rudin, volume 705 of Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences. New York Academy of Sciences, New York, 1993. Papers from
the Summer Conference on General Topology and Applications in honor of Mary Ellen Rudin
held in Madison, Wisconsin, June 26–29, 1991.
[Tarkowski, 1960] S. Tarkowski. On the comparability of dendrites. Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. S´er.
Sci. Math. Astronom. Phys., 8:39–41, 1960.
[Tarski, 1928] A. Tarski. Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles en sous-ensembles presque dis-
joints. Fund. Math., 12:188–205, 1928.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
355
[Tarski, 1929] A. Tarski. Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles en sous-ensembles presque dis-
joints. Fund. Math., 14:205–215, 1929.
[Taylor, 1975] A. Taylor. Some Results in Partition Theory. PhD thesis, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, N.H., 1975. Advisor J. E. Baumgartner; 113 pages.
[Taylor, 1976] A. Taylor. A canonical partition relation for ﬁnite subsets of ω. J. Combinatorial
Theory Ser. A, 21(2):137–146, 1976.
[Taylor, 1978] A. Taylor. Partitions of pairs of reals. Fund. Math., 99(1):51–59, 1978.
[Taylor, 1981] A. Taylor.
Diamond principles, ideals and the normal Moore space problem.
Canad. J. Math., 33(2):282–296, 1981.
[Taylor, 1982] A. Taylor. A note on van der Waerden’s theorem. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A,
33(2):215–219, 1982.
[Tennenbaum, 1959] S. Tennenbaum. Non-archimedian models for arithmetic. Notices Amer.
Math. Soc., 6, 1959. Abstract.
[Tennenbaum, 1968] S. Tennenbaum. Souslin’s problem. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 59:60–
63, 1968.
[Todorcevic and Farah, 1995] S. Todorcevic and I. Farah. Some Applications of the Method of
Forcing. Yenisei Series in Pure and Applied Mathematics. Yenisei, Moscow, 1995.
[Todorcevic and V¨a¨an¨anen, 1999] S. Todorcevic and J. V¨a¨an¨anen.
Trees and Ehrenfeucht-
Fra¨ıss´e games. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 100(1-3):69–97, 1999.
[Todorcevic and Veliˇckovi´c, 1987] S. Todorcevic and B. Veliˇckovi´c. Martin’s Axiom and parti-
tions. Compositio Math., 63(3):391–408, 1987.
[Todorˇcevi´c, 1979a] S. Todorˇcevi´c.
Rezultati i dokazi nezavisnosti u kombinatornoj teoriji
skupova. PhD thesis, University of Belgrade, 1979. Information from Mathematics Genealogy
Project.
[Todorcevic, 1979b] S. Todorcevic.
Rigid Aronszajn trees.
Publ. Inst. Math. (Beograd),
27(41):259–265, 1979. The SANU site lists it as appearing in 1980.
[Todorcevic, 1981a] S. Todorcevic. On the S-space problem. Amer. Math. Soc. Abstracts, 2(4),
1981. Abstract 81T-04-301.
[Todorcevic, 1981b] S. Todorcevic. A partition relation for partially ordered sets. Amer. Math.
Soc. Abstracts, 2(3), 1981. Abstract 81T-03-227.
[Todorcevic, 1981c] S. Todorcevic.
Some consequences of MA + ¬wKH.
Topology Appl.,
12(2):187–202, 1981.
[Todorcevic, 1981d] S. Todorcevic.
Trees, subtrees and order types.
Ann. Math. Logic,
20(3):233–268, 1981.
[Todorcevic, 1983a] S. Todorcevic.
Forcing positive partition relations.
Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc., 280(2):703–720, 1983.
[Todorcevic, 1983b] S. Todorcevic. On a conjecture of R. Rado. J. London Math. Soc. (2),
27(1):1–8, 1983.
[Todorcevic, 1984a] S. Todorcevic. A combinatorial property of sets of irrationals. Preprint,
July 1984.
[Todorcevic, 1984b] S. Todorcevic. A note on the proper forcing axiom. In Axiomatic set theory
(Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemp. Math., pages 209–218. Amer. Math. Soc.,
Providence, RI, 1984.
[Todorcevic, 1984c] S. Todorcevic. Trees and linearly ordered sets. In Handbook of Set-Theoretic
Topology, pages 235–293. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[Todorcevic, 1985a] S. Todorcevic. Partition relations for partially ordered sets. Acta Math.,
155(1-2):1–25, 1985.
[Todorcevic, 1985b] S. Todorcevic. Remarks on chain conditions in products. Compositio Math.,
55(3):295–302, 1985.
[Todorcevic, 1986a] S. Todorcevic. Reals and positive partition relations. In Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science, VII (Salzburg, 1983), pages 159–169. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1986.
[Todorcevic, 1986b] S. Todorcevic.
Remarks on cellularity in products.
Compositio Math.,
57(3):357–372, 1986.
[Todorcevic, 1987] S. Todorcevic. Partitioning pairs of countable ordinals. Acta Math., 159(3-
4):261–294, 1987.
[Todorcevic, 1988a] S. Todorcevic. A chain decomposition theorem. J. Combin. Theory Ser. A,
48(1):65–76, 1988.

356
Jean A. Larson
[Todorcevic, 1988b] S. Todorcevic. Oscillations of real numbers. In Logic Colloquium ’86 (Hull,
1986), pages 325–331. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988.
[Todorcevic, 1989] S. Todorcevic. Partition Problems in Topology, volume 84 of Contemporary
Mathematics. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1989.
[Todorcevic, 1994] S. Todorcevic. Some partitions of three-dimensional combinatorial cubes. J.
Combin. Theory Ser. A, 68(2):410–437, 1994.
[Todorcevic, 1998a] S. Todorcevic.
Basis problems in combinatorial set theory.
In Proceed-
ings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. II (Berlin, 1998), pages 43–52
(electronic), 1998. Extra Vol. II.
[Todorcevic, 1998b] S. Todorcevic. Countable chain condition in partition calculus. Discrete
Math., 188(1-3):205–223, 1998.
[Todorcevic, 2000] S. Todorcevic.
A dichotomy for P-ideals of countable sets.
Fund. Math.,
166(3):251–267, 2000.
[Todorcevic, 2007a] S. Todorcevic. Lipschitz maps on trees. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 6(3):527–
556, 2007.
[Todorcevic, 2007b] S. Todorcevic. Walks on Ordinals and their Characteristics, volume 263 of
Progress in Mathematics. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 2007.
[Todorcevic, 2010] S. Todorcevic.
Introduction to Ramsey Spaces, volume 174 of Annals of
Mathematics Studies. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2010.
[Transue, 1969] W. Transue, editor. Proceedings of the Auburn Topology Conference. Auburn
University, Auburn, Ala., 1969. Held at Auburn University, Auburn, Ala., March 13–15, 1969,
Dedicated to F. Burton Jones on the occasion of his 60th birthday.
[Tur´an, 1941] P. Tur´an.
Eine Extremalaufgabe aus der Graphentheorie.
Mat. Fiz. Lapok,
48:436–452, 1941.
[Ulam, 1930] S. Ulam. Zur masstheorie in der allgemeinen mengenlehre. Fund. Math., 16(1):140–
150, 1930.
[Ulam, 1974] S. Ulam. Sets, Numbers, and Universes: Selected Works. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass.-London, 1974. Edited by W. A. Beyer, J. Mycielski and G.-C. Rota, Mathe-
maticians of Our Time, Vol. 9.
[Ulam, 1976] S. Ulam. Adventures of a Mathematician. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York,
1976.
[Urysohn, 1924] P. Urysohn.
Un th´eor`eme sur la puissance des ensembles ordonn´es.
Fund.
Math., 5:14–19, 1924.
[van der Waerden, 1927] B. van der Waerden.
Beweis einer baudetschen vermutung.
Nieuw
Archief voor Wiskunde, 19:212–216, 1927.
[van der Waerden, 1930] B. van der Waerden.
Moderne Algebra. Teil 1, volume 33 of Der
Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Julius Springer, Berlin, 1930.
[van der Waerden, 1937] B. van der Waerden.
Moderne Algebra I.
Julius Springer, Berlin,
second edition, 1937. First edition copyrighted in 1931.
[van der Waerden, 1953] B. van der Waerden.
Modern Algebra, volume I.
Frederick Ungar
Publishing Co., second edition, 1953. English translation by Fred Blum of the second edition
from 1937.
[van der Waerden, 1954] B. van der Waerden. Einfall und ¨uberlegung in der Mathematik. III.
Elemente der Math., 9:49–56, 1954.
[van der Waerden, 1971] B. van der Waerden. How the proof of Baudet’s conjecture was found.
In Studies in Pure Mathematics (Presented to Richard Rado), pages 251–260. Academic
Press, London, 1971.
[van der Waerden, 1998] B. van der Waerden.
Wie der Beweis der Vermutung von Baudet
gefunden wurde. Elem. Math., 53(4):139–148, 1998.
[van Mill and Reed, 1990] J. van Mill and G. Reed, editors. Open Problems in Topology. North-
Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1990.
[Vaughan, 1980] J. E. Vaughan. Some cardinals related to c and topology. In Topology Con-
ference, 1979 (Greensboro, N.C., 1979), pages 39–49. Guilford College, Greensboro, N.C.,
1980.
[Vaught, 1952] R. Vaught. On the equivalence of the axiom of choice and a maximal principle.
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 58, 1952. Abstract 87t (presented by title) from the December 1,
1951 meeting of the American Mathematical Society in Pasadena, California.
[Vaught, 1963] R. Vaught. Models of complete theories. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 69:299–313,
1963.

Inﬁnite Combinatorics
357
[Vaught, 1997] R. Vaught. On the work of Andrzej Ehrenfeucht in model theory. In Structures
in logic and computer science, volume 1261 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
1–13. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1997.
[Veblen, 1906] O. Veblen. Book Review: The Continuum as a Type of Order: An Exposition
of the Modern Theory. With an Appendix on the Transﬁnite Numbers. Bull. Amer. Math.
Soc., 12(6):302–305, 1906.
[Velickovic and Woodin, 1998] B. Velickovic and W. H. Woodin. Complexity of reals in inner
models of set theory. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 92(3):283–295, 1998.
[Velleman, 1984a] D. Velleman. ω-Morasses, and a weak form of Martin’s Axiom provable in
ZFC. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 285(2):617–627, 1984.
[Velleman, 1984b] D. Velleman. Simpliﬁed morasses. J. Symbolic Logic, 49(1):257–271, 1984.
[Velleman, 1984c] D. Velleman.
Souslin trees constructed from morasses.
In Axiomatic Set
Theory (Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemp. Math., pages 219–241. Amer. Math.
Soc., Providence, RI, 1984.
[Velleman, 1990] D. Velleman.
Partitioning pairs of countable sets of ordinals.
J. Symbolic
Logic, 55(3):1019–1021, 1990.
[Vopˇenka, 1965] P. Vopˇenka. On m1x-model of set theory. Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. S´er. Sci.
Math. Astronom. Phys., 13:267–272, 1965.
[Vuksanovic, 2002] V. Vuksanovic. A combinatorial proof of a partition relation for [Q]n. Proc.
Amer. Math. Soc., 130(10):2857–2864, 2002.
[Watson, 1993] S. Watson. Mary Ellen Rudin’s early work on Suslin spaces. In The Work of
Mary Ellen Rudin (Madison, WI, 1991), volume 705 of Ann. New York Acad. Sci., pages
168–182. New York Acad. Sci., New York, 1993.
[Welsh, 2003] D. Welsh. Crispin St. J. A. Nash-Williams (1932–2001). Bull. London Math. Soc.,
35(6):829–844, 2003.
[Williams, 1977] N. Williams. Combinatorial Set Theory. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1977.
[Wilson, 1991] R. Wilson. Mathematical review of “theory of ﬁnite and inﬁnite graphs” authored
by D´enes K˝onig. Mathematical Reviews of the American Mathematical Society, 91f:01026,
1991. MR1035708.
[Wolfsdorf, 1980] K. Wolfsdorf. Der Beweis eines Satzes von G. Chudnovsky. Arch. Math. Logik
Grundlag., 20:161–171, 1980.
[Wolfsdorf, 1988] K. Wolfsdorf. Das Theorem von Hales-Jewett und M¨ogliche Verallgemeinerun-
gen. European J. Combin., 9(1):91–95, 1988.
[Wolk, 1962] E. Wolk. The comparability graph of a tree. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 13:789–795,
1962.
[Wolk, 1965] E. Wolk. A note on “The comparability graph of a tree”. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.,
16:17–20, 1965.
[Woodall, 1972] D. Woodall.
Two results on inﬁnite transversals.
In Combinatorics (Proc.
Conf. Combinatorial Math., Math. Inst., Oxford, 1972), pages 341–350. Inst. Math. Appl.,
Southend, 1972.
[Woodin, 1999] W. H. Woodin. The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonsta-
tionary Ideal, volume 1 of de Gruyter Series in Logic and its Applications. Walter de Gruyter
& Co., Berlin, 1999.
[Yesenin-Volpin, 1954] A. S. Yesenin-Volpin. The unprovability of Suslin’s hypothesis without
the axiom of choice in the system of axioms of Bernays-Mostowski.
Doklady Akad. Nauk
SSSR (N.S.), 96:9–12, 1954.
[Zarankiewicz, 1947] K. Zarankiewicz. Sur les relations syn´etriques dans l’ensemble ﬁni. Collo-
quium Math., 1:10–14, 1947.
[Zermelo, 1904] E. Zermelo. Beweis, daß jede Menge wohlgeordnet werden kann. Math. Ann.,
59(4):514–516, 1904.
[Zitarelli, 2004] D. Zitarelli. The origin and early impact of the Moore method. Amer. Math.
Monthly, 111(6):465–486, 2004.


LARGE CARDINALS WITH FORCING
Akihiro Kanamori
This chapter describes, following the historical development, the investigation of
large cardinal hypotheses using the method of forcing. Large cardinal hypotheses,
also regarded as strong axioms of inﬁnity, have stimulated a vast mainstream
of modern set theory, and William Mitchell’s chapter in this volume deals with
their investigation through inner models, Menachem Kojman’s chapter with their
involvement in the study of singular cardinals, and Paul Larson’s chapter with
the accentuated direction of determinacy hypotheses. With the subject seen as
a larger, integrated whole, we in this chapter incorporate aspects of these others
while pursuing the directions involving forcing.
The author’s other chapter in this volume, “Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen”
(henceforth referred to as CC for convenience), had presented the historical de-
velopment of set theory through to the creation of the method of forcing. Also,
the author’s book, The Higher Inﬁnite [2003], provided the theory of large cardi-
nals, including determinacy, up to a ﬁrst plateau of combinatorial sophistication.
In this chapter we ﬁrst pick up the historical threads to large cardinals in that
other chapter and pursue the developments involving forcing, thereby providing
a complementary overlay to the book. There is no attempt at being comprehen-
sive; rather we describe the earlier pivotal results and take up the more persistent
themes, those that have mainly driven the subject.
1
TO THE MODERN THEORY
1.1
Beginnings
In this ﬁrst section, we recall the early large cardinal landmarks, as pointed out in
the author’s other chapter CC, and then continue through to the ﬁrst substantive
elaborations of the theory in the 1960s. CC describes and develops the basics of
set theory and should serve as a general reference for concepts, notations, and
publications not again given here, and [Kanamori, 2003] frames a larger mathe-
matical context. The emergence of large cardinal hypotheses dates well back to the
beginnings of set theory; in our quick recapitulation, we proceed anachronistically
in the modern terms of transﬁnite ordinals and cardinals as formulated within set
theory in the 1930s work of John von Neumann.
Felix Hausdorﬀ, the ﬁrst developer of the transﬁnite after Cantor, carried out a
substantive, far-reaching investigation of uncountable ordertypes and cardinals in
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

360
Akihiro Kanamori
the ﬁrst decade of the 20th Century. He brought in the basic concept of coﬁnality
(the coﬁnality cf(κ) of a cardinal κ is the least cardinal λ such that κ is the union
of λ sets each of cardinality less than κ) and the distinction between singular
(cf(κ) < κ) and regular (cf(κ) = κ) cardinals. And for the ﬁrst time, he broached a
large cardinal concept, an uncountable, regular limit cardinal, now also known as a
weakly inaccessible cardinal, as a natural closure point for cardinal limit processes.
In penetrating work early in the next decade, Paul Mahlo considered hierarchies
of such cardinals based on ﬁxed-point phenomena and used for the ﬁrst time the
concept of stationary set. For a cardinal κ, C ⊆κ is closed unbounded (in κ) if it
is closed, i.e. if α < κ and S(C ∩α) = α then α ∈C, and unbounded i.e. S C = κ;
and S ⊆κ is stationary (in κ) if C ∩S ̸= ∅for any closed unbounded C ⊆κ. A
cardinal κ is now called weakly Mahlo if {α < κ | α is regular} is stationary in κ.
Such a cardinal is weakly inaccessible, a limit of such, and so forth, and thus is
conceptually transcendent of such cardinals.1
Ernst Zermelo in a remarkable 1930 paper oﬀered his ﬁnal axiomatization of set
theory. Modern ZFC is recognizable, in that he incorporated the axioms of Re-
placement and Foundation, thereby promoting a view of the set-theoretic universe
as stratiﬁed in a cumulative hierarchy V = S Vα indexed by ordinals forming a
“regular class”, where
V0 = ∅; Vα+1 = P(Vα); and Vδ = S
α<δVα for limit ordinals δ .
Zermelo provided natural models of his axioms, each a Vκ where κ, when uncount-
able, is a (strongly) inaccessible cardinal (regular and strong limit, i.e. if λ < κ
then 2λ < κ). Zermelo in particular focused attention on strong limit cardinals,
and e.g. one has correspondingly that κ is (strongly) Mahlo if κ is inaccessible and
weakly Mahlo, when κ is also a strongly limit of inaccessible cardinals, and so
forth.
The journal volume containing Zermelo’s paper also contained Stanis law Ulam’s
seminal paper on measurable cardinals, which would become focal among large
cardinals. A ﬁlter over a set Z is a family of subsets of Z closed under the taking
of supersets and of intersections. (Usually excluded from consideration as trivial
are the principal ﬁlters, those of form {X ⊆Z | A ⊆X} for some set A ⊆Z.) An
ultraﬁlter U over Z is a maximal ﬁlter over Z, i.e. for any X ⊆Z, either X ∈U
or else Z −X ∈U. For a cardinal λ, a ﬁlter is λ-complete if it is closed under the
taking of intersections of fewer than λ members. Finally, an uncountable cardinal
κ is measurable iﬀthere is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ. Ulam was motivated by
measure-theoretic considerations, and he viewed his work as about {0, 1}-valued
measures, the measure 1 sets being the sets in the ultraﬁlter. Ulam established that
measurable cardinals are inaccessible, and this initial airing generated a question
that was to keep the spark of large cardinals alive for the next three decades: Can
the least inaccessible cardinal be measurable? 2
1This foregoing paragraph elaborates the beginning of CC §2.4. CC cites publications, and as
mentioned earlier, it should serve as a reference for this until we get well into our second section.
2The foregoing two paragraphs elaborate parts of CC §3.2.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
361
A decade later, Tarski provided a systematic development of these concepts in
terms of ideals. An ideal over a set Z is a family of subsets of Z closed under
the taking of subsets and of unions. This is the “dual” notion to ﬁlters; if I is an
ideal (resp. ﬁlter) over Z, then ˘I = {Z −X | X ∈I} is its dual ﬁlter (resp. ideal).
An ideal is λ-complete if its dual ﬁlter is. A more familiar conceptualization in
mathematics, Tarski investigated the general notion of ideal on a Boolean algebra
in place of the power set algebra P(Z). For an ideal I ⊆P(Z), the I-measure zero
(negligible) sets are the members of I, the I-positive measure (non-negligible) sets
are the members of P(Z) −I, and the I-measure one (all but negligible) sets are
the members of the dual ﬁlter. For a regular cardinal λ > ω, a basic example is
the nonstationary ideal NSλ, consisting of the nonstationary subsets of λ, an ideal
which is λ-complete, and the corresponding dual ﬁlter, the closed unbounded ﬁlter
Cλ.
At the very least as counterpoint to large cardinals, attention must be paid
to how set theory was launched on an independent course as a distinctive ﬁeld
of mathematics by Kurt G¨odel’s 1930s construction of L, leading to the relative
consistency of the Axiom of Choice and the Generalized Continuum Hypothe-
sis. To formulate L in the modern way as an archetypal construction, we aﬃrm
notation and concepts in connection with Tarski’s later, systematic deﬁnition of
satisfaction-in-a-structure.
For a ﬁrst-order language, a structure N interpreting that language (i.e. a spec-
iﬁcation of a domain of discourse as well as interpretations of the function and
predicate symbols), a formula ϕ(v1, v2, . . . , vn) of the language with the (free)
variables as displayed, and a1, a2, . . . , an in the domain of N,
N |= ϕ[a1, a2, . . . , an]
asserts that the formula ϕ is satisﬁed in N according to Tarski’s recursive deﬁnition
when vi is interpreted as ai. A subset y of the domain of N is ﬁrst-order deﬁnable
over N iﬀthere is a formula ψ(v1, v2, . . . , vn+1) and a1, a2, . . . , an in the domain
of N such that
y = {z ∈N | N |= ψ[a1, a2, . . . , an, z]}.
(The ﬁrst-order deﬁnability of k-ary relations is analogously formulated with vn+1
replaced by k variables.)
Through Tarski’s recursive deﬁnition and an “arithmetization of syntax” whereby
formulas are systematically coded by natural numbers, the satisfaction relation
N |= ϕ[a1, a2, . . . , an] for sets N is deﬁnable in ZF set theory. On the other hand,
by Tarski’s result on the “undeﬁnability of truth”, the satisfaction relation for V
itself is not ﬁrst-order deﬁnable in V .
For any set x let def(x) denote the collection of subsets of x ﬁrst-order deﬁnable
over the structure ⟨x, ∈⟩with domain x and the membership relation restricted to
it.
Then deﬁne:
L0 = ∅; Lα+1 = def(Lα), Lδ = S{Lα | α < δ} for limit ordinals δ;

362
Akihiro Kanamori
and the constructible universe
L = S
αLα .
With the formalizability of def(x), one can formalize the Axiom of Constructibil-
ity V = L, i.e. ∀x(x ∈L). To have a larger context, we aﬃrm the following for
a class X: For a set-theoretic formula ϕ, ϕX denotes ϕ with its quantiﬁers re-
stricted to X and this extends to set-theoretic terms t (like S x, P(x), and so
forth) through their deﬁnitions to yield tX. X is an inner model iﬀX is a tran-
sitive class containing all the ordinals such that ϕX is a theorem of ZF for every
axiom ϕ of ZF. What G¨odel did was to show in ZF that L is an inner model which
satisﬁes AC and GCH. He thus established a relative consistency which can be for-
malized as an assertion: Con(ZF) implies Con(ZFC + GCH). G¨odel also showed
that for any inner model M of ZF that L ⊆M, so that L is the canonically mini-
mal inner model; it would be to counterpoint this minimality with “maximality”
considerations that would further stimulate the investigation of large cardinals.
In later years G¨odel speculated about the possibility of deciding propositions like
CH outright with large cardinal hypotheses based on the heuristics of reﬂection,
and later, generalization.
In a 1946 address he suggested the consideration of
“stronger and stronger axioms of inﬁnity” and reﬂection down from V : “Any proof
of a set-theoretic theorem in the next higher system above set theory (i.e. any proof
involving the concept of truth ...) is replaceable by a proof from such an axiom of
inﬁnity.” In a 1947 expository article on the Continuum Problem G¨odel presumed
that CH would be shown independent from ZF and speculated more concretely
about possibilities with large cardinals. He argued that the axioms of set theory do
not “form a system closed in itself” and so the “very concept of set on which they
are based suggests their extension by new axioms that assert the existence of still
further iterations of the operation of ‘set of’.” In an unpublished footnote toward
a 1966 revision of the article, G¨odel acknowledged “extremely strong axioms of
inﬁnity of an entirely new kind”, generalizations of properties of ω “supported
by strong arguments from analogy.” These heuristics would surface anew in the
1960s, when the theory of large cardinals developed a self-fueling momentum of
its own, stimulated by the emergence of forcing and inner models.3
From the 1930s, the direct investigation of the transﬁnite as extension of number
was advanced by the emergence of inﬁnite combinatorics. The investigation of
partition relations and trees would be particularly relevant for large cardinals. In
modern terms, for ordinals α, β, and δ and n ∈ω the partition property
β −→(α)n
δ
is the assertion that for any partition f : [β]n →δ of the n-element subsets of β
into δ cells, there is an H ⊆β of order type α homogeneous for the partition,
i.e. all the n-element subsets of H lie in the same cell. Frank Ramsey in 1930
established the inﬁnite Ramsey Theorem: ω −→(ω)n
i for every n, i ∈ω.
3The foregoing paragraphs on G¨odel and his work draw on CC §3.4, but also elaborate ﬁrst-
order deﬁnability.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
363
A tree is a partially ordered set T such that the predecessors of any element
are well-ordered. The αth level of T consists of those elements whose predecessors
have order-type α, and the height of T is the least α such that the αth level of
T is empty. Generally, a chain in a partially ordered set is a linearly ordered
subset, and an antichain is a subset consisting of pairwise incompatible elements.
A coﬁnal branch of T is a chain with elements at every non-empty level of T.
Finally, for a cardinal κ, a κ-tree is a tree of height κ each of whose levels has
cardinality less than κ, and κ has the tree property iﬀevery κ-tree has a coﬁnal
branch. K˝onig’s Lemma, of 1927, is the assertion that ω has the tree property.
Djuro Kurepa, in his 1935 thesis, carried out the ﬁrst systematic study of trans-
ﬁnite trees. In modern terms, an Aronszajn tree is an ω1-tree without a coﬁnal
branch, i.e. a counterexample to the tree property for ω1. Kurepa gave Nachman
Aronszajn’s proof that there is an Aronszajn tree. A Suslin tree is an ω1-tree with
no uncountable chains or antichains. Kurepa reduced a question of Mikhail Suslin
to Suslin’s Hypothesis, that there are no Suslin trees. Finally, a Kurepa tree is an
ω1-tree with at least ω2 coﬁnal branches, and Kurepa’s Hypothesis, the assertion
that there are such trees.
Paul Erd˝os was the prominent ﬁgure of a strong Hungarian tradition in com-
binatorics, and he and his collaborators simply viewed the transﬁnite as a rich
source of combinatorially interesting problems. One of the early advances was the
1943 Erd˝os-Tarski paper, which concluded with an intriguing list of six combina-
torial problems, the positive solution to any, as it was to turn out, amounting to
the existence of a large cardinal. In a footnote various implications were noted,
one of them being essentially that for inaccessible κ, the tree property for κ im-
plies κ −→(κ)2
2, generalizing Ramsey’s ω −→(ω)2
2 and making explicit the K˝onig
Lemma property needed.4
1.2
Model-theoretic methods
The investigation of large cardinal hypotheses was crucially and essentially in-
formed by the infusion of model-theoretic methods into set theory. Model theory
was developed most concertedly by Tarski and his students in the 1950s and 1960s
at the University of California at Berkeley. They carefully laid out satisfaction-in-
a-structure; theories (deductively closed collections of sentences) and their models;
algebratization with Skolem functions and hulls; and elementary substructures and
embeddings. For structures A and B for the same language, j : A →B is an elemen-
tary embedding if for any a1, . . . , an from the domain of A, ⟨a1, . . . , an⟩satisﬁes in
A the same formulas that ⟨j(a1), . . . , j(an)⟩does in B; and when j is the identity,
A is an elementary substructure of B, denoted A ≺B. The construction of models
freely used transﬁnite methods and soon led to new questions in set theory, but
also set theory was to be decisively advanced by the infusion of model-theoretic
methods. In particular, G¨odel’s pivotal work with L years earlier would be recast
in systematic terms and generalized.
4The foregoing four paragraphs draw on CC §3.5.

364
Akihiro Kanamori
A precursory result was a 1949 generalization by Andrzej Mostowski of the
Mirimanoﬀ-von Neumann result that every well-ordered set is order-isomorphic to
exactly one ordinal with membership. A set X is transitive if S X ⊆X, i.e. X
is “closed under membership”.
A binary relation R on a set X is extensional
if distinct members of X have distinct R-predecessors, and well-founded if every
non-empty Y ⊆X has an R-minimal element (or, assuming AC, there is no
inﬁnite R-descending sequence).
If R is an extensional, well-founded relation
on a set X, then there is a unique transitive set T and an isomorphism of the
structure ⟨X, R⟩onto ⟨T, ∈⟩, i.e. a bijection π: X →T such that for any x, y ∈X,
x R y iﬀπ(x) ∈π(y). ⟨T, ∈⟩is the transitive collapse of X, and π the collapsing
isomorphism.
Andr´as Hajnal and Azriel Levy, in their theses of the mid-1950s, developed gen-
eralizations of L that were to become basic in a richer setting. For a set A, Hajnal
formulated the constructible closure L(A) of A, i.e. the smallest inner model M
such that A ∈M, and Levy formulated the class L[A] of sets constructible relative
to A, i.e. the smallest inner model M such that for every x ∈M, A ∩x ∈M. To
formulate L(A), deﬁne: L0(A) = the smallest transitive set ⊇{A} (to ensure that
the resulting class is transitive); Lα+1(A) = def(Lα(A)); Lδ(A) = S
α<δ Lα(A) for
limit δ > 0; and ﬁnally L(A) = S
α Lα(A). To formulate L[A], ﬁrst let defA(x)
denote the collection of subsets of x ﬁrst-order deﬁnable over ⟨x, ∈, A∩x⟩, i.e. A∩x
is now interpreting a predicate that can be used in the deﬁnitions. Then deﬁne:
L0[A] = ∅; Lα+1[A] = defA(Lα[A]); Lδ[A] = S
α<δ Lα[A] for limit δ > 0; and
ﬁnally L[A] = S
α Lα[A]. With the “trace” A = A ∩L[A] one has Lα[A] = Lα[A]
for every α and so L[A] = L[A].
L(A) realizes the algebraic idea of building up a model starting from a set of
generators, and L[A] the logical idea of building up a model using A construed as a
predicate. L(A) may not satisfy AC since it may not have a well-ordering of A, yet
L[A] always satisﬁes that axiom. This distinction was only to surface later, as both
Hajnal and Levy took A to be a set of ordinals, when L(A) = L[A], and used these
models to establish conditional independence results of the sort: if the failure of
CH is consistent, then so is that failure together with 2λ = λ+ for suﬃciently large
cardinals λ. In the coming expansion of the 1960s, both Hajnal and Levy would be
otherwise engaged, with Hajnal becoming a major combinatorial set theorist and
collaborator with Erd˝os, and Levy, a pioneer in the investigation of independence
results.
The set-theoretic generalization of ﬁrst-order logic allowing transﬁnitely indexed
logical operations clariﬁed the size of measurable cardinals. Extending familiarity
by abstracting to a new domain, Tarski in 1962 formulated the strongly compact
and weakly compact cardinals by ascribing natural generalizations of the key com-
pactness property of ﬁrst-order logic to the corresponding inﬁnitary languages.
These cardinals had ﬁgured in the 1943 Erd˝os-Tarski paper in equivalent combi-
natorial formulations that were later seen to imply that a strongly compact cardinal
is measurable, and a measurable cardinal is weakly compact. Tarski’s student Hanf
then established, using the satisfaction relation for inﬁnitary languages, that there

Large Cardinals with Forcing
365
are many inaccessible cardinals (and Mahlo cardinals) below a weakly compact
cardinal. A fortiori, the least inaccessible cardinal is not measurable. This break-
through was the ﬁrst result about the size of measurable cardinals since Ulam’s
original 1930 paper and was greeted as a spectacular success for metamathematical
methods. Hanf’s work radically altered size intuitions about problems coming to
be understood in terms of large cardinals and ushered in model-theoretic methods
into the study of large cardinals beyond the Mahlo cardinals. Weak compactness
was soon seen to have a variety of characterizations, most notably, κ is weakly
compact iﬀκ →(κ)2
2 iﬀκ →(κ)n
λ for every n ∈ω and λ < κ iﬀκ is inaccessible
and has the tree property, and this was an early, signiﬁcant articulation of the large
cardinal extension of context for eﬀecting known proof ideas and methods.5
The concurrent emergence of the ultraproduct construction in model theory set
the stage for the development of the modern theory of large cardinals. The con-
struction was brought to the forefront by Tarski and his students after Jerzy  Lo´s’s
1955 adumbration of its fundamental theorem, and the new method of construct-
ing concrete models brought set theory and model theory even closer together in
a surge of results and a lasting interest in ultraﬁlters.
The ultraproduct construction was driven by the algebraic idea of making a
structure out of a direct product of structures as modulated (or “reduced”) by a
ﬁlter. The particular case when all the structures are the same, the ultrapower,
was itself seen to be substantive. To brieﬂy describe a focal case for set theory, let
N be a set, construed as a structure with ∈, and U an ultraﬁlter over a set Z. On
ZN, the set of functions from Z to N, deﬁne
f =U g iﬀ
{i ∈Z | f(i) = g(i)} ∈U .
The ﬁlter properties of U imply that =U is an equivalence relation on ZN, so with
(f)U denoting the corresponding equivalence class of f, set ZN/U = {(f)U | f ∈
ZN}. Next, the ﬁlter properties of U show that a binary relation EU on ZN/U
can be unambiguously deﬁned by
(f)U EU (g)U iﬀ
{i ∈Z | f(i) ∈g(i)} ∈U .
=U is thus a congruence relation, one that preserves the underlying structure; this
sort of preservation is crucial in ultraproduct and classical, antecedent construc-
tions with ﬁlters. The ultrapower of N by U is then deﬁned to be the structure
⟨ZN/U, EU⟩. The crux of the construction is the fundamental  Lo´s’s Theorem: For
a formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) and f1, . . . , fn ∈ZN,
⟨ZN/U, EU⟩|= ϕ[(f1)U, . . . , (fn)U] iﬀ
{i ∈Z | N |= ϕ[f1(i), . . . , fn(i)]} ∈U .
Satisfaction in the ultrapower is thus reduced to satisfaction on a large set of
coordinates, large in the sense of U. The proof is by induction on the complexity
5The foregoing paragraphs of this subsection draw on CC §3.6.

366
Akihiro Kanamori
of ϕ using the ﬁlter properties of U, the ultraﬁlter property for the negation step,
and AC for the existential quantiﬁer step.
EU is an extensional relation, and crucially, well-founded when U is ℵ1-complete.
In that case by Mostowski’s theorem there is a collapsing isomorphism π of the
ultrapower onto the transitive collapse ⟨M, ∈⟩. Moreover, if for x ∈N, cx is the
constant function: N →{x} and jU : N →M is deﬁned by jU(x) = π((cx)U), then
jU is an elementary embedding, i.e. for any formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn) and a1, . . . , an ∈
N,
⟨N, ∈⟩|= ϕ[a1, . . . , an] iﬀ
⟨M, ∈⟩|= ϕ[jU(a1), . . . , jU(an)]
by  Lo´s’s Theorem. When we have well-foundedness, the ultrapower is identiﬁed
with its transitive collapse and denoted Ult(N, U).
All of the foregoing is applicable, and will be applied, with proper classes N, as
long as we replace the equivalence class (f)U by sets
(f)0
U = {g ∈(f)U | g has minimal rank }
(“Scott’s trick”), and take  Lo´s’s Theorem as a schema for formulas.
The model theorist H. Jerome Keisler established penetrating connections be-
tween combinatorial properties of ultraﬁlters and of their ultraproducts, and in
particular took the ultrapower of a measurable cardinal κ by a κ-complete ultra-
ﬁlter over κ to provide a new proof of Hanf’s result that there are many large
cardinals below a measurable cardinal.
With Ulam’s concept shown in a new
light as providing well-founded ultrapowers, Dana Scott then struck on the idea
of taking the ultrapower of the entire universe V by a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over
a measurable κ, exploiting the resulting well-foundedness to get an elementary
embedding j : V →Ult(V, U). Importantly, κ is the critical point, i.e. j(α) = α
for every α < κ yet κ < j(κ): Taking e.g. the identity function id : κ →κ,
{ξ < κ | α < ξ < κ} ∈U for every α < κ, so that κ ≤π((id)U) < j(κ) by  Lo´s’s
Theorem. If V = L, then Ult(V, U) = L by the deﬁnability properties of L, but
this confronts κ < j(κ), e.g. if κ were the least measurable cardinal. (One could
also appeal to the general fact that U /∈Ult(V, U); that one “loses” the ultraﬁlter
when taking the ultrapower would become an important theme in later work.)
With this Scott established that if there is a measurable cardinal, then V ̸= L.
Large cardinal assumptions thus assumed a new signiﬁcance as a means for “max-
imizing” possibilities away from G¨odel’s canonical, delimitative construction.
The ultrapower construction provided one direction of a new characterization
that established a central structural role for measurable cardinals: There is an
elementary embedding j : V →M for some M with critical point δ iﬀδ is a mea-
surable cardinal. Keisler provided the converse direction: With j as hypothesized,
Uj ⊆P(δ) deﬁned “canonically” by X ∈Uj iﬀδ ∈j(X) is a δ-complete ultraﬁlter
over δ. Generating ultraﬁlters thus via “ideal” elements would become integral to
the theory of ultraﬁlters and large cardinals.
This characterization, when viewed with the focus on elementary embeddings,
raises a point that will be even more germane, and thus will be emphasized later,

Large Cardinals with Forcing
367
in connection with strong hypotheses. That a j : V →M is elementary is not
formalizable in set theory because of the appeal to the satisfaction relation for V ,
let alone the assertion that there is such a class j. Thus the “characterization” is
really one of giving a formalization, one that provides operative sense through the
ultrapower construction. Ulam’s original concept was thus made intrinsic to set
theory with the categorical imperative of elementary embeddings. In any event
ZFC is never actually transcended in consistency results; one can always work in
a suﬃciently large Vα.
In Scott’s j : V →M = Ult(V, U) the concreteness of the ultrapower construc-
tion delivered κM ⊆M, i.e. M is closed under the taking of arbitrary (in V )
κ-sequences, so that in particular Vκ+1 ∩M = Vκ+1. Through this agreement
strong reﬂection conclusions can be drawn. U is normal iﬀπ((id)U) = κ, i.e. the
identity function is a “least non-constant” function, a property that can be easily
arranged. For such U, since κ is inaccessible, it is so in M and hence by  Lo´s’s
Theorem {ξ < κ | ξ is inaccessible} ∈U—the inaccessible cardinals below κ have
measure one. An analogous argument applies to any Vκ+1 property of κ like weak
compactness, and so, as would typify large cardinal hypotheses, measurability
articulates its own sense of reﬂective transcendence over “smaller” large cardinals.
Normality went on to become staple to the investigation of ideals and large
cardinals. Formulated for an ideal I over a cardinal λ, I is normal iﬀwhenever a
function f is regressive on an S ∈P(λ) −I, there is a T ∈P(S) −I on which f is
constant. The 1956 Fodor’s Lemma is the assertion that the nonstationary ideal
NSλ is normal for regular λ > ω, and a multitude of “smallness” properties other
than nonstationarity has been seen to lead to normal ideals.
Through model-theoretic methods set theory was brought to the point of en-
tertaining elementary embeddings into well-founded models. It was soon to be
transﬁgured by a new means for getting well-founded extensions of well-founded
models.6
2
THE ADVENT OF FORCING
2.1
Cohen
Paul Cohen (1934-2007) in April 1963 established the independence of AC from ZF
and the independence of CH from ZFC. That is, Cohen established that Con(ZF)
implies Con(ZF + ¬AC) and that Con(ZFC) implies Con(ZFC + ¬CH). Already
prominent as an analyst, Cohen had ventured into set theory with fresh eyes and an
open-mindedness about possibilities. These results solved two central problems of
set theory. But beyond that, Cohen’s proofs were the inaugural examples of a new
technique, forcing, which was to become a remarkably general and ﬂexible method
for extending models of set theory. Forcing has strong intuitive underpinnings and
reinforces the notion of set as given by the ﬁrst-order ZF axioms with prominent
6The foregoing paragraphs on the ultraproduct construction considerably elaborates the latter
part of CC §3.6, by setting out the basics of the construction.

368
Akihiro Kanamori
uses of Replacement and Foundation. If G¨odel’s construction of L had launched
set theory as a distinctive ﬁeld of mathematics, then Cohen’s method of forcing
began its transformation into a modern, sophisticated one.
Cohen’s approach was to start with a model M of ZF and adjoin a set G that
witnesses some desired new property. This would have to be done in a minimal
fashion in order that the resulting extension M[G] also model ZF, and so Cohen
devised special conditions on both M and G. Cohen’s key idea was to tie G closely
to M through a partially ordered system of sets in M called conditions that would
approximate G. While G may not be a member of M, G is to be a subset of
some Y ∈M (with Y = ω a basic case), and these conditions would “force”
assertions about the eventual M[G], e.g. by deciding some of the membership
questions, whether x ∈G or not, for x ∈Y .
The assertions are to be just
those expressible in a ramiﬁed language with terms developed in M, and Cohen
developed a corresponding forcing relation p ⊩ϕ, “p forces ϕ”, between conditions
p and formulas ϕ, a relation with properties reﬂecting his approximation idea. For
example, if p ⊩ϕ and p ⊩ψ, then p ⊩ϕ ∧ψ. The conditions are ordered
according to the constraints they impose on the eventual G, so that if p ⊩ϕ, and
q is a stronger condition, then q ⊩ϕ. It was crucial to Cohen’s approach that the
forcing relation, like the ramiﬁed language, be deﬁnable in M.
The ﬁnal ingredient which gives this whole scaﬀolding life is the incorporation
of a certain kind of set G. Stepping out of M and actually assuming that it is
countable, Cohen enumerated the formulas of the ramiﬁed language in a countable
sequence and required that G be completely determined by a sequence of stronger
and stronger conditions p0, p1, p2, . . . such that for every formula ϕ of the ramiﬁed
language exactly one of ϕ or ¬ϕ is forced by some pn. Such a G is called a generic
set.
Cohen was able to show that the resulting M[G] does indeed satisfy the
axioms of ZF: Every assertion about M[G] is already forced by some condition;
the forcing relation is deﬁnable in M; and so the ZF axioms holding in M, most
crucially Replacement and Foundation, can be applied to the ramiﬁed terms and
language to derive corresponding forcing assertions about the ZF axioms holding
in M[G].
Cohen ﬁrst described the case when G ⊆ω and the conditions p are functions
from some ﬁnite subset of ω into {0, 1} and p ⊩˙n ∈˙G if p(n) = 1 and p ⊩˙n /∈˙G
if p(n) = 0. Today, a G so adjoined to M is called a Cohen real over M. If
subsets of ω are identiﬁed with reals as traditionally construed, that G is generic
can be extrinsically characterized by saying that G meets every open dense set
of reals lying in M. Generally, a G ⊆κ analogously adjoined with conditions
of cardinality less than κ is called a Cohen subset of κ. Cohen established the
independence of CH by adjoining a set which in eﬀect is a sequence of many Cohen
reals. It was crucial that the cardinals in the ground model and generic extension
coincide, and Cohen to this end drew out and relied on the important countable
chain condition (c.c.c.): Any antichain, i.e. collection of mutually incompatible
conditions, is countable (where two forcing conditions said to be incompatible if
they have no common, stronger condition).

Large Cardinals with Forcing
369
Several features of Cohen’s arguments would quickly be reformulated, reorga-
nized, and generalized, but the thrust of his approach through deﬁnability and
genericity would remain. Cohen’s great achievement lies in devising a concrete
procedure for extending well-founded models of set theory in a minimal fashion
to well-founded models of set theory with new properties but without altering the
ordinals.
Just in the ﬁrst weeks after Cohen’s discovery, Solomon Feferman, who had
been extensively consulted by Cohen as he was coming up with forcing, established
further independences elaborating ¬AC and about deﬁnability. Levy soon joined
in this work and pursued both directions, formulating the “Levy collapse” of an
inaccessible cardinal, and Stanley Tennenbaum established the failure of Suslin’s
Hypothesis by generically adjoining a Suslin tree with ﬁnite conditions.
The Levy collapse would become of central importance for large cardinals. Co-
hen had shown how to “collapse” a cardinal: Given a regular cardinal κ and α > κ
in a ground model M, a generic surjection G of α onto κ can be adjoined using as
conditions approximations of cardinality less than κ. In the Levy collapse of an
inaccessible cardinal λ > κ, such collapsing functions are collectively adjoined for
every α < λ, with the inaccessibility of λ ensuring that it becomes the successor
cardinal to κ in the generic extension. The Levy collapse of an inaccessible cardi-
nal to make it ω1 or ω2, the ﬁrst or second uncountable cardinal of the extension,
would become basic to subsequent developments.
The extent and breadth of the expansion of set theory henceforth described
dwarfs all that has been described before, both in terms of the numbers of people
involved and the results established. With clear intimations of a new and concrete
way of building models, set theorists rushed in and, with forcing becoming method,
were soon establishing a cornucopia of relative consistency results, truths in a wider
sense, with some illuminating classical problems of mathematics. ZFC became
quite unlike Euclidean geometry and much like group theory, with a wide range
of models being investigated for their own sake.7
2.2
Solovay and forcing
Robert Solovay above all epitomized this period of sudden expansion in set theory
with his mathematical sophistication and central results about and with forcing,
and in the areas of large cardinals and descriptive set theory. Following initial
graduate study in diﬀerential topology, Solovay turned to set theory after hearing a
May 1963 lecture by Cohen. Just weeks after, Solovay elaborated the independence
of CH by characterizing the possibilities for the size of 2κ for regular κ and made
the ﬁrst exploration of a range of cardinals. Building on this William Easton in
late 1963 established the deﬁnitive result for powers of regular cardinals: Suppose
that GCH holds and F is a class function from the class of regular cardinals to
cardinals such that for regular κ ≤λ, F(κ) ≤F(λ) and the coﬁnality cf(F(κ)) > κ.
Then there is a (class) forcing extension preserving coﬁnalities in which 2κ = F(κ)
7The foregoing subsection draws on CC §4.1, but also elaborates on the Levy collapse.

370
Akihiro Kanamori
for every regular κ. Thus, as Solovay had seen locally, the only restriction beyond
monotonicity on the power function for regular cardinals is that given by a well-
known constraint, the classical Zermelo-K˝onig inequality that cf(2κ) > κ for any
cardinal κ. Easton’s result enriched the theory of forcing with the introduction
of proper classes of forcing conditions, the basic idea of a product analysis, and
the now familiar concept of Easton support. The result focused interest on the
possibilities for powers of singular cardinals and the Singular Cardinals Hypothesis
(SCH), which asserts that 2κ for singular κ is the least possible with respect to the
powers 2µ for µ < κ as given by monotonicity and the Zermelo-K˝onig inequality.
This requires in particular that for singular strong limit cardinals κ, 2κ = κ+.
Easton’s models satisfy SCH, and the Singular Cardinals Problem, to determine
the range of possibilities for powers of singular cardinals, would become a major
stimulus for the further development of set theory much as the Continuum Problem
had been for its early development.
In the Spring of 1964 Solovay established a result remarkable for its mathemat-
ical depth and revelatory of what standard of argument was possible with forcing:
If there is an inaccessible cardinal, then in a ZF inner model of a forcing extension
the Principle of Dependent Choices (DC) holds and every set of reals is Lebesgue
measurable, has the Baire property, and has the perfect set property. Solovay’s in-
ner model is precluded from having a well-ordering of the reals, but DC is a choice
principle implying the regularity of ω1 and suﬃcient for the formalization of the
traditional theory of measure and category on the real numbers. Thus, Solovay’s
work vindicated the early descriptive set theorists in the sense that the regularity
properties can consistently hold for all sets of reals in a bona ﬁde model for the
classical mathematical analysis of the reals. To prove his result Solovay applied
the Levy collapse of an inaccessible cardinal to make it ω1.
For the Lebesgue
measurability he introduced a new kind of forcing beyond Cohen’s direct ways of
adjoining new sets of ordinals or collapsing cardinals, that of adding a random
real, given by forcing with the Borel sets of positive measure as conditions and p
stronger than q when p−q is null. In contrast to Cohen reals, a random real meets
every measure one subset of the unit interval lying in the ground model. Solovay’s
work not only opened the door to a wealth of diﬀerent forcing arguments, but to
this day his original deﬁnability arguments remain vital to descriptive set theory.
The perfect set property, central to Cantor’s direct approach to the Continuum
Problem through deﬁnability, led to the ﬁrst acknowledged instance of a new phe-
nomenon in set theory: the derivation of equi-consistency results between large
cardinal hypotheses and combinatorial propositions about low levels of the cu-
mulative hierarchy. Forcing showed just how relative the Cantorian concept of
cardinality is, since bijective functions could be adjoined to models of set theory
and powers like 2ℵ0 can be made arbitrarily large with relatively little disturbance.
For instance, large cardinals were found to satisfy substantial propositions even af-
ter they are Levy collapsed to ω1 or ω2. Conversely, such propositions were found
to entail large cardinal propositions in an L-like inner model, mostly pointedly the
very same initial large cardinal hypothesis. Thus, for some large cardinal property

Large Cardinals with Forcing
371
ϕ(κ) and proposition ψ, there is a direction Con(∃κϕ(κ)) →Con(ψ) established
by a collapsing forcing argument, and a converse direction Con(ψ) →Con(∃κϕ(κ))
established by witnessing ϕ(κ) in an inner model.
Solovay’s result provided the forcing direction from an inaccessible cardinal to
the proposition that every set of reals has the perfect set property and ω1 is regular.
But Ernst Specker in 1957 had in eﬀect established that if this obtains, then ω1
(of V ) is inaccessible in L. Thus, Solovay’s use of an inaccessible cardinal was
actually necessary, and its collapse to ω1 complemented Specker’s observation. The
emergence of such equi-consistency results is a subtle realization of earlier hopes
of G¨odel for deciding propositions via large cardinals. Forcing, however, quickly
led to the conclusion that there could be no direct implication for CH itself: Levy
and Solovay, also in 1964, established that measurable cardinals neither imply nor
refute CH, with an argument generalizable to other inaccessible large cardinals.
Rather, CH and many other propositions would be reckoned with in terms of
consistency, the methods of forcing and inner models being the operative modes
of argument.
Building on his Lebesgue measurability result Solovay in 1965 reactivated the
classical descriptive set theory program of investigating the extent of the regular-
ity properties (in the presence of AC) by providing characterizations in terms of
forcing and deﬁnability concepts for the Σ1
2 sets, the level at which G¨odel through
his work on L had in fact established from V = L the failure of the properties.
This led to the consistency relative to ZFC of the Lebesgue measurability of all
Σ1
2 sets. Also, the characterizations showed that the regularity properties for Σ1
2
sets follow from existence of a measurable cardinal. Thus, although measurable
cardinals do not decide CH, they do establish the perfect set property for Σ1
2 sets
so that “CH holds for the Σ1
2 sets”.8 9
In a separate initiative, Solovay [1966; 1971] established the equi-consistency
of the existence of a measurable cardinal and the “real-valued” measurability of
2ℵ0, i.e. that there is a (countably additive) measure extending Lebesgue measure
to all sets of reals. For the forcing direction, Solovay starting with a measurable
cardinal adjoined random reals and applied the Radon-Nikodym Theorem of anal-
ysis, and for the converse direction, he starting with a real-valued measure enlisted
the inner model constructed relative to the ideal of measure zero sets. This con-
sistency result provided context for an extended investigation of the possibilities
for the continuum as structured by such a measure. Through this work the con-
cept of saturated ideal, ﬁrst studied by Tarski, was brought to prominence as a
generalization of having a measurable cardinal applicable to the low levels of the
cumulative hierarchy. For an ideal over a cardinal κ, I is λ-saturated iﬀfor any
{Xα | α < λ} ⊆P(κ)−I there are β < γ < λ such that Xβ∩Xγ ∈P(κ)−I (i.e. the
8A coda after many years: Although Solovay’s use of an inaccessible cardinal for universal
Lebesgue measurability seemed ad hoc at the time, in 1979 Saharon Shelah [1984] established in
a tour de force that if ZF + DC and all Σ1
3 sets of reals are Lebesgue measurable, then ω1 is
inaccessible in L.
9The foregoing paragraphs of §2.2 draws on CC §4.1 and §4.2. We now proceed anew, citing
publications, for the rest of this chapter.

372
Akihiro Kanamori
corresponding Boolean algebra has no antichains of cardinality λ). The ideal of
measure zero sets is ℵ1-saturated, and Solovay showed that if I is any κ-complete
λ-saturated ideal over κ for some λ < κ, then L[I] |= “κ is measurable”.
Solovay’s work also brought to the foreground the concept of generic ultrapower
and generic elementary embedding. For an ideal I over κ, forcing with the members
of P(κ) −I as conditions and p stronger than q when p −q ∈I engenders an
ultraﬁlter on the ground model P(κ). With this one can construct an ultrapower
of the ground model in the generic extension and a corresponding elementary
embedding.
It turns out that the κ+-saturation of the ideal ensures that this
generic ultrapower is well-founded. Thus, a synthesis of forcing and ultrapowers
is eﬀected, and this raised enticing possibilities for having such large cardinal-type
structure low in the cumulative hierarchy.
The development of the theory of forcing went hand in hand with this procession
of central results. Solovay had ﬁrst generalized forcing to arbitrary partial orders
of conditions, proceeding in terms of incompatible members and dense sets and
Levy’s concept of generic ﬁlter. In his work on the Baire property for his 1964
model, Solovay came to the idea of assigning values to formulas from a complete
Boolean algebra. Loosely speaking, the value would be the supremum of all the
conditions forcing it. Working independently, Solovay and Scott developed the
idea of recasting forcing entirely in terms of Boolean-valued models. This approach
showed how to replace Cohen’s ramiﬁed languages by a more direct induction on
rank and how to avoid his dependence on a countable model.
Boolean-valued
functions play the role of sets, and formulas involving these functions are assigned
Boolean-values by recursion respecting logical connectives and quantiﬁers.
By
establishing in ZFC that e.g. there is a complete Boolean algebra assigning the
formula expressing ¬CH Boolean value one, a semantic construction was replaced
by a syntactic one that directly secured relative consistency.
Still, the view of forcing as a way of actually extending models held the reservoir
of sense and the promise of discovery, and after Shoenﬁeld [1971] popularized
an approach to the forcing relation that captured the gist of the Boolean-valued
approach, forcing has been generally cast as a matter of partial orders and generic
ﬁlters. Boolean algebras would nonetheless underscore and enhance the setting:
partial orders are to have a maximum element 1; one is attuned to the separativity
of partial orders, the property that unique Boolean completions; Boolean-values
are used when illuminating; and embedding results for forcing partial orders are
cast, as most algebraically informative, in terms of Boolean algebras.
By the 1970s there would be a further assimilation of both the syntactic and
semantic approaches, in that generic extensions would be “taken” of V . In this
the current approach, a partial order ⟨P, <⟩of conditions is speciﬁed to a purpose,
with p < q for p being stronger than q. A class V P of P-names deﬁned recursively
is used in forcing assertions, with a canonical name ˇx corresponding to x ∈V . A
D ⊆P is dense if for any p ∈P there is a d ∈D with d ≤p. An F ⊆P is a
ﬁlter if (i) if p ∈F and p ≤q, then q ∈F, and (ii) if p1, p2 ∈F then there is
an r ∈F with r ≤p1 and r ≤p2. Finally, G ⊆P is a V -generic ﬁlter if G is a

Large Cardinals with Forcing
373
ﬁlter such that for every dense D ⊆P, G ∩D ̸= ∅. One posits such a G and takes
a generic extension V [G], its properties argued for on the basis of combinatorial
properties of P. For inner or transitive set models M, one proceeds analogously to
deﬁne M-generic ﬁlters meeting every dense set belonging to M and takes generic
extensions M[G].
In this one goes against the sense of V as the universe of all sets and Tarski’s
“undeﬁnability of truth”, but actually V has become schematic for a ground model.
Generic extensions of inner models M are taken with M-generic G, and moreover,
successive iterated extensions are taken, exacerbating any preoccupation with a
single universe of sets. As the techniques of forcing were advanced, the methodol-
ogy was itself soon to be woven into set theory as part of its postulations.
Solovay and Tennenbaum earlier in 1965 (cf. their [1971]) had established the
consistency of Suslin’s Hypothesis, that there are no Suslin trees, illuminating
a classical question from 1920; they had made ground-breaking use of iterated
forcing to “kill” Suslin trees by forcing with them as partial orders and shooting
coﬁnal branches through them. D. Anthony Martin pointed out that the Solovay-
Tennenbaum argument actually established the consistency of a closure of forcing
extensions of a certain kind, an instrumental “axiom” now known as Martin’s
Axiom (MA): For any countable-chain-condition partial order P and collection
D of fewer than 2ℵ0 dense subsets of P, there is a ﬁlter G ⊆P meeting every
member of D. Thus method became axiom, and many consistency results could
now be simply stated as direct consequences of a single umbrella proposition. CH
technically implies MA, but the Solovay-Tennenbaum argument established the
consistency of MA with the continuum being arbitrarily large.
While classical results with CH had worked on an ℵ0 / ℵ1 dichotomy, MA estab-
lished a <2ℵ0/ 2ℵ0 dichotomy. For example, [Martin and Solovay, 1970] established
that MA implies that the union of fewer than 2ℵ0 Lebesgue measure zero sets is
again Lebesgue measure zero. Sierpi´nski in 1925 had established that every Σ1
2
set of reals is the union of ℵ1 Borel sets. Hence, MA and 2ℵ0 > ℵ1 implies that
every Σ1
2 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
Many further results plied the
<2ℵ0/ 2ℵ0 dichotomy to show that under MA inductive arguments can be carried
out in 2ℵ0 steps that previously succeeded under CH in ℵ1 steps. The Continuum
Problem was newly illuminated as a matter of method, by showing that CH as a
construction principle could be generalized to 2ℵ0 being arbitrarily large.
Glancing across the wider landscape, forcing provided new and diverse ways of
adjoin generic reals and other sets, and these led to new elucidations, for example
about cardinal characteristics, or invariants, of the continuum and combinatorial
structures and objects, like ultraﬁlters over ω. The work on Suslin’s Hypothesis
in hand and with the possibilities aﬀorded by Martin’s Axiom, the investigation
of general topological notions gathered steam. With Mary Ellen Rudin and her
students at Wisconsin breaking the ground, new questions were raised for general
topological spaces about separation properties, compactness-type covering prop-
erties, separability and metrizability, and corresponding cardinal characteristics.

374
Akihiro Kanamori
2.3
0# and L[U]
The infusion of forcing into set theory induced a broad context extending beyond
its applications and sustained by model-theoretic methods, a context which in-
cluded central developments about large cardinals having their source in Scott’s
1961 result that measurable cardinals contradict V = L. Haim Gaifman [1964]
invented iterated ultrapowers and established seminal results about and with the
technique, results which most immediately stimulated deﬁnitive work in the for-
mative theses of Silver and Kunen.
Jack Silver in his 1966 Berkeley thesis (cf. his [1971c]) provided a structured
sense of transcendence over L in terms of the existence of a special set of natural
numbers 0# (“zero sharp”) which reﬁned an earlier formulation of Gaifman and
was quickly investigated by Solovay [1967] in terms of deﬁnability. Mostowski and
Andrzej Ehrenfeucht in their [1956] had developed theories whose models have
indiscernibles, implicitly ordered members of the domain all of whose n-tuples
satisfy the same formulas. They had applied Ramsey’s Theorem in compactness
arguments to get models generated by indiscernibles, models consequently having
many automorphisms. Silver applied partition properties satisﬁed by measurable
cardinals to produce indiscernibles within given structures, particularly in the ini-
tial segment ⟨Lω1, ∈⟩of the constructible universe. With deﬁnability and Skolem
hull arguments, Silver was able to isolate a canonical collection of sentences to be
satisﬁed by indiscernibles, a theory whose models cohere to get L itself as generated
by canonical ordinal indiscernibles—a dramatic accentuation of the original G¨odel
generation of L. 0# is that theory coded as a real, and as Solovay emphasized,
0# is the only possible real to satisfy a certain Π1
2 relation, one whose complexity
arises from its asserting that to every countable well-ordering there corresponds
a well-founded model of the coded theory. The canonical class, closed and un-
bounded, of ordinal indiscernibles is often called the Silver indiscernibles. Having
these indiscernibles substantiates V ̸= L in drastic ways: Each indiscernible ι has
various large cardinal properties and satisﬁes Lι ≺L, so that by a straightforward
argument the satisfaction relation for L is deﬁnable from 0#. The theory of 0#
was seen to relativize, and for reals a ∈ωω the analogous a# for the inner model
L[a] would play focal roles in descriptive set theory as based on deﬁnability.
Kunen’s main large cardinal results emanating from his 1968 Stanford thesis
(cf. [1970]) would be the deﬁnitive structure results for inner models of measura-
bility. For U a normal κ-complete ultraﬁlter over a measurable cardinal κ, the inner
model L[U] of sets constructible relative to U is easily seen with U = U ∩L[U]
to satisfy L[U] |= “U is a normal κ-complete ultraﬁlter”.
With no presump-
tion that κ is measurable (in V ) and taking U ∈L[U] from the beginning, call
⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩a κ-model iﬀ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩|= “U is a normal κ-complete ultraﬁlter over
κ”. Solovay observed that in a κ-model, the GCH holds above κ by a version of
G¨odel’s argument for L and that κ is the only measurable cardinal by a version of
Scott’s argument. Silver [Silver, 1971a] then established that the full GCH holds,
thereby establishing the relative consistency of GCH and measurability; Silver’s

Large Cardinals with Forcing
375
proof turned on a local structure Lα[U] being acceptable in the later parlance of
inner model theory.
Kunen made Gaifman’s technique of iterated ultrapowers integral to the subject
of inner models of measurability. For a κ-model ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩, the ultrapower of
L[U] by U with corresponding elementary embedding j provides a j(κ)-model
⟨L[j(U)], ∈, j(U)⟩, and this process can be repeated.
At limit stages, one can
take the direct limit of models, which when well-founded can be identiﬁed with
the transitive collapse. Indeed, by Gaifman’s work these iterated ultrapowers are
always well-founded, i.e. κ-models are iterable. Kunen showed that the λth iterate
of a κ-model for any regular λ > κ+ is of form ⟨L[Cλ], ∈, Cλ∩L[Cλ]⟩, where Cλ again
is the closed unbounded ﬁlter over λ, so that remarkably, constructing relative to
a ﬁlter deﬁnable in set theory leads to an inner model of measurability. With
this, there can be comparison of κ-models and κ′-models by iterating them up
to a suﬃciently large λ. This comparison possibility led to the structure results:
(1) for any κ-model and κ′-model with κ < κ′, the latter is an iterated ultrapower
of the former, and (2) for any κ, there is at most one κ-model. It then followed
that if κ is measurable and U1 and U2 are any κ-complete ultraﬁlters over κ,
then L[U1] = L[U2]. These various results argued forcefully for the coherence and
consistency of the concept of measurability. As for the methods employed, in the
subsequent development of inner model theory iterability and comparison would
remain as basic features of the subject.
Kunen importantly emphasized that iterated ultrapowers can be taken of an
inner model M with respect to an ultraﬁlter U even if U /∈M, as long U is an M-
ultraﬁlter, i.e. U in addition to having M related ultraﬁlter properties also satisﬁes
an “amenability” condition for M. A crucial dividend was a characterization of the
existence of 0# that secured its central importance in inner model theory. With
0#, any increasing shift of the Silver indiscernibles provides an elementary embed-
ding j : L →L. Kunen established conversely that such an embedding generates
indiscernibles, so that 0# exists iﬀthere is a (non-identity) elementary embedding
j : L →L. Starting with such an embedding Kunen deﬁned the corresponding
ultraﬁlter U over the critical point and showed that U is an L-ultraﬁlter with
which the iterated ultrapowers of L are well-founded. The successive images of
the critical point were seen to be indiscernibles for L, giving 0#. As inner model
theory was to develop, this sharp analysis would become schematic: the “sharp” of
an inner model M would encapsulate transcendence over M, and the non-rigidity
of M, that there is a (non-identity) elementary embedding j : M →M, would
provide equivalent structural sense.
2.4
Jensen and constructibility
These various results were set against a backdrop of an increasing articulation
of G¨odel’s original notion of constructibility.
Levy [1965] had put forward the
appropriate hierarchy for the ﬁrst-order formulas of set theory: A formula is Σ0
and Π0 if it is bounded, i.e. having only quantiﬁers expressible in terms of ∀v ∈w

376
Akihiro Kanamori
and ∃v ∈w, and recursively, a formula is Σn+1 if it is of the form ∃v1 . . . ∃vkϕ
where ϕ is Πn and is Πn+1 if it is of the form ∀v1 . . . ∀vkϕ where ϕ is Σn. Two basic
points about discounting bounded quantiﬁers are that Σ0 formulas are absolute
for transitive structures, i.e. they hold in such structures just in case they hold in
V , and that if ϕ is Σn (resp. Πn) then ∃v ∈wϕ and ∀v ∈xϕ are equivalent in
ZFC to Σn (resp. Πn) formulas by uses of Replacement.
G¨odel’s original GCH result with L was newly seen in light of the structured
context for deﬁnability. For N and M construed as structures with ∈, j : N →M
is a Σn-elementary embedding iﬀfor any Σn ϕ(v1, . . . , vk) and x1, . . . , xk ∈N,
N |= ϕ[x1, . . . , xk] iﬀM |= ϕ[j(x1), . . . , j(xk)]. N is a Σn-elementary substructure
of M, denoted N ≺n M, iﬀthe identity map is Σn-elementary. Analysis of the
satisfaction relation established that being an Lα is a Σ1 property, and this led to
the Condensation Lemma:
If α is a limit ordinal and N ≺1 Lα,
then the transitive collapse of N is Lβ for some β ≤α.
Operatively, one applies this lemma with Skolem’s algebraic approach to logic by
taking N to be a Σ1-Skolem hull in Lα: For any Σ0 formula ϕ(v1, . . . , vn, vn+1) and
x1, . . . , xn ∈Lα, if ⟨Lα, ∈⟩|= ϕ[x1, . . . xn, y] for y ∈Lα, let fϕ(x1, . . . , xn) be such
a y. Then let N be the algebraic closure of some subset of Lα under these Skolem
functions. The road from the Condensation Lemma to G¨odel’s Fundamental Theo-
rem for the consistency of GCH is short. Generally, the lemma articulates a crucial
hierarchical cohesion, and its various emanations would become fundamental to
all inner model theory.
The consummate master of constructibility was to be Ronald Jensen, whose
ﬁrst systematic analysis transformed the subject with the introduction of the ﬁne
structure theory for L. Jensen’s work is distinguished by the persistent pursuit of
internal logical structure, the sophistication of the local apparatus developed, and
a series of remarkable successes with reverberations throughout the whole expanse
of set theory. Jensen [1968] made an initial breakthrough by showing that V = L
implies the failure of Suslin’s Hypothesis, i.e. (there is a Suslin tree)L, applying L
for the ﬁrst time after G¨odel to establish a relative consistency result about a clas-
sical proposition. The initial breach had been when Tennenbaum in 1963 (cf. his
[1968]) had adjoined a Suslin tree with forcing with ﬁnite conditions, and then
Thomas Jech [1967] had provided another forcing argument using countable con-
ditions; Jensen at ﬁrst pitched his construction in the guise of a forcing argument,
one in fact like Tennenbaum’s. This is the paradigmatic case of what would be-
come a recurring phenomenon: A combinatorial existence assertion is ﬁrst shown
to be relatively consistent with ZFC using forcing, and then that assertion is shown
to hold in L, the minimal inner model.
The lack of coﬁnal branches in Suslin trees is complemented by their abundance
in Kurepa trees. An early, eye-catching forcing result was due to Silver [1971b]:
If there is an inaccessible cardinal, then in the extension by the Levy collapse to
make it ω2, Kurepa’s Hypothesis fails, i.e. there are no Kurepa trees. Notably,

Large Cardinals with Forcing
377
in a 1966 masters’ thesis D. Stewart [1966] showed how to adjoin a Kurepa tree
by forcing. Inspired by Jensen’s Suslin tree construction, the ubiquitous Solovay
established: (there is a Kurepa tree)L. Moreover, it was noted that if ω2 (of V ) is
not inaccessible in L, then Solovay’s argument still works to establish that there is
a Kurepa tree. Thus, another equi-consistency result illuminated a classical issue:
The failure of Kurepa’s Hypothesis is equi-consistent with having an inaccessible
cardinal.
Jensen, and others, isolated the combinatorial features of L that enabled these
Suslin and Kurepa constructions, and in 1969 he together with Kunen worked out
a larger theory. The focus was mainly on two combinatorial principles for a regular
cardinal κ, ♦κ (“diamond”) and a strengthening, ♦+
κ (“diamond plus”). Stating
the ﬁrst,
♦κ
There is a sequence ⟨Sα | α < κ⟩with Sα ⊆α such that
for any X ⊆κ, {α < κ | X ∩α = Sα} is stationary in κ .
Just ♦is implicitly ♦ω1. ♦κ implies S
α<κ κ|α| = κ (so that ♦implies CH) as
every bounded subset of κ occurs in a ♦κ sequence. Indeed, a ♦κ sequence is an
enumeration of the bounded subsets of κ that can accommodate every X ⊆κ in
anticipatory constructions where X ∩α appearing in the enumeration for many
α’s suﬃces. Within a few years ♦would be on par with CH as a construction
principle with wide applications in topology, algebra, and analysis.10
Jensen abstracted his Suslin tree result to: (1) if V = L, then ♦κ holds for
every regular κ > ω, and (2) if ♦ω1 holds, then there is a Suslin tree. Solovay’s
result was abstracted to higher, κ-Kurepa trees, κ-trees with at least κ+ coﬁnal
branches, in terms of a new cardinal concept, ineﬀability, arrived at independently
by Jensen and Kunen: If V = L and κ > ω is regular, then ♦+
κ holds iﬀκ is not
ineﬀable. Ineﬀable cardinals, stronger than weakly compact cardinals, would soon
be seen to have a range of involvements and an elegant theory. As for higher Suslin
trees, how they might be constructed in L initially motivated a new combinatorial
principle, one that soon ﬁgured in a sophisticated forcing argument.
The crowning achievement of the investigation of Suslin’s Hypothesis was its
joint consistency with CH, Con(ZFC) →Con(ZFC + CH + SH), established by
Jensen (cf. [Devlin and Johnsbraten, 1974]). In the Solovay-Tennenbaum consis-
tency proof for SH, coﬁnal branches had been adjoined iteratively to Suslin trees
as they arose and direct limits were taken at limit stages, a limiting process that
conspired to adjoin new reals so that CH fails.
Jensen, with considerable vir-
tuosity for the time, devised a way to kill Suslin trees less directly and eﬀected
the iteration according to a curtailed tree-like indexing—so that no new reals are
ever adjoined. That indexing is captured by the κ = ω1 case of the combinatorial
principle □κ (“square”):
□κ
There is a sequence ⟨Cα | α a limit ordinal < κ+⟩such that
for α < κ+:
10Another coda of Shelah’s after many years: In 2007 he established that for successors λ+ >
ω1, 2λ = λ+ actually implies ♦λ+, so that the two are equivalent.

378
Akihiro Kanamori
(a) Cα ⊆α is closed unbounded in α,
(b) for β a limit point of Cα, Cα ∩β = Cβ, and
(c) for ω ≤cf(α) < κ, the order-type of Cα is less than κ.
□ω is immediate, as witnessed by any ladder system, i.e. a sequence ⟨Cα | α a
limit ordinal
< ω1⟩such that Cα is of order-type ω and coﬁnal in α. □κ for
κ > ω brings out the tension between the desired (b) and the needed (c). As
such, □κ came to guide many a construction of length κ+ based on components
of cardinality < κ.
Jensen showed that □κ can be adjoined by straightforward forcing with initial
approximations. Continuing his work on constructibility, Jensen soon established:
If V = L, then □κ holds for every κ. As for higher Suslin trees, a κ-Suslin tree
is expectedly a κ-tree with no chains or antichains of cardinality κ. Jensen’s work
on these trees having actually motivated his formulation of □κ, he established,
generalizing his result for κ = ω1: (1) for any κ, ♦κ+ and □κ imply that there
is a κ+-Suslin tree, and, for limit cardinals κ, the characterization (2) there is
a κ-Suslin tree iﬀκ is not weakly compact.
It is a notable happenstance that
Suslin’s early, 1920 speculation would have such extended ramiﬁcations in modern
set theory.
Jensen’s results that □κ holds in L and (2) above were the initial applications
of his ﬁne structure theory. Unlike G¨odel who had focused with L on relative
consistency, Jensen regarded the investigation of how the constructible hierarchy
grows by examining its behavior at arbitrary levels as of basic and intrinsic interest.
And with his ﬁne structure theory Jensen developed a considerable and intricate
machinery for this investigation. A pivotal question became: when does an ordinal
α ﬁrst get “singularized”, i.e. what is the least β such that there is in Lβ+1 an
unbounded subset of α of smaller order-type, and what Σn deﬁnitional complexity
does this set have? One is struck by the contrast between Jensen’s attention to
such local questions as this one, at the heart of his proof of □κ, and how his
analysis could lead to major large-scale results of manifest signiﬁcance.
Jensen’s CH + SH consistency result established the consistency of CH together
with the failure of ♦ω1. What about the possible failure of □ω1? Solovay observed:
If a Mahlo cardinal is Levy collapsed to make it ω2, then in the extension □ω1 fails.
Moreover, Jensen’s argument for □κ works to show that if κ+ is not Mahlo in L,
then □κ holds. Thus, among the increasing number of results complementing the
historical emergence of large cardinal hypotheses was yet another equi-consistency
result: The failure of □ω1 is equi-consistent to having a Mahlo cardinal.
3
STRONG HYPOTHESES
3.1
Large large cardinals
With elementary embedding having emerged as a systemic concept in set theory,
Solovay and William Reinhardt at Berkeley in the late 1960s formulated inter-

Large Cardinals with Forcing
379
related large cardinal hypotheses stronger than measurability.
Reinhardt con-
ceived extendibility, and he and Solovay independently, supercompactness. (See
the later [Solovay et al., 1978] for an exposition.) A cardinal κ is γ-supercompact
iﬀthere is an elementary embedding j : V →M for some inner model M, with
critical point κ and γ < j(κ) such that γM ⊆M, i.e. M is closed under the
taking of arbitrary γ-sequences.
κ is supercompact iﬀκ is γ-supercompact for
every γ.
Evidently, the heuristics of generalization and reﬂection were at work
here, as κ is measurable iﬀκ is κ-supercompact, and stronger closure proper-
ties imposed on the target model M ensure stronger reﬂection properties. For
example, if κ is 2κ-supercompact with witnessing j : V →M, then M |= “κ is
measurable”, since 2κM ⊆M implies that every ultraﬁlter over κ is in M, and
so if Uj ⊆P(κ) is deﬁned canonically from j by X ∈Uj iﬀκ ∈j(X), then
{ξ < κ | ξ is measurable} ∈Uj by  Lo´s’s Theorem. Supercompactness was initially
viewed as an ostensible strengthening of Tarski’s strong compactness in that, with
the focus on elementary embedding, reﬂection properties were directly incorpo-
rated. Whether strong compactness is actually equivalent to supercompactness
became a new, “identity crisis” issue.
Reinhardt entertained a prima facie extension of these ideas, that there is a
(non-identity) elementary embedding j : V →V . With suspicions soon raised,
Kunen [1971a] dramatically established that this is inconsistent with ZFC by ap-
plying an Erd˝os-Hajnal partition relation result, a combinatorial contingency mak-
ing prominent use of the Axiom of Choice. This contingency pointed out a speciﬁc
lack of closure of the target model: For any elementary embedding j : V →M
with critical point κ, let λ be the supremum of κ < j(κ) < j2(κ) < . . .. Then,
Vλ+1 ̸⊆M. This lack of closure has essentially stood as the weakest known to this
day.
A net of hypotheses consistency-wise stronger than supercompactness was soon
cast across the conceptual space delimited by Kunen’s inconsistency. For n ∈ω, κ
is n-huge iﬀthere is an elementary embedding j : V →M, for some inner model
M, with critical point κ such that jn(κ)M ⊆M. As had been ﬁrst formulated
by Kunen, κ is huge iﬀκ is 1-huge. If κ is huge, then Vκ |= “there are many
supercompact cardinals”. Thematically close to Kunen’s inconsistency were sev-
eral hypotheses articulated for further investigation, e.g. there is a (non-identity)
elementary embedding j : Vλ →Vλ for some λ.
The appearance of proper classes in these various formulations raises issues
about legitimacy. By Tarski’s “undeﬁnability of truth”, the satisfaction relation
for V is not deﬁnable in V , and the elementary embedding characterization of mea-
surability already suﬀers from this shortcoming. However, the γ-supercompactness
of κ can be analogously formulated in terms of the existence of a “normal” ultra-
ﬁlter over the set Pκγ = [γ]<κ = {x ⊆γ | |x| < κ}. Similarly, n-hugeness can
also be recast. As for Kunen’s inconsistency, his argument can be regarded as
establishing: There is no (non-identity) elementary embedding j : Vλ+2 →Vλ+2
for any λ.
The details on γ-supercompactness drew out new, generalizing concepts for

380
Akihiro Kanamori
ﬁlters (and so, for ideals). Suppose that Z is a set and F a ﬁlter over P(Z) (so
F ⊆P(P(Z))). Then F is ﬁne iﬀfor any a ∈Z, {x ∈P(Z) | a ∈x} ∈F. F
is normal iﬀwhenever f is a function satisfying {x ∈P(Z) | f(x) ∈x} ∈F,
i.e. f is a choice function on a set in F, there is an a ∈Z such that {x ∈P(Z) |
f(x) = a} ∈F, i.e. f is constant on a set in F. When Z is a cardinal κ and
κ = {x ∈P(κ) | x ∈κ} ∈F, then this new normality reduces to the previous
concept. With an analogous reduction to ﬁlters over Pκγ = [γ]<κ, we have the
formulation: κ is γ-supercompact iﬀthere is a κ-complete, ﬁne, normal ultraﬁlter
over Pκγ.
Also, Tarski’s concept of a cardinal κ being strongly compact can
be formulated as being γ-compact for every γ ≥κ, where κ is γ-compact iﬀ
there is a κ-complete, ﬁne ultraﬁlter over Pκγ.
These formulations inspired a
substantial combinatorial investigation of ﬁlters over sets Pκγ, and a general,
structural approach to ﬁlters over sets P(Z).
Whether it is in these large cardinal hypotheses or the transition from V to V [G]
in forcing, the appeal to the satisfaction relation for V is liberal and unabashed in
modern set-theoretic practice. Yet ZFC remains parsimoniously the oﬃcial the-
ory and this carries with it the necessary burden of formalization. On the other
hand, it is the formalization that henceforth carries the operative sense; for ex-
ample, the ultraﬁlter characterization of γ-supercompactness delivers through the
concreteness of the ultrapower construction critical properties that become part
of the concept in its use. It has become commonplace in modern set theory that
informal assertions and schematic procedures often convey an incipient intentional
sense, but formalization reﬁnes that sense with workable structural articulations.
3.2
Determinacy
Before proceeding with the historical development of the ZFC theory of large
cardinals, we draw back to tuck in an account of a development from a diﬀerent
quarter, a development that at ﬁrst seemed novel and orthogonal but eventually
became woven into the larger fabric of the investigation of large cardinals as strong
propositions. The investigation of the determinacy of inﬁnite games is the most
distinctive and intriguing development of modern set theory, and the correlations
eventually achieved with large cardinals the most remarkable and synthetic.11 For
a set X and A ⊆ωX, let GX(A) denote the following “inﬁnite two-person game
with perfect information”: There are two players, I and II. I initially chooses an
x(0) ∈X; then II chooses an x(1) ∈X; then I chooses an x(2) ∈X; then II
chooses an x(3) ∈X; and so forth:
I
:
x(0)
x(2)
. . .
II :
x(1)
x(3)
. . .
Each player before making each of his moves is privy to the sequence of previous
moves (“perfect information”); and the players together specify an x ∈ωX. I wins
GX(A) if x ∈A (the “payoﬀ” set), and otherwise II wins. A strategy is a function
11See Paul Larson’s chapter for more details on determinacy.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
381
that tells a player what move to make given the sequence of previous moves. A
winning strategy is a strategy such that if a player plays according to it he always
wins no matter what his opponent plays. A is determined if either I or II has a
winning strategy in GX(A).
David Gale and James Stewart [1953] initiated the study of these games and
observed that if A ⊆ωX is open (in the product topology) then A is determined.
The simple argument turned on how membership is secured at a ﬁnite stage,
and a basic stratagem in the further investigations of determinacy would be the
reduction to such “open games”. Focusing on the basic case X = ω and noting
that a strategy then can itself be construed as a real, Gale and Stewart showed by
diagonalizing through all strategies that assuming AC there is an undetermined
A ⊆ωω. Determinacy itself would come to be regarded as a regularity property,
but there were basic diﬃculties from the beginning.
Gale and Stewart asked
whether all Borel sets of reals are determined, and in the decade that followed
only sets very low in the Borel hierarchy were shown to be determined.
Inﬁnitely long games involving reals had been considered as early as in the 1920s
by mathematicians of the Polish school. With renewed interest in the subject in
the 1950s, and with determinacy increasingly seen to be potent in its consequences,
Jan Mycielski and Hugo Steinhaus [1962] proposed the following axiom, now known
as the Axiom of Determinacy (AD):
Every A ⊆ωω is determined.
With AD contradicting AC they proposed from the beginning that in the ZFC
context the axiom should hold in some inner model.
Solovay pointed out the
natural candidate L(R), the constructible closure of the reals R = ωω, observing
that if AD holds then ADL(R), i.e. AD holds in L(R). Further restricted hypotheses
would soon be applied to the tasks at hand: Projective Determinacy (PD) asserts
that every projective A ⊆ωω is determined; Σ1
n-determinacy, that every Σ1
n set
A is determined; and so forth.
By 1964, games to speciﬁc purposes had been devised to show that for A ⊆
ωω there is a closely related B ⊆ωω (a continuous preimage) so that if B is
determined, then A is Lebesgue measurable, and similarly for the Baire property
and the perfect set property. Moreover, AD does imply a limited choice principle,
that every countable set consisting of sets of reals has a choice function. Thus, the
groundwork was laid for the reign of AD in L(R) to enforce the regularity properties
for all sets of reals there as well as a local choice principle, and unfettered uses of
AC relegated to the universe at large.
In 1967 two results drew determinacy to the foreground of set theory, one about
the transﬁnite and the other about deﬁnable sets of reals. Solovay established that
AD implies that ω1 is measurable, injecting emerging large cardinal techniques into
a novel setting without AC. David Blackwell [1967] provided a new proof via the
determinacy of open games of a classical result of Kuratowski that the Π1
1 sets
have the reduction property, one of several properties investigated in descriptive
set theory for the projective sets. These results stimulated interest because of their

382
Akihiro Kanamori
immediacy and new approach to proof, that of devising a game and appealing to
the existence of winning strategies to deduce a dichotomy. Martin in particular saw
the potentialities at hand and soon made incisive contributions to investigations
with and of determinacy. He initially made a simple but crucial observation based
on the construal of strategies as reals that would have myriad applications: Under
AD the ﬁlter over the Turing degrees generated by the cones is an ultraﬁlter.
Martin and Yiannis Moschovakis independently in 1968 extended the reduction
property through the projective hierarchy by playing games and assuming PD,
realizing a methodological goal of the classical descriptive set theorists by carrying
out an inductive propagation. This was Martin’s initial application of his ultraﬁlter
on Turing cones, and the idea of ranking ordinal-valued functions via ultraﬁlters,
so crucial in later arguments, ﬁrst occurred here.
Already in 1964 Moschovakis had abstracted a property stronger and more
intrinsic than reduction, the prewellordering property, from the classical analysis
of Π1
1 sets. A relation ⪯is a prewellordering if it is a well-ordering except possibly
that there could be distinct x and y such that x ⪯y and y ⪯x. While a well-
ordering of a set A corresponds to a bijection of A into an ordinal, a prewellordering
corresponds to a surjection onto an ordinal—a stratiﬁcation of A into well-ordered
layers. A class Γ of sets of reals has the prewellordering property if for any A ∈
Γ there is a prewellordering of A such that both it and its complement are in
Γ in a strong sense.
This property supplanted the reduction property in the
Martin-Moschovakis First Periodicity Theorem, which implied that under PD the
prewellordering property holds periodically for the projective classes: Π1
1, Σ1
2, Π1
3,
Σ1
4, . . ..
As for Solovay’s result, he in fact established that under AD the closed un-
bounded ﬁlter Cω1 is an ultraﬁlter by using a game played with countable ordinals
and simulating it with reals. Martin provided an alternate proof using his ultra-
ﬁlter on Turing cones, and then Solovay in 1968 used Martin’s result to establish
that under AD ω2 is measurable. With an apparent trend set, quite unexpected
was the next advance. Martin in 1970 established that under AD the ωn’s for
3 ≤n < ω are all singular with coﬁnality ω2! This was a by-product of an incisive
analysis of Martin’s of Σ1
3 sets under AD.
Martin [1970] also reactivated the earlier project of securing more and more
determinacy by establishing that if there is a measurable cardinal, then Π1
1-
determinacy holds, or in reﬁned terms, if a# exists, then Π1
1(a)-determinacy holds.
The proof featured a remarkably simple reduction to an open game, based on in-
discernibles and homogeneity properties, of form GX(A) for a set X of ordinals.
This ground-breaking proof served both to make plausible the possibility of getting
PD from large cardinals as well as getting ∆1
1-determinacy, Borel Determinacy, in
ZFC—both directions to be met with complete success in later years.
The advances in the investigation of deﬁnable sets of reals with determinacy
would be in terms of their analysis as projections of trees. For purposes of de-
scriptive set theory, T is a tree on ω × κ iﬀ(a) T consists of pairs ⟨s, t⟩where s
is a ﬁnite sequence drawn from ω and t is a ﬁnite sequence drawn from κ of the

Large Cardinals with Forcing
383
same length, and (b) if ⟨s, t⟩∈T, s′ is an initial segment of s and t′ is a initial
segment of t of the same length, then also ⟨s′, t′⟩∈T. For such T, [T] consists of
pairs ⟨f, g⟩corresponding to inﬁnite branches, i.e. f and g are ω-sequences such
that for any ﬁnite initial segment s of f and ﬁnite initial segment t of g of the
same length, ⟨s, t⟩∈T. In modern terms, A ⊆ωω is κ-Suslin iﬀthere is a tree
on ω × κ such that A = p[T] = {f | ∃g(⟨f, g⟩∈[T])}. [T] is a closed set in the
space of ⟨f, g⟩’s where f : ω →ω and g: ω →κ, and so otherwise complicated sets
of reals, if shown to be κ-Suslin, are newly comprehended as projections of closed
sets. The analytic (Σ1
1) sets are exactly the ω-Suslin sets. Shoenﬁeld [1961] had
established that every Σ1
2 set is ω1-Suslin.
To address the classical issue of uniformization, Moschovakis [1971] abstracted
from the proof of the classical, Kondˆo Π1
1 Uniformization Theorem what would
become the central structural concept in the investigation of deﬁnable sets of reals
with determinacy. A scale on a set A ⊆ωω is an ω-sequence of ordinal-valued
functions on A satisfying convergence and continuity properties, and a class Γ of
sets of reals has the scale property if for any A ∈Γ there is a scale on A whose
corresponding graph relations are in Γ in a strong sense. Having a scale on A
corresponds to having A = p[T] for a tree T in such a way that, importantly,
from A is deﬁnable a member of A through a minimization process (“choosing the
honest leftmost branch”).
In the early 1970s Moschovakis, Martin, and Alexander Kechris proceeded with
scales to provide a detailed analysis of the projective sets under PD in terms of
Borel sets and as projections of trees, based on the projective ordinals δ1
n = the
supremum of the lengths of the ∆1
n prewellorderings. For example, the Σ1
2n+2
sets are exactly the δ1
2n+1-Suslin sets. The projective ordinals themselves were
subjected to considerable scrutiny, with penetrating work of Kunen particularly
advancing the theory, and were found to be measurable and to satisfy strong
partition properties. However, where exactly the δ1
n for n ≥5 are in the aleph
hierarchy would remain a mystery until the latter 1980s, when Steve Jackson
[1988] in a tour de force settled the question with a deep analysis of the ultraﬁlters
and partition properties involved. As an otherwise complete structure theory for
projective sets was being worked out into the 1970s, Martin in 1974 (cf. [1975])
returned to a bedrock issue for the regularity properties and established in ZFC
that ∆1
1-determinacy, Borel Determinacy, holds.
3.3
Elaborations
Although large large cardinals were developed particularly to investigate the pos-
sibilities for elementary embeddings and were quickly seen to have a simple but
elegant basic theory, what really intimated their potentialities were new forcing
results in the 1970s and 1980s, especially from supercompactness, that established
new relative consistencies, even of assertions low in the cumulative hierarchy. The
earliest, orienting result along these lines addressed the Singular Cardinals Prob-
lem.
The “Prikry-Silver” result provided the ﬁrst instance of a failure of the

384
Akihiro Kanamori
Singular Cardinal Hypothesis by drawing together two results of independent sig-
niﬁcance, themselves crucial as methodological advances.
Karel Prikry in his 1968 Berkeley thesis (cf. his [1970]) had set out a simple
but elegant notion of forcing that changed the coﬁnality of a measurable cardinal
without collapsing any cardinals. With U a normal κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ,
Prikry forcing for U has as conditions ⟨p, A⟩where p is a ﬁnite subset of κ and
A ∈U. For conditions ⟨p, A⟩and ⟨q, B⟩, the ﬁrst is stronger than the second if
p ⊇q and α ∈p −q implies α > max(q) and A ∪(p −q) ⊆B. A condition
thus speciﬁes a ﬁnite initial part of a new ω-coﬁnalizing subset of κ, and further
members are to be added on top from a set large in the sense of being in U.
Applying a partition relation available for normal ultraﬁlters, Prikry established a
focal property, that for any condition ⟨p, A⟩and forcing statement, there is a B ⊆A
such that B ∈U and ⟨p, B⟩decides the statement, i.e. extending p is unnecessary.
Hence, e.g. the κ-completeness of U implies that Vκ remains unchanged in the
forcing extension yet the coﬁnality of κ now becomes ω.
Prikry forcing may at ﬁrst have seemed a curious possibility for singularization.
However, that a Prikry generic sequence also generates the corresponding U in
simple fashion and also results from indiscernibles made them a central feature of
measurability. Prikry forcing would be generalized in various directions and for a
variety of purposes. With the capabilities made available for changing coﬁnalities,
equi-consistency connections would eventually be established between large cardi-
nals on the one hand and formulations in connection with the Singular Cardinals
Problem on the other.
Silver in 1971 ﬁrst established the relative consistency of having a measurable
cardinal κ satisfying 2κ > κ+, a proposition that Kunen [1971b] had shown to
be substantially stronger than just having measurability. Forcing over the model
constructed by Silver with Prikry forcing yielded the ﬁrst counterexample to the
Singular Cardinals Hypothesis by providing a singular strong limit cardinal κ
satisfying 2κ > κ+.
To establish his result, Silver provided a technique for extending elementary em-
beddings into generic extensions and thereby preserving large cardinal properties.
To get at what is at issue, suppose that j : V →M is an elementary embedding,
P is a notion of forcing, and G is V -generic for P. To extend (or “lift”) j to an
elementary embedding for V [G], the natural scheme would be to get an M-generic
G′ for j(P) and extend j to an elementary embedding from V [G] into M[G′]. But
for this to work with the forcing terms, it would be necessary to enforce
(∗)
∀p ∈G (j(p) ∈G′) .
For getting a measurable cardinal κ satisfying 2κ = κ++, Silver started with an
elementary embedding as above with critical point κ and devised a P for adjoining
κ++ Cohen subsets of κ. In order to establish a close connection between P and
j(P) toward securing (∗), he took P to be a uniform iteration of forcings to adjoin
λ++ Cohen subsets of λ for every inaccessible cardinal λ up to and including κ.
Then with the shift from κ to j(κ), j(P) can be considered a two-stage iteration

Large Cardinals with Forcing
385
of P followed by a further iteration Q. Now with G V -generic for P, G is also
M-generic for P, and in M[G] one should devise an H M[G]-generic for Q such
that the combined generic G′ = G ∗H satisﬁes (∗).
But how is this to be arranged? Silver was able to control the j(p)’s for p ∈G by
a single, (strong) master condition q ∈Q, and build in V [G] an H M[G]-generic
over Q with q ∈H to satisfy (∗). For getting both q and H, he needed that
M be closed under arbitrary κ++-sequences. Thus he established: If κ is κ++-
supercompact, then there is a forcing extension in which κ is measurable and 2κ =
κ++.12 Silver’s preparatory “reversed Easton” forcing with Easton support and
master condition constructions of generic ﬁlters would become staple ingredients
for the generic extension of elementary embeddings.
What about the use of very strong hypotheses in consistency results? A signal,
1972 result of Kunen (cf. [1978]) brought into play the strongest hypothesis to
date for establishing a consistency result about the low levels of the cumulative
hierarchy. Kunen [1970] had established that having a κ-complete κ+-saturated
ideal over a successor cardinal κ has consistency strength substantially stronger
than having a measurable cardinal. Kunen now showed: If κ is huge, then there is
forcing extension in which κ = ω1 and there is an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal
over ω1. With a j : V →M with critical point κ, λ = j(κ), and λM ⊆M as
given by the hugeness of κ, Kunen collapsed κ to ω1 and followed it was a collapse
of λ to ω2 in such a way so as to be able to deﬁne a saturated ideal. Crucially,
the ﬁrst collapse was a “universal” collapse P iteratively constructed so that the
second collapse can be absorbed into j(P) in a way consistent with j applied
to P, and this required λM ⊆M. Hence, a suﬃcient algebraic argument was
contingent on a closure property for an elementary embedding, one plucked from
the emerging large cardinal hierarchy. In the years to come, Kunen’s argument
would be elaborated and emended to become the main technique for getting various
sorts of saturated ideals over accessible cardinals. As for the proposition that there
is an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1 itself, Kunen’s result set an initial
high bar for the stalking of its consistency strength, but deﬁnitive work of the
1980s would show that far less than hugeness suﬃces.
William Mitchell would become a major developer of inner models for large
cardinals, the ﬁrst after Kunen. His Berkeley thesis (cf. [1972]), however, made
important strides in a diﬀerent direction.
A κ-tree is special if it is the union
of fewer than κ antichains.
Aronszajn’s original construction of an Aronszajn
tree actually provided a special tree. Analogously, a κ-Aronszajn tree is a κ-tree
with no coﬁnal branches, i.e. a counterexample to the tree property for κ, and a
generalization of Aronszajn’s construction shows that if κ is regular and 2α ≤κ
for every α < κ, then there is a special κ+-Aronszajn tree.
Mitchell showed:
If there is a Mahlo cardinal, then there is a forcing extension making it ω2 in
which there are no special ω2-Aronszajn trees. The forcing added Cohen reals to
12To mention an elegant coda, work of Woodin and Gitik in the 1980s showed that having a
measurable cardinal satisfying 2κ > κ+ is equi-consistent with the proposition ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++),
formulated below in the text.

386
Akihiro Kanamori
make the eventual 2ℵ0 necessarily ω2, and had sophisticated features that could
count as “countable support iteration” and “termspace forcing”, important in later
iterated forcing. Mitchell also observed that if there are no special ω2-Aronszajn
trees, then ω2 is Mahlo in L. Hence we have the equi-consistency: Having no
special ω2-Aronszajn trees is equi-consistent to having a Mahlo cardinal. Recall
that a characterization of a cardinal κ being weakly compact is being inaccessible
and having the tree property (i.e. having no κ-Aronszajn trees at all). Mitchell’s
advisor Silver applied Mitchell’s forcing argument and made a corresponding inner
model observation to establish an equi-consistency result for the tree property at
an accessible cardinal: ω2 having the tree property is equi-consistent to having a
weakly compact cardinal.
After a brief excursion into category theory, Mitchell [1974] soon provided the
ﬁrst substantive extension of Kunen’s inner model results and brought to promi-
nence a new, delimitative, large cardinal hypothesis. For normal κ-complete ul-
traﬁlters U and U ′ over κ, deﬁne the Mitchell order U ′ ⊳U iﬀU ′ ∈Ult(V, U),
i.e. there is an f : κ →V representing U ′ in the ultrapower, so that {α < κ | f(α)
is a normal α-complete ultraﬁlter over α} ∈U and κ is already a limit or mea-
surable cardinals. U ⊳U always fails, and generally, ⊳is a well-founded relation
by a version of Scott’s argument that measurable cardinals contradict V = L.
Consequently, to each U can be recursively assigned a rank o(U) = sup{o(U ′)+1 |
U ′ ⊳U}, and to a cardinal κ, the supremum o(κ) = sup{o(U) + 1 | U is a nor-
mal κ-complete ultraﬁlter over κ}. By a cardinality argument, if 2κ = κ+ then
o(κ) ≤κ++.
The hypothesis o(κ) = δ provided an “order” of measurability calibrated by
δ, with larger δ corresponding to stronger assumptions on κ.
For the investi-
gation of these orders, Mitchell devised the concept of a coherent sequence of
ultraﬁlters (“measures”) and was able to establish canonicity results for inner
models L[U] |= “U is a coherent sequence of ultraﬁlters”. A coherent sequence
U is a doubly indexed system of normal α-complete ultraﬁlters U(α, β) over α
such that U(κ, β) ⊳U(κ, β′) for β < β′ at the κth level, and the earlier lev-
els contain just enough ultraﬁlters necessary to represent these ⊳relationships
in the respective ultrapowers.
(Technically, if j : V
→Ult(V, U(κ, β′)), then
j(U)↾{(α, β) | α ≤κ} = U↾{(α, β) | α < κ ∨(α = κ ∧β < β′)}, i.e. j(U)
through κ is exactly U “below” (κ, β′).)
Mitchell ﬁrst aﬃrmed that these L[U]’s are iterable in that arbitrary iterated
ultrapowers via ultraﬁlters in U and its successive images are always well-founded.
He then eﬀected a comparison: Any L[U1] and L[U2] have respective iterated ultra-
powers L[W1] and L[W2] such that W1 is an initial segment of W2 or vice versa.
This he achieved through a process of coiteration of least diﬀerences: At each
stage, one ﬁnds the lexicographically least coordinate at which the current iter-
ated ultrapowers of L[U1] and L[U2] diﬀer and takes the respective ultrapowers by
the diﬀering ultraﬁlters; the diﬀerence is eliminated as ultraﬁlters never occur in
their ultrapowers. With this coiteration, Mitchell established that in L[U] the only
normal α-complete ultraﬁlters over α for any α are those that occur in U and other

Large Cardinals with Forcing
387
propositions like GCH that showed these models to be L-like. Coiteration would
henceforth be embedded in inner model theory, and with his models L[U] mod-
eling o(κ) = δ for δ < κ++L[U], ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++) would become the delimitative
proposition of his analysis.
Much of the early formative work on strong large cardinal hypotheses and their
integration into modern set theory through consistency results was carried out by
Menachem Magidor, whose subsequent, broad-ranging initiatives have consider-
ably advanced the entire subject. After completing his Hebrew University thesis
in 1972 on supercompact cardinals, Magidor in the 1970s established a series of
penetrating forcing consistency results involving strong hypotheses.
In 1972-3
(cf. [1976]) he illuminated the “identity crisis” issue of whether supercompactness
and strong compactness are distinct concepts by establishing: (1) It is consistent
that the least supercompact cardinal is also the least strong compact cardinal, and
(2) It is consistent that the least strong compact cardinal is the least measurable
cardinal (and so, much smaller than the least supercompact cardinal). The proofs
showed how changing many coﬁnalities with Prikry forcing to destroy measurable
cardinals can be integrated into arguments about extending elementary embed-
dings.
In 1973 Magidor (cf. [1977a]) showed how with strong hypotheses the least limit
cardinal ℵω can violate the Singular Cardinals Hypothesis: If κ is supercompact,
there is a forcing extension in which κ is ℵω as a strong limit cardinal yet 2ℵω >
ℵω+1.
The strong elementary embedding hypothesis allowed for an elaborated
Prikry forcing interspersed with Levy collapses. With this ﬁrst net thrown out,
it would be one of the great elaborations of method that equi-consistency results
would eventually be achieved with weaker hypotheses for the violation of SCH,
and already at ℵω.
3.4
Silver’s theorem and covering
In mid-1974 Silver [1975] established that if κ is a singular cardinal with cf(κ) > ω
and 2λ = λ+ for λ < κ, then 2κ = κ+. This was a dramatic event and would
stimulate dramatic developments. There had been precious little in the way of
results provable in ZFC about cardinal arithmetic, and in the early ruminations
about the Singular Cardinals Problem it was quite unforeseen that the power of
a singular cardinal can be so constrained. An analogous preservation result had
been observed by Scott for measurable cardinals, and telling was that Silver used
large-cardinal ideas connected with generic ultrapowers.
Silver’s result spurred broad-ranging investigations both into the combinatorics
and avenue of proof and into larger, structural implications.
The basis of his
argument was a ranking of ordinal-valued functions on cf(κ). Let ⟨γα | α < cf(κ)⟩
be a sequence of ordinals unbounded in κ and for α < cf(κ) let τα : P(γα) →2γα
be a bijection. For X ⊆κ let fX on cf(κ) be deﬁned by: fX(α) = τα(X ∩γα),
noting that X1 ̸= X2 implies fX1 and fX2 diﬀer for suﬃciently large α. Then 2κ is
mirrored through these eventually diﬀerent functions, which one can work to order

388
Akihiro Kanamori
according to an ideal over the uncountable cf(κ). The combinatorial possibilities
of such rankings led to a series of limitative results on the powers of singular
cardinals of uncountable coﬁnality, starting with the results of Fred Galvin and
Hajnal [1975], of which the paradigmatic example is that if ℵω1 is a strong limit
cardinal, then 2ℵω1 < ℵ(2ℵ1)+.
In the wake of Silver’s proof, Thomas Jech and Prikry [1976] deﬁned a κ-
complete ideal over κ to be precipitous iﬀthe corresponding generic ultrapower
`a la Solovay is well-founded. They thus put the focus on a structural property of
saturated ideals that Silver had simulated to such good eﬀect. Jech and Prikry
pointed out that a proof of Kunen’s for saturated ideals using iterated ultrapowers
can be tailored to show: If there is a precipitous ideal over κ, then κ is measurable
in an inner model. Then Mitchell observed (cf. [Jech et al., 1980]): If a measurable
cardinal is Levy collapsed to ω1, then a normal ultraﬁlter generates a precipitous
ideal over ω1 in the extension. Hence, a ﬁrst equi-consistency result was achieved
for measurability and ω1 in ZFC. With combinatorial characterizations of precip-
itousness soon in place, well-foundedness as thus modulated by forcing became a
basic ingredient in a large-scale investigation of strong properties tailored to ideals
and generic elementary embeddings.
The most dramatic and penetrating development from Silver’s Theorem was
Jensen’s work on “covering” for L and its ﬁrst extensions, the most prominent
advances of the 1970s in set theory. Jensen had found Silver’s result a “shock-
ing discovery”, and was stimulated to intense activity.
By the end of 1974 he
had made prodigious progress, solving the Singular Cardinals Problem in the ab-
sence of 0# in three manuscripts, “Marginalia to a Theorem of Silver” and its
two sequels. The culminating result featured an elegant and focal formulation of
intuitive immediacy, the Covering Theorem (or “Lemma”) for L: If 0# does not
exist, then for any uncountable set X of ordinals there is a Y ∈L with |Y | = |X|
such that Y ⊇X. (The ﬁrst published account was given in [Devlin and Jensen,
1975]; without the “uncountable” there would be a counterexample using “Namba
forcing”.) This covering property expresses a global aﬃnity between V and L,
and its contrapositive provides a surprisingly simple condition suﬃcient for the
existence of 0# and the ensuing indiscernible generation of L. As such, Jensen’s
theorem would ﬁnd wide applications for implicating 0# and would provide a new
initiative in inner model theory for encompassing stronger hypotheses.
The Covering Theorem gave the essence of Jensen’s argument that in the ab-
sence of 0# the Singular Cardinals Hypotheses holds: Suppose that κ is singular
and for reckoning with the powers of smaller cardinals consider λ = sup{2µ |
µ < κ}.
If there is a ν < κ such that λ = 2ν, then the functions fX de-
ﬁned as above adapted to the present situation satisfy fX : cf(κ) →2ν, and so
λ ≤2κ ≤(2ν)cf(κ) ≤λ. If on the other hand λ is the strict supremum of increas-
ing 2µ’s, then cf(λ) = cf(κ) and so the Zermelo-K˝onig inequality would dictate
the least possibility for 2κ to be λ+. However, if for any X ⊆κ the range of fX is
covered by a Y ⊆λ with Y ∈L of cardinality cf(κ) · ℵ1, then: there are 2cf(κ)·ℵ1
subsets of each such Y and by the GCH in L, at most |λ+L| such Y . Hence, we

Large Cardinals with Forcing
389
would have 2κ ≤2cf(κ)·ℵ1 · |λ+L| ≤λ+.
The Covering Theorem also provided another dividend that would grow in sep-
arate signiﬁcance as having the weak covering property: Assume that 0# does not
exist. If κ is singular, then κ+L = κ+.
If to the contrary κ+L < κ+, then
cf(κ+L) < κ. Let X ⊆κ+L be unbounded so that |X| < κ and let Y ∈L cover
X with |Y | = |X| · ℵ1.
But then, the order-type of Y would be less than κ,
contradicting the regularity of κ+L in L.
A crucial consequence of weak covering is that in the absence of 0#, □κ holds
for singular κ, since a □κ sequence in the sense of L is then a □κ sequence in
V . The weak covering property would itself become pivotal in the study of inner
models corresponding to stronger and stronger hypotheses, and the failure of □κ
for singular κ would become a delimitative proposition. Solovay (cf. [Solovay et
al., 1978]) had already established an upper bound on consistency by showing in
the early 1970s that if κ is λ+-supercompact and λ ≥κ, then □λ fails.
Jensen’s ingenious proof of the Covering Theorem for L proceeded by taking a
counterexample X to covering with τ = sup(X) and |X| minimal; getting a certain
Σ1-elementary j : Lγ →Lτ which contains X in its range through a Skolem hull
construction so that |γ| = |X| and, as X cannot be covered, γ is a cardinal in L;
and extending j to an elementary embedding from L into L, so that 0# exists.
The procedure for extending j up to some large Lδ was to consider a directed
system of embeddings of structures generated by ξ ∪p for some ξ < γ and p a
ﬁnite subset of Lδ, the transitized components of the system all being members
of Lγ as γ is a cardinal in L, and to consider the corresponding directed system
consisting of the j images. The choice of γ insured that the new directed system
is also well-founded, and so isomorphic to some Lζ.
How can the proof of the Covering Theorem be adapted to establish a stronger
result? The only possibility was to consider a larger inner model M and to establish
that M has the covering property: for any uncountable set X of ordinals there is
a Y ∈M with |Y | = |X| such that Y ⊇X. In groundbreaking work for inner
model theory, Solovay in the early 1970s had developed a ﬁne structure theory
for inner models of measurability. Whilst a research student at Oxford University
Anthony Dodd worked through this theory, and in early 1976 he and Jensen laid
out the main ideas for extending the Covering Theorem to a new inner model,
now known as the Dodd-Jensen core model, denoted KDJ. (See their [1981] and
the full exposition [Dodd, 1982].)
If ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is an inner model of measurability, say the κ-model, then there
is a generic extension in which covering fails: If G is Prikry generic for U over
L[U], then G cannot be covered by any set in L[U] of cardinality less than κ.
Drawing back, there remains the possibility of “iterating out” the measurable
cardinal: If ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩is the κ-model, then ⟨L[W], ∈, W⟩is the λ-model for some
λ > κ exactly when it is an iterate of ⟨L[U], ∈, U⟩, in which case L[W] ⊆L[U],
Vκ ∩L[U] = Vκ ∩L[W], and U /∈L[W]. Thus, if ⟨L[Uα] | α ∈On⟩enumerates
the inner models of measurability, then starting with any one of them, the process
of iterating it through the ordinals converges to a proper class T
α L[Uα] which

390
Akihiro Kanamori
has no inner models of measurability, with the stabilizing feature that for any
γ, Vγ ∩T
α L[Uα] = Vγ ∩L[Uβ] for suﬃciently large β. Assuming that there are
inner models of measurability, KDJ is in fact characterizable as this residue class.
Aspiring to this, but without making any such assumption, Dodd and Jensen
provided a formulation of KDJ in ZFC.
KDJ was the ﬁrst inner model of ZFC since G¨odel’s L developed using distinctly
new generating principles. Dodd and Jensen’s approach was to take KDJ as the
union of L together with “mice”. Loosely speaking, a mouse is a set Lα[U| such
that
⟨Lα[U], ∈, U⟩|= U is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ
satisfying: (i) there is a subset of κ in Lα+1[U] −Lα[U], so that U is on the verge
of not being an ultraﬁlter; (ii) ⟨Lα[U], ∈, U⟩is iterable in that all the iterated
ultrapowers are well-founded, and (iii) ﬁne structure conditions about a projectum
below κ leading to (i). Mice can be compared by taking iterated ultrapowers, so
that there is a natural prewellordering of mice, and moreover, crucial elements
about L can be lifted to the new situation because there is a generalization of
condensation: Σ1-elementary substructures of mice, when transitized, are again
mice. This led to KDJ |= GCH, and that KDJ in the sense of KDJ is again KDJ.
Mice generate indiscernibles through iteration, and so if 0# does not exist,
then KDJ = L; if 0# exists but 0## does not, then KDJ = L[0#]; and this
continues through the transﬁnite by coding sequences of sharps. On the other
hand, KDJ has no simple constructive analysis from below and is rather like a
maximal inner model on the brink of measurability: Its own “sharp”, that there is
an elementary embedding j : KDJ →KDJ, is equivalent to the existence of an inner
model of measurability. Indeed, this was Dodd and Jensen’s primary motivation
for the formulation of KDJ. They used it in place of the elementary embedding
characterization of the existence of 0#, together with the L-like properties of KDJ,
to establish (cf. [1982a]) the Covering Theorem for KDJ: If there is no inner model
of measurability, then KDJ has the covering property.
This has the attendant
consequences for the Singular Cardinals Problem. Moreover, Dodd and Jensen
were able to establish a covering result for inner models of measurability that
accommodates Prikry forcing.
Solovay had devised a set of integers 0† (“zero
dagger”), analogous to 0#, such that 0† exists exactly when for some κ-model
L[U] there is an elementary embedding j : L[U] →L[U] with critical point above
κ. Dodd and Jensen (cf. [1982b]) established: If 0† does not exist yet there is
an inner model of measurability, then for the κ-model L[U] with κ least, either
(a) L[U] has the covering property, or (b) there is a Prikry generic G for U over
L[U] such that L[U][G] has the covering property. Prikry forcing provides the only
counterexample to covering! Hence, the inner models thus far considered were also
“core models”, models on the brink so that the lack of covering leads to the next
large cardinal hypothesis.
In the light of the Dodd-Jensen work, Mitchell in the later 1970s (cf. [1984;
1985]) developed the core model K[U] for coherent sequences U of ultraﬁlters,
which corresponds to his L[U] as KDJ does to L[U]. The mice are now sets of

Large Cardinals with Forcing
391
form Jα[W] with iterability and ﬁne structure properties, where W is an ultraﬁlter
sequence with U as an initial segment. Under the assumption that there is no
inner model satisfying ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++), Mitchell established the weak covering
property for K[U], i.e. that (κ+)K[U] = κ+ for singular κ. With this he showed
that several propositions have at least the consistency strength of ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++).
One such proposition was that there is an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1,
establishing a new lower bound in consistency strength for Kunen’s consistency
result from a huge cardinal. Mitchell [1985] established, generalizing the Dodd-
Jensen result with Prikry generic sets, a full covering theorem for K[U] cast in
terms of coherent systems of indiscernibles and drew further conclusions about
singular cardinals.
3.5
Forcing consistency results through the 1970s
Through the 1970s a wide range of variegated forcing consistency results were
established at a new level of sophistication that clariﬁed relationships among com-
binatorial propositions and principles and often drew in large cardinal hypotheses
and stimulated the development of method, especially in iterated forcing. A con-
spicuous series of results resolved questions of larger mathematics (Whitehead’s
Problem, Borel’s Conjecture, Kaplansky’s Conjecture, the Normal Moore Space
Problem) in terms of relative consistency and set-theoretic principles, newly af-
ﬁrming the eﬃcacy and adjudicatory character of set theory.
In what follows,
we mention these results in turn as we continue to pursue the larger longitudinal
themes, necessarily saying less and less about matters of increasing complexity.
In 1974 Magidor [1978] made a basic contribution to the theory of changing
coﬁnalities, the ﬁrst after Prikry. Magidor established: If a measurable cardinal κ
is of Mitchell order o(κ) ≥λ for a regular λ < κ, then there is a forcing extension
preserving cardinals in which cf(κ) = λ. Generalizing Prikry forcing, Magidor’s
conditions consisted of a ﬁnite sequence of ordinals and a sequence of sets drawn
from normal ultraﬁlters in the Mitchell order, the sets providing for the possible
ways of ﬁlling out the sequence.
Like Prikry’s forcing, Magidor’s may at ﬁrst
have seemed a curious possibility for a new singularization. However, one of the
discernments of Mitchell’s core model for coherent sequences of measures is that,
remarkably [1987]: If a regular cardinal κ in V satisﬁes ω < cf(κ) < κ in a generic
extension, then V has an inner model in which o(κ) is at least that coﬁnality.
Thus, the capability of changing coﬁnalities was exactly gauged; “Prikry-Magidor”
generic sets as sequences of indiscernibles would become a basic component of
Mitchell’s covering work.
The most salient result of Magidor’s of this period were one that provided
counterweight to Silver’s result for the least limit cardinal ℵω. Magidor [1977b]
showed: If κ is a huge cardinal, then there is a forcing extension in which κ = ℵω,
2ℵn = ℵn+1 for n ∈ω, yet 2ℵω > ℵω+1. This was the ﬁrst time after Kunen’s
saturated ideal result (cf. [1978]) that the strength of a huge cardinal was invoked;
with it, the forcing conditions from Magidor’s earlier SCH argument [1977a] could

392
Akihiro Kanamori
be made more liberal in order to ensure that GCH held below ℵω.
With respect to the Jech-Prikry-Mitchell equi-consistency of measurability and
precipitousness, Magidor (cf. [Jech et al., 1980]) showed that absorptive proper-
ties of the Levy collapse of a measurable cardinal to ω1 can be exploited by sub-
sequently “shooting” closed unbounded subsets of ω1 through stationary sets to
get: If there is a measurable cardinal κ, then there is a forcing extension in which
κ = ω1 and NSω1 is precipitous. Thus a basic, deﬁnable ideal can be precipitous,
and this naturally became a principal point of departure for the investigation of
ideals.
The move of Saharon Shelah into set theory in the early 1970s brought in a new
and exciting sense of personal initiative that swelled into an enhanced purposive-
ness across the subject, both through his solutions of major outstanding problems
as well as through his development of new structural frameworks. A phenomenal
mathematician, Shelah from his 1969 Hebrew University thesis on has worked in
model theory and eventually infused it with a transformative, abstract classiﬁca-
tion theory for models. In both model theory and set theory he has remained em-
inent and has produced results at a furious pace, with nearly 1000 items currently
in his bibliography (his papers are currently archived at http://shelah.logic.at/).
In set theory Shelah was initially stimulated by speciﬁc problems.
He typ-
ically makes a direct, frontal attack, bringing to bear extraordinary powers of
concentration, a remarkable ability for sustained eﬀort, an enormous arsenal of
accumulated techniques, and a ﬁne, quick memory. When he is successful on the
larger problems, it is often as if a resilient, broad-based ediﬁce has been erected,
the traditional serial constraints loosened in favor of a wide, ﬂuid ﬂow of ideas and
the ﬁnal result almost incidental to the larger structure. What has been achieved
is more than a just succinctly stated theorem but rather the erection of a whole
network of robust arguments.
Shelah’s written accounts have acquired a certain notoriety that in large part has
to do with his insistence that his ediﬁces be regarded as autonomous conceptual
constructions. Their life is to be captured in the most general forms, and this
entails the introduction of many parameters. Often, the network of arguments is
articulated by complicated combinatorial principles and transient hypotheses, and
the forward directions of the ﬂow are rendered as elaborate transﬁnite inductions
carrying along many side conditions.
The ostensible goal of the construction,
that succinctly stated result that is to encapsulate it, is often lost in a swirl of
conclusions.
Shelah’s ﬁrst and very conspicuous advance in set theory was his 1973, deﬁni-
tive results on Whitehead’s Problem in abelian group theory: Is every Whitehead
group, i.e. an abelian group G satisfying Ext1(G, Z) = 0, free? Shelah [1974], es-
tablished that V = L implies that this is so, and that Martin’s Axiom implies that
there is a counterexample. Shelah thus established for the ﬁrst time that a strong
purely algebraic statement is undecidable in ZFC. With his L result speciﬁcally
based on diamond-type principles, Shelah brought them into prominence with his
further work on them, which were his ﬁrst incursions into iterated forcing. By the

Large Cardinals with Forcing
393
late 1970s his increasing understanding of and work in iterated forcing would put
a ﬁrm spine on much of the variegated forcing arguments about the continuum.
With an innovative argument pivotal for iterated forcing, Richard Laver [1976]
established the consistency of Borel’s Conjecture: Every set of reals of strong mea-
sure zero is countable. CH had provided a counterexample, and Laver established
the consistency with 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. His argument featured the adjunction of what are
now called Laver reals in the ﬁrst clearly set out countable support iteration, i.e. an
iteration with non-trivial local conditions allowed only at countably many coor-
dinates. The earlier Solovay-Tennenbaum argument for the consistency of MA
had relied on ﬁnite support, and the Mitchell argument about Aronszajn trees,
an involved countable support with a “termspace” forcing. Laver’s work showed
that countable support iteration is both manageable and eﬃcacious for preserving
certain framing properties of the continuum to establish the consistency of propo-
sitions with 2ℵ0 = ℵ2. Interestingly, a trade-oﬀwould develop however: while
ﬁnite support iterations put all cardinals ≥ℵ2 on an equal footing with respect
to the continuum, countable support iterations restricted the continuum to be at
most ℵ2. With a range of new generic reals coming into play with the widening
investigation of the continuum, James Baumgartner [1983] formulated a property
common to the corresponding partial orders, Axiom A, which in particular ensured
the preservation of ω1. He showed that the countable support iteration of Axiom
A forcings is Axiom A, thereby uniformizing the iterative adjunction of the known
generic reals.
All this would retrospectively have a precursory air, as Shelah soon established a
general, subsuming framework. Analyzing Jensen’s consistency argument for SH +
CH and coming to grips with forcing names in iterated forcing, Shelah came to the
concept of proper forcing as a general property that preserves ω1 and is preserved
in countable support iterations. The instrumental formulation of properness is
given in an appropriately broad setting:
First, for a regular cardinal λ, let H(λ) = {x | |tc({x})| < λ}, the sets hereditar-
ily of cardinality less than λ. The H(λ)’s provide another cumulative hierarchy for
V , one stratiﬁed into layers that each satisfy Replacement. Whereas the Vα’s for
limit α satisfy every ZFC axiom except possibly Replacement, the H(λ)’s satisfy
every ZFC axiom except possibly Power Set. A partial order ⟨P, <⟩is proper if
for any regular λ > 2|P | and countable M ≺H(λ) with P ∈M, every p ∈P ∩M
has a q ≤p such that q ⊩˙G ∩M is M-generic. (Here, ˙G a canonical name for a
generic ﬁlter with respect to P, and q forcing this genericity assertion has various
combinatorial equivalents.)
A general articulation of how all countable approximations are to have generic
ﬁlters has been achieved, and its presentation under countable support iterations
exhibited the eﬃcacy of this remarkable move to a new plateau.
Shelah soon
devised variants and augmentations, and in a timely monograph Proper Forcing
[1982] revamped forcing for combinatorics and the continuum with systemic proofs
of new and old results. As later presented in Shelah’s mature book [1998] proper
forcing has become a staple part of the methods of modern set theory, with its

394
Akihiro Kanamori
applications wide-ranging and the development of its extended theory a fount of
research.
In light of Shelah’s work and Martin’s Axiom, Baumgartner in the early 1980s
established the consistency of a new encompassing forcing axiom, the Proper Forc-
ing Axiom (PFA): For any proper partial order P and collection D of ℵ1 dense
subsets of P, there is a ﬁlter G ⊆P meeting every member of D. Unlike MA,
the consistency of PFA required large cardinal strength and moreover could not
be achieved by iteratively taking care of the partial orders at issue, as new proper
partial orders occur arbitrarily high in the cumulative hierarchy. Baumgartner
established: If there is a supercompact cardinal κ, then there is a forcing extension
in which κ = ω2 and PFA holds.
In an early appeal to the full global reﬂec-
tion properties available at a supercompact cardinal Baumgartner iteratively took
care of the emerging proper partial orders along a special diamond-like sequence
that anticipates all possibilities. Laver [1978] had formulated such a sequence, the
“Laver diamond”, toward establishing what has become a useful result for forcing
theory; in a forcing extension he made a supercompact cardinal “indestructible”
by any further forcing from a substantial, useful class of forcings. PFA became
a widely applied forcing axiom, showcasing Shelah’s concept, but beyond that, it
would itself become a pivotal hypothesis in the large cardinal context.
4
NEW EXPANSION
4.1
Into the 1980s
The 1980s featured a new and elaborating expansion in set theory signiﬁcantly
beyond the successes, already remarkable, of the previous decade.
There were
new methods and results of course, but more than that there were successful
maximizations in several directions—deﬁnitive and evidently optimal results—
and successful articulations at the interstices—new concepts and reﬁnements that
ﬁlled out the earlier explorations. Our narrative now becomes even more episodic
in increasingly inverse relation to the broad-ranging and penetrating developments.
In 1977 Lon Radin toward his Berkeley thesis developed (cf. [1982]) an ulti-
mate generalization of the Prikry and Magidor forcings for changing coﬁnalities,
a generalization which could in fact adjoin a closed unbounded subset, consisting
of formerly regular cardinals, to a large cardinal κ while maintaining its regular-
ity and further substantive properties. As graduate students at Berkeley, Hugh
Woodin and Matthew Foreman saw the possibilities abounding in Radin forcing.
While an undergraduate at Caltech, Woodin did groundbreaking work (cf. [Dales
and Woodin, 1987]), built on by Solovay, on the consistency of Kaplansky’s Con-
jecture (Is every homomorphism on the Banach algebra of continuous functions
on the unit interval continuous?) and now with Radin forcing in hand Woodin
would produce his ﬁrst series of remarkable results. By 1979 Foreman and Woodin
(cf. their [1991]) had the essentials for establishing: If there is a supercompact car-
dinal κ, then there is forcing extension in which Vκ as a model of ZFC satisﬁes

Large Cardinals with Forcing
395
that GCH fails everywhere, i.e. 2λ > λ for every λ. This conspicuously subsumed
the early Magidor result getting ℵω a strong limit yet 2ℵω > ℵω+1 and put Radin
forcing on the map for establishing global consistency results.
Shelah soon established two re-orienting results about powers of singular car-
dinals. Having come somewhat late into the game after Silver’s Theorem, Shelah
had nonetheless extended some of the limitative results about such powers, even
to singular κ such that ℵκ = κ. Shelah [1983] subsequently established: If there
is a supercompact cardinal κ and α is a countable ordinal, then there is a forcing
extension in which κ is ℵω as a strong limit cardinal yet 2ℵω = ℵα+1. He thus
extended Magidor’s result by showing that the power of ℵω can be made arbitrar-
ily large below ℵω1. In 1980 Shelah established (cf. his book [1982]) the general
result that for any limit ordinal δ, ℵcf(δ)
δ
< ℵ(|δ|cf(δ))+, so that in particular if ℵω
is a strong limit cardinal, then 2ℵω < ℵ(2ℵ0)+.
Shelah thus brought countable
coﬁnality, the one coﬁnality unattended to by Silver’s Theorem, into the scheme
of things by establishing a bound in ZFC analogous to the Galvin-Hajnal bound
for uncountable coﬁnalities. Shelah’s argument, based on the possible coﬁnali-
ties of “reduced products” of a coﬁnal subset of ℵδ, would evolve into a generally
applicable method by the late 1980’s, the remarkable pcf theory.
Mitchell [1978] made a new breakthrough for the inner model theory of large
large cardinals by developing such a model for “hypermeasurable cardinals”, e.g. a
measurable cardinal κ such that for some normal ultraﬁlter U over κ, P(P(κ)) ⊆
Ult(V, U), so that every ultraﬁlter over κ is in the ultrapower.
This at least
captured a substantial consequence of the 2κ-supercompactness of κ, and so en-
gendered the hope of getting L-like inner models for such strong hypotheses. Su-
percompactness, while increasingly relied on in relative consistency results owing
to its reﬂection properties, was out of reach, but the Mitchell result suggested an
appropriate weakening: A cardinal κ is α-strong iﬀthere is an elementary em-
bedding j : V →M for some inner model M, with critical point κ and α < j(κ)
such that Vα ⊆M. (One can alternately require that the αth iterated power set
P α(κ) be a subset of M, which varies the deﬁnition only for small α like α = 2
but makes the deﬁnition more germane for them.) κ is strong iﬀit is α-strong for
every α.
Dodd and Jensen (cf. [Dodd, 1982]) soon simpliﬁed Mitchell’s presentation in
what turned out to be a basic methodological advance for the development of
inner model theory. While introducing certain redundancies, they formulated a
general way of analyzing an elementary embedding in terms of extenders. The
idea, anticipated in Jensen’s proof of the Covering Theorem, is that elementary
embeddings between inner models can be approximated arbitrarily closely as direct
limits of ultrapowers with concrete features reminiscent of iterated ultrapowers.
Suppose that N and M are inner models of ZFC, j : N →M is elementary with
a critical point κ, and β > κ. Let ζ ≥κ be the least ordinal satisfying β ≤j(ζ);
the simple (“short”) case is ζ = κ, and the general case is for the study of stronger
hypotheses. For each ﬁnite subset a of β, deﬁne Ea by:

396
Akihiro Kanamori
X ∈Ea iﬀ
X ∈P([ζ]|a|) ∩N ∧a ∈j(X) .
This is another version of the idea of generating ultraﬁlters from embeddings. Ea
may not be in N, but ⟨N, ∈, Ea⟩|= “Ea is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter over [ζ]|a|”.
The (κ, β)-extender derived from j is E = ⟨Ea | a is a ﬁnite subset of β⟩.
For each ﬁnite subset a of β, Ult(N, Ea) is seen to be elementarily embeddable
into M, so that in particular Ult(N, Ea) is well-founded and hence identiﬁed with
its transitive collapse, say Ma. Next, for a ⊆b both ﬁnite subsets of β, corre-
sponding to how members of a sit in b there is a natural elementary embedding
iab : Ma →Mb. Finally,
⟨⟨Ma | a is a ﬁnite subset of β⟩, ⟨iab | a ⊆b⟩⟩
is seen to be a directed system of structures with commutative embeddings, so
stipulate that ⟨ME, ∈E⟩is the direct limit, and let jE : N →ME be the corre-
sponding elementary embedding. We thus have the extender ultrapower of N by E
as a direct limit of ultrapowers. The crucial point is that the direct limit construc-
tion ensures that jE and ME approximate j and M “up to β”, e.g. if |Vα|M ≤β,
then |Vα|M = |Vα|ME, i.e. the cumulative hierarchies of M and ME agree up to
α. Having formulated extenders derived from an embedding, a (κ, β)-extender is
a sequence E = ⟨Ea | a is a ﬁnite subset of β⟩that satisﬁes various abstracted
properties that enable the above construction.
In a manuscript circulated in 1980, Dodd and Jensen worked out inner models
for strong cardinals. Building on the previous work of Mitchell, Dodd and Jensen
formulated coherent sequences of extenders, built inner models relative to such, and
established GCH in these models. The arguments were based on extending the
established techniques of securing iterability and comparison through coiteration.
The GCH result was signiﬁcant as precursory for the further developments in
inner model theory based on “iteration trees”. Thus, with extenders the inner
model theory was carried forward to encompass strong cardinals, newly arguing
for the coherence and consistency of the concept. There would however be little
further progress until 1985, for the aspiration to encompass stronger hypotheses
had to overcome the problem of “overlapping extenders”, having to carry out
comparison through coiteration for local structures built on (κ1, β1)-extenders and
(κ2, β2)-extenders with κ1 ≤κ2 < β1.
The diﬃculty here is one of “moving
generators”: if an extender ultrapower is taken with a (κ1, β1)-extender and then
with a (κ2, β2)-extender, then κ2 < β1 implies that the generating features of the
ﬁrst extender ultrapower has been shifted by the second ultrapower and so one can
no longer keep track of that ultrapower in the coiteration process. In any event, a
crucial inheritance from this earlier work was the Dodd-Jensen Lemma about the
minimality of iterations copied across embeddings, which would become crucial
for all further work in inner model theory.
Through the 1970s and into the 1980s, those in the burgeoning ﬁeld of set-
theoretic topology continued the topological investigation of the continuum and

Large Cardinals with Forcing
397
general, transﬁnite spaces, and large cardinals ﬁgured more and more as strong
propositions were studied.
One prominent problem was whether every normal
Moore space was metrizable. Notably, William Fleissner [1982] showed that were
that the case there would be an inner model with a measurable cardinal. With
large cardinals intimated, Peter Nyikos [1980] then established that a certain in-
strumental “axoim” implies that every normal Moore space is metrizable, an axiom
which Kunen had shown holds if κ random reals are adjoined to a strong compact
cardinal κ. Hence, if there is a strong compact cardinal, then in a forcing extension
every normal Moore space is metrizable. With this as one striking example, large
cardinals, and even the Proper Forcing Axiom, began to play substantial roles in
new relative consistency results in this area feature general topological articula-
tions. The rich and wide-ranging Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology [Kunen and
Vaughn, 1984] summed up the progress, and its many articles set the tone for
further work.
Conspicuous in combinatorics and topology would be the work of Stevo Todorce-
vic. Starting with his doctoral work with Kurepa, in 1979 he carried out an incisive
analysis of uncountable trees—Suslin, Aronszajn, Kurepa trees and variants—and
their linearizations and isomorphism types.
In 1983 he [1984] dramatically re-
oriented the sense of strength for the Proper Forcing Axiom by showing that PFA
implies that □κ fails for every κ > ω. PFA had previously been shown consistent
relative to the existence of a supercompact cardinal. With the failure of □κ for
singular κ having been seen as having quite substantial consistency strength, PFA
was itself seen for the ﬁrst time as a very strong proposition. Todorcevic would go
from strength to strength, making substantial contributions to the theory of parti-
tion relations, eventually establishing deﬁnitive results about ω1 as the archetypal
uncountable order-structure (cf. his book [2007]).
Starting in 1980 Foreman made penetrating inroads into the possibilities for very
strong propositions holding low in the cumulative hierarchy based on the workings
of generic elementary embeddings. Extending Kunen’s work and deploying Silver’s
master condition idea, Foreman [1982] initially used 2-huge cardinals to get model-
theoretic transfer principles to hold and [1983] saturated ideals to exist among
the range of ℵn’s. He would soon focus on generic elementary embeddings and
corresponding ideals themselves, even making them postulational for set theory.
In a major 1984 collaboration in Jerusalem, Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah
(cf. [1984]) established penetrating results that led to a new understanding of
strong propositions and the possibilities with forcing. The focus was on a new,
maximal forcing axiom: A partial order P preserves stationary subsets of ω1 iﬀ
stationary subsets of ω1 remain stationary in any forcing extension by P, and with
this we have Martin’s Maximum (MM): For any P preserving stationary subsets
of ω1 and collection D of ℵ1 dense subsets of P, there is a ﬁlter G ⊆P meeting
every member of D. This subsumes PFA and is a maximally strong forcing axiom
in that there is a P which does not preserve stationary subsets of ω1 for which
the conclusion fails.
Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah established: If there is a
supercompact cardinal κ, then there is a forcing extension in which κ = ω2 and

398
Akihiro Kanamori
MM holds.
Shelah had considered a weakening of properness called semiproperness, a notion
for forcing that could well render uncountable coﬁnalities countable. To iterate
such forcings, it had to be faced that the countable coﬁnality of limit stages cannot
be ascertained in advance, and so he developed revised countable support iteration
(RCS) based on names for the limit stage indexing. Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah
actually carried out Baumgartner’s PFA consistency proof for semiproper forcings
with RCS iteration to establish the consistency of the analogous Semiproper Forc-
ing Axiom (SPFA). Their main advance was that, although a partial order that
preserves stationary subsets of ω1 is not necessarily semiproper, it is in this super-
compact collapsing context.13
Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah then established the relative consistency of sev-
eral propositions by deriving them directly from MM. One such proposition was
that NSω1 is ℵ2-saturated. Hence, not only was the upper bound for the consis-
tency strength of having an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1 considerably
reduced from Kunen’s huge cardinal, but for the ﬁrst time the consistency of NSω1
itself being ℵ2-saturated was established relative to large cardinals. Another for-
mative result was simply that MM actually implies that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2, starting a train
of thought about forcing axioms actually determining the size of the continuum.14
With their work Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah had overturned a long-held
view about the scaling down of large cardinal properties.
In the ﬁrst ﬂush of
new hypotheses and propositions, Kunen had naturally enough collapsed a large
cardinal to ω1 in order to transmute strong properties of the cardinal into an ℵ1-
complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1, and this sort of direct connection had become
the rule. The new discovery was that a collapse of a large cardinal to ω2 instead
can provide enough structure to secure such an ideal. In fact, Foreman, Magidor,
and Shelah showed that even the usual Levy collapse of a supercompact cardinal
to ω2 engenders an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1. In terms of method,
the central point is that the existence of suﬃciently large cardinals implies the
existence of substantial generic elementary embeddings with small critical points
like ω1. Woodin’s later strengthenings and elaborations of these results would have
far-reaching consequences.
4.2
Reﬂecting stationary sets
Here we work in a discussion of stationary set reﬂection. This serves mainly as
an illustrative example of a theme that interweaves through the mainstream of
large cardinals, but could well be considered a topic suﬃciently prominent to
warrant separate description, particularly because of the way it displays aspects of
many emerging issues. Another theme that would have served as well is Chang’s
13Eventually, Shelah [1987] did establish that MM and SPFA are equivalent.
14It would be by diﬀerent and elegant means that Todorcevic would show in 1990 (cf. [Bekkali,
1991]) that PFA already implies that 2ℵ0 = ℵ2.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
399
Conjecture.15
For S ⊆κ stationary in κ, S reﬂects iﬀthere an α < κ such that S ∩α
is stationary in α.
In these terms, we let Reﬂ(S) be the assertion that every
stationary subset of S reﬂects. That S ⊆κ is stationary in κ is a basic “second-
order” property of ⟨κ, S⟩, and with reﬂection having become an important heuristic
in set theory, stationary set reﬂection commended itself as a speciﬁc, second-order
reﬂection possibility for investigation. It is a direct consequence of a characterizing
reﬂection property of weakly compact cardinals that if κ is weakly compact, then
Reﬂ(κ). Jensen [1972] raised interest in stationary set reﬂection by getting the
converse in L as an initial dividend of his ﬁne structure theory: If V = L, then
κ is weakly compact iﬀReﬂ(κ). On the other hand, Kunen in 1972 (cf. [1978])
quickly complemented Jensen’s result by showing: If κ is weakly compact, then
there a cardinal-preserving forcing extension in which κ is inaccessible but not
weakly compact, yet Reﬂ(κ) holds. Kunen introduced a way of forcing a κ-Suslin
tree through a large cardinal κ, thereby precluding its weak compactness, in such
a way that the forcing combined by the further forcing for shooting a coﬁnal
branch through the adjoined tree is essentially the same as having just added
one Cohen subset of κ in the ﬁrst place. For the actual model, Kunen made an
initial application of Silver’s “reversed Easton” technique (cf. 3.3) by adjoining for
every inaccessible λ < κ a Cohen subset of λ, and then followed this with his way
of adjoining a κ-Suslin tree. Shooting a coﬁnal branch through the tree would
then resurrect the large cardinal properties of κ because of the reversed Easton
preparation, and Kunen exploited this promixity to show that Reﬂ(κ) already
holds in his model.
What about Reﬂ(κ) for successor cardinals κ? For regular λ < κ, deﬁne the
paradigmatic stationary sets
Sκ
λ = {α < κ | cf(α) = λ}.
Then for regular λ, clearly Sλ+
λ
cannot reﬂect.
Beyond this initial restriction,
forcing and L expectedly work against stationary set reﬂection: For any regular
κ ≥ω2, a non-reﬂecting stationary subset of Sκ
ω can be adjoined by straightforward
forcing with initial segments. The Jensen combinatorial principle □λ, holding in
L, directly implies that Reﬂ(S) fails for every stationary S ⊆λ+.
Large cardinals provided the counterweight. Reminiscent of the Mitchell-Silver
result on the tree property (cf. 3.3) but more immediate in its proof, Baumgartner
[1976] observed how the collapse of a weakly compact cardinal preserves a sig-
niﬁcant attribute: If a weakly compact cardinal is Levy collapsed to make it ω2,
then Reﬂ(Sω2
ω ) holds in the extension. Reﬂ(Sω2
ω ) implies the failure of □ω1, which
by Jensen’s ﬁne structure argument for the principle holding in L implies that
ω2 must be Mahlo there. Thus, as for many propositions in modern set theory,
15For some representative articles, [Silver, 1971b] established the consistency of Chang’s Con-
jecture relative to a large cardinal; Donder (cf. [Donder et al., 1981]) established the converse
with the core model KDJ; [Donder and Koepke, 1983] investigated higher versions; and [Levinski
et al., 1990] established the relative consistency of the version at ℵω+1.

400
Akihiro Kanamori
the consistency strength of Reﬂ(Sω2
ω ) was initially bracketed, here between having
a weakly compact cardinal and having a Mahlo cardinal. The expectation was
nonetheless for weak compactness. This was especially so as Magidor (cf. [1982])
showed that if for any pair of sets S1, S2 ⊆ω2 both stationary in ω2 there is an
α < ω2 such that both S1 ∩α and S2 ∩α are stationary in α, then ω2 is weakly
compact in L. This “pair reﬂection” actually held in the Levy collapse of a weakly
compact cardinal to make it ω2 by checking Baumgartner’s argument, and so at
least there was this equi-consistency.
It was somewhat surprising then, when in the late 1970s, Leo Harrington and
Shelah (cf. [1985]) established: If a Mahlo cardinal, after ﬁrst arranging CH, is
Levy collapsed to make it ω2, then Reﬂ(Sω2
ω ) holds in the extension. Their result
involved a reﬁned auxiliary forcing argument, which revealed a sense in which
a concrete second-order reﬂection requires only a ﬁrst-order overlay as given by
a Mahlo cardinal.
Remarkably, reﬂection and pair reﬂection were exactly and
separately gauged in consistency strength!
Shelah also noted a generalization of Baumgartner’s result, one exhibiting the
global reﬂection possibilities provided by supercompactness: If a supercompact
cardinal is Levy collapsed to make it ω2, then in the extension Reﬂ(Sκ
ω) holds for
every regular κ ≥ω2.
As in many situations, ω2 typiﬁed an accessible cardinal in the investigation
of the consistency strength of stationary set reﬂection, as described above, but
with ω2 paradigmatic of successors of regular cardinals. For successors of singular
cardinals the emerging inner model theory showed that the failure of □κ for singu-
lar κ has strong consistency strength, and so also Reﬂ(κ+). With ωω+1 typifying
a successor of a singular cardinal, Magidor [1982] established: If inﬁnitely many
supercompact cardinals are iteratively Levy collapsed to become the ωn’s, then in
the extension Reﬂ(ωω+1) holds. The intricate proof involved the lifting of various
supercompact embeddings to the extension and then a careful analysis of how sta-
tionary reﬂection via these embeddings at intermediate stages is preserved to the
end. This result, like others of Magidor’s from this period, featured the liberal use
of strong hypotheses providing strong elementary embeddings. In this case how-
ever, the hypothesis of the theorem has not as yet been signiﬁcantly reduced in
subsequent work for getting Reﬂ(ωω+1). As with several strong propositions, it has
been suﬃcient that a beachhead was secured, and a stalking for equi-consistency
has not proceeded—unlike for the Singular Cardinals Problem (cf. 4.4) with its
immediacy as a pressing issue for set theory. Be that as it may, Magidor’s re-
sult was a seminal one for the investigation of the combinatorics and consistency
of properties at successors of singular cardinals, a subject which has intimately
involved strong large cardinal hypotheses through forcing.16
The 1984 Foreman-Magidor-Shelah collaboration led to the formulation of a
strong stationary set reﬂection principle. The sets PκX = {x ⊆X | |x| < κ}
having emerged in the ultraﬁlter formulations of large large cardinals (cf. 3.1),
the concepts of closed unbounded and stationary have natural generalizations to
16See Eisworth’s chapter in [Foreman and Kanamori, 2010].

Large Cardinals with Forcing
401
this index set: C ⊆PκX is closed unbounded if it is closed, i.e. under the taking
of ⊆-chains of length less than κ, and unbounded, i.e. for any y ∈PκX there
is an x ⊇y such that x ∈C.
S ⊆PκX is stationary if C ∩S ̸= ∅for any
closed unbounded C ⊆PκX. Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah showed that their
Martin’s Maximum implies the following Reﬂection Principle: For any regular
λ ≥ω2, if S ⊆Pω1λ is stationary, then there is an X ⊆λ with |X| = ℵ1 and
X ⊇ω1 such that S ∩Pω1X is stationary in Pω1X. Remarkably, the main-cited
consequences of MM already follow from this reﬂection principle, except that it
only implies that NSω1 is precipitous. Todorcevic (cf. [Bekkali, 1991]) formulated
a strong reﬂection principle, one that also follows from MM but moreover has as
a consequence that NSω1 is ℵ2-saturated. Qi Feng and Jech [1998] also came up
with a stronger reﬂection principle, but they soon showed it to be equivalent to
Todorcevic’s. Thus, stationary set reﬂection itself garnered a historically focal goal
of large cardinal hypotheses.
4.3
Consistency of determinacy
The developments of the 1980s which are the most far-reaching and presentable as
sustained narrative have to do with the stalking of the consistency of determinacy.
By the late 1970s a more or less complete structure theory for the projective sets
was in place, a resilient ediﬁce founded on determinacy with both strong buttresses
and ﬁne details. In 1976 the researchers had started the Cabal Seminar in the Los
Angeles area, and in a few years, with John Steel and Woodin having joined
the ranks, attention began to shift to sets of reals beyond the projective sets, to
inner models, and to questions of overall consistency. Most of the work before the
crowning achievements of the later 1980s appears in the several proceedings of the
Cabal Seminar, [Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978; Kechris et al., 1981; Kechris et
al., 1983; Kechris et al., 1988].
The question of the overall consistency of determinacy came increasingly to the
fore. Is AD consistent relative to some large cardinal hypothesis? Or, with its
strong consequences, can AD subsume large cardinals in some substantial way
or be somehow orthogonal? A decade after his initial result that the existence
of a measurable cardinal implies Π1
1-determinacy, Martin [1980] applied its ho-
mogeneity idea with a “Martin-Solovay” tree representation for Π1
2 sets, together
with algebraic properties of elementary embeddings posited close to Kunen’s large
cardinal inconsistency, to establish Π1
2-determinacy. A direction was set but gener-
ality only came in 1984, when Woodin showed that an even stronger large cardinal
hypothesis implies ADL(R). So, a mooring was secured for AD after all in the large
cardinal hierarchy. With Woodin’s hypothesis apparently too remote it would now
be a question of scaling it down according to the methods becoming available for
proofs of determinacy, perhaps even achieving an equi-consistency result.
The rich 1984 Foreman-Magidor-Shelah work would have crucial consequences
for the stalking of consistency also for determinacy. Shelah carried out a version
of their collapsing argument that does not add any new reals but nonetheless

402
Akihiro Kanamori
gets an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1. Woodin then pointed out that
with no new reals adjoined the generic elementary embedding induced by such
an ideal can be used to establish that the ground model L(R) reals are actually
Lebesgue measurable. Thus Shelah and Woodin (cf. their [1990]) had established
an outright result: If there is a supercompact cardinal, then every set of reals in
L(R) is Lebesgue measurable. This result not only portended the possibility of
getting ADL(R) from a supercompact cardinal, but through the speciﬁcs of the
argument stimulated the reducing of the hypothesis. While Woodin was visiting
Jerusalem in June 1984, he came up with what is now known as a Woodin cardinal.
The hypothesis was then reduced as follows: If there are inﬁnitely many Woodin
cardinals with a measurable cardinal above them, then every set of reals in L(R)
is Lebesgue measurable. An early suggestion of optimality of hypothesis was that
if the “inﬁnitely” is replaced by “n” for some n ∈ω, then one can conclude that
every Σ1
n+2 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable. The measurable cardinal hovering
above would be a recurring theme, the purpose loosely speaking to maintain a
stable environment with the existence of sharps.
Especially because of its subsequent centrality, it is incumbent to give an oper-
ative deﬁnition of Woodin cardinal: For a set A, κ is α-A-strong iﬀthere is an
elementary embedding j : V →M witnessing that κ is α-strong which moreover
preserves A: A∩Vα = j(A)∩Vα. A cardinal δ is Woodin iﬀfor any A ⊆Vδ, there
is a κ < δ which is α-A-strong for every α < δ.
A Woodin cardinal, evidently a technical, consistency-wise strengthening of a
strong cardinal, is an important example of concept formation through method.
The initial air of contrivance gives way to seeing that Woodin cardinal seemed to
encapsulate just wanted is needed to carry out the argument for Lebesgue mea-
surability. That argument having been based on ﬁrst collapsing a large cardinal
to get a saturated ideal and then applying the corresponding generic elementary
embedding, Woodin later in 1984 stalked the essence of method and formulated sta-
tionary tower forcing (cf. [1990]). An outgrowth of the Foreman-Magidor-Shelah
work, this notion of forcing streamlines their forcing arguments to show that a
Woodin cardinal suﬃces to get a generic elementary embedding j : V →M with
critical point ω1 and ωM ⊆M. With a new, minimizing large cardinal concept
isolated, there would now be dramatic new developments both in determinacy and
inner model theory. One important scaling down result was the early 1985 result
of Shelah (cf. [1987a]): If κ is Woodin, then in a forcing extension κ = ω1 and
NSω1 is ℵ2-saturated. The large cardinal strength now seemed minimal for getting
such an ideal, and there was anticipation of achieving an equi-consistency.
Steel in notes of Spring 1985 developed an inner model for a weak version of
Woodin cardinal. While inner models for strong cardinals had only required linear
iterations for comparison, the new possibility of overlapping extenders and moving
generators had led Mitchell in 1979 to develop iteration trees of iterated ultrapow-
ers for searching for possible well-founded limits of models along branches.
A
particularly simple example of an iteration tree is an alternating chain, a tree con-
sisting of two ω-length branches with each model in the tree an extender ultrapower

Large Cardinals with Forcing
403
of the one preceding it on its branch, via an extender taken from a corresponding
model in the other branch. Initially, Steel tried to avoid alternating chains, but
the Foreman-Magidor-Shelah work showed that for dealing with Woodin cardinals
they would be a necessary part. Their use soon led to a major breakthrough in
the investigation of determinacy.
In the Fall of 1985 Martin and Steel (cf. [1988; 1989]) showed that Woodin
cardinals imply the existence of alternating chains in which both branches have
well-founded direct limits, and used this to establish: If there are inﬁnitely many
Woodin cardinals, then PD holds. This was a culmination of method in several re-
spects. In the earlier Martin results getting Π1
1-Determinacy and Π1
2-Determinacy,
trees on ω × κ for some cardinal κ had been used, to each node of which were at-
tached ultraﬁlters in a coherent way that governed extensions. Kechris and Martin
isolated the relevant concept of homogeneous tree, the point being that sets of reals
which are the projections p[T] of such trees T—the homogeneously Suslin sets—
are determined. With PD, the scale property had been propagated through the
projective hierarchy. Now with Woodin cardinals, having representations via ho-
mogeneous trees was propagated, getting determinacy itself. In particular, Martin
and Steel established: If n ∈ω and there are n Woodin cardinals with a measurable
cardinal above them, then Π1
n+1-determinacy holds.
Within weeks after the Martin-Steel breakthrough, Woodin used it together
with stationary towers to investigate tree representations in L(R) to establish: If
there are inﬁnitely Woodin cardinals with a measurable cardinal above them, then
ADL(R) holds. With the consistency strength of AD having been gauged by this
result, Woodin soon established the crowning equi-consistency result: The Axiom
of Determinacy is equi-consistent with the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin
cardinals.17
This was a remarkable achievement of the concerted eﬀort to establish the
consistency strength of AD along the large cardinal hierarchy.
But even this
would just be a beginning for Woodin, who would go from strength to strength in
establish many structural results involving AD and stronger principles, to become
preeminent with Shelah in set theory.
4.4
Into the 1990s
In the later 1980s set theory continued to expand apace in various directions, and
we conclude our historical survey by mentioning here a few of the most prominent
developments, each of a diﬀerent character but all being decisive advances.
In inner model theory, Stewart Baldwin in 1987 made a suggestion, one which
Mitchell then newly forwarded, which led to a crucial methodological advance. Up
to then, the extender models L[ ⃗E] constructed relative to a coherent sequence of
extenders ⃗E had each extender E in the sequence “measure” all the subsets in
L[ ⃗E] of the critical point. The Baldwin-Mitchell idea was to construct only with
17See the Neeman and Koellner-Woodin chapters of [Foreman and Kanamori, 2010] for proofs
of each direction beneﬁtting from hindsight.

404
Akihiro Kanamori
“partial” extenders E which if indexed at γ only measures the sets in Lγ[ ⃗E↾γ].
This together with a previous Mitchell strategy of carrying out the comparison
process using ﬁnely calibrated partial ultrapowers (“dropping to a mouse”) led to a
comparison process internal to L[ ⃗E] based on the use of ﬁne structure. The infusion
of ﬁne structure made the development of the new extender models more complex,
but with this came the important dividends of a more uniform presentation, a much
stronger condensation, and a more systematic comparison process. During 1987-
9, Mitchell and Steel (cf. their [1994]) worked out the details and showed that if
there is a Woodin cardinal then there is an inner model L[ ⃗E], L-like in satisfying
GCH and so forth, in which there is a Woodin cardinal. The process involved the
correlating of iteration trees for L[ ⃗E] with iteration trees in V . A canonical, ﬁne
structural inner model of a Woodin cardinal newly argued for the consistency of
the concept, as well as provided a great deal of understanding about it as set in a
ﬁnely tuned, layer-by-layer hierarchy.
What about a core model “up to” a Woodin cardinal, in analogy to KDJ for
L[U]? In 1990, Steel (cf. [1996]) solved the “core model iterability problem” by
showing that large cardinals in V are not necessary for showing that certain models
L[ ⃗E] have suﬃcient iterability properties. With this, he constructed a new core
model, ﬁrst building a “background certiﬁed” Kc based on extenders in V and
then the “true” core model K. Steel was thus able to extend the previous work of
Mitchell on the core model K[U] up to ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++) to establish e.g.: If there
is an ℵ1-complete ℵ2-saturated ideal over ω1 and a measurable cardinal, then there
is an inner model with a Woodin cardinal. Thus, Shelah’s 1985 forcing result and
Steel’s, except for the artifact of “the measurable cardinal above”, had calibrated
an important consistency strength, and what had become a central goal of forcing
and inner model theory was handily achieved.
In the early 1990s, Steel, Mitchell, and Ernest Schimmerling (cf. their [1997])
pushed the Jensen covering argument over the hurdles of the new ﬁne structural
Steel core model K to establish a covering lemma up to a Woodin cardinal. Schim-
merling [1994] both established combinatorial principles in K as well established
new consistency strengths, e.g. PFA implies that there is an inner model with a
Woodin cardinal.
The later 1980s featured a distinctive development that led to a new conceptual
framework of applicability to singular cardinals, new incisive results in cardinal
arithmetic, and a re-orienting of set theory to new possibilities for outright the-
orems of ZFC. Starting in late 1987 Shelah returned to the work on bounds for
powers of singular cardinals and drew out an extensive underlying structure of
possible coﬁnalities of reduced products, soon codiﬁed as pcf theory. With this
emerged new work in singular cardinal combinatorics, with Shelah himself ini-
tially providing applications to model theory, partition relations, J´onsson alge-
bras, Boolean algebras, and cardinal arithmetic. This last was epitomized by a
dramatic result that exhibited how the newly seen structural constraints impose a
tight bound: If δ is a limit ordinal with |δ|cf(δ) < ℵδ then ℵcf(δ)
δ
< ℵ(|δ|+4), so that
in particular if ℵω is a strong limit cardinal, then 2ℵω < ℵω4. This substantively

Large Cardinals with Forcing
405
betters the former bound ℵ(2ℵ0)+ of his 1980 result (cf. [1982]), and complements
his [1983] consistency result from that time that values for 2ℵω up to ℵω1 are pos-
sible. Whether the gap betweeen ℵω1 and ℵω4 can be closed is a prominent open
problem.
Suppose that A is an inﬁnite set of cardinals and F is a ﬁlter over A. The product
ΠA consists of functions f with domain A such that f(a) ∈a for every a ∈A.
For f, g ∈ΠA, the relation =F deﬁned by f =F g iﬀ{a ∈A | f(a) = g(a)} ∈F
is an equivalence relation on ΠA, and the reduced product ΠA/F consists of the
equivalence classes. We can impose order, oﬃcially on ΠA/F but still working
with functions themselves, by: f <F g iﬀ{a ∈A | f(a) < g(a)} ∈F.
Shelah’s new theory took as central the investigation of the possible coﬁnalities
function:
pcf(A) = {cf(ΠA/D) | D is an ultraﬁlter over A}
as calibrated by the ideals
J<λ[A] = {b ⊆A | cf(ΠA/D) < λ whenever
D is an ultraﬁlter over A such that b ∈D}.
These concepts had appeared before in Shelah’s work, notably in his 1980 result
ℵcf(δ)
δ
< ℵ(|δ|cf(δ))+, but now they became autonomous and were propelled forward
by the discovery of unexpectedly rich structure.
With an eye to substantive coﬁnal subsets A of a singular cardinal, the abiding
assumption was that A is a set of regular cardinals satisfying |A| < min(A). With
this one gets that for any ultraﬁlter D over A, cf(ΠA/D) < λ iﬀD ∩J<λ[A] ̸= ∅,
and further, that pcf(A) has a maximum element. At the heart is the striking
result that J<λ+[A] is generated by J<λ[A] together with a single set Bλ ⊆A.
Shelah in fact got “nice” generators Bλ derived from imposing the structure of
elementary substructures of a suﬃciently large H(Ψ). A bulwark of the theory is
then that with µ = sup A and F = {X ⊆cf(µ) | |cf(µ) −X| < cf(µ)} the ﬁlter
of co-bounded subsets of cfµ, it is a theorem of ZFC that ΠA/F has a linearly
ordered, coﬁnal sequence of length µ+—a scale for µ. The careful control on the
possible coﬁnalities led as well, when A consists of all the regular cardinals in an
interval of cardinals, to |pcf(A)| ≤|A|+++, and in particular to the ℵω4 bound
mentioned above.
Shelah’s work on pcf theory to 1993 appeared in his book Cardinal Arithmetic
[1994], and since then he has further developed the theory and provided wide-
ranging applications.
Through its applicability pcf theory has to a signiﬁcant
extent been woven into modern set theory as part of the ZFC facts of singular
cardinal combinatorics.
The Singular Cardinal Hypothesis (SCH) and the train of results starting with
the Prikry-Silver result of the early 1970s were to be decisively informed by results
of Moti Gitik. Gitik’s work exhibits a steady engagement with central and diﬃcult
issues of set theory and a masterful virtuosity in the application of sophisticated
techniques over a broad range. Gitik [1980] had established through an iterated

406
Akihiro Kanamori
Prikry forcing the conspicuous singularization result that: If there is a proper class
of strongly compact cardinals, then in a ZF inner model of a class forcing exten-
sion every inﬁnite cardinal has coﬁnality ω. Mentioned earlier was the mid-1970s
result that that NSω1 is precipitous is equi-consistent with having a measurable
cardinal. Gitik [1984] established: The precipitousness of NSω2 is equi-consistent
with having a measurable cardinal κ such that o(κ) = 2 in the Mitchell order.
The diﬃcult, forcing direction required considerable ingenuity because of inherent
technical obstructions.18
Turning to the work on SCH, in 1988 Woodin dramatically weakened the large
cardinal hypothesis needed to get a measurable cardinal κ satisfying 2κ > κ+,
using a technique of “altering generic objects”. With the subsequent use of Prikry
forcing leading to the failure of SCH, a proposition technically strengthening mea-
surability now suﬃced for the failure of SCH. He also showed that one can in
fact get Magidor’s conclusion that ℵω could be the least cardinal at which GCH
fails. Soon afterwards Gitik established both directions of an equi-consistency:
First, he established that one can get the consistency of Woodin’s proposition
from just ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++). Then, he applied a result from Shelah’s pcf theory to
Mitchell’s K[U] analysis to establish, bettering a previous result of Mitchell, that
∃κ(o(κ) = κ++) is actually necessary to get the failure of SCH. Hence, The failure
of SCH is equi-consistent with ∃κ(o(κ) = κ++).
Woodin’s model in which GCH ﬁrst fails at ℵω required a delicate construction
to arrange GCH below and an ingenious idea to get 2ℵω = ℵω+2. How about
getting 2ℵω > ℵω+2? In a signal advance of method, Gitik and Magidor in 1989
provided a new technique to handle the general Singular Cardinals Problem with
appropriately optimal hypotheses.
The Prikry-Silver two-stage approach, ﬁrst
making 2κ large and then singularizing κ without adding any new bounded sub-
sets or collapsing cardinals, had been the basic model for attacking the Singular
Cardinals Problem. Gitik and Magidor showed how to add many subsets to a large
cardinal κ while simultaneously singularizing it without adding any new bounded
subsets or collapsing cardinals. Thus, it became much easier to arrange any par-
ticular continuum function behavior below κ, like achieving GCH below, while at
the same time making 2κ large. Moreover, the new method smacked of naturalness
and optimality.
The new Gitik-Magidor idea was to add many new Prikry ω-sequences corre-
sponding to κ-complete ultraﬁlters over κ while maintaining the basic properties of
Prikry forcing. There is an evident danger that if these Prikry sequences are too in-
dependent, information can be read from them that corresponds to new reals being
adjoined. The solution was to start from a suﬃcient strong large cardinal hypoth-
esis and develop an extender-based Prikry forcing structured on a “nice system” of
ultraﬁlters ⟨Uα | α < λ⟩, a system such that for many α ≤β < λ there is a ground
model function f : κ →κ such that: For all X ⊆κ, X ∈Uα iﬀf −1(X) ∈Uβ.
(Having such a projection function is the classical way of connecting two ultra-
18Gitik eventually established [1995; 1997] deﬁnitive equi-consistency results for having NSκ
precipitous for κ > ω2 of analogous sort involving the Mitchell order.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
407
ﬁlters together, and one writes that Uα ≤RK Uβ under the Rudin-Keisler partial
order.) By this means one has the possibility of adding new subsets of κ, corre-
sponding to diﬀerent Prikry sequences, which are still dependent on each other
so that no new bounded subsets need necessarily be added in the process. Gitik
and Magidor worked out how their new approach leads to what turns out to be
optimal or near optimal consistency results, and incorporating collapsing maps
as in previous arguments of Magidor and Shelah, they got models in which GCH
holds below ℵω yet 2ℵω = ℵα+1 for any prescribed countable ordinal α.
In subsequent work Gitik, together with Magidor, Mitchell, and others, have
considerably advanced the investigation of powers of singular cardinals.
Equi-
consistency results have been achieved for large powers of singular cardinals along
the Mitchell order and with α-strong cardinals, and uncountable coﬁnalities have
been encompassed, the investigation ongoing and with dramatic successes.
4.5
Ideals
In this last section we take a quick look at later developments involving ideals.
In the 1990s ideals low in the cumulative hierarchy yet having strong consistency
strength became more and more focal as being of intrinsic interest, to the extent
that postulations about them were put forward as themselves large cardinal axioms
as modulated by forcing.
The continuing investigation of determinacy led to the study of a very strong
property of ideals. An ideal I over a cardinal κ is λ-dense iﬀthere is a family
D ⊆P(κ)−I with |D| = λ such that for any X ∈P(κ), there is a Y ∈D such that
Y −X ∈I. This is a natural notion of density for the algebra P(κ) −I. Clearly,
if I is λ-dense and λ < µ, then I is µ-saturated. Woodin drew attention to ℵ1-
complete ℵ1-dense ideals over ω1 by establishing the consistency of their existence
ﬁrst from strong determinacy hypotheses and, by a notably simple argument, from
a large cardinal hypothesis just weaker than having a huge cardinal. Stimulating
interest on how strong ideals over ω1 may aﬀect CH, Shelah [1986] showed by an
elegant argument that ZFC imposes an intriguing limitation: If 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 (e.g. if
CH holds), then NSω1 is not ℵ1-dense.
Pushing the connections between ideals and the consistency of determinacy,
Woodin established the following, using results of Steel about L(R): If there is
an ℵ1-complete, ℵ1-dense ideal over ω1, then ADL(R) holds. Then in late 1992,
Woodin was able to establish the following converse for consistency strength: As-
sume ADL(R); then there is a forcing extension of L(R) satisfying ZFC + NSω1
is ℵ1-dense. Quite remarkably, AD is equi-consistent with NSω1 being ℵ1-dense!
This encapsulation made ideal hypotheses central to modern set theory.
Is NSω1 being ℵ2-saturated consistent with CH? This was a prominent ques-
tion for some time, with the consistency results for ℵ2-saturation all achieved
with ¬CH and Shelah’s actually deriving ¬CH from ℵ1-denseness. Again it was
Woodin; he established in descriptive set-theoretic terms: If NSω1 is ℵ2-saturated
and there is a measurable cardinal, then δ1
2 = ω2. Since then there are, hierarchi-

408
Akihiro Kanamori
cally, prewellorderings of length at least ω2, CH fails in a strong, deﬁnable sense.
Pursuing this work, Woodin in the mid-1990s (cf. [1999]) developed a vast ma-
chinery for forcing over models of determinacy, his Pmax extensions, that get at
canonical maximal models of ZFC + ¬CH. This in turn led (cf. [2001a; 2001b]) to
his Ω-logic, and a possible, structured solution to the Continuum Problem itself.
With this we have peered ahead a long distance in a vast, remarkably rich direc-
tion; we return to the bedrock of large cardinals and forcing to draw this chapter
to a close.
Foreman (cf. his chapter in [Foreman and Kanamori, 2010]) has provided a
systematic approach to ideals and generic elementary embeddings, to the point
of postulating axioms as was ﬁrst done on his [1986].
To set things out once
again, what is at play is the basic synthesis of forcing and ultrapowers whereby
one starts with an ideal I over a cardinal κ; forces with P(κ) −I where p is
stronger than q if p −q ∈I; thus produces an ultraﬁlter over the ground model
P(κ); and then gets a “generic” elementary embedding of the ground model into
the corresponding ultrapower. With the possibilities of ideals occurring low in
the cumulative hierarchy, so that large cardinal ideas can be brought to bear on
classical problems of set theory, an enormous subject has grown.
At the broadest level are the “three parameters” describing the strength of a
generic elementary embedding j : V →M: how j moves the ordinals; how large
and closed M is; and the nature of the forcing that provided j. This last is the new
parameter at play beyond the “conventional” large cardinal hypotheses. Ideals
through their forcing properties thus assuming a crucial role, another guiding
theme is the distinction between “natural” ideals that have intrinsic deﬁnitions
and ideals “induced” by elementary embeddings. Strong ideal assumptions gain
an autonomy as “generic large cardinals” in their own right, and there is a further
delineation according to consequences of generic large cardinals and consistency
results about them.
Of consequences, we mentioned Shelah’s and Woodin’s ¬CH results above, and
there are implications for GCH; SCH; graphs and groups; stationary set reﬂection;
Suslin and Kurepa trees; partition properties; and descriptive set theory. More-
over, there are remarkable limitative results on ideals properties e.g. the Gitik-
Shelah result (cf. their [1997]) that if κ is regular and δ+ < κ, then the ideal
generated by NSκ and {α < κ | cf(α) = δ} is not κ+-saturated, and their result
(cf. their [1989]) that there is no ℵ1-complete ℵ0-dense nowhere prime ideal.19
Of consistency results, beyond the several we have already mentioned there is
Foreman’s relative consistency of having an ℵ1-complete ℵ1-dense (uniform) ideal
over ω2 from a strong hypothesis about two coordinated huge-type cardinals. In
general terms, Foreman has shown how the “conventional” large cardinals and
the “generic” large cardinals interleave in consistency strength, sometimes with
equi-consistencies at play. At this general conﬂuence of the methods of forcing
and ultrapowers, there is a wealth of possibilities.
19An ideal is nowhere prime if it restricted to no set becomes a maximal ideal, dual to an
ultraﬁlter.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
409
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Baumgartner, 1976] J. E. Baumgartner. A new class of order types. Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 9:187–222, 1976.
[Baumgartner, 1983] J. E. Baumgartner. Iterated forcing. In A. R. D. Mathias, editor, Surveys
in Set Theory, volume 87 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, pages 1–59.
Cambridge University Press, 1983.
[Bekkali, 1991] M. Bekkali. Topics in Set Theory, volume 1476 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[Blackwell, 1967] D. Blackwell. Inﬁnite games and analytic sets. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, 58:1836–1837, 1967.
[Dales and Woodin, 1987] H. G. Dales and W. H. Woodin. An Introduction to Independence
for Analysts, volume 115 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge
University Press, 1987.
[Devlin and Jensen, 1975] K. J. Devlin and R. B. Jensen. Marginalia to a theorem of Silver. In
G. H. M¨uller, A. Oberschelp, and K. Potthoﬀ, editors, ISILC Logic Conference, Kiel, 1974,
volume 499 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 115–142. Springer, 1975.
[Devlin and Johnsbraten, 1974] K. J. Devlin and H. Johnsbraten. The Souslin Problem, volume
405 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1974.
[Dodd and Jensen, 1981] A. J. Dodd and R. B. Jensen. The core model. Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 20:43–75, 1981.
[Dodd and Jensen, 1982a] A. J. Dodd and R. B. Jensen. The covering lemma for K. Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 22:1–30, 1982.
[Dodd and Jensen, 1982b] A. J. Dodd and R. B. Jensen. The covering lemma for L[U]. Annals
of Mathematical Logic, 22:127–135, 1982.
[Dodd, 1982] A. J. Dodd. The Core Model, volume 61 of London Mathematical Society Lecture
Note Series. Cambridge University Press, 1982.
[Donder and Koepke, 1983] H.-D. Donder and P. G. Koepke. On the consistency strength of
‘accessible’ Jonsson cardinals and of the weak Chang conjecture. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 25:233–261, 1983.
[Donder et al., 1981] H.-D. Donder, R. B. Jensen, and B. J. Koppelberg. Some applications of
the core model. In Set theory and model theory, volume 872 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, 1981.
[Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski, 1956] A. Ehrenfeucht and A. M. Mostowski. Models of axiomatic
theories admitting automorphisms. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 43:50–68, 1956.
[Feng and Jech, 1998] Q. Feng and T. J. Jech. Projective stationary sets and a strong reﬂection
principle. Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 58:271–283, 1998.
[Fleissner, 1982] W. G. Fleissner. If all normal moore spaces are metrizable, then there is an
inner model with a measurable cardinal. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society,
273:365–373, 1982.
[Foreman and Kanamori, 2010] M. Foreman and A. Kanamori, editors. Handbook of Set Theory.
Springer, 2010.
[Foreman and Woodin, 1991] M. Foreman and W. H. Woodin. The generalized continuum hy-
pothesis can fail everywhere. Annals of Mathematics, 133:1–35, 1991.
[Foreman et al., 1984] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Martin’s Maximum, saturated
ideals, and nonregular ultraﬁlters I. Annals of Mathematics, 127:1–47, 1984.
[Foreman, 1982] M. Foreman. Large cardinals and strong model theoretic-transfer properties.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 272:427–463, 1982.
[Foreman, 1983] M. Foreman. More saturated ideals. In A. S. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and Y. N.
Moschovakis, editors, Cabal Seminar 79-81. Proceedings of the Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar
1979-81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 1–27. Springer-Verlag, 1983.
[Foreman, 1986] M. Foreman.
Potent axioms.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, 294:1–28, 1986.
[Gaifman, 1964] H. Gaifman. Measurable cardinals and constructible sets (abstract). Notices
of the American Mathematical Society, 11:771, 1964.
[Gale and Stewart, 1953] D. Gale and F. M. Stewart. Inﬁnite games with perfect information.
In Contributions to the Theory of Games, vol. 2, Annals of Mathematical Studies #28, pages
245–266. Princeton University Press, 1953.

410
Akihiro Kanamori
[Galvin and Hajnal, 1975] F. Galvin and A. Hajnal. Inequalities for cardinal powers. Annals of
Mathematics, 101:491–498, 1975.
[Gitik and Shelah, 1989] M. Gitik and S. Shelah. Forcings with ideals and simple forcing notions.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 68:129–160, 1989.
[Gitik and Shelah, 1997] M. Gitik and S. Shelah.
Less saturated ideals.
Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, 125:1523–1530, 1997.
[Gitik, 1980] M. Gitik. All cardinals can be singular. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 35:61–88,
1980.
[Gitik, 1984] M. Gitik. The nonstationary ideal on ℵ2. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 48:257–
288, 1984.
[Gitik, 1995] M. Gitik. Some results on the nonstationary ideal. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
92:61–112, 1995.
[Gitik, 1997] M. Gitik. Some results on the nonstationary ideal. II. Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 99:175–188, 1997.
[Harrington and Shelah, 1985] L. A. Harrington and S. Shelah.
Some exact equiconsistency
results in set theory. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 26:178–188, 1985.
[Jackson, 1988] S. Jackson. AD and the projective ordinals. In A. S. Kechris, D. A. Martin,
and J. R. Steel, editors, Cabal Seminar 81-85. Proceedings, Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar
1981-1985, volume 1333 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 117–220. Springer-Verlag,
1988.
[Jech and Prikry, 1976] T. J. Jech and K. L. Prikry. On ideals of sets and the power set opera-
tion. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 82:593–595, 1976.
[Jech et al., 1980] T. J. Jech, M. Magidor, W. J. Mitchell, and K. L. Prikry. Precipitous ideals.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 45:1–8, 1980.
[Jech, 1967] T. J. Jech. Non-provability of Souslin’s hypothesis. Commentationes Mathematicae
Universitatis Carolinae, 8:291–305, 1967.
[Jensen, 1968] R. B. Jensen. Souslin’s hypothesis is incompatible with V = L (abstract). Notices
of the American Mathematical Society, 1968.
[Jensen, 1972] R. B. Jensen. The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. Annals of Math-
ematical Logic, pages 229–308, 1972.
[Kanamori, 2003] A. Kanamori. The Higher Inﬁnite. Large Cardinals in Set Theory from their
Beginnings. Springer, 2003. Second edition.
[Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978] A. S. Kechris and Y. N. Moschovakis, editors. Cabal Seminar
76-77. Proceedings of the Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar 1976-77, volume 689 of Lecture Notes
in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1978.
[Kechris et al., 1981] A. S. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and Y. N. Moschovakis, editors. Cabal Sem-
inar 77-79. Proceedings of the Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar 1977-79, volume 839 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1981.
[Kechris et al., 1983] A. S. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and Y. N. Moschovakis, editors. Cabal Semi-
nar 79-81. Proceedings of the Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar 1979-81, volume 1019 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1983.
[Kechris et al., 1988] A. S. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and J. R. Steel, editors. Cabal Seminar 81-
85. Proceedings of the Caltech-UCLA Logic Seminar 1981-85, volume 1333 of Lecture Notes
in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[Kunen and Vaughn, 1984] K. Kunen and J. E. Vaughn. Handbook of Set-Theoretic Topology.
North-Holland, 1984.
[Kunen, 1970] K. Kunen. Some applications of iterated ultrapowers in set theory. Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 1:179–227, 1970.
[Kunen, 1971a] K. Kunen. Elementary embeddings and inﬁnitary embeddings. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 36:407–413, 1971.
[Kunen, 1971b] K. Kunen. On the GCH at measurable cardinals. In R. O. Gandy, editor, Logic
Colloquium ’69, pages 107–110. North-Holland, 1971.
[Kunen, 1978] K. Kunen. Saturated ideals. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 43:65–76, 1978.
[Laver, 1976] R. Laver. On the consistency of Borel’s Conjecture. Acta Mathematica, 137:151–
169, 1976.
[Laver, 1978] R. Laver. Making the supercompactness of κ indestructible under κ-directed closed
forcing. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 29:385–388, 1978.
[Levinski et al., 1990] J.-P. Levinski, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Chang’s Conjecture for ℵω.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 69:161–172, 1990.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
411
[Levy, 1965] A. Levy. A hierarchy of formulas in set theory. Memoirs of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 57, 1965.
[Magidor, 1976] M. Magidor. How large is the ﬁrst strongly compact cardinal? or: A study on
identity crises. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 10:33–57, 1976.
[Magidor, 1977a] M. Magidor. On the singular cardinals problem. I. Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 28:1–31, 1977.
[Magidor, 1977b] M. Magidor. On the singular cardinals problem. II. Annals of Mathematics,
106:514–547, 1977.
[Magidor, 1978] M. Magidor.
Changing coﬁnality of cardinals.
Fundamenta Mathematicae,
99:61–71, 1978.
[Magidor, 1982] M. Magidor. Reﬂecting stationary sets. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47:755–
771, 1982.
[Martin and Solovay, 1970] D. A. Martin and R. M. Solovay. Internal Cohen extensions. Annals
of Mathematical Logic, 2:1443–178, 1970.
[Martin and Steel, 1988] D. A. Martin and J. R. Steel. Projective determinacy. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA, 85:6582–6586, 1988.
[Martin and Steel, 1989] D. A. Martin and J. R. Steel.
A proof of Projective Determinacy.
Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 2:1–73, 1989.
[Martin, 1970] D. A. Martin. Measurable cardinals and analytic games. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 66:287–291, 1970.
[Martin, 1975] D. A. Martin. Borel determinacy. Annals of Mathematics, 102:363–371, 1975.
[Martin, 1980] D. A. Martin.
Inﬁnite games.
In O. Lehto, editor, Proceedings of the Inter-
national Congress of Mathematicians, Helsinki 1978, pages 269–273. Academia Scientiarum
Fennica, 1980.
[Mitchell and Steel, 1994] W. J. Mitchell and J. R. Steel. Fine Structure and Iteration Trees,
volume 3 of Lecture Notes in Logic. Springer, 1994.
[Mitchell et al., 1997] W. J. Mitchell, E. Schimmerling, and J. R. Steel. The covering lemma up
to a Woodin cardinal. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 84:219–255, 1997.
[Mitchell, 1972] W. J. Mitchell. Aronszajn trees and the independence of the transfer property.
Annals of Mathematical Logic, 5:21–46, 1972.
[Mitchell, 1974] W. J. Mitchell. Sets constructible from sequences of ultraﬁlters. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 39:57–66, 1974.
[Mitchell, 1978] W. J. Mitchell. Hypermeasurable cardinals. In M. Boﬀa, D. van Dalen, and
K. McAloon, editors, Logic Colloquium ’78, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathe-
matics, pages 303–316. North-Holland, 1978.
[Mitchell, 1984] W. J. Mitchell. The core model for sequences of measures. I. Mathematical
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 95:229–260, 1984.
[Mitchell, 1985] W. J. Mitchell. The core model for sequences of measures. II.
Available at
http://www.math.uﬂ.edu/ wjm/papers, 1985.
[Mitchell, 1987] W. J. Mitchell. Applications of the covering lemma for sequences of measures.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 299:41–58, 1987.
[Moschovakis, 1971] Y. N. Moschovakis. Uniformization in a playful universe. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 77:731–736, 1971.
[Mycielski and Steinhaus, 1962] J. Mycielski and H. Steinhaus. A mathematical axiom contra-
dicting the axiom of choice. Bulletin de l’Acad´eme Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences
Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques, 10:1–3, 1962.
[Nyikos, 1980] P. J. Nyikos. A provisional solution to the normalMoore space problem. Pro-
ceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 78:429–435, 1980.
[Prikry, 1970] K. L. Prikry. Changing measurable cardinals into accessible cardinals. Disserta-
tiones Mathematicae (Rozprawy Matematyczne), 68:5–52, 1970.
[Radin, 1982] L. B. Radin. Adding closed coﬁnal sequences to large cardinals. Annals of Math-
ematical Logic, 22:243–261, 1982.
[Schimmerling, 1994] E. Schimmerling.
Combinatorial principles in the core model for one
Woodin cardinal. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 74:153–201, 1994.
[Shelah and Woodin, 1990] S. Shelah and W. H. Woodin.
Large cardinals imply that every
reasonably deﬁnable set of reals is Lesbegue measurable.
Israel Journal of Mathematics,
70:381–394, 1990.
[Shelah, 1974] S. Shelah. Inﬁnite abelian groups, Whitehead problem and some constructions.
Israel Journal of Mathematics, 18:243–256, 1974.

412
Akihiro Kanamori
[Shelah, 1982] S. Shelah.
Proper Forcing, volume 940 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, 1982.
[Shelah, 1983] S. Shelah. The singular cardinals problem: Independence results. In A. R. D.
Mathias, editor, Surveys in Set Theory, volume 87 of London Mathematical Society Lecture
Note Series, pages 116–134. Cambridge University Press, 1983.
[Shelah, 1984] S. Shelah. Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 48:1–47, 1984.
[Shelah, 1986] S. Shelah. Around Classiﬁcation Theory of Models, volume 1182 of Lecture Notes
in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1986.
[Shelah, 1987] S. Shelah. Semiproper Forcing Axiom implies Martin’s Maximum but not PFA+.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:360–367, 1987.
[Shelah, 1987a] S. Shelah. Iterated forcing and normal ideals on ω1. Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 60:345–380, 1987.
[Shelah, 1994] S. Shelah.
Cardinal Arithmetic, volume 29 of Oxford Logic Guides.
Oxford
University Press, 1994.
[Shelah, 1998] S. Shelah. Proper and Improper Forcing, volume 29 of Perspectives in Mathe-
matical Logic. Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1961] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. The problem of predicativity. In Y. Bar-Hillel, E. I. J. Poz-
nanski, M. O. Rabin, and A. Robinson, editors, Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics,
pages 132–139. Magnes Press, 1961.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1971] J. R. Shoenﬁeld. Unramiﬁed forcing. In D. S. Scott, editor, Axiomatic Set
Theory, volume 13(1) of Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, pages 357–381. Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, Providence, 1971.
[Silver, 1971a] J. H. Silver. The consistency of the GCH with the existence of a measurable
cardinal. In Dana S. Scott, editor, Axiomatic Set Theory, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure
Mathematics, pages 391–395. American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1971.
[Silver, 1971b] J. H. Silver.
The independence of Kurepa’s conjecture and two-cardinal con-
jectures in model theory.
In D. S. Scott, editor, Axiomatic Set Theory, volume 13(1) of
Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, pages 383–390. American Mathematical Soci-
ety, Providence, 1971.
[Silver, 1971c] J. H. Silver. Some applications of model theory in set theory. Annals of Mathe-
matical Logic, 3:45–110, 1971.
[Silver, 1975] J. H. Silver. On the singular cardinals problem. In Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians, Vancouver, B. C., 1974, volume 1, pages 265–268. Canadian
Mathematical Congress, 1975.
[Solovay and Tennenbaum, 1971] R. M. Solovay and S. Tennenbaum. Internal Cohen extensions
and Souslin’s problem. Annals of Mathematics, 94:201–245, 1971.
[Solovay et al., 1978] R. M. Solovay, W. N. Reinhardt, and A. Kanamori.
Strong axioms of
inﬁnity and elementary embeddings. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 13:73–116, 1978.
[Solovay, 1966] R. M. Solovay.
Real-valued measurable cardinals (abstract).
Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, 13:721, 1966.
[Solovay, 1967] R. M. Solovay.
A nonconstructible ∆1
3 set of integers.
Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, 127:50–75, 1967.
[Solovay, 1971] R. M. Solovay. Real-valued measurable cardinals. In Dana S. Scott, editor, Ax-
iomatic Set Theory, volume 13(1) of Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics. American
Mathematical Society, Providence, 1971.
[Steel, 1996] J. R. Steel. The Core Model Iterability Problem. Springer, 1996.
[Stewart, 1966] D. H. Stewart. Master’s thesis, University of Bristol, 1966.
[Tennenbaum, 1968] S. Tennenbaum. Souslin’s problem. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA, 59:60–64, 1968.
[Todorcevic, 1984] S. Todorcevic. A note on the Proper Forcing Axiom. In James E. Baum-
gartner, D. Anthony Martin, and Saharon Shelah, editors, Axiomatic Set Theory, volume 31
of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 209–218. American Mathematical Society, 1984.
[Todorcevic, 2007] S. Todorcevic. Walks on Ordinals and their Characteristics, volume 263 of
Progress in Mathematics. Birkh¨auser, 2007.
[Woodin, 1990] W. H. Woodin. Supercompact cardinals, sets of reals, and weakly homogeneous
trees. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 85:6587–6591, 1990.

Large Cardinals with Forcing
413
[Woodin, 1999] W. H. Woodin. The Axiom of Determinacy , Forcing Axioms and the Non-
stationary Ideal, volume 1 of de Gruyter Series in Logic and Its Applications. de Gruyter,
1999.
[Woodin, 2001a] W. H. Woodin. The Continuum Hypothesis. I. Notices of the American Math-
ematical Society, 48:567–576, 2001.
[Woodin, 2001b] W. H. Woodin.
The Continuum Hypothesis. II.
Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 48:681–690, 2001.


INNER MODELS FOR LARGE CARDINALS
William J. Mitchell
One new idea leads to another, that to a third, and so on through a
course of time until someone, with whom no one of these is original,
combines all together, and produces what is justly called a new inven-
tion.1
1
INTRODUCTION
This chapter will discuss the development of inner models for large cardinals dur-
ing the last part of the last century, beginning at the end of Kanamori’s chapter
[2011b], which is to say at about 1965. There are two major themes in this develop-
ment: The ﬁrst of these is the expansion of G¨odel’s class L of constructible sets to
obtain L-like models of ZFC which are capable of containing any larger cardinals
existing in the universe, and the second is the development of core model theory,
which provides the possibility of proving that the universe is well approximated
by such a model.
The main part of the chapter is accordingly divided into two themes. The ﬁrst is
in Section 2, which describes the process of incorporating large cardinal properties
into the constructibility paradigm, and the discovery of strong uniqueness prop-
erties of the resulting models, allowing the class of large cardinals to be seen as a
well-ordered extension of the ordinals. The second theme is begun in Section 3,
which describes the evolution of combinatorial principles in L, leading through
the development of ﬁne structure to the discovery of the Covering Lemma. The
generalization of this development into a core model theory for larger cardinals
is described in Section 4. The two themes merge in Section 5, which describes
the extension of the models to the level of Woodin cardinals, where the models
involved rely on ﬁne structure and other techniques of core model theory, even
when the maximality implied by the core model is not assumed.
Section 1 provides an introduction, which discusses the basic concepts of con-
structibility, on the one hand, and of large cardinals, on the other, as they were
understood prior to the start of the main narrative. Both of these topics are cov-
ered more fully in other chapters of this volume: constructibility in [Kanamori,
2011b] (also see [Kanamori, 2007]) and large cardinals in [Kanamori, 2011a].
1Thomas Jeﬀerson, quoted in Bedini, “Godfather of American Invention,” p. 82.
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

416
William J. Mitchell
1.1
Constructibility
According to Kanamori [2011b], “An inner model is a transitive class containing
all the ordinals such that, with membership and quantiﬁcation restricted to it, the
class satisﬁes each axiom of ZF.” If we restrict consideration to deﬁnable classes,
we have three principal examples.
The ﬁrst example is the universe V which,
although not generally thought of as an inner model, does satisfy the deﬁnition;
and it also provides, via the cumulative hierarchy deﬁned by von Neumann in
1929, the beginnings of the structural analysis which will be seen in other inner
models to be discussed.
The second example of an inner model is the class of hereditarily ordinal deﬁn-
able sets (HOD) which was introduced independently by several people to give an
easier proof of the consistency of the Axiom of Choice. The model HOD has no
intrinsic structure: the cumulative hierarchy in V is needed to see that the class
HOD is even deﬁnable, and moreover the formula deﬁning it is not absolute, so
that the model HOD(HOD), that is, the model HOD as deﬁned inside HOD, may
well be a proper subclass of HOD. Its primary use has been to produce, with
the help of forcing, models which do not satisfy the Axiom of Choice. However, a
precursor to the core model and covering lemma can be seen in Vopˇenka’s theorem
[Vopˇenka and H´ajek, 1972] stating that any set of ordinals is in a generic extension
of HOD. The theme of HOD as a core model has recently been investigated: see,
for example, [Steel, 1995].
The third example of an inner model, and the prototype of the models with
which this chapter is concerned, is G¨odel’s class L of constructible sets, introduced
by G¨odel [1938; 1939; 1940]. The model L is deﬁned using a hierarchy like that
of the ﬁrst example, but the hierarchy incorporates deﬁnability by modifying the
successor step to Lα+1 = def(Lα) where def(X) is the set of subsets of X which
are ﬁrst-order deﬁnable over the model (X, ∈), using parameters from X. In this
case the deﬁnability is restricted to the emerging class being deﬁned, and hence
the deﬁnition of the class L is independent of the universe in which it is being
deﬁned.
Thus the class L is minimal in the sense that it is contained in any
model of ZF which contains all of the ordinals. A simple induction shows that it
satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice and that |Lα| = |α| for all inﬁnite ordinals α. To
prove the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH) it then suﬃces to show that
P(κ) ⊆Lκ+ for every cardinal κ. This is a consequence of what has become known
as the principle of condensation:
LEMMA 1 (Condensation.) Suppose that α is an inﬁnite ordinal and X ≺Lα.
Then X ∼= L¯α for some ordinal ¯α ≤α.
This principle is one of the major themes in the developments described in this
chapter.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
417
Relative constructibility
Relative constructibility was introduced independently by Hajnal [1956; 1961] and
Levy [1957; 1960], who gave deﬁnitions which were equivalent in their original
applications, but are quite diﬀerent in general. Hajnal modiﬁed the deﬁnition of L
to deﬁne L(A), where A is an arbitrary transitive set, by setting L0(A) = A. Thus
L(A) is the smallest model of ZF which contains A ∪{A}. The model L(A) need
not satisfy the Axiom of Choice, and indeed is most commonly used in applications
where the Axiom of Choice does not hold.
Levy’s deﬁnition of L[A], on the other hand, retained from L the deﬁnition of
L0[A] = ∅, and instead modiﬁed the successor step, deﬁning Lα+1[A] to be the
set of subsets of Lα[A] which are deﬁnable in Lα[A] using parameters from Lα[A]
together with the predicate A. Thus L[A] is the smallest model M of ZF which
has A ∩M as a member, and L[A] always satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice; however
A is not, in general, a subset of L[A].
The model L[A] can be viewed as the
smallest model which contains the structure of the set A, and since this chapter
is concerned with models including large cardinal structure, essentially all models
discussed will be of this type.
In both cases the deﬁnability of the model requires the use of A as a parameter.
For this reason the condensation principle, Lemma 1, is severely weakened. It is,
in general, valid for L(A) only in the case that A ⊆X. For L[A] there is the
general statement:
LEMMA 2. Suppose π: M ∼= X ≺Lα[A] is the inverse of the the transitive
collapse of X. Then M = L¯α[ ¯A] for some ordinal ¯α ≤α, where ¯A = π−1[A ∩X].
In particular, if ¯A = A ∩L¯a[ ¯A] then X ∼= L¯α[A].
Levy originally applied this condensation principle in cases in which the set A
is contained in a transitive subset of X, so that A = ¯A. Using this he could prove,
for example, that if A ⊆κ then 2λ = λ+ in L[A] for all λ ≥κ. The successful
application of models of the form L[A] to large cardinal theory has come from
choosing the set A to encode the large cardinal structure, and then using that
structure to see that ¯A = A ∩L¯α[ ¯A] holds even in cases that π is not the identity
on A.
In the model L[A] the set A is being regarded as providing structure. If U is a
ultraﬁlter on a cardinal κ, for example, then the model L(U ∪{U}) would include
all subsets of κ, whether or not they have any relation to measurability. The model
L[U], on the other hand, contains only those subsets of κ which are required by
the possibility of using U as a predicate. As will be seen, these are exactly the
sets which are required by the existence of any measure on κ.
1.2
Large cardinals
Of the large cardinal properties known at the start of this history, two will domi-
nate it: measurability and supercompactness.

418
William J. Mitchell
Measurable cardinals were introduced by Ulam [1930], but we will use the later
formulation in terms of elementary embeddings and normal ultraﬁlters: A cardinal
κ is measurable if there is an elementary embedding i: V →M into a well-founded
model M with critical point κ, that is, such that i(κ) > κ, but i(ν) = ν for all
ν < κ.
The normal ultraﬁlter, or measure, associated with this embedding is
U = { x ⊆κ : κ ∈i(x) }. The measure U in turn leads to an embedding via the
ultrapower construction, iU : V →Ult(V, U).
The concept of a measurable cardinal will serve as both a goal and a benchmark.
The ﬁrst part of the story will largely concern the eﬀect which the presence of a
measurable cardinal has on the constructible universe L, and the understanding
of the minimal model L[U] containing a measurable cardinal.
The rest of the
story will concern the generalization of this model and associated techniques to
accommodate larger cardinals.
A number of large cardinals weaker than a measurable cardinal were known at
the start of this history: these include inaccessible, Mahlo, and weakly compact
cardinals.
The most important for our purposes are Ramsey cardinals, which
satisfy the partition relation κ →(κ)<ω
2
and their generalization the α-Erd˝os
cardinals, which satisfy the partition relation κ →(α)<ω
2
.
Supercompact cardinals were introduced, at the start of the period of this his-
tory, by Reinhardt and Solovay although they were only published later in [Solovay
et al., 1978]: a cardinal κ is λ-supercompact if there is an elementary embedding
i: V →M with critical point κ such that λM ⊆M, and is supercompact if it
is λ-supercompact for all λ. In contrast to measurable cardinals, it enters this
history only as a goal: as this is being written, there is still no fully developed
L-like model for even a κ+-supercompact cardinal.
Given this fact, it is natural to ask about cardinal properties intermediate be-
tween measurable cardinals; at the start of this history, however there were, with
one possible exception, no such cardinals. The possible exception is a strongly
compact cardinal. This notion was deﬁned by Tarski [1962] using inﬁnitary logic
but characterized by Reinhardt and Solovay as being supercompactness without
normality: that is, with the condition λM ⊆M replaced by the covering prop-
erty ∀x ∈[M]λ ∃y ∈M (x ⊆y ∧|y| < j(κ)). It is conjectured that having a
strongly compact cardinal is equiconsistent with having a supercompact cardinal,
and proving this has been described as the holy grail problem of inner model
theory.
A number of intermediate large cardinal properties have since been discovered,
and will be described in due course. Most of these are modiﬁcations either of mea-
surability or of supercompactness, but one exception is worth mentioning here:
Woodin cardinals, discovered in 1984, have come to have an independent impor-
tance comparable to that of measurable and supercompact cardinals.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
419
2
DEVELOPMENT OF INNER MODELS WITHOUT FINE STRUCTURE
2.1
Large cardinals in L
The study of L-like models for large cardinals naturally starts with L itself. G¨odel
[1938] observed that any inaccessible or Mahlo cardinal in V has the same property
in L, simply because these properties are downward absolute to any inner model.
After the discovery of weakly compact cardinals it was quickly realized that they
too are downward absolute to L, by a more complicated argument. The same was
true of several related stronger properties.
The study of inner models for larger cardinals can be said to have started with
Dana Scott’s [1961] proof that there cannot be any measurable cardinals in L, by
observing that otherwise there would be an elementary embedding iU : L →M =
Ult(L, U) in M such that iU(κ) > κ, where κ is the least measurable cardinal in L.
This is impossible because M, as an inner model of the minimal model L, must be
equal to L; but M satisﬁes the sentence asserting that i(κ) is the least measurable
cardinal.
The response to Scott’s observation took two directions. The ﬁrst direction,
which concentrated on the model L in order to further characterize the conse-
quences of the existence in V of a measurable cardinal, led to Silver’s discovery of
0#. The other direction developed the model L[U] as the minimal model, anal-
ogous to L, which contains a measurable cardinal.
These two approaches use
many of the same techniques, and they eventually merged in Dodd and Jensen’s
construction of the core model.
2.2
What a measurable cardinal says about L
Scott’s result was followed up in the model L by Gaifman [1974] and Rowbottom
[1971]. Gaifman, working in 1963, realized that the ultrapower embedding used by
Scott could be iterated, and in the next year he realized that this iteration could be
carried out using a countable elementary substructure of an appropriate Vλ. This
showed, for example, that every cardinal of V is inaccessible in L. Rowbottom
obtained similar results using partition properties. He reproved an earlier result
of Erd˝os and Hajnal that any measurable cardinal is a Ramsey cardinal: If U
is a measure on κ and f : [κ]<ω →λ for λ < κ then there is a set A ∈U such
that f is constant on [A]n for each n ∈ω. He then used this to show that κ is
what came to be known as a Rowbottom cardinal, which is a cardinal κ with the
following property: Suppose that (κ, A, . . . ) is any structure with universe κ, that
ρ is a cardinal less than κ, and A ⊆κ with ρ < |A| < κ. Then there is a set
X ⊆κ with ρ ⊆X and |X ∩A| = ρ such that (X, A ∩X, . . . ) ≺(κ, A, . . . ). He
then used condensation to show that this implies that every successor cardinal of
V is inaccessible in L.
This analysis of the structure of L in the presence of a measurable cardinal took
its ﬁnal form with Silver’s discovery of 0#. He observed that starting from a Ram-
sey cardinal, or even an ω1-Erd˝os cardinal, one could obtain an uncountable set of

420
William J. Mitchell
indiscernibles for L, that is, a set of ordinals A such that any two ﬁnite increasing
sequences of members of A of the same length satisfy the same formulas in L.
Using the condensation property of L, together with model-theoretic methods of
Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski, he then showed that any such set could be extended
to a proper class I of indiscernibles with the property that every set x ∈L is
deﬁnable in L using only parameters from I. Furthermore, he noted that if the
class I of indiscernibles is chosen so that its ωth member is as small as possible,
then the class I would be closed and unbounded, and hence uniquely determined.
Finally he deﬁned the set 0# ⊆ω to be
0# = { ⌜φ(x0, . . . , xn−1)⌝: L |= φ(c0, . . . , cn−1) }
(1)
and showed that 0# can be used to construct, and can be constructed from, the
class I of indiscernibles. This class has since become known as the class of Silver
indiscernibles.
Solovay independently discovered the set 0#, and observed that the singleton
{0#} is Π1
2-deﬁnable over the reals, and thus 0# is a ∆1
3 subset of ω which is not
constructible.
The existence of 0# has three important consequences.
(i) As mentioned above,
the set {0#} is deﬁnable over the real numbers, by an absolute Π1
2 formula which
describes the process of obtaining I from 0#. (ii) It takes the results of Rowbottom
and Gaifman to a natural conclusion: if α is any member of I, and in particular
any uncountable cardinal of V , then α is, in L, inaccessible and weakly compact—
indeed α has every large cardinal property which can hold in L. (iii) It implies
that there is a nontrivial elementary embedding L →L. Indeed every increasing
embedding from I into I can be extended to an elementary embedding from L
into L, and every elementary embedding i: L →L is determined by its restriction
to the class I.
This analysis was rounded out by Kunen, who proved that the
existence 0# follows from the existence of any nontrivial embedding i: L →L.
Other work of Silver reinforced the view that the existence of 0# is the weak-
est large cardinal property not compatible with L. He noted [Silver, 1970] that
although the existence of 0#, and hence V ̸= L, follows from the existence of an
ω1-Erd˝os cardinal, any cardinal which is α-Erd˝os for any ordinal — or even all
ordinals — less than ωL
1 has the same property in L.
It is evident that the same analysis which gave 0# can be carried out for any set
a ⊆ω, by deﬁning a# to be the theory of a closed unbounded class of indiscernibles
for the structure (L[a], ∈, a). In particular the sharp construction can be iterated:
setting 0α# = ⟨0ν# : ν < α ⟩# for any countable ordinal α. This construction gives
the beginning of a hierarchy of inner models, L[⟨0α# : α < θ ⟩]. The case when
θ is equal to ω1 in the resulting model gives a minimal model for the statement
that a# exists for all reals a, which is the correct hypothesis for many results
giving consequences for the continuum of the existence of a measurable cardinal.
For example, results of Martin and Solovay [1969], including their Σ1
3-absoluteness
result, follow from this hypothesis.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
421
2.3
L[U]
The other direction, deﬁning a model analogous to L with a measurable cardinal,
was initiated by Solovay. If U is a measure on a cardinal κ then it is easy to see
that U ∩L[U] ∈L[U], and that U ∩L[U] is a measure on κ. In addition, the same
arguments as were used for L can be used to show that L[U] satisﬁes the axioms
of ZFC.
Condensation, however, is more problematic. It was straightforward to show
that it holds for any set X ≺L[U] such that κ ⊆X, and it follows that L[U] |=
2λ = λ+ for all λ ≥κ. Solovay also showed that κ is the only measurable cardinal
in L[U].
Condensation does not hold for arbitrary sets X ≺Lα[U]; however [Silver, 1971]
extended G¨odel’s proof that 2λ = λ+ in L to cardinals λ < κ in L[U] by using
Rowbottom’s partition theorem (cf. Section 2.1) to ﬁnd, for each x ⊆λ in L[U],
a set X ≺La[U] with X ∩κ ∈U and λ ∪{x} ⊆X but | P(λ) ∩X| = λ. Then
condensation does hold for such X: if π: L¯α[ ¯U] ∼= X is the transitive collapse then
{ λ ∈κ : π(λ) = λ } ∈U and hence ¯U = π−1[U ∩X] = U ∩L¯α[U]. This is precisely
what is needed to show that L[U] |= 2λ = λ+.
The ﬁnal step towards establishing L[U] as a close analog of the model L was
taken by Kunen in his thesis [1968; 1970], which adapted from Gaifman the use
of iterated ultrapowers. The thesis began by reﬁning Gaifman’s theory of iterated
ultrapowers. Kunen deﬁned an M-ultraﬁlter on a transitive model M of set theory
to be an ultraﬁlter U, not necessarily a member of M, on P(κ) ∩M such that
X ∩U ∈M whenever X ∈M and |X|M = κ, and he showed that this property
suﬃced for the construction of an iterated ultrapower Ultα(M, U).
He then turned to the model L[U], showing that if the models L[U] and L[U ′]
satisfy that U and U ′, respectively, are measures on the same cardinal κ, then
L[U] = L[U ′] and U ∩L[U] = U ′ ∩L[U].
It follows that U ∩L[U] is the only measure in L[U], and that L[U] is a deﬁnable
subset of any class model of ZFC + “κ is a measurable cardinal”.
Kunen’s proof used several techniques which became important to the later
development of inner model theory.
First, he took from Gaifman the idea of
iterated ultrapowers: if M is a model and U a measure on κ in M, then the
iterated ultrapowers iU
α : M →Ultα(M, U) are deﬁned by setting Ult0(M, U) =
M, Ultα+1(M, U) = Ult(Ultα(M, U), iα(U)), and taking the direct limit when
α is a limit ordinal. He observed that if L[U] and L[U ′] are as assumed, then
Ultκ++(L[U], U) = Ultκ++(L[U ′], U ′), since both models are equal to L[C] where C
is the closed unbounded ﬁlter on κ++. Further, he showed that if Γ is any proper
subclass of the image { iU
κ++(α) : α an ordinal } in L[C] such that κ ⊆Γ then L[U]
is isomorphic to the Skolem hull of Γ in L[C], and similarly for L[U ′]. Finally,
he noted that the intersection Γ of the ranges of iU
λ++ and iU ′
λ++ is a proper class,
so that each of L[U] and L[U ′] is the Skolem hull of Γ in L[C]. It follows that
L[U] = L[U ′].
Kunen also applied these arguments to the case when L[U] and L[U ′] satisfy

422
William J. Mitchell
that U and U ′, respectively, are measures on diﬀerent cardinals κ and κ′.
He
showed that in this case, if κ < κ′, then L[U ′] = Ultα(L[U], U) for some ordinal
α. Thus an appropriate analog to L for the theory ZFC + “there is a measurable
cardinal” is the model L[U] satisfying that U is a measure on some κ, where U is
chosen so that κ is as small as possible.
Techniques such as these were also applied in situations in which no actual
measurable cardinal was assumed. Several examples of this were due to Kunen, but
perhaps the most important example is Solovay’s proof [1971] that the existence
of a real-valued measurable cardinal is equiconsistent with that of a (two-valued)
measurable cardinal. One direction of this involved showing that if µ is a real-
valued measure on κ and F is the ﬁlter of sets x ⊆κ such that µ(x) = 1, then
F ∩L[F] is an ultraﬁlter on κ in L[F].
2.4
More measurable cardinals
The deﬁnition of the model L[U] can easily be extended to models of the form L[U],
where U = ⟨Uν : ν < α ⟩is a sequence of measures on an increasing sequence
of cardinals ⟨κν : ν < α ⟩. Solovay deﬁned 0† by using indiscernibles for L[U]
in the same way in which 0# is deﬁned using indiscernibles for L.
He brieﬂy
hoped that models with more than one measurable cardinal would lead to further
progress in descriptive set theory, but quickly realized that a model of the form
L[U0, . . . , Un−1] with n measurable cardinals has essentially the same properties
as does L[U]. Silver [1971] stated that the techniques he used for L[U] can be
extended to a model of the form L[U], provided that α is countable.
Kunen
similarly pointed out that the same techniques he used for L[U] worked for models
L[U] where U is a sequence of arbitrary length α, so long as α was smaller than
the ﬁrst measurable cardinal κ0 of the sequence U. In [Kunen, 1970] he used such
models to show that one could obtain models with arbitrarily many measurable
cardinals from a strongly compact cardinal κ, and in [Kunen, 1971] he reached the
same conclusion from the assumption that the GCH fails at a measurable cardinal
κ, or that every κ-complete ﬁlter can be extended to an ultraﬁlter.
Kunen’s hypothesis, that there were fewer than measurably many measurable
cardinals, was not by any means a rigid limit on the eﬀectiveness of his techniques;
however longer sequences of measures did entail additional complications, and a
new framework was needed to deal with these complications in a general way.
This framework came out of consideration of a much less important question: how
many diﬀerent measures could a single cardinal carry? Kunen showed that the
model L[U] had only one measure, and Kunen and Paris [1971] had presented
a model in which there are 22κ measures, the maximum possible. However no
model was known with any intermediate number of measures, and they ended
their paper with the following question: “Can the number of normal ultraﬁlters
on a measurable cardinal be intermediate between 1 and 22κ? Can this number
be 2?”
Kunen [1970] gave an inductive proof that every measurable cardinal has a

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
423
measure concentrating on smaller nonmeasurable cardinals: Suppose that for each
measurable cardinal λ < κ we have such a measure Uλ on λ, and let U be a
measure on κ which does concentrate on smaller measurable cardinals.
Then
there is a second measure on κ, concentrating on nonmeasurable cardinals, which
can be deﬁned by setting Uκ = { x ⊆κ : { λ < κ : x ∩λ ∈Uλ } ∈U }, or
equivalently Uκ = i(⟨Uλ : λ < κ ⟩)κ. Seeing this Mitchell, then ﬁnishing up his
graduate work at Berkeley, asked whether there could be a model in which these
are the only two measures on κ? It should be noted that the model L[U, Uκ] would
not do: this would be equal to L[U], since the measures U and Uκ would agree on
every set constructed using them as predicates. Two years later, driving back to
Berkeley for the summer after a digression into category theory, he realized how to
construct such a model. In [Mitchell, 1974] he deﬁned an order on the ultraﬁlters
on κ, by saying that U ⊳U ′ if U ∈Ult(V, U ′).
Thus, for example, Uκ ⊳U in
Kunen’s example discussed above. By an argument like that which Scott had used
to prove that there are no measurable cardinals in L, Mitchell showed that the
partial order ⊳is well-founded, and this fact allowed a deﬁnition of the order of a
measure, o(U) = sup{ o(U ′)+1 : U ′ ⊳U }, and of a cardinal, o(κ) = sup{ o(U)+1 :
U is a measure on κ }. He then deﬁned a coherent sequence of ultraﬁlters to be a
function U, with domain of the form { (κ, β) : β < oU(κ) } for some function oU,
which witnesses that o(U(κ, β)) = β in the sense that iU(κ,β)(U)(κ, α) = U(κ, α)
for all α < β < oU(κ), and he showed that if U is a coherent sequence then many of
the basic properties of L[U] can be extended to L[U]. In particular, L[U] is a model
of ZFC + GCH, and the only normal measures in L[U] are the sets U(κ, β) ∩L[U]
with β < oU(κ). Thus, provided suitable coherent sequences could be found, this
construction provided models with any desired number δ of normal measures on
a cardinal κ, with 0 ≤δ ≤κ++. Since the models satisﬁed GCH, this was the
maximum possible number of measures.
For any ﬁnite n it was easy, if given a cardinal κ with o(κ) ≥n, to ﬁnd a co-
herent sequence U with oU(κ) = n. This gave models which exactly n measures,
for any ﬁnite n. Finding coherent sequences with oU(κ) inﬁnite was more diﬃcult.
Mitchell used what he later termed a µ-measurable cardinal to obtain sequences
with o(κ) = λ for any λ ≤κ++. It is a commentary on the growth of our under-
standing of large cardinals that the smallest cardinal property generally known at
the time which implied the existence of a µ-measurable cardinal — which is barely
stronger than ∃κ o(κ) = κ++ — was supercompactness. Later it was determined
that the µ-measurable cardinal is not necessary. It was shown, ﬁrst by using core
model theory but later, in [Mitchell, 1983], with more elementary methods: If
o(κ) = δ then there is an inner model L[U] in which either oU(κ) = δ or else
oU(κ) = κ++L[U] < δ. This was achieved by using a sequence U which might not
be fully coherent in V : instead the measures on the sequence U were only required
to have the correct order. In L[U] the sequence becomes fully coherent, because
no set is constructed in L[U] which would witness a failure of coherence. This
concept was independently discovered by A. Dodd and has come to be used as an
important tool, referred to as Doddages, in core model theory.

424
William J. Mitchell
Iterating the least diﬀerence
The essential tool in the analysis of L[U] was a generalization of Kunen’s use of
iterated ultrapowers which has come to be known as the process of iterating the
least diﬀerence. This process is central to the development of inner model theory,
and it seems appropriate to describe it a bit more fully so as to have a framework
for discussing how its use has inﬂuenced the development of later inner models.
To this end we will give a brief sketch of the proof of a simple application: every
measure in L[U] is a member of the sequence U.
Supposing the contrary, we may assume that U is the shortest sequence for
which the assertion to be proved is false, and κ is the smallest cardinal for which
there is a measure W in L[U] which is not on the sequence U.
The proof uses a comparison of L[U] with the ultrapower Ult(L[U], W) of that
model by the supposed extraneous ultraﬁlter W.
The comparison is made by
iterated ultrapowers of the two models,
i0,θ :
L[U]
iW

M0
i01 / M1
i12
/ · · · Mθ
j0,θ :
Ult(L[U], W)
N0
j01 / M1
j12
/ · · · Nθ
(2)
The term “iterating the least diﬀerence” describes the way the iterated ultra-
powers i0,θ and j0,θ are deﬁned: at stage ν we have Mν = L[i0ν(U)] and Nν =
L[j0ν ◦iW (U)].
The next models Mν+1 and Nν+1 in the sequence are deﬁned
by simply identifying the ﬁrst ultraﬁlter occurring in one of the sequences i0ν(U)
and j0ν ◦iU(U) which does not occur in the other, and taking the ultrapower of
that model by that ultraﬁlter. A crucial fact, the proof of which we skip over, is
that this process always terminates, either with the ﬁnal models Mθ and Nθ being
equal, or else with one being a proper initial segment of the other. In this case the
models must be equal, since each satisﬁes the formula stating that its sequence of
measures is the shortest sequence for which the statement being proved is false.
Now we can conclude the proof of the statement: we want to show that the
ultraﬁlter W, supposedly not on the sequence U, is in fact equal to the ﬁrst
ultraﬁlter used in the iterated ultrapower i0θ. It can be shown that this ultraﬁlter
is on κ; write it as U = U(κ, β), so i01 = iU. Now suppose to the contrary that
U ̸= W, and let x be the ﬁrst subset of κ on which W and U disagree. The
argument is concluded by showing that
x ∈U ⇐⇒κ ∈iU(x) = i01(x) ⇐⇒κ ∈i0θ(x)
(3)
x ∈W ⇐⇒κ ∈iW (x) ⇐⇒κ ∈j0θ ◦iW (x)
(4)
and noting that the whole construction, and in particular the set x, is deﬁnable in
L[U], so that i0θ(x) = j0,θ ◦iW (x). Hence W = U.
This concludes the proof of the assertion that there are no measures in L[U]
other than those on the sequence U. We now isolate, for future reference, three
factors which are necessary to the success of this argument:

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
425
Iterability.
All iterated ultrapowers of L[U], and in particular the ﬁnal models
Mθ and Nθ in the comparison, are well-founded.
Equal comparison.
The ﬁnal models of the iteration are equal: neither of Mθ
or Nθ is a proper initial segment of the other.
No moving generators.
None of the critical points of ultraﬁlters used in the
iterated ultrapowers of diagram (2) are moved by later ultrapowers in the same
iteration.
Two of these terms, iterability and moving generators, are standard. For the
models currently under consideration, iterability can be insured by using countably
complete ultraﬁlters: either, as in this case, countably complete in L[U] or, in the
case of a proof where the iteration is not deﬁnable in L[U], countably complete
in V . Later, for larger cardinals, other methods became necessary. At the time of
writing, iterability is still the principal limiting factor for the provable existence
of inner models.
In the proof of x ∈U
⇐⇒
x ∈W sketched above, the lack of moving
generators was used only with respect to the critical point κ of the embeddings
iW and i0,1 = iU. It is also needed, with respect to all critical points, in the omitted
proof that the comparison terminates. It was not recognized as a diﬃculty at this
point in the history, since it is ensured by the coherence of the sequence U of
measures. Later, in the 1980s when models for cardinals beyond a strong cardinal
are developed (as we shall describe), it will be seen to have (in a more general form)
a critical inﬂuence: it will require a major change in the structure of the iterated
ultrapowers used for this method of comparison by iterating the least diﬀerence.
(The term “moving generators” comes from the extenders used in such models.)
The deﬁnability technique used in the proof above to ensure equal comparison
was implicitly used by Kunen, but was isolated by Mitchell [1974] and given the
name φ-minimality. An important theme in the development of core models has
been the introduction of new techniques to ensure equal comparison.
3
FINE STRUCTURE AND THE COVERING LEMMA IN L
Most of Jensen’s work was originally distributed as handwritten, mimeographed
notes made shortly after the results were obtained. These notes, though usually
undated, provide a valuable source from which to follow his evolving views.
The ﬁrst suggestion of ﬁne structure came in his Habilitationsschrift [Jensen,
1967].
The introduction states that the main problem is to determine, given
a transitive set M, for which ordinals α is the structure Lα(M) closed under
given logical operations, and states that some of this is related to interests of his
advisor, G. Hasenjaeger. The ﬁrst theorem stated asserts that P(M)∩Lα+1(M) ⊆
Lα(M) if and only if there is no Lα(M)-deﬁnable map from M onto Lα, which
recognizably presages (in contrapositive form) the basic theorems of ﬁne structure.

426
William J. Mitchell
An appendix speciﬁcally gives the Σ1 case: every subset of M which is Σ1-deﬁnable
over Lα(M) is a member of Lα(M) if and only if there is no map from M onto
Lα(M) which is Σ1-deﬁnable over Lα(M). Jensen has stated that the name “ﬁne
structure” came from Gandy’s comments on the Habilitationsschrift. Jensen has
regretted the name, as it also names an unfashionable area of algebraic geometry.
In [1968?] Jensen proved that there is a Suslin tree in L. The proof was based
on Tennenbaum’s [1968] forcing construction of a Suslin tree: Jensen observed
that in the tree T given by Tennenbaum’s construction, the nodes Tα of T at level
α < ω1 were generic branches through the ﬁrst α levels of T, and noted that it
would be enough if they were generic only over the countable model Lβ, where
β ≥α is least such that P(ω) ∩Lβ+1 ⊈Lβ. Shortly after that, Solovay used a
similar method to prove that there is a Kurepa tree in L, and several people then
independently discovered the combinatorial principle ♦, and proved that ♦is true
in L and allows the construction of a Suslin tree. In [Jensen, 1969a], written at
the Rockefeller University in 1969, Jensen discussed results of Kunen and himself
concerning ♦as well as the stronger principle ♦+ which is needed to prove that
there is a K¨urepa tree.
In the notes [Jensen, 1970], expanded from lectures at Kiev, he presented a
number of results relating to ♦and trees, including generalizations of ♦(which is
♦ω1) and Suslin trees to larger cardinals. At the end he considered the question of
a Suslin tree on an inaccessible cardinal κ in L. Now if κ is weakly compact then
there is no Aronszajn tree on κ, and hence no Suslin tree, so his argument needed
another constraint. The construction of a ω1-Suslin tree T proceeded by recursion
on the level α of T, and for a limit ordinal α the deﬁnition of the αth level of
the tree had two parts: ﬁrst showing that the tree of height α constructed so far
had branches, and then selecting countably many of these branches to continue
the tree. To deﬁne a κ-Suslin tree for larger κ, these two parts had conﬂicting
requirements: there must be a stationary set E ⊆κ of ordinals at which fewer
than κ many nodes would be selected to continue the tree, but the proof that there
are branches at each level α requires a closed unbounded subset Cα ⊆α disjoint
from E along which a branch can be deﬁned by recursion. This was not a problem
in deﬁning a κ+-Suslin tree for a regular cardinal κ, as one could take E to be the
set of ordinals of coﬁnality κ and pick sets Ca of order type at most κ, so that
the limit points of Cα all have coﬁnality less than κ. In [Jensen, 1970], Jensen
described a new combinatorial principle which he called K∗
κ, and showed that K∗
κ
+ ♦κ implies that there is a κ-Suslin tree. The principle K∗
κ asserts that there
are sets E and Cν as needed, and Jensen states as a theorem that K∗
κ holds in L
for every cardinal κ which is inaccessible, but not weakly compact. He omits the
proof: “Der Beweis hiervon ist leider sehr lang and wird deshalb nicht gebracht”.
The principle K∗
κ is essentially a square principle, but omits the vital coherence
condition: Cβ = Cα ∩β whenever β is a limit point of Cα.
This coherence
condition appears at the end of Jensen’s proof [1969?b] of the consistency of the
Suslin Hypothesis with CH, in an addendum in which Jensen corrects an error,
pointed out by Solovay, in section I of the note. The correction, which Jensen

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
427
characterizes as “restoring the ‘unsimpliﬁed’ proof”, uses a principle which he
calls +, and which we can recognize as essentially □ω1. In this note Jensen uses a
preliminary forcing extension to make the principle + true.
In [Jensen, 1972], Jensen ﬁnally gave a complete exposition of the ﬁne structure
of L, ending with the deﬁnition of □κ and of global square, and completing the
proof that in L there is a κ-Suslin tree for every regular cardinal κ > ω which is not
weakly compact. In this result the case in which κ was the successor of a singular
cardinal λ was new, relying on the principle □λ. This principle was also critical in
a ﬁnal section written by Silver which proved that L satisﬁes the transfer property
(κ, δ) →(λ+, λ) for any cardinals κ < δ and λ. This notation means that any
theory with a model of type (κ, δ) also has a model of type (λ+, λ), where a model
(M, U, · · · ) is said to have type (κ, λ) if M has size κ and the unary predicate U
has size λ.
Details of the ﬁne structure construction are far out of the scope of this pa-
per, but it will be useful to have a simpliﬁed (and in some aspects inaccurate)
description. We begin with an innovation which, though inessential and technical,
was important to the later study of L and of ﬁne structure models in general: the
introduction of the Jα hierarchy in place of the usual Lα hierarchy. The Jα hier-
archy was based on the set of rudimentary functions, deﬁned by Gandy in [1974].
The two hierarchies are essentially equivalent (whence the characterization of the
innovation as ‘inessential’); however the new sequence allowed a much cleaner
analysis, largely because every ﬁnite sequence of members of Jα is a member of
Jα. The fact that the parameters, which were ﬁnite sequences of ordinals, could
not be treated as single objects in Lα had greatly complicated the ﬁne structure
analysis of the Lα hierarchy. The Jα hierarchy has been widely used since, and is
universally used in any inner model theory involving ﬁne structure. We will use
the Jα hierarchy henceforth; however a reader who prefers to read Jα as Lα will
lose little or nothing in accuracy or comprehension.
Jensen took from Kripke and Platek the term projectum. He deﬁned the projec-
tum of Jα to be the least ordinal ρ ≤α such that there is a subset of ρ which is in
Jα+1 \ Jα, and for n ∈ω he deﬁned the Σn projectum of Jα to be the least ordinal
ρα
n such that such a subset is Σn-deﬁnable over Jα with parameters from Jα. He
answered the question left open in [Jensen, 1967] by showing that there is, for each
ordinal α and each n ∈ω, a Σn-deﬁnable map from ρα
n onto Jα; however what
is more important is the construction by which the map is obtained. He deﬁned
by recursion on n ∈ω the Σn-core Cn(Jα) as a structure (Jρα
n, Aα
n) in which Aα
n
coded the Σn theory of Jα, with parameters from ρα
n. In the recursion step, he
used the method from his Habilitationsschrift to deﬁne a ΣCn(Jα)
1
-deﬁnable map
from the Σ1-projectum of Cn(Jα), which is the Σn+1 projectum ρα
n+1 of Jα. He
then deﬁned Cn+1(Jα) = (Jρα
n+1, Aα
n+1) where Aα
n+1 encoded in a natural way the
Σ1 theory of Cn(Jα) and hence, by extension, the Σn+1 theory of Jα.
The construction was entirely canonical. In particular, given Cn(Jα) one could
recover Jα. In addition—and this is a critical point—it is preserved by embeddings:
he showed that any substructure X ≺Σ1 Cn(Jα) of the Σn-code of Jα is isomorphic

428
William J. Mitchell
to the Σn code of some J¯α, and furthermore the collapse map π: Cn(J¯α) ∼= X ≺Σ1
Cn(Jα) can be extended to a Σn+1 elementary map from J¯α →Jα. We will refer
to this property as downward extension of embeddings, but it should be noted that
it can be regarded as an enhancement of the Condensation Lemma 1: it says that
condensation applies at each of the inﬁnitely many levels of the Levy hierarchy
between Jα and Jα+1.
The importance of this may be seen in the proof of the principle □κ, which
states that there is a sequence of closed unbounded subsets of Cα, deﬁned for
limit ordinals α < κ+, such that the order type of Cα is at most κ, and if β is
a limit point of Cα then Cβ = Cα ∩β. Jensen’s construction has a number of
cases, but the interesting case is that in which κ < α < κ+ and α has uncountable
coﬁnality. Jensen considers the ﬁrst ordinal γ such that α is singular in Jα+1.
Then the least witness σ: ξ →α to this singularity is Σn+1-deﬁnable over Jγ
for some n ∈ω. By careful use of the Σn code of Jγ, Jensen ﬁnds a tower of
Σn+1 elementary substructures Xν ≺Σn+1 Jγ with the following property: For
limit ν < ξ set αν = sup σ“ν and let πν : Xν ∼= Jγν be the collapse map. Then
πν preserves the deﬁnition of the map σ, so that σ↾ν is the least witness to the
singularity of αν, just as σ was for α. In particular, if σ is used to deﬁne Cα and
β is any limit member of Cα, then β = αν for some ν < ξ, so Cβ is deﬁned using
σ↾ν in the same way as the deﬁnition of Cα used σ. Thus Cβ = Cα ∩β.
The property □κ has given rise to an extensive literature. In addition to its
consequences, a number of weaker principles have been considered, starting with
weak square, □∗
κ, which was deﬁned by Jensen by allowing κ many club subsets
of each α < κ+ instead of only one. In particular, some of the scale and club
guessing principles which Shelah has introduced in connection with his pcf theory
can be regarded as weak versions of □κ. Little of this theory is relevant, however,
to this history: since square holds in the inner models we are discussing, the study
of weaker properties is moot. The reader may see the chapter [Kojman, 2011],
covering singular cardinal combinatorics, for more about these properties.
Following the completion of [Jensen, 1972], Jensen went on to prove that the
gap-1 transfer property is true in L. The gap-1 transfer property states that if
α > β+ are cardinals then any theory which has a model of type (α, β) also has
models of type (κ++, κ) for any cardinal κ. For this he deﬁned a new combinatorial
structure, which he called a gap-1 morass, and used the ﬁne structure to show
that such a morasses exists in L on every cardinal.
The gap-1 ω2-morass, for
example, expressed Jω2 as an intricate direct limit of countable structures. This
structure permitted a structure of size ω2 to be deﬁned as a limit of recursively
deﬁned countable models, in somewhat the same way as Chang’s original proof
that (α+, α) →(ω1, ω) constructed a model of size ω1 as a limit of countable
models.
From here, Jensen went on to deﬁne gap-n morasses for each n ∈ω, and he
used these to prove transfer theorems with larger gaps: If V = L and n ∈ω then
(λ+n, λ) →(κ+n, κ) for any inﬁnite cardinals λ and κ. Part of the motivation here
was in the hope that this would lead to a solution to the leading open problem

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
429
of set theory of the time: the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis (SCH). The hope was
this construction would lead to a forcing notion over L which would give a model
in which 2ωn = ωn+1 for all n < ω, but 2ωω > ωω+1. The actual outcome was
quite diﬀerent.
Before continuing, it is worth noting that while the combinatorial principles
described above had their origin in the constructible universe L, they have largely
moved away from constructivity and inner model theory in general — indeed a
primary part of the motivation for their deﬁnition was to abstract away from L
the combinatorial properties used in applications. This is not true of the next
topic: the covering lemma remains tightly tied to the inner model program and
has remained at its center.
3.1
The Singular Cardinal Hypothesis and the covering lemma
The origins of the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis are described in chapter [Kanamori,
2011b]. Shortly after Cohen’s proof of the independence of the Continuum Hy-
pothesis, Easton [1970] completely settled the general question of the size of the
power sets of regular cardinals; however this left the size of the power set of a
singular cardinal λ completely open. The Singular Cardinals Hypothesis, SCH, is
the assertion that λcf(λ) = max(λ+, 2cf(λ)) for every singular cardinal λ. For the
case when λ is a strong limit cardinal, this can be simpliﬁed to 2λ = λ+. Easton’s
model satisﬁes SCH, but Silver showed that a model in which SCH failed could
be constructed by starting with a κ++ supercompact cardinal. It was commonly
believed that no such hypothesis was necessary: there should be an Easton-like
theorem for singular cardinals with no large cardinal hypothesis.
While trying to prove such a theorem for singular cardinals, Silver in 1974
(cf. [1975]) discovered a new restriction to the size of the power set of a singular
cardinal: Suppose that λ is a singular cardinal of uncountable coﬁnality, and 2γ =
γ+ for stationarily many γ < λ. Then 2λ = λ+. In particular, if λ is the ﬁrst
singular cardinal at which SCH fails, then λ has coﬁnality ω.
Silver’s proof started by using forcing to obtain a generic ultraﬁlter U on
PV (cf(λ)) extending the closed unbounded ﬁlter, and then considered the em-
bedding iU : V →M = Ult(V, U). The model M is not well-founded; however if
we set ¯λ = sup{ i(α) : α < λ } then the ordering in M of the set of ordinals below
¯λ is λ-like,2 and that of (¯λ+)M is λ+-like. Also M |= 2¯λ = ¯λ+ by the  Los theorem,
and from these facts he deduced that 2λ = λ+ in V .
Only a few weeks later, Jensen distributed a handwritten note entitled Margina-
lia to a Theorem of Silver [Jensen, 1974b], which gave the ﬁrst statement of the
covering lemma. In spite of the name of the note, the proof of the covering lemma
is not closely related to the proof of Silver’s theorem: the only thing they have in
common is that both involve embeddings on a singular cardinal. A close reading of
2A linear ordering (R, ≤) is said to be λ-like, where λ is a cardinal, if R has size λ but each
proper initial segment has size less than λ.

430
William J. Mitchell
the main theorem of [Jensen, 1974b] gives a hint as to how thinking about Silver’s
result led Jensen to the covering lemma.
The main theorem of [Jensen, 1974b] is in three parts, all of which concern
a singular cardinal β of uncountable coﬁnality. The ﬁrst part, Theorem I(i), is
essentially a straightforward application of Silver’s method, though Jensen (in-
dependently of Baumgartner and Prikry) eliminated the use of forcing from the
proof: Assume that A ⊆β is such that3 Lβ[A] = Hβ and 2λ = λ+ on a stationary
subset of β, and that cfL(β) = cf(β) and (β+)L = β+. Then P(β) ⊆L[A]. The
second part, Theorem I(ii), applies Theorem I(i) in the special case A = ∅. The
hypothesis that 2λ = λ+ for all λ < β follows automatically from the hypothesis
that Hβ = Lβ, but there remain the awkward extra assumptions cfL(β) = cf(β)
and (β+)L = β+. Jensen used his newly developed ﬁne structure to show that
these assumptions also follow automatically. Consider, for example, the statement
that cfL(β) = cf(β). Jensen used the singularity of β to obtain an elementary
substructure X of Lβ of size cf(β) < β such that X ∩β is coﬁnal in β. By the
condensation property, there is an isomorphism π: L ¯β ∼= X ≺Lβ for some ¯β < β.
Since Hβ = Lβ, the preimage ¯σ of σ is in L. In particular, ¯β is singular in L. Let
¯α ≥¯β be least such that ¯β is singular in L¯α+1.
To complete the proof, Jensen introduced two innovations.
First, he gener-
alized the ultrapower construction to extend the embedding π to an embedding
˜π: L¯α →Lα for some α ≥β. This generalization later gave rise to the notion
of an extender, which has become central to the theory of inner models for large
cardinals. Second, an upward extension of embeddings principle, a counterpart to
the downward extension of embeddings principle used for the □principles, en-
abled this extension to be further extended to preserve the deﬁnition over L¯α of
a witness to the singularity of ¯β. It followed that the same deﬁnition, applied to
Lα, gave a witness to the singularity of β: thus β was singular in L.
In Theorem I(iii) Jensen let this argument stand on its own, and replaced the
hypothesis that Lβ = Hβ with the much weaker assumption that 0# does not
exist. The result is recognizably the covering lemma (for uncountable coﬁnality):
if β is a singular cardinal with cf(β) > ω, and if cfL(β) = β or (β+)L < β+, then
0# exists.
The argument again uses the embedding π as an extender: If ¯σ is not singular
in L then π can be extended to a nontrivial map ˜π: L →L, which by Kunen’s
theorem implies that 0# exists.
The restriction in [Jensen, 1974b] to cardinals β of uncountable coﬁnality came
from the need to show that the target of the extended embedding ˜π, which was
obtained by the use of π as an extender, was well-founded. The main theorem
of the second note, [Jensen, 1974c], removes this restriction: Assume ¬0#. Then
cfL(λ) ≥ω2
=⇒
cf(λ) = cfL(λ). The proof replaces the previous use of the
assumption that cf(λ) > ω with the facts that λ+ and ω1 each have uncountable
coﬁnality. The use of ω1 in the proof dictates the restriction cfL(λ) ≥ω2. As he
3Here Hβ is the set of all sets which are hereditarily of size less than β, that is, sets whose
transitive closure has size less than β.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
431
remarks, it would be “reasonable but wrong to suppose the theorem to hold for
cf(λ) ≥ω1” because of the counterexample in [Namba, 1971].
The third and ﬁnal note in this series, [Jensen, 1974a], gives the ﬁnal form
to the statement of the covering lemma: “Theorem: Assume ¬0#. Let X be an
uncountable set of ordinals. Then there is a set Y ∈L such that |X| = |Y | and
X ⊆Y .” He lists as consequences all of the results in the two earlier notes.
As we have seen, the ﬁne structure was a basic component of Jensen’s proof
of the covering lemma; however some have considered its use to be a ﬂaw in the
theory.
Silver has given a proof which avoids ﬁne structure by using what he
called “machines”; these machines were perhaps simpler than the ﬁne structure
but were, at least in this author’s opinion, less intuitive. In any case they have
not been generalized to the larger theory described in the rest of this chapter.
Another proof, due to Magidor [1990], replaces the ﬁne structure with the na¨ıve
Skolem function for Σn sets: using, for a Σn relation R over Lα, the function
h(x) = µy R(x, y). This function is not Σn-deﬁnable over Lα, but surprisingly
the covering lemma can be proved by replacing the use of the Σn code Cn(Jα)
with the closure of Jα under the function h. Magidor has had some success in
generalizing this method to core models with sequences of measurable cardinals,
but unfortunately it does not appear to be suitable even for the full theory of such
sequences, let alone the larger core models we describe in section 5.3.
The main result of Magidor’s paper [1990] cited above gave an interesting al-
ternate conclusion from the proof of the covering lemma: If 0# does not exist then
every primitively closed set of ordinals is a countable union of sets in L. Another
interesting development is the strong covering theorem, an observation contained
in an unpublished note of Carlson: If 0# does not exists, then for any pair of
uncountable cardinals δ < κ, with δ regular, there is a set C ⊆[κ]δ in L which is
unbounded and closed under increasing unions of sequences of length δ.
4
THE CORE MODEL
4.1
Up to one measurable cardinal
It now seemed that, with the new machinery available, the truth in L of any ques-
tion could be decided, and attention turned to larger models. An obvious choice
was L[U], and Solovay extended Jensen’s ﬁne structure to L[U] and veriﬁed that
♦κ and □κ held there for all κ. However, while the model L[U] is, in many re-
spects, a suitable generalization of L, it has number of defects centering on the
fact that its construction requires a known ultraﬁlter U. In some applications this
problem was overcome, notably in the use by Solovay and Kunen of models L[F],
where F was the cardinal ﬁlter or the closed unbounded ﬁlter, under hypotheses
which implied that F became an ultraﬁlter in L[F]. The usefulness of such strate-
gies was limited, however. There is, for example, no evident ﬁlter associated with
the failure of Singular Cardinal Hypothesis. Furthermore, the model L[U] gives
little insight into large cardinal properties lying between L and L[U]: it does not

432
William J. Mitchell
for example, provide a minimal model for a Ramsey cardinal.
Jensen and Anthony Dodd started with Solovay’s ﬁne structure for L[U], but
took it in a diﬀererent direction. Instead of assuming that there is a model L[U]
with a measurable cardinal, they used approximations to such a model, which they
called mice. There have been many conjectures as to where the name “mouse”
came from but, according to Jensen, he chose the term simply because he felt that
the concept was important and he wanted to give it a name which had not been
used elsewhere in mathematics. A mouse is a structure M = Jα[U] which has three
properties: (i) it satisﬁes the statement that U is a measure on some κ, (ii) all
of its iterated ultrapowers are well-founded, and (iii) it admits a ﬁne structure
analysis, with projectum ρM smaller than the critical point of the ultrapower. The
paradigmatic example of a mouse comes from 0#. If U is a measure on κ, then
Jκ+1[U] is equal to Jκ+1, but 0# is Σ1-deﬁnable in the structure (Jκ+1[U], ∈, U):
the G¨odel number ⌜φ(c0, . . . , cn)⌝is in 0# if and only if
∃X ∈U n ∩Jκ+1[U] ∀(ν0, . . . , νn−1) ∈X Jκ+1[U] |= φ(ν0, . . . , νn−1).
This fact is rather awkward for the ﬁne structure of L[U], taken by itself: what is
“ﬁne” about a subset of ω which does not appear until after a measurable cardinal?
Taking the transitive collapse of the Σ1-Skolem hull of Jκ+1[U], however, gives a
countable structure M = J¯κ+1[ ¯U], over which 0# is similarly deﬁnable. Thus M
and 0# are equiconstructible.
Another way to view the equivalence between M and 0# is to take an iterated
ultrapower of M of length Ω, the class of ordinals. In the resulting class model, the
measurable cardinal is Ωand the initial segment below Ωis isomorphic to L, with
the critical points of the embedding being the Silver indiscernibles. This can be
compared with [Gaifman, 1974], in which he started with a countable substructure
of an appropriate Vτ containing a measurable cardinal, and obtained a countable
model X whose iterations generated a closed unbounded class of inaccessibles of
L containing the cardinals of V . The 0# mouse M is the ultimate reﬁnement of
Gaifman’s model X, and is the weakest Dodd-Jensen mouse.
It is important to realize that the measure U in a mouse M = Jα[U] is not
a measure in V ; indeed the ﬁne structure analysis ensures that Jα+1 |= |α| =
ρM < crit(U), so that U is not a measure in any model larger than M. Thus if
M = Jα[U] and Jα′[U ′] are two mice then neither is an initial part of the other,
as always happens at two levels Jα and Jα′ of the L hierarchy. However the mice
M and M ′ can be compared by use of iterated ultrapowers, as Kunen did with
L[U] and L[U ′], because the fact that a mouse M has a ﬁne structure, and that its
projectum ρ is smaller than its critical point, ensures that the iterated ultrapowers
will preserve the deﬁnition of the new subset of its projectum ρ. Thus the ﬁne
structure of a mouse can be used to ensure the criterion of equal comparison from
section 2.4, similarly to the way φ-minimality was used at that point.
The use of comparison by iterated ultrapowers gave a well-ordering of the mice,
deﬁned by setting M ⊳M ′ if M is a member of an iterated ultrapower of M ′. This
opened the way for Dodd and Jensen to deﬁne the core model as L[M], where M

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
433
is the class of all mice. Although they called this model K, we will refer to it as
KDJ to distinguish it from later generalizations. Using properties of mice, they
showed that KDJ had most of the basic properties of L: It is a model of ZFC, it has
a condensation property and hence satisﬁes GCH, and it satisﬁes ♦κ and □κ for
all cardinals κ. One important diﬀerence was in the complexity of its deﬁnition:
while a model M = Jα need only be well-founded to be an initial segment of L,
a model M = Jα[U] must have all of its iterated ultrapowers well-founded. This
meant that for x ⊆ω, the formula “x ∈KDJ ” is Σ1
3 while the sentence “x ∈L” is
Σ1
2, and thus the canonical well-ordering of the reals of K is ∆1
3 as in L[U], instead
of ∆1
2 as in L.
Dodd and Jensen showed that KDJ bridged the gap between L and L[U] in the
sense that we would have KDJ = L in the event 0# did not exist, while if there were
a model L[U] with a measure U on κ, then KDJ was equal to the initial ordinal
length segment of UltON(L[U], U) or, equivalently, to T
α∈ON Ultα(L[U], U). In
particular, V KDJ
κ
= V L[U]
κ
.
Finally, they proved a pair of covering lemmas. The covering lemma stated for
KDJ in [Dodd and Jensen, 1982a] assumed that there is no inner model with a
measurable cardinal and had the same statement as that for L: If there is no inner
model with a measurable cardinal, then for any uncountable set x of ordinals there
is a set y ⊇x in KDJ of the same cardinality. The following paper, [Dodd and
Jensen, 1982b], assumed that a model L[U] with a measurable cardinal existed,
but 0†, the sharp of L[U], did not. Here the conclusion bifurcated. As Prikry
had shown in his thesis [1970], there is a forcing notion which, given a measurable
cardinal κ, adds an ω sequence C of ordinals, coﬁnal in κ, without collapsing
any cardinals.
However the necessary modiﬁcation to the covering lemma was
minimal. With the term “covering property” having the expected meaning from
above: Suppose that U is a measure in L[U], the critical point κ is as small as
possible, and 0† does not exist. Then either L[U] has the covering property, or else
there is a Prikry sequence C such that the model L[U, C] has the covering property.
Furthermore the model L[U, C] is unique, though the sequence C is unique only
up to ﬁnite changes.
The ﬁrst publication of this work was in a handwritten note, [Dodd and Jensen,
1976] titled A Modest Remark. The title referred not to the covering lemma, but
to an alleged theorem claiming that the existence of a measurable cardinal was
inconsistent with ZF. The error was quickly discovered independently by several
parties in widespread locations: Jensen had incorrectly assumed that a cardinal
κ of coﬁnality ω could be collapsed onto ω1 without also collapsing κ+. Jensen
had, as he admitted, written and hurriedly distributed the note without consulting
its putative coauthor Dodd. In spite of the error, this note provided a valuable
early exposition of Dodd and Jensen’s theory of the core model.
The formal
publication of the theory came in three papers: [Dodd and Jensen, 1981] gave
the basic construction of KDJ and the two papers [Dodd and Jensen, 1982a] and
[Dodd and Jensen, 1982b] gave the proof of the covering lemma for KDJ and L[U]
respectively. In addition Dodd wrote a book, [Dodd, 1982], giving an exposition

434
William J. Mitchell
of KDJ and looking towards extensions of this model.
They showed that, just as the existence of a nontrivial embedding i: L →L
implies that 0# exists, the existence of a nontrivial embedding i: KDJ →KDJ
implies that there is a model L[U] with a measurable cardinal. Where the critical
point of an embedding i: L →L is always a Silver indiscernible, however, Jensen
showed in [2001] (see also [Mitchell, 2010b, Theorem 3.43]) the critical point of an
embedding i: KDJ →KDJ may be smaller than the measurable cardinal in L[U].
The most important immediate consequence of the Dodd-Jensen core model
theory is that a failure of the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis entails that 0†, the
sharp for a model L[U] with a measure, exists. The proof of this implication was
the same as the proof using L: the three coveriing lemmas of Jensen and Dodd
imply that if 0† does not exist, then one of the models KDJ, L[U] or L[U, C] has
the covering property. Since all of these models satisfy GCH, this implies that
SCH holds in V .
An important later consequence was Jensen’s extension in [Donder et al., 1981]
of Shoenﬁeld’s theorem [Shoenﬁeld, 1961] that any model M of set theory contain-
ing ω1 is absolute for Σ1
2 formulas. Jensen’s theorem stated: Assume a# exists for
every real a, and that there is no inner model with a measurable cardinal. Then
KDJ is absolute for Σ1
3 formulas.
His proof actually showed that the same is true
of any model M ⊇KDJ.
Another consequence of the Dodd-Jensen covering lemma was a generalization,
due to Mitchell, of Kunen’s theorem [1970] that all J´onsson cardinals in L[U] are
Ramsey: Mitchell [1979b] showed that all J´onsson cardinals in V are Ramsey in
KDJ. It followed that a minimal model for a Ramsey cardinal could be constructed
by taking the least initial segment of KDJ which satisﬁes that there is a Ramsey
cardinal. This was generalized by Jensen in [Donder et al., 1981] to show that
any δ-Erd˝os, and even any δ-J´onsson cardinal, is δ-Erd˝os in KDJ. Thus the core
model provides minimal models for these cardinals.
Before going on, a word about terminology is in order. At this point we have
three covering lemmas for three diﬀerent models: for the model L if 0# does not
exist, for the Dodd-Jensen core model KDJ if 0# exists but L[U] does not, and for
L[U] if it exists but 0† does not. In the current terminology any of these models
would, under the appropriate hypothesis, be called the core model and written as
K. Much of the rest of this chapter is concerned with the continuing eﬀort to
extend this theory to encompass larger cardinals.
It will be useful here to consider some of the properties of the core model as
described so far in the article in order to get some sense of what can be expected of
larger core models, both those in the remainder of this history and those to come in
the future. One such property is that the model is structured in a hierarchy, with
each step in the hierarchy containing only sets which self-evidently must be in any
model containing the previous steps of the hierarchy together with a measurable
cardinal. Thus the result is guaranteed to be the smallest possible model of set
theory containing all of the ordinals and every fragment of a measurable cardinal.
Following this intuition, the model which is today called the core model, and is

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
435
denoted by the symbol K, can be deﬁned — as a goal, though not mathematically
— as the minimal model of ZFC containing all of the large cardinal structure
existing in the universe (cf. [Mitchell, 2010a], section 5).
Some of the other properties of the core model K, whether L, KDJ or L[U],
described so far provide evidence that the core model constructions described thus
far satisfy this deﬁnition, provided that 0† does not exist. The core model is rigid,
in the sense that there is no nonidentity embedding i: K →K, although this
sense of rigidity is weakened in the case of L[U] by the existence of embeddings
i: L[U] →M given by iterated ultrapowers. The core model is absolute: in the
case K = L or K = KDJ this is true in the strong sense that KM = K ∩M for any
uncountable model M of set theory, but again the statement in the case K = L[U]
is weaker as KM may be an iterated ultrapower of L[U].
Finally, the covering lemma shows that the model K is close to V ; again, the
statement of the covering lemma is signiﬁcantly weakened in the case K = L[U].
4.2
More measures
The obvious next step was to incorporate the new core model theory into Mitchell’s
model L[U] for a sequence of measures, thereby extending the core model construc-
tion to include any number of measures. Mitchell had been attempting to do so
even before Dodd and Jensen completed their work on KDJ. Now, with notes
available on the Dodd-Jensen techniques, he was able to proceed.
Mitchell called his model K(F); however we will write K[F], using square
brackets to agree with the standard notation for relative constructibility.
The
sequence F was a sequence of ﬁlters in V , which was intended to become a sequence
of ultraﬁlters in K[F]; however it is noteworthy that neither the deﬁnition of K[F]
nor the ﬁne structure analysis made any use of the structure of F: what is deﬁned
is really a relativized core model, built above an arbitrary set F.4
The model K[F] was deﬁned to be L[F, M], where M was the class of structures
called F-mice. The part of this work which was published in [Mitchell, 1984a]
ended at the point where ﬁne structure was to be introduced. It proved that the
model K[F] was the union of the class of F-mice, and that if F was strong —
that is, it was a coherent iterable sequence of measures in K[F] — then K[F] was
a model of ZFC + GCH + the set of reals has a ∆1
3 well-ordering + every normal
ultraﬁlter is a member the sequence F.
The rest of this paper was never published, though it had some distribution as
the manuscript [Mitchell, 1985]. Section 4, which analyzed the ﬁne structure of
the model, took up more than half of this manuscript, 65 out of about 110 double-
spaced pages. Much of this was a straightforward extension of the Dodd-Jensen
ﬁne structure of L[U], as extended to sequences of measures by using Mitchell’s
techniques from L[U]. An F-mouse M was a structure Jα[G], where G has F as an
initial segment and, above that, a coherent sequence of measures corresponding to
4Of course this statement assumes (as will we, unless stated otherwise) that F is not a proper
class.

436
William J. Mitchell
the single measure in the Dodd-Jensen mice. Some technical adaptations were, of
course, needed to accommodate new sets being directly deﬁned from the members
of the sequence, and from the fact of working above the arbitrary set F. The major
complication involved the criterion of equal comparison: a new complement was
needed to the use of mice, as described in section 2.4. We will return to this point
when we look at the Dodd-Jensen lemma, which is a more general alternative to
the technical trick used in this paper.
Only at this point was it possible to prove the crucial observation that if F is
strong then K[F↾α] ⊆K[F], and in particular that the deﬁnition of K[F] in the
case that F is a proper class, K[F] = S
α∈ON K[F↾α], makes sense.
Perhaps the most important change from Dodd and Jensen’s analysis of KDJ
is that the ﬁne structure analysis took on a new role: it enabled a sequence F
to be deﬁned by recursion. More speciﬁcally, the main theorem of section 4 was:
Suppose F is a sequence of ﬁlters such that for each (α, β) in the domain of F,
the ﬁlter F(α, β) (i) is a normal ultraﬁlter of order β on K[F↾(α, β)] and (ii) is
countably complete.
Then F is strong in the sense that each ﬁlter F(α, β) in
the sequence F is an ultraﬁlter in K[F]. This was used to deﬁne a preliminary
version of the core model, which is now known as Kc, the countably complete core
model, by setting Kc equal to the model K[F] where F is the maximal sequence
of countably complete measures, deﬁned recursively by adding a ﬁlter F(α, β)
whenever it satisﬁes the criterion above.
A full covering lemma, in the style of that in the case that the core model is
equal to L or KDJ, or even L[U], is not possible for these models. Mitchell in-
stead used what the reader may recognize as Jensen’s ﬁrst version of the covering
lemma in [Jensen, 1974b]: he said that an inner model M satisﬁes the weak cov-
ering lemma if, for every suﬃciently large strong limit cardinal λ, the successor
(λ+)M of λ as evaluated in M is the same as the successor λ+ as calculated in V .
Mitchell used recursion to deﬁne what came to be known as the countably complete
(later, with Steel’s work, countably certiﬁed) core model Kc = K[F], by requiring
that each ﬁlter F(α, β) on the sequence F be a countably complete K[F↾(α, β)]-
ultraﬁlter. The countable completeness ensured that all iterated ultrapowers were
well-founded, and this in turn allowed the use of ﬁne structure to show that each
ﬁlter F(α, β) was still an ultraﬁlter in the full model Kc. Mitchell’s proof that
Kc has the weak covering property was essentially the same as Dodd and Jensen’s
proof that KDJ has the covering property, here applied to κ = (λ+)Kc which has,
if it is smaller than λ+ of V , coﬁnality less than λ.
One important consequence of the weak covering lemma is that it provides a new
technique for satisfying the criterion of equal comparison: a model K[F] which
satisﬁes the weak covering property is universal in the sense that when K[F] is
compared, using iterated ultrapowers, with any other model K[F′] then the model
K[F] will compare at least as long as K[F′]: the ﬁnal model in the iteration of
K[F′] will always be an initial segment of the ﬁnal model in the iteration of K[F].
In particular, if K[F′] is also universal then the ﬁnal models of the two iterations
will be equal.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
437
The weak covering lemma not only showed that Kc is universal; it also provided
a criterion for the transitive collapse of an elementary submodel X ≺Kc to be
universal. This criterion is a counterpart to the particular case of condensation
for L that any elementary subset of L which contains a proper class of ordinals is
isomorphic to L. For K[F] it was not enough to assume that X is a proper class:
Mitchell deﬁned X to be thick if, for a stationary class of singular cardinals λ the
order type of X ∩λ+ is equal to λ+. It follows from the weak covering lemma that
not only is Kc universal, but also the transitive collapse of any thick class X ≺Kc
is universal. This fact was used in Section 7 to obtain the true core model, which
was written K[FM] but today would be written simply as K. The sequence FM
was deﬁned recursively in the same way as Fc, but with countable completeness
replaced with the requirement that Ult(K[G], F(α, β)) be well-founded whenever
G is a strong sequence which extends F↾(α, β). This fact was used to show that
K[FM] is iterable by showing that it is an elementary submodel of Kc.
Consequences of the covering lemma for sequences of measures
The unpublished article [Mitchell, 1985] concluded with a number of applications of
the weak covering lemma in K: Any of the following assertions imply the existence
of an inner model of ∃κ o(κ) = κ++:
(i) κ and κ+ are both weakly compact,
(ii) κ is κ+ strongly compact, (iii) κ is measurable and κ+ > (κ+)K[F], (iv) κ is
measurable and 2κ > κ+, (v) there is a κ-complete ultraﬁlter U on κ such that
iU(κ) = κ+ (in particular, the Axiom of Determinacy holds), (vi) every κ-complete
ﬁlter can be extended to a κ-complete ultraﬁlter, or (vii) there is a κ+-saturated
ideal on a successor cardinal κ.
These results relied on consequences of the weak covering lemma, and in par-
ticular on one which did not originally appear, at least in its strongest form,
in [Mitchell, 1985], but was added as an addendum dated July 1985 after Steel
pointed out its omission: If there is no inner model of ∃κ o(κ) = κ++ then every
elementary embedding i: K[FM] →N into a well-founded model N is an iterated
ultrapower by measures in FM.
The arguments from K used in this proof seemed much stronger than the core
model K itself, and it was expected that, once larger core models had been con-
structed, the same arguments would yield a stronger conclusion. This turned out
to be true for all but clause (iii): A closer at this look led Mitchell to make the
suggestion that ∃κ o(κ) = κ++ was the exact large cardinal strength of the failure
of GCH at a measurable cardinal; this suggestion was later conﬁrmed by work of
Woodin (using a slightly stronger assumption) and Gitik [1989].
Of the the topics one might have expected to see in [Mitchell, 1985], two were
omitted. One was the weak covering lemma for the case of cardinals κ which are
not countably closed, that is, such that λω ≥κ for some λ < κ, and the other was
the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis, or, indeed, any version of the covering lemma
beyond the weak covering lemma. The ﬁrst of these was the less consequential,
but took the longest to resolve: the proof for κ which are not ω closed does not

438
William J. Mitchell
require any techniques except those in [Mitchell, 1985], together with those used
for L in [Jensen, 1974c]; however no published, or even manuscript, exposition of
the extension of the covering lemma for sequences of measures to the non-closed
case appeared until [Mitchell and Schimmerling, 1995] (for a much more powerful
version of the core model).
Applying this model to the SCH problem was much more troublesome. The
most complicated case of the Dodd-Jensen covering lemma is that in which 0†
does not exist and there is a model L[U] with a measurable cardinal, along with
a Prikry sequence C for that measure. Then the model L[U, C] provides covering
sets. The set C is not quite unique — this is a change from previous versions of the
covering lemma — but the model L[U, C] is unique. Mitchell showed in [Mitchell,
1984b] that a straightforward generalization of this is false in general. If λ is an
inaccessible limit of a set I of measurable cardinals in V , then there is a generic
extension V [G] in which each κ ∈I is made singular by a Prikry sequence over
V , but there is no sequence of Prikry sequences which is uniform: that is, for any
sequence ⟨Cκ : κ ∈I ⟩of Prikry sequences there is a sequence of sets ⟨Aκ : κ ∈I ⟩
in the ground model such that each set Aκ is a member of the measure on κ, but
nevertheless { κ ∈I : Cκ ⊈Aκ } is unbounded in κ.
In this model, there is a uniform sequence of Prikry sequences for each subset
of I which is bounded in κ, and this proved to be the general situation. Mitchell
deﬁned a notion of a system of indiscernibles which generalized, in a natural way,
the notion of a Prikry sequence, and he proved a version of the covering lemma
stating that for any uncountable set X in V , there is a system C of indiscernibles
for K such that X is contained in a set Y ∈K[C] of the same cardinality. However
the system C is, in contrast to the case in the Dodd-Jensen covering lemma for
L[U, C], essentially local: it depends on the set X, and its size is at most that of
X. Furthermore, while there is a sense in which the choice of C is, on its domain,
unique up to ﬁnite variations, this is not enough to directly generalize the Jensen
proof that the nonexistence of 0# implies SCH.
This version of the covering lemma was published in [Mitchell, 1987], which
included several of its consquences.
The simplest of these gave a converse to
Magidor’s construction in [Magidor, 1978]: Suppose that there is no inner model
satisfying ∃κ o(κ) = κ++, and that λ is a singular cardinal of uncountable coﬁnal-
ity δ which is regular in K. Then o(λ) ≥δ in K. An additional result in [Mitchell,
1987] showed that if there is a model of ZF in which the closed unbounded ultra-
ﬁlter on ω1 is an ultraﬁlter then κ is a (weak) repeat point, a result which Mitchell
later showed (in unpublished work) is best possible. A ﬁnal result considered the
model L[i], constructed from an embedding i: V →M: it was shown that if there
is no inner model of ∃κ o(κ) = κ++ then the model L[i] contains an iterate of the
core model K, and is equal to an iterate of K if the embedding is an ultrapower
embedding i: V →Ult(V, U).
Several succeeding papers yielded further consequences: notably [Mitchell, 1991],
which characterized the ways (assuming no inner model of ∃κ o(κ) = κ++) in which
a cardinal could become singular. Not until [Mitchell, 1992b] did he publish the

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
439
partial results he obtained on the strength of SCH, and by this time [Gitik, 1991]
had already appeared, giving the ﬁnal solution to this question: If SCH fails,
then there is an inner model satisfying ∃κ o(κ) = κ++. Gitik’s proof of this result
required deep techniques from Shelah’s pcf theory in addition to Mitchell’s results.
As related above, he had already strengthened a result of Woodin to prove that
the existence of such a model is suﬃcient to obtain a forcing extension in which κ
is measurable and 2κ = κ++, and hence one in which SCH failed.
At about the same time, Mitchell [1992a] generalized Jensen’s absoluteness re-
sult mentioned earlier: Suppose that there is no inner model of ∃κ o(κ) = κ++, a#
exists for every real a, and M is a model containing K, or an iterated ultrapower
of K. Then every Σ1
3 formula true in V is true in M. But, as we shall see, Steel
shortly afterward had a stronger result, which was actually published earlier.
5
EXTENDER MODELS: WOODIN CARDINALS AND BEYOND
5.1
Moving beyond measurable cardinals
With the core model understood up to ∃κ o(κ) = κ++, both Mitchell and the
team of Dodd and Jensen turned their attention to larger cardinals. The smallest
of these was a µ-measurable cardinal, deﬁned in [Mitchell, 1979a] to be a cardinal
κ such that there exists an embedding i: V →M with κ = crit(i) such that
the induced ultraﬁlter µ = { x ⊆κ : κ ∈i(x) } is a member of M.
Such an
embedding cannot be obtained from an ultrapower using a normal ultraﬁlter, but
it can be obtained by using a nonnormal ultraﬁlter on Vκ, namely W = { x ⊆
Vκ : µ ∈i(x) }.
The next natural step beyond a µ-measurable cardinal is a
P2(κ) strong cardinal, that is, a cardinal κ with an embedding i: V →M such
that P2(κ) ⊆M. Such an embedding cannot be represented by a ultraﬁlter on
Vκ, since any such ultraﬁlter would be a member of M. Thus signiﬁcant progress
beyond ∃κ o(κ) = κ++ depended on the invention of a more ﬂexible representation
for large cardinal embeddings.
Such a representation was discovered by Mitchell [1979a] and subsequently sim-
pliﬁed by Jensen. Of these two, it was Jensen’s formulation which has become
standard. This notion, which Jensen called an extender, is the same construction
as was used to extend the collapse embedding in the proof of the covering lemma.
An embedding i: V →M, with critical point κ is said to be an ultrapower by a
(κ, λ)-extender if crit(i) = κ and M = { i(f)(a) : a ∈[λ]<ω }. In this case the
(κ, λ)-extender E such that M = Ult(V, E) can be represented as a sequence of
ultraﬁlters ⟨Ea : a ∈[λ]<ω ⟩, with Ea = { x ∈κ|a| : a ∈i(x) }. The embedding i
is then a direct limit of the ultrapower embeddings ia : V →Ult(V, Ea), with the
image of [f]Ea in Ult(V, E) being written as [f]E,a.
Mitchell’s construction in [Mitchell, 1979a] was eﬀectively the same, but com-
plicated by using, instead of all ordinals less than λ, only the generators of the
embedding i, that is, the set of ordinals α < λ such that α ̸= i(f(a)) for any
a ∈[α]<ω. This decision to separate out the generators proved to be unnecessary

440
William J. Mitchell
and undesirable: for example, the question of which ordinals are generators de-
pends on the power set of κ, and hence may diﬀer between an embedding i: V →M
and the restriction of that embedding to an inner model.
Jensen’s notion of an extender had a side eﬀect of eliminating a signiﬁcant
complication in Mitchell’s models L[U]:
the need for coherence functions.
If
α < β < o(κ) then the requirement that U(κ, α) ⊳U(κ, β) entails that there is
a function f ∈κκ such that α = [f]U(α,β). Mitchell’s core model construction, for
example, required special care to ensure that no measure U(κ, β) was used in the
construction until all of its coherence functions had appeared. If this same model
is recast by representing the measures as extenders then this becomes unnecessary:
the measure U = U(κ, β) has the single generator κ and is most conservatively
represented as a (κ, κ + 1) extender; however it can be equivalently represented as
a (κ, λ) extender for any λ > κ. If λ ≥β then, since α = i(id)(α), where id is the
identity function, we can write α = [id]U(κ,β),{α} for all α < β. Thus the identity
function is the only coherence function needed.
In addition to Mitchell, Dodd and Baldwin both started using extenders to
construct models with larger cardinals. All three claimed, at least brieﬂy, to be
able to deal with cardinals up to a superstrong cardinal, that is, a cardinal κ with
an embedding i: V →M with Vi(κ) ⊆M; however their actual success was much
more modest.
The extension of the models was straightforward up to a strong cardinal, that is,
a cardinal κ such that for each λ > κ there is an elementary embedding i: V →M
with Vλ ⊆M. This, however, was only a short step towards a superstrong cardinal,
and cardinals larger than this presented a new diﬃculty. Recall that one of the
three criteria given in Section 2.4 for the success of a comparison by iterating the
least diﬀerences was that generators not be moved. The use of the term “moving
generators” at that point in the history was somewhat anachronistic: since the
only generator of a normal ultraﬁlter U is its critical point, the coherence of the
sequence of ultraﬁlters was enough to ensure that no generators were moved. For a
(κ, λ)-extender E, in contrast, every ordinal in the interval [κ, λ) is a generator, so
that the principle of no moving generators would seem to require that if E is used
in an iteration, then the rest of the iteration cannot involve any (κ′, λ′)-extender
E′ with κ′ < λ. This diﬃculty begins to occur as soon as there is a cardinal
which is strong past the next measurable cardinal, that is, a cardinal κ having an
embedding i: V →M with critical point κ such that some cardinal λ > κ has a
measure U such that U ∈M. While the problem of moving generators can easily
be dealt with at this level, a general solution turned out to be much more elusive.
A secondary problem at this level involves the indexing of the sequence. The
indexing U(κ, β) used by Mitchell relied on the fact that given two measures on
diﬀerent cardinals, the one on the larger cardinal is stronger. Again, this is always
true up to a strong cardinal, where a cardinal κ is strong if for any λ there is
an elementary embedding i: V →M with critical point κ such that Vλ ⊆M.
However, if κ is a strong cardinal, and there is also an extender E′ with critical
point κ′ > κ, then there is an extender E on κ such that E′ is in a member of the

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
441
codomain Ult(V, E) of the embedding iE, so that E′ ⊳E.
Of the three working on the problem at this time, Baldwin [1986] was the only
one whose work was published, and the one whose work went furthest in terms of
the large cardinal properties accommodated. In order to deal with the problem
of moving generators, he relied on a diﬀerent, carefully deﬁned indexing of the
extenders, designed so that, although the iteration did have moving generators,
there was guaranteed to be a closed unbounded set of stages of the iteration where
the generators of the extender used were not later moved. This was suﬃcient to
ensure the success of the comparison — at least for the cardinals discussed in
the paper, which included hierarchies of what he called β-hypermeasurable and
β-hyperhypermeasurable cardinals. The apparent problem with Baldwin’s idea
was that there did not seem to be a clear scheme for ﬁnding a suitable indexing as
one moved to larger cardinals, and indeed Steel has asserted that Baldwin’s paper
came close to the limit of what can be achieved with such techniques.
The model described in Dodd’s notes [1984?] allowed for a class of strong car-
dinals, weaker than the cardinals in Baldwin’s model but enough to require con-
sideration of moving generators. Like Baldwin’s, it relied on a reindexing of the
sequence and on ﬁnding a closed unbounded set of stages of the iteration genera-
tors which were not moved, and it shared the shortcoming of Baldwin’s techniques.
However Dodd’s notes are important for introducing two new techniques into the
comparison process which became important for later developments. One of these
was the Dodd-Jensen lemma which, as was pointed out earlier, serves as an im-
portant complement to the use of mice in the veriﬁcation that the criterion of
equal comparison is satisﬁed. The lemma states that an iterated ultrapower is
minimal among all Σ0-elementary embeddings mapping into the same ﬁnal model;
more speciﬁcally: Suppose i: M →M ′ is an iterated ultrapower of the mouse M,
and σ: M →M ′ is a Σ0-elementary embedding. Then range(σ) is coﬁnal in M ′,
and σ(α) ≥i(α) for all ordinals α in M. A typical application occurs in the ﬁne
structure analysis: in this case σ = j ◦π, where π: M →Jα[E] arises from the
transitive collapse of a Skolem hull in Jα[E], and j and i are iterated ultrapowers
on M and Jα[E] respectively arising from the comparison of these models. The
model M can be treated as a mouse, and since its projectum is not moved by the
iterated ultrapower i on M this implies that the last model M ′ of this iteration is
not a proper initial segment of the last model of the iteration j of Jα[E]. It is not
immediately clear, however, that the embedding j does not move the projectum,
and hence the mouse criterion cannot be used to rule out the possibility that the
last model of the iteration j is a proper initial segment of M ′. The Dodd-Jensen
lemma does rule this out, since i is an iterated ultrapower and hence minimal.
There is some question about the origin of the Dodd-Jensen lemma. The au-
thor’s memory is that it came as a result of a message from Dodd pointing out
a hole in the author’s proposals. The author, after some thought, ﬁlled the hole,
and Dodd and Jensen turned his argument into a general lemma. The author
remembers doubting the general statement and being startled to be told that the
proof was his own. However Jensen has no memory of this, and it is likely that

442
William J. Mitchell
he and Dodd independently discovered the proof before the author’s letter was
received. However the author is certainly responsible for the current name of the
lemma.
The other new technique in [Dodd, 1984?], was the use of a larger model to
back up an iteration. As used by Dodd, this replaces the use of regarding M as
a mouse in the argument described in the second paragraph above. Supposing,
for the sake of contradiction, the iterated ultrapower of the collapsed model M
involves an extender E which moves the projectum of M, he instead applies the
extender E to the full model Jα[E], and institutes a comparison between Jα[E]
and Ult(Jα[E], E). Since both sides of this comparison may be regarded as iterated
ultrapowers of Jα[E], the Dodd-Jensen lemma may be applied to both sides, leading
to the conclusion that the two embeddings are equal. It follows that E was a
member of Jα[E], which contradicts the assumption that it was necessary to use it
in the original comparison. This technique was later developed into the structure
which Steel called a phalanx.
Overlapping extenders and iteration trees
At a talk at the 1979 Association of Symbolic Logic meeting in Biloxi, Mississippi,
the author conﬁdently asserted that an inner model for a supercompact cardinal
was at hand. This conﬁdence was largely based on a alternative technique of iter-
ation. This alternative, which seems to be forced if one wishes to exclude moving
generators, is to generalize the technique of iteration. The iterated ultrapowers
up to this point had been linear: they looked like
L[E] = M0
i0,1
−−→M1
i1,2
−−→· · · Mω
iω,ω+1
−−−−→Mω+1
iω+1,ω+2
−−−−−−→· · · Mθ
(5)
where θ is the length of the iteration. In this construction, each model Mα+1 is
the ultrapower of the previous model: Mα+1 = Ult(Mα, Eα) where Eα is the least
extender in the sequence i0,α(E) of Mα = L[i0,α(E)] which is not in the corre-
sponding sequence on the other side of the comparison. In the new construction,
the extender Eγ is chosen in the same way, but Mα+1 may be an ultrapower by
an earlier model in the sequence: Mα+1 = Ult(Mα∗, Eα) where α∗is the least
ordinal such that iEα moves generators of the extender Eα∗used to deﬁne Mα∗+1.
This gives a tree ordering, deﬁned by taking the ordinal α∗to be the immediate
predecessor of α + 1. If Mγ and Mγ′ are two models of the iteration, then the
iteration provides an embedding iγ,γ′ : Mγ →Mγ′ between them if and only if γ
precedes γ′ in the tree. Any branch of this tree looks like a linear iteration, except
that the extenders used to construct the embeddings along the branch may be
taken from models in other branches, rather than from the models to which they
are applied.
The resulting iteration trees satisfy the criterion of no moving generators, and
they can be used in much the same way as linear iterations.
In particular, a
comparison between two models L[E] and L[E′], using the process of iteration by

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
443
the least diﬀerence but organized as a tree iteration, will terminate if it can be
carried out far enough.
The use of nonlinear iterations eliminates moving generators, but introduces
a new diﬃculty: that of proving iterability, that is to say, verifying that the
comparison process can be carried out “far enough”. This has proved to be far
more diﬃcult than for linear iterations, for which iterability can be ensured simply
by using countably complete extenders. There was some question even at successor
stages: Since the extender Eα used to deﬁne Mα+1 is not a member of Mα∗, why
does Ult(Mα∗, Eα) even exist, and if it does, why is it well-founded? The primary
diﬃculty, however comes a limit stages. Suppose that the iteration has been carried
out for ν stages, where ν is a limit ordinal. If b is any branch of the tree (ν, ≺)
then iα,α′ is deﬁned for any α < α′ in b, so we can deﬁne Mb to be the direct limit
of the system (⟨Mα : α ∈b ⟩, ⟨iα,α′ : α ≺α′ ∈b ⟩). If there is a branch b which is
coﬁnal in the tree such that Mb is well-founded, then the model Mb is a possible
choice for Mν; however it is not evident that there will be any such branch. Indeed
it is not clear that the tree even has a coﬁnal branch b, let alone a well-founded
one; indeed, one could imagine a worst case in which α∗= 0 for all α > 0, so that
the tree has length ω, but every branch has length 2.
The author recalls attempting, while on the airplane home from Biloxi, to sub-
stantiate the claim which he had made of being on the verge of a model for a
supercompact cardinal, and being shocked on convincing himself that iterability
necessarily fails in the region of a supercompact cardinal. This conclusion was
later conﬁrmed by Neeman’s discovery [Neeman, 2004] of an inﬁnite iteration tree
with no branches of length 4.
This was a serious setback, since there seemed
to be no interesting cardinals between measurability and supercompactness, and
furthermore the problem of iterability seemed to be very diﬃcult even below a
supercompact cardinal.
Woodin cardinals
Discouraged, Mitchell essentially gave up work on such inner models; however
his Biloxi talk did have one important eﬀect: it attracted Steel to work on the
topic. Steel was largely ignorant of inner models, and did not understand the
later parts of the talk; however he was excited at the idea of models incorporat-
ing hypermeasures. He had regarded the coherent sequence framework as being
only a technical elaboration of Kunen’s work, but realized that models capable of
incorporating embeddings with all of P2(κ) in the ultrapower gave a much more
general instance of the “more of V contained in M” hierarchy of large cardinals.
With Martin’s help, he studied the available literature on inner models. During
this early period, although he recognized the seriousness of the problem of moving
generators, Steel was inhibited from using nonlinear iterations because he realized
that, for countable models, the deﬁnition of iterability for such iterations would
require a Π1
3 formula for its expression. This would give a ∆1
3 well-ordering of the
reals; however the state of knowledge about the Axiom of Determinacy at that

444
William J. Mitchell
time had led to a near universal belief that the well-ordering of the reals would
not become that complicated until well past a supercompact cardinal.
Little further progress was made for the ﬁrst ﬁve years.
The breakthrough
came from work of Foreman, Magidor and Shelah in the spring of 1984 which
led to [Foreman et al., 1988]. This did not immediately involve inner models at
all; indeed it contradicted some of the aims of the inner model program. One of
the results in this paper was that if it is consistent that there is a supercompact
cardinal, then it is consistent that the ﬁlter of nonstationary sets on ω1 is saturated.
This in turn implies that, in a generic extension, there is an embedding i: V →M
which, if it were in V rather than in a generic extension, would be much stronger
than a supercompact embedding. Such an embedding contradicted an implicit
premise of the inner model program, that any such embedding would extend a
large cardinal embedding existing in the ground model.
Shelah and Woodin, in [Shelah and Woodin, 1990] and [Woodin, 1988], built
on the techniques and results of [Foreman et al., 1988] to prove: If there is a
supercompact cardinal, then in the model L(R)
(i) all sets of reals are Lebesgue
measurable, (ii) all sets of reals have the property of Baire, and (iii) the partition
property ω →(ω)ω
2 holds.
As a consistency result this was not strong: all three
are true in Solovay’s model [1970] arising from the Levy collapse of an inaccessible
cardinal to become ω1 (with (iii) having been added to Solovay’s results by Mathias
[1977]). However the fact that, given a supercompact cardinal, these consequences
were outright true in L(R) was striking, especially in view of the fact that all are
consequences of the Axiom of Determinacy.
Attempts to weaken the hypothesis ultimately led to Woodin’s deﬁnition of
what came to be called a Woodin cardinal. An inaccessible cardinal δ is said to
be Woodin if for all functions f : δ →δ there is an embedding i: V →M with
critical point κ < δ such that Vi(f)(κ) ⊆M. The last theorem in [Woodin, 1988]
stated that if there is a model with a Woodin cardinal, together with a sharp for
that model, then every Σ1
3 set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
An important tool in dealing with Woodin cardinals was a modiﬁcation, in-
vented by Woodin, of the forcing of [Foreman et al., 1988].
The new forcing,
which he called the stationary tower, came in two forms. The ﬁrst, which was
used for results such as that stated in the last paragraph, collapsed cardinals so
that the Woodin cardinal in the ground model became ω1 in the generic extension.
The other preserved the Woodin cardinal and deﬁned, in the generic extension
V [G], an elementary embedding iG : V →M with the remarkable property that
(Vδ)M = (Vδ)V [G]. This second form ruled out a core model K with the properties
which had been expected on the basis of earlier work. The forcing collapses many
successors of singular cardinals, so that a core model K either would not have the
weak covering property, or else KV [G] = iG(K) ̸= (K)V , in which case the core
model would be changed by set forcing.
The introduction of Woodin cardinals spurred the development of inner models
in two ways: ﬁrst, it gave as a goal an important new large cardinal property which
was more accessible than supercompactness, and, second, it helped to explain

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
445
some of the diﬃculties which had been encountered. About this time, Steel began
working with Martin, and they proceeded to develop a theory of iteration trees.
The ﬁrst result of this collaboration was published in [Martin and Steel, 1988] and
[Martin and Steel, 1989], which proved: If there is a model with n Woodin cardinals
and a measurable cardinal above them, then all Π1
n+1 sets are determined.
Thus,
they obtained projective determinacy from a model with inﬁnitely many Woodin
cardinals. Later they used a result of Woodin to prove that if there is a model
with ω many Woodin cardinals with a measurable cardinal above them, then the
Axiom of Determinacy holds in L(R).
The proof of Π1
n+1 determinacy involved ﬁrst developing the theory of iteration
trees far enough to show that no countable iteration tree using countably complete
extenders could have ill-founded limits on all branches with the ill-foundedness
witnessed by a continuous function on the nodes of the iteration tree. Thus, by
constructing a tree having such a witness to ill-foundedness on all but one of its
branches, they could ensure that the remaining branch had a well-founded limit.
They then used the Woodin cardinal to ﬁnd a special type of iteration tree, which
they called an alternating chain, consisting of just two branches, each of length ω.
They constructed the tree so that the well-foundedness of one of the branches
implied the existence of a strategy, and they ensured that the limit on that branch
was well-founded by constructing the other branch to be ill-founded.
In the search for inner models for a Woodin cardinal, one key fact was observed
by Martin and Steel: Suppose that M is an extender model, and T is an iteration
tree on M having two distinct branches b and c with well-founded limits Mb and
Mc. Then there is model with a Woodin cardinal. In fact if δ is the supremum
of the lengths of the extenders used in T , then δ is Woodin with respect to any
function f ∈Mb ∩Mc. In particular, if M is a class model then δ is Woodin in
L[E], where E = EMb↾δ = EMc↾δ.
This had two important consequences. One was obvious: in order to reach a
minimal model with a Woodin cardinal, it would be enough to deﬁne a sequence
E by recursion in such a way that, so long as it did not reach a Woodin cardi-
nal, every iteration tree had at least one branch with a well-founded limit. The
other consequence was an absoluteness result, which enchanced the importance of
countable iteration trees: it was not possible, using a homogeneous forcing such
as a Levy collapse, to add a new well-founded branch to an iteration tree which
did not reach a Woodin cardinal.
Their strategy for ﬁnding well-founded branches was to assume that a tree had
no well-founded branches, take an elementary substructure to obtain a countable
model having such an ill-founded tree, and then deﬁne maps from models in this
iteration tree into V which commuted with the tree embeddings, thus obtaining
a contradiction since the union of the range of the maps would be an ill-founded
collection of sets in V . Using this strategy, they succeeding in proving in [Martin
and Steel, 1994] that if there are n Woodin cardinals, for n < ω, then there is a
proper class model Mn satisfying ZFC + there are n Woodin cardinals + R has
a Σ1
n+2 well-order. This result was essentially best possible in the sense that by

446
William J. Mitchell
their previous result the existence of n Woodin cardinals plus a measurable cardinal
above them implies that Π1
n+1 determinacy holds, and this in turn implies that
there is no ∆1
n+2 well-ordering of the reals.
This Martin-Steel model does have a serious weakness, however. The models
introduced in this paper have the form L[E], where E is a sequence of extenders.
The comparison process for these models, however, does not use ultrapowers of the
models themselves, but instead relies on ultrapowers in a larger model constructed
from a sequence F of background extenders. For each extender E in the sequence
E there is a background extender F in the sequence F. The extender F extends
E, however it is substantially stronger than E: it is an extender in V , not just
L[E], and if E is a (κ, λ)-extender then F is satisﬁes Vλ+2 ⊆Ult(V, F). Because
of this use of external iterations, many of the structural properties of their model
were unclear. For example, they were not able to show that GCH holds in their
model, although they did show, using a result of Jensen, that it satisﬁes CH.
A second forcing notion discovered by Woodin sheds further light on the question
of iterability.
The extender algebra, which according to Woodin was probably
discovered in July of 1986, is related to the forcing of Vopˇenka [Vopˇenka and H´ajek,
1972], by which any set is generic over HOD. Let M be a model of set theory with
a Woodin cardinal δ such that the Woodinness of δ is witnessed by extenders in
M which are iterable in the universe V (though perhaps not in M). The extender
algebra is a forcing of size δ, deﬁned in M, with the property that, for any set x
in V , there is an iterated ultrapower i: M →M ∗of M such that x is M ∗-generic
over i(P). Thus, for example, if there is a supercompact cardinal in V then there
is, for each λ, a generic extension of M which has a λ-supercompact cardinal
— even if the model M has no more than one Woodin cardinal. The apparent
contradiction is avoided because the model M does not know the strategy for
iterating itself, and hence the argument cannot be carried out inside M. Indeed
this forcing can be used to show that there is no fully iterable model of the form
L[A], with A a set, having a Woodin cardinal: any such model would have, in a
generic extension, a model L[A′] having the same property with A′ contained in
the smallest measurable cardinal of L[A]. In fact Woodin has shown that if there
is a iterable model with a Woodin cardinal, then x# exists for every set x.
This does not exclude the possibility that there is a a strategy in V for iterating
the model M, but it does imply that an iteration of the model M will not, in
general, be fully internal to M even if it is internal in the sense that all extenders
involved are members of the appropriate model of the iteration tree, and even if (as
in the case of the genericity iteration of the last paragraph) the iteration is deﬁned
inside M. Of course this is not always such a diﬃculty as it may appear, since in
most cases an iteration tree is used which is not deﬁned inside M. The iteration
trees used to compare two models M and N, for example, require knowledge of
both models and hence cannot be carried out inside of either.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
447
5.2
Fine structural extender models
Encouraged by the work of Martin and Steel, and prodded by work of Baldwin,
Mitchell returned to work on inner models with extenders in 1986. Since he in-
tended that the end result was a core model, he assumed from the start that the
models would include mice as well as extenders.
A signiﬁcant innovation was suggested by a note of Baldwin and greatly simpli-
ﬁed the presentation of the model. Recall that Mitchell’s original core model K(F)
had the form L[F, M] where F was the sequence of ultraﬁlters of the model and
M was a class of mice. This was awkward at the time, and promised to become
more so in the newer models, as the mice would be expected to mimic the full core
model and hence would need to themselves contain mice. In the new presentation
the model had the form L[E], being constructed entirely from extenders Eγ in the
sequence E. However these extenders were not necessarily extenders on the full
model L[E]; instead Eγ was an extender on the model Jγ[E↾γ] constructed up to
that point. The result was that the mice in the model L[E] were just the initial
segments M = Jα[E] of L[E]. As a consequence, the instances of the Condensation
Property, Lemma 1, which are needed for the analysis of ﬁne structure would hold
automatically.
In 1987 Mitchell visited Steel at UCLA, and described the idea of using partial
extenders. Steel had, before this time, also been thinking about a ﬁne structural
model. After discussing the new idea with Jensen, who was visiting at the same
time, he was excited to realize that it did, in fact, cut through many of the com-
plications involved in the ﬁne structure.
Although much hard work remained, the way was now open to precisely char-
acterizing the structure of the extender models as they are known today. However
there remained the iterability problem, that is, the problem of showing that such
models could be constructed so that there was a strategy for choosing the branches
in iteration trees which maintained the well-foundedness of the iterates. For this,
Steel started with the techniques which he and Martin had developed for their pre-
vious inner model. The use of external iterations in that model had been dictated
by the need for agreement between the models in the tree; under the new struc-
ture this agreement was ensured by the ﬁne structure, so the iterations would be
internal in the sense that all of the extenders used were taken from the models in
the tree. However, he retained the use of background extenders. The construction
proceded through a delicate recursion, which deﬁned a sequence of models Mα. To
deﬁne Mα+1, the model Mα would ﬁrst be extended, either by constructing one
step further or, if a suitably backgrounded extender was available, by adding that
extender to the sequence. If the resulting model Nα did not contain any bounded
subsets of Mα which were not already in Mα, then Mα+1 would be equal to Nα.
Otherwise the ﬁne structural collapse would be used to obtain the core structure
of Nα, and Mα+1 would be that core structure. In this case, any extenders in Nα
which had critical points greater than its projectum would become partial exten-
ders in Mα+1. This process converged, and yielded a model L[E] which satisﬁed

448
William J. Mitchell
the desired properties, inluding GCH and a ∆1
3 well ordering of the reals, and
which would have a Woodin cardinal assuming that there was one in V . This
work was ultimately published as the book [Mitchell and Steel, 1994].
Steel later extended this work in [Steel, 1993] to models with arbitrarily many
Woodin cardinals, and Neeman [2002] has deﬁned such extender models slightly
beyond a Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals. This is the best result known giving,
from the assumption of a large cardinal, an iterable extender model L[E] for that
(or even a smaller) cardinal. However if one is willing to add appropriate iterability
hypotheses to the large cardinal assumptions then this construction can be carried
out as far as, and even somewhat beyond, a superstrong cardinal, that is, a cardinal
κ such that there is an embedding i: V →M with critical point κ such that
Vj(κ) ⊆κ. Doing so relies on a modiﬁcation, due to Jensen and using a suggestion
of Sy Friedman, of the construction of L[E]. Suppose that E is a (κ, λ)-extender
to be added to the sequence E, where E cannot be represented as an extender of
length less than λ. The construction of [Mitchell and Steel, 1994] adds E as Eγ
where γ = λ+ in L[E↾λ+], a value for γ which was used because it is the least
choice such that the mapping E 7→γ is one-to-one. The Jensen construction sets
γ = iE(κ+), which avoids some anomalies in the construction. This approach was
introduced in [Jensen, 1997], and a detailed exposition is given in the last part of
the book [Zeman, 2002].
Most applications of the models L[E] rely on core model techniques, which
will be discussed in the next subsection; however one striking application can
be described here. The discussion of ﬁne structure in this history started with
the development of Jensen’s deﬁnition of the principle □κ and the proof that it
holds in L. This result had been extended a number of times to larger models:
by Solovay to L[U], to KDJ in [Welch, 1979], and for arbitrary sequences with
measures of order 0 in [Wylie, 1989].
Schimmerling [1995] extended this to a
model with ∃κ o(κ) = κ++ and proved weaker square principles for larger models.
Finally Schimmerling and Zeman, working ﬁrst independently and then together,
completed this program. Jensen had deﬁned a subcompact cardinal to be a cardinal
κ such that for each B ⊆κ+ there is a µ < κ, A ⊆µ+ and an elementary
embedding j : (Hµ+, ∈, A) →(Hκ+, ∈, B). This is a property somewhat stronger
than superstrong, but weaker then κ+-supercompact, and Jensen had proved that
□κ fails for any subcompact cardinal.
Schimmerling and Zeeman [2001; 2004]
proved a converse for extender models: the property □κ holds in any extender
model L[E] for any cardinal κ which is not subcompact.
5.3
L[E] as a core model
The models presented in [Mitchell and Steel, 1994] gave the form for a core model.
Like the core models previously developed by Dodd and Jensen and by Mitchell,
and unlike L[U], they were built up recursively from below using mice, and so could
present an apparently minimal model for any cardinal smaller than a Woodin car-
dinal. Furthermore all of the previously described core models could be presented

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
449
as a model in the new form L[E]. In the case of the Mitchell’s core model for
sequences of measures, and arguably even for the Dodd-Jensen core model KDJ,
doing so yielded a great gain in clarity. However, [Mitchell and Steel, 1994] did
not present a core model construction: they relied on the Martin-Steel technique
for the proof of iterability, and that required starting with extenders in the real
world, called background extenders. Indeed, the background extenders had to be
stronger than the extenders in the model L[E]. Thus, like the model L[U], they
would not give a model with a Woodin cardinal unless a Woodin cardinal was
already known to exist in the universe. A core model construction, in contrast,
should expose the latent large cardinal structure even if the large cardinal has
been destroyed by, for example, a forcing extension collapsing cardinals.
Before proceeding, it will be useful to compare the eﬀect of Woodin cardinals
in an inner model with that of measurable cardinals. The presence of measurable
cardinals changed the theory in two major respects:
(i) models were required to
be iterable, rather than merely well-founded, and (ii) the covering lemma had to
be adapted to allow for the possible presence of Prikry sequences.
In the case of measurable cardinals, iterability can be ensured by using only
countably complete measures. Furthermore, if M is a model with only measurable
cardinals for which all countable iterations are well-founded, then iteration of M
of any length are well-founded. Hence any model M containing ω1 is iterable in
V if and only if M |= “I am iterable” — indeed any iterated ultrapower in V can
be embedded into an iterated ultrapower which is deﬁned inside M.
None of these observations are true for extenders. Two important conjectures
assert that the ﬁrst is true for countable iteration trees: If T is a countable iteration
tree, using only extenders which are countably complete in the model in which they
appear, then the Coﬁnal Branches Hypothesis (CBH) asserts that T has a coﬁnal
branch with a well-founded limit, and the Unique Branches Hypothesis (UBH)
asserts that it has at most one such branch. Surprisingly, and fortunately, ω1 + 1-
iterability, that is, iterability for trees of length at most ω1, is suﬃcient for much
of inner model theory.
This increased complexity of the concept of iterability does not actually begin
at a Woodin cardinal; in fact it is a consideration in any model with overlapping
extenders. However it is mitigated, short of a Woodin cardinal, by the Martin-Steel
result in [Martin and Steel, 1994] that any iteration tree with two well-founded
branches of length δ induces a model in which δ is Woodin. This means that,
except at a Woodin cardinal, the property of an iteration tree having a well-
founded branch is not changed by homogeneous forcing, such as a Levy collapse.
Clause (ii) above, the eﬀect of Prikry forcing on the covering lemma at a mea-
surable cardinal, is paralleled by a much larger eﬀect at a Woodin cardinal: as
was pointed out earlier, the stationary tower forcing witnesses that a model with
a Woodin cardinal δ may not have even the weak covering property below δ.
This goal of eliminating the need for background extenders in V was reached,
or nearly reached, by Steel [1996] in 1990. The key observation was that a much
weakened background extender could be used: an extender on a cardinal κ would

450
William J. Mitchell
only need background extenders for κ-sized restrictions of the extender, and such
background extenders could be obtained by assuming the presence of a single
measurable cardinal in V . By adapting the recursive construction of [Mitchell and
Steel, 1994] to this weaker notion of background extenders, he deﬁned a model of
height Ωwhich he called Kc, corresponding to Mitchell’s countably closed core
model Kc; in this case Steel took the superscript ‘c’ to mean “certiﬁed’.’
He
proved, assuming there is no inner model with a Woodin cardinal, that this model
satisﬁes what he called a “cheapo” covering lemma: if µ is the given measure on
κ, then Kc is a model of height κ such that the set of cardinals λ < κ such that
λ+ = (λ+)Kc is a member of µ. This version of the weak covering theorem implies
that Kc is universal (as a model of height Ω), and enabled him to deﬁne the true
core model K as a elementary submodel of Kc. As with Mitchell’s core model
for sequences of measures, this proof gave an alternate direct deﬁnition of K, as
a model L[E] where the members Eγ of the sequence are chosen by induction on
γ. However the characterization of which extenders to add to the sequence so as
to ensure the ﬁnal model is iterable is somewhat more delicate than in the case of
Mitchell’s model.
Among the applications given in [2002], Steel showed that if there is a mea-
surable cardinal Ωthen the existence of a model with a Woodin cardinal follows
from the existence of a presaturated ideal on ω1, and the existence of a tree on VΩ
with two coﬁnal well-founded branches implies the existence of a model with two
Woodin cardinals. In other applications, the assumption of a measurable cardinal
could be dispensed with because it was implied by the hypothesis, either in V or
in an inner model. Thus the existence of a model with a Woodin cardinal follows
from Martin’s Maximum, from the assumption that every set of reals is weakly
homogeneous, or (using an unpublished result of Woodin) from the existence of
a strongly compact cardinal. Steel also reproved Woodin’s result that a model
with a Woodin cardinal follows from ∆1
2 determinacy plus the assumption that a#
exists for all reals a, and in 1993 he extended a result of Jensen by showing that
if there are two measurable cardinals in V , and there no Woodin cardinals in Kc,
then Kc is Σ1
3 correct.
The results of [Steel, 1996] raised several obvious questions.
Is the measur-
able cardinal really necessary? Does Steel’s core model satisfy the weak covering
property? Is there a core model for more than a single Woodin cardinal?
The ﬁrst question was still unanswered at the end of the century. Although it
was easy to see that the full strength of a measurable cardinal was not necessary,
it did not seem possible to fully eliminate the need for some large cardinal in V .
This has continued to be an active ﬁeld of research during the ﬁrst decade of the
current century, and it seems likely that this problem has been solved by work of
Jensen and Steel.
The second question was answered by Mitchell, Schimmerling and Steel in
[Mitchell et al., 1997], who showed that if there is no model with a Woodin
cardinal, then (κ+)K = κ+ for all countably closed singular cardinals. The as-
sumption of countable closure was eliminated shortly afterward by Mitchell and

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
451
Schimmerling [1995]. Another answer was given in [Schimmerling and Woodin,
2001]: Suppose that L[E] is an iterable extender model with no measurable cardi-
nals and no extenders of superstrong type. Then either a sharp exists for L[E],
or else cf((κ+)L[E]) ≥|κ| whenever |κ| is a countably closed cardinal. Note that
although L[E] does not have any measurable cardinals, it may have submodels
L[E↾γ] with Woodin or stronger cardinals.
Steel tackled the third question, of getting larger core models, in [Steel, 2002].
He succeeded in deﬁning a model Kc as in [Steel, 1996], having the ‘cheapo’
covering lemma, so long as there is no model of a non-tame mouse, that is, no
mouse having a Woodin cardinal δ and also an extender Eγ with crit(Eγ) < δ ≤γ.
This construction of Kc required only ω1 + 1-iterability, that is, every suitable
iteration tree of length at most ω1 has a branch. In order to obtain the model
K, however, he needed to show that the model was Ω+ 1-iterable, that is, that
any iteration tree of height at most the measurable cardinal Ωhad a well-founded
branch. He was successful enough in this to show that K exists, provided that there
is no model with inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals, and used this to show that
the existence of an Ω-iterable premouse of height Ωwith inﬁnitely many Woodin
cardinals is equivalent to any of the following three statements: (i) the ﬁrst-order
theory of L(R) is unchanged by small forcing, (ii) the Axiom of Determinacy Is
true in L(R) after any small forcing, and (iii) no small forcing extension adds
an uncountable sequence of distinct reals in L(R). This was a result that had
been reached independently, and slightly diﬀerent methods, by Woodin. Steel also
showed in [Steel, 2002] that a failure of the Unique Branch Hypothesis for trees of
arbitrary length, that is, the existence of a nonoverlapping iteration tree T with
two distinct well-founded branches, implies that there is an inner model with ω
many Woodin cardinals.
One of the obstacles to extending the construction Kc beyond the restriction to
tame mice in [Steel, 2002] was removed by [Neeman and Steel, 1999]. The proof
of the Dodd-Jensen lemma, which is heavily used in establishing the basic ﬁne
structure, depends on the fact that iteration trees have at most one well-founded
branch, and this is not known to be true for the trees needed for larger models. In
this paper Neeman and Steel gave a variant of the Dodd-Jensen lemma, which they
called the weak Dodd-Jensen lemma, which does not require unique branching but
which is strong enough for the construction of Kc. With this result, iterability is
the only gap that remains to be ﬁlled in order to construct Kc for any cardinal
up to a superstrong cardinal. Andretta, Neeman and Steel [2001] used the weak
Dodd-Jensen lemma to show that Kc exists provided that there is no non-domestic
mouse, that is, that there is no sharp for a model with a proper class of Woodin
cardinals and a proper class of strong cardinals. This is currently the best result
known on the existence of Kc.

452
William J. Mitchell
6
EPILOGUE
The end of the twentieth century is the cutoﬀdate for this volume, but it is far from
being a natural end point for the subject of this chapter. The temptation to try to
continue the exposition to the present, however, is countered by the observation
that the present is unlikely to be a better ending point, and that stopping at the
end of the century yields the beneﬁt of a few years perspective. However it seems
desirable to mention three recent advances which promise to be major subjects of
investigation in the future.
The ﬁrst of these is core model induction, which was introduced by Woodin as
a new technique for obtaining models higher in the hierarchy of Woodin cardinals.
An interesting aspect of this technique is the use, in addition to the ordinary mice
described earlier in this history, of hybrid mice, which are mice which include, in
addition to extenders, information about a strategy for iterating those extenders.
This recognizes the fact that, at and above a Woodin cardinal, iterability is an
important part of the large cardinal structure. An exposition of the core model
induction is given in [Schimmerling and Steel, 2006].
The other two advances give at least partial answers to questions raised earlier
in this history. One of these questions concerns the elimination of the measurable
cardinal, which was needed in [Steel, 1996] to obtain a core model up to a Woodin
cardinal. After progress was made by several people, the problem appears to have
been solved by the use of a new technique of Jensen, which he calls stacks of mice.
The technique was introduced in a paper by Jensen, Schimmerling, Schindler and
Steel, [Jensen et al., 2009], which applies the technique to obtain a model with a
nondomestic mouse from any of several hypotheses, including the failure of both □κ
and □(κ) at a countably closed cardinal κ ≥ω3. The use of stacks to construct the
core model K up to a Woodin cardinal, without the use of a measurable cardinal,
is due to Jensen and Steel and is currently unpublished.
The other major advance is due to Woodin, who has discovered a framework
which gives inner models for essentially every large cardinal property which has
been considered, including properties involving nontrivial embeddings i: Vλ →Vλ.
He avoids a problem, which Steel had called moving spaces and which seemed
to show that an extender model L[E] could not contain cardinals larger than a
supercompact cardinal, by deﬁning a modiﬁed extender model L[E] in which the
critical points of the extenders in the sequence E are bounded, and then showing
that the desired embeddings with larger critical point are constructed from E. This
work is as yet unpublished.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Andretta et al., 2001] A. Andretta, I. Neeman, and J. Steel. The domestic levels of Kc are
iterable. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 125:157–201, 2001.
[Baldwin, 1986] S. Baldwin. Between strong and superstrong. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
51(3):547–559, 1986.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
453
[Dodd and Jensen, 1976] A. Dodd and R. Jensen. A modest remark. Handwritten manuscript,
1976. Available in [Jensen, 2006].
[Dodd and Jensen, 1981] A. Dodd and R. Jensen. The core model. Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 20(1):43–75, 1981.
[Dodd and Jensen, 1982a] A. Dodd and R. Jensen.
The covering lemma for K.
Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 22(1):1–30, 1982.
[Dodd and Jensen, 1982b] A. Dodd and R. Jensen. The covering lemma for L[U]. Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 22(2):127–135, 1982.
[Dodd, 1982] A. Dodd. The core model, volume 61 of London Mathematical Society Lecture
Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982.
[Dodd, 1984?] A. Dodd. Notes on strong cardinals. Handwritten notes, as transcribed in TEX
by Apollo Hogan, 1984?
[Donder et al., 1981] H. Donder, R. Jensen, and B. Koppelberg. Some applications of the core
model.
In Set theory and Model Theory (Bonn, 1979), volume 872 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, pages 55–97. Springer, Berlin, 1981.
[Easton, 1970] W. Easton. Powers of regular cardinals. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 1:139–
178, 1970.
[Foreman and Kanamori, 2010] M. Foreman and A. Kanamori, editors. Handbook of Set Theory.
Springer, 2010.
[Foreman et al., 1988] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Martin’s Maximum, saturated
ideals, and nonregular ultraﬁlters. I. Annals of Mathematics, 127(1):1–47, 1988.
[Gaifman, 1974] H. Gaifman. Elementary embeddings of models of set-theory and certain sub-
theories.
In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part II, Univ.
California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages 33–101. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence R.I.,
1974.
[Gandy, 1974] R. Gandy. Set-theoretic functions for elementary syntax. In Axiomatic Set Theory
(Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part II, Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967),
pages 103–126. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1974.
[Gitik, 1989] M. Gitik.
The negation of the singular cardinal hypothesis from o(κ) = κ++.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 43(3):209–234, 1989.
[Gitik, 1991] M. Gitik. The strength of the failure of the singular cardinal hypothesis. Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 51(3):215–240, 1991.
[G¨odel, 1938] K. G¨odel. The consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum
hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 24:556–557, 1938.
[G¨odel, 1939] K. G¨odel. Consistency-proof for the generalized continuum-hypothesis. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 25:220–224, 1939.
[G¨odel, 1940] K. G¨odel. The Consistency of the Continuum Hypothesis. Annals of Mathematics
Studies, no. 3. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1940.
[Hajnal, 1956] A. Hajnal. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum
problem. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logic und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 2:131–136,
1956.
[Hajnal, 1961] A. Hajnal. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum
problem. Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 12:321–376, 1961.
[Jensen et al., 2009] R. Jensen, E. Schimmerling, R. Schindler, and J. Steel. Stacking mice. The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 74(1):315–315, March 2009.
[Jensen, 1967] R. Jensen. Stufen der konstrktiblen hierarchie. Habilitationsschrift, June 1967.
Available on [Jensen, 2006].
[Jensen, 1968?] R. Jensen. Souslin’s hypothesis is incompatible with V = L, 1968. Available on
[Jensen, 2006].
[Jensen, 1969a] R. Jensen. Some combinatorial properties of L and V . Handwritten manuscript,
1969. Available on [Jensen, 2006] or at http://www.mathematik.hu-berlin.de/~raesch/org/
jensen.html.
[Jensen, 1969?b] R. Jensen.
Souslin’s hypothesis is compatible with CH.
Handwritten
manuscript, 1969? Available on [Jensen, 2006].
[Jensen, 1970] R. Jensen. Kombinatorische eigenschaften der konstruktiblen hierarchie. Hand-
written manuscript, 1970. Available on [Jensen, 2006].
[Jensen, 1972] R. Jensen. The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. Annals of Mathe-
matical Logic, 4:229–308; erratum, ibid. 4 (1972), 443, 1972. With a section by Jack Silver.

454
William J. Mitchell
[Jensen, 1974a] R. Jensen. Marginalia III. Handwritten manuscript, 1974. Available on [Jensen,
2006].
[Jensen, 1974b] R. Jensen. Marginalia to a theorem of Silver. Handwritten manuscript, 1974.
Available on [Jensen, 2006].
[Jensen, 1974c] R. Jensen.
More marginalia.
Handwritten manuscript, 1974. Available on
[Jensen, 2006].
[Jensen, 1997] R. Jensen. A new ﬁne structure for higher core models, August 1997. Avail-
able on [Jensen, 2006]; also available at http://www.mathematik.hu-berlin.de/~raesch/org/
jensen.html.
[Jensen, 2001] R. Jensen. On some problems of Mitchell, Welch and Vickers, 2001. Available
on [Jensen, 2006] or at http://www.mathematik.hu-berlin.de/~raesch/org/jensen.html.
[Jensen, 2006] R. Jensen. CDROM with compilation of Jensen notes. Notes stamped ”Seminar
F¨ur Logik und Grundlagenforshung Universit¨at Bonn”, 2006.
[Kanamori, 2007] A. Kanamori.
G¨odel and set theory.
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
13(2):153–188, 2007.
[Kanamori, 2011a] A. Kanamori. Large cardinals with Forcing. In Kanamori et al. [2011, chapter
4].
[Kanamori, 2011b] A. Kanamori. Set theory from Cantor to Cohen. In Kanamori et al. [2011,
chapter 1].
[Kanamori et al., 2011] A. Kanamori, D. Gabbay, and J. Woods, editors. Sets and Extensions
in the Twentieth Century, volume 6, Handboo for the History of Logic. Elsevier, 2011.
[Kojman, 2011] M. Kojman. Singular cardinals: from Hausdorﬀ’s gaps to Shelah’s pcf theory.
In Kanamori et al. [2011, chapter 7].
[Kunen and Paris, 1971] K. Kunen and J. Paris. Boolean extensions and measurable cardinals.
Annals of Mathematical Logic, 2(4):359–377, 1971.
[Kunen, 1968] K. Kunen. Inaccessibility properties of cardinals. PhD thesis, Stanford University,
1968.
[Kunen, 1970] K. Kunen. Some applications of iterated ultrapowers in set theory. Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 1:179–227, 1970.
[Kunen, 1971] K. Kunen. On the GCH at measurable cardinals. In Logic Colloquium ’69 (Proc.
Summer School and Colloq., Manchester, 1969), pages 107–110. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1971.
[Levy, 1957] A. Levy. Ind´ependance conditionnelle de V = L et d’axiomes qui se rattachent
au syst`eme de M. G¨odel. Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Academie des
Sciences, Paris, 245:1582–1583, 1957.
[Levy, 1960] A. Levy. A generalization of G¨odel’s notion of constructibility. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 25:147–155, 1960.
[Magidor, 1978] M. Magidor.
Changing coﬁnality of cardinals.
Fundamenta Mathematicae,
99(1):61–71, 1978.
[Magidor, 1990] M. Magidor. Representing sets of ordinals as countable unions of sets in the
core model. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 317(1):91–126, 1990.
[Martin and Solovay, 1969] D. A. Martin and R. Solovay. A basis theorem for Σ1
3 sets of reals.
Annals of Mathematics, 89:138–159, 1969.
[Martin and Steel, 1988] D. A. Martin and J. Steel. Projective determinacy. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 85(18):6582–6586, 1988.
[Martin and Steel, 1989] D. A. Martin and J. Steel. A proof of projective determinacy. Journal
of the American Mathematical Society, 2(1):71–125, 1989.
[Martin and Steel, 1994] D. A. Martin and J. Steel. Iteration trees. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, 7(1):1–73, 1994.
[Mathias, 1977] A. Mathias. Happy families. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 12(1):59–111, 1977.
[Mitchell and Schimmerling, 1995] W. Mitchell and E. Schimmerling. Weak covering without
countable closure. Mathematical Research Letters, 2(5):595–609, 1995.
[Mitchell and Steel, 1994] W. Mitchell and J. Steel. Fine structure and iteration trees, volume 3
of Lecture Notes in Logic. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
[Mitchell et al., 1997] W. Mitchell, E. Schimmerling, and J. Steel. The covering lemma up to a
Woodin cardinal. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 84(2):219–255, 1997.
[Mitchell, 1974] W. Mitchell. Sets constructible from sequences of ultraﬁlters. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 39:57–66, 1974.

Inner Models for Large Cardinals
455
[Mitchell, 1979a] W. Mitchell.
Hypermeasurable cardinals.
In Logic Colloquium ’78 (Mons,
1978), volume 97 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 303–316.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.
[Mitchell, 1979b] W. Mitchell. Ramsey cardinals and constructibility. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 44(2):260–266, 1979.
[Mitchell, 1983] W. Mitchell.
Sets constructed from sequences of measures: revisited.
The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 48(3):600–609, 1983.
[Mitchell, 1984a] W. Mitchell.
The core model for sequences of measures. I.
Mathematical
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 95(2):229–260, 1984.
[Mitchell, 1984b] W. Mitchell. Indiscernibles, skies, and ideals. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Boul-
der, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 161–182. American Math-
ematical Society, Providence, RI, 1984.
[Mitchell, 1985] W. Mitchell. The core model for sequences of measures, II. A scanned typescript
is available at http://www.math.ufl.edu/~wjm/papers/, 1985.
[Mitchell, 1987] W. Mitchell. Applications of the covering lemma for sequences of measures.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 299(1):41–58, 1987.
[Mitchell, 1991] W. Mitchell. Deﬁnable singularity. Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, 327(1):407–426, 1991.
[Mitchell, 1992a] W. Mitchell. Σ1
3-absoluteness for sequences of measures. In Set theory of the
Continuum (Berkeley, CA, 1989), volume 26 of Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
Publications, pages 311–355. Springer, New York, 1992.
[Mitchell, 1992b] W. Mitchell. On the singular cardinal hypothesis. Transactions of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 329(2):507–530, 1992.
[Mitchell, 2010a] W. Mitchell. Beginning inner model theory. In Foreman and Kanamori [2010].
[Mitchell, 2010b] W. Mitchell. The covering lemma. In Foreman and Kanamori [2010].
[Namba, 1971] K. Namba. Independence proof of (ω, ωα)-distributive law in complete Boolean
algebras. Commentarii Mathematici Universitatis Sancti Pauli, 19:1–12, 1971.
[Neeman and Steel, 1999] I. Neeman and J. Steel. A weak Dodd-Jensen lemma. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 64(3):1285–1294, 1999.
[Neeman, 2002] I. Neeman. Inner models in the region of a Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 116(1-3):67–155, 2002.
[Neeman, 2004] I. Neeman. The Mitchell order below rank-to-rank. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 69(4):1143–1162, 2004.
[Prikry, 1970] K. Prikry. Changing measurable into accessible cardinals. Dissertationes Math-
ematicae (Rozprawy Matematyczne), 68:55, 1970.
[Rowbottom, 1971] F. Rowbottom. Some strong axioms of inﬁnity incompatible with the axiom
of constructibility. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 3(1):1–44, 1971.
[Schimmerling and Steel, 2006] E. Schimmerling and J. Steel. The strength of AD. Available
at http://wwwmath.uni-muenster.de/logik/Personen/rds/AD_skript.pdf, July 2006.
[Schimmerling and Woodin, 2001] E. Schimmerling and W. H. Woodin. The Jensen covering
property. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 66(4):1505–1523, 2001.
[Schimmerling and Zeman, 2001] E. Schimmerling and M. Zeman. Square in core models. The
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 7(3):305–314, 2001.
[Schimmerling and Zeman, 2004] E. Schimmerling and M. Zeman. Characterization of □κ in
core models. Journal of Mathematical Logic, 4(1):1–72, 2004.
[Schimmerling, 1995] E. Schimmerling.
Combinatorial principles in the core model for one
Woodin cardinal. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 74(2):153–201, 1995.
[Scott, 1961] D. Scott.
Measurable cardinals and constructible sets.
Bulletin de l’Academie
Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques,
9:521–524, 1961.
[Shelah and Woodin, 1990] S. Shelah and W. H. Woodin.
Large cardinals imply that every
reasonably deﬁnable set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
Israel Journal of Mathematics,
70(3):381–394, 1990.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1961] J. Shoenﬁeld. The problem of predicativity. In Essays on the Foundations
of Mathematics, pages 132–139. Magnes Press, Hebrew Univ., Jerusalem, 1961.
[Silver, 1970] J. Silver. A large cardinal in the constructible universe. Fundamenta Mathemati-
cae, 69:93–100, 1970.

456
William J. Mitchell
[Silver, 1971] J. Silver. The consistency of the GCH with the existence of a measurable cardinal.
In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, Univ. California,
Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages 391–395. American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I.,
1971.
[Silver, 1975] J. Silver. On the singular cardinals problem. In Proceedings of the International
Congress of Mathematicians (Vancouver, B. C., 1974), Vol. 1, pages 265–268. Canad. Math.
Congress, Montreal, Que., 1975.
[Solovay et al., 1978] R. Solovay, W. Reinhardt, and A. Kanamori. Strong axioms of inﬁnity
and elementary embeddings. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 13(1):73–116, 1978.
[Solovay, 1970] R. Solovay. A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue mea-
surable. Annals of Mathematics, 92:1–56, 1970.
[Solovay, 1971] R. Solovay. Real-valued measurable cardinals. In Axiomatic Set Theory (Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XIII, Part I, Univ. California, Los Angeles, Calif., 1967), pages
397–428. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1971.
[Steel, 1993] J. Steel. Inner models with many Woodin cardinals. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 65(2):185–209, 1993.
[Steel, 1995] J. Steel.
HODL(R) is a core model below Θ.
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
1(1):75–84, 1995.
[Steel, 1996] J. Steel. The core model iterability problem, volume 8 of Lecture Notes in Logic.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996.
[Steel, 2002] J. Steel. Core models with more Woodin cardinals. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
67(3):1197–1226, 2002.
[Tarski, 1962] A. Tarski. Some problems and results relevant to the foundations of set theory. In
Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Proc. 1960 Internat. Congr.), pages 125–135.
Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif., 1962.
[Tennenbaum, 1968] S. Tennenbaum. Souslin’s problem. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences U.S.A., 59:60–63, 1968.
[Ulam, 1930] S. Ulam. Zur Masstheorie in der allgemeinen Megenlehre. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 16:140–150, 1930.
[Vopˇenka and H´ajek, 1972] P. Vopˇenka and P. H´ajek. The Theory of Semisets. Academia (Pub-
lishing House of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences), Prague, 1972.
[Welch, 1979] P. Welch. Combinatorial Principles In the Core Model. PhD thesis, University
of Oxford, 1979.
[Woodin, 1988] W. H. Woodin. Supercompact cardinals, sets of reals, and weakly homogeneous
trees. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 85(18):6587–6591, 1988.
[Wylie, 1989] D. Wylie. Condensation and square in a higher core model. PhD thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, 1989.
[Zeman, 2002] M. Zeman. Inner models and large cardinals, volume 5 of de Gruyter Series in
Logic and its Applications. Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 2002.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF DETERMINACY
Paul B. Larson
1
INTRODUCTION
Determinacy axioms are statements to the eﬀect that certain games are deter-
mined, in that each player in the game has an optimal strategy.1 The commonly
accepted axioms for mathematics, the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms with the Axiom
of Choice (ZFC; see [Jech, 2003; Kunen, 1983]), imply the determinacy of many
games that people actually play. This applies in particular to many games of per-
fect information, games in which the players alternate moves which are known to
both players, and the outcome of the game depends only on this list of moves, and
not on chance or other external factors. Games of perfect information which must
end in ﬁnitely many moves are determined. This follows from the work of Ernst
Zermelo [1913], D´enes K˝onig [1927] and L´aszl´o K´almar [1928], and also from the
independent work of John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern (in their 1944
book, reprinted as [2004]).
As pointed out by Stanis law Ulam [1960], determinacy for games of perfect
information of a ﬁxed ﬁnite length is essentially a theorem of logic.
If we let
x1,y1,x2,y2,. . .,xn,yn be variables standing for the moves made by players I (who
plays x1,. . .,xn) and II (who plays y1,. . .,yn), and A (consisting of sequences of
length 2n) is the set of runs of the game for which I wins, the statement
∃x1∀y1 . . . ∃xn∀yn⟨x1, y1, . . . , xn, yn⟩∈A
essentially asserts that the ﬁrst player has a winning strategy in the game, and its
negation,
∀x1∃y1 . . . ∀xn∃yn⟨x1, y1, . . . , xn, yn⟩̸∈A
essentially asserts that the second player has a winning strategy.2
We let ω denote the set of natural numbers 0, 1, 2, . . .; for brevity we will often
refer to the members of this set as “integers”. Given sets X and Y , XY denotes
1That is, either one of the players has a strategy that guarantees a win, or both players have
strategies which guarantee at least a tie. Some of the games considered in this chapter allow ties,
but most do not.
2If there exists a way of choosing a member from each nonempty set of moves of the game,
then these statements are actually equivalent to the assertions that the corresponding strategies
exist. Otherwise, in the absence of the Axiom of Choice the statements above can hold without
the corresponding strategy existing.
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

458
Paul B. Larson
the set of functions from X to Y . The Baire space is the space ωω, with the
product topology. The Baire space is homeomorphic to the space of irrational real
numbers (see [Moschovakis, 2009, p. 9], for instance), and we will often refer to
its members as “reals” (though in various contexts the Cantor space ω2, the set
of subsets of ω (P(ω)) and the set of inﬁnite subsets of ω ([ω]ω) are all referred to
as “the reals”).
Given A ⊆ωω, we let Gω(A) denote the game of perfect information of length ω
in which the two players collaborate to deﬁne an element f of ωω (with I choosing
f(0), II choosing f(1), I choosing f(2), and so on), with I winning a run of the
game if and only if f is an element of A. A game of this type is called an integer
game, and the set A is called the payoﬀset. A strategy in such a game for player
I (II) is a function Σ with domain the set of sequences of integers of even (odd)
length such that for each a ∈dom(Σ), Σ(a) is in ω. A run of the game (partial or
complete) is said to be according to a strategy Σ for player I (II) if every initial
segment of the run of odd (nonzero even) length is of the form a⌢⟨Σ(a)⟩for some
sequence a. A strategy Σ for player I (II) is a winning strategy if every complete
run of the game according to Σ is in (out of) A.
We say that a set A ⊆ωω
is determined (or the corresponding game Gω(A) is determined) if there exists a
winning strategy for one of the players. These notions generalize naturally for
games in which players play objects other than integers (for instance, real games,
in which they play elements of ωω) or games which run for more than ω many
rounds (in which case player I typically plays at limit stages).
The study of determinacy axioms concerns games whose determinacy is neither
proved nor refuted by the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms ZF (without the Axiom of
Choice). Typically such games are inﬁnite. Axioms stating that inﬁnite games of
various types are determined were studied by Stanis law Mazur, Stefan Banach and
Ulam in the late 1920’s and early 1930’s; were reintroduced by David Gale and
Frank Stewart [1953] in the 1950’s and again by Jan Mycielski and Hugo Steinhaus
[1962] in the early 1960’s; gained interest with the work of David Blackwell [1967]
and Robert Solovay in the late 1960’s; and attained increasing importance in the
1970’s and 1980’s, ﬁnally coming to a central position in contemporary set theory.
Mycielski and Steinhaus introduced the Axiom of Determinacy (AD), which
asserts the determinacy of Gω(A) for all A ⊆ωω. Work of Banach in the 1930’s
shows that AD implies that all sets of reals satisfy the property of Baire. In the
1960’s, Mycielski and ´Swierczkowski proved that AD implies that all sets of reals
are Lebesgue measurable, and Mycielski showed that AD implies countable choice
for reals. Together, these results show that determinacy provides a natural context
for certain areas of mathematics, notably analysis, free of the paradoxes induced
by the Axiom of Choice.
Unaware of the work of Banach, Gale and Stewart [1953] had shown that the
AD contradicts ZFC. However, the proof used a wellordering of the reals given
by the Axiom of Choice, and therefore did not give a nondetermined game of
this type with deﬁnable payoﬀset. Starting with Banach’s work, many simply
deﬁnable payoﬀsets were shown to induce determined games, culminating in D.

A Brief History of Determinacy
459
Anthony Martin’s celebrated 1974 result [1975] that all games with Borel payoﬀ
set are determined. This result came after Martin had used measurable cardinals
to prove the determinacy of games whose payoﬀset is an analytic sets of reals.
The study of determinacy gained interest from two theorems in 1967, the ﬁrst
due to Solovay and the second to Blackwell. Solovay proved that under AD, the
ﬁrst uncountable cardinal ω1 is a measurable cardinal, setting oﬀa study of strong
Ramsey properties on the ordinals implied by determinacy axioms. Blackwell used
open determinacy (proved by Gale and Stewart) to reprove a classical theorem of
Kazimierz Kuratowski. This also led to the application, by John Addison, Martin,
Yiannis Moschovakis and others, of stronger determinacy axioms to produce struc-
tural properties for deﬁnable sets of reals. These axioms included the determinacy
of ∆
∼
1
n sets of reals, for n ≥2, statements which would not be proved consistent
relative to large cardinals until the 1980’s.
The large cardinal hierarchy was developed over the same period, and came to be
seen as a method for calibrating consistency strength. In the 1970’s, various special
cases of ∆
∼
1
2 determinacy were located on this scale, in terms of the large cardinals
needed to prove them. Determining the consistency (relative to large cardinals) of
forms of determinacy at the level of ∆
∼
1
2 and beyond would take the introduction
of new large cardinal concepts. Martin (in 1978) and W. Hugh Woodin (in 1984)
would prove Π∼
1
2-determinacy and ADL(R) respectively, using hypotheses near the
very top of the large cardinal hierarchy. In a dramatic development, the hypotheses
for these results would be signiﬁcantly reduced through work of Woodin, Martin
and John Steel. The initial impetus for this development was a seminal result
of Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor and Saharon Shelah which showed,
assuming the existence of a supercompact cardinal, that there exists a generic
elementary embedding with well-founded range and critical point ω1. Combined
with work of Woodin, this yielded the Lebesgue measurability of all sets in the
inner model L(R) from this hypothesis. Shelah and Woodin would reduce the
hypothesis for this result further, to the assumption that there exist inﬁnitely
many Woodin cardinals below a measurable cardinal.
Woodin cardinals would turn out to be the central large cardinal concept for the
study of determinacy. Through the study of tree representations for sets of reals,
Martin and Steel would show that Π∼
1
n+1-determinacy follows from the existence
of n Woodin cardinals below a measurable cardinal, and that this hypothesis was
not suﬃcient to prove stronger determinacy results for the projective hierarchy.
Woodin would then show that the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals
below a measurable cardinal implies ADL(R), and he would locate the exact con-
sistency strengths of ∆
∼
1
2-determinacy and ADL(R) at one Woodin cardinal and ω
Woodin cardinals respectively.
In the aftermath of these results, many new directions were developed, and we
give only the briefest indication here. Using techniques from inner model theory,
tight bounds were given for establishing the exact consistency strength of many
determinacy hypotheses. Using similar techniques, it has been shown that almost
every natural statement (i.e., not invented speciﬁcally to be a counterexample)

460
Paul B. Larson
implies directly those determinacy hypotheses of lesser consistency strength. For
instance, by G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, ZFC cannot prove that the
AD holds in L(R), as the latter implies the consistency of the former. Empirically,
however, every natural extension of ZFC without this limitation (i.e., not proved
consistent by AD) does appear to imply that AD holds in L(R).
This sort of
phenomenon is taken by some as evidence that the statement that AD holds in
L(R), and other determinacy axioms, should be counted among the true statements
extending ZFC.
The history presented here relies heavily on those given by Jackson [2010],
Kanamori [1995; 2003], Moschovakis [2009], Neeman [2004] and Steel [2008a]. As
the title suggests, this is a selective and abbreviated account of the history of
determinacy. We have omitted many interesting topics, including, for instance,
Blackwell games [Blackwell, 1969; Martin, 1998; Martin et al., 2003] and prov-
ing determinacy in second-order arithmetic [Louveau and Saint-Raymond, 1987;
Louveau and Saint-Raymond, 1988; Koellner and Woodin, 2010].
2
EARLY DEVELOPMENTS
The ﬁrst published paper in mathematical game theory appears to be Zermelo’s
paper [1913] on chess. Although he noted that his arguments apply to all games of
reason not involving chance, Zermelo worked under two additional chess-speciﬁc
assumptions. The ﬁrst was that the game in question has only ﬁnitely many states,
and the second was that an inﬁnite run of the game was to be considered a draw.
Zermelo speciﬁed a condition which is equivalent to having a winning strategy
in such a game guaranteeing a win within a ﬁxed number of moves, as well as
another condition equivalent to having a strategy guaranteeing that one will not
lose within a given ﬁxed number of moves. His analysis implicitly introduced the
notions of game tree, subtree of a game tree, and quasi-strategy.3
The paper states indirectly, but does not quite prove, or even deﬁne, the state-
ment that in any game of perfect information with ﬁnitely many possible positions
such that inﬁnite runs of the game are draws, either one player has a strategy that
guarantees a win, or both players have strategies that guarantee at least a draw.
A special case of this fact is determinacy for games of perfect information of a
ﬁxed ﬁnite length, which is sometimes called Zermelo’s Theorem.
K˝onig [1927] applied the fundamental fact now known as K˝onig’s Lemma to
the study of games, among other topics. While K˝onig’s formulation was some-
what diﬀerent, his Lemma is equivalent to the assertion that every inﬁnite ﬁnitely
branching tree with a single root has an inﬁnite path (a path can be found by iter-
atively choosing any successor node such that the tree above that node is inﬁnite).
Extending Zermelo’s analysis to games in which inﬁnitely many positions are pos-
sible while retaining the condition that each player has only ﬁnitely many options
3As deﬁned above, a strategy for a given player speciﬁes a move in each relevant position; a
quasi-strategy merely speciﬁes a set of acceptable moves. The distinction is important when the
Axiom of Choice fails, but is less important in the context of Zermelo’s paper.

A Brief History of Determinacy
461
at each point, K˝onig used the statement above to prove that in such a game, if
one player has a strategy (from a given point in the game) guaranteeing a win,
then he can guarantee victory within a ﬁxed number of moves. The application of
K˝onig’s Lemma to the study of games was suggested by von Neumann.
K´almar [1928] took the analysis a step further by proving Zermelo’s Theorem for
games with inﬁnitely many possible moves in each round. His arguments proceeded
by assigning transﬁnite ordinals to nodes in the game tree, a method which remains
an important tool in modern set theory. K´almar explicitly introduced the notion
of a winning strategy for a game, though his strategies were also quasi-strategies as
above. In his analysis, K´almar introduced a number of other important technical
notions, including the notion of a subgame (essentially a subtree of the original
game tree), and classifying strategies into those which depend only on the current
position in the game and those which use the history of the game so far.4
Games of perfect information for which the set of inﬁnite runs is divided into
winning sets for each player appear in a question by Mazur in the Scottish Book,
answered by Banach in an entry dated August 4, 1935 (see [Mauldin, 1981, p. 113]).
Following up on Mazur’s question (still in the Book), Ulam asked about games
where two players collaborate to build an inﬁnite sequence of 0’s and 1’s by al-
ternately deciding each member of the sequence, with the winner determined by
whether the inﬁnite sequence constructed falls inside some predetermined set E.
Essentially raising the issue of determinacy for arbitrary Gω(E), Ulam asked: for
which sets E does the ﬁrst player (alternately, the second player) have a winning
strategy? (Section 2.1 below has more on the Banach-Mazur game.)
Games of perfect information were formally deﬁned in 1944 by von Neumann
and Morgenstern [2004]. Their book also contains a proof that games of perfect
information of a ﬁxed ﬁnite length are determined (page 123).
Inﬁnite games of perfect information were reintroduced by Gale and Stewart
[1953], who were unaware of the work of Mazur, Banach and Ulam (Gale, personal
communication). They showed that a nondetermined game can be constructed us-
ing the Axiom of Choice (more speciﬁcally, from a wellordering of the set of real
numbers).5 They also noted that the proof from the Axiom of Choice does not
give a deﬁnable undetermined game, and raised the issue of whether determinacy
might hold for all games with a suitably deﬁnable payoﬀset. Towards this end,
they introduced a topological classiﬁcation of inﬁnite games of perfect information,
deﬁning a game (or the set of runs of the game which are winning for the ﬁrst
player) to be open if all winning runs for the ﬁrst player are won at some ﬁnite
4See [Schwalbe and Walker, 2001] for much more on these papers of Zermelo, K˝onig and
K´almar.
5Given a set Y , we let ACY denote the statement that whenever {Xa | a ∈Y } is a collection
of nonempty sets, there is a function f with domain Y such that f(a) ∈Xa for all a ∈Y .
Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice [1904] is equivalent to the statement that ACY holds for all sets Y .
A linear ordering ≤of a set X is a wellordering if every nonempty subset of X has a ≤-least
element. The Axiom of Choice is equivalent to the statement that there exist wellorderings of
every set. K˝onig’s Lemma is a weak form of the Axiom of Choice and cannot be proved in ZF
(see [L´evy, 1979, Exercise IX.2.18]).

462
Paul B. Larson
stage (i.e., if, whenever ⟨x0, x1, x2, . . .⟩is a winning run of the game for the ﬁrst
player, there is some n such that the ﬁrst player wins all runs of the game extending
⟨x0, . . . , xn⟩). Using this framework, they proved a number of fundamental facts,
including the determinacy of all games whose payoﬀset is a Boolean combination
of open sets (i.e., in the class generated from the open sets by the operations of
ﬁnite union, ﬁnite intersection and complementation). The determinacy of open
games would become the basis for proofs of many of the strongest determinacy hy-
potheses. Gale and Stewart also asked a number of important questions, including
the question of whether all Borel games are determined (to be answered positively
by Martin [1975] in 1974).6 Classifying games by the deﬁnability of their payoﬀs
sets would be an essential tool in the study of determinacy.
2.1
Regularity properties
Early motivation for the study of determinacy was given by its implications for
regularity properties for sets of reals. In particular, determinacy of certain games
of perfect information was shown to imply that every set of reals has the property
of Baire and the perfect set property, and is Lebesgue measurable.7 These three
facts themselves each contradict the Axiom of Choice. We will refer to Lebesgue
measurability, the property of Baire and the perfect set property as the regularity
properties, the fact that there are other regularity properties notwithstanding.
Question 43 of the Scottish Book, posed by Mazur, asks about games where
two players alternately select the members of a shrinking sequence of intervals of
real numbers, with the ﬁrst player the winner if the intersection of the sequence
intersects a set given in advance. Banach posted an answer in 1935, showing that
such games are determined if and only if the given set is either meager (in which
case the second player wins) or comeager relative to some interval (in which case
the ﬁrst player wins), i.e., if and only if the given set has the Baire property (see
[Oxtoby, 1980, pp. 27-30], [Kanamori, 2003, pp. 373-374]). This game has come
to be known as the Banach-Mazur game. Using an enumeration of the rationals,
one can code intervals with rational endpoints with integers, getting a game on
integers.
Morton Davis [1964] studied a game, suggested by Dubins, where the ﬁrst player
plays arbitrarily long ﬁnite strings of 0’s and 1’s and the second player plays
individual 0’s and 1’s, with the payoﬀset a subset of the set of inﬁnite binary
sequences as before. Davis proved that the ﬁrst player has a winning strategy in
6The Borel sets are the members of the smallest class containing the open sets and closed
under the operations of complementation and countable union. The collection of Borel sets is
generated in ω1 many stages from these two operations. A natural process assigns a measure to
each Borel set (see, for instance, [Halmos, 1950]).
7A set of reals X has the property of Baire if X △O is meager for some open set O, where the
symmetric diﬀerence A △B of two sets A and B is the set (A \ B) ∪(B \ A), and A \ B = {x ∈
A | x ̸∈B}. A set of reals X has the perfect set property if it is countable or contains a perfect
set (an uncountable closed set without isolated points). A set of reals X is Lebesgue measurable
if there is a Borel set B such that X △B is a subset of a Borel measure 0 set. See [Oxtoby, 1980].

A Brief History of Determinacy
463
such a game if and only if the payoﬀset contains a perfect set, and the second
player has a winning strategy if and only if the payoﬀset is ﬁnite or countably
inﬁnite. The determinacy of all such games then implies that every uncountable
set of reals contains a perfect set (asymmetric games of this type can be coded by
integer games of perfect information). It follows that under AD there is no set of
reals whose cardinality falls strictly between ℵ0 and 2ℵ0.8
Mycielski and Stanis law ´Swierczkowski [1964] showed that the determinacy of
certain integer games of perfect information implies that every subset of the real
line is Lebesgue measurable. Simpler proofs of this fact were later given by Leo
Harrington (see [Kanamori, 2003, pp. 375-377]) and Martin [2003].
By way of contrast, an argument of Vitali [1905] shows that under ZFC there
are sets of reals which are not Lebesgue measurable. Banach and Tarski ([1924],
see also [Wagon, 1993]), building on work of Hausdorﬀ[1914], showed that under
ZFC the unit ball can be partitioned into ﬁve pieces which can be rearranged to
make two copies of the same sphere, again violating Lebesgue measurability as well
as physical intuition. As with the undetermined game given by Gale and Stewart,
the constructions of Vitali and Banach-Tarski use the Axiom of Choice and do not
give deﬁnable examples of nonmeasurable sets. Via the Mycielski-´Swierczkowski
theorem, determinacy results would rule out the existence of deﬁnable examples,
for various notions of deﬁnability.
2.2
Deﬁnability
As discussed above, ZFC implies that open sets are determined, and implies also
that there exists a nondetermined set. The study of determinacy was to merge nat-
urally with the study of sets of reals in terms of their deﬁnability (i.e., descriptive
set theory), which can be taken as a measure of their complexity. In this section
we brieﬂy introduce some important deﬁnability classes for sets of reals. Standard
references include [Moschovakis, 1980; Kechris, 1995]. While we do mention some
important results in this section, much of the section can be skipped on a ﬁrst
reading and used for later reference.
A Polish space is a topological space which is separable and completely metriz-
able. Common examples include the integers ω, the reals R, the open interval
(0, 1), the Baire space ωω, the Cantor space ω2 and their ﬁnite and countable
products. Uncountable Polish spaces without isolated points are a natural setting
for studying deﬁnable sets of reals. For the most part we will concentrate on the
Baire space and its ﬁnite powers.
Following notation introduced by Addison [1958],9 open subsets of a Polish
space are called Σ∼
0
1, complements of Σ∼
0
nsets are Π∼
0
n, and countable unions of Π∼
0
n
8i.e., for every set X, if there exist injections f : ω →X and g : X →2ω, then either X is
countable or there exists a bijection between X and 2ω.
9The papers [Addison, 1958] and [Addison, 1959] appear in the same volume of Fundamenta
Mathematicae. The front page of the volume gives the date 1958-1959. The individual papers
have the dates 1958 and 1959 on them, respectively.

464
Paul B. Larson
sets are Σ∼
0
n+1. More generally, given a positive α < ω1, Σ∼
0
α consists of all countable
unions of members of S
β<α Π∼
0
β, and Π∼
0
α consists of all complements of members
of Σ∼
0
α. The Borel sets are the members of S
α<ω1 Σ∼
0
α.
A pointclass is a collection of subsets of Polish spaces.
Given a pointclass
Γ ⊆P(ωω), we let Det(Γ) and Γ-determinacy each denote the statement that
Gω(A) is determined for all A ∈Γ. Philip Wolfe [1955] proved Σ∼
0
2-determinacy in
ZFC. Davis [1964] followed by proving Π∼
0
3-determinacy. Jeﬀrey Paris [1972] would
prove Σ∼
0
4-determinacy. However, this result was proved after Martin had used a
measurable cardinal to prove analytic determinacy (see Section 5.2).
Continuous images of Π∼
0
1 sets are said to be Σ∼
1
1, complements of Σ∼
1
n sets are
Π∼
1
n,and continuous images of Π∼
1
n sets are Σ∼
1
n+1. For each i ∈{0, 1} and n ∈ω, the
pointclass ∆
∼
i
n is the intersection of Σ∼
i
n and Π∼
i
n. The boldface projective pointclasses
Σ∼
1
n, Π∼
1
n, ∆
∼
1
n were introduced independently by Nikolai Luzin [1925c; 1925b; 1925a]
and Wac law Sierpi´nski [1925]. The notion of a boldface pointclass in general (i.e.,
possibly non-projective) is used in various ways in the literature. We will say that
a pointclass Γ is boldface (or closed under continuous preimages or continuously
closed) if f −1[A] ∈Γ for all A ∈Γ and all continuous functions f between Polish
spaces (where A is a subset of the codomain). The classes Σ∼
0
n, Π∼
0
n, ∆
∼
0
n are also
boldface in this sense.
The pointclass Σ∼
1
1 is also known as the class of analytic sets, and was given an
independent characterization by Mikhail Suslin [1917]: a set of reals A is analytic
if and only if there exists a family of closed sets Ds (for each ﬁnite sequence s
consisting of integers) such that A is the set of reals x for which there is an ω-
sequence S of integers such that x ∈T
n∈ω DS↾n.10 Suslin showed that there exist
non-Borel analytic sets, and that the Borel sets are exactly the ∆
∼
1
1 sets.
We let ∃0 and ∃1 denote existential quantiﬁcation over the integers and reals,
respectively, and ∀0 and ∀1 the analogous forms of universal quantiﬁcation. Given
a set A ⊆(ωω)k+1, for some positive integer k, ∃1A is the set of (x1, . . . , xk) ∈
(ωω)k such that for some x ∈ωω, (x, x1, . . . , xk) ∈A, and ∀1A is the set of
(x1, . . . , xk) ∈(ωω)k such that for all x ∈ωω, (x, x1, . . . , xk) ∈A.
Given a
pointclass Γ, ∃1Γ consists of ∃1A for all A ∈Γ, and ∀1Γ consists of ∀1A for
all A ∈Γ. It follows easily that for each positive integer n, ∃1Π∼
1
n = Σ∼
1
n+1 and
∀1Σ∼
1
n = Π∼
1
n+1.
Given a pointclass Γ, ¬Γ is the set of complements of members of Γ, and ∆Γ is
the pointclass Γ ∩¬Γ; Γ is said to be selfdual if ∆Γ = Γ. A set A ∈Γ is said to
be Γ-complete if every member of Γ is a continuous preimage of A. If Γ is closed
under continuous preimages and Γ-determinacy holds, then ¬Γ-determinacy holds.
Each of the regularity properties for a set of reals A are given by the determinacy
of games with payoﬀset simply deﬁnable from A (indeed, continuous preimages
of A), but not necessarily with payoﬀA itself. It follows that when Γ is a boldface
pointclass, Γ-determinacy implies the regularity properties for sets of reals in Γ.
10For S a function with domain ω, and n ∈ω, S↾n = ⟨S(0), . . . , S(n −1)⟩.

A Brief History of Determinacy
465
A simple application of Fubini’s theorem shows that if Γ is a boldface pointclass
and there exists in Γ a wellordering of a set of reals of positive Lebesgue measure,
then there is a non-Lebesgue measurable set in Γ. Skipping ahead for a moment, in
the early 1970’s Alexander Kechris and Martin, using a technique of Solovay called
unfolding, proved that for each integer n, Π∼
1
n-determinacy plus countable choice
for sets of reals11 implies that all Σ∼
1
n+1 sets of reals are Lebesgue measurable,
have the Baire property and have the perfect set property (see [Kanamori, 2003,
pp. 380-381]).
As developed by Stephen Kleene, the eﬀective (or lightface) pointclasses Σ0
n,
Π0
n, ∆0
n [1943] and Σ1
n, Π1
n, ∆1
n [1955c; 1955b; 1955a] are formed in the same way
as their boldface counterparts, starting instead from Σ0
1, the collection of open
sets O such that the set of indices for basic open sets contained in O (under a
certain natural enumeration of the basic open sets) is recursive (see [Moschovakis,
2009], for instance). Sets in Σ0
1 are called semirecursive, and sets in ∆0
1 are called
recursive. Given a ∈ωω, Σ0
1(a) is the collection of open sets O such that the set
of indices for basic open sets contained in O is recursive in a, and the relativized
lightface projective pointclasses Σ0
n(a), Π0
n(a), ∆0
n(a), Σ1
n(a), Π1
n(a), ∆1
n(a) are
built from Σ0
n in the manner above. It follows that each boldface pointclass is
the union of the corresponding relativized lightface classes (relativizing over each
member of ωω).
Following [Moschovakis, 2009], a pointclass is adequate if it contains all recursive
sets and is closed under ﬁnite unions and intersections, bounded universal and
existential integer quantiﬁcation (see [Moschovakis, 2009, p. 119]) and preimages
by recursive functions.12 The arithmetic and projective pointclasses are adequate
(see [Moschovakis, 2009, pp. 118-120]).
Given a Polish space X, an integer k, a set A ⊆Xk+1 and x ∈X, Ax is the
set of (x1, . . . , xk) such that (x, x1, . . . , xk) ∈A. A set A ⊆Xk+1 in a pointclass
Γ is said to be universal for Γ if each subset of Xk in Γ has the form Ax for some
x ∈X. Pointclasses of the form Σ1
n, Π1
n have universal members. Those of the
form ∆1
n do not. Each member of each boldface pointclass is of the form Ax for
A a member of the corresponding eﬀective class. Conversely, as each member of
each lightface projective pointclass listed above is deﬁnable, each member of each
corresponding boldface pointclass is deﬁnable from a real number as a parameter.
A set of reals is said to be Σ2
1 (Π2
1) if is deﬁnable by a formula of the form
∃X ⊆R φ (∀X ⊆R φ), where all quantiﬁers in φ range over the reals or the
integers.
In the L´evy hierarchy [L´evy, 1965b], a formula φ in the language of set theory is
∆0 (equivalently Σ0, Π0) if all quantiﬁers appearing in φ are bounded (see [Jech,
2003, Chapter 13]); Σn+1 if it has the form ∃xψ for some Πn formula ψ; and Πn+1
11The statement that whenever Xn (n ∈ω) are nonempty sets of reals, there is a function
f : ω →R such that f(n) ∈Xn for each n. Countable choice for sets of reals is a consequence of
AD, as shown by Mycielski [1963] (see Section 2.3).
12A function f from a Polish space X to a Polish space Y is said to be recursive if the set of
pairs x ∈X, n ∈ω such that f(x) is in the n-th basic open neighborhood of Y is semi-recursive.

466
Paul B. Larson
if it has the form ∀xψ for some Σn formula ψ. A set is Σn-deﬁnable if it can
be deﬁned by a Σn formula (and similarly for Πn). We say that a model M is
Γ-correct, for a class of formulas Γ, if for all φ in Γ and x ∈M, M |= φ(x) if
and only if V |= φ(x). If M is a model of ZF, we say that a set in M is ΣM
n if it
is deﬁnable by a Σn formula relativized to M (and similarly for other classes of
formulas).
G¨odel’s inner model L is the smallest transitive model of ZFC containing the
ordinals. For any set A, G¨odel’s constructible universe L generalizes to two inner
models L(A) and L[A], developed respectively by Andr´as Hajnal [1956; 1961] and
Azriel L´evy [1957; 1960] (see [Jech, 2003, Chapter 13] or [Kanamori, 2003, p. 34]).
Given a set A, L(A) is the smallest transitive model of ZF containing A and the
ordinals and L[A] is the smallest transitive model of ZF containing the ordinals
and closed under the function X 7→A∩X. Alternately, L(A) is constructed in the
same manner as L, but introducing the members of the transitive closure of the set
{A} at the ﬁrst level, and L[A] is constructed as L, but by adding a predicate for
membership in A to the language.13 When A is contained in L, L(A) and L[A] are
the same. While L[A] is always a model of AC, L(A) need not be. Indeed, L(R)
is a model of AD in the presence of suitably large cardinals, and is thus a natural
example of a “smaller universum” as described in the quote from [Mycielski and
Steinhaus, 1962] in Section 2.3.
Though it can be formulated in other ways, we will view the set 0# (“zero
sharp”) as the theory of a certain class of ordinals which are indiscernibles over
the inner model L. This notion was independently isolated by Solovay [1967] and
by Jack Silver in his 1966 Berkeley Ph.D. thesis (see [1971]). The existence of 0#
cannot be proved in ZFC, as it serves as a sort of transcendence principle over
L. For instance, if 0# exists then every uncountable cardinal of V is a strongly
inaccessible cardinal in L.14 For any set X there is an analogous notion of X# (“X
sharp”) serving as a transcendence principle over L(X) (see [Kanamori, 2003]).
2.3
The Axiom of Determinacy
The Axiom of Determinacy, the statement that all length ω integer games of perfect
information are determined, was proposed by Mycielski and Steinhaus [1962].15 In
a passage that anticipated a commonly accepted view of determinacy, they wrote
It is not the purpose of this paper to depreciate the classical math-
ematics with its fundamental “absolute” intuitions on the universum
of sets (to which belongs the axiom of choice), but only to propose
13A set x is transitive if z ∈x whenever y ∈x and z ∈y. The transitive closure of a set x is
the smallest transitive set containing x.
14A cardinal κ is strongly inaccessible if it is uncountable, regular and a strong limit (i.e., 2γ < κ
for all γ < κ). If κ is a strongly inaccessible cardinal, then Vκ is a model of ZFC. Hence, by
G¨odel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals cannot
be proved in ZFC. See [Jech, 2003] for the deﬁnition of Vα, for an ordinal α.
15We continue to use the now-standard abbreviation AD for the Axiom of Determinacy; it was
called (A) in [Mycielski and Steinhaus, 1962].

A Brief History of Determinacy
467
another theory which seems very interesting although its consistency
is problematic. Our axiom can be considered as a restriction of the
classical notion of a set leading to a smaller universum, say of deter-
mined sets, which reﬂect some physical intuitions which are not fulﬁlled
by the classical sets . . . Our axiom could be considered as an axiom
added to the classical set theory claiming the existence of a class of sets
satisfying (A) and the classical axioms (without the axiom of choice).
Mycielski and Steinhaus summarized the state of knowledge of determinacy at
that time, including the fact that AD implies that all sets of reals are Lebesgue
measurable and have the Baire property, and they noted that by results of Kurt
G¨odel and Addison [1958], there is in G¨odel’s constructible universe L (and thus
consistently with ZFC) a ∆1
2 wellordering of the reals, and thus a ∆1
2 set which is
not determined.
In his [1963], Mycielski proved several fundamental facts about determinacy,
including the fact that AD implies countable choice for set of reals (he credits
this result to ´Swierczkowski, Dana Scott and himself, independently). Thus, while
AD contradicts the Axiom of Choice, it implies a form of Choice which suﬃces
for many of its most important applications, including the countable additivity
of Lebesgue measure. Via countable choice for sets of reals, AD implies that ω1
is regular.16 Mycielski also showed that AD implies that there is no uncountable
wellordered sequence of reals. In conjunction with the perfect set property, this
implies that under determinacy, ωV
1 is a strongly inaccessible cardinal in the inner
model L (and even in L[a] for any real number a), a fact which was to be greatly
extended by Solovay, Martin and Woodin. Harrington [1978] would show that Π1
1-
determinacy implies that 0# exists, and thus that Π1
1-determinacy is not provable
in ZFC.
In the same paper, Mycielski showed that ZF implies the existence of an unde-
termined game of perfect information of length ω1 where the players play countable
ordinals instead of integers. An interesting aspect of the proof is that it does not
give a speciﬁc undetermined game. As a slight variant on Mycielski’s argument,
consider the game in which the ﬁrst player plays a countable ordinal α (and then
makes no other moves for the rest of the game) and the second player plays a
sequence of integers coding α, under some ﬁxed coding of hereditarily countable
sets by reals.17 Since the ﬁrst player cannot have a winning strategy in this game,
determinacy for the game implies the existence of an injection from ω1 into R,
which contradicts AD but is certainly by itself consistent with ZF, as it follows
from ZFC. Later results of Woodin would show that, assuming the consistency
16The ordinal ω1 is the ﬁrst uncountable ordinal. A cardinal κ is regular if, for every γ < κ,
every function f : γ →κ has range bounded in κ.
Under ZFC, every successor cardinal is
regular. Feferman and L´evy [1963] (see also [Howard and Rubin, 1998, pp. 153-154]) showed
that the singularity of ω1 is consistent with ZF. Moti Gitik [1980] showed that it is consistent
with ZF (relative to large cardinals) that ω is the largest regular cardinal.
17The hereditarily countable sets are those sets whose transitive closures are countable. Such
sets are naturally coded by sets of integers.

468
Paul B. Larson
of certain large cardinal hypotheses, ZFC is consistent with the statement that
every integer game of length ω1 with payoﬀset deﬁnable from real and ordinal
parameters is determined (see Section 6.2, and [Neeman, 2004, p. 298]). Mycielski
noted that under AD there are no nonprincipal ultraﬁlters18 on ω (this follows
from Lebesgue measurability for all sets of reals plus a result of Sierpi´nski [1938]
showing that nonprincipal ultraﬁlters on ω give rise to nonmeasurable sets of re-
als), which implies that every ultraﬁlter is countably complete (i.e., closed under
countable intersections).
Finally, in a footnote on the ﬁrst page of the paper,
Mycielski reiterated a point made in the passage quoted above from his paper
with Steinhaus, suggesting that an inner model containing the reals could sat-
isfy AD. In a followup paper, Mycielski [1966] presented a number of additional
results, including the fact that there is a game in which the players play real num-
bers whose determinacy implies uniformization (see Section 3.2) for subsets of the
plane, another weak form of the Axiom of Choice.
In 1964, a year after Paul Cohen’s invention of forcing, Solovay [1970] proved
that if there exists a strongly inaccessible cardinal, then in a forcing extension there
exists an inner model containing the reals in which every set of reals satisﬁes the
regularity properties from Section 2.1. Shelah [1984] later showed that a strongly
inaccessible cardinal is necessary, in the sense that the Lebesgue measurability of
all sets of reals implies that ω1 is strongly inaccessible in all models of the form
L[a], for a ⊆ω. In the introduction to his paper, Solovay conjectured (correctly,
as it turned out) that large cardinals would imply that AD holds in L(R).
1967 saw two major results in the study of determinacy, one by Blackwell [1967]
and the other by Solovay.
Reversing chronological order by a few months, we
discuss Blackwell’s result and its consequences in the next section, and Solovay’s in
Section 4. These two sections correspond roughly to the work of the so-called Cabal
Seminar, whose proceedings were published in four volumes covering the years 1976
to 1985 [Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978a; Kechris et al., 1981b; Kechris et al., 1983;
Kechris et al., 1988] (at this time, one volume of a planned reissue has appeared
[Kechris et al., 2008]).
3
REDUCTION AND SCALES
Blackwell [1967] used open determinacy to reprove a theorem of Kuratowski [1936]
stating that the intersection of any two analytic sets A, B in a Polish space Y is
also the intersection of two analytic sets A′ and B′ such that A ⊆A′, B ⊆B′
and A′ ∪B′ = Y .19
Brieﬂy, the argument is as follows.
Since A and B are
analytic, there exist continuous surjections f : ωω →A and g: ωω →B.
For
18An ultraﬁlter on a nonempty set X is a collection U of nonempty subsets of X which is closed
under supersets and ﬁnite intersections, and which has the property that for every A ⊆X, exactly
one of A and X\A is in U. An ultraﬁlter is nonprincipal if it contains no ﬁnite sets. The existence
of nonprincipal ultraﬁlters on ω follows from ZFC, but (as this result shows) requires the Axiom
of Choice.
19Blackwell describes the discovery of his proof in [Albers and Alexanderson, 1985, p. 26].

A Brief History of Determinacy
469
each ﬁnite sequence ⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩, let Ω(⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩) be the set of x ∈ωω with
⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩as an initial segment; let R(⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩) be the closure (in Y ) of the
f-image of Ω(⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩); and let S(⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩) be the closure of the g-image
of Ω(⟨n0, . . . , nk⟩). Then for each z ∈Y , let G(z) be the game where players I and
II build x and y in ωω, with I winning if for some integer k, z ∈R(x↾k) \ S(y↾k),
II winning if for some integer k, z ∈S(y↾k) \ R(x↾(k + 1)), and the run of the
game being a draw if neither of these happens. Roughly, each player is creating
a real (x or y) to feed into his function, and trying to maintain for as long as
possible that the corresponding output can be made arbitrarily close to the target
real z; the loser is the ﬁrst player to fail to maintain this condition. Let A′ be the
set of z for which player I has a strategy guaranteeing at least a draw, and let B′
be the set of z for which player II has such a strategy. Then the determinacy of
open games implies that ωω = A′ ∪B′, and A ⊆A′, B ⊆B′ and A′ ∩B′ = A ∩B
follow from the fact that A is the range of f and B is the range of g. The sets A′
and B′ are analytic, as A′ is a projection of the set of pairs (φ, z) such that φ is
(a code for) a strategy for I in G(z) guaranteeing at least a draw, which is Borel,
and similarly for B′.20
3.1
Reduction, separation, norms and prewellorderings
In his [1936], Kuratowski deﬁned the reduction theorem (now called the reduction
property) for a pointclass Γ to be the statement that for any A, B in Γ there exist
disjoint A′, B′ in Γ with A′ ⊆A, B′ ⊆B and A′ ∪B′ = A ∪B. He showed in
this paper that Π∼
1
1 and Σ∼
1
2 have the reduction property; Addison [1958] showed
this for Π1
1(a) and Σ1
2(a), for each real number a. Blackwell’s argument proves the
reduction property for Π∼
1
1, working with the corresponding Σ∼
1
1 complements.
Kuratowski also deﬁned the ﬁrst separation theorem (now called the separation
property) for a pointclass Γ to be the statement that for any disjoint A, B in
Γ there exists C in ∆Γ with A ⊆C and B ∩C = ∅. This property had been
studied by Sierpi´nski [1924] and Luzin [1930a] for initial segments of the Borel
hierarchy. Kuratowski also noted that the reduction property for a pointclass Γ
implies the separation property for ¬Γ. Luzin [1927, pp. 51-55] proved that the
pointclass Σ∼
1
1 satisﬁes the separation property, by showing that disjoint Σ∼
1
1 sets
are contained in disjoint Borel sets. Petr Novikov [1935] showed that Π∼
1
2 satisﬁes
the separation property and Σ∼
1
2 does not. Novikov [1935] (in the case of Σ∼
1
2 sets)
and Addison [1958] showed that if Γ satisﬁes the reduction property and has a
so-called doubly universal member, and ∆Γ has no universal member, then Γ does
not have the separation property, so ¬Γ does not have the reduction property.21
20A projection of a set A
⊆
(ωω)k (for some integer k
≥
2) is a set of the form
{(x0, . . . , xi−i, xi+1, . . . , xk−1) | ∃xi(x0, . . . , xk−1) ∈A}, for some i < k.
21Members U,V of a pointclass Γ are doubly universal for Γ if for each pair A,B of members of
Γ there exist an x ∈ωω such that Ux = A and Vx = B. The non-selfdual projective pointclasses
(e.g., Σ1
1(a), Π1
1(a), Σ1
2(a), Π1
2(a), . . .) all have doubly universal members.

470
Paul B. Larson
Addison [1958; 1959] showed that if all real numbers are constructible, then the
reduction property holds for Σ∼
1
k, for all k ≥2.
Inspired by Blackwell’s argument, Addison and Martin independently proved
that ∆
∼
1
2-determinacy implies that Π∼
1
3 has the reduction property. Since the point-
class Σ∼
1
3 has a doubly universal member, this shows that ∆
∼
1
2-determinacy implies
the existence of a nonconstructible real. This fact also follows from G¨odel’s result
(discussed in [Addison, 1959]) that the Lebesgue measurability of all ∆1
2 sets im-
plies the existence of a nonconstructible real. Determinacy would soon be shown
to imply stronger structural properties for the projective pointclasses.
The key technical idea behind the (pre-determinacy) results listed above on
separation and reduction for the ﬁrst two levels of the projective hierarchy was
the notion of sieve (in French, crible). This construction ﬁrst appeared in a pa-
per of Lebesgue [1905], in which he proved the existence of Lebesgue-measurable
sets which are not Borel. In Lebesgue’s presentation, a sieve is an association
of a closed subset Fr of the unit interval [0, 1] to each rational number r in this
interval. The sieve then represents the set of x ∈[0, 1] such that {r | x ∈Fr} is
wellordered, under the usual ordering of the rationals. Using this approach, Luzin
and Sierpi´nski [1918; 1923] showed that Σ∼
1
1 sets and Π∼
1
1 sets are unions of ℵ1 many
Borel sets.
Much of the classical work of Luzin, Sierpi´nski, Kuratowski and Novikov men-
tioned here was redeveloped in the lightface context by Kleene [1943; 1955c; 1955b;
1955a], who was unaware of their previous work. The two theories were uniﬁed
primarily by Addison (for example, [1959]). While Blackwell’s argument general-
izes throughout the projective hierarchy, Moschovakis ([1967; 1969; 1970; 1971],
see also [2009, pp. 202-206]) developed via the eﬀective theory a generalization
of the Luzin-Sierpi´nski approach (decomposing a set of reals into a wellordered
sequence of simpler sets) which could be similarly propagated. Moschovakis’s goal
was to ﬁnd a uniform approach to the theory of Π1
1 and Σ1
2; he was unaware of
either Kuratowski’s work or determinacy (personal communication). He extracted
the following notions, for a given pointclass Γ: a Γ-norm for a set A is a function
ρ: A →On for which there exist relations R+ ∈Γ and R−∈¬Γ such that for any
y ∈A,
x ∈A ∧ρ(x) ≤ρ(y) ↔R+(x, y) ↔R−(x, y);
a pointclass Γ is said to have the prewellordering property if every A ∈Γ has
a Γ-norm.22
The prewellordering property was ﬁrst explicitly formulated by
Moschovakis in 1964; the deﬁnition just given is a reformulation due to Kechris.
Kuratowski [1936] and Addison [1958] had shown that a variant of the property
implies the reduction property; the same holds for the prewellordering property as
deﬁned by Moschovakis. Moschovakis applied Novikov’s arguments to show that
22A prewellordering is a binary relation which is wellfounded, transitive and total. A function
ρ from a set X to the ordinals induces a prewellording ⪯on X by setting a ⪯b if and only if
ρ(a) ≤ρ(b). Conversely, a prewellordering ⪯on a set X induces a function ρ from X to the
ordinals, where for each a ∈X, ρ(a) (the ⪯-rank of a) is the least ordinal α such that ρ(b) < α
for all b ∈X such that b ⪯a and a ̸⪯b. The range of ρ is called the length of ⪯.

A Brief History of Determinacy
471
if Γ is a projective pointclass such that ∀1Γ ⊆Γ, and Γ has the prewellordering
property, then so does the pointclass ∃1Γ. Martin and Moschovakis independently
completed the picture in 1968, proving what is now known as the First Periodicity
Theorem.
THEOREM 1 (First Periodicity Theorem.) Let Γ be an adequate pointclass and
suppose that ∆Γ-determinacy holds. Then for all A ∈Γ, if A admits a Γ-norm,
then ∀1A admits a ∀1∃1Γ-norm.
COROLLARY 2 ([Addison and Moschovakis, 1968; Martin, 1968].) Let Γ be an
adequate pointclass closed under existential quantiﬁcation over reals, and suppose
that ∆Γ-determinacy holds. If Γ satisﬁes the prewellordering property, then so
does ∀1Γ.
Projective Determinacy (PD) is the statement that all projective sets of reals
are determined. By the First Periodicity Theorem, under Projective Determinacy
the following pointclasses have the prewellordering property, for any real a:
Π1
1(a), Σ1
2(a), Π1
3(a), Σ1
4(a), Π1
5(a), Σ1
6(a), . . .
By contrast (see [Kanamori, 2003, pp. 409–410]), in L the pointclasses with the
prewellordering property are
Π1
1, Σ1
2, Σ1
3, Σ1
4, Σ1
5, Σ1
6, . . .
3.2
Scales
As noted above, the Axiom of Determinacy contradicts the Axiom of Choice, but it
is consistent with, and even implies, certain weak forms of Choice. If X and Y are
nonempty sets and A is a subset of the product X ×Y , a function f uniformizes A
if the domain of f is the set of x ∈X such that there exists a y ∈Y with (x, y) ∈A,
and such that for each x in the domain of f, (x, f(x)) ∈A. A consequence of the
Axiom of Choice, uniformization is the statement that for every A ⊆R × R there
is a function f which uniformizes A. Uniformization is not implied by AD, as it
fails in L(R) whenever there are no uncountable wellordered sets of reals ([Solovay,
1978b]; see Section 3.3).
Uniformization was implicitly introduced by Jacques Hadamard [1905], when
he pointed out that the Axiom of Choice should imply the existence of functions
on the reals which disagree everywhere with every algebraic function over the inte-
gers. Luzin [1930b] explicitly introduced the notion of uniformization and showed
that such functions exist. He also announced several results on uniformization,
including the fact that all Borel sets (but not all Σ∼
1
1 sets) can be uniformized by
Π∼
1
1 functions. The result on Borel sets was proved independently by Sierpi´nski.
Novikov [1935] showed that every Σ∼
1
1 set of pairs has a Σ∼
1
2 uniformization.
A pointclass Γ is said to have the uniformization property if every set of pairs
in Γ is uniformized by a function in Γ. Motokiti Kondo [1938] showed that the
pointclasses Π∼
1
1 and Σ∼
1
2 have the uniformization property. The eﬀective version of

472
Paul B. Larson
this result (i.e., for Π1
1 and Σ1
2) was proved by Addison. In some sense this is as
far as one can go in ZFC : L´evy [1965a] would show that consistently there exist
Π1
2 sets that cannot be uniformized by any projective function.
After studying Kondo’s proof, Moschovakis in 1971 isolated a property for sets
of reals which induces uniformizations. Given a set A and an ordinal γ, a scale
(or a γ-scale) on A into γ is a sequence of functions ρn : A →γ (n ∈ω) such that
whenever
• {xi | i ∈ω} ⊆A and limi→ω xi = x, and
• the sequence ⟨ρn(xi) : i ∈ω⟩is eventually constant for each n ∈ω,
then x ∈A and, for every n ∈ω, ρn(x) is less than or equal to the eventual value
of ⟨ρn(xi) : i ∈ω⟩. The scale is a Γ-scale if there exist R+ ∈Γ and R−∈¬Γ such
that for all y ∈A and all n ∈ω,
x ∈A ∧ρn(x) ≤ρn(y) ↔R+(n, x, y) ↔R−(n, x, y).
A pointclass Γ has the scale property if every A in Γ has a Γ-scale. Moschovakis
[1971] proved the following three theorems about the scale property.
THEOREM 3. If Γ is an adequate pointclass, A ∈Γ, and A admits a Γ-scale,
then ∃1A admits a ∃1∀1Γ-scale.
THEOREM 4 (Second Periodicity Theorem.) Suppose that Γ is an adequate point-
class such that ∆Γ-determinacy holds. Then for all A ∈Γ, if A admits a Γ-scale,
then ∀1A admits a ∀1∃1Γ-scale.
THEOREM 5. Suppose that Γ is an adequate pointclass which is closed under inte-
ger quantiﬁcation. Suppose that Γ has the scale property, and that ∆Γ-determinacy
holds. Then Γ has the uniformization property.
Kondo’s proof of uniformization for Π∼
1
1 shows that Π1
1(a) has the scale prop-
erty for every real a (see [Kanamori, 2003, p. 419]). It follows that under ∆
∼
1
2n-
determinacy, Π∼
1
2n+1 and Σ∼
1
2n+2 have the scale property, and every Π∼
1
2n+1 relation
on the reals can be uniformized by a Π∼
1
2n+1 relation (and similarly for Σ∼
1
2n+2).
Furthermore, under Projective Determinacy, for any real a, the projective point-
classes with the scale property are the same as those with the prewellordering
property: Π1
1(a), Σ1
2(a), Π1
3(a), Σ1
4(a), Π1
5(a), Σ1
6(a), etc..
A tree on a set X is a collection of ﬁnite sequences from X closed under initial
segments. Given sets X and Z, a positive integer k and a tree T on Xk × Z,
the projection of T, p[T], is the set of x ∈(Xω)k such that for some z ∈Zω,
(x↾n, z↾n) ∈T for all n ∈ω (strictly speaking, this deﬁnition involves the iden-
tiﬁcation of ﬁnite sequences of k-tuples with k-tuples of ﬁnite sequences). If one
substitutes the Baire space ωω for R, Suslin’s construction for analytic sets (see
Section 2.2) essentially presents them as projections of trees on ω ×ω, modulo the
representation of closed intervals. Many descriptive set theorists, starting perhaps
with Luzin and Sierpi´nski [1923], used trees to represent sets of reals, except that

A Brief History of Determinacy
473
they converted these trees to linear orders via what is now known as the Kleene-
Brouwer ordering (after [Brouwer, 1924] and [Kleene, 1955c]). The explicit use of
projections of trees as we have presented them here is due to Richard Mansﬁeld
[1970]. As pointed out in [Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978b], given an ordinal γ, a
γ-scale for a subset A of the Baire space naturally gives rise to a tree on ω×γ such
that p[T] = A. Given a set Z, a subset of the Baire space is said to be Z-Suslin if
it is the projection of a tree on ω×Z. Suslin’s representation of analytic sets shows
that a set is analytic if and only if it is ω-Suslin. Some authors use “Suslin” to
mean “analytic”. We will follow a diﬀerent usage, however, and say that a subset
of the Baire space is Suslin if is γ-Suslin for some ordinal γ.
Given a tree T on ω × Z and a wellordering of Z, a member of p[T] can be
found by following the so-called leftmost inﬁnite branch through T (similar to the
proof of K˝onig’s Lemma, one picks a path through the tree by taking the least
next step which is the initial segment of an inﬁnite path through the tree). In a
similar manner, a tree on (ω ×ω)×γ, for some ordinal γ, induces a uniformization
of the projection of the tree.
3.3
The game quantiﬁer
Given a Polish space X and a set B ⊆X × ωω, we let ⅁B denote the set of x ∈X
such that I has a winning strategy in Gω(Bx). If Γ is a pointclass, ⅁Γ is the class
{⅁B | B ∈Γ}. The following facts appear in [Moschovakis, 2009, pp. 245-246].
THEOREM 6. If Γ is an adequate pointclass then the following hold.
• ⅁Γ is adequate and closed under ∃0 and ∀0.
• ∃1Γ ⊆⅁Γ and ∀1Γ ⊆⅁Γ.
• If Det(Γ) holds, then ⅁Γ ⊆∀1∃1Γ.
The First Periodicity Theorem can be stated more generally as the fact that
if an adequate pointclass Γ has the prewellordering property, then so does ⅁Γ,
and the Second Periodicity Theorem can be similarly stated as saying that if an
adequate pointclass Γ has the scale property, then so does ⅁Γ (see [Moschovakis,
2009, pp. 246,267]). The propagation of these properties through the projective
pointclasses then follows from Theorem 6, given that they hold for Π∼
1
1 (and its
variants).
Modifying the notion of Γ-scale by dropping the requirement that ρn(x) is less
than or equal to the eventual value of ⟨ρn(xi) : i ∈ω⟩, one gets the notion of
Γ-semiscale. Moschovakis’s Third Periodicity Theorem [1973] concerns the deﬁn-
ability of winning strategies and is stated using the game quantiﬁer and the notion
of semiscale.
THEOREM 7 (Third Periodicity Theorem.) Let Γ be an adequate pointclass, and
suppose that Det(Γ) holds. Fix A ⊆ωω in Γ, and suppose that A admits a Γ-

474
Paul B. Larson
semiscale and that I has a winning strategy in the game Gω(A). Then I has a
winning strategy coded by a subset of ω in ⅁Γ.
One consequence the Third Periodicity Theorem in conjunction with Theorem
6 is the following [Moschovakis, 1973]: for any n ∈ω, if Σ∼
1
2n-determinacy holds,
A ⊆ωω is Σ1
2n(a) for some real a and I has a winning strategy in the game with
payoﬀA, then I has a winning strategy coded by a subset of ω in ∆1
2n+1(a).
Let ⅁1 denote the game quantiﬁer for real games, games of length ω where the
players alternate playing real numbers. Then ⅁1Σ∼
0
1 deﬁnes the inductive sets of
reals.23 Moschovakis [1978] showed that the inductive sets have the scale property.
Moschovakis [1983] showed that, assuming the determinacy of all games with payoﬀ
in the class built from the inductive sets by the operations of projection and
complementation, coinductive sets have scales in this class. Building on this work,
Martin and Steel [1983] showed that the pointclass Σ∼
2
1 has the scale property in
L(R). Kechris and Solovay had shown that if there is no wellordering of the reals
in L(R), then there exists in L(R) a set of reals that cannot be uniformized, the
set of pairs (x, y) such that y is not ordinal deﬁnable from x (i.e., deﬁnable from
x and some ordinals). This set is Π2
1 in L(R).
The Solovay Basis Theorem says that if P(A) is a Σ2
1 relation on subsets of ωω
and there exists a witness to P(A) in L(R), then there is a ∆2
1 witness. This reﬂec-
tion result, along with the Martin-Steel theorem on scales in L(R), compensates
in many circumstances for the fact that not every set of reals has a scale in L(R).
Steel [1983] applied Jensen’s ﬁne structure theory [1972] to the study of scales
in L(R), reﬁning and unifying a great deal of work on scales and Suslin cardinals.
Extending [Martin and Steel, 1983], he showed that for each positive ordinal α,
determinacy for all sets of reals in Jα(R) implies that the pointclass ΣJα(R)
1
has
the scale property.
Martin [1983] showed how to propagate the scale property using the game quan-
tiﬁer for integer games of ﬁxed countable length (this subsumes propagation by
the quantiﬁer ⅁1), and Steel [1988; 2008b] did the same for certain games of length
ω1.
3.4
Partially playful universes
The periodicity theorems showed that determinacy axioms imply structural prop-
erties for sets of reals beyond the classical regularity properties.
It remained
to show that these hypotheses were necessary.
Towards this end, Moschovakis
(see [Becker, 1978]) identiﬁed for each integer n (under the assumption of ∆
∼
1
k-
determinacy, where k is the greatest even integer less than n) the smallest tran-
sitive Σ1
n-correct model of ZF + Dependent Choices (DC) which contains all the
23Formally, this deﬁnition requires a deﬁnable association of ω-sequences of reals to individual
reals. Alternately, a set of reals is inductive if it is in Σ
JκR (R)
1
, where J refers to Ronald Jensen’s
constructibility hierarchy and κR is the least κ such that Jκ(R) is a model of Kripke-Platek set
theory.

A Brief History of Determinacy
475
ordinals (Joseph Shoenﬁeld [1961] had shown that L is Σ1
2-correct).24 This model
satisﬁes AC and ∆
∼
1
k-determinacy and has a Σ1
n+1 wellordering of the reals. In this
model, Π1
i has the scale property for all odd i ≤n, and Σ1
i has the scale property
for all other positive integers i.
Kechris and Moschovakis [1978b] introduced the models L[T2n+1], where T2n+1
denotes the tree for a Π1
2n+1-scale for a complete Π1
2n+1 set. Moschovakis showed
that L[T1] = L, and conjectured that L[T2n+1] is independent of the choice of
complete set and scale when for all n. This conjecture was proved by Howard
Becker and Kechris in [1984].
Solovay [1969] showed that if L∩R is countable, then it is the largest countable
Σ1
2 set of reals (i.e., a countable Σ1
2 set which contains all other such sets). Kechris
and Moschovakis [1972] showed that for each positive integer n, if Det(∆1
2n) holds
then there exists a largest countable Σ1
2n+2 set. The largest countable Σ1
2n set
came to be called C2n. Kechris [1975] showed that under Projective Determinacy
there is for each integer n a largest countable Π1
2n+1 set, which he also called
C2n+1.
The case n = 0 follows from ZF + DC and was shown independently
by David Guaspari, Kechris and Gerald Sacks [1976]. Kechris also showed that
under Projective Determinacy there are no largest countable Σ1
2n+1 or Π1
2n sets.
It follows that under Projective Determinacy the lightface projective pointclasses
with a largest countable set are the same as those in the zig-zag pattern above
for the prewellording property and the scale property. Harrington and Kechris
[1981] showed (under the assumption that AD holds in L(R)) that the reals of
each L[T2n+1] are exactly C2n+2, for all integers n (the case n = 1 was due to
Kechris and Martin).
Kechris showed (assuming Projective Determinacy) that each model L[C2n] sat-
isﬁes Det(∆
∼
1
2n−1) but not Det(Σ∼
1
2n−1), and has a ∆1
2n wellordering of its reals.
Martin would show that Det(∆
∼
1
2n) implies Det(Σ∼
1
2n) for each positive integer n.
3.5
Wadge degrees
In 1968, William Wadge considered the following game, given two sets of reals A
and B: I builds a real x, II builds a real y, and II wins if x ∈A ↔y ∈B.
Determinacy for this class of games is known as Wadge determinacy. Given two
sets of reals A, B, we say that A ≤W B (A has Wadge rank less than or equal to
B, or is Wadge reducible to B) if there is a continuous function f such that for
all reals x, x ∈A if and only if f(x) ∈B (i.e., such that A = f −1[B]). Wadge
determinacy implies that for any two sets of reals A, B, either A ≤W B (in the case
that II has a winning strategy) or ωω \ B ≤W A (in the case that I does), from
which it follows that for any two pointclasses closed under continuous preimages,
24The Axiom of Dependent Choices (DC) is the statement that if R is a binary relation on a
nonempty set X, and if for each x ∈X there is a y ∈X such that xRy, then there exists an
inﬁnite sequence ⟨xi : i < ω⟩such that xiRxi+1 for all i ∈ω. This statement is a weakening of the
Axiom of Choice, suﬃcient to prove K˝onig’s Lemma, the regularity of ω1 and the wellfoundedness
of ultrapowers by countably complete ultraﬁlters. See [Jech, 2003].

476
Paul B. Larson
either the two classes are dual (i.e., a pair of the form Γ, ¬Γ) or one is contained in
the other. Wadge showed that ≤W is wellfounded on the Borel sets, and Martin,
using an idea of Leonard Monk, using AD + DC, extended this to all sets of reals
under AD + CD (see [Van Wesep, 1978b]).
Wadge determinacy and the wellfoundedness of the Wadge hierarchy divide
P(ωω) into equivalence classes by Wadge reducibility and order these classes into a
wellfounded hierarchy, where each level consists either of one selfdual equivalence
class, or two non-selfdual classes, one consisting of all the complements of the
members of the other. Wadge determinacy also implies that every non-selfdual
adequate pointclass has a universal set (see [Van Wesep, 1978b, p. 162]).
The discovery of Wadge determinacy led to further progress on separation and
reduction. Robert Van Wesep [1978a] proved that under AD, if Γ is a non-selfdual
pointclass which is closed under continuous preimages, then Γ and ¬Γ cannot both
have the separation property. Kechris, Solovay and Steel [1981c] showed that under
AD + DC, if Γ ⊆L(R) is nonselfdual boldface pointclass and Γ is closed under
countable intersections and unions and either ∃1 or ∀1, but not complements, then
either Γ or ¬Γ has the prewellordering property. In 1981, Steel [1981] showed that
under AD, if Γ is a nonselfdual pointclass closed under continuous preimages, then
either Γ or ¬Γ has the separation property, and if one assumes in addition that
∆Γ is closed under ﬁnite unions, then either Γ or ¬Γ has the reduction property.
4
PARTITION PROPERTIES AND THE PROJECTIVE ORDINALS
A cardinal κ is measurable if there is a nonprincipal κ-complete ultraﬁlter on κ,
where κ-completeness means closure under intersections of fewer than κ many
elements. In ZFC measurable cardinals are strongly inaccessible. In 1967, Solovay
(see [Jech, 2003, p. 633] or [Kanamori, 2003, p. 348]) showed that AD implies
that the club ﬁlter on ω1 is an ultraﬁlter, which implies that ω1 is a measurable
cardinal.25 Ulam had shown that under ZFC there are stationary, co-stationary
subsets of ω1; Solovay’s result shows the opposite under AD. Solovay also showed
that under AD every subset of ω1 is constructible from a real (i.e., exists in L[a]
for some real number a). Since the measurability of ω1 implies that the sharp of
each real exists, this gives another proof that the club ﬁlter on ω1 is an ultraﬁlter,
since for any real a, if a# exists, then every subset of ω1 in L[a] either contains or
is disjoint from a tail of the a-indiscernibles below ω1, which is a club set.
A Turing degree is a nonempty subset of P(ω) closed under equicomputability.
A cone of Turing degrees is the set of all degrees above (or computing) a given
degree.26 Martin [1968] showed that under AD the cone measure on Turing degrees
is an ultraﬁlter, i.e., that every set of Turing degrees either contains or is disjoint
25A subset of an ordinal is closed unbounded (or club) if it is unbounded and closed in the
order topology on the ordinals, and stationary if it intersects every club set. The club ﬁlter on
an ordinal γ consists of all subsets of γ containing a club set.
26See [Soare, 1987; Cooper, 2004] for more on the Turing degrees, including a more precise
statement of their deﬁnition.

A Brief History of Determinacy
477
from a cone. This important fact has a relatively short and simple proof: the two
players collaborate to build a real, with the winner decided by whether the Turing
degree of the real falls inside the payoﬀset; the cone above the degree of any real
coding a winning strategy must contain or be disjoint from the payoﬀset. Martin
used this result to ﬁnd a simpler proof of the measurability of ω1. Solovay followed
by showing that ω2 is measurable as well. Turing determinacy is the restriction of
AD to payoﬀsets closed under Turing equivalence. This form of determinacy is
easily seen to suﬃce for Martin’s result. In the early 1980’s, Woodin would show
that, in L(R), AD and Turing determinacy are equivalent.
Given an ordered set X and an ordinal β, [X]β denotes the set of subsets of X
of ordertype β. Given ordinals, α, β, δ and γ, the expression α →(β)γ
δ denotes
the statement that for every function f : [α]γ →δ, there exists an X ∈[α]β such
that f is constant on [X]γ. Frank Ramsey [1930] proved that ω →(ω)n
2 holds
for each positive n ∈ω (this fact is known as Ramsey’s Theorem). For inﬁnitary
partitions, Paul Erd˝os and Andr´as Hajnal [1966] showed (in ZFC) that for any
inﬁnite cardinal κ there is a function f : [κ]ω →κ such that for every X ∈[κ]κ,
the range of f↾X is all of κ.
In 1968, Adrian Mathias [1968; 1977] showed that ω →(ω)ω
2 holds in Solovay’s
model from [1970], in which all sets of reals satisfy the regularity properties. A set
Y ⊆[ω]ω is said to be Ramsey if there exists an X ∈[ω]ω such that either [X]ω ⊆Y
or [X]ω∩Y = ∅. The statement ω →(ω)ω
2 is equivalent to the statement that every
subset of [ω]ω is Ramsey. Prikry [1976] showed that under ADR (determinacy for
games of perfect information of length ω for which the players play real numbers)
every subset of [ω]ω is Ramsey. It follows from the main theorem of [Martin and
Steel, 1983] that AD + V =L(R) implies that every such set is Ramsey. Whether
AD alone suﬃces is still an open question.
In late 1968, Martin (see [Kanamori, 2003, p. 392]) showed that AD implies
ω1 →(ω1)ω
2 (this implies for instance that the club ﬁlter on ω1 is an ultraﬁlter).
Kenneth Kunen then showed that AD implies that ω1 satisﬁes the weak partition
property, where a cardinal κ satisﬁes the weak partition property if κ →(κ)α
2
holds for every α < κ. Martin followed by showing that ω1 →(ω1)ω1
2 , again under
AD. The proof actually shows ω1 →(ω1)ω1
2ω and ω1 →(ω1)ω1
α for every countable
ordinal α. Martin and Paris (in an unpublished note [March, 1971], see [Kechris,
1978]) showed that under AD + DC, ω2 has the weak partition property.
Before continuing with this line of results, we brieﬂy discuss the Coding Lemma
and the projective ordinals.
4.1
Θ, the Coding Lemma and the projective ordinals
Following convention, we let Θ denote the least ordinal that is not a surjective
image of R. Under ZFC, Θ = c+, but under AD, Θ is a limit cardinal, as noted by
Harvey Friedman (see [Kanamori, 2003, p. 398]). This fact follows from a theorem
known as the Coding Lemma, due to Moschovakis [1970], extending earlier work
of Friedman and Solovay.

478
Paul B. Larson
Given a subset P of some Polish space, let Σ∼
1
1(P) denote the pointclass of sets
which are Σ1
1-deﬁnable using P and individual reals as parameters.
THEOREM 8 (Coding Lemma.) Assume ZF + AD. Let ⪯be a prewellordering
of a set of reals X. Let ξ be the length of ⪯and let A be a subset of ξ. Then there
exists a Y ⊆X in Σ∼
1
1(⪯) such that A is the set of ⪯-ranks of elements of Y .
As an immediate consequence, under AD, if ξ < Θ, then there is a surjection
from R onto P(ξ) (furthermore, if α < ΘM for some wellfounded model M of ZF
containing the reals, then such a surjection can be found in M). The proof of
the Coding Lemma uses a version of Kleene’s Recursion Theorem (ﬁrst proved in
[Kleene, 1938] for partial recursive functions on the integers), which can be stated
as saying that given a suitable coding under which each real x codes a continuous
partial function ˆx (our notation) on the reals, for each two-variable continuous
partial function g on the reals there is a real x such that ˆx(w) = g(x, w) for all
reals w.
If Γ is a pointclass, δΓ denotes the supremum of the lengths of the prewellorder-
ings of the reals in ∆Γ. The notation δ
∼
1
n is used to denote δΣ∼
1
n (which is the
same as δΠ∼
1n). The projective ordinals are the ordinals δ
∼
1
n, for n ∈ω \ {0}. It
follows from the results of [Luzin and Sierpi´nski, 1923] that Σ∼
1
1 prewellorderings of
the reals have countable length, and therefore that the ordinal δ
∼
1
1 is equal to ω1.
Moschovakis [1970] showed (under AD, using the Coding Lemma) that for each
n ∈ω, δ
∼
1
n+1 is a cardinal, and that δ
∼
1
2n+1 is regular and (using just PD) strictly
less than δ
∼
1
2n+2. Martin showed (without AD) that δ
∼
1
2 ≤ω2 (see [Kechris and
Moschovakis, 1978b]); together these results show that under AD, δ
∼
1
2 = ω2.
Kunen and Martin (see [Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978b]) independently es-
tablished from ZF + DC that every wellfounded κ-Suslin prewellordering has
length less than κ+ (this fact is sometimes called the Kunen-Martin Theorem).
Moschovakis ([1970]; see [Moschovakis, 2009, 4C.14]) showed (from PD) that any
Π∼
1
2n+1-norm on a complete Π∼
1
2n+1 set has length δ
∼
1
2n+1 (this result also uses
Kleene’s Recursion Theorem). By the scale property for Π∼
1
2n+1 sets (under the
assumption of DC + ∆
∼
1
2n-determinacy, given n ∈ω [Moschovakis, 1971]), every
Π∼
1
2n+1 set (and thus every Σ∼
1
2n+2 set) is δ
∼
1
2n+1-Suslin, and, since δ
∼
1
2n+1 is regular,
every Σ∼
1
2n+1 set is λ-Suslin for some λ < δ
∼
1
2n+1. It follows that under the same
hypothesis, δ
∼
1
2n+2 ≤(δ
∼
1
2n+1)+, and under AD that δ
∼
1
2n+2 = (δ
∼
1
2n+1)+ for each
n ∈ω.
Kechris [1974] proved (assuming AD) that δ
∼
1
2n+1 is a successor cardinal (its
predecessor is called λ2n+1).
It follows from his arguments, and those of the
previous paragraph, that the pointclasses Σ∼
1
2n+2 and Σ∼
1
2n+1 are exactly the δ
∼
1
2n+1-
Suslin and λ2n+1-Suslin sets respectively.
Given an ordinal λ, the λ-Borel sets of reals are those in the smallest class
containing the open sets and closed under complements and well-ordered unions of
length less than λ. Martin showed that if κ is a cardinal of uncountable coﬁnality,

A Brief History of Determinacy
479
then all κ-Suslin sets are κ+-Borel. He also showed (using AD + DC, the Coding
Lemma and Wadge determinacy) the δ
∼
1
2n+1-Borel sets are ∆
∼
1
2n+1, for each n ∈ω
(the reverse inclusion follows from the results of Moschovakis [1971] mentioned
above). Using this fact, Kechris proved (again, under AD) that λ2n+1 has coﬁnality
ω. It follows (under AD) that δ
∼
1
2n < δ
∼
1
2n+1 for each n ∈ω, so that under AD the
sequence ⟨δ
∼
1
n+1 : n ∈ω⟩is a strictly increasing sequence of successor cardinals.
Kunen [March, 1971] showed that δ
∼
1
n is regular for each positive n ∈ω.
Solovay noted that under AD, Θ is the Θ-th cardinal, and that under the further
assumption of V =L(R), Θ is regular (see [Kanamori, 2003, p. 398]). He showed
[1978b] that under DC, Θ has uncountable coﬁnality, and also that ZFC + ADR
+ cf(Θ) > ω proves the consistency of ZF + ADR, so that by G¨odel’s Second
Incompleteness Theorem, if ZF + ADR is consistent, then so is ZFC + ADR +
cf(Θ) = ω. Kechris [1984], using the proof of the Third Periodicity Theorem and
work of Martin, Moschovakis and Steel on scales [Martin et al., 1982], showed
that DC follows from AD + V =L(R). Woodin (see [Kechris, 1984]) strengthened
Solovay’s result that DC does not follow from AD by showing that, assuming AD
+ V =L(R) there is an inner model of a forcing extension satisfying ZF + AD +
¬ACω (DC directly implies ACω). Whether AD implies DC(ωω) (DC for relations
on ωω) is still open.
4.2
Partition properties and ultraﬁlters
Kunen in an unpublished note [September, 1971b] proved that δ
∼
1
2n →(δ
∼
1
2n)λ
2 for
all positive n ∈ω and λ < ω1, under AD. He also showed [September, 1971a]
(under the same hypothesis) that δ
∼
1
2n →(δ
∼
1
2n)δ
∼
1
2n
2
is false. Martin, in another
unpublished note from 1971, showed that δ
∼
1
2n+1 →(δ
∼
1
2n+1)λ
2 for all positive n ∈ω
and λ < ω1, under AD.
While Erd˝os and Hajnal [1958] had shown how to derive partition properties
from measurable cardinals, Eugene Kleinberg proved the following result in the
other direction, which shows (via λ = ω) that δ
∼
1
n is measurable for each positive
n ∈ω.27
THEOREM 9 ([Kleinberg, 1970].) If λ < κ, λ is regular, and κ →(κ)λ+λ
2
holds,
then Cλ
κ is a normal ultraﬁlter over κ.
In 1970, Kunen proved, using Martin’s result on the cone measure on the Tur-
ing degrees, that under AD, any ω1-complete ﬁlter on an ordinal λ < Θ can be
extended to an ω1-complete ultraﬁlter, and that every ultraﬁlter on an ordinal less
than Θ is deﬁnable from ordinal parameters (see [Kanamori, 2003, pp. 399-400]).
Solovay [1978b] proved that under ADR, there is a normal ultraﬁlter on Pℵ1R:
for each A ⊆Pℵ1R, consider the game where I and II collaborate to build a
sequence ⟨si : i < ω⟩consisting of ﬁnite sets of reals, and I wins if and only if
27We let Cλ
κ denote the ﬁlter generated by the set of λ-closed unbounded subsets of κ. A ﬁlter
is normal if every regressive function on a set in the ﬁlter is constant on a set in the ﬁlter.

480
Paul B. Larson
S{si : i ∈ω} ∈A.28 This implies (again, under ADR) that for each ordinal γ < Θ
there is a normal ultraﬁlter on Pℵ1γ. It is not known whether AD suﬃces for this
result, though Harrington and Kechris [1981] showed that if AD holds and γ is less
than a Suslin cardinal, then there is a normal ultraﬁlter on Pℵ1γ.29 Extending
work of Becker, Woodin [1983a] showed that there is just one such ultraﬁlter for
each γ < Θ, if either ADR holds or AD holds and γ is below a Suslin cardinal.
A cardinal κ is said to have the strong partition property if κ →(κ)κ
µ holds for
every µ < κ. As mentioned above, Martin showed that under AD, ω1 has the strong
partition property. In late 1977, Kechris adapted Martin’s argument to show that
under AD there exists a cardinal κ with the strong partition property such that
the set of λ < κ with the strong partition property is stationary below κ (see
[Kanamori, 2003, p. 432]). Pushing this further, Kechris, Kleinberg, Moschovakis
and Woodin [1981a] showed (using a uniform version of the Coding Lemma) that
AD implies that unboundedly many cardinals below Θ have the strong partition
property and are stationary limits of cardinals with the strong partition property.
They also showed that whenever λ is an ordinal below a cardinal with the strong
partition property, all λ-Suslin sets are determined. Using work of Steel [1983] and
Martin [1983], Kechris and Woodin [1983] showed that in L(R), AD is equivalent to
the assertion that Θ is a limit of cardinals with the strong partition property, and
also to the statement that all Suslin sets are determined. James Henle, Mathias
and Woodin [1985] later showed that the ﬁrst equivalence does not follow from ZF
+ DC, since the existence of a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter on ω is consistent with Θ
being a limit of cardinals with the strong partition property.
A key step in the proof of the Kechris-Woodin theorem was a transfer theorem
extending results of Harrington and Martin (discussed in Section 5.3). Harrington
and Martin had shown from ZF + DC that, for each real a, Π1
1(a)-determinacy is
equivalent to determinacy for the larger class S
β<ω2 β-Π1
1(a). Kechris and Woodin
showed, from the same hypothesis, that for all positive integers k, ∆
∼
1
2k-determinacy
is equivalent to ⅁(2k−1) S
β<ω2 β-Π∼
1
1-determinacy, where ⅁(2k−1) indicates an ap-
plication of 2k −1 many instances of the game quantiﬁer ⅁.
By Theorem 6,
this means that ∆
∼
1
2k-determinacy implies Π∼
1
2k-determinacy. Martin had proved
the lightface version in 1973 (see [Kechris and Solovay, 1985]). Later results of
Woodin and Itay Neeman [1995] would show that Π∼
1
n+1-determinacy is equivalent
to ⅁(n) S
β<ω2 β-Π∼
1
1-determinacy for all n ∈ω.
4.3
Cardinals, uniform indiscernibles and the projective ordinals
A cardinal κ is Ramsey if for every function f : [κ]<ω →{0, 1} (where [κ]<ω
denotes the ﬁnite subsets of κ) there exists A ∈[κ]κ such that for each n ∈ω,
28Given a cardinal κ and a set X, PκX denotes the collection of subsets of X of cardinality
less than κ. An ultraﬁlter U on PκX is normal if for each Y ∈U, if f is a regressive function on
Y (i.e., if dom(f) = Y and f(A) ∈A for all nonempty A ∈Y ) then f is constant on a set in U.
29An ordinal (necessarily a cardinal) κ is said to be Suslin if there is a set of reals which is
κ-Suslin but not λ-Suslin for any λ < κ.

A Brief History of Determinacy
481
f↾[κ]n is constant. Measurable cardinals are Ramsey, and if there exists a Ramsey
cardinal then the sharp of each real number exists. Assuming the existence of a
Ramsey cardinal, Martin and Solovay [1969] showed that nonempty Σ∼
1
3 subsets of
the plane have ∆
∼
1
4 uniformizations. As mentioned above, L´evy [1965a] had shown
that ZFC does not suﬃce for this result. Martin and Solovay used an analysis of
sharps for reals, and modeled their argument after the proof of the Kondo-Addison
theorem. Mansﬁeld [1971] extended the Martin-Solovay analysis to show (using a
measurable cardinal) that nonempty Π∼
1
2 sets are uniformized by Π∼
1
3 functions.
Given a positive ordinal α, uα denotes the αth uniform indiscernible, the αth
ordinal which is a Silver indiscernible for each real number. As bijections between
ω and countable ordinals can be coded by reals, the ﬁrst uniform indiscernible, u1,
is ω1. It follows from the basic analysis of sharps that all uncountable cardinals are
uniform indiscernibles, so u2 ≤ω2. By applying the Kunen-Martin theorem inside
models of the form L[a], for a a real number, and applying the basic analysis of
sharps, Martin showed that δ
∼
1
2 = u2 if the sharp of every real exists (see [Kechris,
1978]). Recall that by the results of Section 4.1, δ
∼
1
2 = ω2, under AD.
Martin showed from ZF plus the assumption that the sharp of each real exists
that every Σ∼
1
3 set is uω-Suslin, and from AD that uω = ωω (see [Kanamori, 2003,
pp.203-204]). By the Kunen-Martin Theorem, then, AD implies that δ
∼
1
3 ≤ωω+1.
Solovay had shown that if the sharp of every real exists, then uξ+1 has the same
coﬁnality as u2, for every positive ordinal ξ (see [Kechris, 1978]). Since uω = ωω,
it follows that each ωn (n ≥2) is of the form uk+1 for some positive integer k,
and thus that each such ωn has coﬁnality ω2. It follows that under AD + DC,
δ
∼
1
3 = ωω+1, since δ
∼
1
3 is a regular cardinal, and therefore that δ
∼
1
4 = ωω+2. Kunen
and Solovay would then show that un = ωn for all n satisfying 1 ≤n ≤ω.
In 1971, Kunen reduced the computation of δ
∼
1
5 to the analysis of certain ultra-
powers of δ
∼
1
3 (see [Kechris, 1978]; as part of his analysis, Kunen showed that δ
∼
1
3 has
the weak partition property, see [Solovay, 1978a]). The completion of this project
was to take another decade. In the early 1980’s, Martin proved new results analyz-
ing these ultrapowers, and Steve Jackson, using joint work with Martin, computed
δ
∼
1
5. The following theorem [Jackson, 1988; Jackson, 1999] completes the calcula-
tion of the δ
∼
1
n’s.
THEOREM 10
(Jackson.) Assume AD. Then for n ≥1, δ
∼
1
2n+1 has the strong
partition property and is equal to ωw(2n−1)+1, where w(1) = ω and w(m + 1) =
ωw(m) in the sense of ordinal exponentiation.
Jackson’s proof of this theorem was over 100 pages long. Elements of his argu-
ment (as presented in [Jackson, 1999]) include the Kunen-Martin theorem, Kunen’s
∆
∼
1
3 coding for subsets of ωω [Solovay, 1978a], Martin’s theorem that ∆
∼
1
2n+1 is closed
under intersections and unions of sequences of sets indexed by ordinals less than
δ
∼
1
3, and so-called homogeneous trees, a notion which traces back to [Martin and
Solovay, 1969] and a result of Martin discussed in the next section.

482
Paul B. Larson
5
DETERMINACY AND LARGE CARDINALS
As discussed above, a strongly inaccessible cardinal is an uncountable regular car-
dinal which is closed under cardinal exponentiation. If κ is strongly inaccessible,
then Vκ is a model of ZFC, so that the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals
is not a consequence of ZFC. While there is no technical deﬁnition of large cardinal,
a typical large cardinal notion (in the context of the Axiom of Choice) speciﬁes
a type of strongly inaccessible cardinal. Examples of this type include Ramsey
cardinals, measurable cardinals, Woodin cardinals and supercompact cardinals.
The large cardinal hierarchy orders large cardinals by consistency strength. That
is, large cardinal notion A is below large cardinal notion B in the hierarchy if the
existence of cardinals of type B implies the consistency of cardinals of type A. It
is a striking empirical fact that the large cardinal hierarchy is linear, modulo open
questions (the examples just given were listed in increasing order, for instance).
Even more striking is the fact that many set-theoretic statements having no os-
tensible relationship to large cardinals are equiconsistent with some large cardinal
notion.30
By results of Mycielski (discussed in Section 2.3), AD implies that ω1 is strongly
inaccessible in L, which means that AD cannot be proved in ZFC. Moreover,
Solovay’s result that AD implies the measurability of ω1 implies that under AD,
ω1 (as computed in the full universe) is a measurable cardinal in certain inner
models of AC, such as HOD.31 As we shall see in this section, the relationship
between large cardinals and determinacy runs in both directions: various forms of
determinacy imply the existence of models of ZFC containing large cardinals, and
the existence of large cardinals can be used to prove the determinacy of certain
deﬁnable sets of reals.
5.1
Measurable cardinals
Solovay [1969] showed in 1965 that if there exists a measurable cardinal then
every uncountable Σ∼
1
2 set of reals contains a perfect set. This result was proved
independently by Mansﬁeld (see [Solovay, 1969]). Martin [1970] showed that in
fact analytic determinacy follows from the existence of a Ramsey cardinal.
Roughly, the idea behind Martin’s proof is that if A is the projection of a tree
T on ω × ω and χ is a Ramsey cardinal, one can modify the original game for
A to require the second player to play, in addition to his usual moves, a function
G∗: ω<ω →χ witnessing (via the wellfoundedness of the ordinal χ) that the
fragment of T corresponding to the real produced by the two players in their
moves from the original game has no inﬁnite branches, and thus that this real is
not in the projection of T. This modiﬁed game is closed, and thus determined, by
Gale-Stewart. If the second player has a winning strategy in the modiﬁed game,
30[Kanamori, 2003] is the standard reference for the large cardinal hierarchy.
31The inner model HOD (a model of ZFC) consists of all sets x such that every member of the
transitive closure of {x} is ordinal-deﬁnable (see [Jech, 2003, Chapter 13]).

A Brief History of Determinacy
483
then he has a winning strategy in the original game by ignoring his extra moves.
In general there is no reason that a winning strategy for the ﬁrst player in the
modiﬁed game will induce a winning strategy for the original game. However, if
χ is a Ramsey cardinal, then there is uncountable X ⊆χ such that, as long as
the range of G∗is contained in X, the ﬁrst player’s strategy does not depend on
the extra moves for the second player. Using this fact, the ﬁrst player can convert
his winning strategy in the modiﬁed game into a winning strategy in the original
game. The notion of a determined (often closed) auxiliary game and a method for
transferring strategies from the auxiliary game to the original game is the basis of
many determinacy proofs.
Martin later proved the following reﬁnement.
THEOREM 11. If the sharp of every real exists, then Π∼
1
1-determinacy holds.
In the 1970’s Kunen and Martin independently developed the notion of a ho-
mogeneous tree, following a line of ideas deriving from Martin’s proof of Π∼
1
1-
determinacy (see [Kechris, 1981]).
Given a set Z and a cardinal κ, a tree on
ω × Z is said to be κ-homogeneous if for each σ ∈ω<ω there is a κ-complete
ultraﬁlter µσ on Z|σ| such that
• for each σ ∈ω<ω, {z | (σ, z) ∈T} ∈µσ;
• p[T] is the set of x ∈ωω such that the sequence ⟨µx↾i : i ∈ω⟩is countably
complete.32
A tree is said to be homogeneous if it is ℵ1-homogeneous. A set of reals is said to
be homogeneously Suslin if it is the projection of a homogeneous tree. There are
related notions of weakly homogeneous tree and weakly homogeneously Suslin set
of reals, involving a more involved relationship with a set of ultraﬁlters. Though it
was not the original deﬁnition, let us just say that a tree on a set of the form ω ×
(ω×Z) is weakly homogeneous if and only if the corresponding tree on (ω×ω)×Z
is homogeneous, and note that a set of reals is weakly homogeneously Suslin if and
only if it is the projection of a homogeneously Suslin set of pairs.
Martin’s proof then shows the following.
THEOREM 12 (Martin.) Homogeneously Suslin sets are determined.
The unfolding argument mentioned in Section 2.2 then shows that weakly ho-
mogeneously Suslin sets satisfy the regularity properties.
In retrospect, Martin’s proof of analytic determinacy can be broken into two
parts, the fact that homogeneously Suslin sets are determined, and the fact that
if there is a Ramsey cardinal then Π∼
1
1 sets are homogeneously Suslin.
The results of [Martin and Solovay, 1969] can similarly be reinterpreted. If Π∼
1
1
sets are homogeneously Suslin, then Σ∼
1
2 sets are weakly homogeneously Suslin.
The Martin-Solovay construction can be seen as a method for taking a γ-weakly
32i.e., for each sequence ⟨Ai | i ∈ω⟩such that each Ai ∈µx↾i there exists a t ∈Zω such that
t↾i ∈Ai for each i.

484
Paul B. Larson
homogeneous tree T (for some cardinal γ) and producing a tree S on ω × γ′, for
some ordinal γ′, projecting to the complement of the projection of T. From this
follows that all Π∼
1
2 sets, and thus all Σ∼
1
3 sets, are projections of trees on the product
of ω with some ordinal. More sophisticated arguments can be carried out from the
existence of sharps, using the fact that sharps give ultraﬁlters over certain inner
models.
5.2
Borel determinacy
In 1968, Friedman [1970] showed that the Replacement axiom is necessary to prove
Borel determinacy, even for sets invariant under Turing degrees (he also showed
that analytic determinacy cannot hold in a forcing extension of L). As reﬁned by
Martin, his results show (for each α < ω1) that ZFC - Power Set - Replacement +
“the αth iteration of the power set of ωω exists” does not prove the determinacy
of all Σ∼
0
1+α+3 sets.
James Baumgartner mixed the method of Martin’s Π∼
1
1-determinacy proof with
Davis’s Σ∼
0
3-determinacy proof to give a new proof of Σ∼
0
3-determinacy in ZFC.
Using a similar approach, Martin proved Det(Σ∼
0
4) from the existence of a weakly
compact cardinal,33 and then Paris [1972] proved it in ZFC (Paris noted at the
end of his paper that his argument could be carried out without the power set
axiom, assuming instead only that the ordinal ω1 exists).
Andreas Blass [1975] and Mycielski (1967, unpublished) independently proved
that ADR is equivalent to determinacy for integer games of length ω2. The key
idea in Blass’s proof was to reduce determinacy in the given game to determinacy
in another, auxiliary, game in such a way that one player’s moves in the auxiliary
game correspond to fragments of his strategy in the original game. Martin [1975]
used this basic idea to prove Borel determinacy in 1974 (the auxiliary game was
in fact an open game). In his [1985], Martin gave a short, inductive, proof of
Borel determinacy, and introduced the notion of unraveling a set of reals—roughly,
ﬁnding an association of the set to a clopen set in a larger domain with a map
sending strategies in one game to strategies in the other. In his [1990], Martin
extended this method to games of length ω played on any (possibly uncountable)
set, with Borel payoﬀ(in the corresponding sense). Neeman [2000; 2006b] would
unravel Π∼
1
1 sets from the assumption of a measurable cardinal κ of Mitchell rank
κ++ (proved to be an optimal hypothesis by Steel [1982]; see [Jech, 2003, pp. 357-
360] for the deﬁnition of Mitchell rank).
Complementing Friedman’s theorem,
Martin proved that for each α < ω1, the determinacy of each Boolean combination
of Σ∼
0
α+2 sets follows from ZF - Power Set - Replacement + Σ1-Replacement + “the
αth iteration of the power set of ωω exists”.
33A cardinal κ is weakly compact if κ →(κ)2
2.
Weakly compact cardinals are below the
existence of 0# and above strongly inaccessible cardinals in the consistency strength hierarchy
(see [Kanamori, 2003, pp. 76,472]).

A Brief History of Determinacy
485
5.3
The Π∼
1
1 diﬀerence hierarchy
Given a countable ordinal α and a real a, a set of reals X is said to be α-Π1
1(a)
if there is wellordering of ω of length α recursive in a with corresponding rank
function R: ω →α and a Π1
1(a) subset A of ω × ωω such that
• for all n, m ∈ω, if R(n) < R(m) then
{x | (m, x) ∈A} ⊆{x | (n, x) ∈A};
• X is the set of reals x for which the least ξ such that either ξ = α or ξ < α
and (R−1(ξ), x) ̸∈A is odd.
This notation has its roots in [Hausdorﬀ, 1908]. When a is itself recursive one
writes α-Π1
1. The union of the sets α-Π1
1(a) for all reals a is denoted α-Π∼
1
1. The
union of the sets α-Π∼
1
1 for all α < ω1 is denoted Diﬀ(Π∼
1
1). Note that Diﬀ(Π∼
1
1) is a
proper subclass of ∆
∼
1
2.
Friedman [1971] extended Theorem 11 to show that Det(3-Π∼
1
1) follows from the
existence of the sharp of every real. Martin in 1975 then extended this result to
show that the existence of 0# is equivalent to Det(S
β<ω2 β-Π1
1) (see [DuBose,
1990]). Harrington [1978] then proved the converse to Theorem 11 by showing
that Det(Π1
1(a)) implies the existence of a#, for each real a.
For the purposes of the next theorem, say that a model has α measurable cardi-
nals and indiscernibles if there exists a set of ordertype α consisting of measurable
cardinals of the model, and there exist uncountably many ordinal indiscernibles of
the model above the supremum of these measurable cardinals. Martin proved the
following theorem after Harrington’s result.
THEOREM 13. For any real a and any ordinal α recursive in a, the following are
equivalent.
• Det(S
β<ω2 (ω2 · α + β)-Π1
1(a)).
• Det((ω2 · α + 1)-Π1
1(a)).
• There is an inner model of ZFC containing a and having α many measurable
cardinals and indiscernibles.
Still, a large-cardinal consistency proof of Det(∆
∼
1
2), the hypothesis used by
Addison and Martin in their extension of Blackwell’s argument, remained beyond
reach. John Green [1978] showed that Det(∆1
2) implies the existence of an inner
model with a measurable cardinal of Mitchell rank 1.
5.4
Larger cardinals
In Section 4 we deﬁned a measurable cardinal to be a cardinal κ such that there
exists a nonprincipal κ-complete ultraﬁlter on κ. Equivalently, under the Axiom of

486
Paul B. Larson
Choice, κ is measurable if and only if there is a nontrivial elementary embedding j
from the full universe V into some inner model M whose critical point is κ, i.e., such
that κ is the least ordinal not mapped to itself by j. Many large cardinal notions
can be expressed both in terms of ultraﬁlters and in terms of embeddings, though
in the Choiceless context (without the corresponding form of  Lo´s’s Theorem, see
[Jech, 2003, p. 159]) it is the deﬁnition in terms of ultraﬁlters which is relevant.
For instance, a cardinal κ is supercompact if for each λ > κ there exists a normal
ﬁne ultraﬁlter on Pκλ.34 Under the Axiom of Choice, κ is supercompact if and
only if for every λ > κ there is an elementary embedding j from V into an inner
model M such that the critical point of j is κ and M is closed under sequences of
length λ. Every supercompact cardinal is a limit of measurable cardinals. An even
larger large cardinal notion is the huge cardinal, where an uncountable cardinal
κ is huge if for some cardinal λ > κ there is a κ-complete normal ﬁne ultraﬁlter
on [λ]κ (where “normal” and “ﬁne” are deﬁned in analogy with the supercompact
case, see [Kanamori, 2003, p. 331]). Under AC, κ is huge if and only if there is
an elementary embedding j : V →M with critical point κ such that M is closed
under sequences of length j(κ). The existence of huge cardinals does not imply
the existence of supercompact cardinals, but it does imply their consistency.
Kunen [1971] put a limit on the large cardinality hierarchy, showing in ZFC that
there is no nontrivial elementary embedding from V into itself. A corollary of the
proof is that for any elementary embedding j of V into any inner model M, if δ is
the least ordinal above the critical point of j sent to itself by j, then Vδ+1 ̸⊆M.
In 1978, Martin [1980] proved Π∼
1
2-determinacy from hypothesis I2, which states
that for some ordinal δ there is a nontrivial elementary embedding of V into an
inner model M with critical point less than δ such that Vδ ⊆M and j(δ) = δ. In
1984, Woodin proved ADL(R) from I0, the statement that for some ordinal δ there
is a nontrivial elementary embedding from L(Vδ+1) into itself with critical point
below δ, thus verifying Solovay’s conjecture that ADL(R) would follow from large
cardinals. I0 is one of the strongest large cardinal hypotheses not known to be
inconsistent. The inner model program at the time had produced models for many
measurable cardinals, hypotheses far short of I2, and so there was little hope of
showing that I2 and I0 were necessary for these results.
New large cardinal concepts would prove to be the missing ingredient. Given
an ideal I on a set X, forcing with the Boolean algebra given by the power set of
X modulo I gives a V -ultraﬁlter on the power set of X.35 The ideal I is said to
be precipitous if the ultrapower of V by this generic ultraﬁlter is wellfounded in
all generic extensions. If the underlying set X is a cardinal κ, the ideal I is said to
be saturated if the Boolean algebra P(κ)/I has no antichains of cardinality κ+.36
34Given a cardinal κ and a set X, a collection U of subsets of PκX is ﬁne if it contains the
collection of supersets of each element of PκX.
35An ideal is a collection of sets closed under subsets and ﬁnite unions. Given a model M
and a set X in M, an M-ultraﬁlter is a subset of P(X) ∩M closed under supersets and ﬁnite
intersections such that for every A ⊆X in M, exactly one of A and X \ A is in U. Note that U
does not need to be an element of M.
36An antichain in a partial order (or a Boolean algebra) is a set of pairwise incompatible

A Brief History of Determinacy
487
If κ is a regular cardinal, saturation of I implies precipitousness. Huge cardinals
were invented by Kunen [1978], who used them to produce a saturated ideal on
ω1.
In early 1984, Matthew Foreman, Menachem Magidor and Shelah [1988] showed
that if there exists a supercompact cardinal—a hypothesis much weaker than I0
or I2—then there is an ω1-preserving forcing making the nonstationary ideal on
ω1 (NSω1) saturated.
Foreman (see [1986]) and Magidor [1980] had earlier made a connection be-
tween generic elementary embeddings37 and regularity properties for reals. Magi-
dor [1980] in particular had shown that the Lebesgue measurability of Σ1
3 sets
followed from the existence of a generic elementary embedding with critical point
ω1 and wellfounded image model (the existence of such an embedding follows from
the Foreman-Magidor-Shelah result mentioned above). Woodin noted that these
arguments plus earlier work of his (see [1986]) could be used to extend this to
Lebesgue measurability for all projective sets. Woodin also noted that arguments
from [Foreman et al., 1988] could be used to prove the Lebesgue measurability
of all sets of reals in L(R), if one could force to produce a saturated ideal on ω1
without adding reals. Shelah then noted that techniques from [Shelah, 1998] could
be modiﬁed to do just that. It followed then that the existence of a supercompact
cardinal implies that all sets of reals in L(R) are Lebesgue measurable.
Woodin and Shelah then addressed the problem of weakening the hypotheses
needed for the Lebesgue measurability of all projective sets of reals. We follow the
account in [Neeman, 2004]. Woodin noted that a superstrong cardinal suﬃced.
Shelah then isolated a weaker notion now known as a Shelah cardinal, and showed
that the existence of n + 1 Shelah cardinals implies that Σ∼
1
n+2 sets are Lebesgue
measurable.
DEFINITION 14. A cardinal κ is a Shelah cardinal if for every f : κ →κ there is
an elementary embedding j : V →N with critical point κ such that Vj(f)(κ) ⊆N.
Woodin noted that by switching the quantiﬁers in Shelah’s deﬁnition one ob-
tained a weaker, still suﬃcient, hypothesis, now known as a Woodin cardinal.
DEFINITION 15. A cardinal δ is a Woodin cardinal if for each function f : δ →δ
there exists an elementary embedding j : V →M with critical point κ < δ closed
under f such that Vj(f)(κ) ⊆M.
Woodin proved that the existence of n Woodin cardinals below a measurable
cardinal implies the Lebesgue measurability of Σ∼
1
n+2 sets, the same amount of
measurability that would follow from Π∼
1
n+1-determinacy.
All of this work was
done within a few weeks of the Foreman-Magidor-Shelah result on the saturation
of NSω1.
In [Shelah and Woodin, 1990] the hypothesis for the statement that
all sets of reals in L(R) are Lebesgue measurable and have the property of Baire
elements. In the case of a Boolean algebra of the form P(κ)/I, an antichain is a collection of
subsets of κ not in I which pairwise have intersection in I.
37A generic elementary embedding is an elementary embedding of the universe V into some
class model M which exists in a forcing extension of V .

488
Paul B. Larson
was reduced to the existence of ordertype ω + 1 many Woodin cardinals. The
hypothesis was to be reduced even further.
Woodin extracted from the Foreman-Magidor-Shelah results a one-step forcing
for producing generic elementary embeddings with critical point ω1, and developed
it into a general method, now known as the stationary tower. Using this he showed
(by the fall of 1984, see his [1988]) that if there exists a supercompact cardinal,
then every set of reals in L(R) is weakly homogeneously Suslin.
Steel had been working on the problem of ﬁnding inner models for supercompact
cardinals. Inspired by the results of Foreman, Magidor, Shelah and Woodin, he
begin to work on producing models for Woodin cardinals, and had some partial
results by the spring of 1985, producing inner models with certain weak variants
of Woodin cardinals.
These models were generated by sequences of extenders,
directed systems of ultraﬁlters which collectively generate elementary embeddings
whose images contain more of V than possible for embeddings generated by a
single ultraﬁlter. Special cases of extenders had appeared in Jensen’s proof of the
Covering Lemma, and in [Mitchell, 1979]. Jensen formulated the general notion
of extender, which ﬁrst appeared in [Dodd, 1982]. Steel and Martin saw that the
problem of building models with Woodin cardinals was linked to the problem of
proving determinacy, and they sets their sight on this problem in the late spring
of 1985.
One key combinatorial problem related to elementary embeddings is whether
inﬁnite iterations of these embeddings produce wellfounded models. Kunen [1970]
had shown that the answer was positive for iterations derived from a single ultraﬁl-
ter. With extenders the situation was more complicated, as the iterations did not
need to be linear but could produce trees of models with no rule for ﬁnding a path
through the tree leading to a wellfounded model (indeed, this nonlinearity was
essential, since otherwise the models would have simply deﬁnable wellorderings of
their reals). The simplest such tree, a so-called alternating chain, is countably
inﬁnite and consists of two inﬁnite branches. Martin and Steel saw that the issue
of wellfoundedness for the direct limits along the two branches was linked. This
observation led to the following theorem, proved in August of 1985.
THEOREM 16 (Martin-Steel [1989].) Suppose that λ is a Woodin cardinal and
A is a λ+-weakly homogeneously Suslin set of reals. Then for any γ < λ, ωω \ A
is γ-homogeneously Suslin.
It follows from this and the fact that analytic sets are homogeneously Suslin
in the presence of a measurable cardinal that if there exist n Woodin cardinals
below a measurable cardinal, then Π∼
1
n+1 sets are determined, and that Projective
Determinacy follows from the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals.
Combined with Woodin’s application of the stationary tower mentioned above,
the Martin-Steel theorem implied that ADL(R) follows from the existence of a
supercompact cardinal. By the end of 1985, Woodin had improved the hypothesis
to the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals below a measurable cardinal
(see [Larson, 2004]).

A Brief History of Determinacy
489
THEOREM 17 (Woodin.) If there exist inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals below
a measurable cardinal, then AD holds in L(R).
In the spring of 1986, Martin and Steel [1994] produced extender models with
n Woodin cardinals and ∆1
n+2 wellorderings of the reals. Such a model necessar-
ily has a Σ1
n+2 set which is not Lebesgue measurable, and fails to satisfy Π1
n+1-
determinacy.
Skipping ahead for a moment, let (∗)n be the statement that for each real
x there exists an iterable model M containing x and n Woodin cardinals plus
the sharp of V M
δ , for δ the largest of these Woodin cardinals. For odd n, the
equivalence of Π∼
1
n+1-determinacy and (∗)n was proved by Woodin in 1989. That
(∗)n implies Π∼
1
n+1-determinacy for all n was proved by Neeman [1995] in 1994.
Roughly, Neeman’s methods work by considering a modiﬁed game in which one
player builds an iteration tree and makes moves in the image of the original game by
the embeddings given by the tree. In 1995, Woodin proved that Π∼
1
n+1-determinacy
implies (∗)n for even n > 0.
As discussed above, homogeneously Suslin and weakly homogeneously Suslin
sets of reals played an important role in applications of large cardinals to regularity
properties for sets of reals, as early as the 1969 results of Martin and Solovay.
Qi Feng, Magidor and Woodin [1992] introduced a related tree representation
property for sets of reals. Given a cardinal κ, a set A ⊆ωω is κ-universally Baire
if there exist trees S, T such that p[S] = A and S and T project to complements
in every forcing extension by a partial order of cardinality less than or equal to κ.
Woodin (see [Kanamori, 2003; Larson, 2004]) showed that if δ is a Woodin car-
dinal, then δ-universally Baire sets of reals are <δ-weakly homogeneously Suslin.
It follows from the arguments of [Martin and Solovay, 1969] that if A ⊆ωω is
κ+-weakly homogeneously Suslin, then it is κ-universally Baire.
Feng, Magidor and Woodin showed that if there exist two Woodin cardinals,
then every universally Baire set is determined. Neeman later improved the hypoth-
esis to one Woodin cardinal. In addition to the following theorem, Feng, Magidor
and Woodin showed that Det(Π∼
1
1) is equivalent to the statement that every Σ∼
1
2 set
of reals is universally Baire.
THEOREM 18 (Feng, Magidor and Woodin [1992].) Assume ADL(R). Then the
following are equivalent.
• ADL(R) holds in every forcing extension.
• Every set of reals in L(R) is universally Baire.
Woodin’s Tree Production Lemma is a powerful means for showing that sets of
reals are universally Baire (see [Larson, 2004]). Woodin’s proof of Theorem 17
proceeded by applying the lemma to the set R#. Informally, the lemma can be
interpreted as saying that a set of reals A is δ-universally Baire if for every real
r generic for a partial order in Vδ, either r is in the image of A for every Q<δ-
embedding for which r is in the image model, or r is in the image of A for no such
embedding.

490
Paul B. Larson
The partial order Col(ω, <δ) consists of all ﬁnite partial functions p from ω × δ
to δ, with the requirement that p(n, α) ∈α for all (n, α) in the domain of p
(Col(ω, <δ) is ordered by inclusion). If δ is a regular cardinal, then δ is the ω1 of
any forcing extension by Col(ω, <δ).
THEOREM 19 (Tree Production Lemma.) Suppose that δ is a Woodin cardinal.
Let φ and ψ be binary formulas, and let x and y be arbitrary sets, and assume that
the empty condition in the stationary tower Q<δ forces that for each real r,
M |= ψ(r, j(y)) ⇔V [r] |= φ(r, x),
where j : V →M is the induced elementary embedding. Then there exist trees T,S
such that p[T] = {r | ψ(r, y)} and T and S project to complements after forcing
with Col(ω, <δ).
Woodin followed this by determining the exact consistency strength of AD. The
forward direction of the next theorem (proved in [Koellner and Woodin, 2010])
shows from ZF + AD that there exist inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals in an
inner model of a forcing extension (HOD of the forcing extension with respect to
certain parameters) of V . The proof built on a sequence of results, starting with
Solovay’s theorem that AD implies that ω1 is a measurable cardinal, which, as
mentioned above, also shows that ω1 (as deﬁned in V ) is measurable in the inner
model HOD. Becker (see [Becker and Moschovakis, 1981]) had shown that, under
AD, ωV
1 is the least measurable in HOD. Becker, Martin, Moschovakis and Steel
then showed that under AD + V =L(R), δ
∼
2
1 is β-strong in HOD, where β is the
least measurable cardinal greater than δ
∼
2
1 in HOD.38 In the 1980’s, Woodin showed
under the same hypothesis that δ
∼
2
1 is β-strong in HOD for every β < Θ (and that
δ
∼
2
1 is the least ordinal with this property), and that Θ is Woodin in HOD.
THEOREM 20 (Woodin.) The following are equiconsistent.
• ZF + AD
• There exist inﬁnitely many Woodin cardinals.
The following theorem illustrates the reverse direction of the equiconsistency
(see [Steel, 2009]). It can be seen as a special case of the Derived Model Theorem,
discussed in Section 6.1.
THEOREM 21
(Woodin.) Suppose that λ is a limit of Woodin cardinals, and
G ⊆Col(ω, <λ) is V -generic ﬁlter. Let R∗= S{RV [G↾α] | α < λ}. Then AD
holds in L(R∗).
The results of Section 5.3 illustrate the diﬃculties in proving the determinacy
of Π1
2 sets. Woodin resolved this problem in 1989. The forward direction of the
following theorem is proved in [Koellner and Woodin, 2010]. The proof was in-
spired in part by a result of Kechris and Solovay [1985], saying that in models of
38A cardinal κ is β-strong if there is an elementary embedding j : V →M with critical point
κ such that Vβ ⊆M, and <δ-strong if it is β-strong for all β < δ.

A Brief History of Determinacy
491
the form L[a] for a ⊆ω, ∆1
2-determinacy implies the determinacy of all ordinal de-
ﬁnable sets of reals. Standard arguments show that if ∆1
2 determinacy holds, then
it holds in L[x] for some real x. Woodin showed that if V is L[x] for some real x,
and ∆1
2-determinacy holds, then ωL[x]
2
is a Woodin cardinal in HOD. Recall (from
the end of Section 4.2) that ∆1
2-determinacy and Π1
2-determinacy are equivalent,
by a result of Martin.
THEOREM 22 (Woodin.) The following are equiconsistent.
• ZFC + Det(∆1
2).
• ZFC + There exists a Woodin cardinal.
The following theorem illustrates the reverse direction. Its proof can be found
in [Neeman, 2010, p. 1926]. The partial order Col(ω, δ) consists of all ﬁnite partial
functions from ω to δ, ordered by inclusion.
THEOREM 23
(Woodin.) If δ is a Woodin cardinal and G ⊆Col(ω, δ) is a
V -generic ﬁlter, then ∆1
2-determinacy holds in V [G].
6
LATER DEVELOPMENTS
In this ﬁnal section we brieﬂy review some of the developments that followed the
results of the previous section. As discussed in the introduction to this chapter,
the set of topics presented here is by no means complete. The ﬁrst two subsections
discuss forms of determinacy ostensibly stronger than AD, in models larger than
L(R). The next discusses applications of determinacy to the realm of AC, via
producing models of AC by forcing over models of determinacy. In the last two
subsections we present some results which derive forms of determinacy from their
ostensibly weak consequences, or from statements having no obvious relationship
to determinacy. Many of the results of the last two subsections are applications of
the study of canonical inner models for large cardinals.
6.1
AD+ and ADR
Moschovakis [1981] proved that under AD, if λ is less than Θ, A is a set of functions
from ω to λ and A is Suslin and co-Suslin, then the game Gω(A) is determined,
where here the players play elements of λ. Woodin formulated the following axiom
as an attempt to capture the consequences of being an inner model of a model
of AD with the same reals and Suslin representations for all sets of reals in the
inner model. A set of reals A is said to be ∞-Borel if there is a set of ordinals
S and binary formula φ such that A = {x ∈R | L[x, S] |= φ(x, S)}. A Suslin
representation is an example of a witness to a set of reals being ∞-Borel.
DEFINITION 24. AD+ is the conjunction of the following statements.
• DC(ωω)

492
Paul B. Larson
• Every set of reals is ∞-Borel.
• If λ < Θ and π: λω →ωω is a continuous function, then π−1[A] is determined
for every A ⊆ωω.
It is an open question whether AD implies AD+, though it is known that AD+
holds in all models of AD of the form L(A, R), where A is a set of reals (some
of the details of the argument showing this appear in [Jackson, 2010]). It is not
known whether ADR implies AD+, though AD+ does follow from ADR + DC.
The following consequences of AD+ were announced in [Woodin, 1999].
THEOREM 25 (ZF + DC(ωω).) If AD+ holds and V = L(P(R)), then
• the pointclass Σ2
1 has the scale property,
• every Σ2
1 set of reals is the projection of a tree in HOD,
• every true Σ1-sentence is witnessed by a ∆
∼
2
1 set of reals.
Woodin’s Derived Model Theorem, proved around 1986, gives a means of pro-
ducing models of AD+. The model L(R∗, Hom∗) in the following theorem is said to
be a derived model (over the ground model). A tree T is said to be <λ-absolutely
complemented if there is a tree S such that p[T] = R\p[S] in all forcing extensions
by partial orders of cardinality less than λ.
THEOREM 26 (Derived Model Theorem; Woodin (see [Steel, 2009]).) Let λ be
a limit of Woodin cardinals. Let G ⊆Col(ω, <λ) be a V -generic ﬁlter. Let
• R∗be S
α<λ RV [G↾α];
• Hom∗be the collection of sets of the form p[T] ∩R∗, for T a <λ-absolutely
complemented tree in V ;
• Γ be the collection of sets of reals A in V [G] such that L(A, R∗) |= AD+.
Then
• L(Hom∗, R∗) |= AD+.
• Hom∗is the collection of Suslin, co-Suslin sets of reals in L(Hom∗, R∗).
• L(Γ, R∗) |= AD+.
• Hom∗is the collection of Suslin, co-Suslin sets of reals in L(Γ, R∗).
The Derived Model Theorem has a converse, also due to Woodin, which says
that all models of AD+ arise in this fashion.
THEOREM 27 (Woodin.) Let M be a model of AD+, and let Γ be the collection
of sets of reals which are Suslin, co-Suslin in M. Then in a forcing extension of
M there is an inner model N such that L(R∗, Γ) is a derived model over N.

A Brief History of Determinacy
493
In unpublished work, Woodin has shown that over AD, ADR is equivalent to
some of its ostensibly weak consequences (see [Woodin, 1999]). The implication
from (4) to (1) in the following theorem is due independently to Martin. The
implication from (1) to (4) relies heavily on work of Becker [1985].
THEOREM 28 (Woodin.) Assume ZF + DC. Then the following are equivalent.
1. ADR
2. AD + Uniformization
3. AD + Every set of reals has a scale
4. AD + Every set of reals is Suslin
Woodin would also produce models of ADR from large cardinals.
THEOREM 29
(Woodin.) Suppose that there exists a cardinal δ of coﬁnality
ω which is a limit of Woodin cardinals and <δ-strong cardinals. Then there is
a forcing extension in which there is an inner model containing the reals and
satisfying ADR.
6.2
Long games
As mentioned above, Blass [1975] and Mycielski showed that determinacy for
games of length ω2 is equivalent to ADR. For each n ∈ω, determinacy for games
of length ω + n is equivalent to AD (think of the game as being divided in two
parts, where in the ﬁrst part (of length ω) the players try to obtain a position
from which they have a winning strategy in the second; the winning strategy in
the second part can be coded by an integer, and thus uniformly chosen).
Martin and Woodin independently showed that ADR is equivalent to determi-
nacy for games of length α for each countable α ≥ω2. Determinacy for games of
length ω · 2 easily gives uniformization. It follows from this and Theorem 28 that
ADR is equivalent to determinacy for games of length α for each α ≥ω · 2.
While AD does not imply uniformization, the Second Periodicity Theorem
shows that PD implies the uniformization of projective sets. It follows that PD is
equivalent to PD for games of length less than ω2. As noted by Neeman [2005],
the techniques from this proof can be used to prove the determinacy of games of
length ω2 with analytic payoﬀfrom ADL(R) plus the existence of R#.
Steel [1988] considered continuously coded games, games where each stage of the
game is associated with an integer, and the game ends when an associated integer
is repeated. Such a game must end after countably many rounds, but runs of the
game can have any countable length. Steel proved that ZF + AD + DC + “every
set of reals has a scale” + “ω1 is P(R)-supercompact” implies the determinacy of
all continuously coded games.
Extending this result, Neeman [2004; 2005; 2006a] proved a number of deter-
minacy results for games of variable countable length.
The proofs of many of

494
Paul B. Larson
these results reduced the determinacy of long games to the iterability of models
containing large cardinals.
We give one example. Given C ⊆R<ω1, let Glocal(L, C) be the game where
players I and II alternate playing natural numbers so as to deﬁne elements zξ
of the Baire space. The game ends at the ﬁrst γ such that γ is uncountable in
L[zξ : ξ < γ], with I winning if the sequence ⟨zξ : ξ < γ⟩is in C. It follows from
mild large cardinal assumptions (for instance, the existence of the sharp of every
subset of ω1) that γ must be countable.
The existence of M satisfying the hypotheses of the following theorem follows
from the existence in V of a sharp for a Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals [Neeman,
2002]. Given a pointclass Γ, a set C consisting of countable sequences of reals is
said to be Γ in the codes if the set of reals coding members of C (under a suitably
deﬁnable coding) is in Γ.
THEOREM 30 (Neeman [2004].) Suppose that there exists an iterable class model
M with a cardinal θ such that θ is a Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals in M and
countable in V . Then the games Glocal(L, C) are determined for all C which are
⅁
ω(<ω2−Π1
1) in the codes.
Woodin used techniques from the proof of this theorem and his work on AD+
to prove the following.
THEOREM 31 (Woodin.) Suppose that there is a Woodin limit of Woodin cardi-
nals and a proper class of inaccessible limits of Woodin cardinals above it. Let A
be universally Baire and let Λ be the pointclass of recursive preimages of A. Let
C be Λ in the codes. Then Glocal(L, C) is determined.
Again using some of the techniques from the proof of Theorem 30, Woodin
proved that if there exists an iterable class model M with a cardinal θ which is a
Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals in M and countable in V , then it is consistent
that all games on integers of length ω1 with payoﬀdeﬁnable from reals and ordinals
are determined (see Exercise 7F.15 of [Neeman, 2004]). Larson and Shelah [2008]
showed that it is possible to force that some such game is not determined.
We give one more result of Neeman, proving the determinacy of certain games
of length ω1. In Theorem 32 below, L+ is the language of set theory with one
additional unary predicate. Given an integer k and a sequence ¯S of stationary sets
indexed by [ω1]<k, [ ¯S] is the collection of increasing k-tuples ⟨α0, . . . , αk−1⟩from
ω1 such that each initial segment of length j ≤k is in S⟨α0,...,αj−l⟩. The game
Gω1,k( ¯S, φ) is a game of length ω1 in which the players collaborate to build a
function f : ω1 →ω1. Then player I wins if there is a club C such that ⟨Lω1, r⟩|=
φ(α0, . . . , αk−1) for all ⟨α0, . . . , αk−1⟩∈[ ¯S] ∩[C]k, and player II wins if there is a
club C such that ⟨Lω1, r⟩|= ¬φ(α0, . . . , αk−1) for all ⟨α0, . . . , αk−1⟩∈[ ¯S] ∩[C]k.
Though there can be runs of the game for which neither player wins, determinacy
for this game in the sense of Theorem 32 refers to the existence of a strategy for
one player or the other that guarantees victory.
The model 0W is the minimal iterable ﬁne structural inner model M which has
a top extender predicate whose critical point is Woodin in M. The existence of

A Brief History of Determinacy
495
such a model is not known to follow from large cardinals.
The last part of the conclusion of Theorem 32 extends a result of Martin, who
showed that for any recursive enumeration ⟨Bi : i < ω⟩of the <ω2-Π1
1 sets, the
set of i such that I has a winning strategy in Gω(Bi) is recursively isomorphic to
0#.
THEOREM 32
(Neeman [2007a].) Suppose that 0W exists. Let k < ω. Let ¯S
be a sequence of mutually disjoint stationary sets indexed by [ω1]<k.
Let φ be
a L+ formula with k free variables. Then the game Gω1,k( ¯S, φ) is determined.
Furthermore, the winner of each such game depends only on φ and not on ¯S,
and the set of φ for which the ﬁrst player has a winning strategy is recursively
equivalent to 0W .
If one allows the members of ¯S all to be ω1, then there are undetermined games
of this type, as observed by Greg Hjorth (see [Neeman, 2007a]). If one allows the
members of ¯S all to be ω1 and changes the winning condition for player II to
be simply the negation of the winning condition for I, then one can force from a
strongly inaccessible limit of measurable cardinals that some game of this type is
not determined [Larson, 2005].
6.3
Forcing over models of determinacy
Steel and Van Wesep [1982] showed that by forcing over a model of ADR + “Θ is
regular” (the hypothesis they used was actually weaker) one can produce a model
of ZFC in which NSω1 is saturated and δ
∼
1
2 = ω2. This was the ﬁrst consistency
proof of either of these two statements with ZFC. Martin had conjectured that
“∀n ∈ω δ
∼
1
n = ℵn” is consistent with ZFC, and this veriﬁed the conjecture for the
case n = 2. Woodin [1983b] subsequently reduced the hypothesis to AD.
Shelah [1998] later showed that it was possible to force the saturation of NSω1
from a Woodin cardinal. Woodin [1999] proved that the saturation of NSω1 plus
the existence of a measurable cardinal implies that δ
∼
1
2 = ω2. Woodin then turned
his proof into a general method for producing models of ZFC by forcing over
models of determinacy. The most general form of this method, a partial order
called Pmax, consists roughly of a directed system containing all countable models
of ZFC with a precipitous ideal on ω1. In the presence of large cardinals, the
resulting extension is maximal for Π2 sentences in H(ω2), even with predicates
for NSω1 and each set of reals in L(R).
In this model, NSω1 is saturated and
δ
∼
1
2 = ω2. There are many variants of Pmax. One of these variants, called Qmax,
produces a model in which NSω1 is ℵ1-dense (i.e., P(ω1)/NSω1 has a dense subset
of cardinality ℵ1; this implies saturation), from the assumption that AD holds in
L(R). No other method is known for producing a model of ZFC in which NSω1 is
ℵ1-dense.
Steel [1995] showed that under AD, HODL(R) is a core model below Θ. Woodin
then showed that the entire model HODL(R) can be viewed as a core model plus
a fragment of its iteration strategy. Using this approach, Steel showed that for
every regular κ < Θ, the ω-club ﬁlter over κ is an ultraﬁlter in L(R). Woodin used

496
Paul B. Larson
this to show that ω1 is <Θ-supercompact in L(R), and showed that ω1 is huge to
κ for each measurable κ < Θ, improving results of Becker. Neeman [2007b] used
this approach to prove, for each λ < Θ, the uniqueness of the normal ultraﬁlter
on Pℵ1λ witnessing the λ-supercompactness of ω1. Solovay had proved this using
determinacy for games on λ, and Harrington and Kechris [1981] proved the de-
terminacy of these games from AD for λ < δ
∼
2
1. Woodin proved the uniqueness of
these ultraﬁlters witnessing supercompactness up to δ
∼
2
1.
Neeman and Woodin independently used this approach to show that, assuming
AD + V = L(R), one could force without adding reals to obtain ZFC + δ
∼
1
n = ω2,
for any n ≥3. It is still unknown whether δ
∼
1
n can equal ωn for any n > 2 (under
ZFC).
6.4
Determinacy from its consequences
Woodin [1982] conjectured that Projective Determinacy follows from the statement
that all projective sets are Lebesgue measurable, have the Baire property and can
be uniformized by projective functions (all consequences of PD). This conjecture
was refuted by Steel in 1997. If one requires the uniformization property for the
scaled projective pointclasses, then the conjecture is still open. Woodin did prove
the following version of the conjecture in the late 1990’s. The reverse direction of
the theorem used work of Steel in inner model theory.
THEOREM 33 (Woodin.) Assume ZF + DC + V =L(R). Then the following are
equivalent.
• AD
• Every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable and has the property of Baire, and
every Σ2
1 subset of
2(ωω) can be uniformized.
Woodin had proved another equivalence in the early 1980’s.
THEOREM 34 (Woodin.) Assume ZF + DC + V =L(R). Then the following are
equivalent.
• AD
• Turing determinacy.
It is apparently an open question whether AD follows from ZF + DC + V =L(R)
plus either of (a) for every α < Θ there is a surjection of ωω onto P(α); (b) Θ is
inaccessible.
Steel [1996] showed that the reduction property for Π∼
1
3 plus the existence of
sharps for reals implies that there are inner models with Woodin cardinals.
Determinacy would turn out to be necessary for some of its earliest applications.
For instance, Steel [1996] showed that Σ∼
1
3-separation plus the existence of sharps
for all reals implies ∆
∼
1
2-determinacy. Hjorth [1996] showed that Π∼
1
2-determinacy

A Brief History of Determinacy
497
follows from Wadge determinacy for Π∼
1
2 sets. Earlier, Harrington had shown that,
for each real x, Π∼
1
1(x)-Wadge determinacy implies that x# exists.
6.5
Determinacy from other statements
Determinacy axioms such as PD and ADL(R) imply the consistency of ZFC (plus
certain large cardinal statements) and so cannot be proved in ZFC. Empirically,
however, these statements appear to follow from every natural statement of suﬃ-
cient consistency strength. This includes a number of statements ostensibly having
little relation to determinacy. In this section we give a few examples of this phe-
nomenon. Most of these arguments use inner model theory, and our presentation
relies heavily on [Schimmerling, 2010].
The following theorem shows, among other things, that in the presence of large
cardinals, even mere forcing-absoluteness for the theory of L(R) implies ADL(R).
The theorem is due to Steel and Woodin independently (see [Steel, 2002]).
THEOREM 35. Suppose that κ is a measurable cardinal. Then the following are
equivalent.
• For all partial orders P ∈Vκ, the theory of L(R) is not changed by forcing
with P.
• For all partial orders P ∈Vκ, AD holds in L(R) after forcing with P.
• For all partial orders P ∈Vκ, all sets of reals in L(R) are Lebesgue measurable
after forcing with P.
• For all partial orders P ∈Vκ, there is no ω1-sequence of reals in L(R) after
forcing with P.
As discussed in Section 6.3, Woodin showed using a variation of Pmax that over
a model of AD one can force to produce a model of ZFC in which the nonstationary
ideal on ω1 is ℵ1-dense. Woodin developed a technique known as the core model
induction, an application of descriptive set theory and core model theory, and
used it to show that the ℵ1-density of NSω1 implies ADL(R). It follows that the
two statements are equiconsistent. Steel had previously shown, using core models,
that Projective Determinacy follows from CH plus the existence of a homogeneous
ideal on ω1 (a weaker assumption that the ℵ1-density of NSω1, which is in turn
inconsistent with CH, by a theorem of Shelah).
A sequence C = ⟨Cα : α < λ⟩(for some ordinal λ) is called a coherent sequence
(of length λ) if each Cβ is a club subset of β, and Cα = α ∩Cβ whenever α is a
limit point of Cβ. A thread of such a coherent sequence C is a club set D ⊆λ
such that Cα = α ∩D for all limit points α of D. The principle □(λ) says that
there is a coherent sequence of length λ with no thread. The principle □κ says
that there is a coherent sequence C of length κ+ such that the ordertype of Cα
is at most κ, for each limit α < λ. The principles □κ were isolated in the 1960’s

498
Paul B. Larson
by Jensen [1972], who showed that □κ holds in L for all inﬁnite cardinals κ (see
[Devlin, 1984, p. 141]). The principles □(λ) were later extracted from Jensen’s
work by Stevo Todorcevic.
Todorcevic [1984] showed that the Proper Forcing Axiom (PFA) implies that
□(κ) fails at all cardinals κ of coﬁnality at least ω2, from which it follows that □κ
fails for all uncountable cardinals. The failure of these square principles implies
the failure of covering theorems for certain inner models, from which one can
derive inner models with large cardinals.
Using this general approach, Ernest
Schimmerling [1995] proved that PFA implies ∆
∼
1
2-determinacy. Woodin extended
this proof to show that PFA implies PD. Woodin also showed that PFA plus the
existence of a strongly inaccessible cardinal implies ADL(R), using the core model
induction. Roughly, the idea is to inductively work through the Wadge degrees to
build canonical inner models which are correct for each Wadge class. The induction
works through the gap structure highlighted in [Steel, 1983].
Alessandro Andretta, Neeman and Steel [2001] showed that PFA plus the exis-
tence of a measurable cardinal implies the existence of a model of ADR containing
all the reals and ordinals. Steel [2005] showed that if □κ fails for a singular strong
limit cardinal κ, then AD holds in L(R).
The following theorem is due to Schimmerling [2007]. Steel later strengthened
the conclusion to ADL(R).
THEOREM 36. If κ ≥max{ℵ2, c} and □(κ) and □κ fail, then Projective Deter-
minacy holds.
Todorcevic (see [Bekkali, 1991]) and Boban Veliˇckovi´c [1992] showed that PFA
implies that 2ℵ0 = 2ℵ1 = ℵ2. This gives another route towards showing that PFA
implies that the AD holds in L(R).
Schimmerling and Martin Zeman used the core model induction to prove the
following theorem [2001]. They had previously derived Projective Determinacy
from the failure of a weaker version of □κ at a weakly compact cardinal; Woodin
had then derived ADL(R) from the same hypothesis.
THEOREM 37. If κ is a weakly compact cardinal and □κ fails, then AD holds in
L(R).
Steel [1996] showed that if NSω1 is saturated and there is a measurable car-
dinal, then ∆
∼
1
2-determinacy holds.
The hypothesis of the measurable cardinal
was later removed through work of Jensen and Steel. In 2000, Steel and Zoble de-
rived ADL(R) from another principle of Todorcevic, known as the Strong Reﬂection
Principle at ω2.
We conclude with one ﬁnal example. As mentioned in Section 2.3, Gitik showed
that if there is a proper class of strongly compact cardinals, then there is a model of
ZF in which all inﬁnite cardinals have coﬁnality ω. Using the core model induction,
Daniel Busche and Ralf Schindler [2009] showed that this statement implies that
AD holds in the L(R) of a forcing extension of HOD, for some partial order in
HOD.

A Brief History of Determinacy
499
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is supported in part by NSF grant DMS-0801009.
Gunter Fuchs helped with some original sources in German. The author would
like to thank Akihiro Kanamori, Alexander Kechris, Tony Martin, Jan Mycielski,
Robert Solovay and John Steel for making many helpful suggestions.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Addison and Moschovakis, 1968] J. Addison and Y. Moschovakis. Some consequences of the
axiom of deﬁnable determinateness. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A.,
59:708–712, 1968.
[Addison, 1958] J. Addison. Some consequences of the axiom of constructibility. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 46:337–357, 1958.
[Addison, 1959] J. Addison. Separation principles in the hierarchies of classical and eﬀective
descriptive set theory. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 46:123–135, 1959.
[Albers and Alexanderson, 1985] D. Albers and G. Alexanderson, editors. Mathematical People.
Birkh¨auser Boston Inc., Boston, MA, 1985. Proﬁles and interviews.
[Andretta et al., 2001] A. Andretta, I. Neeman, and J. Steel. The domestic levels of Kc are
iterable. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 125:157–201, 2001.
[Banach and Tarski, 1924] S. Banach and A. Tarski.
Sur la d´ecomposition des ensembles de
points en parties respectivement congruentes. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 6:244–277, 1924.
[Becker and Kechris, 1984] H. Becker and A. Kechris. Sets of ordinals constructible from trees
and the third Victoria Delﬁno problem. In Axiomatic Set Theory, volume 31 of Contemporary
Mathematics, pages 13–29. American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1984.
[Becker and Moschovakis, 1981] H. Becker and Y. Moschovakis. Measurable cardinals in playful
models. In Cabal Seminar 77–79 (Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1977–79), volume 839 of
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 203–214. Springer, Berlin, 1981.
[Becker, 1978] H. Becker. Partially playful universes. In Cabal Seminar 76–77 (Proc. Caltech-
UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 55–90.
Springer, Berlin, 1978.
[Becker, 1985] H. Becker. A property equivalent to the existence of scales. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, 287(2):591–612, 1985.
[Bekkali, 1991] M. Bekkali. Topics in Set Theory, volume 1476 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991. Lebesgue measurability, large cardinals, forcing axioms, rho-
functions, Notes on lectures by Stevo Todorˇcevi´c.
[Blackwell, 1967] D. Blackwell. Inﬁnite games and analytic sets. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 58:1836–1837, 1967.
[Blackwell, 1969] D. Blackwell. Inﬁnite Gδ-games with imperfect information. Zastosowania
Matematyki, 10:99–101, 1969.
[Blass, 1975] A. Blass.
Equivalence of two strong forms of determinacy.
Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, 52:373–376, 1975.
[Brouwer, 1924] L. Brouwer. Beweis dass jede volle Funktion gleichm¨assig stetig ist. Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Amsterdam, 27:189–193, 1924.
[Busche and Schindler, 2009] D. Busche and R. Schindler. The strength of choiceless patterns of
singular and weakly compact cardinals. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 159(1-2):198–248,
2009.
[Cooper, 2004] S. B. Cooper. Computability Theory. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL,
2004.
[Davis, 1964] M. Davis. Inﬁnite games of perfect information. In Advances in Game Theory,
pages 85–101. Princeton Univversity Press, Princeton, N.J., 1964.
[Devlin, 1984] K. J. Devlin.
Constructibility.
Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1984.
[Dodd, 1982] A. J. Dodd. The Core Model, volume 61 of London Mathematical Society Lecture
Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982.

500
Paul B. Larson
[DuBose, 1990] D. DuBose. The equivalence of determinancy and iterated sharps. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 55(2):502–525, 1990.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1958] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal.
On the structure of set mappings.
Acta
Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 9:111–131, 1958.
[Erd˝os and Hajnal, 1966] P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal.
On a problem of B. J´onsson.
Bulletin
d’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et
Physiques, 14:19–23, 1966.
[Feferman and L´evy, 1963] S. Feferman and A. L´evy.
Independence results in set theory by
Cohen’s method II. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 10:593, 1963. Abstract.
[Feng et al., 1992] Q. Feng, M. Magidor, and W. H. Woodin. Universally Baire sets of reals.
In Set Theory of the Continuum (Berkeley, CA, 1989), volume 26 of Mathematical Sciences
Research Institute Publications, pages 203–242. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992.
[Foreman et al., 1988] M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah. Martin’s Maximum, saturated
ideals, and nonregular ultraﬁlters. I. Annals of Mathematics, 127(1):1–47, 1988.
[Foreman, 1986] M. Foreman.
Potent axioms.
Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, 294(1):1–28, 1986.
[Friedman, 1970] H. Friedman. Higher set theory and mathematical practice. Annals of Math-
ematical Logic, 2(3):325–357, 1970.
[Friedman, 1971] H. Friedman. Determinateness in the low projective hierarchy. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 72(1):79–95. (errata insert), 1971.
[Gale and Stewart, 1953] D. Gale and F. Stewart. Inﬁnite games with perfect information. In
Contributions to the theory of games, vol. 2, Annals of Mathematics Studies, no. 28, pages
245–266. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1953.
[Gitik, 1980] M. Gitik. All uncountable cardinals can be singular. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
35(1-2):61–88, 1980.
[Green, 1978] J. Green.
Determinacy and the existence of large measurable cardinals.
PhD
thesis, University of California at Berkeley, 1978.
[Hadamard, 1905] J. Hadamard. Cinq letters sur la th´eorie des ensembles. Bulletin de la Societ´e
math´ematique de France, 33:261–273, 1905.
[Hajnal, 1956] A. Hajnal. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum
problem. Zeitschrift f¨ur Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 2:131–136,
1956.
[Hajnal, 1961] A. Hajnal. On a consistency theorem connected with the generalized continuum
problem. Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 12:321–376, 1961.
[Halmos, 1950] P. Halmos. Measure Theory. D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., New York, N.
Y., 1950.
[Harrington and Kechris, 1981] L. Harrington and A. Kechris. On the determinacy of games on
ordinals. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 20:109–154, 1981.
[Harrington, 1978] L. Harrington. Analytic determinacy and 0♯. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
43(4):685–693, 1978.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1908] F. Hausdorﬀ. Grundz¨uge einer Theorie der geordneten Mengen. Mathematis-
che Annalen, 65:435–505, 1908.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1914] F. Hausdorﬀ. Bemerkung ¨uber den Inhalt von Punktmengen. Mathematische
Annalen, 75:428–434, 1914.
[Henle et al., 1985] J. Henle, A. Mathias, and W. H. Woodin. A barren extension. In Methods
in Mathematical Logic (Caracas, 1983), volume 1130 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages
195–207. Springer, Berlin, 1985.
[Hjorth, 1996] G. Hjorth. Π1
2 Wadge degrees. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 77(1):53–74,
1996.
[Howard and Rubin, 1998] P. Howard and J. Rubin.
Consequences of the Axiom of Choice,
volume 59 of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, 1998.
[Jackson, 1988] S. Jackson. AD and the projective ordinals. In Cabal Seminar 81–85, volume
1333 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 117–220. Springer, Berlin, 1988.
[Jackson, 1999] S. Jackson.
A computation of δ1
5.
Memoirs of the American Mathematical
Society, 140(670):viii+94, 1999.
[Jackson, 2010] S. Jackson. Structural Consequences of AD. In M. Foreman and A. Kanamori,
editors, Handbook of Set Theory. Springer, 2010.
[Jech, 2003] T. Jech. Set Theory. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
2003. The third millennium edition, revised and expanded.

A Brief History of Determinacy
501
[Jensen, 1972] R. Jensen. The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. Annals of Mathe-
matical Logic, 4:229–308; erratum, ibid. 4 (1972), 443, 1972. With a section by Jack Silver.
[Kalm´ar, 1928] L. Kalm´ar. Zur theorie der abstrakten Spiele. Acta Scientiarum Mathemati-
carum Szeged, 4:65–85, 1928. 1928 -29.
[Kanamori, 1995] A. Kanamori. The emergence of descriptive set theory. In From Dedekind to
G¨odel (Boston, MA, 1992), volume 251 of Synthese Library, pages 241–262. Kluwer Acad.
Publ., Dordrecht, 1995.
[Kanamori, 2003] A. Kanamori. The Higher Inﬁnite. Springer Monographs in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second edition, 2003. Large cardinals in set theory from their begin-
nings.
[Kechris and Moschovakis, 1972] A. Kechris and Y. Moschovakis. Two theorems about projec-
tive sets. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 72:391–399, 1972.
[Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978a] A. Kechris and Y. Moschovakis, editors. Cabal Seminar 76–
77, volume 689 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Berlin, 1978. Springer.
[Kechris and Moschovakis, 1978b] A. Kechris and Y. Moschovakis. Notes on the theory of scales.
In Cabal Seminar 76–77 (Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, pages 1–54. Springer, Berlin, 1978. Reprinted in [Kechris et al., 2008].
[Kechris and Solovay, 1985] A. Kechris and R. Solovay. On the relative consistency strength of
determinacy hypotheses. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 290(1):179–
211, 1985.
[Kechris and Woodin, 1983] A. Kechris and W. H. Woodin. Equivalence of partition properties
and determinacy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 80(6 i.):1783–
1786, 1983.
[Kechris et al., 1981a] A. Kechris, E. Kleinberg, Y. Moschovakis, and W. H. Woodin. The axiom
of determinacy, strong partition properties and nonsingular measures. In Cabal Seminar 77–
79 (Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1977–79), volume 839 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 75–99. Springer, Berlin, 1981.
[Kechris et al., 1981b] A. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and Y. Moschovakis, editors. Cabal Seminar
77–79, volume 839 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Berlin, 1981. Springer.
[Kechris et al., 1981c] A. Kechris, R. Solovay, and J. R. Steel. The axiom of determinacy and
the prewellordering property.
In Cabal Seminar 77–79 (Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem.,
1977–79), volume 839 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 101–125. Springer, Berlin,
1981.
[Kechris et al., 1983] A. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and Y. Moschovakis, editors. Cabal Seminar
79–81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Berlin, 1983. Springer-Verlag.
[Kechris et al., 1988] A. Kechris, D. A. Martin, and J. Steel, editors. Cabal Seminar 81–85,
volume 1333 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Berlin, 1988. Springer-Verlag.
[Kechris et al., 2008] A. Kechris, B. L¨owe, and J. Steel, editors.
Games, Scales, and Suslin
cardinals. The Cabal Seminar. Vol. I, volume 31 of Lecture Notes in Logic. Association for
Symbolic Logic, Chicago, IL, 2008.
[Kechris, 1974] A. Kechris. On projective ordinals. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 39:269–282,
1974.
[Kechris, 1975] A. Kechris. The theory of countable analytical sets. Transactions of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 202:259–297, 1975.
[Kechris, 1978] A. Kechris. AD and projective ordinals. In Cabal Seminar 76–77 (Proc. Caltech-
UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 91–132.
Springer, Berlin, 1978.
[Kechris, 1981] A. Kechris. Homogeneous trees and projective scales. In Cabal Seminar 77–79
(Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1977–79), volume 839 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 33–73. Springer, Berlin, 1981.
[Kechris, 1984] A. Kechris. The axiom of determinacy implies dependent choices in L(R). The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 49(1):161–173, 1984.
[Kechris, 1995] A. Kechris. Classical Descriptive Set Theory, volume 156 of Graduate Texts in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
[K˝onig, 1927] D. K˝onig. ¨Uber eine Schlusswiese aus dem endlichen ins Unendliche. Acta Scien-
tiarum Mathematicarum Szeged, 3:121–130, 1927.
[Kleene, 1938] S.. Kleene. On notation for ordinal numbers. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
3:150–155, 1938.

502
Paul B. Larson
[Kleene, 1943] S. Kleene. Recursive predicates and quantiﬁers. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 53:41–73, 1943.
[Kleene, 1955a] S. Kleene. Arithmetical predicates and function quantiﬁers. Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society, 79:312–340, 1955.
[Kleene, 1955b] S. Kleene. Hierarchies of number-theoretic predicates. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 61:193–213, 1955.
[Kleene, 1955c] S. Kleene. On the forms of the predicates in the theory of constructive ordinals.
II. American Journal of Mathematics, 77:405–428, 1955.
[Kleinberg, 1970] E. Kleinberg. Strong partition properties for inﬁnite cardinals. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 35:410–428, 1970.
[Koellner and Woodin, 2010] P. Koellner and W. H. Woodin. Large cardinals from determinacy.
In M. Foreman and A. Kanamori, editors, Handbook of Set Theory. Springer, 2010.
[Kondo, 1938] M. Kondo. Sur l’uniformization des complementaires analytiques et les ensembles
projectifs des las second classe. Japanese Journal of Mathematics, 15:197–230, 1938.
[Kunen, 1970] K. Kunen. Some applications of iterated ultrapowers in set theory. Annals of
Mathematical Logic, 1:179–227, 1970.
[Kunen, 1971] K. Kunen. Elementary embeddings and inﬁnitary combinatorics. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 36:407–413, 1971.
[Kunen, 1978] K. Kunen. Saturated ideals. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 43(1):65–76, 1978.
[Kunen, 1983] K. Kunen. Set Theory, volume 102 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of
Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1983. An introduction to indepen-
dence proofs, Reprint of the 1980 original.
[Kunen, March, 1971] K. Kunen. A remark on Moschovakis’s uniformization theorem. Circu-
lated note, March, 1971.
[Kunen, September, 1971a] K. Kunen. Some more singular cardinals. Circulated note, Septem-
ber, 1971.
[Kunen, September, 1971b] K. Kunen. Some singular cardinals. Circulated note, September,
1971.
[Kuratowski, 1936] K. Kuratowski. Sur les th´eor`emes de s´eparation dans la th´eorie des ensem-
bles. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 26:183–191, 1936.
[Larson and Shelah, 2008] P. Larson and S. Shelah. The stationary set splitting game. Mathe-
matical Logic Quarterly, 54(2):187–193, 2008.
[Larson, 2004] P. Larson. The Stationary Tower, volume 32 of University Lecture Series. Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2004. Notes on a course by William Hugh Woodin.
[Larson, 2005] P. Larson.
The canonical function game.
Archive for Mathematical Logic,
44(7):817–827, 2005.
[Lebesgue, 1905] H. Lebesgue.
Sur les fonctions repr´esentables analytiquement.
Journal de
Mathe´ematiques Pures et Appliqu´ees, 1:139–216, 1905.
[L´evy, 1957] A. L´evy. Ind´ependance conditionnelle de V = L et d’axiomes qui se rattachent
au syst`eme de M. G¨odel. Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des
Sciences, Paris, 245:1582–1583, 1957.
[L´evy, 1960] A. L´evy. A generalization of G¨odel’s notion of constructibility. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 25:147–155, 1960.
[L´evy, 1965a] A. L´evy. Deﬁnability in axiomatic set theory. I. In Logic, Methodology and Philos.
Sci. (Proc. 1964 Internat. Congr.), pages 127–151. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[L´evy, 1965b] A. L´evy. A hierarchy of formulas in set theory. Memoirs of the American Math-
ematical Society, 57:76, 1965.
[L´evy, 1979] A. L´evy. Basic Set Theory. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
[Louveau and Saint-Raymond, 1987] A. Louveau and J. Saint-Raymond.
Borel classes and
closed games: Wadge-type and Hurewicz-type results. Transactions of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 304(2):431–467, 1987.
[Louveau and Saint-Raymond, 1988] A. Louveau and J. Saint-Raymond. The strength of Borel
Wadge determinacy. In Cabal Seminar 81–85, volume 1333 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 1–30. Springer, Berlin, 1988.
[Luzin and Novikov, 1935] N. Luzin and P. Novikov. Choix eﬀectif d’un point dans un comple-
mentaire analytique arbitraire, donne par un crible. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 25:559–560,
1935.

A Brief History of Determinacy
503
[Luzin and Sierpi´nski, 1918] N. Luzin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur quelques propri´et´es des ensembles
(A). Bulletin de l’Acad´emie des Sciences Cracovie, Classe des Sciences Math´ematiques, S´erie
A, pages 35–48, 1918.
[Luzin and Sierpi´nski, 1923] N. Luzin and W. Sierpi´nski. Sur un ensemble non measurable B.
Journal de Math´ematiques Pures et Applique´ees, 2(9):53–72, 1923.
[Luzin, 1925a] N. Luzin.
Les proprietes des ensembles projectifs.
Comptes Rendus Hebdo-
madaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 180:1817–1819, 1925.
[Luzin, 1925b] N. Luzin. Sur les ensembles projectifs de M. Henri Lebesgue. Comptes Rendus
Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 180:1318–1320, 1925.
[Luzin, 1925c] N. Luzin. Sur un probl`eme de M. Emile Borel et les ensembles projectifs de M.
Henri Lebesgue: les ensembles analytiques. Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de
l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 164:91–94, 1925.
[Luzin, 1927] N. Luzin. Sur les ensembles analytiques. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 10:1–95,
1927.
[Luzin, 1930a] N. Luzin. Analogies entre les ensembles mesurables B et les ensembles analy-
tiques. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 16:48–76, 1930.
[Luzin, 1930b] N. Luzin. Sur le probl`eme de M. J. Hadamard d’uniformisation des ensembles.
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 190:349–351,
1930.
[Magidor, 1980] M. Magidor. Precipitous ideals and Σ1
4 sets. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
35(1-2):109–134, 1980.
[Mansﬁeld, 1970] R. Mansﬁeld. Perfect subsets of deﬁnable sets of real numbers. Paciﬁc Journal
of Mathematics, 35:451–457, 1970.
[Mansﬁeld, 1971] R. Mansﬁeld. A Souslin operation for Π1
2. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
9:367–379, 1971.
[Martin and Paris, March, 1971] D. A. Martin and J. Paris. AD →∃exactly 2 normal measures
on ω2, March, 1971.
[Martin and Solovay, 1969] D. A. Martin and R. Solovay. A basis theorem for Σ1
3 sets of reals.
Annals of Mathematics, 89:138–159, 1969.
[Martin and Steel, 1983] D. A. Martin and J. Steel. The extent of scales in L(R). In Cabal
Seminar 79–81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 86–96. Springer, Berlin,
1983. Reprinted in [Kechris et al., 2008].
[Martin and Steel, 1989] D. A. Martin and J. Steel. A proof of projective determinacy. Journal
of the American Mathematical Society, 2(1):71–125, 1989.
[Martin and Steel, 1994] D. A. Martin and J. Steel. Iteration trees. Journal of the American
Mathematical Society, 7(1):1–73, 1994.
[Martin et al., 1982] D. A. Martin, Y. Moschovakis, and J. Steel. The extent of deﬁnable scales.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 6:435–440, 1982.
[Martin et al., 2003] D. A. Martin, I. Neeman, and M. Vervoort.
The strength of Blackwell
determinacy. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 68(2):615–636, 2003.
[Martin, 1968] D. A. Martin.
The axiom of determinateness and reduction principles in the
analytical hierarchy. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 74:687–689, 1968.
[Martin, 1970] D. A. Martin. Measurable cardinals and analytic games. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, 66:440–442, 1970.
[Martin, 1975] D. A. Martin. Borel determinacy. Annals of Mathematics, 102(2):363–371, 1975.
[Martin, 1980] D. A. Martin. Inﬁnite games. In Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians (Helsinki, 1978), pages 269–273, Helsinki, 1980. Acad. Sci. Fennica.
[Martin, 1983] D. A. Martin. The real game quantiﬁer propagates scales. In Cabal Seminar
79–81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 157–171. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
Reprinted in [Kechris et al., 2008].
[Martin, 1985] D. A. Martin.
A purely inductive proof of Borel determinacy.
In Recursion
Theory (Ithaca, N.Y., 1982), volume 42 of Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics,
pages 303–308. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1985.
[Martin, 1990] D. A. Martin. An extension of Borel determinacy. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 49(3):279–293, 1990.
[Martin, 1998] D. A. Martin. The determinacy of Blackwell games. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 63(4):1565–1581, 1998.

504
Paul B. Larson
[Martin, 2003] D. A. Martin. A simple proof that determinacy implies Lebesgue measurability.
Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico Universit`a e Politecnico de Torino, 61(4):393–397,
2003.
[Mathias, 1968] A. Mathias. On a generalization of Ramsey’s theorem. Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 15:931, 1968.
[Mathias, 1977] A. Mathias. Happy families. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 12(1):59–111,
1977.
[Mauldin, 1981] R. Mauldin, editor. The Scottish Book. Birkh¨auser Boston, Mass., 1981. Math-
ematics from the Scottish Caf´e, Including selected papers presented at the Scottish Book
Conference held at North Texas State University, Denton, Tex., May 1979.
[Mitchell, 1979] W. Mitchell.
Hypermeasurable cardinals.
In Logic Colloquium ’78 (Mons,
1978), volume 97 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 303–316.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.
[Moschovakis, 1967] Y. Moschovakis. Hyperanalytic predicates. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 129:248–282, 1967.
[Moschovakis, 1969] Y. Moschovakis. Abstract ﬁrst order computability I and II. Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society, 138:427–504, 1969.
[Moschovakis, 1970] Y. Moschovakis. Determinacy and prewellorderings of the continuum. In
Mathematical Logic and Foundations of Set Theory (Proc. Internat. Colloq., Jerusalem,
1968), pages 24–62. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1970.
[Moschovakis, 1971] Y. Moschovakis.
Uniformization in a playful universe.
Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 77:731–736, 1971.
[Moschovakis, 1973] Y. Moschovakis.
Analytical deﬁnability in a playful universe.
In Logic,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science IV (Proc. Fourth Internat. Congr., Bucharest, 1971),
pages 77–85. Studies in Logic and Foundations of Math., Vol. 74. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1973.
[Moschovakis, 1978] Y. Moschovakis. Inductive scales on inductive sets. In Cabal Seminar 76–77
(Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 185–192. Springer, Berlin, 1978. Reprinted in [Kechris et al., 2008].
[Moschovakis, 1980] Y. Moschovakis. Descriptive Set Theory, volume 100 of Studies in Logic
and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1980.
[Moschovakis, 1981] Y. Moschovakis. Ordinal games and playful models. In Cabal Seminar 77–
79 (Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1977–79), volume 839 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 169–201. Springer, Berlin, 1981.
[Moschovakis, 1983] Y. Moschovakis.
Scales on coinductive sets.
In Cabal Seminar 79–81,
volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 77–85. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
[Moschovakis, 2009] Y. Moschovakis. Descriptive Set Theory, volume 155 of Mathematical Sur-
veys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2009.
[Mycielski and Steinhaus, 1962] J. Mycielski and H. Steinhaus. A mathematical axiom contra-
dicting the axiom of choice. Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences. S´erie des Sciences
Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques, 10:1–3, 1962.
[Mycielski and ´Swierczkowski, 1964] J. Mycielski and S. ´Swierczkowski. On the Lebesgue mea-
surability and the axiom of determinateness. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 54:67–71, 1964.
[Mycielski, 1963] J. Mycielski. On the axiom of determinateness. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
53:205–224, 1963. 1963 -64.
[Mycielski, 1966] J. Mycielski. On the axiom of determinateness. II. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
59:203–212, 1966.
[Neeman, 1995] I. Neeman. Optimal proofs of determinacy. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
1:327–339, 1995.
[Neeman, 2000] I. Neeman.
Unraveling Π1
1 sets.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 106(1-
3):151–205, 2000.
[Neeman, 2002] I. Neeman. Inner models in the region of a Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 116(1-3):67–155, 2002.
[Neeman, 2004] I. Neeman. The Determinacy of Long Games, volume 7 of de Gruyter Series
in Logic and its Applications. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, 2004.
[Neeman, 2005] I. Neeman. An introduction to proofs of determinacy of long games. In Logic
Colloquium ’01, volume 20 of Lecture Notes in Logic, pages 43–86. Assoc. Symbol. Logic,
Urbana, IL, 2005.

A Brief History of Determinacy
505
[Neeman, 2006a] I. Neeman. Determinacy for games ending at the ﬁrst admissible relative to
the play. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 71(2):425–459, 2006.
[Neeman, 2006b] I. Neeman.
Unraveling Π1
1 sets, revisited.
Israel Journal of Mathematics,
152:181–203, 2006.
[Neeman, 2007a] I. Neeman. Games of length ω1. Journal of Mathematical Logic, 7(1):83–124,
2007.
[Neeman, 2007b] I. Neeman. Inner models and ultraﬁlters in L(R). The Bulletin of Symbolic
Logic, 13(1):31–53, 2007.
[Neeman, 2010] I. Neeman. Determinacy from large cardinals. In M. Foreman and A. Kanamori,
editors, Handbook of Set Theory. Springer, 2010.
[Novikov, 1935] P. Novikov. Sur la s´eparabilit´e des ensembles projectifs de seconde class. Fun-
damenta Mathematicae, 25:459–466, 1935.
[Oxtoby, 1980] J. Oxtoby. Measure and Category, volume 2 of Graduate Texts in Mathemat-
ics.
Springer-Verlag, New York, second edition, 1980.
A survey of the analogies between
topological and measure spaces.
[Paris, 1972] J. Paris. ZF ⊢Σ0
4 determinateness. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 37:661–667,
1972.
[Prikry, 1976] K. Prikry. Determinateness and partitions. Proceedings of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 54:303–306, 1976.
[Ramsey, 1930] F. Ramsey. On a problem of formal logic. Proceedings of the London Mathe-
matical Society, 30(2):2–24, 1930.
[Sacks, 1976] G. Sacks. Countable admissible ordinals and hyperdegrees. Advances in Mathe-
matics, 20(2):213–262, 1976.
[Schimmerling and Zeman, 2001] E. Schimmerling and M. Zeman. Square in core models. The
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 7(3):305–314, 2001.
[Schimmerling, 1995] E. Schimmerling.
Combinatorial principles in the core model for one
Woodin cardinal. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 74(2):153–201, 1995.
[Schimmerling, 2007] E. Schimmerling. Coherent sequences and threads. Advances in Mathe-
matics, 216(1):89–117, 2007.
[Schimmerling, 2010] E. Schimmerling. A core model toolbox and guide. In M. Foreman and
A. Kanamori, editors, Handbook of Set Theory. Springer, 2010.
[Schwalbe and Walker, 2001] U. Schwalbe and P. Walker. Zermelo and the early history of game
theory. Games and Economic Behavior, 34(1):123–137, 2001. With an appendix by Ernst
Zermelo, translated from German by the authors.
[Shelah and Woodin, 1990] S. Shelah and W. H. Woodin.
Large cardinals imply that every
reasonably deﬁnable set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
Israel Journal of Mathematics,
70(3):381–394, 1990.
[Shelah, 1984] S. Shelah. Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 48(1):1–47, 1984.
[Shelah, 1998] S. Shelah. Proper and Improper Forcing. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second edition, 1998.
[Shoenﬁeld, 1961] J. Shoenﬁeld. The problem of predicativity. In Essays on the Foundations
of Mathematics, pages 132–139. Magnes Press, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 1961.
[Sierpi´nski, 1924] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une propri´et´e des ensembles ambigus. Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 6:1–5, 1924.
[Sierpi´nski, 1925] W. Sierpi´nski. Sur une class d’ensembles. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 7:237–
243, 1925.
[Sierpi´nski, 1938] W. Sierpi´nski. Fonctions additives non compl`etement additives et fonctions
non mesurables. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 30:96–99, 1938.
[Silver, 1971] J. Silver. Some applications of model theory in set theory. Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 3(1):45–110, 1971.
[Soare, 1987] R. Soare. Recursively Enumerable Sets and Degrees. Perspectives in Mathemat-
ical Logic. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987. A study of computable functions and computably
generated sets.
[Solovay, 1967] R. Solovay. A nonconstructible ∆1
3 set of integers. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 127:50–75, 1967.
[Solovay, 1969] R. Solovay. On the cardinality of Σ1
2 sets of reals. In Foundations of Mathematics
(Symposium Commemorating Kurt G¨odel, Columbus, Ohio, 1966), pages 58–73. Springer,
New York, 1969.

506
Paul B. Larson
[Solovay, 1970] R. Solovay. A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue mea-
surable. Annals of Mathematics, 92:1–56, 1970.
[Solovay, 1978a] R. Solovay. A ∆1
3 coding of the subsets of ωω. In Cabal Seminar 76–77 (Proc.
Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages
133–150. Springer, Berlin, 1978.
[Solovay, 1978b] R. Solovay. The independence of DC from AD. In Cabal Seminar 76–77 (Proc.
Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages
171–183. Springer, Berlin, 1978.
[Steel and Van Wesep, 1982] J. Steel and R. Van Wesep.
Two consequences of determinacy
consistent with choice. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 272(1):67–85,
1982.
[Steel, 1981] J. Steel. Determinateness and the separation property. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 46(1):41–44, 1981.
[Steel, 1982] J. Steel.
Determinacy in the Mitchell models.
Annals of Mathematical Logic,
22(2):109–125, 1982.
[Steel, 1983] J. Steel. Scales in L(R). In Cabal Seminar 79–81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes
in Mathematics, pages 107–156. Springer, Berlin, 1983. Reprinted in [Kechris et al., 2008].
[Steel, 1988] J. Steel. Long games. In Cabal Seminar 81–85, volume 1333 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, pages 56–97. Springer, Berlin, 1988. Reprinted in [Kechris et al., 2008].
[Steel, 1995] J. Steel.
HODL(R) is a core model below Θ.
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic,
1(1):75–84, 1995.
[Steel, 1996] J. Steel. The Core Model Iterability Problem, volume 8 of Lecture Notes in Logic.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996.
[Steel, 2002] J. Steel. Core models with more Woodin cardinals. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
67(3):1197–1226, 2002.
[Steel, 2005] J. Steel. PFA implies ADL(R). The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 70(4):1255–1296,
2005.
[Steel, 2008a] J. Steel. Games and scales. Introduction to Part I. In Games, Scales, and Suslin
cardinals. The Cabal Seminar. Vol. I, volume 31 of Lecture Notes in Logic, pages 3–27. Assoc.
Symbol. Logic, Chicago, IL, 2008.
[Steel, 2008b] J. Steel. The length-ω1 open game quantiﬁer propagates scales. In Games, Scales,
and Suslin cardinals. The Cabal Seminar. Vol. I, volume 31 of Lecture Notes in Logic, pages
260–269. Assoc. Symbol. Logic, Chicago, IL, 2008.
[Steel, 2009] J. Steel. The derived model theorem. In Logic Colloquium 2006, Lecture Notes in
Logic, pages 280–327. Association of Symbolic Logic, Chicago, IL, 2009.
[Suslin, 1917] M. Suslin. Sur une d´eﬁnition des ensembles measurable B sans nombres transﬁnis.
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, Paris, 164:88–91,
1917.
[Todorcevic, 1984] S. Todorcevic. A note on the proper forcing axiom. In Axiomatic Set Theory
(Boulder, Colo., 1983), volume 31 of Contemporary Mathematics, pages 209–218. Amer.
Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984.
[Ulam, 1960] S. Ulam. A Collection of Mathematical Problems. Interscience Tracts in Pure and
Applied Mathematics, no. 8. Interscience Publishers, New York-London, 1960.
[Van Wesep, 1978a] R. Van Wesep. Separation principles and the axiom of determinateness.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 43(1):77–81, 1978.
[Van Wesep, 1978b] R. Van Wesep. Wadge degrees and descriptive set theory. In Cabal Sem-
inar 76–77 (Proc. Caltech-UCLA Logic Sem., 1976–77), volume 689 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, pages 151–170. Springer, Berlin, 1978.
[Veliˇckovi´c, 1992] B. Veliˇckovi´c. Forcing axioms and stationary sets. Advances in Mathematics,
94(2):256–284, 1992.
[Vitali, 1905] G. Vitali. Sul problema della misura dei gruppi di punti di una retta. Tip. Gam-
berini e Parmeggiani, pages 231–235, 1905.
[von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2004] J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern. Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2004. Reprint of the 1980
edition [Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ].
[Wagon, 1993] S. Wagon.
The Banach-Tarski Paradox.
Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1993. With a foreword by Jan Mycielski, Corrected reprint of the 1985 original.

A Brief History of Determinacy
507
[Wolfe, 1955] P. Wolfe. The strict determinateness of certain inﬁnite games. Paciﬁc Journal of
Mathematics, 5:841–847, 1955.
[Woodin, 1982] W. H. Woodin. On the consistency strength of projective uniformization. In
Proceedings of the Herbrand Symposium (Marseilles, 1981), volume 107 of Studies in Logic
and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 365–384. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1982.
[Woodin, 1983a] W. H. Woodin.
AD and the uniqueness of the supercompact measures on
Pω1(λ). In Cabal Seminar 79–81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 67–
71. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
[Woodin, 1983b] W. H. Woodin. Some consistency results in ZFC using AD. In Cabal Seminar
79–81, volume 1019 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 172–198. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
[Woodin, 1986] W. H. Woodin. Aspects of determinacy. In Logic, Methodology and Philosophy
of Science, VII (Salzburg, 1983), volume 114 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of
Mathematics, pages 171–181. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1986.
[Woodin, 1988] W. H. Woodin. Supercompact cardinals, sets of reals, and weakly homogeneous
trees.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
85(18):6587–6591, 1988.
[Woodin, 1999] W. H. Woodin. The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonsta-
tionary Ideal, volume 1 of de Gruyter Series in Logic and its Applications. Walter de Gruyter
& Co., Berlin, 1999.
[Zermelo, 1904] E. Zermelo. Beweis, dass jede menge wohlgeordnet werden kann. Mathematische
Annalen, 59:514–516, 1904.
[Zermelo, 1913] E. Zermelo.
¨Uber eine Anwendung der Mengenlehre auf die Theorie des
Schachspiels. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Congress Mathematics, pages 501–
504, Cambridge, MA, 1913. Cambridge University Press.


SINGULAR CARDINALS:
FROM HAUSDORFF’S GAPS TO
SHELAH’S PCF THEORY
Menachem Kojman
The mathematical subject of singular cardinals is young and many of the math-
ematicians who made important contributions to it are still active. This makes
writing a history of singular cardinals a somewhat riskier mission than writing the
history of, say, Babylonian arithmetic.
Yet exactly the discussions with some of the people who created the 20th century
history of singular cardinals made the writing of this article fascinating. I am
indebted to Moti Gitik, Ronald Jensen, Istv´an Juh´asz, Menachem Magidor and
Saharon Shelah for the time and eﬀort they spent on helping me understand the
development of the subject and for many illuminations they provided. A lot of
what I thought about the history of singular cardinals had to change as a result
of these discussions.
Special thanks are due to Istv´an Juh´asz, for his patient reading for me from
the Russian text of Alexandroﬀand Urysohn’s Memoirs, to Salma Kuhlmann,
who directed me to the deﬁnition of singular cardinals in Hausdorﬀ’s writing, and
to Stefan Geschke, who helped me with the German texts I needed to read and
sometimes translate.
I am also indebted to the Hausdorﬀproject in Bonn, for publishing a beautiful
annotated volume of Hausdorﬀ’s monumental Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre and for
Springer Verlag, for rushing to me a free copy of this book; many important details
about the early history of the subject were drawn from this volume.
The wonderful library and archive of the Institute Mittag-Leﬄer are a treasure
for anyone interested in mathematics at the turn of the 20th century; a particularly
pleasant duty for me is to thank the institute for hosting me during my visit in
September of 2009, which allowed me to verify various details in the early research
literature, as well as providing me the company of many set theorists and model
theorists who are interested in the subject.
I an grateful to all colleagues who read early versions of this manuscript and who
made many valuable comments. Aki Kanamori, who spent too many hours of his
time reading and correcting my writing, deserves my deepest gratitude. Needless
to say, all mistakes which remained in this text are solely mine.
Every mathematician has come across Hausdorﬀ’s name, typically in more than
one area of mathematics. That was the case with me as well, but it was not until
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

510
Menachem Kojman
the writing of this chapter that I truly grasped the inﬂuence of Hausdorﬀ’s work on
modern set theory and, reading his letters, had the chance to appreciate from afar
his delicate sense of humour and modesty. This article is devoted to his memory.
1
INTRODUCTION
Singular cardinals appeared on the mathematical world stage two years before they
were deﬁned. At the third international congress of mathematicians in Heidelberg,
on August 10, 1904, Julius K¨onig allegedly refuted Georg Cantor’s two major
conjectures simultaneously, by proving that the continuum could not be well-
ordered in any of the order-types in Cantor’s list of alephs.
K¨onig’s proof went as follows: Suppose that the continuum is some ℵβ. Look at
the sequence ℵβ+1, ℵβ+2, . . . , ℵβ+n, . . . for all natural numbers n. Its limit ℵβ+ω
is equal to the sum P
n ℵβ+n.
K¨onig next presented his newly proved special case of what is now known as
“K¨onig’s inequality”, which states that
Y
ℵβ+n+1 >
X
ℵβ+n,
(1)
to derive the inequality
(ℵβ+ω)ℵ0 > ℵβ+ω.
(2)
So far, K¨onig is absolutely correct. The general theorem now known as “K¨onig’s
inequality” was obtained by Zermelo and presented in G¨ottingen in the same year,
but published only four years later [Zermelo, 1908]. Next, K¨onig quotes a theorem
from Felix Bernstein’s G¨ottingen dissertation: (ℵα)ℵ0 = ℵα · 2ℵ0 for every ordinal
α. Substituting β + ω for α and using 2ℵ0 = ℵβ one gets
(ℵβ+ω)ℵ0 = ℵβ+ω
(3)
Now (2) and (3) contradict each other. Ergo: 2ℵ0 is not an aleph!
This had a dramatic eﬀect:
Though mathematics rarely makes a ripple in the daily press today,
the local papers then were full of reports describing K¨onig’s sensational
discovery.
This is from Cantor’s biography by Dauben [1990, p.249], where Cantor’s conster-
nation with the situation is described in detail (p.248):
As Schoenﬂies once put it, belief that the power of the continuum was
equal to ℵ1 was a basic dogma with Cantor. Not only did K¨onig’s
proof challenge this dogma, but it further implied that the continuum
could not be well-ordered. This rendered doubtful another article of
Cantorian faith—that every set could be well-ordered.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
511
Cantor was immediately suspicious of K¨onig’s proof, particularly of Bernstein’s
lemma. Making a pun on K¨onig’s last name, “Cantor quipped that whatever had
been done to produce the alleged proof, he suspected the king less than the king’s
ministers.” (Dauben [1990, p.249])
Indeed, Bernstein’s lemma was false for exactly the type of cardinals required in
K¨onig’s use of it. Felix Hausdorﬀ, after coming back from Wengen, Switzerland,
where he and Hilbert had spent a short vacation after the Heidelberg congress,
poetically described K¨onig’s and Bernstein’s combined ﬂaw in a letter to Hilbert
in the following month (cf. [Hausdorﬀ, 2002, p.11]):
After the continuum problem plagued me in Wengen almost like an
obsession, my ﬁrst look here was naturally directed to Bernstein’s dis-
sertation. The bug lay exactly in the expected place, on page 50 [. . . ]
Bernstein’s argument employs a recursion from ℵµ which does not hold
for alephs that have no immediate predecessor, that is, exactly those
alephs which K¨onig required.1
That is, Bernstein’s ﬂaw lies in the fact that exactly the limit cardinal for which
K¨onig uses Bernstein’s equality—ℵβ+ω—escapes the recursion Bernstein uses to
prove the equality, as it has no immediate predecessor.
As [Hausdorﬀ, 2002] mentions, it was for a while erroneously thought that
Zermelo was the one who detected the error in K¨onig’s false proof. The debate
continues whether it was actually Hausdorﬀ(cf. [Hausdorﬀ, 2002, p.10]) or someone
else. Recently Moore [2009, p.825] suggested that a letter by Otto Blumenthal to
´Emile Borel dated December 1, 1904, may indicate that “K¨onig himself was the
ﬁrst to realize that his proof was not valid, followed (independently of each other)
by Cantor, Bernstein and Zermelo.”
Singular cardinals could not have received a louder introduction than the one
they received in the 1904 Heidelberg episode: at an international congress, with
all other parallel sessions canceled by the organizers to allow everyone to attend
K¨onig’s sensational lecture, in the presence of Cantor and Hilbert, and in direct
relation to the two most important problems in set theory of the time.
Furthermore, disregarding the circumstances and considering only the mathe-
matical concepts, inﬁnite products of distinct regular cardinals, which are the most
important objects in the modern elementary theory of singular cardinals, were in-
troduced in K¨onig’s pioneering result. K¨onig showed that the product Q
n ℵβ+n
is embeddable in the power set of ℵβ+ω and diagonalizable against the sum of
cardinals P
n ℵβ+n = ℵβ+ω. He takes Cantor’s diagonal argument for the inequal-
ity 2κ > κ an important step further and applies it in a setting with a singular
cardinal. Using the fact that ℵβ+ω is a countable sum, he can use diagonalization
1Nachdem das Continuumproblem mich in Wengen beinahe wie eine Monomanie geplagt
hatte, galt hier mein erster Blick nat¨urlich der Bernsteinschen Dissertation.
Der Wurm sitzt
genau an der vermutheten Stelle, S. 50 [. . . ] Bernsteins Betrachtung giebt eine Recursion von
ℵµ+1 auf ℵµ, versagt aber f¨ur solche ℵµ, die keinen Vorg¨anger haben, also gerade f¨ur die Alephs,
f¨ur die Herr J. K¨onig sie nothwendig braucht.

512
Menachem Kojman
to show that the total number of countable subsets of ℵβ+ω exceeds ℵβ+ω. Zer-
melo [1908] extended this result to general products and observed that it implies
Cantor’s theorem that the power set of any set had larger cardinality than the
set itself. Thus, the K¨onig-Zermelo inequality held all the information that Can-
torian diagonalization could give at the time about cardinal exponentiation, and
surprisingly enough continued to do so for many more decades.
The importance of this interplay between inﬁnite products and inﬁnite sums,
which K¨onig discovered and Zermelo phrased in full generality, goes well beyond
cardinal arithmetical considerations—it is fundamental for every mathematical
structure of singular cardinality. Even a superﬁcial examination of K¨onig’s ar-
gument shows than it actually proves more that it states — e.g., that for every
collection of ℵβ+ω small subsets of ℵβ+ω there exists a countable subset with ﬁnite
intersection with each set in the family. A central tool for the study of singular
cardinals has been introduced by K¨onig already in 1904 in Heidelberg, but was
not put to appropriate use at that time.
K¨onig’s Heidelberg episode clearly brought out the issue that would accompany
the development of singular cardinals theory for many years to come. Singular
cardinals were regarded as a curiosity, an obstacle, a threat to Cantor’s conjectures.
They are the points in the list of alephs at which Bernstein’s inductive argument
and many other arguments that would be attempted in the years to come break
down, exactly because of the fact that some of the small subsets of the cardinal
are unbounded in it — a property described as “singularity” by K¨onig [1905], and
later adapted by Hausdorﬀas the name for these cardinals.
It is instructive to compare K¨onig’s diagonal argument to the Baire category
theorem, proved just three years earlier: both are proved via variations on Cantor’s
diagonal argument for 2ℵ0 > ℵ0, with the Baire argument using ﬁrst category sets
instead of singletons and the K¨onig argument using subsets of cardinality smaller
than the singular cardinal instead of singletons. Both theorems had short, simple
proofs that were accessible to everyone and both were immediately accepted as
true. One can argue that both theorems had similar aesthetic appeal. Yet, the
Baire theorem rapidly became a part of the general mathematical language—it
is probably one of the most frequently used theorems in mathematics and has
numerous applications and generalizations—and many other uses of Cantorian
diagonalization in analysis followed the Baire theorem example. But hardly any
research at all followed the K¨onig-Zermelo inequality for many decades. The next
development in singular cardinal arithmetic in the direction that the inequality
marked came only with Silver’s theorem in 1974 (see below).
Why did not K¨onig himself, Cantor, or, more realistically, Zermelo, who pub-
lished the general formulation of K¨onig’s inequality, or Hausdorﬀ, pursue K¨onig’s
discovery further? K¨onig, at 1904 only one year before his retirement, is deter-
mined to disprove Cantor’s well-ordering conjecture as much as Cantor is deter-
mined to prove it. He would spend the last eight years of his life trying to refute
the Axiom of Choice, which Zermelo phrased and used to prove the Well-Ordering
theorem shortly after the Heidelberg congress.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
513
Cantor, who had previously been on good terms with K¨onig and appreciated
his work, was agitated and probably angry that K¨onig put him in such public
discomfort in Heidelberg, not having told him beforehand about the contents of
his talk. Neither of them pursues K¨onig’s discovery further.
Zermelo may have been more interested in the Axiom of Choice and in axiom-
atization issues in general than in exploring singular cardinal arithmetic further.
Hausdorﬀ, who was an ideal candidate for studying the products that appeared
in K¨onig’s proof, with which he was well acquainted, and who would soon launch
an intensive study of the inﬁnite product ωω—concludes his letter to Hilbert as
follows (cf. [Hausdorﬀ, 2002, p.11]):
I had written to this eﬀect to Herr K¨onig while still on the road and
explained this as far as I could without using Bernstein’s work, but
so far received no reply.
Now I am yet even more convinced that
K¨onig’s proof is wrong and I believe K¨onig’s theorem to be the peak
of impossibility. On the other hand, I am sure you too do not believe
that Herr Cantor discovered during these last few weeks what he has
been looking for in vain for the last 30 years. Thus, your problem No.
1 seems to remain after the Heidelberg congress exactly where you left
it after the Paris congress.
But perhaps, as I am writing this, one of the combating parties is
already in possession of the truth. I am very curious to see the printed
proceedings of the congress.2
In K¨onig’s paper, published in 1905 in Mathematische Annalen, he indeed retracted
his claim and pointed to Bernstein’s mistake (see below for further discussion of
this paper).
Once the doubts that K¨onig’s announcement cast had been lifted, eﬀort to solve
Cantor’s two big open problems resumed. What is important to observe is that
apart from its potential hazard to Cantor’s problem, Hausdorﬀsays nothing about
K¨onig’s inequality. This mathematically valuable statement seems to have been
welded to the wrong proof in which it played a part.
Would K¨onig’s important discovery have received wider attention had it been
presented on its own, and not as part of the false refutation of the continuum
hypothesis?
The circumstances so dictated that the mathematical contents of
K¨onig’s inequality was overshadowed by K¨onig’s erroneous use of it. By the time
K¨onig’s congress paper appeared in 1905, all K¨onig claimed to have proved was
2Ich hatte in diesem Sinne, soweit Ich ohne Benutzung der Bernsteinschen Arbetin konnte,
schon von unterwegs an Herrn K¨onig geschrieben, aber keine Antwort erhalten, bin also umso
mehr geneigt, den K¨onig’schen Beweis f¨ur falsch und den K¨onig’schen Satz f¨ur den Gipfel des
Unwahrscheinlichen zu Halten. Anderseits werden wohl auch Sie kaum den Eindruck gewonnen
haben, dass Herr Cantor das, was er seit 30 Jahren vergeblich sucht, in den letzten Wochen
gefunden haben sollte, und so scheint Ihr Problem Nr. 1 nach dem Heidelberger Congress genau
dort to stehen, wo Sie es aur dem Pariser Congress verlassen haben.
Aber vielleicht ist, w¨ahrend ich dies schriebe, doch schon eine der streitenden Parteien im
Besitze der Wahrheit. Ich bin sehr gespannt auf die gedruckten Verhandlungen des Congresses.

514
Menachem Kojman
that the continuum could not be well-ordered in an order-type of the form ℵβ+ω.
However, his argument essentially proved that the continuum could not be well-
ordered in a type of countable coﬁnality; as “coﬁnality” had not been yet deﬁned,
he could not state this. (Hausdorﬀlater attributed the full statement to K¨onig.)
But this claim is incomparably less dramatic that his original statement that the
continuum could not be well-ordered at all.
The name “singular cardinal” and the circumstances of its emergence as a name
for non-regular limit cardinals requires some explanation. This name appears for
the ﬁrst time in K¨onig’s [1905] following his congress lecture, in a passage in which
he explains the mistake in his lecture:
It follows that the assumption that the continuum is equivalent to a
well-ordered set would be certainly false if Bernstein’s theorem was
correct n general. Unfortunately its proof has a signiﬁcant gap since
for ℵω and each of the “singular” well-ordered sets considered above,
the assumption that each countable subset is included in a [proper]
initial segment is not correct anymore.
I mention this mainly in order to retract the conclusion that I drew from
Bernstein’s theorem in my talk at the congress under the assumption
that the theorem was correct.
From a distance of over a hundred years the scorn in K¨onig’s articulation is still
audible: if not for these “singular” order-types, as K¨onig puts it, his proof would
still be correct. Later in the paper K¨onig brings up the possibility that the contin-
uum is not well-orderable and (as a non-well-ordered cardinal) larger than every
well-orderable set. In this case, he writes, Bernstein’s theorem follows.
Technically, K¨onig’s original use of “singular” means “an uncountable cardinal
with unbounded countable subsets”, that is, singular of countable coﬁnality. The
name “singular” was adopted by Hausdorﬀto describe cardinals whose coﬁnality
type was smaller than themselves, once coﬁnality had been deﬁned in his 1906
paper on order-types, and became the standard name for these cardinals ever since.
This name was far from neutral. Hausdorﬀ’s division of cardinals to “regular” and
“singular” suggested that regular cardinals were the objects that deserved serious
attention, and that the singulars were less important. This view was sustained for
a surprisingly long time.
Zermelo [1904] introduced the Axiom of Choice and proved that every set could
be well-ordered, and Hausdorﬀlaunched an intensive project of classifying order-
types, perhaps hoping he could solve Cantor’s continuum problem in this way.
Hausdorﬀ’s ﬁrst result in set theory (obtained independently by Bernstein) was
that the number of countable order-types is equal to the continuum. Moore [1989]
expresses the opinion that Hausdorﬀwas doing this so that he could prove that
the number of countable well-order-types, which Cantor had already shown to
be ℵ1, was equal to the total number of countable order-types, and in this way
solve Cantor’s continuum problem, but Steprans [2010] feels that Hausdorﬀwas

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
515
“primarily interested in the classiﬁcation of linear order-types, but . . . nevertheless
recognized the signiﬁcance of his work to the Continuum Problem.”
Although Hausdorﬀdid treat singular cardinals in his work, they were cast
aside by him and the other researchers of the time in favor of the more burning
issue of the continuum. The (consistent) possibilities that the continuum itself
was a singular or a regular limit cardinal were not raised at that time at all. This
may be partly due to the confusion between the ℵoperation and the ℶoperation;
the continuum is clearly not closed under the latter, therefore (if the two are the
same, as GCH claims) it is not closed under the former. It took a stimulus from
measure theory to bring the possibility of a limit continuum into the foreground
(see Sect. 6.1).
Neither fashion nor prejudice could hide singular cardinals from the mathemat-
ical eye for long. The interrelation between singular cardinalities and basic prop-
erties of standard mathematical objects is so profound and varied that singular
cardinals inevitably appeared in set-theoretic investigation in several mainstream
branches of mathematics during the long period of time in which they were ignored
by the organized set-theoretic research. Some of these investigations foundered for
decades in the absence of the right set-theoretic tools. In Section 3 we shall look
at some of these occurrences of singulars.
Set theory had to experience several remarkable metamathematical develop-
ments before set theorists developed an elementary theory of singular cardinals.
It had to be realized ﬁrst that there were no more rules for regular cardinal arith-
metic than those given by the K¨onig-Zermelo inequality (and the trivial weak
monotonicity). It was actually the singular cardinals that possessed a theory, and
hence deserved a close study. A theory of singular cardinal arithmetic was ﬁnally
developed without metamathematical means, via the algebraic study of small inﬁ-
nite products of diﬀerent regular cardinals by Shelah in the 1980s and 1990s under
the name of pcf theory.
A posteriori, Shelah’s theory shed an explanatory light
on the instances in which singular cardinals appeared naturally in topology, alge-
bra and elsewhere, and in many cases could be used to directly continue the early
investigations of singulars.
A central ingredient in Shelah’s pcf theory is the theory of exact upper bounds
of increasing sequences of ordinal functions modulo some ideal on an inﬁnite set.
Given an ideal I of subsets over an inﬁnite set A one deﬁnes a quasi-ordering on
the class of functions from A to the ordinal numbers, OnA. For two such functions
f and g, f is smaller modulo I than g if except for a set in I it holds for all a ∈A
that f(a) < g(a). This relation is denoted by <I and similarly ≤I and =I are
deﬁned. A typical example is the ideal of ﬁnite sets—in which case the relations
<I, ≤I and =I are customarily denoted by <∗, ≤∗and =∗.
A central notion in pcf theory is that of a scale—a sequence of functions in an
inﬁnite product of regular cardinals which is linearly ordered and dominating for
the relation <I for some ideal I. Shelah’s results on scales are remarkably similar
to what Hausdorﬀwas looking for in his study of sequences of functions from
natural numbers to natural numbers modulo the ideal of ﬁnite sets (cf. [Steprans,

516
Menachem Kojman
2010]).
Hausdorﬀknew that the existence of an ω1-scale in (ωω, <∗) followed
from CH, but failed to prove the existence of such a scale without CH. He later
managed to prove without CH (after having ﬁrst proved with CH) the existence
of an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap in (ωω, <∗). A (κ, κ∗)-gap in a partially ordered set is a pair
of sequences of length κ, the ﬁrst increasing, the second decreasing, with each
element in the ﬁrst sequence being smaller than every element in the second, and
with no member of the partially ordered set between the sequences.
The proof of the existence of an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap in (ωω, <∗) was one of Hausdorﬀ’s
most important results—partly so because Shelah’s work in the 1990s showed that
Hausdorﬀcould not have proved more than that without using additional axioms.
The irony is exquisite. Hausdorﬀ, who discovered everything one could discover
without metamathematics about gaps in (ωω, <∗), is unaware that this is all that
can be proved about gaps. Shelah, who knows everything there is to know about
the independence phenomena surrounding the continuum proves that there are no
ZFC gaps in the product Q
n ωn except the gaps Hausdorﬀhad discovered in 1909,
and proves the existence of an (ℵω+1)-scale in a product of the form Q
n∈B ωn by
totally elementary means. As Shelah writes in the introduction to his Cardinal
Arithmetic [1994a], “Cantor should have no problems understanding and (so I feel)
appreciating the theorems and even most proofs in this book.”
Did Hausdorﬀmiss the opportunity to discover pcf theory?
Could he have
extended his study of scales and gaps in ωω to scales and gaps in the (much
better behaved) product Q
n ωn?
Perhaps so; there is no mathematical reason
for not discovering at least some of the elementary theory of singular cardinals
in Hausdorﬀ’s lifetime.
We shall see in Section 3 that early investigations of
structures related to singular cardinals came very close to discovering elements
from pcf theory.
One should recall that the general notion of an ideal was not yet available to
Hausdorﬀ, that the  Lo´s ultraproduct theorem appears much later,3 that a good
part of the ZFC combinatorics Shelah employs was motivated by the combinatorial
principles which Ronald Jensen discovered with ﬁne structure theory in G¨odel’s
constructible universe in the 1970s (like ♦, □and others), and that the most
fundamental concept of “covering” was not arrived at in Hausdorﬀ’s lifetime. But
it is still not hard to imagine Hausdorﬀdiscovering some of the basic facts about
products of distinct regular cardinals. The sophistication and diﬃculty of what
Hausdorﬀachieved in his 1909 construction of an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap certainly indicates
that he would have discovered quite a bit of what there was to discover about
inﬁnite products of regular cardinals which arise in the study of singular cardinals,
had he studied the appropriate products.4
I will risk stating that it was not mathematical ability that Hausdorﬀlacked;
3It is, however, remarkable that Hausdorﬀ[1909] discovered a substantial part of the struc-
ture of a reduced product modulo the ideal of ﬁnite sets in his construction of an “arithmetic
pantachie”. See [Plotkin, 2005, p.264].
4I recently heard from Ronald Jensen the following words on this matter: “After Silver’s
result was obtained I found an elementary proof of it, which I wrote down and circulated. As I
was writing the proof I thought, ‘Hausdorﬀcould have proved this theorem!’ ”

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
517
rather, it was the independence results which blew away the chaﬀfrom the wheat
in cardinal arithmetic in the 1960s. History shows that singular cardinal arithmetic
was pursued only after Cohen’s, Solovay’s and Easton’s results made it absolutely
clear that there was no elementary theory of regular cardinal arithmetic.5
What is more important, from the historical point of view, is that the impressive
research about the structure of the product ωω which Hausdorﬀ, Rothberger and
later researchers have conducted, whose discoveries were later delineated by the
huge body of complementary independence results that followed Cohen’s discovery
of forcing, created an intuition about the structure of ωω whose analog for the
structure of the product Q
n ωn were totally misleading. The structural properties
of each of these two inﬁnite products are very diﬀerent from those of the other
and the independence phenomenon has a totally diﬀerent eﬀect in each (as will be
described in Section 5). Thus, the inﬂuence of the understanding of (ωω, <∗) on
the understanding of (Q
n ωn, <∗) was more by contrast than by analogy.
Sociologically, rather than mathematically, before the method of forcing was
discovered and used by Easton to show that apart from weak monotonicity and
the K¨onig-Zermelo inequality there were no other rules governing regular cardinal
exponentiation, attention was not diverted to singular cardinal exponentiation.
After the discovery of forcing and the development of large cardinals theory, the
understanding of singular cardinal arithmetic progressed simultaneously in three
tracks—consistency results were proved with large cardinal forcing, ZFC results
were proved by a variety of methods, ﬁrst non-elementary, then elementary, and
consistency strength was achieved via the inner-model program.
Chronologically, the metamathematical investigations of singular cardinals pre-
ceded the development of their elementary theory. Still, in this history the ele-
mentary theory is described ﬁrst. The reader should not forget that Prikry and
Silver proved the consistency of the failure of the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis
and Magidor proved the consistency of its failure at ℵω before Silver’s theorem
was discovered (see Section 4.1 below)—this fact will be emphasized below.
Although the modern elementary theory of singular cardinals is accessible, in
principle, to Hausdorﬀor to Cantor, the part played in its development by a variety
of sophisticated metamathematical means is signiﬁcant.
In retrospect, Cantor, K¨onig and Zermelo discovered by 1904 all the rules that
could be discovered for regular cardinal exponentiation. The fact that no more new
rules were discovered between 1904 and the 1970s was not because set theorists
were less skilled in these decades, but because there are no other rules to discover.
Had Hausdorﬀknown that the K¨onig-Zermelo inequality was all that one could
prove about regular cardinals, he and others who followed in his footsteps might
have turned their attention to investigating singular cardinals.
5This dynamics of set-theoretic discoveries in the modern era is evident also in the working
mathematician’s private sphere, rather than that of the community at large. I heard from Shelah
in the 1980s the view that it is good mathematical practice to try and prove by forcing the
negation of your intended theorem before trying to prove it. He claimed that many of his ZFC
proofs came after attempts to force the consistency of the negation had failed, leaving behind
valuable clues about how the proof should go.

518
Menachem Kojman
Among the duties that kept K¨onig busy in 1905 as a member of the Hungarian
Academy of Science was his appointment to serve on the committee of the newly
established Bolyai prize.
In that year, to mark the centennial anniversary of
J´anos Bolyai, and also partly stirred by the new Swedish Nobel Prize and the new
Russian Lubachevsky prize, the Hungarian Academy of Science established the
Bolyai prize, to be awarded to an important treatise or book published in the ten
years preceding the award.
Two candidates were considered in 1905 for the Bolyai prize: Henri Poincar´e
and David Hilbert. Poincar´e won the 1905 prize, and Hilbert was re-nominated
and won the next prize in 1910.6 The prize regulations required that the prize
committees each consist of two Hungarian academy members and two foreign
academy members. The two foreign members in 1905 were the Frenchman Jean-
Gaston Darboux and the German Felix Klein, and in 1910 they were Poincar´e, the
1905 prize winner (who became a foreign academy member after his win) and the
Swede G¨osta Mittag-Leﬄer. In both the 1905 and 1910 Bolyai prize committees
served the same two Hungarian academy members: Guszt´av Rados and Gyula
(Julius) K¨onig.
How is all this related to singular cardinals? Well, it is quite surprising that
the third winner of the Bolyai prize, in the year 2000, was Saharon Shelah, for
his book Cardinal Arithmetic [1994a]. The Bolyai prize had been discontinued for
almost a century, and was resumed in 2000. The ﬁrst time it was awarded in the
new era was for a monograph on singular cardinals.
The history of the Bolyai prize demarcates the story of singular cardinals in the
20th century. All the story unfolded below happens between the year in which the
founder of the theory of inﬁnite products of diﬀerent regular cardinals served on
the Bolyai prize committee and the year 2000, in which Shelah won the prize for
his monograph on the study of singular cardinals via the algebraic theory of such
products of sets of regular cardinals, called pcf theory.
The two mathematical events which demarcate the development of singular car-
dinals theory in the 20th century would have to be Hausdorﬀ’s famous construction
of an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap inside (Rω, <∗)7 and Shelah’s construction of an ℵω+1-scale in
(Q
n∈B ωn, <∗) for some inﬁnite set B ⊆ω. Hausdorﬀhad previously hoped to
construct an ω1-scale and had also previously [1908] constructed such a gap with
the aid of CH, and regarded his elimination of CH from the proof as a major
6The mathematical politics of that time is quite fascinating.
It is perhaps worthwhile to
mention in the context of this article that Poincar´e opposed modern set theory, and declared
that “Cantorism was dead”, as Hausdorﬀstates in a letter to Hilbert in 1907 (cf. [Plotkin, 2005]).
Hilbert, in contrast to Poincar´e, was the most prominent defender of set theory from the attacks
on which were made, in Hausdorﬀ’s words, “by such medieval means!” ([Plotkin, 2005]).
7I choose Hausdorﬀ’s gap theorem and not K¨onig’s inequality, because although the inequality
introduced the products used in the study of singular cardinals, no development followed it for
many decades.
Hausdorﬀproved his gap theorem for sequences of real numbers—that is, he
worked in the structure (Rω, <∗). It had soon become clear that one could work with (ωω, <∗)
or even (2ω, ≤∗). The latter structure is indeed the one Hausdorﬀuses in publishing his second
construction of a gap in [1936] (see also the English translation in [Plotkin, 2005]). A discussion
of these issues in the context of set theory of the real numbers is found in [Steprans, 2010].

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
519
achievement by which “the ﬁrst closer relationship between the continuum and
the second number class [i.e. ω1] would be established”. We know in hindsight
that this was all the relationship Hausdorﬀcould hope to ﬁnd between the con-
tinuum and ω1. Shelah, on the other hand, had also ﬁrst proved the existence of
an ℵω+1-scale with the aid of an additional assumption (that 2ℵ0 ≤ℵω+1) but
continued to discover that this was in fact a ZFC theorem. At that point, the
structural analogy between (ωω, <∗) and (Q
n ωn, <∗) broke down; the indepen-
dence over ZFC of the existence of an ω1-scale in the former versus the existence in
ZFC of an ℵω+1-scale in a sub-product of the latter, made the diﬀerence between
the theory of ωω and the theory of Q
n ωn manifest.
More than 80 years after their discovery, singular cardinals did receive their
proper status. By the time Shelah published his book on singular cardinal arith-
metic, it was suﬃciently clear to everyone that there is no theory of regular cardinal
arithmetic, that there was no need for Shelah to title his book “Singular Cardinal
Arithmetic”; “Cardinal Arithmetic” was quite enough.8 The absence of the word
“singular” in Shelah’s title symbolizes thus the singular cardinals’ triumph as a
central set-theoretic subject.
2
THE BEGINNING: HAUSDORFF’S WORK
Hausdorﬀ, whose interest in set theory had begun shortly before the 1904 meeting,
proceeded after 1904 to advance the theory of Cantor’s alephs, and grounded
them in the broader setting of linearly ordered sets.
It is hard to exaggerate
the importance of his 1906–1909 work on order-types. To this day, this work is
fundamental.9
For our purposes, though, the most important part of this work is Hausdorﬀ’s
[1906] deﬁnition, for the ﬁrst time, of the coﬁnality type of a linearly ordered
set, and the division of cardinals into regular cardinals—those whose coﬁnality
types are equal to themselves—and singular cardinals, whose coﬁnality types are
smaller than themselves. Here too Hausdorﬀis being politely aware of K¨onig’s
earlier imprecise use of the word “type” in saying that the continuum could not
be well-ordered in any of the types ℵβ+ω. The right statement is, of course, that
the continuum could not be well-ordered in any type of countable coﬁnality, which
now after Hausdorﬀ’s deﬁnition is expressible precisely.
Hessenberg [1906] also deﬁned coﬁnality independently of Hausdorﬀin the same
year, in a text intended for general readership. Hessenberg uses a diﬀerent termi-
nology than Hausdorﬀ. He talks about the “kernel” Kern(M) of a linearly ordered
set M (a coﬁnal subset of M).
Hausdorﬀproved that all successor cardinals are regular, or, equivalently, that
8Shelah reports that he had considered also the names “Coﬁnality Arithmetic” or “The Skele-
ton of Set Theory” for a while.
9The whole corpus of Hausdorﬀ’s work on ordered sets is fortunately available in English
translation in Plotkin’s lovely book [2005].

520
Menachem Kojman
all singular cardinals are limit. The modern eye may overlook the fact that Haus-
dorﬀdid not hesitate to use Zermelo’s newly formulated Axiom of Choice, which
is today generally accepted as a true axiom, but which at that time was still in
dispute. Hausdorﬀhad to use the Axiom of Choice, as without the axiom it may
consistently hold that all uncountable cardinals are singular, as proved by Moti
Gitik [1980] from the assumption of the consistency of existence of a proper class
of large cardinals.
Hausdorﬀwas aware of the possibility of a regular limit cardinal. He writes in
his Gr¨undzuge der Mengenlehre about regular limit cardinals ([Hausdorﬀ, 2002,
p.131]):
Wenn es also regul¨are Anfangzahlen mit Limesindex gibt (und es is
bisher nicht gelungen, in dieser Annahme einen Widerspruch zu ent-
decken), so is die kleinste unter ihnen von einer so exorbitanten Gr¨oße,
daß sie f¨ur die ¨ublichen Zwecke der Mengenlehre kaum jemals in Be-
tracht kommen wird.
Hausdorﬀdescribes the regular limit cardinals “whose existence so far did not lead
to any contradiction” as being “of such an exorbitant magnitude that they can
hardly be taken into account for the usual purposes of set theory.” It is completely
clear that Hausdorﬀdoes not consider the possibility that the continuum itself may
be a regular limit cardinal. He also does not make a distinction between a strong
limit regular—a “strongly inaccessible”, that is, a limit which is closed under
exponentiation—and a regular limit, a limit cardinal whose coﬁnality is equal to
itself.
It is very reasonable to speculate that Hausdorﬀdid not consider the possibility
of a singular continuum either. As K¨onig proved, the possibility that the contin-
uum was singular of countable coﬁnality did not exist, but there still remained the
(consistent) possibility that the continuum was singular of uncountable coﬁnality.
This speculation is consistent with Hausdorﬀ’s formulation of the Generalized
Continuum Hypothesis (GCH) in his [1908], which was the fourth in a sequence
of works on order-types.
Hausdorﬀcalls GCH Cantor’s Aleph Hypothesis and
formulates it as the statement that κ<κ = κ for every regular κ. He warns his
readers not to forget that he only requires it for regular cardinals; we know that
he himself was aware of the possibility of a regular limit cardinal. He does men-
tion in a footnote that for a singular cardinal µ the equality µ = µ<µ does not
hold, and generously credits K¨onig’s 1905 paper for this fact, although, strictly
speaking, K¨onig stated this only for singular cardinals of type ℵβ+ω, that is, the
ω-th successor of some cardinal, whereas the full generality of the statement for
all singular cardinals follows from Zermelo’s formulation.
It is not clear whether Hausdorﬀregarded GCH as a “dogma” in the sense that
Schoenﬂies ascribed to Cantor’s view of CH (see quotation above). It is quite
certain that at the time Hausdorﬀdeﬁnes singular cardinal he does not consider
the possibility that CH could be false, and in particular does not consider the
possibility of a singular continuum.
Hausdorﬀ’s results in the 1909 paper on

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
521
order-types illustrated the usefulness of GCH, whose consistency was established
by Kurt G¨odel in 1937, and it is possible that Hausdorﬀalso regarded GCH as
true in the same sense.10
Among the striking pioneering results Hausdorﬀ[1908] proved is the result, as-
suming GCH and AC, that in every inﬁnite cardinal a universal linearly ordered set
exists.11 The argument Hausdorﬀuses is a saturation argument. Model theorists
would most likely not declare Hausdorﬀas the ﬁrst model theorist, but Hausdorﬀ
in fact counts types and realizes them to obtain saturated order-types, many years
before the formal birth of model theory. Saturation arguments were formulated
and used by Vaught and Morley in the 1950s and are central in model theory, but
they appear for the ﬁrst time in Hausdorﬀ’s work on linearly ordered sets.
For limit cardinals Hausdorﬀintroduces the ﬁrst construction of a “special
model”, in model-theoretic terminology. In a previous paper he proved the unique-
ness of saturated linearly ordered sets and their universality without deciding their
existence, and in [1908] establishes the existence of such orderings in all inﬁnite
cardinalities from GCH. For this construction, it is important that the limit car-
dinal at hand is a strong limit, that is, closed under the ℶfunction, which indeed
follows from his assumption of GCH. In this way Hausdorﬀgeneralized Cantor’s
treatment of countable order-types and initiated the uniform treatment of the class
of all inﬁnite cardinals.
It is important to acknowledge Hausdorﬀ’s contribution here to establishing the
study of the class of cardinal numbers as standard mathematical object, similar
to the way all natural numbers are studied in number theory.
In his work on
order-types, Hausdorﬀfor the ﬁrst time proves a structure theorem, one could
even say, a model-theoretic theorem, concerning all inﬁnite cardinals, and for the
ﬁrst time phrases and applies GCH. Similar proofs are now standard in modern
algebra, topology, Boolean algebra and so on.
Hausdorﬀdeclared the regular well-order-types and their inverses as being “fun-
damental building blocks”, or “atoms” in the structural theory of linearly ordered
sets (as, say, is demonstrated by his work on scattered order-types). This is cer-
tainly true, but may be misleading about the function cardinals serve in measuring
properties of structures (e.g. the weight of a topological space, the coﬁnality of a
partially ordered set, etc.). It is unclear to what extent this work of Hausdorﬀ’s
inﬂuenced the general perception of singular cardinals, as most of his achieve-
ments here were not included in his famous and very inﬂuential book Grundz¨uge
der Mengelehre (see below).
Another aspect of Hausdorﬀ’s use of CH is quite modern and merits attention.
The Continuum Hypothesis is the equation 2ℵ0 = ℵ1, which asserts that the car-
dinality of the real line (2ℵ0) is equal to that of the ﬁrst uncountable ordinal. This
10The use of GCH for combinatorial arguments was made routine by Erd˝os, who elegantly used
this assumption numerous times in his papers. Andras Hajnal coined the humorous acronym
“ZFE”, “Zermelo-Fraenkel-Erd˝os”, for ZFC + GCH.
11A universal linearly ordered set of cardinality ℵα is a linearly ordered set of cardinality ℵα
with the property that every linearly ordered set of cardinality ℵα order-embeds into it.

522
Menachem Kojman
equation has since been used often for deriving consequences about the structure of
the real line and its many related structures. The Polish school, mainly Sierpi´nski,
excelled in this subject. It was much later that uses of CH (and more generally,
of GCH) became popular for proving (combinatorial, model-theoretic, algebraic)
theorems about the ordinals themselves in branches of modern mathematics in
which the notion of an inﬁnite cardinal played a central role, like inﬁnite Abelian
group, inﬁnite combinatorics and model theory. Hausdorﬀ’s construction of a uni-
versal linearly ordered set of cardinality ℵ1 is an early and rare example in which
CH is used to prove a property of ℵ1, rather than of R.
Finally, another remarkable feature of Hausdorﬀ’s work with CH is that he ob-
tained the ﬁrst, and what would remain forever a rare instance of a “veriﬁable
consequence” of CH. Let us recall G¨odel’s [1947] objection to CH as not hav-
ing enough “veriﬁable consequences”, that is, consequences which turn out to be
ZFC theorems. Among the myriad consequences of CH listed in Sierpinski’s book
[1934], almost none proved to be a ZFC theorem.12 Hausdorﬀﬁrst constructed
an (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap with CH, and then was able to prove the existence of such a gap
in ZFC. It is now known that he could not hope to construct any other gap in
ZFC! The relation between ω1 and 2ℵ0 stands, of course, in strong contrast to the
relation between (ℵω)ℵ0 and ℵω+1, as in ZFC there exists an ℵω+1-scale inside
(Q
n ωn) (see below for further discussion).
In 1914 Hausdorﬀpublished his very inﬂuential Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre,
which was dedicated to “the creator of set theory, Herr Georg Cantor”. In this
surprisingly concise volume Hausdorﬀpresents the basics of modern set theory,
Borel sets, metric space theory, measure theory and many other subjects that
have become indispensable for modern mathematics. But no extensive treatment
of singular cardinals is given. His theorem about universal order-types in all car-
dinals from GCH, for one example, stayed outside of this book (see [Plotkin, 2005]
for further discussion of this issue). It could be that Hausdorﬀdid not consider
singular cardinals as suﬃciently relevant to the central problem of set theory—
Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis. Although Hausdorﬀhimself deﬁned the singular
cardinals rigorously and made important contributions to their theory, his inﬂu-
ential volume on set theory maintained the early approach to singular cardinals
as a marginal subject.
3
EARLY OCCURRENCES OF SINGULAR CARDINALS IN
MATHEMATICS
Cardinals are more than just abstract objects which one studies for their own
sake. They are used to measure the size, and other properties, of mathematical
structures. One expects that the arithmetical properties of the cardinality or other
cardinal characteristics of a mathematical structure provide information about the
structure itself. In the case of ﬁnite structures, this is hardly surprising. Recall,
12I know of exactly one: number 46, communicated to me by E. Grzegorek (cf. his [1985]).

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
523
for instance, that a ﬁnite group whose cardinality divisible by a prime p has p-
subgroups or that if the cardinality of a ﬁnite group is a power of a prime then
the group must have a non-trivial center—that is, the cardinality of a ﬁnite group
provides information about the group’s algebraic structure.
Long before the elementary arithmetic of singular cardinals was discovered, cer-
tain arithmetical properties of singular cardinals surfaced in various well-known
classes of mathematical structures—topological spaces, Abelian groups and Boo-
lean algebras are some of the examples—as holding signiﬁcant structural informa-
tion. All these occurrences of singular cardinals are understood better in retro-
spect from the point of view of the elementary theory of singular cardinals, but it
is interesting to assess them in the context in which they emerged.
We shall review a limited number of such occurrences in chronological order,
leaving out many others, perhaps just as interesting and important. It appears
that a singular cardinal characteristic of a structure was often more informative
than a regular one. In some of the examples we examine in this section one may
feel that singular cardinals were treated with a certain resentment, even when they
occurred quite naturally. An exception to that general impression is found in the
work of the Hungarian school in inﬁnite combinatorics—Erd˝os, Rado, Hajnal and
others.
3.1
Singular cardinals in topology: the work of
Alexandroﬀand Urysohn
Two of the many young mathematicians who read Hausdorﬀ’s newly published
Grundz¨uge carefully were Pavel Alexandroﬀand Pavel Urysohn from the new
Moscow School of mathematics.13 Their interest in the notion of topological com-
pactness, which was formulated by Fr´echet and presented in Hausdorﬀ’s book, led
them to reformulate this notion by quantifying over the class of inﬁnite cardinals
in their Memoirs [1929].
A point of complete accumulation of a subset A ⊆X is a point x ∈X each of
whose open neighborhoods u ∋x satisﬁes |A| = |A ∩u|. Alexandroﬀand Urysohn
observed that for every topological space X the following three properties are
equivalent, and called a space which satisﬁed them “bicompact”:
A Every inﬁnite subset has a point of complete accumulation.
B Every well-ordered decreasing intersection of nonempty closed sets has a
nonempty intersection.
C Every open cover has a ﬁnite subcover.
13About the “Lusitania” group in Moscow, lead by Egorov and Luzin, and the development of
descriptive set theory, see [Graham and Kantor, 2009]. As part of the Lusitania group’s excessive
interest in names, each member in the club was named by some aleph. “Recruits were called
ℵ0. . . . Alexandroﬀand Urysohn soon achieved the high rank of ℵ5. Luzin himself was given the
name ℵ17. Egorov was ℵω.” [Graham and Kantor, 2009, p.116]

524
Menachem Kojman
Condition C is nowadays called “compactness”. This term was used then for what
now is called “countable compactness” (the property that every inﬁnite set has an
accumulation point). Condition B is of course equivalent to the statement that
every open cover that is linearly ordered by inclusion has a ﬁnite subcover.
A reasonable strategy for proving the equivalence was to try to prove it sepa-
rately for each cardinal λ being the relevant parameter. However, this equivalence
for a single inﬁnite cardinal λ holds only if λ is a regular cardinal. To prove the
equivalence between A, B, and C as stated, that is, for all cardinals together, they
considered for each of the conditions A, B and C its relativization to the class
of regular cardinals Ar, Br and Cr and actually prove the equivalence of all six
conditions.
Using their equivalence and the well-ordering of the cardinals, Alexandroﬀand
Urysohn obtain the following elegant equivalent deﬁnition of topological compact-
ness: a space X is compact if and only if for every regular cardinal λ, X satisﬁes the
λ-complete accumulation point property. This result is very modern in ﬂavor. In
particular, the Alexandroﬀ-Urysohn characterization of topological compactness
in terms of complete accumulation points allowed them to ignore sets of points of
singular cardinality: a space X is compact iﬀevery inﬁnite subset of X of regular
cardinality has a complete accumulation point iﬀevery inﬁnite subset—of regular
or of singular cardinality—has a complete accumulation point. This was actually
convenient, as the standard operations one does with countable sequences in a
topological space generalize to sequences of regular length, but not to sequences
of singular length (e.g., that a sequence can be thinned out to either a constant or
a 1-1 sequence of the same order-type). Thus, not having to deal with sequences
of singular length was an advantage.
Thus, this set-theoretic characterization of compactness is a very interesting
early example of “elimination of singulars” from the natural mathematical dis-
course. Alexandroﬀand Urysohn skip over the singular cardinals elegantly. An
open cover of singular cardinality µ can be made, by unionizing, an increasing cover
of regular cardinality cf(µ). The complete accumulation point property for cf(µ)
implies that the unionized cover has a strictly smaller subcover, and hence also
the original cover has a strictly smaller subcover. The equation µ = P
α<cf(µ) µα
is found useful for the calculus of accumulation points.
As Juh´asz and Szentmikl´ossy point out in their [2009], the property of having
complete accumulation points satisﬁes a sort of additivity: if µ = P
i<κ λi where
κ is regular and ⟨λi : i < κ⟩is an increasing sequence of regular cardinals, then
whenever a space X satisﬁes the complete accumulation point condition for κ and
for all λi then it satisﬁes it also for µ. There is no need to go through the language
of open covers. Thus, if the accumulation point condition holds for all regular
cardinals, it holds for all cardinals.
For a topological space X let CAP(X) be the class of all cardinals λ for which
X satisﬁes the λ-complete accumulation point property. What Alexandroﬀand
Urysohn discovered was that CAP(X) is “closed under singular sums”, that is, if κ
and each κα for α < κ belong to CAP(X) then also P
α<κ κα belongs to CAP(X).

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
525
It is quite ironic that in their elimination of singular cardinals from the discus-
sion of accumulation points Alexandroﬀand Urysohn indirectly prove an important
topological property of singular cardinals that rests on their arithmetical struc-
ture. One can compare their discovery to Euler’s discovery that if every prime
number is a sum of four squares, then also every composite positive integer is. In
this analogy the regular cardinals correspond to primes, and the singular cardinals
to composites. However, Euler did not think (I hope) that composite numbers
were of secondary importance! In fact, the desired theorem, eventually proved by
Lagrange, was that every positive integer was a sum of four squares. It seems that
this point of view is missing in the Memoirs about the class of cardinal numbers.
This example, discovered by Alexandroﬀand Urysohn, is the ﬁrst in a line of
many examples of structural properties indexed by a singular cardinal which are
inherited from smaller regular cardinals. Cardinal exponentiation, the freeness of
an Abelian group and several other topological properties demonstrate that the
fact a singular cardinal is built from smaller ones is signiﬁcant to many mathe-
matical structures of such cardinality.
Next in their discussion of compactness Alexandroﬀand Urysohn consider a
localization of their complete accumulation point condition. They consider ﬁnally
compact spaces, that is, spaces in which the complete accumulation point condition
holds for all regular cardinals in an end-segment of the cardinals, and pay special
attention to the case in which all uncountable regular cardinals are considered.
It is right here that their elimination of singular cardinals ﬁghts back. They are
unable to prove the full correspondence they had before, and have to settle for a
weaker implication. To the modern eye, the reason is clear: eliminating the regular
cardinal ℵ0 inﬂuences the topological behavior of subsets of cardinality µ for all µ
with countable coﬁnality, not only ℵ0.
However, if one held the view that only regular cardinals mattered—a view that
the characterization of compactness supported—then it made sense to conjecture
that if the CAP condition held for all regular uncountable cardinals then every
open cover could be reduced to a countable subcover, that is, that this property
of a space X was equivalent to the Lindel¨of property.14
If, indeed, ℵ0 is removed from the class of all inﬁnite cardinals, that is, X is
required to satisfy the λ-complete accumulation point property for every λ > ℵ0,
then indeed X is Lindel¨of (as the implication from accumulation points to smaller
subcovers does not require regularity). However, this property is too strong to
characterize Lindel¨ofness, as there are Lindel¨of spaces that do not satisfy the
complete accumulation point for singular cardinals.15 But as they required this
only for regular λ > ℵ0, Alexandroﬀand Urysohn were only able to prove that a
space X which satisﬁes this requirement is linearly Lindel¨of, that, is, each of its
linearly ordered covers has a countable subcover.
The question of whether linearly Lindel¨of and Lindel¨of are the same remained
14A topological space X satisﬁes the Lindel¨of property if each of its open covers has a countable
subcover.
15Arhangelskii [2008] believes that this was known to Alexandroﬀand Urysohn.

526
Menachem Kojman
unanswered for a long time. Alexandroﬀand Urysohn did not come up with an
example of a space X which satisﬁed the complete accumulation point condition for
every regular λ > ℵ0 but failed to have the Lindel¨of property. If such an example
existed, then in it the iterated process of shrinking covers, which Alexandroﬀand
Urysohn described, not to reach a subcover of cardinality ℵ0, it would have to
stop at a singular of countable coﬁnality. Thus, the topological weight16 of such
a space would have to be at least ℵω.
Such a non-Lindel¨of space was indeed discovered in 1959 by the Russian mathe-
matician A. Miˇsˇcenko [1962]. His space was a subspace of the product Q
n(ωn +1)
with the product topology. In other words, Miˇsˇcenko used a singular cardinal to
construct his example, in fact, a product of distinct regular cardinals. An even
easier example is provided in unpublished work of Gruenhage and Buzyakova from
the 1990s: Let X be the space of all functions in 2ℵω which satisfy |f −1(1)| < ℵω,
with the topology induced from standard product topology on 2ℵω. This space is
linearly Lindel¨of but not Lindel¨of.
For our purposes, this historic development illustrates simultaneously the nat-
uralness and fundamentality of singular cardinals on the one hand and the re-
sistance to acknowledge them on the other hand. Linearly Lindel¨of spaces are
investigated in general topology and their properties are compared with those of
Lindel¨of spaces. The main point is that a topologist who is interested in the Lin-
del¨of property will inevitably be driven to consider spaces of singular weight—a
fact that at ﬁrst glance may not seem very natural.
Quite recently, Juh´asz and Szentmikl´ossy [2009] proved the following result:
if a space X satisﬁes the complete accumulation point condition for all regular
uncountable cardinals and in addition for ℵω, the smallest singular cardinal, then X
satisﬁes the condition for all λ > ℵ0 and is hence Lindel¨of. The only tool they use
which Alexandroﬀand Urysohn did not have is Shelah’s pcf scales theorem. This
is a good example of how very early results about singular cardinals in topology
were continued both naturally and by elementary means after a remarkably long
pause.
3.2
More topology in products: Rudin’s space
Miˇsˇcenko’s space motivated the famous construction of a Dowker space in ZFC by
Mary Ellen Rudin [1971]. The problem of Dowker spaces began with a homotopy
extension theorem due to Karol Borsuk [1936] which uses the following assumption
about a normal space17 X: the product X × [0, 1] is also normal. At the time,
Borsuk did not know whether this indeed was an additional assumption. Perhaps
all normal spaces X satisﬁed that their product with the closed unit interval is
also normal.
16The weight of a topological space X is the smallest cardinality of a topological base for X.
17A topological space X is normal if any two closed and disjoint subsets of X can be separated
by two open sets.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
527
In 1951 the British topologist Cliﬀord Dowker [1951] gave an internal charac-
terization of the normality of X × [0, 1]. For a normal X, X × [0, 1] is normal if
and only if X is countably paracompact.18 The name “Dowker space” became a
standard name for normal yet not countably paracompact spaces. The existence of
such spaces was still unknown at the time Dowker obtained this characterization.
The ﬁrst Dowker space in ZFC was constructed by Rudin in 1969 (cf. [1971])
and for over 20 years was the only known ZFC example. Rudin was motivated
by Miˇsˇcenko’s construction of the subspace of Q
n(ωn + 1). Miˇsˇcenko raised in
his paper the question of whether his space was Dowker or not. Very soon it was
observed by many that Miˇsˇcenko’s space was not normal, hence not a Dowker
space.
Rudin made the following modiﬁcations to Miˇsˇcenko’s construction: she used
only functions whose values are everywhere of uncountable coﬁnality, and she
replaced the product topology by the box product topology.19 Now she was able
to prove normality, making essential use of the fact that her space was a P-space,
that is, satisﬁed that any countable intersection of open sets was open. She also
proved that her space was not countably paracompact by exposing a combinatorial
property of unbounded subsets of her partially ordered space.
The cardinality of Rudin’s Dowker space is (ℵω)ℵ0.
For many years, Rudin
herself promoted the “small Dowker space problem”, that is, of ﬁnding a ZFC
example of a Dowker space with “small” cardinal characteristics, like cardinality,
weight and local character. She called her own space, of cardinality and weight
(ℵω)ℵ0 and local character ℵω, “huge” and “ugly”. When a ZFC Dowker space of
cardinality 2ℵ0 and weight 22ℵ0 was constructed by Zoltan Balogh [1996] in a paper
titled “A small Dowker space in ZFC” it was accepted by Rudin and many others
in the set-theoretic topology community as a solution of the small Dowker space
problem. Was the continuum provably smaller that (ℵω)ℵ0? Even after it was
known that the continuum was not bounded in ZFC, and could be, for example,
a regular limit cardinal, still the opinion prevailed that 2ℵ0 was “small”, while ℵω
was “large”.
What is absolutely remarkable about Rudin’s construction is that Rudin’s clear
resistance to singular cardinals did not stop her from implicitly discovering sev-
eral important ingredients of the systematic theory of small products of regular
cardinals. Looking carefully through her proof of the failure of countable para-
compactness, one can trace elements of pcf theory appearing.
In fact, neither
normality nor the absence of countable paracompactness required the use of all
functions in the product. The Rudin Dowker space contains a closed Dowker sub-
space of cardinality ℵω+1 [Kojman and Shelah, 1998], smaller in cardinality than
all but the ﬁrst ω members of the class of possible values of the continuum.
The interested reader may read more about singular cardinals in topology and
18A normal space X is countably paracompact if for every sequence {Dn}n of closed subsets
of X which satisﬁes T
n Dn = ∅there are open sets Un ⊇Dn such that T
n Un = ∅.
19The box product topology on a product Q
i∈I Xi is the topology generated by all sets of the
form Q
i∈I ui where ui ⊆Xi is open.

528
Menachem Kojman
in Boolean algebra in Juh´asz’s book [1980] and in Monk’s book [1996], both dealing
with cardinal characteristics. Singular cardinals often play a diﬀerent role in this
setting than regular cardinals—we shall mention as a ﬁnal example just one result,
due to Erd˝os and Tarski [1943], that a singular cellularity20 of a topological space
or of a complete Boolean algebra is always attained.
3.3
The Czech school’s investigations of the algebra P<µ(µ)
A cardinal number is also referred to in the set-theoretic literature since Haus-
dorﬀ’s time as an “initial ordinal”, that is, an ordinal which is not equinumerous
with any smaller ordinal. A cardinal is, then, an ordinal which possesses “new”
properties, not possessed by smaller ordinals.
It makes sense to discover the genuinely new information stored in the power
set P(κ) of a cardinal κ by modding-out all smaller subsets of κ and inspecting the
the quotient Boolean algebra. Let P(κ)/<κ denote the completion of the quotient
algebra of P(κ) over the ideal of all subsets of κ of cardinality smaller than κ. For
the case κ = ℵ0 this algebra corresponds to βω \ ω, where βω is the ˇCech-Stone
compactiﬁcation of ω. These Boolean algebras were addressed by the Czech school
of set theory, and several interesting achievements were obtained, some of which
are highly relevant to singular cardinals.
Among the cardinal characteristics studied in this setting one ﬁnds the dis-
tributivity number of P(κ)/<κ, which, in forcing terminology, is the smallest car-
dinality of a new sequence of ordinals which is added by extending the universe
of sets with the Boolean algebra as a forcing notion. In 1972 Bohuslav Balcar
and Petr Vopˇenka began the study of distributivity in quotient algebras P(κ)/<κ
for inﬁnite cardinals κ. Their ﬁrst interesting discovery about singular cardinals
was quit surprising then. While for regular cardinals κ the distributivity num-
ber of P(κ)/<κ was undecidable over ZFC, Balcar and Vopˇenka [1972] proved
that for singular cardinals µ the distributivity number of P(µ)/<µ is completely
determined in ZFC by the coﬁnality of µ as follows: for µ of countable coﬁnal-
ity the distributivity number is ω1 and for µ of uncountable coﬁnality it is ω.
Additional parameters of distributivity in P(µ)/<µ for a singular µ were com-
puted in a series of papers [Balcar and Franˇek, 1987; Balcar and Simon, 1989;
Balcar and Simon, 1988], usually under additional set-theoretic assumptions.
The Balcar-Vopˇenka discovery was made already at a time when the intuition
about cardinal characteristics of the continuum emerged that almost everything
about them was independent of the axioms. Thus, it was remarkable that the
naturally derived structures P(µ)/<µ are much more stable for singular cardinals
than for regular cardinals.
In their [1987], Balcar and Franˇek were able to show that under certain addi-
tional axioms, the quotient algebra P(µ)/<µ was actually isomorphic to a collapse
20The cellularity of a topological space is the supremum over all cardinalities of families of
pairwise disjoint nonempty open sets of the space.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
529
algebra Col(ω1, µℵ0):21 in the case that µ had countable coﬁnality the algebra
P(µ)/<µ was isomorphic to Col(ω1, µℵ0) and in the other case to Col(ω, µ+).
The question may have arisen naturally whether these two algebras could be
isomorphic just in ZFC, if not for an earlier independence result due to Baum-
gartner [1973]. By Baumgartner’s result on almost disjoint families a negative
consistent answer was given to the isomorphism question: it was consistent that
these two algebras had diﬀerent cellularities, or, in more detail, that P(µ)/<µ has
strictly bigger cellularity than that of Col(ω1, µℵ0) for a singular µ of countable
coﬁnality. The higher cellularity, one should point out, resulted from subsets of µ
of regular cardinality larger than ω.
Balcar and Simon [1995] then conjectured that it would turn out in ZFC that
Col(ω1, µℵ0) was isomorphic to a complete subalgebra of P(µ)/<µ. This was proved
by them with various additional axioms, and was ﬁnally settled just in ZFC by
Kojman and Shelah [2001] with pcf theory.
As was the case with the topological properties of Rudin’s space, after the
discovery of pcf theory it turned out that some of the Boolean-algebraic properties
of P(µ)/<µ for a singular µ are not that related to the usual power-set function
κ 7→2κ but rather closely related to the “binomial” function on singular cardinals
(see Section 4 below).
3.4
The Erd˝os-Rado work in the partition calculus and the Erd˝os-
Hechler work on MAD families over a singular
Paul Erd˝os was one of the ﬁrst mathematicians to discover the charm of singu-
lar cardinals. The combinatorial arguments he employed in his considerations of
singular cardinals were often very elegant. There are two other characteristics of
Erd˝os’ approach to inﬁnite combinatorics. The ﬁrst is his insistence not to ex-
clude singular cardinals from the general formulation of a theorem. The other is
his readiness to assume GCH for counting arguments.
Among the early results in partition calculus one ﬁnds the Erd˝os-Dushnik-Miller
[1941] partition relation, valid for every inﬁnite cardinal κ:
κ →(κ, ω)2.
This symbol means that for every partition of unordered pairs from κ to two parts,
if there is no inﬁnite subset of κ all of whose pairs lie in the ﬁrst part, then there
exists a subset of κ of cardinality κ all of whose pairs lie in the other part.
Dushnik and Miller [1941] were interested in this relation for the purpose of
showing that any two enumerations of a set in the order-type of its cardinality
agree on a large set (which follows from this relation trivially), and were able to
prove it for regular cardinals. Erd˝os provided the elegant argument for the singular
case.
21The collapse algebra Col(ω1, κ) is the unique complete Boolean algebra in which the partially
ordered set of all countable partial functions from ω1 to κ is densely embedded. This poset is
the standard forcing notion for collapsing the cardinal κ to ω1.

530
Menachem Kojman
Erd˝os and Rado begin their monumental work A Partition calculus in set theory
[1956] by quoting previous results. The very ﬁrst is Ramsey’s theorem. Then comes
the relation by Dushnik and Miller above.
The third is a negative22 partition
relation:
ℵω0 ̸→(ℵ1, ℵω0)2.
All along the way singular cardinals are treated in this work as equal to their
fellow regular cardinals and many a time the combinatorial argument required for
a singular case is actually prettier than in the regular case.
It is interesting to point out that a “polarized partition relation” which was
proved for singular cardinals of countable coﬁnality in [Erd˝os et al., 1965] and was
left open for singular cardinals of uncountable coﬁnality (even with GCH) was
ﬁnally proved by Shelah [1998] to follow from the assumption that the singular
cardinal is a strong limit but its exponent is larger that its successor.23
Another beautiful example from the Hungarian school of inﬁnite combinatorics
is Hajnal’s free set theorem. Erd˝os’ review of Hajnal’s paper tells the story com-
pletely:
Let S be a set of power m. To every X ∈S there corresponds a subset
f(X) of S. We assume that there exists a cardinal number n < m so
that for every X, f(X) has power less than m. A subset S′ of S is
called free if for every every X, Y ∈S′, X ̸∈f(Y ) and Y ̸∈f(X).
Ruziewicz conjectured that there always exists a free subset of power m.
The ﬁrst question of this type is due to P. Tur´an and the ﬁrst positive
results are due to G. Gr¨unwald and D. L´az´ar.
If m is regular the
conjecture was ﬁrst proved by Sierpi´nski and if m is coﬁnal to ω it was
proved by S. Piccard. Assuming the generalised continuum hypothesis
the reviewer proved the conjecture in full generality. The author now
proves the conjecture without any hypothesis in a surprisingly simple
and ingenious way.
The theorem was ﬁrst proved for regular cardinals, then for singular cardinals with
coﬁnality ω, then for all cardinals (“in full generality”) with GCH (by Erd˝os him-
self) and ﬁnally in ZFC for all cardinals. Obviously, it was the singular cardinals
case that required more ingenuity than the regular cardinal case, and, also obvi-
ously, it was not called “the free set theorem” before all cardinals were covered in
ZFC.
Erd˝os and Steven Hechler have studied maximal almost disjoint families over
a singular cardinal in their [1975]. For a singular cardinal µ denote by MAD(µ)
the collection of cardinalities of maximal almost disjoint families over µ, that is,
cardinalities of families F ⊆P(µ) satisfying that each member of the family has
22The negation line on the arrow means that the partition relation expressed by the arrow
notation does not hold.
23That is, from the negation of the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis, for which see the next
section.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
531
cardinality µ, the intersection of any two members in the family has cardinality
smaller than µ and every set A ⊆µ of cardinality µ has intersection of size µ
with some member of the family. For obvious reasons, families whose cardinality
is smaller than cf(µ) are not considered.
Erd˝os and Hechler began their investigations with an observation that resembles
very much the additivity of the complete accumulation point spectrum described
in section 3.1 above, and with pretty much the “same” proof: they proved that
MAD(µ) is closed under singular suprema. That is, if {λi : i < θ} ⊆MAD(µ) and
λ := P
i<θ λi > θ, then λ ∈MAD(µ). Using this, they proved that for a singular
µ it could be that µ ∈MAD(µ)—a relation which clearly cannot hold for a regular
cardinal! The simplest case to state is that if 2ℵ0 < ℵω then every cardinal in the
interval [2ℵ0, ℵω] belongs to MAD(ℵω).
Then Erd˝os and Hechler raised the question of whether their assumption was
necessary, and in fact conjectured that 2ℵ0 > ℵω together with Martin’s Axiom
would imply that ℵω /∈MAD(ℵω). Their conjecture was answered positively in
[Kojman et al., 2004], in which new ways to control MAD(µ) for a singular µ were
introduced using pcf theory. The Erd˝os-Hechler additivity method works plainly
only up to µ itself; with pcf theory one can get almost-increasing smooth unions
up to some cardinal larger than µ, and prove that the whole interval of cardinals
from min MAD(µ) to that cardinal is contained in MAD(µ).
3.5
Singular cardinal compactness and Whitehead’s problem
The algebraic compactness that Shelah discovered and which shall be described
now is a phenomenon which is unique to singular cardinals. Let us give a simple
example: if an Abelian group G is of singular cardinality µ and G is almost free,
that is, each of the subgroups of G of cardinality smaller than |G| is free, then
G itself is free. This implication does not hold, in general, for Abelian groups of
regular cardinality. In the constructible universe, for example, this phenomenon of
algebraic compactness does not hold for any regular cardinal other than the weakly
compact cardinals, hence consistently does not hold for any regular cardinal at
all. The implication “almost free” =⇒“free” holds for all cardinals—regular or
singular—above a compact cardinal.
The discovery of singular cardinal compactness was related to Shelah’s solution
of Whitehead’s problem in inﬁnite Abelian groups. Whitehead’s problem in inﬁnite
Abelian group theory is the following: is every Whitehead group a free Abelian
group? An Abelian group G is Whitehead if Ext(G, Z) = 0, that is, the functor
Ext on G is trivial. Every free Abelian group is Whitehead, and Whitehead’s
problem, which stood open for many years, was whether the converse implication
is also true.
Shelah constructed a non-free Whitehead group from MA(ℵ1), and thus showed
that the implication “Whitehead” =⇒“free” could not be proved in ZFC (see the
discussion in [Steprans, 2010] of the role of this development for the set theory of
the continuum). Could this implication be refuted in ZFC? Since Shelah’s counter-

532
Menachem Kojman
example utilized the additional axiom MA(ℵ1), it did not produce a refutation in
ZFC.
Shelah proved that from G¨odel’s axiom of constructibility it followed that every
Whitehead group is free, hence that Whitehead’s implication cannot be refuted
in ZFC. The proof was by induction on cardinality, utilizing the fact that the
Whitehead property is hereditary. Given a Whitehead group of cardinality λ, each
of its subgroups of smaller cardinality is Whitehead as a subgroup of a Whitehead
group, and by the induction hypothesis is therefore free. For a regular cardinal λ,
the constructibility axiom is used to assure that also G itself is free. But in the
case λ is singular, Shelah discovered a very interesting fact: every Abelian group
of singular cardinality all of whose subgroups of smaller cardinality are free, is
itself free—just in ZFC.
A previous theorem by Paul Hill stated that a group of cardinality µ which is
almost free is free whenever µ is singular of coﬁnality ω0 or ω1. It had also been
known that every countable subgroup of Zω is free, but that there are subgroups
of Zω of cardinality ℵ1 which are not free (cf. [Eklof and Mekler, 2002]).
In fact Shelah has done much more. He phrased a simple set of axioms for
an abstract notion of freeness, axioms which freeness in Abelian groups satisﬁes,
and proved his Singular Cardinals Compactness theorem [Shelah, 1975]: Every
structure of singular cardinality which is almost free is free. Many other natural
problems fell under the scope of Shelah’s set of axioms for freeness.
A reader who is interested in almost-freenes may want to look at the book [Eklof
and Mekler, 2002] on this subject.
4
THE ARITHMETIC OF SINGULAR CARDINALS
Cantor and Hessenberg proved that for every inﬁnite cardinal κ the equality 2κ =
κκ, which implies trivially that whenever λ ≤κ the exponentiation λκ is equal
to 2κ. Thus, exponentiations in which the base is not larger than the exponent,
reduced to exponentiations with base 2.
The K¨onig-Zermelo inequality showed that for a singular µ, µcf(µ) > µ. Thus,
there are nontrivial exponentiations in which the base is larger than the exponent.
Zermelo proved in general that whenever λ = P
i<θ λi with the λi are increasing
with i, the product Q
i λi has larger cardinality than λ.
Before continuing with the arithmetic of singular cardinals, it is important to
note that the “usual” power set function κ 7→2κ is not always suﬃciently infor-
mative for understanding singular cardinals. Suppose that λ = P
i<θ λi where θ is
regular and the λi are increasing. By the usual distributive law, known to Cantor,
it follows that
2
P
i<θ λi =
Y
i<θ
2λi.
(4)
In other words, the power set of a singular cardinal is itself representable as a
product of the sort considered by K¨onig. However, the cardinalities of such prod-
ucts have lives of their own. While in the case of a product of uncountably many

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
533
diﬀerent cardinals there is some inﬂuence on the product from the exponentiations
of its factors, in countable products this is more delicate. In particular, the ﬁrst
ﬁxed point of the aleph function µ may be a strong limit and have an arbitrary
large 2µ.
The equation (4) above constituted an observation by Lev Bukovsk´y [1965] and
independently by Hechler (see [Jech, 2003]) that if in this case the function κ 7→2κ
is eventually constant below a singular, then its value persists at the singular itself.
Bukovsk´y in fact proved that all exponentiations are reducible to the gimmel
function given by κ 7→κcf(κ). For regular cardinals the gimmel function is exactly
the power-set function, and for singular cardinals it is again related to K¨onig-type
products. If one knows what are the values of 2κ for regular κ and what are the
values of µcf(µ) for singular µ, then one knows what is κλ for every κ and λ.
This indicates that for singular cardinals µ it is not the function µ 7→2µ which
matters, but rather µ 7→µcf(µ). What can be said about this function? Well, the
cardinal µcf(µ) is clearly the total number of functions from cf(µ) to µ, which is
equal to the total number of cf(µ)-subsets of µ, that is |[µ]cf(µ)|.
Let us now consider a diﬀerent function, which Cantor neglected to introduce:
the binomial
 µ
cf(µ)

which we deﬁne as the coﬁnality of the partially ordered set
([µ]cf(µ), ⊆).
This is the smallest cardinality of a collection of cf(µ)-subsets of
µ which covers all of [µ]cf(µ). It is justiﬁed to call this function “the binomial”
because if you apply it to natural numbers k ≤n it gives exactly the usual binomial
(because two diﬀerent k-subsets of n do not cover each other).
It is obvious that µcf(µ) = max{2cf(µ),
 µ
cf(µ)

}. Thus, one can use the bino-
mial for singular cardinals rather than the gimmel function for determining all
exponentiations.
K¨onig’s original argument needs to be only slightly modiﬁed to prove, for a
singular µ, that

µ
cf(µ)

> µ;
in fact it gives more, namely that the almost disjointness number of [µ]cf(µ) is
larger than µ.
The Singular Cardinals Hypothesis (SCH) is, basically, the statement that ex-
ponentiation of singular cardinals assumes the smallest possible value. It was ﬁrst
phrased in a special way as a conditional:
^
κ<µ
2κ < µ =⇒2µ = µ+.
We ﬁnd it in this form in Azriel Levy’s review of [Easton, 1970]:
The corresponding question concerning the singular ℵα’s is still open,
and seems to be one of the most diﬃcult open problems of set theory
in the post-Cohen era. It is, e.g., unknown whether for all n(n < ω →
2ℵn = ℵ.
n+1) implies 2ℵω = ℵω+1 or not.

534
Menachem Kojman
This formulation says nothing when µ is not a strong limit.
Then SCH was phrased in a more general way, which makes sense also in when
µ is not a strong limit (see, e.g. [Jech, 2003, p.61]):
2cf(µ) < µ =⇒µcf(µ) = µ+.
It can be put equivalently as µcf(µ) = max{µ+, 2cf(µ)}, since for any cardinal κ < µ
it holds that if 2κ > µ then µκ = 2κ. This formulation allows that 2(cf(µ))+ > µ
while remaining meaningful. When 2cf(µ) > µ, this formulation says nothing.
However, there is no need to make any conditions about 2cf(µ) either: the
Binomial Hypothesis (BH) is simply

µ
cf(µ)

= µ+.
This statement is meaningful also in the case 2cf(µ) is larger than µ.
This separation of cardinal arithmetic to the exponent function on regular cardi-
nals and to the binomial on singular cardinals enables the separate study of each of
the functions independently of the other. Thus, for example, one may ask whether
the Binomial Hypothesis for ℵω holds or not regardless of what the continuum
is. (One may observe that adding any number of Cohen reals, for example, has
absolutely no eﬀect on
 ℵω
ω

.)
The gimmel function was not dealt with before Bukovsk´y [1965]. The function
κ 7→2κ for regular κ was completely understood with Easton’s results, that fol-
lowed Cohen and Solovay. Apart from the K¨onig-Zermelo inequality and weak
monotonicity there are no rules governing κ 7→2κ on the regular cardinals.
This created a drastically wrong intuition about the Singular Cardinals Hy-
pothesis. Mathematicians in the 1970s expected that Easton’s results would be
extended to the singular cardinals.
The truth turned out to be totally diﬀer-
ent. The following table, incorporating present knowledge, illustrates the vastly
diﬀerent behavior of 2ℵ0 versus
 ℵω
ω

.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
535
Properties \ Term
2ℵ0
 ℵω
ω

Possible values of
the term
The class of all cardinals
κ satisfying cf(κ) ̸= ω
Only Regular Cardinals
in the interval
[ℵω+1, ℵω4). Only regular
cardinals below ℵω1 are
known to actually occur
in models of ZFC.
Structural relations
with least possible
value
Hardly any structural
relation between
canonical structures on
2ℵ0 and ω1
Many structural relations
between canonical
structures on (ℵω)ℵ0 and
ℵω1
Consistency
Strength of values
other than the
least possible one
All possible values are
equiconsistent with ZFC
Any value other than
ℵω+1 requires the
consistency of a
measurable κ of order at
least κ++
Implications of the
negations of
CH/BH
No information on ω1 is
available in ZFC from
ω1 < 2ℵ0
ℵω+1 <
 ℵω
ω

has many
implications for ℵω1,
some of which are
strengthening of
consequences of BH
The behavior of the power-set function at ℵ0 is not unique to this cardinal—it
is shared by every regular cardinal. There is no bound for 2κ for a regular κ, and
worse, by Easton’s result. The binomial of singular cardinals behaves diﬀerently.
On singular cardinals which are not ﬁxed points of the aleph function there are
bounds.
At the least ﬁxed point there is no bound.
However, above the ﬁrst
cardinal which is compact for Abelian groups (that is, above it, every almost free
Abelian group is free) BH holds [Shelah, 1994a]. One can say that some chaos
is displayed in the behavior of the binomial, but only for a “small” part of the

536
Menachem Kojman
universe, and at a high consistency-strength cost.
It had already been amply conﬁrmed from Sierpi´nski’s days that CH, that is, the
equation 2ℵ0 = ℵ1, has many consequences for the structure of the continuum. Less
evident is that there is information stored in this equation for ℵ1. However, the
negation of CH has very little information about what happens at that cardinality.
If Martin’s Axiom holds, that all cardinals which are smaller than the continuum
“look like” ℵ0.
Nothing of the structure of the continuum is inherited by its
subsets of cardinality ℵ1.
For example, if CH holds then by Hausdorﬀ’s work
there is a universal linearly ordered set of cardinality ℵ1, a fact which does not
necessarily hold without CH. Another example is that by CH there are many
pairwise incomparable separable, ℵ1-dense order-types; but if the continuum is
larger than ℵ1 there may be only a single isomorphism type of such a set, by
[Baumgartner, 1973].
Finally, the existence of an ω1-scale in (ωω, <∗), which
follows from CH, is not a ZFC theorem, nor is the existence of scale of any length.
All this background makes Hausdorﬀ’s fantastic discovery of a ZFC (ω1, ω∗
1)-gap
shine in solitude.
In strong contrast to this situation, much of what is true for ℵω+1 when BH
holds remains true when BH fails. For example, the existence of an ℵω+1-scale
in (Q
n ℵn, <∗), which is a triviality from BH, is actually a ZFC theorem, that
is, holds whether BH holds or not. Furthermore, if BH fails, not only does an
ℵω+1-scale exist, but actually one exists with additional, combinatorial properties
which follow from V = L but are not true for all scales in general—a scale which
is called “very good”, that is, in which a closed unbounded set of initial segments
of coﬁnality ω1 are equivalent to strictly increasing sequences (see [Shelah, 1994a,
Chap. II]).
An even more intriguing example is the polarized partition relation for a singular
with uncountable coﬁnality [Shelah, 1998], which at the moment is known to follow
only from the assumption that the singular is a strong limit which violates SCH.
As Shelah described it:
This is a good example of a major thesis from [Shelah, 1994a]:
Thesis 1.2 Whereas CH and GCH are good (helpful, strategic) as-
sumptions having many consequences and, say, ¬CH is not, the nega-
tion of GCH at singular cardinals (i.e. for µ strong limit singular
2µ > µ+ or, really, the strong hypothesis: cf(µ) < µ =⇒pp(µ) > µ+)
is good (helpful, strategic) assumption.
The fact that the negation of BH is also useful allows one to prove theorems by
dividing the proof to cases: one argument if BH holds and another if it fails. (Such,
for example, was Shelah’s ﬁrst proof of the existence of an ℵω+1-scale.)
In summary, most of the intuition that was gathered about CH and the negation
of CH in many decades simply shatters when approaching BH. BH is hard to
violate, its negation has consequences, and there are deep, unbreakable connections
between
 ℵω
ω

, (ℵω)ℵ0, and ℵω+1 with many consequences. Several mathematical

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
537
structures constructed on (ℵω)ℵ0 reﬂect down to (absolute) objects of cardinality
ℵω+1 because the machinery which dictates their properties is binomial rather
than exponential. For example, a closed Dowker space of cardinality ℵω+1 was
constructed inside Rudin’s original space, whose cardinality is (ℵω)ℵ0 [Kojman and
Shelah, 1998], with a pcf scale and without forming unrestricted inﬁnite products,
which appear in Rudin’s construction.
4.1
Annus Mirabilis: the development of singular cardinal arithmetic
in 1974
The beginning of modern singular cardinal arithmetic can certainly be dated to
Silver’s 1974 theorem about the exponentiation of singulars of uncountable coﬁ-
nality. It is not only the theorem itself which marks the beginning of the modern
era, but the realization that followed its publication, that there actually was a
theory of singular cardinal arithmetic to be discovered.
By 1974 Solovay had already proved that SCH holds above a compact cardinal,
and Magidor had proved that SCH may fail at ℵω, starting from a supercompact
cardinal. But Magidor himself, like everyone else, thought that large cardinals
were not necessary for such consistency results and that with time it would be
discovered that also singular cardinal arithmetic did not really exist. Jensen was
investigating his morasses with the intention of putting them to use to proving the
consistency of the negation of SCH without appealing to the consistency of large
cardinals.
Magidor arrived in Berkeley in 1974 shortly after Jensen left Berkeley for Bonn.
Magidor, who was interested in ultrapowers of the universe of sets, was trying to
establish that non-regular ultraﬁlters on ω1 could not exist, by examining ultra-
products of the universe taken with such an ultraﬁlter. Rather than disproving
the existence of such ultraﬁlters, his eﬀorts led to a surprising discovery, that if
there is such an ultraﬁlter and GCH held below ℵω1 it would continue to hold at
ℵω1 itself. By modifying Magidor’s proof, Silver proved in ZFC that GCH does
not fail for the ﬁrst time at a singular of uncountable coﬁnality.
Silver’s own account of the discovery of his famous theorem is as follows:
The immediate stimulus for this result was some work of Kanamori and
Magidor1 concerning nonregular ultraﬁlters on ω1. The other princi-
pal inﬂuences were the result of Scott concerning GCH at measurable
cardinals, Some work of Keisler on ultrapowers . . . , the two-cardinal
theory developed by several model-theorists, some work of Prikry and
Silver on indecomposable ultraﬁlters . . . as well as Cohen’s and work
on nonstandard models of set theory . . . 24
24The footnote below the line is Silver’s and so is the formulation of the properties of the
ultraﬁlter.

538
Menachem Kojman
1The result of Magidor states, in particular: If there is a regular,
nonuniform ultraﬁlter over ω1 and 2ℵα = ℵα+1 for all α < ω1 then
2ℵω1 = ℵω1+1.
We shall not survey all of the developments that Silver lists in this passage; rather,
the reader is invited to appreciate the enormous quantity and sophistication of
techniques that went into stimulating what very soon turned out to be an elemen-
tary theorem.
Magidor had presented in a seminar the following proof: Suppose that there is
a non-regular ultraﬁlter on ω1. By a theorem of Kanamori [1976] who built on
earlier work by Ketonen [1976], also a weakly normal such ultraﬁlter exists. Hence,
in the ultraproduct of the universe of sets (which is not necessarily well founded)
the constant functions with values ωα for α < ω1 are coﬁnal below the identity
function.
Taking a non-wellfounded ultraproduct of the universe of sets, Magidor showed
that if GCH was true below ℵω1, then it could not fail at ℵω1. Magidor was hoping
to obtain a contradiction with these considerations.
Silver, who was present at the seminar, observed that one did not need to assume
that there was such an ultraﬁlter; rather, the situation which Magidor obtained
from this assumption could be forced, without any assumptions, by collapsing 2ω1
to ω, and rather than a real ultrapower of the universe, a generic ultrapower of
the ground universe suﬃced.
The result was stunning:
THEOREM 1 (Silver.) If GCH holds below ℵω1 then it holds at ℵω1.
This result should be viewed in the light of the prevailing view in those days, that
Easton’s result would soon be generalized also to singular cardinals. Baumgart-
ner and Prikry [1977], and independently Jensen, discovered elementary proofs
of Silver’s theory shortly after its discovery. Baumgartner and Prikry soon pub-
lished a self-contained, purely combinatorial proof of Silver’s theorem and Jensen
circulated mimeographed copies of essentially the same elementary proof.
More mimeographed notes were being circulated from Bonn by Jensen, who was
studying the consequences of Silver’s result. After several preliminary partial re-
sults, Jensen realized that what he was doing in showing that L computes coﬁnality
correctly amounted to showing that any subset from V was covered by a subset in
L of the same cardinality plus ℵ1. Jensen’s covering lemma was discovered:
THEOREM 2 (Jensen’s Covering Lemma.) If 0# does not exist, then every set
of ordinals A is covered by a set of ordinals A′ ∈L such that |A′| ≤|A| + ℵ1.
0# is a set of integers whose existence is implied by large cardinals and implies that
L is very small compared to V (cf. Sect. 6.2). The lemma provides a surprisingly
weak condition for the existence of 0#.
The consequences of this lemma were dramatic. We quote from the introduction
to the paper by Devlin and Jensen [1975]:

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
539
Jensen’s eﬀort to produce a positive solution [getting SCH to fail by
forcing] over L led to total failure. Silver’s work then led him to con-
sider the problem from a new perspective. He discovered the statement
“0# does not exist” . . . implies a negative solution to all cases of the
singular cardinal problem. But then there cannot be a positive forcing
solution over L, since every generic extension of L by a set of condi-
tions satisﬁes ¬0#. . . . Our main theorem says, in eﬀect, that if ¬0#
then the “essential structure” of cardinalities and coﬁnalities in L is
retained in V .
Jensen continued his work and together with Dodd published in [1981] their
work on the core model, from which it followed that for Magidor’s result at least
the assumption of a measurable cardinal was necessary.
Magidor and Solovay obtained a bound on the power of a strong limit singular
cardinal of uncountable coﬁnality from the assumption of a Ramsey cardinal, but
their proof was soon subsumed by the proof of Galvin and Hajnal [1975] of a bound
in ZFC. Galvin and Hajnal proved, e.g., that if ℵω1 is a strong limit cardinal then
2ℵω1 < ℵ(2ℵ1)+. Jech and Prikry [1976] were able to extend such bounds to more
cases, like ﬁxed points of the aleph function, using the additional assumption of a
precipitous ideal on ω1, and Magidor [1977a] obtained the bound (ℵω1)ℵ1 < ℵω2
from Chang’s conjecture.
Both Silver’s theorem and Solovay’s theorem would turn out to be special cases
of more general pcf theorems. This is the time to describe this theory, to which
we devote a separate section.
5
SHELAH’S PCF THEORY
Before describing the historical development of Shelah’s pcf theory it is perhaps
useful to describe the theory itself. The name “pcf” stands for “possible coﬁnali-
ties”. The basic discovery in Shelah’s pcf theory is that products of small sets of
regular cardinals have a basis for their set of possible coﬁnalities.
The notion of coﬁnality was introduced by Hausdorﬀfor linearly ordered sets,
as the smallest well-order-type of a coﬁnal subset of the linearly ordered set. With
linearly ordered sets, “coﬁnal” and “unbounded” are the same. Not so with par-
tially ordered sets, where these two parameters may diﬀer.
In a partially ordered set with no ﬁnite unbounded set, the least cardinality of
an unbounded subset is always a regular cardinal, which is called the bounding
number of the poset.
The coﬁnality, or dominating number, of a poset is the
least cardinality of a coﬁnal, or dominating, set, and this time may be of singular
cardinality. The bounding and dominating numbers are denoted by b(P, ≤) and
d(P, ≤) respectively.
When in a poset it happens that the bounding number and the potentially
larger dominating number are the same number, it is said that the poset has true
coﬁnality that number, which is denoted by tcf(P, ≤).

540
Menachem Kojman
An inﬁnite product of cardinals Q
i∈A λi consists of all functions f : A →On
which satisfy that f(i) ∈λi for all i ∈A. There is a natural partial ordering on
this product, namely, f < g ⇐⇒f(i) < g(i) for all i ∈A. As mentioned earlier,
this partial ordering can be “modded out” using an ideal I on A to get f <I g
iﬀ{i ∈I : g(i) ≤f(i)} ∈I. In the well-studied case (ωω, <∗) where <∗is <I
for the ideal I of ﬁnite subsets of ω, the dominating number is uncountable, but
undecidable in ZFC. It may be singular. The bounding number is also uncount-
able, not greater than the dominating number and undecidable in ZFC. Whether
b(ωω, <∗) = d(ωω, <∗) or not is also not decidable in ZFC. Lastly, it may be the
case that for every ultraﬁlter U over ω, when modding out by (the dual of) U,
hence making (ωω, <U) a linearly ordered set in which bounding and domination
agree, this number is always strictly larger than b(ωω, <∗).
This discussion may be technical, but it is important to mention these facts as
the results which pcf theory obtained go against the intuition that may have been
created by earlier results about ωω.
In the product (Q
n ωn, <∗), for example, the bounding number is equal to ℵω+1
in ZFC (that is, absolutely), the dominating number is always regular and for every
ideal I over ω the bounding number b(Q
n ωn, <I) is equal to the coﬁnality modulo
some ultraﬁlter disjoint to I, actually to the true coﬁnality of some non-maximal
ideal extending I. The exact details are less important than the general theme
that in the product Q
n ωn there exists decidable structure, while in ωω there is
none.
We quote now the “basis theorem” for all possible coﬁnalities of structures of
the form (Q
n ωn, <I) for some ideal I:
THEOREM 3 (Shelah’s pcf theorem.) Let A be a set of regular cardinals which
satisﬁes |A| < min A. Let pcf(A) be the set of all bounding numbers of all reduced
products (Q A, <I) modulo some proper ideal I ⊆P(A).
Then for every λ ∈
pcf(A) there is a set Bλ ⊆A, called the pcf generator for λ, such that, letting J<λ
be the ideal generated by {Bθ : θ ∈pcf(A) and θ < λ}:
• λ = b(Q A, <J<λ) = tcf(Q Bλ, <J<λ).
• For every proper ideal I ⊆P(A) the bounding number b(Q A, <I) is the least
λ for which Bλ /∈I and d(Q A, <I) is the last λ for which Bλ /∈I.
• tcf(Q A, <I) = λ iﬀλ ∈pcf(A) is unique such that Bλ /∈I.
Implicit in the theorem is that every bounding number is also a true coﬁnality.
With this theorem it is easy to determine what is the bounding number modulo
an ideal I and whether or not it is also a true coﬁnality: the bounding number of
(Q A, <I) is simply the least λ for which Bλ /∈I and true coﬁnality exists if and
only if for every θ ̸= λ in pcf(A) it holds that Bθ ∈I.
Shelah’s pcf theorem is an algebraic basis theorem for the space of all linearly
ordered homeomorphic images of the partially ordered product (Q A, <). It is not

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
541
something one expects to ﬁnd if guided by the intuition accumulated in the area
of independence results surrounding ωω, or the continuum in general.
The modern way to prove this theorem uses the density of exact sequences,
that is, for every <I-increasing sequence ⟨fα : α < λ⟩for regular λ there is a
<I-increasing sequence ⟨f ′
α : α < λ⟩such that fα ≤f ′
α for all α and ⟨f ′
α : α < λ⟩
has an exact upper bound g : A →On. The existence of the latter sequence is
proved using some ZFC combinatorics, typically, a stationary set in an intrinsically
important ideal I[λ], with which an exact sequence is constructed so that two of
the three possibilities in Shelah’s Trichotomy Theorem are ruled out, leaving only
the exact upper bound possibility.
The relation of pcf to arithmetic is as follows: for a singular µ let pp(µ) be the
supremum of all tcf(Q A, <I) for A ⊆µ an unbounded set of regular cardinals of
cardinality cf(µ) and I an ideal over A which contains all bounded subsets of A.
For many singular cardinals it is known that pp(µ) is the binomial
 µ
cf(µ)

. If fact,
the consistency of the opposite is not known.
In particular, if some end-segment A of all regular cardinals below a singular
µ has order-type smaller than µ and hence without loss of generality satisﬁes
|A| < min A, then max pcf(A) = cf([µ]cf µ, ⊆).
In other words, the binomial
function at µ is equal to max pcf(A). For such µ,
µcf(µ) = max pcf(A) + 2cf(µ).
This part of the theory is obtained with the “convexity” or “no hole” theorem,
which states that if the set A is an interval of regular cardinals then also pcf(A)
is an interval of regular cardinals.
Another important pcf theorem is that for regular uncountable products, e.g.
Q
α<ω1 ℵα+1, true coﬁnality exists and is equal to the least possible value, that is,
in the case quoted, tcf(Q
α<ω1 ℵα+1, <NS) = ℵω1+1.25 This is the underlying basis
for, e.g., Silver’s theorem.
The pcf theorem is a ZFC theorem, but did not start out as a ZFC theorem.
It was not discovered all at once.
We describe now the gradual emergence of
its components. Let us identify now the exact place where pcf theory was born:
Shelah’s [1978] construction of a Jonsson algebra on ℵω+1 from the assumption
2ℵ0 ≤ℵω+1.
A Jonsson algebra is an algebra of functions—an inﬁnite set with countably
many (ﬁnitary) operations—that has no proper subalgebra of the same cardinality
as the whole algebra. There is a Jonsson algebra on ω and if there is a Jonsson
algebra on a cardinal κ there is one on κ+. Thus a straightforward induction gives
that there are Jonsson algebras on ℵn for all n ∈ω. What about ℵω? This is still
an open problem! The next cardinal in line is, then, ℵω+1. Can one combine the
Jonsson algebras on each ℵn to create one on ℵω+1? From modern pcf theory the
answer is obviously positive: if ⟨fα : α < ℵω+1⟩⊆Q
n∈Bℵω+1 ωn is <∗-increasing
and <∗-coﬁnal in the product then every subset of this scale of the same cardinality
25NS denotes the ideal of non-stationary subsets of ω1.

542
Menachem Kojman
as the whole scale achieves unbounded values in unboundedly many ωn, and so a
Jonsson algebra is easily created from such a scale.
Does such a scale exist? This is exactly the third in a list of three questions with
which the paper [Shelah, 1978] begins, the ﬁrst being whether a Jonsson algebra
on ℵω+1 exists in ZFC.
Shelah deﬁnes a precursor of the pcf operation, PscD(λ) where λ = ⟨λi : i < δ⟩
is a sequence of regular cardinals and D is a ﬁlter containing all co-bounded sets of
δ. Now Psc,“possible scales”, is the set of all cardinals λ obtainable as follows: for
some subsequence of ⟨λi : i < δ⟩, replace λi in the product by 1. This corresponds
to changing the ﬁlter D to its restriction D ↾B to a subset B ⊆δ. Now the cardinal
which is obtained is simply the bounding number of the product (Q
i<δ λi, <D↾B).
Since a single ﬁlter is considered, there are at most 2δ localizations D ↾B, hence
the set of possible scales has cardinality at most 2δ.
What Shelah does next is to prove the ﬁrst version of the “no-hole” theorem,
using the assumption that the continuum is small:
THEOREM 4. Suppose λ = ⟨λi : i < κ⟩is increasing, κ regular, and λ∗=
P
i<κ λi. If λ ∈PscDλ, λ∗< µ < λ, µ regular, D ℵ1-complete or 2κ < µ, then
µ ∈PscD⟨λ′
i : i < κ⟩for some λ′
i ≤λi, ⟨λ′
i : i < κ⟩is not D-trivial.
Thus he gets a maximal ﬁlter D on ω with cf(Q
n ωn, <D) = ℵω+1, and uses this
to get a Jonsson algebra.
We ﬁrst ﬁnd here the main themes of pcf theory, but should also appreciate, in
retrospect, the way Shelah managed to circumvent the diﬃculty which may arise
by choosing inadvertently a maximal ﬁlter which creates coﬁnality larger than
ℵω+1. One cannot just prove that for an arbitrary maximal ﬁlter the coﬁnality
shall be as desired.
The consideration of D ↾B already predicts the concept of a pcf generator.
Also the concept of a least upper bound is present and least upper bounds are
obtained by using the cardinal arithmetic assumptions.
It is quite fascinating to look at this early work and trace the exact point
in history at which pcf theory emerged.
It is also important to observe that
the motivation for this development was a concrete combinatorial problem; not a
systematic study of cardinal arithmetic.
In 1980 Shelah was working on stronger versions of Jensen’s covering lemma.
One of the discoveries made in this context led to the next important step in the
development of pcf theory. Shelah discovered that the intersection of a suﬃciently
closed elementary submodel M of size ℵ1 (for example) with the ordinals below ℵω,
say, is determined by the model’s characteristic function χM(n) := sup M ∩ωn.
By carefully choosing particular pcf scales and employing a sophisticated argu-
ment, Shelah obtained control over characteristic functions of suﬃciently closed
submodels. Now Shelah could use pcf theory to bound (ℵω)ℵ0.
Thus we ﬁnd the full scheme of the pcf proof for upper bounds for singular
cardinal exponentiation appearing in Shelah’s 1980 result:
∀n(2ℵn < ℵω) =⇒2ℵω < ℵ(2ℵ0)+.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
543
pcf theory of a set A was developed here with ultraﬁlters and with the additional
assumption that 2|A| < min A. That was a reasonable assumption in the context
of the application, but Shelah was aware then of the importance of separating pcf
theory from the exponentiation of regular cardinals.
This proof appeared in Shelah’s book Proper Forcing [1982] right after the
sections dealing with the strong covering lemma. The ideal J<λ(A) was deﬁned
as the collection of all B ⊆A such that for every ultraﬁlter U containing B the
coﬁnality of the product mod U is smaller than λ. Also the notions of exact upper
bound and true coﬁnality of an ideal appear.
Shelah obtained his result in 1980 while visiting Ohio State University, where
Hugh Woodin had just presented a proof using large cardinals that (ℵω)ℵ0 could be
arbitrarily large with ℵω being strong limit. After leaving Ohio State University,
Woodin discovered a gap in his proof, and was trying to ﬁll it for a while until
Shelah’s proof of the bound was communicated to him.
Shelah presented his proof of the bound at the logic meeting in Patras, Greece,
1980.
Woodin was not present in that meeting, but his earlier announcement
created the suspicion (or the hope, for some) that large cardinals would soon be
proved inconsistent. However, all large cardinals involved in this incident are still
alive and well.
The remaining developments in pcf theory we shall refer to here appear in
Shelah’s book Cardinal Arithmetic [1994a]. In [1990], which became Chapter I
of [1994a], Shelah replaces the assumption 2|A| < min A by |A| < min A. The
existence of a single generator for J<λ+ over J<λ for λ ∈pcf(A) is not yet proved.
This is an important step forward in separating the exponent function from the
binomial function.
A major advance is made in Chapter II of [1994a]; Shelah isolated the Tri-
chotomy Theorem for sequences of ordinal functions which are increasing mod-
ulo some ideal.
This discovery is presented as “Claim 1.2” on page 41 of the
book, a presentation which does little justice to its formidable contents.
She-
lah’s trichotomy says, roughly, that for any ideal I over an inﬁnite set A and any
<I-increasing sequence of ordinal functions ⟨fα : α < λ⟩on A of regular length
λ > |A|+, either the sequence is equivalent modulo some larger ideal to a sequence
inside the product of small sets (that is, in case A is countable, the sequence is
inside a copy of ωω); or there is explicit evidence that the saturation of I exceeds
λ; or there is an exact upper bound to the sequence modulo I. If the ideal I is
maximal or if λ > 2|A|, neither of the latter two alternatives can hold, and thus
the sequence has an exact upper bound.
This is a remarkable discovery: the class of ordinal functions on a set A satisﬁes
Dedekind completeness for all increasing sequences of length larger than 2|A| when
quasi-ordered modulo any ideal over A. This means that Hausdorﬀcould not have
discovered any gap other than the one he discovered in Onω. Even if Hausdorﬀwas
allowed to choose any ideal he wanted over ω and search for gaps of any cardinal
length λ in the class of all cardinal functions on ω, he would ﬁnd no other gap
in ZFC than the one he discovered: If CH holds, then every sequence of ordinal

544
Menachem Kojman
functions on ω of length ≥ω2 which is increasing modulo some ideal I over ω
has an exact upper bound modulo the same ideal I. Put more bluntly: Hausdorﬀ
had discovered the single exceptional case in the whole multitude of <I-increasing
sequences of ordinal functions on ω for any ideal I!
Using his trichotomy, Shelah proceeds to prove one of the most useful pcf the-
orems, the existence of a µ+-scale for every singular µ, i.e. a sequence which is
increasing and coﬁnal of length µ+ inside a product (Q
i<cf(µ) κi, <bd) for an in-
creasing sequence ⟨κi : i < cf(µ)⟩of regular cardinals with supremum µ. This
had many applications, e.g. the existence of a Jonsson algebra on ℵω+1 in ZFC,
as mentioned earlier.
The development here resembles the steps that Hausdorﬀhad taken some eighty
years earlier. Hausdorﬀﬁrst sought an ω1-scale—which he found, with the aid of
CH, but could not ﬁnd in ZFC—and then moved to construct his gap. Shelah ﬁrst
got an ℵω+1-scale from 2ℵ0 ≤ℵω+1, and then proceeded to discover that such a
scale existed in ZFC. One cannot help but wonder what would have happened if
Hausdorﬀwas driven to study the product (Q
n ωn, <∗).
To apply the strength of the Trichotomy Theorem inside the product (Q A, <I)
two ingredients were needed: club guessing and having stationary sets in an intrin-
sically important ideal I[λ]. Club guessing was discovered by Shelah in 1988 in his
model-theoretic work—to prove that a non-superstable theory has many pairwise
non-embeddable models at a singular cardinality. It is a prediction principle which
is a formal weakening of Jensen’s diamond principle, weaker in the sense that it
predicts only closed unbounded subsets (rather than all subsets) of a cardinal with
the prediction requirement weakened from equality to inclusion. Formally, if κ < λ
are regular cardinals, a club guessing sequence on Sλ
κ := {a < λ: cf(α) = κ} is a
sequence C = ⟨cδ : δ ∈Sλ
κ⟩such that for each δ ∈Sλ
κ, cδ is a closed unbounded
subset of δ of order-type κ and such that for every closed unbounded E ⊆λ there
is a δ ∈Sλ
κ such that cd ⊆E. The main gain in weakening Jensen’s diamond
principle in this way is, as Shelah proved, that if κ+ < λ and both κ and λ are
regular, then a club-guessing sequence on Sλ
κ exists in ZFC.
Club guessing appears in [Shelah, 1994a], but the existence of a stationary set
S ⊆Sκ
λ in I[λ] for κ+ < λ = cf(λ) does not appear in the book—although Shelah
knew this for a long time before the book was printed. These two facts are related:
the existence of a stationary set in I[λ] is proved using club guessing. With these
two facts one proves the density of exact sequences in products (Q A, <I) and can
prove with them the existence of pcf generators.
In Chapter VIII of [Shelah, 1994a], Shelah proves the existence of a single
pcf generator without using the later approach. The mechanism of the proof of a
stationary set in I[λ] appears in disguise in the proof of the existence of a generator.
The other property of pcf that is proved in the chapter is the localization theorem,
which states that if λ ∈pcf(B) where B ⊆pcf(A) then there is a subset C ⊆B
of cardinality at most |A| such that λ ∈pcf(C). In the very ﬁrst section of the
chapter Shelah proves a pcf generalization of the Galvin-Hajnal theorem for his
pp function.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
545
By the Fall of 1989 all ingredients were ready to the next great achievement of
pcf theory—the ℵω4 bound. Shelah was visiting Mathematical Sciences Research
Institute in Berkeley, where, according to testimony in his own book, he was
eager to contradict Leo Harrington’s opinion that cardinal arithmetic was “dead”
([Shelah, 1994a, p.359]):
I was interested in this particularly since 80, but the last impetus was
my failure in Fall 89 to convince Harrington to retract his 86 statement:
“cardinal arithmetic, this was a great problem, [but is now] essentially
ﬁnished.”
The set pcf({ℵn : n ∈ω}) is an interval of regular cardinals on which the pcf op-
eration deﬁnes a closure operation, hence a topology. This topology is countably-
tight,26 by the localization theorem. Furthermore, this topology is related to the
order topology by the representation theorem of µ+. Now a purely combinatorial
argument proves that such a structure has cardinality smaller than ω4.
This proves that max pcf({ℵn : n ∈ω}) < ℵω4. By the equality of max pcf with
the binomial it follows that
cf([ℵω]ω, ⊆) < ℵω4.
Thus, unlike the exponentiation 2ℵ0 which has no bound in the list of alephs, the
binomial of ℵω is bounded by ℵω4.
This gives immediately the following bounds:
2ℵ0 < ℵω =⇒(ℵω)ℵ0 < ℵω4;
∀n(2ℵn < ℵω) =⇒2ℵω < ℵω4.
The signiﬁcant improvement in bound ℵω4 over Shelah’s 1980 bound ℵ(2ℵ0)+ is that
the subscript ω4 does not contain any exponentiation. This is perhaps Shelah’s
best known application of pcf theory.
As Shelah writes about the problem of what the actual bound is:
So really our problem breaks to two:
(a) Is it consistent to have such [a pcf] structure on speciﬁc γ(∗)?
(b) If there is such a structure can we then force a suitable cardinal
arithmetic such that it is the structure corresponding to it?
What is accomplished here . . . is that in (a), for ℵω, necessarily γ(∗) <
ℵ4. . . . But (b) is widely open, and it does not seem unreasonable at
all, to me at least.
26Countable tightness in a topological space X is the property that for every subset A ⊆X
and a point x in the closure of A there is a countable B ⊆A with x in the closure of B.

546
Menachem Kojman
The same proof works to bound the binomial of every singular which is not a
ﬁxed point of the aleph function. For the ﬁrst ﬁxed point the theory breaks down,
as there is no interval of regular cardinals of the right form unbounded in this
singular cardinal. As Shelah puts it:
. . . before 1980 we could have thought that for example for strong limit
λ of coﬁnality ℵ0 there are no restrictions on 2λ . . . we know now there
are some but have less clear idea what to expect for ﬁx points.
In the same chapter the relation between pp(µ) and the binomial of µ is clariﬁed
for singular µ. Earlier, Shelah [1986] proved that if µ is strong limit singular of
uncountable coﬁnality with no weakly inaccessible cardinal below it then 2µ is
smaller than the ﬁrst weakly inaccessible cardinal.
In [1983] Shelah had already proved that for the ﬁrst ﬁxed point of order ω1
of the aleph function of coﬁnality ℵ127 this was the best upper bound. Also, for
every limit δ of uncountable coﬁnality, for club many α < δ of countable coﬁnality
pp(ℶα) is equal to the binomial of ℶα. Finally, if cf(δ) = ℵ0 and the binomial of
ℶδ is strictly larger than pp(ℶδ), then pp(ℶδ) must be very large: there is some
ﬁxed point µ of the aleph function of uncountable coﬁnality between ℶδ and its
pp.
A remarkable result of Moti Gitik [2005] showed that the least ﬁxed point of
the aleph function, which is the least cardinal for which pcf theory does not give a
bound on its binomial, indeed has no bound on its binomial. This result required
the full machinery of large cardinal forcing developed by Magidor and Gitik in
over 20 years. This result of Gitik closed a circle that began in 1980 when Woodin
thought he could prove that there was no bound on the power set of a strong limit
ℵω. In exactly the same year Shelah discovered the ℵ(2ℵ0)+ bound. Gitik proved
for the ﬁrst ﬁxed point of the aleph function what Woodin tried to prove for ℵω.
In the very ﬁrst section of [1994a] Shelah proves that the least µ for which
pp(µ) > µ+ satisﬁes that pp(µ) is equal to its binomial. This was the missing
part for completing the work of Gitik and Mitchell on the consistency strength of
the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis. Gitik and Mitchell proved that the negation of
SCH is equiconsistent with a measurable κ of order κ++.
Shelah continued to develop pcf theory in many directions. He [1997] investi-
gated relaxations of the condition |A| < min A and considered the theory in models
without AC. Research on pcf theory and on its application is conducted presently
by set-theorists and by mathematicians from other ﬁelds.
It should be made clear that only a small part of pcf theory had been described
here.
Not even all of the material in Cardinal Arithmetic has been described,
while the volume of results in pcf theory and its application has doubled since the
appearance of the book. Shelah produces formidable results faster than what the
author of this paper can read, and even a well-known text like the book contains
27A cardinal ℵα is a ﬁxed point if ℵα = α. It is a ﬁxed point of order two if it is a ﬁxed point
and is equal to its own index in the increasing enumeration of ﬁxed points, and so forth.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
547
too many results to digest in a life time. A reader who wishes to learn more about
pcf theory should consult the analytical guide at the end of the book and Shelah’s
archive: http://shelah.logic.at.
5.1
The revised GCH above ℶω
A result of special status is Shelah’s [2000b].
In this work Shelah provides a
new perspective on cardinal arithmetic by proving in ZFC that a natural cardinal
arithmetic function asymptotically assumes the smallest possible value.
We may recall the value of 2ℵ0 is undecidable in a formidable way: the axiom
system ZFC allows 2ℵ0 to be any cardinal ℵα for which cf(ℵα) ̸= ω. Thus CH is
very far from being “true in ZFC”. The situation with GCH on regular cardinals is
not much better, as by Easton’s result there are no restrictions on regular cardinal
exponentiation other than K¨onig’s lemma and weak monotonicity.
With full exponentiation being separated into the binomial on singular cardi-
nals and exponentiation on regular cardinals, it made sense to clarify what rules
governed the binomial. As long as the singular at hand is not a ﬁxed point of
countable coﬁnality of the aleph function, there is a bound (whether the “4” in
the bound is best possible or not is a separate issue) and the binomial of the ﬁrst
ﬁxed point of countable coﬁnality is unbounded.
In 1990, the British model theorist Wilfrid Hodges communicated to Shelah a
problem posed by another British mathematician, Kishor Kale: Do the cardinali-
ties of countably generated topologies satisfy the continuum hypothesis? Suppose
that τ is a topology, not necessarily Hausdorﬀ, nor even T0, which has a countable
basis. Does it follow that the number of open sets with respect to τ is either
countable or equal to the continuum?
Shelah’s answer was positive and appeared in [1993], but that was not the end
of this investigation. He examined what happens if one replaces ℵ0 by ℶω. In
[1994b] Shelah proved the analogous theorem for ℶω: if a topology τ has a base
of cardinality at most µ and for some strong limit cardinal λ of coﬁnality ω and
λ ≤µ < 2λ, then the size of τ is either ≤µ or ≥2λ. Shelah’s ﬁrst proof used
cardinal arithmetic assumptions that were shortly later replaced by the revised
GCH theorem.
In [2000b] Shelah formulated a diﬀerent binomial function: λ[κ] is the least
cardinality of a family of κ-subsets of λ with the property that every κ-subset of λ
is contained in the union of fewer that κ members of the family. Clearly, for every
singular cardinal µ it holds that µ ≤µ[cf(µ)] ≤
 µ
cf(µ)

. However, a totally new
phenomenon emerged with this revised form of the binomial. This new function
seemed to be able to absorb almost all independence ﬂuctuations, and assumes
asymptotically the smallest possible values. Shelah proved in ZFC that for every
λ ≥ℶω, for every suﬃciently large κ < ℶω it holds that λ[κ] = λ. This result is
Shelah’s “revised GCH in ZFC”.
This theorem has applications (some of which are described below) and will
have more applications in the future, but its primary signiﬁcance is in changing

548
Menachem Kojman
the attitude towards the axiomatic system ZFC in the context of inﬁnite cardinal
arithmetic. Placing Easton’s result that there are no rules of singular cardinal
exponentiation at one extreme, this theorem secures the opposite extreme position.
The revised GCH in ZFC demonstrates that a natural cardinal arithmetic function
assumes the smallest possible value asymptotically.
The asymptotic minimality of the revised binomial is not an isolated cardinal
arithmetic fact, but actually has applications which change the standard intuition
about using cardinals in mathematics. Let us quote an example.
A Boolean algebra B is µ-linked if B \ {0} is the union of at most µ sets, in
each of which any two elements are compatible (have non-zero intersection); it is
ccc, i.e. satisﬁes the countable chain condition, if in every uncountable subset of
the algebra there are two elements with non-zero intersection. Hajnal, Juh´asz and
Szentmikl´ossy in their [1997] proved the following interesting structure theorem for
Boolean algebras: If µ = µℵ0 then every ccc Boolean algebra B whose cardinality
satisﬁes |B| ≤µ+ω < 2µ is µ-linked.
What about larger cardinalities below 2µ? Well, the same authors proved that
this was independent: for |B| = µ+ω+1 the condition could hold or could fail.
This may indicate that nothing more can be proved on the relation between chain
condition and µ-linkedness, as Shelah writes ([2000a, Sect. 8]):
This gives the impression of essentially closing the issue, and so I would
have certainly thought some years ago,. . .
Now Shelah proves: If µ = µ<ℶω and B is a ccc Boolean algebra whose cardinality
satisﬁes |B| < 2µ then B is µ-linked. Here the result is gotten for all cardinals
below 2µ, rather than only for the ﬁrst ω + 1 of them. The proof uses the revised
GCH above ℶω.
What has changed in Shelah’s perspective?
It is the awareness that things
do not always become more complicated along the sequence of cardinals. Once
Hajnal, Juh´asz and Szentmikl´ossy pushed their proof up to µ+ω and showed that
the next case is consistently false, then why should anyone bother to look higher?
What was shown is that there is a qualitative diﬀerence between the condition
µ = µℵ0 and the condition µ = µℶω.
This is a new sort of intuition about inﬁnite cardinals. One may say, more
mature, or less na¨ıve. One ﬁnds such a point of view among the mathematicians
who look at the natural numbers. There it is not expected that simple intuitions
will guide the researcher correctly. Many years of number theoretic investigations
have accustomed number theorists to expect surprises. With cardinal arithmetic
this is only beginning.
Kurt G¨odel [1947] introduced “veriﬁable consequences” as a means by which
new axioms should be evaluated. A new axiom could help mathematicians easily
prove theorems which may later be proved without it. Such is, for example, the
Axiom of Choice. In the same paper G¨odel uses his own criterion to reject CH.
Among all consequences of CH, he explains, none turned out to be “really” true.
That of course projected on G¨odel’s own constructibility axiom V = L, which

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
549
implies CH. Later mathematical discoveries, like Scott’s theorem (see below) also
indicated that L may be very far from the “real” universe of sets.
However, as one moves up the list of cardinal numbers, the axiom V = L seems
to have more and more “veriﬁable consequences”, if not literally, then at least
metaphorically.
Asymptotic regularity along the sequence of cardinal numbers
emerged in many combinatorial discoveries of Shelah in the sense that combina-
torial principles which hold in L by Jensen’s work had weaker forms that are true
in ZFC—from some point onwards.
Shelah’s revised GCH in ZFC is the culmination of the “eventual regularity”
theme, or, the veriﬁability of V = L theme, which emerged from previous pcf
discoveries. The standard GCH is of course not a ZFC theorem, and even the
binomial hypothesis is not a ZFC theorem, though its violation requires consistency
strength, but the revised GCH is a ZFC theorem—above ℶω. A. Kanamori writes
in his review of [Shelah, 2000b]:
Bewildered by the sheer volume of [Shelah’s] work, one can lose the
sense for those few among the many achievements that might have an
even higher claim to signiﬁcance.
The current paper under review,
number 460, is such a paper, and although it was written in the early
1990s, it has not appeared in print until now. . . . This is a remark-
able ZFC result about the small size of covering families. Whether or
not one regards the result as an appropriate “solution” to Hilbert’s
ﬁrst problem, it is certainly a triumph for the author’s pcf theory, as
developed in his book.
In spite of its evident signiﬁcance, Shelah’s [2000b] claim that this result was a
solution to Hilbert’s ﬁrst problem did not stir any serious discussion. On the one
hand, this is certainly not Hilbert’s original problem. On the other hand, after
Easton’s result, which Hilbert of course was not acquainted with, the problem,
viewed broadly as “to discover the rules of cardinal exponentiation”, needed to
be reformulated. If one adopts Hilbert’s problem to “is cardinal arithmetic sim-
ple” or even “do the arithmetic functions assume their least possible values” then
this is indeed a partial solution: a natural cardinal arithmetical function assumes
asymptotically its least possible values, in every universe of sets which satisﬁes
ZFC.
As an application of his theorem, Shelah proved the following: for every λ ≥ℶω,
2λ = λ+ if and only if Jensen’s diamond holds on λ+. Kanamori addresses in his
review this new connection between GCH and Jensen’s diamond:
The two principles had long been known to be distinct at small car-
dinals, but Shelah’s result says that for suﬃciently large λ, they are
equivalent! There are further applications to topology and to model
theory. Once again, the power of the author’s pcf theory is demon-
strated with surprising and elegantly concise results provable in ZFC.

550
Menachem Kojman
Shelah’s discovery of the revised GCH in ZFC enabled many new proofs by
induction along the cardinals. Some of these inductions have to begin above ℶω,
though. A new type of intuition has formed: there is eventual regularity in ZFC.
While in the small cardinals there may be a radically diﬀerent behavior in V than
the behavior in L, asymptotically V behaves in many ways like L.
Most of Shelah’s diamond consequences were superseded by an even more sur-
prising theorem of his, from 2007: for every uncountable λ, 2λ = λ+ if and only
if diamond holds on λ+. Thus, ℵ0 is the only inﬁnite cardinal on which and in-
stance of GCH may hold without being accompanied by Jensen’s diamond on its
successor.
This is, philosophically, an interesting example in the development of the sub-
ject, as the “simplest case” was again, as in other cases, not discovered ﬁrst: Shelah
ﬁrst proved the equivalence of instances of GCH with Jensen’s diamond for fairly
large cardinals, and only later, and with a simpler proof, proved it for all successors
of uncountable cardinals.
6
FROM MEASURABLE CARDINALS TO LARGE CARDINAL FORCING
Measurable cardinals are never singular! But measurable cardinals theory never-
theless induced several major developments in singular cardinal theory.
6.1
Ulam’s discovery of measurable cardinals and a regular limit con-
tinuum
The discussion of Ulam’s [1930] discoveries about measurable cardinals belongs
naturally to the opening lines of a history of large cardinals.
This chapter of
modern set theory is, however, relevant to the history of singular cardinals.
The ﬁrst relevance is that by proving that the least real-valued measurable
cardinal is either at most the continuum or else a strong limit cardinal, Ulam
directed attention for the ﬁrst time to the possibility that the continuum may be
a limit cardinal. Ulam discovered that in yet another branch of mathematics—
measure theory—the relation between a cardinal and its coﬁnality is useful. Thus,
the least cardinal which carries a real-valued measure cannot be a successor, and
cannot be singular. This makes the least real-valued measurable cardinal a regular
limit—one of those “exorbitantly big” cardinal numbers which Hausdorﬀpredicted
would not be related to any meaningful mathematical consideration. Furthermore,
if the real-valued measure is atomless, the continuum is at least as large as the
least real-valued measurable.
6.2
Scott’s theorem
Set theory developed as a modern discipline from G¨odel’s work on the constructible
universe. The role of formal logic and the concept of the universe of set theory

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
551
became central, and the line of research of set theory as a set of axioms became a
central branch of investigation.
 Lo´s’s discovery of ultrapowers and Ulam’s work on measurable cardinals were
combined by Scott [1961] to introduce the construction of the ultraproduct em-
bedding of the universe of set theory into a transitive class. Two theorems were
proved by Scott: ﬁrst, that if GCH fails at a measurable cardinal κ then it fails in
many cardinals below κ; second, that if a measurable cardinals exists, then V ̸= L.
This was the ﬁrst time in which the way L sits inside V was investigated, and
in which it was shown that L could be diﬀerent from V —if large cardinals exist.
After Scott’s theorem further work was done by Gaifman and by Rowbottom,
who showed that if large cardinals exist not only did L diﬀer from V but actually
L was very small—-e.g. contains only countably many real numbers.
Silver’s Ph.D. thesis completed this line of investigation by showing that a small
L was very small—that assuming a set of integers 0# exists as given by large
cardinals, all cardinals from V , for instance, are indiscernible, inaccessible and so
on in L. In particular, singular cardinals in V are regular from the point of view
of L. This meant that singular cardinals could be much larger in an inner model
than what they seemed in V . This possibility was manifested much more sharply
after Prikry showed how a measurable could be turned into a singular of countable
coﬁnality by forcing while preserving all cardinals as cardinals; yet already at that
stage of history, the importance of singular cardinals to the study of the relation
between V and L became evident.
The role singular cardinals played in this branch of set theory became much
more central when Jensen derived the ﬁrst consequences from the assumption that
0# did not exist after Silver’s theorem about singular cardinals. Jensen’s covering
lemma was discovered under direct inﬂuence of Silver’s theorem, and implied that
if 0# did not exist, that all singular cardinals in V are also singular in L. Thus,
although their elementary theory was not yet explored in depth, singular cardinals
served as a central tool for detecting the distance between L and V .
6.3
Generic sequences: Prikry’s discovery
After the invention of forcing, measurable cardinals were found related to singular
cardinal in a surprisingly intimate way.
In 1970 Karel Prikry made a formidable discovery: that an unbounded ω-
sequence to a measurable cardinal κ could be introduced by a forcing notion, called
ever since its discovery “Prikry forcing”, without collapsing the cardinal, without
introducing bounded subsets of κ and without changing the universe above κ. In
short, Prikry’s forcing does virtually nothing else other than changing the coﬁ-
nality of κ to ω. In other words, the singular of coﬁnality ω is a strong limit
regular—in fact measurable—cardinal in an inner model which is hidden below
the full universe V by a thin crust.
The unbounded sequences in a singular cardinal received a totally diﬀerent
meaning after Prikry’s discovery. Prikry sequences are still the basis to all modern

552
Menachem Kojman
large cardinal forcing constructions for increasing the power of a strong limit sin-
gular cardinal. Prikry himself observed that his forcing could provide a counterex-
ample to the SCH if it could be arranged to have a measurable cardinal κ which vi-
olates GCH. Indeed, Silver managed to start with an even larger large cardinal—a
supercompact—and by forcing turn it into a measurable κ with 2κ > κ+, actually,
with 2κ arbitrarily large. Now following Silver’s forcing by Prikry’s, this κ became
a strong limit singular of coﬁnality ω which satisﬁed 2κ > κ+. It is important to
observe that the singular κ was very high on the list of alephs. In retrospect, this
made a diﬀerence, as for strong limit singular cardinals below the least ﬁxed point
of the aleph function it is, as we now know, impossible to make their power set
arbitrarily large. The feeling at the time was that the use of a large cardinal to
obtain a violation of SCH would turn out to be unnecessary.
The next major development was Magidor’s technique of changing the coﬁnality
of a large cardinal. Magidor combined a system of Levy collapses with Prikry’s
method of adding an ω-sequence to a large cardinal and obtained in [1977b] a model
in which ℵω was strong limit and 2ℵω was larger than ℵω+1, as large as ℵω+ω+1.
Thus, the ﬁrst singular cardinal—ℵω—was shown to consistently violate SCH. The
diﬀerence between the violation of SCH at a “large” singular by combining Prikry
and Silver forcing, described above, to Magidor’s result is not merely quantitative.
In retrospect we know that the structure of the product of the ωn’s imposes strong
restrictions on the power set of ℵω, while at larger singular cardinals, e.g. ﬁxed
points of the aleph function, such limitations are not present. Magidor’s forcing
construction had to overcome these diﬃculties, before pcf theory was discovered.
In a subsequent paper [1977c] Magidor started from a larger large cardinal,
managed to obtain an even more stunning result: ℵω is the ﬁrst cardinal violating
GCH. This means that for every n ∈ω it holds that 2ℵn = ℵn+1 but 2ℵω = ℵω+2
in Magidor’s model.
Still, in 1973, Magidor—like everyone else working in this ﬁeld —was convinced
that large cardinals were not truly needed to force a failure of SCH and that
eventually Easton’s result would be extended to all cardinals by some forcing
over, say, L.
Magidor was able to obtain violations of SCH in an arbitrary long initial segment
of the ordinals with the techniques he introduced. After Radin’s forcing [1982] was
introduced, with which a club is added to a large cardinal, Foreman and Woodin
[1991] were able to improve on Magidor’s techniques to obtain a model in which
GCH fails at every cardinal. Cummings [1992] used Radin forcing to obtain a
model in which GCH holds at regular cardinals and fails at singular cardinals.
In [1983] Shelah built on Magidor’s work to increase the lower bound on the
power of a strong limit ℵω. For an arbitrary α < ω1 Shelah proved the consistency
of 2ℵω = ℵα+1 while 2ℵn < ℵω for all n.
An important breakthrough in Prikry-type forcing was obtained by Woodin in
the early 1980s (unfortunately, unpublished).
Woodin was able to replace the
supercompact cardinal by a (κ, κ++ +1) extender in obtaining GCH up to ℵω and
a gap of 2 above. This was a major step nearing the exact consistency strength,

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
553
which is a measurable κ of order κ++.
Gitik and Magidor, who, as they write in the paper [1992], were “grateful for
the opportunity to work together in Berkeley”, introduced a new type of forcing
to obtain GCH below ℵω and 2ℵω = ℵα+1 for an arbitrary countable ordinal
α.
They used a directed system of extenders related by projections so that a
Prikry sequence of a higher one created the Prikry sequence of a lower one. The
directedness secured the κ++-chain condition for their forcing.
They obtained
the lower bound of Shelah, with GCH below ℵω, from a weaker large cardinal
hypothesis.
In a series of papers Gitik investigated this type of forcing further. He managed
to replace the Woodin (κ, κ+++1) extender by a (κ, κ++) extender, and continued
to tighten the lower bounds obtained by Mitchell on the consistency strength
of the negation of SCH. By around 1990 Gitik and Mitchell (cf. [Gitik, 1989;
Gitik, 1991]) completed the mission of computing the exact consistency strength
of the failure of SCH at ℵω: a measurable κ of order κ++.
With Gitik’s proof that there was no bound on the binomial of the least ﬁxed
point of the aleph function, basically all cardinal arithmetic problems concerning
κ 7→2κ that were expressible before the discovery of pcf theory were solved.
7
THE 21ST CENTURY
Singular cardinals theory is very active in the present century. In 2004 a workshop
titled “Cardinal arithmetic at work” was held in Jerusalem, where more than half
of the results which were presented were about singular cardinals. In 2004 in Banﬀ,
a meeting was held which was solely devoted to “singular cardinals combinatorics”.
Many important results have been obtained about singular cardinals in the
last decade. Of these let us mention Matteo Viale’s proof [2006] that the Proper
Forcing Axiom implies SCH, which built on earlier work by Moore [2006]. Assaf
Sharon’s forcing construction of the failure of SCH with combinatorial conditions
and ﬁnally Itai Neeman’s proof [2009] of the consistency of the failure of SCH at
a singular of countable coﬁnality µ together with the tree property at µ+.
More work is being done by Shelah and others on pcf without AC. Applications
of pcf theory to topology, measure theory and algebra continue to ﬂow.
The mathematical subject of singular cardinals is most likely only in it begin-
ning, and someone should certainly revise its history in the 22nd century.
8
SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
The understanding of singular cardinals developed in the 20th century in a chaotic
way. The main feature of this development, as seen from the description above, is
that existing techniques were not accompanied by suitable conjectures. In other
words, not all that could be discovered with elementary methods was discovered;
much of it was not even conjectured.

554
Menachem Kojman
Singular cardinals appeared in many subjects, and their centrality to mathe-
matics was well established. Within set theory itself, singular cardinals play a role
in several contexts. First, they serve as gauges for the distance between L and V ,
and thus have metamathematical signiﬁcance. Second, their arithmetic is where
ZFC could restore some of its lost honor after it was discovered that it could prove
next to nothing about regular cardinal arithmetic.
Finally, in tracing the major developments in the theory, one ﬁnds that concrete
mathematical problems were several times the stimulus for important discoveries
in set theory. This is true for set theory in general, of course, as Cantor discovered
the uncountability of R in his investigations of uniqueness of trigonometric series,
and is evident in the history of singular cardinals as well. Topological investigations
related to homotopy led to the ﬁrst constructions of spaces in the product Q
n ωn
whose more advance properties touched pcf theory; the problem of a Jonsson
algebra on ℵω+1 is where pcf theory is directly born; and Kishor Kale’s innocent
looking problem about the number of open sets in a countably generated topology
let quite quickly to Shelah’s discovery of the revised GCH in ZFC.
Many of the advanced techniques for treating singular cardinals are widespread.
Large cardinal forcing, L-like combinatorics and pcf theory are being used daily
by young set theorists, and perhaps soon by mathematicians from neighboring
subjects. There is still much left to be explored.
Having traced the fascinating connection between Hausdorﬀ’s work and She-
lah’s work, it is ﬁtting to conclude this article by the following mathematical
problem which is related to the work of both mathematicians. This problem is a
good benchmark for the existing techniques, and it illustrates that not all singular
cardinals are alike.
Hausdorﬀproved that for every strong limit cardinal µ there is a universal
linearly ordered set of cardinality µ. A partial converse was proved by Kojman and
Shelah [1992] for an initial segment of the singular cardinals: For every singular µ
below the least ﬁxed point of second order, if µ is not strong limit, then a universal
linearly ordered set of cardinality µ does not exist. (A ﬁxed point is a cardinal
µ = ℵµ and a ﬁxed point of the second order is a cardinal µ which is the µ-th ﬁxed
point.)
Does this converse hold for all cardinals? Does it fail at the least ﬁxed point of
second order? Does it fail higher?
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Alexandrov and Urysohn, 1929] P. S. Alexandrov and P. S. Urysohn. M´emoire sur les espaces
topologique compacts. Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Weten-
schappen Tweed Reeks. Afdeling Natuurkunde, 14:1–93, 1929.
[Arhangelskii, 2008] A. Arhangelskii. Homogeneity and complete accumulation points. Topology
Proceedings, 32:239–243, 2008. Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference.
[Balcar and Franˇek, 1987] B. Balcar and F. Franˇek.
Completion of factor algebras of ideals.
Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 100(2):205–212, 1987.
[Balcar and Simon, 1988] B. Balcar and P. Simon. On collections of almost disjoint families.
Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 29(4):631–646, 1988.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
555
[Balcar and Simon, 1989] B. Balcar and P. Simon. Disjoint reﬁnements. In J. D. Monk and
R. Bonnet, editors, Handbook of Boolean Algebra, volume 2. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
1989.
[Balcar and Simon, 1995] B. Balcar and P. Simon. Baire number of the spaces of uniform ul-
traﬁlters. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 92:263–272, 1995.
[Balcar and Vopˇenka, 1972] B. Balcar and P. Vopˇenka.
On systems of almost disjoint sets.
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, As-
tronomiques et Physiques, 20:421–424, 1972.
[Balogh, 1996] Z. Balogh. A small Dowker space in ZFC. Proceedings of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 124:2555–2560, 1996.
[Baumgartner and Prikry, 1977] J. Baumgartner and K. Prikry. Singular cardinals and the gen-
eralized continuum hypothesis. The American Mathematical Monthly, 84(2):108–113, 1977.
[Baumgartner, 1973] J. Baumgartner. All ℵ1-dense sets can be isomorphic. Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 79:101–106, 1973.
[Borsuk, 1936] K. Borsuk. Sur les prolongements des transformations continues. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 28:99–110, 1936.
[Bukovsk´y, 1965] L. Bukovsk´y. The continuum problem and powers of alephs. Commentationes
Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 6:181–197, 1965.
[Cummings, 1992] J. Cummings. A model in which GCH holds at successors but fails at limits.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 329:1–39, 1992.
[Dauben, 1990] J. W. Dauben. Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1990.
[Devlin and Jensen, 1975] K. Devlin and R. Jensen. Marginalia to a theorem of Silver. In ⊨ISILC
Logic Conference (Proc. Internat. Summer Inst. and Logic Colloq., Kiel, 1974), volume 499
of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 115–142. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Dodd and Jensen, 1981] A. Dodd and R. Jensen. The core model. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 20:43–75, 1981.
[Dowker, 1951] C. H. Dowker. On countably paracompact spaces. Canadian Journal of Math-
ematics, 3:219–224, 1951.
[Dushnik and Miller, 1941] B. Dushnik and E. W. Miller.
Partially ordered sets.
American
Journal of Mathematics, 63:600–610, 1941.
[Easton, 1970] W. B. Easton. Powers of regular cardinals. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 1:139–
178, 1970.
[Eklof and Mekler, 2002] P. C. Eklof and A. H. Mekler. Almost Free Modules. Set-Theoretic
Methods, volume 65 of North-Holland Mathematical Library.
North-Holland, Amsterdam,
2002. Revised edition, xxii+597 pp.
[Erd˝os and Hechler, 1975] P. Erd˝os and S. Hechler. On maximal almost-disjoint families over
singular cardinals. In A. Hajnal, R. Rado, and V. T. S´os, editors, Inﬁnite and Finite Sets
(Keszthely, Hungary 1973), volume 10 of Colloquia Mathematica Societatis J´anos Bolyai,
pages 597–604. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Erd˝os and Rado, 1956] P. Erd˝os and R. Rado. A partition calculus in set theory. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society, 62:427–489, 1956.
[Erd˝os and Tarski, 1943] P. Erd˝os and A. Tarski. On families of mutually exclusive sets. Annals
of Mathematics, 44:315–329, 1943.
[Erd˝os et al., 1965] P. Erd˝os, A. Hajnal, and R. Rado. Partition relations for cardinal numbers.
Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 16:93–196, 1965.
[Foreman and Woodin, 1991] M. Foreman and W. H. Woodin. The generalized continuum hy-
pothesis can fail everywhere. Annals of Mathematics, 133:1–35, 1991.
[Galvin and Hajnal, 1975] F. Galvin and A. Hajnal. Inequalities for cardinal powers. Annals of
Mathematics, 101:491–498, 1975.
[Gitik and Magidor, 1992] M. Gitik and M. Magidor. The Singular Cardinals Hypothesis re-
visited. In Set Theory of the Continuum (Berkeley, CA, 1989), volume 26 of Mathematical
Sciences Research Institute Publicatons, pages 243–279. Springer, New York, 1992.
[Gitik, 1980] M. Gitik. All uncountable cardinals can be singular. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
35:61–88, 1980.
[Gitik, 1989] M. Gitik.
The negation of the singular cardinal hypothesis from o(κ) = κ++.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 43:209–34, 1989.
[Gitik, 1991] M. Gitik. The strength of the failure of the singular cardinal hypothesis. Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 51:215–240, 1991.

556
Menachem Kojman
[Gitik, 2005] M. Gitik.
No bound for the ﬁrst ﬁxed point.
Journal of Mathematical Logic,
5:193–246, 2005.
[G¨odel, 1947] K. G¨odel. What is Cantor’s continuum problem?
The American Mathematical
Monthly, 54:515–525, 1947.
[Graham and Kantor, 2009] L. Graham and J.-M. Kantor. Naming Inﬁnity: A True Story of
Religious Mysticism and Mathematical Creativity. The Belknap Press of Harvard Uiversity
Press, 2009.
[Grzegorek, 1985] E. Grzegorek. Always of the ﬁrst category sets (II). In Z. Frolik, V. Souˇcek,
and J. Vin´arek, editors, Proceedings of the 13th Winter School on Abstract Analysis, Section
of Analysis, pages 43–48. Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Palermo, 1985.
[Hajnal et al., 1997] A. Hajnal, I. Juh´asz, and Z. Szentmikl´ossy. On CCC Boolean algebras and
partial orders. Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 38:537–544, 1997.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1906] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Untersuchungen ¨uber ordnungstypen I,II,III.
Bericht ¨uber
die Verhandlungen der K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Mathematisch-Physische Klasse, 58:106–169, 1906.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1908] F. Hausdorﬀ. Gr¨undzuge einer Theorie der geordneten Mengen. Mathematis-
che Annalen, 65:435–505, 1908.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1909] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Die graduierung nach dem endverlauf.
Abhandlungen der
K¨oniglich S¨achsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Mathematisch-Physische
Klasse, 31:295–334, 1909.
[Hausdorﬀ, 1936] F. Hausdorﬀ. Summen von ℵ1 mengen. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 26:241–
255, 1936.
[Hausdorﬀ, 2002] F. Hausdorﬀ.
Gesammelte Werke, Band II, Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002. Edited and with commentary by E. Brieskorn, S. D. Chatterji,
M. Epple, U. Felgner, H. Herrlich, M. Husek, V. Kanovei, P. Koepke, G. Preuß, W. Purkert
and E. Scholz, xviii+884 pp.
[Hessenberg, 1906] G. Hessenberg. Grundbegriﬀe der Mengenlehre. Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht,
G¨ottingen, 1906.
[Jech and Prikry, 1976] T. Jech and K. Prikry. On ideals of sets and the power set operation.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 82:593–595, 1976.
[Jech, 2003] T. Jech. Set Theory. Springer, Berlin, 2003. Third millennium edition, revised and
expanded.
[Juh´asz and Szentmikl´ossy, 2009] I.
Juh´asz
and
Z.
Szentmikl´ossy.
Interpolation
of
κ-
compactness and PCF. Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae, 50:315–320,
2009.
[Juh´asz, 1980] I. Juh´asz. Cardinal Functions in Topology—Ten Years Later, volume 123 of
Mathematical Centre Tracts.
Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam, 1980.
Second edition,
iv+160 pp.
[Kanamori, 1976] A. Kanamori. Weakly normal ﬁlters and irregular ultraﬁlters. Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society, 220:393–399, 1976.
[Ketonen, 1976] J. Ketonen. Nonregular ultraﬁlters and large cardinals. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, 224:61–73, 1976.
[Kojman and Shelah, 1992] M. Kojman and S. Shelah.
Non-existence of universal orders in
many cardinals. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 57:875–891, 1992.
[Kojman and Shelah, 1998] M. Kojman and S. Shelah.
A ZFC Dowker space in ℵω+1: An
application of PCF theory to topology. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society,
126:2459–2465, 1998.
[Kojman and Shelah, 2001] M. Kojman and S. Shelah. Fallen cardinals. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 109:117–129, 2001.
[Kojman et al., 2004] M. Kojman, W. Kubis, and S. Shelah. On two problems of Erd˝os and
Hechler: new methods in singular madness. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Soci-
ety, 132:3357–3365, 2004.
[K¨onig, 1905] J. K¨onig.
¨Uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre und das Kontinuumproblem.
Mathematische Annalen, 61:156–160, 1905.
[Magidor, 1977a] M. Magidor. Chang’s conjecture and powers of singular cardinals. The Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 42:272–276, 1977.
[Magidor, 1977b] M. Magidor. On the singular cardinals problem. I. Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, 28:1–31, 1977.

Singular Cardinals: From Hausdorﬀ’s Gaps to Shelah’s pcf Theory
557
[Magidor, 1977c] M. Magidor. On the singular cardinals problem. II. Annals of Mathematics,
106:517–547, 1977.
[Miˇsˇcenko, 1962] A. Miˇsˇcenko.
On ﬁnally compact spaces.
Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR,
145:1224–1227, 1962.
[Monk, 1996] J. D. Monk. Cardinal invariants on Boolean algebras, volume 142 of Progress in
Mathematics. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, 1996. x+298 pp.
[Moore, 1989] G. H. Moore. Towards a history of Cantor’s continuum problem. In The history
of Modern Mathematics: Ideas and Their Reception (Poughkeepsie 1989), volume 1, pages
79–121. Academic Press, Boston, 1989.
[Moore, 2006] J. T. Moore. The Proper Forcing Axiom, Prikry forcing, and the Singular Car-
dinals Hypothesis. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 140:128–132, 2006.
[Moore, 2009] G. H. Moore. Review of: Ernst Zermelo: An Approach to His Life and Work by
Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 56:823–827, 2009.
[Neeman, 2009] I. Neeman.
Aronszajn trees and failure of the singular cardinal hypothesis,
2009. Preprint,to appear in the Journal of Mathematical Logic.
[Plotkin, 2005] J. M. Plotkin, editor.
Hausdorﬀon Ordered Sets, volume 35 of History of
Mathematics. American Mathematical Society, 2005.
[Radin, 1982] L. B. Radin. Adding closed coﬁnal sequences to large cardinals. Annals of Math-
ematical Logic, 22:243–261, 1982.
[Rudin, 1971] M. E. Rudin. A normal space X for which X × I is not normal. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 73:179–186, 1971.
[Scott, 1961] D. S. Scott. Measurable cardinals and constructible sets. Bulletin de l’Acad´emie
Polonaise des Sciences, S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques,
9:521–524, 1961.
[Shelah, 1975] S. Shelah. A compactness theorem for singular cardinals, free algebras, White-
head problem and transversals. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 21:319–349, 1975.
[Shelah, 1978] S. Shelah. Jonsson algebras in successor cardinals. Israel Journal of Mathematics,
30:57–64, 1978.
[Shelah, 1982] S. Shelah.
Proper Forcing, volume 940 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, 1982.
[Shelah, 1983] S. Shelah. The singular cardinals problem: independence results. In A. R. D.
Mathias, editor, Surveys in Set Theory, volume 87 of London Mathematical Society Lecture
Note Series, pages 116–134. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.
[Shelah, 1986] S. Shelah. On power of singular cardinals. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
27:263–299, 1986.
[Shelah, 1990] S. Shelah. Products of regular cardinals and cardinal invariants of products of
boolean algebras. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 70:129–187, 1990.
[Shelah, 1993] S. Shelah. Number of open sets for a topology with a countable basis. Israel
Journal of Mathematics, 83:369–374, 1993.
[Shelah, 1994a] S. Shelah.
Cardinal Arithmetic, volume 29 of Oxford Logic Guides.
Oxford
University Press, New York, 1994.
[Shelah, 1994b] S. Shelah. Cardinalities of topologies with small base. Annals Pure and Applied
Logic, 68, 1994.
[Shelah, 1997] S. Shelah. The pcf-theorem revisited. In R. L. Graham and J. Nesetril, editors,
The Mathematics of Paul Erd˝os, II, pages 420–459. Springer, Berlin, 1997.
[Shelah, 1998] S. Shelah. A polarized partition relation and failure of GCH at singular strong
limit. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 155:153–160, 1998.
[Shelah, 2000a] S. Shelah. Cellularity of free products of Boolean algebras (or topologies). Fun-
damenta Mathematicae, 166:153–208, 2000.
[Shelah, 2000b] S. Shelah. The Generalized Continuum Hypothesis revisited. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 116:285–321, 2000.
[Sierpi´nski, 1934] W. Sierpi´nski. Hypoth`ese du Continu, volume 4 of Monograﬁe Matematyczne.
Warsaw, 1934. Second, revised edition, Chelsea, New York 1956.
[Steprans, 2012] J. Steprans. History of the continuum in the 20th century, 2012. this volume.
[Ulam, 1930] S. Ulam. Zur Masstheorie in der allgemeinen Mengenlehre. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae, pages 140–150, 1930.
[Viale, 2006] M. Viale. The Proper Forcing Axiom and the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis. The
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 71:473–479, 2006.

558
Menachem Kojman
[Zermelo, 1904] E. Zermelo. Beweis, dass jede Menge wohlgordnet werden kann. Mathematische
Annalen, 59:514–516, 1904.
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. I. Mathe-
matische Annalen, 65:261–281, 1908.

ALTERNATIVE SET THEORIES
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
1
INTRODUCTION
The one thing that all alternative set theories have in common is the fact that they
are alternatives to ZF or ZFC. They are not what the biologists call monophyletic
nor do they form what the philosophers call a natural kind. Nor for that matter
is there anything alternative about them in the vulgar sense: people who study
alternative set theory are no more New Age or eco-friendly than any other kind
of set theorist. What unites alternative set theories is what they are not. To this
end the treatments of the alternative set theories will potter oﬀinto their little
separate corners at the earliest opportunity.
The diversity of set-theoretic systems that have been considered since the dis-
covery of the paradoxes is either unrecognized or disregarded. For one system has
always overshadowed the others: Zermelo’s and its variants, notably ZF, which
is now the presumed referent of the phrase “axiomatic set theory”. And this is
perfectly understandable since—as well as providing a natural foundational frame-
work for ordinary mathematics—no other system has proved to be more appro-
priate for investigating questions about inﬁnity, which—after all—was the original
motivation for Cantor’s work.
Yet sets are abstract objects, and therefore subject to mathematical abstraction
and generalization. Thus, as happened with the concept of number, it was to be
expected that mathematical constructions, as algebraic, topological, or more gen-
erally categorical ones, would be used to extend the concept of set in one way or
another. One often cites standard algebraic constructions in the theory of ﬁelds as
inspiring the usual model-theoretic techniques for proving relative consistency and
independence results in ZF. But a more signiﬁcant example can be found in [Bar-
wise and Moss, 1996], where the move from the integers to the rationals is used to
motivate the enrichment of the ordinary well-founded universe of sets by so-called
“hypersets”, which provides solutions to certain reﬂexive set-theoretic equations.
At least, the independence of the Axiom of Foundation and subsequently the con-
sistency of anti-foundation axioms, discussed in [Aczel, 1988], have shown that the
iterative conception of sets cannot be regarded as the sole motivation for ZF-like
axiomatizations of set theory, and a fortiori as the sole method of avoidance of the
paradoxes.1
1But see the discussion below of the realization of something like the cumulative hierarchy
(and so of the iterative conception) in theories with anti-foundation axioms.
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

560
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Arguably, what characterizes ZF-like axiomatizations then is the principle of
specialized comprehension, cited in [Church, 1974], according to which “we seek
axioms which are special cases of the general comprehension axiom and which
promise to maintain consistency while at the same time being adequate for a large
variety of mathematical purposes”. In the systems we are going to review the
selection of admissible instances of comprehension is not guided by mathematical
purposes, whatever they are, but is essentially of a logico-syntactic nature in order
to block the paradoxes.
One famous example of such systems is Quine’s “New Foundations” [Quine,
1937]. This belongs to the respectable category of type-theoretic approaches, which
make use of syntactical criteria to prohibit circularity in deﬁnitions — as typically
in the instance of comprehension leading to Russell’s paradox, i.e., {x | ¬(x ∈x)}.
A section on type theory is provided to support the discussion of New Foundations.
Another logico-syntactic device which can be used in a type-free setting to
eradicate Russell’s paradox is to proscribe negation in formulas deﬁning sets, or at
least to tamper with its use. Systems following that prescription will be referred
to as positive set theory. A section below gives the reader an overview of such
systems, in connection with the general topic of topological set theory. Although
the subject would also encompass systems based on certain non-classical logics,
these are not going to be discussed in this chapter. A historical account of positive
set theory from that perspective can be found in [Libert, 2004].
Nor are we going to discuss set theories motivated by the application of intu-
itionistic logic. This is not because we do not consider these theories interesting,
but because they introduce a new level of complexity which would make this chap-
ter much longer.
We will brieﬂy cover simple type theory [Wang, 1970] and Zermelo set theory
[Zermelo, 1908], which are not strictly speaking alternative set theories (type the-
ory is not precisely set theory and Zermelo set theory is not precisely “alternative”,
as it is the original version of ZFC: but we do present a version of Zermelo set
theory which qualiﬁes as an alternative set theory). We will discuss theories with
proper classes: VGB set theory [G¨odel, 1940] and Kelley-Morse set theory [Kelley,
1976] are very close to ZFC; Ackermann set theory [Levy, 1959] appears quite
distant in its motivation from ZFC but turns out to be almost the same theory.
We then discuss a further class of theories which are quite close to ZFC, in which
the Axiom of Extensionalityis weakened to allow atoms or in which the Axiom of
Foundation is negated.
The next section takes us farther from the familiar. New Foundations [Quine,
1937] and the known-to-be consistent theories allied with it are motivated by simple
type theory rather than Zermelo set theory and superﬁcially look very diﬀerent
from the usual set theory. Some of the consistent fragments remain alien to ZFC
on closer inspection, but the most mathematically ﬂuent system of this kind, NFU
(Jensen’s modiﬁcation of NF to allow urelements in [Jensen, 1969]) turns out to
be quite closely related to the usual set theory in a way we will describe.
We then discuss positive set theories. The most mathematically ﬂuent system

Alternative Set Theories
561
of positive set theory is the system GPK+
∞deﬁned by Olivier Esser [Esser, 1999],
which is based on earlier work on positive comprehension and “hyperuniverses”
in which Marco Forti is prominent (see [Forti and Honsell, 1996b]). This system
is elegant, superﬁcially diﬀerent from standard set theory but underneath deeply
related to a powerful extension of ZFC, and surprisingly strong: its model theory
takes us into the domain of large cardinalsof moderate strength (this is also true
of the higher reaches of the model theory of natural extensions of NFU, but in
the case of Esser’s theory one is involved with large cardinals from the outset).
Esser’s set theory and earlier related systems of Forti and others have topological
motivation, and these theories might be called topological set theories.
We discuss a pair of set theories motivated by the surprising application of
model theory to analysis subsumed under the term “nonstandard analysis”. One
of these, Nelson’s IST [Nelson, 1977], is a deliberate adaptation of ZFC to sup-
port nonstandard analysis. The other, Vopˇenka’s “alternative set theory” or AST
[Vopˇenka, 1979], is more sui generis, and diﬀers more fundamentally in its outlook
from ordinary set theory: it is mathematically interesting though as a set theory
it is rather weak.
Finally, we discuss two curiosities. The ﬁrst one honestly exhibits a characteris-
tic which has been ascribed by philosophers to all systems of set theory (incorrectly,
we believe). The double extension set theory of Andrzej Kisielewicz [1998] is a fas-
cinating and bizarre system of set theory which is frankly an ad hoc solution to the
paradoxes. Appropriately, we do not yet know whether this system is consistent.
It is at least as strong as ZFC, for reasons which seem to resemble those which
make the Ackermann set theory as strong as ZFC.
The other curiosity is the theory obtained by adjoining the existence of an ele-
mentary embedding j : V →V to Zermelo set theory with the Rank Axiom, which
has been studied by Paul Corazza [2000]. The existence of such an embedding is
inconsistent with ZFC (though it is not known to be inconsistent with ZF), and
this extension of Zermelo set theory is not a weak theory but is in fact one of the
strongest set theories ever proposed.
Zermelo set theory (ﬁrst proposed in [Zermelo, 1908]) was not in our view mo-
tivated by an ad hoc attempt to resolve the paradoxes. Zermelo appears to have
catalogued constructions in set theory which had actual applications in mathemat-
ical reasoning and which were required to implement his proof that the Axiom of
Choice implies the well-ordering theorem. The motivation of simple type theory
seems to us to be similar (though more motivated by logical considerations than by
mathematical practice): its history is enormously complicated (see [Wang, 1970]).
New Foundations ([Quine, 1937], hereinafter NF) does seem to have started out
as an ad hoc attempt to further simplify “simple type theory” to eliminate the
annoyance of type indices: but the simpliﬁcation which motivates New Founda-
tions is mathematically very appealing and the fact that almost any reasonable
weakening of NF seems to give a demonstrably consistent theory suggests that
Quine was onto something. Positive set theory appears to have an elegant topo-
logical motivation. A ﬁnal point is that most of these set theories, diﬀerent as

562
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
they appear to be from one another, seem to converge on the same picture of the
world of set theory, though there are some interesting byways.
2
THE BASICS: TYPE THEORY AND THE ORIGINAL THEORY OF
ZERMELO
In this section we describe two systems which are not “alternative”: they are
standard theories. These are simple type theory (in a streamlined form—not the
complex theory of Principia Mathematica [Whitehead and Russell, 1910-13] but
the much simpler system whose evolution is described in [Wang, 1970]) and the
original set theory of Zermelo [1908], which diﬀers in some ways from its ﬁnal
modern development.
2.1
Simple type theory
The simple type theory TST is a ﬁrst-order many-sorted theory with equality and
membership as primitive relations. The sorts, called “types” are indexed by the
natural numbers 0, 1, 2 . . .. Atomic formulas are well-formed if they take one of
the forms xn = yn or xn ∈yn+1, where the superscript indicates the type of the
variable.
The intuition is that type 0 is inhabited by some objects of an unspeciﬁed nature
called “individuals”, type 1 is inhabited by sets of individuals, type 2 is inhabited
by sets of sets of individuals, and so forth; in general type n + 1 is inhabited by
sets of type n objects.
There are two axiom schemes which make up the core of the theory and two fur-
ther axiom schemes which are usually assumed. We advocate the use of variables
without explicit type superscripts in this system, in situations where the types
assigned can be deduced from the context or in which any types for the variables
compatible with the syntax will work, but we will sometimes give explicit type
indices for clarity.
Axiom of Extensionality: (∀AB.A = B ↔(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B)). Objects of
any positive type are equal iﬀthey have the same elements.
Axiom of Comprehension: For any formula φ in which A does not appear free,
(∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)). Any condition on objects of a given type deﬁnes a set
of the next higher type.
Deﬁnition: For any formula φ in which An+1 does not appear free, {xn | φ}n+1
is deﬁned as the unique An+1 such that (∀xn.xn ∈An+1 ↔φ) (which exists
by Comprehension and is unique by Extensionality).
Note that in the statement of the axiom schemes we do not assign types explic-
itly to the variables: any assignment of types which works will give an instance of
the scheme.

Alternative Set Theories
563
We deﬁne V n+1 as {xn | xn = xn}n+1 and ∅n+1 as {xn | xn ̸= xn}n+1. We
deﬁne {xn, yn}n+1 as {zn | zn = xn ∨zn = yn}n+1. Type indices may be omitted.
Ordered pairs can be deﬁned using the usual Kuratowski deﬁnition (x, y) =
{{x}, {x, y}}, and relations and functions can then be deﬁned as usual.
It is
unfortunate that in the notation x R y the type of R is 3 higher than that of x or
y, and similarly the type of f is three higher than that of x in the notation f(x);
there is a way to change this displacement to the more natural 1 (by developing
an ordered pair which is of the same type as its projections) but that development
would take us a bit far aﬁeld.
We deﬁne 0 as {∅}: note that we can assign any type ≥2 to this object, and
in fact we deﬁne 0 in each type at or above 2. For each set A, deﬁne A + 1 as
{a ∪{x} | a ∈A ∧x ̸∈a}. A + 1 is the set of all objects obtained by adding a
single new element to an element of A. Now 0+1 is the set of all one-element sets,
which we call 1, and 1+1 is the set of all two-element sets, which we call 2, and so
forth. We deﬁne N, the set of natural numbers, as the intersection of all sets which
contain 0 and are closed under the extended “successor” operation. Notice that a
version of each natural number is deﬁned in each type with index ≥2, and a set
N is deﬁned in each type with index ≥3. The elements of the natural numbers
are the ﬁnite sets: we deﬁne the set F of ﬁnite sets as S N.
We can now assert the remaining axioms usually assumed in TST.
Axiom of Inﬁnity: V n+1 ̸∈Fn+2. The universe (of objects of a given type) is
not a ﬁnite set.
Axiom of Choice: Any pairwise disjoint collection of nonempty sets (of a given
type) has a choice set (of the next lower type).
This theory ﬁgures in our discussion here primarily as the basis for the devel-
opment of New Foundations and related theories, but there are other interesting
relationships between TST and other alternative set theories.
This theory has been described carelessly as the simple type theory of Russell,
but this is historically inaccurate. Russell had something like this in mind in the
Appendix to Principles of Mathematics [Russell, 1903] though even there this is
not clear. In the formalization of Principia Mathematica (hereinafter PM, [White-
head and Russell, 1910-13]) Whitehead and Russell were hampered by the lack of
a set-theoretical deﬁnition of ordered pair. They knew that relations were sets
of ordered pairs, but they had no set-based notion of ordered pair, so in fact in
PM they deﬁned ordered pairs as a sort of relation! The type system of PM con-
tains types of n-ary relations over each ﬁnite sequence of previously deﬁned types,
which makes it quite complex: it is further complicated by predicativity restric-
tions which motivate the further subdivision of types into “orders”. Ramsey [1926]
pointed out that the Axiom of Reducibility renders the orders redundant, and so
they should simply be dropped. Norbert Wiener [1914] gave the ﬁrst set-theoretical
deﬁnition of ordered pair, deﬁning (x, y) as {{{x}, ∅}, {{y}}}, a deﬁnition which
has certain formal merits. He pointed out that this made it possible to collapse

564
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
the complex type system of relations of PM to a simple linear hierarchy of set
types. Hao Wang [1970] has an interesting discussion of the history of simple type
theory which suggests that this kind of theory was actually ﬁrst described in detail
around 1930.
Whitehead and Russell were aware of the ambiguity of the notation (what com-
puter scientists call “polymorphism”) which tempts us to omit explicit type indices:
they called it “systematic ambiguity” in PM and took advantage of it in the same
way to avoid giving explicit indications of type in his much more complex type
system. (In fact, oddly, PM does not have a notation for types).
2.2
The original system of Zermelo
The axioms of Zermelo’s original theory of [1908] are presented. The content is pre-
sented (this is not a literal translation). Familiarity with common set-theoretical
notation is assumed.
Axiom of Extensionality: If every element of a set A is also an element of B
and vice versa, then A = B.
Axiom of Elementary Sets: ∅exists; for any object x, {x} exists; for any ob-
jects x and y, {x, y} exists.
Axiom of Separation: If P(x) is a proposition with a deﬁnite truth-value for
each x ∈M, {x ∈M | P(x)} exists.
Power Set Axiom: For every set A, the power set P(A), the set of all subsets
of A, exists.
Union Axiom: For any set A, the union S A, the set of all elements of elements
of A, exists.
Axiom of Choice: Any pairwise disjoint collection of nonempty sets has a choice
set.
Axiom of Inﬁnity: There is a set Z such that ∅∈Z and for each x ∈Z,
{x} ∈Z.
The Axiom of Extensionality is phrased in a way which allows non-set elements
of the domain of discourse (objects with no elements distinct from one another
and from the empty set, which are often called atoms or urelements). In modern
theories, it is usually assumed that every object is a set.
The Axiom of Elementary Sets is usually replaced with the Axiom of Pairing,
which asserts the existence of {x, y} for any objects x and y. The existence of ∅
follows from Separation and the existence of any speciﬁc set (such as the one given
in Inﬁnity). It is a more modern observation that the existence of {x} = {x, x} is
a special case of pairing.

Alternative Set Theories
565
Zermelo did not have the modern formulation of the conditions in the Axiom
of Separation in terms of formulas of the ﬁrst-order language of set theory, and
apparently when he saw this formulation he did not like it: he believed that it was
too restrictive. The true formulation of Zermelo’s intentions may be second-order.
The Axiom of Choice takes a modern form.
It is interesting that Zermelo
proves his theorem that the well-ordering principle follows from choice in his [1908],
without having the ability to express ordered pairs as sets (which was present in
this theory of course, but ﬁrst recognized by Norbert Wiener [1914]).
The Axiom of Inﬁnity diﬀers from its usual modern form which asserts the
existence of a set which contains ∅and is closed under the von Neumann successor
operation x 7→x∪{x}. A diﬀerent deﬁnition of the natural numbers is the reason:
Zermelo deﬁnes the natural numbers as the iterated singletons of the empty set.
It is an interesting fact that though the mathematical eﬀect of either axiom of
inﬁnity is the same, these axioms are not equivalent in the presence of the other
axioms of Zermelo set theory: neither one implies the other. They have the same
consistency strength: each theory can interpret the other.
The two axioms of
inﬁnity are equivalent in the presence of the very powerful Axiom of Replacement;
they are also equivalent in the presence of a weaker axiom which asserts that each
object belongs to some rank of the cumulative hierarchy.
The Axiom of Foundation is absent from Zermelo’s original theory though it
often appears in modern lists of axioms for Zermelo set theory.
Axiom of Foundation: For any non-empty set x, there is a y ∈x such that
y ∩x = ∅.
This axiom asserts that the membership relation restricted to any set is a well-
founded relation. It rules out such things as self-membered sets. This is a con-
sequence of the view that the world of set theory is constructed by the iterated
application of the power set operation to an initial collection (the empty set or
perhaps a set of atoms) through stages indexed by the ordinals. We will see be-
low that variations of ZFC have been studied whose distinctive feature is that
Foundation is omitted and replaced with principles which ﬂatly contradict it.
This subsection introduces the original system of Zermelo, but does not aim
to correct common usage: “Zermelo set theory” in the sequel will refer to the
theory with the von Neumann form of the Axiom of Inﬁnity and with the Axiom
of Foundation.
For reference we include a statement of the ﬁnal axiom scheme which turns
Zermelo set theory (in either form) to the usual set theory ZFC:
Axiom of Replacement: If a is a set and φ is a formula such that we can prove
(∀x.(∃!y.φ)), then {y | (∃x ∈a.φ)} is a set.
2.3
The relationship between these systems. Mac Lane set theory
The simple theory of types and Zermelo set theory appear superﬁcially to live at
the same level of strength. Both of them can talk about an inﬁnite set (type 0

566
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
for TST, the set provided by Inﬁnity for Zermelo) and its iterated power sets.
Each theory proves the existence of the cardinals ℵn for each n but cannot prove
the existence of ℵω. But Zermelo set theory is stronger: Kemeny proved in his
PhD thesis [1950] (which was never published) that Zermelo set theory proves the
consistency of TST.
The source of strength in Zermelo set theory is the ability to quantify over
the entire universe in instances of Separation. The variant of Zermelo set theory
in which Separation is restricted to ∆0 formulas (those in which every quantiﬁer
is bounded in a set) [with the von Neumann form of Inﬁnity and the Axiom of
Foundation] is known as Mac Lane set theory (because it was advocated as a
foundational system by Saunders Mac Lane [1986]), and Mac Lane set theory is
demonstrably mutually interpretable with TST.
Adrian Mathias has written a beautiful survey of relations between Mac Lane
set theory, Zermelo set theory, and some other systems, found in [Mathias, 2001a],
[Mathias, 2001b].
2.4
Mac Lane or Zermelo set theory as an alternative set theory
As witnessed by the program of Mac Lane mentioned above, Zermelo set theory
or variants of Zermelo set theory have been pressed into service themselves as
alternative set theories, presumably by workers nervous about the high consistency
strength of ZFC.
One is then faced with the problem that the implementations of cardinal and
ordinal numbers traditional in ZFC do not work in Zermelo set theory. Cardinals
are implemented as initial ordinals, so we need only consider the ordinals. And here
we have a serious problem. Zermelo set theory with the modern form of Inﬁnity
proves the existence of the von Neumann ordinals 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . ω, ω+1, ω+2, ω+3 . . .
but not of ω · 2.
But these theories prove the existence of much longer well-
orderings.
An elegant solution is obtained by adding the Axiom of Foundation (or re-
stricting our attention to well-founded sets), and further stipulating that every
set belongs to a rank of the cumulative hierarchy. It is then possible to deﬁne
the cardinality of a set A as the set of all sets B which are equinumerous with
A and of the lowest rank which contains such sets, and deﬁne the order type of
a well-ordering ≤as the set of all well-orderings similar to ≤and of the lowest
rank which contains such well-orderings (notice that we no longer identify cardi-
nals with initial ordinals if we use these implementations). This is called “Scott’s
trick”, introduced in [Scott, 1955].
It remains to explain how to stipulate that every set belongs to a rank of the
cumulative hierarchy.
Deﬁnition: A set H is a subhierarchy iﬀH is well-ordered by inclusion, S I ∈H
for each I ⊆H, and for any x ∈H other than S H, the minimal element of
H properly including x is P(x). A set r is a rank iﬀthere is a subhierarchy
H such that r ∈H.

Alternative Set Theories
567
Axiom of Rank: For every set x there is a rank r such that x ∈r.
Theorem: For any subhierarchies H1 and H2, either H1 ⊆H2 or H2 ⊆H1.
Proof: Omitted.
Corollary: Ranks are well-ordered by inclusion (all ranks, not just the ones in
any given subhierarchy).
Deﬁnition: For any set x, the rank of x is the minimal rank which contains x as
a subset.
Deﬁnition: For any set A, |A| ≡def {B ∈rA | B ∼A} where rA is the minimal
rank which contains a set equinumerous with A. A cardinal number is a set
|A|.
Deﬁnition: For any well-ordering W let rW be the minimal rank which contains
a well-ordering isomorphic to W. Deﬁne ot(W) as {W ′ ∈rW | W ≈W ′}.
An ordinal number is a set of the form ot(W).
Deﬁnition: For any ordinal α, Vα is the rank (if there is one) such that the order
type of the inclusion order on the ranks properly included in α is α.
It is further interesting to observe that the following axioms suﬃce to present
this extension of Zermelo (or Mac Lane) set theory.
Axiom of Extensionality: Sets with the same elements are the same.
Axiom of (Bounded) Separation: For any set A and (∆0) formula φ in which
B is not free, (∃B.x ∈B ↔x ∈A ∧φ).
Axiom of Power Set: For any set A, there is a set P(A) whose members are
exactly the subsets of A.
Axiom of Rank: Every set belongs to some rank.
Axiom of Inﬁnity: The von Neumann ordinal ω exists. [it is equivalent to as-
sume the existence of the set of Zermelo natural numbers in this context.]
Axiom of Choice: Any pairwise disjoint collection of nonempty sets has a choice
set.
The axioms of Pairing and Union in the original Zermelo axiom set turn out
to be redundant. If x and y belong to ranks rx and ry, {x, y} = {z ∈rx ∪ry |
z = x ∨z = y}, where rx ∪ry is a set because it is the larger of the two ranks.
If x belongs to the rank rx, S x = {y ∈rx | (∃z.y ∈z ∧z ∈x)}. The Axiom of
Foundation follows quite directly from the Axiom of Rank as well.
A book-length development of set theory in this style is given by Michael Potter
[2004]. The Axiom of Rank adds no essential strength to Zermelo or MacLane set
theory: see [Mathias, 2001a].

568
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
For reference and comparison, we give the familiar deﬁnition of ordinal usual in
ZFC, originally due to von Neumann.
Deﬁnition: A set A is transitive iﬀfor all x, y, x ∈y ∧y ∈A implies x ∈A. This
admits the equivalent formulations S A ⊆A and A ⊆P(A).
Deﬁnition: A (von Neumann) ordinal is a transitive set α which is strictly well-
ordered by the membership relation.
Deﬁnition: The (von Neumann) order type of a well-ordering ≤is the unique
(von Neumann) ordinal α such that ≤is isomorphic to the inclusion order
on α.
The Axiom of Replacement suﬃces to prove that every well-ordering has a von
Neumann order type. This is not a theorem of Zermelo set theory (or any of the
related theories of similar strength that we have described).
3
THEORIES WITH CLASSES
3.1
General considerations
In any version of set theory, we ﬁnd ourselves wanting to talk about collections
which are not sets as if they were sets. It is easy to see that in a certain sense such
talk is harmless: if (M, E) is a model of set theory, we could add P(M) (the true
power set of M) as a new domain, and add the membership relation of elements
of M in elements of P(M) to obtain a theory with signature
(M, P(M), E, ∈∩(M × P(M))),
then ﬁnally identify each preimage of an element of M under E with that element
of M and collapse E and ∈∩(M × P(M) into a single relation appropriately. Of
course this requires some strength in the metatheory, but not very much.
In such an extended theory, the domain of the original theory is deﬁnable as
the collection of elements. In the family of theories with classes that we give ﬁrst,
general objects are called classes and objects which are elements of classes are
called sets. The primitive relations of the theory are equality and membership as
usual.
We give the following
Deﬁnition: set(x) ≡(∃Y.x ∈Y ): a set is a class which is an element of some
class.
Convention: We use upper case letters for general variables and lower case letters
for variables restricted to the sets.
Any theory of this kind has two characteristic axioms as preamble.

Alternative Set Theories
569
Axiom of Extensionality: (∀AB.A = B ↔(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B))
Axiom of {Predicative} Class Comprehension: Where φ is a formula {in
which all quantiﬁers are restricted to the domain of sets} in which A does
not appear free, (∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)). Note the use of the variable case
convention here: if we were to assume that variables ranged over all classes,
this would be (∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔set(x) ∧φ)).
Deﬁnition: The object A such that (∀x.x ∈A ↔φ) (where A is not free in φ) is
denoted by {x | φ}.
The diﬀerences between predicative and impredicative class comprehension will
be brought out in the next subsection. The motivating discussion above suggests
that any set theory can be extended to a theory of classes with extensionality and
full class comprehension. Thus impredicative class comprehension as such adds no
additional strength to a set theory, but it does add considerable expressive power.
3.2
Von Neumann-G¨odel-Bernays and Kelley-Morse set theory
Two theories with sets and classes are given here. The theory of sets in each ex-
tends ZFC. The ﬁrst theory, called VGB (von Neumann-G¨odel-Bernays set theory
— [G¨odel, 1940] is a reference) is a conservative extension of ZFC: it proves noth-
ing about sets that ZFC does not. This theory was originally proposed by von
Neumann [1925] but as a theory of functions rather than sets. We give our own
presentation of a theory with the same mathematical force.
Notice that if x and y are sets, the existence of {x, y}, S x, P(x) (understood as
the collection of subsets of x) follows from Class Comprehension: the additional
axioms corresponding to the axioms of Pairing, Union, and Power Set assert that
these classes are sets.
Axiom of Extensionality: as above
Axiom of Predicative Class Comprehension: as above
Axiom of Separation: Every subclass of a set is a set.
Axiom of Power Set: for any set x, P(x) is a set.
Axiom of Set Union: for any set x, S x is a set.
Axiom of Inﬁnity: There is a set which contains ∅and contains x ∪{x} if it
contains x, for any set x.
Axiom of Limitation of Size: A class C is not a set iﬀthere is a class bijection
from the class V of all sets to C.
Axiom of Foundation: For any non-empty set x, there is an element y of x such
that x ∩y = ∅.

570
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Many of the axioms of ZFC (or even of Zermelo set theory) may seem to be
missing here, but this is not the case.
The Axiom of Inﬁnity implies that there are at least three distinct sets (say
the von Neumann numerals 0, 1, 2) so there cannot be a bijection between a class
{x, y} and the universe, so {x, y} must be a set so Pairing holds. Since Pairing
holds, ordered pairs of sets are sets, and so every logical relation on sets is realized
by a class of ordered pairs.
The Axiom of Choice (in a strong form) follows from Limitation of Size (sur-
prise!). The class of von Neumann ordinals is not a set, so there is a class bijection
from the class of von Neumann ordinals to the class of all sets, which determines
a well-ordering of the universe in the obvious way. From any element of a collec-
tion of pairwise disjoint sets, select the least element with respect to this global
well-ordering: collect these least elements to build a choice set.
The Axiom of Replacement follows from Limitation of Size. Suppose a is a
set and (∀x ∈a.(∃!y.φ)).
The class B = {y | (∃x ∈a.φ)} exists as a class
by Class Comprehension. Note that B = F“a where F = {(x, y) | φ}. Deﬁne
F −1(b) as {a ∈A | F(a) = b}: notice that F −1 is an injection from B into P(a).
{F −1(b) | b ∈B} is a set because it is a subclass of P(a): if there were a class
bijection from V to B, there would be a class bijection from V to this set, which
contradicts Limitation of Size. Thus B is a set and Replacement holds.
If one wishes to avoid proving Choice, one can replace Limitation of Size with
the following weaker axiom:
Weak Limitation of Size: For any set a and class B, if there is a bijection from
a to B then B is a set.
It is straightforward to check that the derivation of Replacement above still
succeeds. In the presence of the other axioms and weak Limitation of Size, we can
deduce full Limitation of Size from a strong version of Choice (such as “there is
a class well-ordering of the universe of sets”) but not from weaker forms such as
“every pairwise disjoint set of sets has a choice set”.
The role of Limitation of Size in encapsulating the powerful axioms of Replace-
ment and Choice is one of the striking features of VGB class theory. The other
striking feature, found in all the original presentations, and obscured in our presen-
tation so far, is that VGB class theory is ﬁnitely axiomatizable, because the axiom
scheme of Predicative Class Comprehension can be replaced by ﬁnitely many of
its instances.
We present a reduction of Predicative Class Comprehension to ﬁnitely many
axioms. This proceeds by induction on the structure of formulas.
To handle classes in which the top level logical operator in the deﬁning formula
is propositional, note that
{x | φ ∧ψ} = {x | φ} ∩{x | ψ}
and
{x | ¬φ} = V −{x | φ},

Alternative Set Theories
571
and every propositional operator can be deﬁned in terms of conjunction and nega-
tion. So we stipulate that if A and B are classes, A ∩B and V \ A are classes.
We stipulate that for any sets x and y, {x, y} is a set and so (x, y) = {{x}, {x, y}}
is a set. We deﬁne (a1, a2, . . . , an) as (a1, (a2, . . . , an)). We stipulate that (x1) =
x1: a 1-tuple is its sole item.
We deﬁne π1 as {((x, y), x) | x = x} and π2 as {((x, y), y) | x = x}. We deﬁne
A|B for A and B classes as {(x, y) | (∃z.(x, z) ∈A ∧(z, y) ∈B)}. Note that if
f and g are functions in the usual sense, f ◦g = g|f. We stipulate that π1 is a
class, π2 is a class, and if A and B are classes, so is A|B. Note that each of the
sets πn
i = {((a1, . . . , ai, . . . , an), ai) | a1 = a1}, the function sending an n-tuple to
its ith element, is a class because constructible from the projection functions and
relative product, except for π1
1 = {(x, x) | x = x}, which we stipulate is a class.
For any class R we stipulate that dom(R) ≡{x | (∃y.(x, y) ∈R)} is a class and
R−1 ≡{(y, x) | (x, y) ∈R} is a class.
Deﬁne R⊗S as (R|π−1
1 )∩(S|π−1
2 ). Deﬁne R1⊗R2⊗. . .⊗Rn as R1⊗(R2⊗. . .⊗Rn)
(same grouping as for n-tuples).
Our strategy is ﬁrst to ﬁx a ﬁnite sequence of variables x1, . . . , xn and show
how to deﬁne {(x1, . . . , xn) | φ} for any formula in which no variable other than
the xi’s appears free.
We provide {(x1, x2) | x1 = x2} and {(x1, x2) | x1 ∈x2} as basic classes
(actually, we have already provided the former).
If we have already shown Xψ = {(b1, . . . bp) | ψ} to be a class, where all free
variables in ψ appear among the bi’s, then {(a1, . . . , an) | ψ(as1, . . . , asp)} can be
shown to exist using the constructions we have already deﬁned and one additional
construction. It is constructible as dom((πs1
n ⊗. . .⊗πsp
n )∩V ×Xψ), so we stipulate
that for any class X, V × X is a class (and for any classes X and Y , X × Y =
(V × X)−1 ∩(V × Y ) is thus a class).
If we have already shown Xφ = {(a1, . . . , an) | φ} to be a class, we construct
{(a1, . . . , an) | (∃ai.φ)} as dom(π1
n⊗. . .⊗πi−1
n
⊗(V ×V )⊗πi+1
n
⊗. . .⊗πn
n)∩(V ×Xφ).
Of course there are typographical variations of this if i = 1, i = n.
Now we show how to construct an arbitrary {x | φ}. Let x, x2, x3, . . . , xn be
all the variables free or bound in φ. Construct {(x, x2, . . . , xn) | φ}. For each
of the xi’s which is free in φ, intersect this class with (πi
n)−1“{xi} (R−1“A ≡
dom(R−1 ∩V × A); pairing implies the existence of singletons as sets and so as
classes). Finally, the domain of this intersection is {x | φ}.
We present the ﬁnite list of axioms which we have just shown to imply predica-
tive class comprehension.
boolean intersection: For any classes A and B, A ∩B = {x | x ∈A ∧x ∈B} is
a class.
complement: For any class A, V \ A = {x | x ̸∈A} is a class.
pairing: For any sets x and y, {x, y} = {z | z = x ∨z = y} is a set.
deﬁnition of ordered pair: (x, y) is deﬁned as {{x}, {x, y}}.

572
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
projections: π1 = {((x, y), x) | x = x} is a class. π2 = {((x, y), y) | x = x} is a
class.
relative product: For any classes R and S, R|S = {(x, y) | (∃z.(x, z) ∈R ∧
(z, y) ∈S)} is a class.
converse: For any class R, R−1 = {(y, x) | (x, y) ∈R} is a class.
domain: For any class R, dom(R) = {x | (∃y.(x, y) ∈R)} is a class.
primitive relations: {(x, x) | x = x} and {(x, y) | x ∈y} are classes.
cartesian product: for any classes A and B, A × B = {(a, b) | a ∈A ∧b ∈B}
is a class (we only used V × A in the construction above, but one might as
well provide the general construction).
Various ﬁnite sets of constructions have been given for this purpose. The prim-
itives here are basic operations of the algebras of sets and relations, and the ap-
proach is inspired by the work of Givant and Tarski in [Tarski and Givant, 1987], in
which they show that standard axioms for relation algebra augmented with basic
properties of projection operations are suﬃcient to interpret ﬁrst-order logic.
One can note here that our elimination of the Axiom of Pairing from the axioms
of VGB is undone when we “unpack” the predicative comprehension scheme, but
we are still correct that it is not needed in the presence of that scheme: what we
have apparently revealed is that it is a component of that scheme. It is unique
among those components in being a set existence principle rather than a class
existence principle.
Kelley-Morse set theory (see the appendix to Kelley’s [1976]) diﬀers from VGB
simply in having the full scheme of class comprehension instead of the predicative
scheme.
We can quantify over all classes in constructions of both classes and
sets in Kelley-Morse set theory. We remarked above that adding classes which
satisfy impredicative class comprehension to a set theory adds no real strength to
the theory, but impredicative class comprehension can be used here to prove the
existence of sets as well as classes, since any subclass of a set is a set and any class
which can be placed in a class one-to-one correspondence with a set is a set.
Kelley-Morse set theory is stronger than VGB in a very marked way: Kelley-
Morse set theory proves the consistency of VGB. Further, the class comprehension
scheme of Kelley-Morse set theory cannot be ﬁnitely axiomatized.
The signiﬁcant nature of the diﬀerence between VGB and Kelley-Morse set
theory is not at ﬁrst obvious. One way of seeing it is to observe that the classes
of VGB can be identiﬁed with formulas of the language of ZFC; we will explain in
what sense this is true and why it is not true of Kelley-Morse set theory.
If (M, E) is a model of ZFC, we show how to construct a model of VGB (with
the weak version of Limitation of Size) which satisﬁes exactly the same theorems.
A preclass is a formula with no variable other than x free in the language of ZFC
augmented with constants for each element of M. We deﬁne φ ∼ψ as holding iﬀ

Alternative Set Theories
573
(∀x.φ ↔ψ) holds in (M, E). We deﬁne a class as an equivalence class of preclasses
under ∼. We deﬁne [φ] E∗[ψ] as holding iﬀ(∃y.(∀x.x ∈y ↔φ) ∧ψ[y/x]). It is
straightforward to establish that the structure (C, E∗), where C is the set of classes,
satisﬁes VGB (with the weak form of Limitation of Size; if a global well-ordering
of the universe is added, we can get full Limitation of Size) and moreover satisﬁes
exactly the same sentences about sets as (M, E). This establishes that VGB (at
least the version with weak Limitation of Size) proves nothing about sets that is
not provable in ZFC.
We pause to observe that we can deﬁne ordered pairs of classes as classes. Let
σ be the function which sends each natural number to its successor and ﬁxes each
other object. For classes A and B, deﬁne (A, B) as σ“A ∪{0} × σ“B ∪{0}. From
a cartesian product of nonempty classes one can of course extract the ﬁrst and
second projections. This means that we can represent formulas with arbitrary
class parameters as classes in either VGB or Kelley-Morse set theory by a suitable
coding scheme. What we can do in Kelley-Morse set theory that we cannot do in
VGB is deﬁne satisfaction for formulas with no quantiﬁers over classes. In fact,
we can deﬁne the structure deﬁned in the previous paragraph over the universe of
sets and code every element of it (set or preclass) as a set, so we obtain a class
structure which is a model of VGB and we can prove the consistency of VGB. This
shows that Kelley-Morse set theory is essentially stronger than VGB.
3.3
Ackermann set theory
The set theory of Ackermann (see [Levy, 1959]) has sets and classes but not in
the same sense as VGB or Kelley-Morse. In the former theories, classes which
are not sets are not elements; in Ackermann set theory some non-set classes are
elements of other classes. The notion of set in Ackermann set theory is an inde-
pendent primitive notion not deﬁnable in terms of the usual primitives of equality
and membership: in fact, the whole thing works precisely because sethood is not
deﬁnable.
Ackermann set theory is a ﬁrst-order theory. General objects are called classes.
Primitive relations are equality and membership and there is a primitive unary
predicate of sethood.
Here are the ﬁve axioms of the theory.
Extensionality: Classes with the same elements are equal.
Class Comprehension: For any formula φ in which the variable A is not free,
(∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔set(x) ∧φ)).
Elements: Any element of a set is a set.
Subclasses: Any subclass of a set is a set.
Set Comprehension: Let φ be a formula in which the variable A is not free,
in which the predicate set does not occur, and in which all free variables

574
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
other than x denote sets, and suppose (∀x.φ →set(x)). Then (∃A.set(A) ∧
(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)).
We give the ﬂavor of this theory by doing some basic proofs.
Universe: There is a class V which contains exactly the sets as elements (this is
obvious from Class Comprehension).
Empty Set: ∅is a set. The formula x ̸= x satisﬁes the conditions of Set Com-
prehension vacuously.
Pairing: Suppose a and b are sets. Then {a, b} is a set.
Proof: The formula x = a ∨x = b, for any sets a and b, satisﬁes the conditions
of Set Comprehension: it does not mention set, the parameters a and b are
sets, and if it is true of x then x is a set.
Union: Suppose a is a set. Then (∃y.x ∈y ∧y ∈a) satisﬁes the conditions of Set
Comprehension. Note that if x ∈y and y ∈a, then y must be a set by the
Axiom of Elements (it belongs to the set a) and so x must also be a set (as
it belongs to the set y).
Power Set: Suppose a is a set. Then (∀y.y ∈x →y ∈a) satisﬁes the conditions
of Set Comprehension. If x satisﬁes this condition it is a set by the Axiom
of Subclasses.
Inﬁnity: There is a set which contains ∅as an element and is closed under the
operation x 7→x ∪{x}.
Proof: “x belongs to every class C such that ∅∈C and (∀X.X ∈C →
X ∪{X} ∈C)” is a formula which satisﬁes the conditions of Set Com-
prehension. Note that ∅is a set and for any set x, x ∪{x} is a set (by
applications of Pairing and Union proved above). This means that the class
V of all sets is a class with the desired closure conditions. This veriﬁes that
if x satisﬁes this condition then x ∈V so x is a set! Note that the condition
here quantiﬁes over all classes (in fact we cannot quantify over all sets in
an instance of Set Comprehension, because this would require us to mention
the set predicate).
Separation: If a is a set, {x ∈a | φ} is a set for any formula φ at all, by the
Axiom of Subclasses.
Transitive Closure: The transitive closure TC(A) of a set A, the intersection
of all transitive sets which contain A as a subset, is a set.
Proof: Let A be a set. Consider the formula “x belongs to every class C such that
A ∈C and for any x ∈C, S x ∈C”. Note that V has the closure property
in question, so this formula satisﬁed the requirements for Set Comprehension
and deﬁnes a set. The union of this set is a transitive set containing A as a
subset (and in fact is the minimal such set).

Alternative Set Theories
575
The proofs of Union and Power Set seem to be “set up” in advance by the
axioms of Elements and Subclasses, but the fact that we can prove Inﬁnity is a
surprise.
At this point we have shown that Ackermann set theory has the strength of
Zermelo set theory and so is adequate for classical mathematics.
We pause before considering how much stronger this theory might be to won-
der what the motivation of the theory might be. Suppose that sets are actual
(completed, deﬁnite) collections and classes are merely potential collections. The
collection of all sets is a merely potential collection (however many actual sets
we have constructed, we can construct some more). The class of all sets with a
given property is a potential collection (as we built more and more sets we may
add more objects to this class). An element of an actual collection is actual; a
subclass of an actual collection is actual. The tricky part (as always) is getting
one’s mind around the interpretation of Set Comprehension. A collection deﬁned
mentioning only actual parameters (and in particular not mentioning the merely
potential collection V of all sets) all of whose members turn out to be actual. . .is
actual. This is not to our minds entirely convincing, but it may be suggestive.
We now develop an argument for the proposition that the well-founded sets of
Ackermann set theory satisfy ZFC.
Deﬁnition: A hierarchy is a class which is well-ordered by inclusion, contains the
unions of all its subclasses as elements, and in which the immediate successor
of each element in the inclusion order (if it has one) is its power class. A
rank is a class which belongs to a hierarchy. (Note that this deﬁnition is
similar to the deﬁnition of subhierarchy in section 3.4, but note also that
there is a distinction between set and class here which is not drawn in the
earlier context).
Comments: A linear order is a well-ordering iﬀeach subclass of its domain has a
least element; since our class comprehension principles are apparently limited
to classes of sets this might mean less than it appears to mean once we get
past set ranks: we would not necessarily be able to carry out inductions on
non-set ranks because not all deﬁnable subcollections of arbitrary classes are
necessarily classes. The power class of a class is the class of all subclasses of
that class, if such a class exists.
Theorem: For any two hierarchies H1 and H2 which are classes of sets, either
H1 ⊆H2 or H2 ⊆H1.
Comment: We omit the proof of this result as we did with the similar result
stated in section 3.4: we note that the restriction to hierarchies of sets is
necessary because our comprehension principles are restricted.
Corollary: The set ranks are well-ordered by inclusion.
Deﬁnition: A good rank is a rank which is either included in or includes each other
rank, and such that the ranks included in it are well-ordered by inclusion.

576
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Theorem: The class of all ranked sets is a good rank.
Proof: Any hierarchy which contains all the set ranks will contain the class of all
ranked sets as an element: then every element of such a hierarchy (and so
every rank) will either be a set rank (and so be included in the class of all
ranked sets) or include the class of all ranked sets. A hierarchy which does
not contain all ranked sets will have its union a set rank, which is a subset
of the class of all ranked sets.
Theorem: The class of all ranked sets is not the maximal good rank in the in-
clusion order.
Proof: If it were, it would be a set by set comprehension, as it would be deﬁnable
without reference to the sethood predicate (as the maximal good rank in the
inclusion order) and all of its elements are sets (since it is the class of all
ranked sets). If the class of all ranked sets were a set, its power class would
also be a set, so it would itself be a ranked set, and an element of itself. It is
straightforward to establish by induction on inclusion that all set ranks are
non-self-membered.
Corollary: There are non-sets which are elements: any rank which properly in-
cludes the class of all ranked sets has the class of all ranked sets itself as an
element!
Theorem: Each of the axioms remains true if the term “ranked set” replaces the
term “set”.
Proof: Extensionality does not mention sethood at all. Any deﬁnable subclass of
the ranked sets is a class by Class Comprehension, so the modiﬁed version of
Class Comprehension holds. Any element of a ranked set is a ranked set: one
proves by induction on the inclusion order that all set ranks are transitive.
So the modiﬁed version of the Axiom of Elements holds. Any subclass of a
ranked set is a ranked set: if x is included in a set rank r, the power set of
x is included in the power set of r. So the modiﬁed version of the Axiom of
Subclasses holds. A class x which is deﬁned without reference to sethood,
with no parameters but ranked set parameters, and all of whose members
are ranked sets is a set by Set Comprehension. x is included as a subset in
a rank (the class of all ranked sets will serve). The ﬁrst rank which includes
x must be a set, because we just deﬁned it using only a set parameter, and
all of its elements are sets. Thus the modiﬁed version of Set Comprehension
holds.
Comment: We have just shown that we can without aﬀecting the strength of
the theory simply add the assertion that every set belongs to a rank as an
axiom.

Alternative Set Theories
577
Theorem: Let φ(x, y) be a formula containing only ranked set parameters which
does not mention the sethood predicate and which is functional (for every
ranked set x there is exactly one ranked set y such that φ(x, y)). Then for
any ranked set a, {y | (∃x ∈a.φ(x, y))} is a set.
Proof: This set exists by set comprehension, by inspection of its deﬁnition. There
is a rank which includes all of its elements, namely the class of all ranked
sets, and the minimal rank in the inclusion order which includes this set is
also a set by set comprehension, so it follows that this set is a ranked set.
Comment: This assertion looks like the Axiom of Replacement, but some deli-
cacy is required to show that the Axiom of Replacement holds for all for-
mulas. The diﬃculty is that the formula φ in an instance of Replacement
as directly translated from ZFC may contain quantiﬁers over all sets, which
would be quantiﬁers over the class of sets in Ackermann set theory, to which
set comprehension could not be applied. Nonetheless Replacement does hold.
The idea is to show that (∃x ∈V.φ(a1, . . . , an)) can be translated to a formula
not mentioning nonset parameters or the sethood predicate if φ is equivalent
to a formula not mentioning nonset parameters or the sethood predicate.
Deﬁne r(a1, . . . , an) as the least rank in the inclusion order which includes
an x such that φ(a1, . . . , an), if there is one, and otherwise the empty rank.
Note that this rank will be a set in any case.
(∃x ∈V.φ(a1, . . . , an)) is
equivalent to (∃x ∈r(a1, . . . , an).φ(a1, . . . , an)). By this technique we can
systematically eliminate quantiﬁers over the domain of all sets from formu-
las that meet the appropriate syntactical restrictions. We should now have
given at least a strong indication why the ﬁnal theorem holds. Full details
of the equivalence of Ackermann and ZF are found in [Reinhardt, 1970].
Theorem: The interpretation of the Axiom of Replacement (and, as we have
already seen, of all the other axioms of ZFC) holds on the domain of ranked
sets of Ackermann set theory.
The consistency of Ackermann set theory also follows from the consistency of
ZFC, in a way which reveals something about the nature of the domain of “sets”
in Ackermann set theory.
Augment the language of ZFC with an additional symbol M.
Provide ax-
ioms asserting that M is transitive and contains all subsets of its elements. For
each formula φ and variables x, y add an axiom to the eﬀect that (∀x.(∃y.φ)) ↔
(∀x ∈M.(∃y ∈M.φ)) (for all values of any parameters). Note that a corollary
of this is that (∀x.φ) ↔(∀x ∈M.φ) will be an axiom for any φ (use a dummy
variable y that does not appear in φ).
It is straightforward to show that any
ﬁnite collection of such axioms is consistent with ZFC. If (∀x.(∃y.φ)) holds, we
arrange for M to be closed under a suitable operation (applying replacement); if
(∀x.(∃y.φ)) does not hold, we arrange for M to include a counterexample (if φ
contains parameters, this is still a closure operation, as we need counterexamples
for all appropriate values of the parameters).

578
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
This extension of ZFC has a model if ZFC has a model. We claim that this is a
model of Ackermann set theory, with the sethood predicate taken as meaning “is
an element of M”. The only axiom which requires any attention is Set Compre-
hension. Let φ be a predicate not mentioning M with all parameters other than
x belonging to M. We may suppose without loss of generality that there is only
one parameter a ∈M. So we express the predicate as φ(x, a) and further suppose
that for any a ∈M, φ(x, a) is in M. Note that in our original model of ZFC it
will be the case for every a ∈M that {x | φ(x, a)} exists as a set in ZFC (it will
be in the power set of M), and so for every a ∈M there is a (dummy) b ∈M such
that {x | φ(x, a)} exists, and so for every a whatsoever, {x | φ(x, a)} exists. From
this it follows by a more natural application of the special axioms for M that for
each a ∈M, {x | φ(x, a)} ∈M, and this establishes that the interpretation of
Ackermann set theory’s Set Comprehension Axiom holds in the extended model
of ZFC.
It is worth noting that though externally M is a model of ZFC, the extended
model of ZFC does not necessarily think that M is a model of ZFC (after all, the
original model may not see any models of ZFC, in which case the extended model
will not see any either). In Ackermann set theory, the class V of all sets cannot
be shown to be a model of ZFC, though in some external sense it is, for similar
reasons.
3.4
A pocket set theory
This ﬁnal theory with classes is an expansion by one of the authors (Holmes) of
a suggestion of Rudy Rucker. It is the weakest set theory discussed so far in this
chapter. It is also very funny.
It is a folk observation that there are two sizes of inﬁnite sets which occur
in nature (that is, which occur naturally in mathematics outside of set theory).
These are ℵ0 and c, the cardinalities of the set of natural numbers and the set
of real numbers respectively. The theory under consideration here asserts that
these are the only inﬁnite cardinalities (the alternative set theory of Vopˇenka
has this consequence).
The very amusing aspect is that with carefully crafted
axiomatics the assertion that these are the only two inﬁnite cardinalities turns out
to be almost the entire theory, and the theory is strong enough to support most
classical mathematics.
Pocket set theory is a theory with sets and classes.
We have the usual ax-
ioms and deﬁnitions: this is a ﬁrst-order single sorted theory with equality and
membership as primitive relations.
Extensionality: (∀AB.A = B ↔(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B))
Deﬁnition: set(x) ≡(∃Y.x ∈Y )
Class Comprehension: For any formula φ and variable A not free in φ,
(∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔set(x) ∧φ)).

Alternative Set Theories
579
Deﬁnition: We deﬁne {x | φ} as the unique A (A not free in φ) such that
(∀x.x ∈A ↔set(x) ∧φ).
Deﬁnition: For any sets a and b, we deﬁne {a, b} as {x | x = a ∨x = b}. We
deﬁne {a, a} as {a}. We deﬁne (a, b) as {{a}, {a, b}}. Note that these are
strictly deﬁnitions: we do not as yet know that there are any sets at all, nor
have we assumed that an unordered pair of sets is itself a set.
Deﬁnition: A relation is a class of ordered pairs. For any relation R, we deﬁne
R−1 as {(y, x) | (x, y) ∈R} (if this class exists, which requires that (y, x) be
a set for each (x, y) ∈R). A relation is a function f such that (∀xyz.(x, y) ∈
f ∧(x, z) ∈f →y = z). A function f is a bijection iﬀf −1 exists and is
a function. We deﬁne dom(R) for any relation R as {x | (∃y.(x, y) ∈R)}.
We say that f is a bijection from A to B if f is a bijection, dom(f) = A
and dom(f −1) = B. Sets A and B are said to be the same size iﬀthere is a
bijection from A to B.
Now we give the axioms which provide the speciﬁc content of this theory (so
far we have just given the generic theory of sets and classes and some deﬁnitions).
Deﬁnition: A class C is inﬁnite iﬀthere is a bijection from C to some proper
subclass of C. A class C is proper if it is not a set.
Axiom of Inﬁnite Sets: There is an inﬁnite set. Any two inﬁnite sets are the
same size.
Axiom of Proper Classes: Any two proper classes are the same size, and any
class the same size as a proper class is proper.
These axioms assert that there are just two inﬁnite cardinalities for classes, the
cardinality of the inﬁnite sets and the cardinality of the proper classes.
This may not seem like a mathematically adequate set of axioms. But it is.
Deﬁnition: We ﬁx an inﬁnite set I. We deﬁne R as the class {x | x ̸∈x}, the
Russell class, which is demonstrably proper.
Theorem: The empty class is a set.
Proof: Note that ∅= {x | x ̸= x} does exist as a class by Class Comprehension.
Suppose that ∅is not a set and so is proper. It follows that ∅is the same size
as R, so R is empty from which it follows that every set is self-membered.
It follows further that {I} is a set (because it is certainly not the same size
as ∅) but also {I} ̸∈{I}, because I ̸= {I}, because {I} clearly is not the
same size as any of its proper subclasses, so it cannot be the inﬁnite I, so
{I} ∈R, which is a contradiction.
Theorem: For any set x, {x} is a set.

580
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Proof: Suppose otherwise. Then {x} is proper and must be the same size as R,
so R has just one element, which must be ∅as obviously ∅∈R. From this it
follows that {I, ∅} is a set (because both I and ∅are sets and there cannot
be a bijection from {I, ∅} to {x}), but neither I nor ∅can have exactly two
elements, so {I, ∅} ∈R, which is a contradiction.
Theorem: For any sets x and y, {x, y} is a set.
Proof: R contains ∅, {∅} and {{∅}}, so {x, y} cannot be the same size as R.
Corollary: (x, y) is a set for any sets x and y.
Theorem: For any formula φ(x, y), there is a class {(x, y) | φ(x, y)} which imple-
ments it. This makes it possible to demonstrate the existence of deﬁnable
bijections as classes (note that until this point we have never appealed to
the existence of speciﬁc bijections but only to the logical impossibility of the
existence of bijections between concrete ﬁnite sets of speciﬁc sizes).
Deﬁnition: A von Neumann ordinal is a transitive set which is strictly well-
ordered by the membership relation (where this means that every subclass
of a von Neumann ordinal has a membership-minimal element).
Theorem: The class of all von Neumann ordinals is strictly well-ordered by the
membership relation. The proof of this is standard, involved, and omitted.
Theorem: The class of all von Neumann ordinals is not a set.
Proof: This class is transitive and it is strictly well-ordered by membership. If it
were a set it would be a von Neumann ordinal and so self-membered and so
not strictly well-ordered by membership, which is a contradiction.
Theorem: If two classes are each the same size as a subclass of the other, then
they are the same size. This is the Cantor-Schr¨oder-Bernstein theorem and
the standard proof is omitted.
Theorem: The Axiom of Choice holds.
Proof: By Cantor-Schr¨oder-Bernstein, the universe V of all sets and R are the
same size (R is the same size as R ⊆V and V is the same size as
{{{x}, ∅} | x ∈V } ⊆R.)
R is the same size as the class of von Neumann ordinals. Thus the universe
is the same size as the class of von Neumann ordinals and a speciﬁc bijection
from V to the ordinals gives an ordinal indexing of the universe which induces
a well-ordering in the obvious way. A global well-ordering of the universe
obviously implies Choice: choose the least element in the well-ordering of
each element of a pairwise disjoint family of nonempty sets in order to get a
choice set.

Alternative Set Theories
581
Theorem: Each set is the same size as a von Neumann ordinal.
Proof: Each set is the same size as a set of von Neumann ordinals, which can be
mapped by an obvious recursion to an initial segment of the von Neumann
ordinals, which is itself a von Neumann ordinal, which will be a set because
it is in bijection with a set.
Theorem: There is an inﬁnite von Neumann ordinal.
Proof: The von Neumann ordinal which is the same size as I is inﬁnite.
Theorem: All inﬁnite von Neumann ordinals are the same size as the ﬁrst inﬁnite
von Neumann ordinal ω (that is, all inﬁnite ordinals are countably inﬁnite).
Proof: All inﬁnite sets are the same size.
Theorem: The class of all subsets of ω is not a set.
Proof: The standard argument for Cantor’s Theorem shows that ω is not the
same size as the class of its subsets. Since the class of all subsets of ω is
clearly inﬁnite, it cannot be a set, and so must be a proper class.
Construction: The usual constructions of integers, rational numbers, and real
numbers as Dedekind cuts in the rationals can be carried out. The set of
reals is the same size as the class of all sets of natural numbers for standard
reasons, and so is a proper class. Individual reals are countable collections
of rationals, thus sets.
Theorem: Each inﬁnite subclass of the class of real numbers is either the size of
the class of real numbers or countable. c = ℵ1.
Proof: The real numbers make up a proper class. An inﬁnite subclass of the reals
is either a set, in which case it is the same size as the inﬁnite set ω, or it
is a proper class, in which case it is the same size as the proper class of all
reals. The real numbers can be placed in one-to-one correspondence with
the countable ordinals, as both collections are proper classes.
Comment: The principle of Limitation of Size of the original class theories, which
appears here as the Axiom of Proper Classes, in this context allows us to
prove not only the “Axiom” of Choice (as in the original theories) but also
the Continuum Hypothesis! This theory is much weaker than the theory of
types (all objects it constructs appear by type 5 on the most uncharitable
interpretation of the capabilities of TST), but every mathematical object
needed in physics is constructible here. The collection of all functions from
the reals to the reals is too large, but notice that the collection of continuous
functions from the reals to the reals is of size c and can be represented
in fairly natural ways, and in general the constructions actually needed in
mathematical physics (or any mathematics short of set theory and shorn of

582
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
excessive levels of abstraction) do not transcend the cardinality c. Points
of Hilbert space are countable sequences of real numbers (thus sets) and
continuous functions on Hilbert space are representable just as continuous
functions on the reals are representable, and so forth.
4
THEORIES WITH ATOMS AND THEORIES WITH ANTI-FOUNDATION
AXIOMS
4.1
Weak extensionality and ZFA
Most modern set theories have sets (or more generally classes) as the only objects.
This is odd because originally sets were conceived as collections of other, previously
given objects. It has seemed less odd (at least to those who have completed their
indoctrination in foundations of mathematics) since we have adopted the view
that all mathematical objects are sets. It also aﬀords a logical simpliﬁcation of
the theories.
The usual form of the axiom of extensionality is
Axiom of Extensionality: (∀AB.A = B ↔(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B))
A more natural axiom from a na¨ıve standpoint would be
Weak Axiom of Extensionality: (∀AB.class(A) ∧class(B) →(A = B ↔
(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B)))
Here we restrict the scope of extensionality to classes (we say “class” here to
avoid collision with the notion of “sethood” found in the theories with sets and
classes above; below in NFU we will use “set” for this concept).
Further, it seems natural to assert that classes are the only things which have
elements:
Axiom of Classhood: (∀Ax.x ∈A →class(A))
The non-classes have no elements. These objects are generally called atoms or
urelements. There is (in most theories) an elementless class ∅as well (and it is
the only one). This observation about ∅indicates that, though we can formalize
theories with weak extensionality using a primitive notion of classhood there is no
need to do this.
Deﬁnition: class(x) ≡x = ∅∨(∃y.y ∈x)
This treatment applies equally well to theories with or without proper classes.
If no distinction is drawn between sets and classes, then the predicate class could
equally well be written set. In either case it is deﬁnable if we are willing to take ∅
as a primitive notion instead of the classhood (or sethood) predicate.

Alternative Set Theories
583
In most cases it is mathematically preferable to suppose that everything is a set
and adopt the strong form of extensionality. In the context of New Foundations
the adoption of strong extensionality has very strong consequences: the theory
NFU with weak extensionality is known to be consistent where the original theory
NF of Quine is not. This will be discussed below. In Kripke-Platek set theory (see
[Barwise, 1975]) it is found useful to have a variant KPU with urelements: this we
do not discuss at all here.
The theory (or theories) ZFA obtained by replacing Extensionality with Weak
Extensionality in the usual set theory ZFC have a notable practical application
which make them worthy of note as an alternative set theory.
These theories
support a relatively straightforward proof of the independence of the Axiom of
Choice from the other axioms of set theory [Fraenkel, 1922]. It is trickier to prove
the relative consistency of ¬AC with extensional ZF: this was not done until forcing
was developed by Cohen (and the proof owes something to the technique based in
ZFA).
We note that there are two diﬀerent sorts of ZFA, depending on whether the
atoms make up a set or a proper class. A very strong denial of Extensionality
would stipulate that every set is the same size as some set of atoms; a weaker
nonextensional theory would provide that the universe consisted of the union of
all the iterated power sets of a set A of atoms.
If we ﬁx an inﬁnite set of atoms A, we can consider the action of permutations on
A on all sets: if π is a permutation of A, there is a uniquely determined permutation
π∗acting on all sets such that π∗(a) = π(a) for a ∈A and π∗(B) = π∗“B for all sets
B (the existence of this uniquely determined permutation depends on Foundation).
We can then say that a set B has support S ⊆A iﬀevery permutation π∗ﬁxing
each element of A \ S also ﬁxes B. The punchline is that the class of all sets with
ﬁnite support in A satisﬁes all the axioms of ZFA except Choice: for certainly
A itself has ﬁnite support in A and no linear order of A has ﬁnite support in A
(much less any well-ordering of A). The demonstration that the other axioms of
ZFA hold in the domain of sets with ﬁnite support in A is technically involved and
beyond the scope of this chapter.
While there might seem to be philosophical advantages to providing many non-
classes with no elements (because it is a very sophisticated ontological perspective
indeed that would lead us to decide that everything is a set), the mathematical
advantage generally seems to be with stipulating that everything is a set, and
where we do ﬁnd mathematical applications for atoms they do not seem to have
anything to do with the pre-set-theoretical reasons for supposing that there are
such objects.
4.2
Aczel’s AFA
Nowadays when people use the phrase “anti-foundation axiom” it is almost always
to denote speciﬁcally the anti-foundation axiom of Forti and Honsell [Forti and
Honsell, 1983] rather than any of the other anti-foundation axioms that have

584
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
appeared from time to time. Broadly the common noun ‘anti-foundation axiom’
is used to refer to an axiom (scheme) which can be added to the axioms of ZF(C)
once the Axiom of Foundation has been dropped. Thus anti-foundation axioms are
alternative in the sense of being alternative to the axiom scheme of Foundation
once the other axioms of ZF have been agreed on. This is a diﬀerent sense of
‘alternative’ from the way in which NF or GPK+
∞are alternative.
Forti-Honsell’s axiom (which is called AFA by Peter Aczel in his [Aczel, 1988]) is
the most interesting and gives rise to the clearest mathematics, and this is probably
because of all the anti-foundation axioms it is that one which most clearly arises
from a sensible conception of what sets are. It arises from the idea that sets are
things denoted by set pictures.
Deﬁnition: The ﬁeld of a relation R is deﬁned as the union of its domain and
range. A pair (R, r) is a set picture iﬀR is a relation, r is an element of the
ﬁeld of R, and there is a map f with domain the ﬁeld of R with the property
that f(x) = {f(y) | y R x} for all x in the ﬁeld of R. We say further that
(R, r) is a set picture of f(r). There is no immediate reason that a set picture
should be a set picture of just one set (but this is the case in the ﬁrst theory
we consider).
In the usual set theory ZFC (or for that matter in ZF: choice is not an issue),
the question of what relations are set pictures is fully settled in a very simple way.
Theorem (ZFC): A pair (R, r) with r in the ﬁeld of R is a set picture iﬀthe
relation R is well-founded. Further it is the picture of a uniquely determined
set.
The Axiom of Foundation implies immediately that any set picture must be well-
founded, and the Mostowski Collapsing Lemma establishes that any well-founded
relation is actually a set picture of a uniquely determined set.
Now we change our attention to the theory ZFC– which is obtained by omitting
the Axiom of Foundation from ZFC. It now becomes conceivable that more general
relations R may be set pictures.
Consider the very simple example of a reﬂexive relation R with ﬁeld {r}. If
(R, r) is a set picture, there is a set which is its own sole element. Note that
nothing tells us that there cannot be many such sets if the possibility of one is
admitted: the same relation may be the picture of many diﬀerent sets.
It is a theorem of ZFC– that for each well-founded set picture (R, r) the set
of which it is a picture is uniquely determined, but this depends strongly on the
well-foundedness of R.
The axiom of Forti and Honsell which is called AFA by Aczel asserts this:
Axiom of Anti-Foundation: Each pair (R, r) with R a relation and r in the
ﬁeld of R is a set picture and the set picture of a uniquely determined set.

Alternative Set Theories
585
There are two things going on here: that every pair (R, r) is a set picture
says that the Axiom of Foundation fails in very elaborate ways (though not in
all possible ways as we will see); that each relation R is a set picture in only one
way amounts to a strong form of extensionality. There is a set which its own sole
element under AFA, but also there is exactly one such set.
At least one of the authors (Holmes) can testify that the appearance of Aczel’s
book which popularized this anti-foundation axiom caused a deal of philosophi-
cal excitement, as it seemed that the possibility of self-membered sets somehow
transcended the iterative conception of set. This excitement was ill-founded (the
author begs forgiveness for the pun): the relation of ZFC– + AFA to ZFC is in-
timate, and even in its own terms it reveals the stamp of the iterative conception
of set. The theory does have technical uses in avoiding certain inconveniences of
the universe of well-founded sets, but its philosophical diﬀerences from ZFC have
been overstated.
ZFC– + AFA is readily interpreted in ZFC. If we have two relations R and S in
ZFC we say that a relation b from the ﬁeld of R to the ﬁeld of S is a bisimulation
iﬀx b y iﬀfor each z R x there is w S y such that z b w and for each w S y there is
z R x such that z b w. The objects of our interpretation of ZFA will be pairs (R, r)
where R is a relation and r is an element of the ﬁeld of R. Two pairs (R, r) and
(S, s) are equivalent iﬀthere is a bisimulation from the ﬁeld of R to the ﬁeld of
an end extension of S which relates r to s (an end extension of S is a relation
including S under which elements of the ﬁeld of S have the same preimages they
have under S). We say that (R, r) E (S, s) iﬀ(R, r) is equivalent to some (S, t)
where t S s. E is the membership relation of our interpretation of ZFC– + AFA.
We will not present a proof that this works in the limited space of this chapter.
In terms of ZFC– + AFA, a version of the cumulative hierarchy is readily recov-
ered in spite of the ill-founded nature of the theory. The stages of this hierarchy
are indexed by the ordinals as is the usual hierarchy of ranks. H0 = {0, 1} (it will
clear in a moment why we cannot start with an empty rank). Once Hα is deﬁned,
we deﬁne Hα+1 as the collection of all sets which have set pictures R with ﬁeld a
subset of Hα. At limit stages, we take unions as in the usual hierarchy. Observe
for example that H1 contains three sets, the empty set and {∅} (pictured by the
usual order relation on {0, 1}), and the solitary object which is its own sole element
(pictured in any reﬂexive relation). It is straightforward to show that the power
set of Hα is included in Hα+2 (and in Hα+1 if α is inﬁnite) but of course each new
level of the hierarchy includes new sets deﬁned in non-well-founded ways. How-
ever, the novelty is quite constrained: Hα is the same size as Vα for each inﬁnite
ordinal α.
4.3
Boﬀa’s axiom
An anti-foundation axiom with eﬀects rather diﬀerent those of AFA was proposed
by Boﬀa [1972]. Aczel’s axiom allows relatively few non-well-founded objects be-
cause of its strong extensionality attributes (for example, it allows only one self-

586
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
singleton). Boﬀa’s axiom allows (speaking roughly) as many non-well-founded sets
as possible. For example, under ZFC– with Boﬀa’s anti-foundation axiom there is
a proper class of self-singletons.
Deﬁnition: A relation R is extensional iﬀeach element x of the range of R is
uniquely determined by its preimage R−1“{x}.
Deﬁnition: Let R be an extensional relation. A set-labelling of R is an injection
s with domain a subset of the ﬁeld of R with the property that if x is in the
domain of s then R−1“{x} is included in the domain of s and
s(x) = {s(y) | y R x}.
Boﬀa’s anti-foundation axiom: Any set-labelling of an extensional relation R
can be extended to a set-labelling of R (not necessarily unique) whose domain
is the entire ﬁeld of R.
So, for example, if we deﬁne a relation R on the domain N so that m R n iﬀ
either n = 0 or m = n > 0, we ﬁnd that under Aczel’s axiom this is a set picture
of the unique self-singleton, whereas under Boﬀa’s axiom we can extend the empty
set-labelling of this set to a total set-labelling of its range and discover that each
positive integer is sent to a self-singleton and 0 is sent to a countably inﬁnite
set of self-singletons. The same technique can be used to get as many distinct
self-singletons as we might want.
Boﬀa’s axiom is similarly motivated by the idea of sets as derived from set
pictures, but with leeway for many sets to be represented by the same picture,
and ZFC– with Boﬀa’s axiom admits a fairly straightforward relative consistency
proof from ZFC.
5
NEW FOUNDATIONS AND RELATED SYSTEMS
In this section we review the set theory “New Foundations” (NF) proposed by
W. v. O. Quine [1937] and related systems. This system is not so far known to
be consistent, and it was shown by Specker [1953] that it disproves the Axiom of
Choice (and so it proves Inﬁnity). However, there are several known subsystems of
NF which are known to be consistent (none of which reproduce Specker’s disproof
of Choice, though one of them does allow use of Specker’s argument to prove
Inﬁnity, as we will see below).
5.1
Stratiﬁed comprehension
New Foundations is a variant of TST rather than of Zermelo set theory, in spite of
the fact that it is an untyped set theory. The starting point for the development
of NF is the observation that TST enjoys a great deal of what Russell called “sys-
tematic ambiguity”, modern set theorists call “typical ambiguity”, and computer

Alternative Set Theories
587
scientists call “polymorphism”. For any sentence φ in the language of TST, deﬁne
φ+ as the sentence obtained by raising the type of each variable in φ by one. Note
that for any axiom φ, φ+ is also an axiom, and that for any rule of inference al-
lowing ψ to be deduced from χ, ψ+ can be deduced from χ+ using the same rule.
It follows from these considerations that for any formula φ, if φ is a theorem so is
φ+. If we associate with each variable x a speciﬁc variable x+ of the next higher
type, we can extend the deﬁnition of φ+ to all formulas. Note that each object
{x | φ} deﬁned by a set abstract has a precise analogue {x+ | φ+} in the next
higher type: for example the Frege natural number 3 deﬁned in type 2 (the set of
all type 1 sets with three elements) has a precise analogue in type 3 (the set of all
type 2 sets with three type 1 elements) and indeed in each higher type.
Quine’s suggestion is that this is an indication that the types need not actually
be diﬀerent.
He proposed that all the types might be the same domain: the
sentence φ says the same thing as the sentence φ+ and the object {x | φ} is the
same object as {x+ | φ+}: in our example, there is exactly one Frege natural
number 3 which is simply the set of all sets with three elements.
The axioms of Quine’s theory “New Foundations” (so called from the name of
the paper [Quine, 1937]) are the extensionality and comprehension axioms of TST
with all indications of type removed. The details follow.
NF is a ﬁrst-order single-sorted theory with equality and membership as prim-
itive relations.
Axiom of Extensionality: (∀AB.A = B ↔(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B)).
Axiom of Comprehension: For any formula φ in which A does not appear free,
and which can be converted to a well-formed formula of TST by an assign-
ment of types to variables, (∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)) is an axiom.
Deﬁnition: For any formula φ in which A does not appear free, {x | φ} is deﬁned
as the unique A (if there is one) such that (∀x.x ∈A ↔φ) (this exists by
Comprehension if φ can be obtained by dropping types from a formula of
TST and is unique if it exists by Extensionality).
This presentation of the axioms should make it clear why dropping types from
the axioms of TST does not give us the inconsistent Axiom of Comprehension of
na¨ıve set theory. The Russell class {x | x ̸∈x} is not provided by the Axiom of
Comprehension of NF because there is no way to assign types to the variables in
x ̸∈x which gives a well-formed formula of TST.
It is usual to rephrase the comprehension axiom of NF in a way which hides the
apparent dependence on the language of another theory.
Deﬁnition: A formula φ is said to be stratiﬁed iﬀthere is a function σ from the
set of all variables to the natural numbers (equivalently, to the integers) such
that for each atomic subformula x = y of φ we have σ(x) = σ(y) and for
each atomic subformula x ∈y of φ we have σ(x)+1 = σ(y). Such a function
σ is called a stratiﬁcation of φ.

588
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Axiom of Stratiﬁed Comprehension: For
any
stratiﬁed
formula
φ,
(∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)) is an axiom.
A stratiﬁcation of φ of course codes an assignment of types to the variables in
φ which converts φ to a well-formed formula of TST.
The dependence of the axiomatization of NF on an understanding of TST really
is just apparent as we said above. The axiom scheme of Stratiﬁed Comprehension
is equivalent to a ﬁnite collection of its instances, and so can be given as a list of
particular comprehension axioms with no reference to types or stratiﬁcation at all.
The original reference for this is [Hailperin, 1944], but the implementation given
there is terrible. The construction of such a ﬁnite axiomatization is similar to our
development of the ﬁnite axiomatization of predicative class comprehension given
above.
5.2
New Foundations with urelements
In this section we will explore the development of set theory with stratiﬁed com-
prehension, but we will begin with a critique of the theory history presents to
us.
Motivation of NFU
Quine [Quine, 1937] claimed that the choice of strong extensionality over weak
extensionality is purely a matter of convenience. He suggested that any urelements
(objects with no elements distinct from the empty set and from one another) could
be reinterpreted as self-singletons x = {x}, thus restoring strong extensionality.
In Zermelo-style set theory this suggestion makes sense. One can deﬁne a (proper
class) map f which sends each urelement and iterated singleton of an urelement to
its singleton and redeﬁne membership to the relation x ∈f y ≡def x ∈f(y). This
will preserve the axioms of Zermelo-style set theory and convert all urelements to
self-singletons. But this procedure makes no sense in a set theory with stratiﬁed
comprehension, because the map f has an unstratiﬁed deﬁnition, so sets deﬁned
in terms of ∈f cannot be expected to exist in general.
This suggests that the theory we should be considering is the theory NFU whose
primitive notions are equality, membership, and the empty set, and whose axioms
are as follows:
Axiom of the Empty Set: (∀x.x ̸∈∅)
Axiom of Weak Extensionality: (∀ABx.x ∈A →(A = B ↔(∀y.y ∈
A ↔y ∈B)))
Axiom of Stratiﬁed Comprehension: For
any
stratiﬁed
formula
φ,
(∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)) is an axiom.
Deﬁnition: set(x) ≡def x = ∅∨(∃y.y ∈x).
Notice that (∀AB.set(A) ∧
set(B) →(A = B ↔(∀y.y ∈A ↔y ∈B)))

Alternative Set Theories
589
Deﬁnition: For any stratiﬁed formula φ, we deﬁne {x | φ} as the unique A such
that set(x) and for all x, x ∈A ↔φ. This exists by stratiﬁed comprehension
and is unique by weak extensionality and the deﬁnition of the empty set.
And indeed history suggests that this is the theory we should be thinking about.
The consistency of NF remains an open question after more than 70 years, but R.
B. Jensen proved the consistency of NFU on quite weak assumptions in [Jensen,
1969]. Most of the standard development of mathematics in NF (which looks quite
odd from the Zermelo-trained standpoint) works perfectly well in NFU, which has
well-understood models which can be examined to see what is going on.
For this reason, we will follow the plan of giving the general presentation of
mathematics with stratiﬁed comprehension in NFU, then following with a section
in which distinctive features of mathematics in NF (notably Specker’s disproof of
the Axiom of Choice in [Specker, 1953]) are described.
A model construction for NFU
We ﬁrst give a model construction for NFU. This is not the original consistency
proof due to Jensen, but a similarly motivated model construction due to Maurice
Boﬀa [1988].
We consider a model of Mac Lane set theory without the Axiom of Inﬁnity or
the Axiom of Choice (though both could be adjoined and usually will be) with
an external automorphism j which moves a rank Vα of the cumulative hierarchy
downward. The existence of such models is a standard result of model theory. The
domain of the model of NFU to be constructed is the extension of the nonstandard
rank Vα. The membership relation of the model is the relation x ∈NFU y ≡def
j(x) ∈y ∧y ∈Vj(α)+1.
Each element x of Vj(α)+1 is assigned the extension
of j−1(x) in the original model (notice in particular that Vj(α) is assigned the
extension of Vα, the entire universe of the model!), and each element of Vα\Vj(α)+1
is treated as an urelement. This should make it clear that weak extensionality is
satisﬁed. Of course the empty set of the model of NFU is the empty set of the
original model of set theory.
We argue that stratiﬁed comprehension is satisﬁed in the model. Let φ be a
stratiﬁed formula in the language of NFU with a stratiﬁcation σ. Let N be a
natural number larger than the value of σ at any variable in φ. This formula
has a translation φ1 into the language of the model of Mac Lane in which the
model construction is carried out. Each reference to ∅in NFU is replaced with a
reference to ∅in the language of Mac Lane set theory, each atomic formula u = v
is replaced with u = v, each atomic formula u ∈v is replaced with j(u) ∈v ∧v ∈
Vj(α)+1, and each quantiﬁer is bounded in Vα. It might seem that we just need to
construct the set {x ∈Vα | φ1} and note that j({x ∈Vα | φ1}) is the set which we
assign this extension in the model of NFU. That is what we do in the end, but it
requires justiﬁcation. The problem is that the formula φ1 contains references to
the automorphism j, and the Axiom of Separation of Mac Lane set theory does not
apply to formulas containing j, unless all references to j are in parameters (terms

590
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
not containing bound variables). We show how to eﬀect a transformation of φ1 to
an equivalent formula in which j occurs only in parameters. We begin by replacing
each atomic formula u = v with jN−σ(v)(u) = jN−σ(v)(v).
This is equivalent
because j is an automorphism. Notice that jN−σ(v)(u) = jN−σ(u)(u) because σ is a
stratiﬁcation. We replace each formula j(u) ∈v with jN−σ(v)(j(u)) ∈jN−σ(v)(v).
This is equivalent because j is an automorphism. Notice that jN−σ(v)(j(u)) =
jN−σ(u)(u) because σ is a stratiﬁcation. We replace formulas of the shape v ∈
Vj(α)+1 with the equivalent jN−σ(v)(v) ∈jN−σ(v)(Vj(α)+1). These substitutions
produce a formula φ2.
In φ2, every variable u occurs with exactly N −σ(u)
applications of j. An equivalent formula is produced by replacing each jN−σ(u)(u)
such that u is bound by a quantiﬁer (restricted to Vα) with the variable u, replacing
the bounding set with jN−σ(u)(Vα). These substitutions produce a formula φ3.
The variable x occurs in φ3 only in the context jN−σ(x)(x). φ4 is obtained by
replacing this term with x. Note that φ4 contains no occurrences of j except in
constants. j−(N−σ(x))({x ∈jN−σ(x)(Vα) | φ4}) is the set {x ∈Vα | φ1} of the
original model of Mac Lane set theory, and the image of this set under j is the set
{x | φ} of the model of NFU.
If we let the ordinal α above be a nonstandard natural number, we obtain a
model of NFU in which the universe is ﬁnite! This witnesses an error in [Quine,
1937]: Quine says there that the existence of ∅, {∅}, {{∅}}, etc. shows that Inﬁnity
holds in NF. Inﬁnity does hold in NF but not for this reason. This sequence of
sets witnesses the fact that any model of NFU (including a model of NFU + “the
universe is ﬁnite”) must actually be externally inﬁnite, but it does not witness the
Axiom of Inﬁnity because there is no reason to expect that it is a set (its deﬁnition
is not stratiﬁed). In a model of NFU + “the universe is ﬁnite” it is not a set. It is
interesting to observe that in fact this collection can be a set but this would take
us far aﬁeld.
If we assume that Inﬁnity and Choice hold in the underlying model of Mac
Lane, Inﬁnity and Choice hold in the model of NFU. We can obtain strong axioms
of inﬁnity by assuming them in the underlying model of Mac Lane set theory, but
more satisfying results can be achieved by making strong assumptions about the
automorphism j (which are generally equivalent to strong axioms of inﬁnity in
Mac Lane or ZFC, but give nicer characteristics to the model of NFU).
Mathematics in NFU
In this section, we outline the development of the foundations of mathematics in
NFU. What we do here will also work in NF, as long as we do not assume Choice.
Inﬁnity, which we must add as an assumption to NFU for the purposes of this
development, is a theorem of NF, as we will see in the next section.
We develop the natural numbers (following Frege’s deﬁnition) exactly as we did
above in TST. We deﬁne 0 as {∅}. For each set A, deﬁne A+1 as {a∪{x} | a ∈A∧
x ̸∈a}. A + 1 is the set of all objects obtained by adding a single new element to
an element of A. Now 0 + 1 is the set of all one-element sets, which we call 1, and

Alternative Set Theories
591
1 + 1 is the set of all two-element sets, which we call 2, and so forth. We deﬁne
N, the set of natural numbers, as the intersection of all sets which contain 0 and
are closed under the extended “successor” operation. The elements of the natural
numbers are the ﬁnite sets: we deﬁne the set F of ﬁnite sets as S N.
Notice that NFU witnesses the coherence of Frege’s implementation of the nat-
ural number n as the set of all sets with n elements.
We are not quite done. There is a bad possibility which we have avoided dis-
cussing in the development above. One can prove by mathematical induction that
no natural number contains a proper subset of one of its elements. This implies
that if the universal set V is ﬁnite, the natural number which contains it as an
element is {V }. It then follows that the successor of V is ∅, and of course the
successor of ∅is also ∅. This gives an exception to Peano’s fourth axiom (all the
others are easily seen to hold for this implementation of the natural numbers).
We rule out this badness by adopting the
Axiom of Inﬁnity: V ̸∈F.
We further usually adopt the
Axiom of Choice: Each pairwise disjoint collection of nonempty sets has a choice
set.
though in this context it should be noted that the Axiom of Choice is false in
NF.
We discuss the extension of the deﬁnition of stratiﬁcation to support term con-
structions. Where ψ is a stratiﬁed formula, let (ιx.ψ) represent the unique object
x such that ψ (if there is one) and the empty set otherwise. We deﬁne (∃!x.ψ)
as (∃x.ψ) ∧(∀xy.ψ ∧ψ[y/x] →x = y) (y being a fresh variable). Notice that
this is stratiﬁed iﬀψ was stratiﬁed. Now note that φ[(ιx.ψ)/x] is equivalent to
((∃!x.ψ) ∧φ) ∨(¬(∃!x.ψ) ∧φ[∅/x]). The correct notion of stratiﬁcation for general
terms containing deﬁnite description terms (ιx.ψ) is as follows. A stratiﬁcation of
a formula φ is a function σ from terms to natural numbers (or integers) such that
for any atomic subformula t = u we have σ(t) = σ(u), for any atomic subformula
t ∈u we have σ(t) + 1 = σ(u) [note that t and u may be complex terms rather
than variables], and σ((ιx.ψ)) = σ(x): each deﬁnite description is assigned the
same type as the variable bound in it. To see that this works, check that in the
transformations above a stratiﬁcation of a formula is the same as the stratiﬁcation
of the transformed formula. We do not intend to explicitly use deﬁnite descrip-
tion terms in what follows, but any deﬁned term construction introduced can be
thought of as being implemented in this way.
As we noted above under TST, the usual Kuratowski deﬁnition (x, y) ≡def
{{x}, {x, y}} of the ordered pair is inconvenient in type theory because the pair
thus deﬁned is two types higher than its projections.
If we assume Inﬁnity, it is possible to deﬁne an ordered pair on P2(V ) (the
collection of sets of sets) which is the same type as its projections. In NF, since

592
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
P2(V ) = V , this is a deﬁnable type level ordered pair on the universe. In NFU,
we develop a modiﬁed interpretation of NFU in which there is a type level pair
on the universe. It should also be noticed that it is provable in NFU + Inﬁnity
+ Choice that there is a type level pair (this follows from the theorem κ2 = κ
for inﬁnite cardinals κ, in the special case κ = |V |, but this line of development
requires that a lot of mathematics be developed using the Kuratowski pair ﬁrst).
Deﬁnition: We deﬁne σ(x) as x + 1 if x is a natural number and as x otherwise.
Deﬁnition: We deﬁne σ1(x) as {σ(y) | y ∈x} and σ2(x) as σ1(x) ∪{0}, for any
x, y ∈P(V ).
Observations: Notice that σi(x) = σi(y) →x = y for i = 1, 2, and note also that
σ1(x) ̸= σ2(y) for any x, y.
Deﬁnition: We deﬁne σ1“x as {σ1(y) | y ∈x}, σ2“x as {σ2(y) | y ∈x}, and (x, y)
(the Quine ordered pair of x and y) as σ1“x ∪σ2“y, for any x, y ∈P2(V ).
Deﬁnition: For any w ∈P2(V ), we deﬁne π1(w) as {x | σ1(x) ∈w} and π2(w)
as {x | σ2(x) ∈w}.
Observation: π1(x, y) = x; π2(x, y) = y; (π1(x), π2(x)) = x, for all x, y ∈P2(V ).
This gives an ordered pair on sets of sets which is assigned the same value as its
projections by any stratiﬁcation (due to Quine [1945] and thus called the Quine
ordered pair) . Now for a trick. We deﬁne a new interpretation of NFU whose
domain is the extension of P2(V ) in the model we start with. The empty set of the
new interpretation is the empty set of the old model. The equality relation of the
new interpretation is the equality relation of the old interpretation restricted to the
new domain. The membership relation x ∈new y ≡def x ∈y ∧y ∈P3(V ). In other
words, each set of sets of sets retains its original extension (so all subsets of the
domain of the new interpretation are realized) and sets of sets which are not sets of
sets of sets are treated as urelements. The veriﬁcation that the new interpretation
satisﬁes the axioms of NFU is straightforward. The type level ordered pair on sets
of sets of the old interpretation serves as a type level pair in the new interpretation.
If we replace natural numbers n with their restrictions n ∩P2(V ) to sets of sets
in the deﬁnition of the Quine pair, and use the modiﬁed Quine pair to carry out
the construction of the new interpretation, then the type level pair of the new
interpretation will coincide with the original (unmodiﬁed) Quine pair of the new
interpretation on sets of sets. The reason for this is that the restricted natural
number n ∩P2(V ) becomes a natural number in the new interpretation.
The upshot of this discussion is that we might as well adjoin relations π1 and
π2 with the same stratiﬁcation conditions as equality to our language, deﬁne (x, y)
as (ιz.zπ1x ∧zπ2y), deﬁne π1(x) as (ιy.xπ1y) and π2(x) as (ιy.xπ2y), then adjoin
an
Axiom of Ordered Pairs: π1(x, y) = x; π2(x, y) = y; (π1(x), π2(x)) = x.

Alternative Set Theories
593
We could but do not need to stipulate that the type level ordered pair coincides
with the Quine pair on sets of sets. The introduction of type level ordered pairs by
axiom in NFU is a proposal of one of the authors (Holmes) in his [Holmes, 1998].
The Axiom of Ordered Pairs is actually an inessential strengthening of the
Axiom of Inﬁnity (in the presence of Choice, they are equivalent); we have just
shown that NFU + Inﬁnity interprets NFU + Ordered Pairs. The function sending
x to (x, 0) has a stratiﬁed deﬁnition and maps the universe V to its proper subset
V × {0} which is suﬃcient to show that Ordered Pairs implies Inﬁnity.
Whether we introduce a primitive type level pair as we have just done or use
the Kuratowski pair, the deﬁnitions of relations and functions and the basic prop-
erties of and operations on relations and functions are similar. There is a precise
correspondence between the functions and relations implementable with a type
level pair and those implementable with the Kuratowski pair. One has to bear
in mind with the Kuratowski pair that the pair is two types higher than its pro-
jections: this causes some inconveniences. A fundamental diﬀerence between the
Quine pair and the Kuratowski pair is that the projection operations of the Quine
pair (or of a primitive type level pair) are set functions, while the projection func-
tions of the Kuratowski pair are not. If ⟨x, y⟩is the Kuratowski pair, there is a
set function π∗
1 such that π∗
1(⟨x, y⟩) = {{x}} but there is no set function π∗
1 such
that π∗
1(⟨x, y⟩) = x. Notice that the double application of the singleton operation
ensures that the relative types of the two occurrences of x are the same.
We deﬁne cardinal number.
For any set A, we deﬁne the relation A ∼B
as holding iﬀthere is a bijection f from A onto B.
This is proved to be an
equivalence relation in a standard way. We deﬁne |A| as {B | B ∼A}. It is useful
to observe that |A| is exactly the same set whether we use the type level pair or
the Kuratowski pair (because every function implemented with the type level pair
has an exact analogue implemented with the Kuratowski pair and vice versa). |A|
is one type higher than A for purposes of stratiﬁcation. Note that the natural
numbers deﬁned above are cardinal numbers of ﬁnite sets. This can be proved by
mathematical induction. Objects which are |A| for some set A are called cardinal
numbers.
We deﬁne isomorphism types of relations. R ≈S is deﬁned as holding iﬀthere is
a bijection f from the ﬁeld of R onto the ﬁeld of S such that x R y ↔f(x) S f(y).
Isomorphism is an equivalence relation on relations for standard reasons.
The
isomorphism type of a relation R is deﬁned as {S | S ≈R}.
The identity of
the isomorphism type of R does depend on the pair used, and so does the type
diﬀerential, because the isomorphism type is a set of functions and so a set of sets
of ordered pairs. If we use the type level pair, the isomorphism type of R is one
type higher than R for purposes of stratiﬁcation; if we use the Kuratowski pair it
is three types higher than R.
Isomorphism types of well-orderings are of special interest to us. If ≤is a well-
ordering, we deﬁne ot(≤) as the isomorphism type of ≤. An isomorphism type of
a well-ordering is called the order type of a well-ordering, and an object which is
the order type of some well-ordering is called an ordinal number.

594
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
These collections are very big. The analogous classes in Zermelo-style set theory
are proper. Further, we have the universal set V = {x | x = x}, the very standard
of bigness. We can contemplate |V |, the cardinality of the universe. We can prove
that there is a natural well-ordering on the ordinal numbers in a quite standard
way, then consider the order type Ωof the natural order on the ordinal numbers.
We seem to be very close to paradox here, as |V | and Ωare precisely the objects
which instigate the classic paradoxes of Cantor and Burali-Forti!
However, we will now discover that NFU has its own characteristic way of
averting paradox.
We begin with the Cantor paradox of the largest cardinal.
The Cantor theorem in TST takes the form |P1(A)| < |P(A)|, where P1(A) is
the set of one-element subsets of A; the usual form |A| < |P(A)| would be ill-
typed.
The proof of the Cantor theorem of TST is inherited by NFU, so we
have |P1(A)| < |P(A)| for any set A and so in particular |P1(V )| < |P(V )|.
Now of course we can add in |P1(V )| < |P(V )| ≤|V |, so we get the odd result
|P1(V )| < |V |. This is odd because we can “see” the one-to-one correspondence
between these two sets deﬁned by the singleton map. But there is no reason to
believe that the singleton map is a set function, and we have just shown that it
can’t be.
Since we have a counterexample to the intuitively plausible proposition |P1(A)| =
|A| (A = V ) and since it is easy to show that |A| = |B| ↔|P1(A)| = |P1(B)|,
we deﬁne an operation on cardinals with deﬁning equation T(|A|) = |P1(A)|. We
have just shown that T(|V |) < |V |, so this is a nontrivial operation. There are sets
A such that |P1(A)| = |A|: standard ﬁnite sets have this property, for example.
Such sets are called cantorian sets and their cardinals are called cantorian cardi-
nals. An even stronger property (motivated by the apparent witness our incorrect
intuition that |P1(A)| = |A| for all A, and also holding of concrete ﬁnite sets) is
this: a set A (and its cardinality) is said to be strongly cantorian (s.c). iﬀι⌈A,
the restriction of the singleton map to A, is a set. Clearly strongly cantorian sets
are cantorian; the converse is a strong axiom of inﬁnity.
The Burali-Forti paradox is resolved in an even more interesting way.
One
can prove in a quite standard way that for any two well-orderings, either one
is similar to an initial segment of the other, or the two are similar (the three
alternatives being mutually exclusive).
This determines a natural linear order
on the ordinal numbers (qua isomorphism types of well-orderings) which is itself
a well-ordering and so has an isomorphism type Ω.
The paradox depends on
the “obvious” observation that the order type of the restriction of this order to
the ordinals less than α is α. The resolution depends on the discovery that this
“obvious” observation is false.
For any relation R, we can deﬁne a relation Rι = {({x}, {y}) | x R y}. If the
isomorphism type of R is ρ, we deﬁne T(ρ) as the isomorphism type of Rι. It
is straightforward to show that the deﬁnition of T(ρ) does not depend on the
choice of the relation R. Note that Rι is one type higher than R for purposes
of stratiﬁcation and T(ρ) is one type higher than ρ. We have just seen that the
singleton map is not a function, so we have no reason to believe that ρ = T(ρ)

Alternative Set Theories
595
in general. A relation type ρ is cantorian iﬀT(ρ) = ρ and strongly cantorian iﬀ
T(ρ) = ρ is witnessed for each R ∈ρ by a set function equal to the restriction of
the singleton map to the ﬁeld of ρ.
Suppose that ≤is a well-ordering belonging to an ordinal number α. For each
x in the ﬁeld of ≤, we can deﬁne αx as the order type of the restriction of ≤
to {y | y ≤x}.
If ≤is also used for the order on ordinal numbers, we have
x ≤y ↔αx ≤αy. This would establish the desired isomorphism between the
natural order on the ordinals less than α and the element ≤of α if the map
x 7→αx were a function.
But this cannot be shown to be the case, for αx is
two types higher than x for purposes of stratiﬁcation (four types if we were using
the Kuratowski pair). What is a function is {{x}} 7→αx; the application of the
singleton operation repairs the failure of stratiﬁcation. So what we can actually
show is that (≤ι)ι is similar to the natural order on the ordinals less than α, so
the order type of the ordinals less than α is T 2(α).
Now the paradox resolves itself. For the order type of the ordinals less than Ω
is T 2(Ω) by the preceding discussion, and it then follows that T 2(Ω) < Ω. This is
not altogether appetizing, because it is easy to show that for any ordinals α and
β, T(α) < T(β) ↔α < β, so T 2(α) < T 2(β) ↔α < β, so . . . T 6(Ω) < T 4(Ω) <
T 2(Ω) < Ω. This does not give an inﬁnite descending sequence of ordinals in NFU,
because T is not a function and the sequence just revealed cannot be shown to
be a set (fortunately!). This does imply that any set model of NFU has ordinals
whose elements are not well-orderings from an external standpoint. If our working
set theory were NFU, this would not lead to contradiction, because though the
domain V of the “model” of NFU in which we would work is a set, the membership
relation ∈of the “model” is not a set.
Notice that the T operation appears to be an external endomorphism of the
ordinals. In our model construction for NFU, we used an external automorphism
of our model of set theory which moved ordinals. This similarity is not an accident.
The T operation on isomorphism types is closely related to the automorphism j of
the underlying model of set theory if we are working in a Boﬀa model (the same
is true of the T operation on cardinals deﬁned above).
The considerations so far give us some assurance that the original system NF
does not easily fall prey to the paradoxes. We know that NFU does not (unless a
quite weak fragment of the usual set theory is inconsistent).
We now turn our attention to the implementation of mathematics in NF(U).
We have already described the implementations of natural numbers, ordered pairs,
relations, functions, and cardinal and ordinal numbers. Operations on cardinal
and ordinal numbers admit quite usual deﬁnitions (hereafter in this subsection we
assume without comment that the pair is type level). For example, |A| + |B| =
|(A×{0})∪(B×{1})| and |A|·|B| = |A×B| are quite familiar-looking deﬁnitions of
cardinal addition and multiplication. If we deﬁne BA as the collection of functions
from A to B, we might want to deﬁne |B||A| as |BA|, but we do not for reasons
of relative type. The type of |BA| is one higher than that of A or B: we correct
this by deﬁning |B||A| as T −1(|BA|).
This is not a total operation: there are

596
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
cardinals κ such that there is no λ such that T(κ) = λ, such as κ = |V |.
A
special case of this deﬁnition is 2|A| = T −1(|{0, 1}A|) = T −1(|P(A)|) (the last
equation uses the one-to-one correspondence between sets and their characteristic
functions). The argument for Cantor’s theorem above shows that |A| < 2|A| for all
A for which 2|A| is deﬁned: we have |P1(A)| < |P(A)|: applying T −1 to both sides
of the inequality gives |A| < T −1(|P(A)|), whenever the latter is deﬁned, and so
|A| < 2|A|. It is straightforward to establish that the T operation distributes over
all these operations and relations in the obvious sense, and so does T −1 where it
is deﬁned. Very similar considerations apply to operations on ordinal numbers,
though all the usual operations on ordinals turn out to be total. One should note
that the identiﬁcation between cardinal numbers and initial ordinals does not hold
here, so one needs to make use from time to time of explicit operations card(α)
= the cardinality of the ﬁeld of an element of the ordinal α and init(κ) = the
smallest order type of a well-ordering of a set of size κ.
All of the mathematical constructions we have done so far can be clariﬁed by
looking at how one would do the same mathematics in TST. The appearance of
T and T −1 is unmysterious there: a set of size T(κ) is “the same size” as a set of
size κ but appears one type higher. A set of size T −1(κ) is a set the same size as
a set of size κ but one type lower, and it is not surprising that this does not work
for all κ because higher types are larger (being “power sets” of lower types).
Some mathematical constructions are awkward in NFU because they are awk-
ward in TST. A general class of constructions for which this is true is “indexed
families of sets”. The diﬃculties are best illustrated by giving an example. We are
going to develop the deﬁnition of the product of a family of cardinals, Πi∈Iκi. The
product is the size of the generalized cartesian product of a collection of sets Ai
each of cardinality κi. The generalized cartesian product ×i∈IAi is the collection
of all functions f such that f(i) ∈Ai for each i ∈I. The problem that now arises
is how to read the various indexed expressions here. The diﬃculty is that the sets
A are one type lower than the cardinals κ, so if we read Ai as A(i) (letting A be a
function from I to sets) then we need to read κi as κ({i}), so κ can be construed as
a function from P1(I) to cardinals. The set ×i∈IAi can then be deﬁned explicitly
as the set of all functions f such that f(i) ∈P1(A(i)) for each i ∈I. We cannot
have f(i) ∈Ai because once again the types are wrong: the type of i is the same
as the type of A(i) and so is one higher than the type of an element of Ai: we
ﬁx this by having f send each A(i) to the singleton of one of its elements. We
want Πi∈Iκi to be of the same type as each of the cardinals κi. ×i∈IAi is a set
of functions which are each one type higher than elements of I, so it is itself two
types higher than an element of I, and its cardinality is three types higher than
that of an element of I. We want Πi∈Iκi to be of the same type as the κ(i)’s. A
κi = κ({i}) is one type higher than that of an element of i. So the full deﬁnition of
Πi∈Iκi is T −2(|×i∈I Ai|), where A(i) ∈κ({i}) for each i ∈I (the existence of such
an A and the well-deﬁnedness of this cardinal depends on Choice; this leaves open
the possibility that products of indexed families of cardinals may be undeﬁned be-
cause T −2 is partial, and indeed they may). There is no particular mystery to do

Alternative Set Theories
597
with NF(U) in this construction: it is a construction in TST imported into NFU.
The awkwardness could be reduced in special cases if we had index sets made up
of self-singletons (if i = {i} for each i ∈I). One can prove the consistency of the
existence of such index sets, but it is also provable that they are all small sets
(such an index set would certainly be strongly cantorian, and it is consistent with
NFU that every s.c. set is the same size as a set of self-singletons).
There are some mathematical techniques appropriate to NFU which take ad-
vantage of the fact that it is a type-free theory and cannot be replicated in TST.
These generally require “reasonable” assumptions about the behavior of T opera-
tions on cardinals and ordinals which are not provable in NFU (and are in eﬀect
strong axioms of inﬁnity).
We deﬁned the notion of strongly cantorian set above. “Strongly cantorian” is a
notion of smallness (every subset of a strongly cantorian set is strongly cantorian).
A variable x restricted to a strongly cantorian set in a set deﬁnition does not need
to have a type assigned to it for purposes of stratiﬁcation. The reason is that its
type can be freely manipulated: if x ∈A and A is s.c., then x = S(ι⌈A(x)) =
(ι⌈A)−1({x}): in one of these expressions the type of x is raised by one and in one
it is lowered by one, and these operations can be iterated.
The ﬁrst special axiom we might consider is Rosser’s Axiom of Counting (pro-
posed by Rosser [1953]), which asserts that the set of natural numbers is strongly
cantorian. Rosser’s original formulation was the assertion that {1, . . . , n} ∈n for
each natural number n: the connection of this to our usual counting procedure
should be clear and the theorem provable in NF(U) is {1, . . . , n} ∈T 2(n) It is
clear that Rosser’s axiom implies and is implied by the assertion that each natural
number n is cantorian (T(n) = n). It is only very slightly less obvious that this is
equivalent to the assertion that the set of natural numbers is s.c. It is provable in
NFU + Inﬁnity that N is cantorian, and the natural inductively deﬁned bijection
from N to P1(N) sends T(n) to {n} for each n, so will witness that N is s.c. if and
only if every natural number is cantorian.
The practical eﬀect of the use of Rosser’s Axiom of Counting is that one does
not need to assign types to variables with natural number values. In fact, the same
becomes true of many familiar classes of mathematical objects, as the class of s.c.
sets is closed under cartesian product, power set, and the formation of function
spaces, so for example the set of real numbers or the set of points in Hilbert space
will be s.c. sets.
The metamathematical eﬀect of the Axiom of Counting is surprising. It does
not actually add practical strength on the level of arithmetic (even arithmetic of
higher order): we simply avoid notational complications. The truly substantial
eﬀects are in set theory. NFU + Inﬁnity does not prove the existence of ℶω; NFU
+ Counting proves the existence of ℶinit(ℶn) for each natural number n. NFU +
Counting has models ℶinit(ℶω) is needed in the construction) and NF + Counting
is known to prove the consistency of NF (such independence results are rare for
NF).
The strong principle of mathematical induction (induction for unstratiﬁed as

598
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
well as stratiﬁed formulas) is stronger than the Axiom of Counting (which it easily
implies).
Its precise strength is not known, but it is weaker than ZFC, as an
ω-model of NFU can be constructed on fairly weak assumptions (existence of
ℶinit(ℶω1) is enough). Again, its eﬀects are not seen in higher-order arithmetic
(which is adequately handled by stratiﬁed induction) but in set theory.
An assumption considered by C. Ward Henson [1973] (in a slightly more re-
stricted form) is “every cantorian set is strongly cantorian”, which we call CS
(short for “the Axiom of Cantorian Sets”). Notice that Inﬁnity and CS together
imply Counting. The strength of NFU + Inﬁnity + CS is rather shocking: it is
equiconsistent with ZFC + “there is an n-Mahlo cardinal” for each concrete nat-
ural number n (see [Holmes, 2001]). Rieger-Bernays permutation methods can be
used to convert a model of this theory to one in which the hereditarily strongly
cantorian sets make up a model of ZFC with an n-Mahlo cardinal for each concrete
n.
There are still stronger assumptions which have been investigated and shown to
correspond in strength to further strong axioms of inﬁnity, but this is enough to
show the pattern: natural axioms formulated in NFU which regularize the behav-
ior of strongly cantorian sets have surprisingly strong eﬀects on the consistency
strength of the extended version of NFU which results. We give one more example:
the Axiom of Small Ordinals (introduced in [Holmes, 1998] and [Holmes, 2001]) in
its weakest form asserts that any deﬁnable class of strongly cantorian ordinals is
the intersection of the class of strongly cantorian ordinals (which is not a set) with
some set. NFU + Inﬁnity + Small Ordinals has the same strength as Kelley-Morse
set theory + “the proper class ordinal is weakly compact” or ZFC - Power Set +
“there is a weakly compact cardinal” (Solovay showed this in [Solovay, preprint]).
5.3
Peculiarities of NF
We now address the oddities of New Foundations itself. These are twofold. On the
negative side, no consistency proof for NF is known, nor is there any proof that
NF is any stronger than TST with the Axiom of Inﬁnity (or equivalently Mac Lane
set theory with Inﬁnity) which is somewhat weaker than Zermelo set theory. Any
suspicion that NF must be strong because it allows “big” sets such as the universe
should be dispelled by the observation that NFU, which proves the existence of
the same big sets for the same reasons, is weaker than Peano arithmetic, and NFU
+ Inﬁnity (which is a more reasonable set theory) is exactly as strong as TST +
Inﬁnity or Mac Lane set theory with Inﬁnity. There is a useful distinction to be
drawn between “big” objects such as the universe V or the ordinal Ωand “large”
objects such as inaccessible or measurable cardinals.
On the positive side, NF is known to prove the Axiom of Inﬁnity and disprove
the Axiom of Choice [Specker, 1953]. This means that NFU + Choice (which is
known to be consistent) proves the existence of urelements! Specker gave separate
proofs of these two results, but of course the proof that Choice is false also proves
Inﬁnity: if the universe were ﬁnite, it could be well-ordered, which would allow

Alternative Set Theories
599
the proof of Choice in a familiar way (it is worth noting here that all the standard
equivalences between forms of Choice hold in NF(U), as long as one is careful to
state them in stratiﬁed forms).
We present Specker’s proof that the Axiom of Choice is false.
Theorem: (NF, due to Specker). ¬AC.
Proof: Suppose otherwise. Then the natural order on the cardinal numbers would
be a well-ordering (this is equivalent to AC for quite standard reasons).
We know from above that the exponential map κ 7→2κ is partial.
We
deﬁne for each cardinal κ a set called the exp-closure of κ (this is a nonce
notion): the exp-closure of κ is the smallest set which contains κ and contains
2λ whenever it contains λ and 2λ exists. We deﬁne the set SM (German
Speckermenge, “the Specker set”, a coinage of Thomas Forster) as the set of
all cardinals whose exp-closure is ﬁnite. This set is nonempty: for example,
|V | belongs to SM.
Now comes a move which is peculiar to NF. We have 2|P1(V )| = |P(V )| by the
deﬁnition of exponentiation. But this means that 2T (|V |) = |V | (this requires
|P(V )| = |V |, which is a consequence of strong extensionality). Properties
of the T operation then tell us that 2T n+1(|V |) = T n(|V |) for each concrete
natural number n, so all the cardinals T n(|V |) (which do not make up any
kind of set sequence!) are in SM.
We argue that for any cardinal κ in SM, we also have T nκ ∈SM and
T −1(κ) ∈SM, if the latter cardinal exists. Suppose κ ∈SM. We give the
name exp to the map κ 7→2κ. If λ is an element of the exp-closure of κ (so of
the form expn(κ) for some natural number n) then T(λ) is in the exp-closure
of T(κ), because it is equal to expT (n)(T(κ)) (this proof is considerably
simpler if the Axiom of Counting is assumed, which would give T(n) = n!).
Now consider the largest element ν of the exp-closure of κ. It must be greater
than T(|V |), or else its image under exp would be deﬁned (notice that linear
ordering of cardinals by the natural order is used here). exp(T(ν)) will be
deﬁned, since T(ν) ≤T(|V |): since ν > T(|V |), we have T(ν) > T 2(|V |) and
so exp(T(ν)) ≥exp(T 2(|V |)) = T(|V |). From this it follows that exp2(T(ν))
either fails to exist or is equal to |V |. So if the cardinality of the exp-closure
of κ is n, the cardinality of the exp-closure of T(κ) will be either T(n) + 1 or
T(n)+2, and in any case ﬁnite, so T(κ) ∈SM. Now suppose that κ = T(λ),
and that λ ̸∈SM. This would imply that expn(λ) was deﬁned for every n,
and it would follow that T(expn(λ)) = expT (n)(κ) was deﬁned for every n,
and though the T operation might fail to be the identity on N it is onto:
it follows that κ ̸∈SM contrary to hypothesis. So if κ ∈SM and T −1(κ)
exists, it follows that T −1(κ) ∈SM.
Because SM is a set of cardinals, it has a smallest element µ. The results
above imply that T(µ) = µ. For otherwise we would have to have T(µ) > µ,

600
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
whence T −1(µ) would exist, belong to SM, and be less than µ, contrary to
choice of µ (because the T operation preserves order on cardinals and its
domain of deﬁnition is downward closed). Now let n be the ﬁnite number
of elements in the exp-closure of µ. We see from the previous paragraph
that the number of elements in the exp-closure of T(µ) must be T(n) + 1 or
T(n) + 2, and of course this must be the same number. But n = T(n) mod
3 is easy to show, so n = T(n) + 1 or n = T(n) + 2 is impossible.
As we have already remarked, there is a nicer proof of this (in detail; the basic
idea is the same) if the Axiom of Counting is assumed, found in [Holmes, 1998]
(mod 3 arithmetic does not come into play), but we will shortly indicate reasons
why we do not regard the assumption of Counting as harmless.
For any cardinal κ, we deﬁne the Specker tree of κ as the smallest set which
contains κ and includes the preimage under exp of each of its elements. This is
the set of all cardinals λ such that expn(λ) = κ for some n ∈N. If the Axiom
of Choice is assumed, it is straightforward to show that the Specker tree of any
cardinal has ﬁnite depth (there is an n such that for no λ is expn(λ) = κ). It is a
theorem of ZF that the Specker tree of any cardinal is well-founded, due to Forster
[1976] (using Sierpinski’s result that ℵ(κ) < exp3(κ), where ℵis the Hartogs aleph
function: ℵ(κ) is the ﬁrst ordinal which is not the order type of a well-ordering of
a subset of a set of size κ [this deﬁnition would need to be modiﬁed slightly to be
stratiﬁed]). Thus in ZF the Specker tree of a cardinal must have an ordinal rank
in an obvious sense, which if AC is assumed must be ﬁnite. It is an open question
in ZF whether it is possible for a cardinal to have a Specker tree of inﬁnite rank
(and so have inverse images under exp of every index); it is a theorem of NF +
Counting that the Specker tree of the cardinality of the universe has inﬁnite rank:
so here we have a combinatorial situation arising in what should not be a terribly
strong extension of NF whose possibility has not been established in the usual
Choice-free mathematics.
The only obvious mathematical advantage of NF over NFU which we see is that
the Quine pair is deﬁnable in NF. There may be other elegant features of mathe-
matical development in NF which follow from the absence of urelements. The use
of Choice in mathematics is pervasive, which is a strong apparent disadvantage
of NF over NFU. Now it might be said that the form of Choice most often used
in classical mathematics is Dependent Choices, and so far as anyone knows DC
is not inconsistent with NF. Unfortunately, no one has any idea how to provide a
relative consistency proof for DC relative to NF.
The only method for relative consistency and independence proofs which has
been used extensively with NF is the Rieger-Bernays permutation method, which
can prove various amusing results, but is limited by the fact that stratiﬁed sen-
tences (i.e, anything which makes sense in TST) are invariant in permutation
models. Orey showed that NF + Counting is essentially stronger than NF using
metamathematical techniques. It is possible to emulate work done for NFU to
show that NF + Inﬁnity + CS proves the relative consistency of the existence of
n-Mahlos, but we do not know that NF + Counting does not prove the existence of

Alternative Set Theories
601
n-Mahlos. Similar considerations apply to other strong extensions of NFU whose
consistency strength is known. Recently, one of the authors has shown that forc-
ing arguments can be carried out in NF, but without some Choice forcing is not
useful. A typical result which can be shown is that if NF + DC is consistent then
NF + DC + “the continuum is well-ordered” is consistent.
The appeal that NF has over NFU for some is that it is a theory of pure sets.
In NF (as in ZF) everything without exception is a set. This appeal should be
resisted or at least viewed with care. Notice that in ZF the idea that something is
a pure set can be expressed and used to deﬁne subsets using the Separation Axiom.
In NFU, the predicate “is a pure set” has no stratiﬁed deﬁnition, and so cannot
be used in a set deﬁnition (if there were such a deﬁnition, then the collection of
pure sets in any model of NFU would be a model of NF, and this is not the case
in known models). These considerations are intimately related to the fact that
there are easy ways to interpret ZFA in ZF and vice versa, whereas all eﬀorts to
interpret NF in NFU have failed.
5.4
Extensional fragments of New Foundations
NFU, which is known to be consistent, diﬀers from NF “only” in that extension-
ality is weakened to allow urelements; it has the same comprehension scheme.
There are other fragments of NF which are known to be consistent which include
the strong Axiom of Extensionality and perforce involve limitations on Stratiﬁed
Comprehension. We describe two of them.
In the same year (1969) that Jensen showed the consistency of NFU, Grishin
[1969] showed the consistency of NF3, the fragment of New Foundations whose
axioms are the strong Extensionality Axiom and all those comprehension axioms
which admit a stratiﬁcation whose range has no more than three elements: that
is, all those axioms which can be typed in TST using types 0,1,2. He also showed
that NF4 is the same theory as NF, and that NF3 + “{{{x}, y} | x ∈y} exists” is
the same theory as NF.
To put this result in context, we cite a model-theoretic result of Specker. He
showed that NF is equiconsistent with TST plus the scheme “φ ↔φ+” (for each
formula φ). This scheme is more brieﬂy called Amb (the ambiguity scheme). This
result is a veriﬁcation of Quine’s motivation for NF. The technique of his proof
generalizes to relate fragments of NF to fragments of TST. For example, NFU is
equiconsistent with TSTU, the version of TST in which urelements are allowed
in each positive type. Grishin’s system NF3 is equiconsistent with TST3 + Amb,
where TST3 is the system of type theory with only three types (0,1,2), and the
notation φ+ of course only applies to formulas not mentioning type 2. It turns
out that all inﬁnite models of TST3 satisfy Amb, so the consistency of NF3 and
indeed of powerful extensions of NF3 is easy to establish, and it appears that
NF3 is a much more natural theory than NF. On the other hand, NF3 is not an
environment in which it is easy to do mathematics (essentially because TST3 is
rather restrictive). Henrard, in unpublished work, has shown that NF3 does admit

602
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
a theory of cardinal number. Pabion has shown that NF3 + Inﬁnity is precisely
as strong as second-order arithmetic.
Marcel Crabb´e [1982] deﬁned a system NFP (for “predicative NF”) and a
stronger system NFI (which Holmes has called “mildly impredicative NF”). NFI
consists of the strong Axiom of Extensionality and those axioms {x | φ} exists”
which admit a stratiﬁcation in which the type assigned to {x | φ} (one higher than
the type assigned to x) is the highest type in the range. NFP further restricts to
those comprehension axioms in which no variable of the type of {x | φ} is bound in
φ. Crabb´e showed that NFI (and so of course NFP) is consistent. NFI is exactly
as strong as second order arithmetic and NFP is weaker than Peano arithmetic.
A striking feature of NFP is that one can make use of the Specker argument
for the failure of Choice to prove Inﬁnity. All the known consistent fragments
(including NFP and NFI) are consistent with Choice. The argument goes like
this. Use ι(x) as a nonce notation for {x}. For any formula φ, for suﬃciently
large n, “{ιn(x) | φ} exists” will be a comprehension axiom of NFP (make n large
enough, and the variable representing ιn(x) will have type higher than any of the
variables in φ). From this it follows that NFP + Union = NF. Argue in NFP
that Inﬁnity holds as follows: if Union holds then Inﬁnity follows by Specker’s
argument in NF; if Union does not hold, then Inﬁnity holds because ﬁnite sets
have unions. There is of course a bit of detail to this argument hidden in this
sketch. NFP has interesting relationships to weak subsystems of arithmetic, and
Holmes has shown that it is precisely equiconsistent with the ramiﬁed theory of
types of Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica without the Axiom of
Reducibility (and it is much simpler!) NFI admits just enough impredicativity
to implement impredicative arithmetic, and is as we observed above precisely as
strong as second-order arithmetic.
5.5
Reﬂections on New Foundations and ZF
Perhaps the single most important point to make about the Quine systems is
that—properly understood—they do not contradict ZF at all. This point is in any
case important, being both fundamental and correct, but it is important also in
the sense that there is a continuing and pressing need to make it. Let us explain.
ZF and ZF-like theories are the endeavour to axiomatise our understanding of
the cumulative hierarchy of well-founded sets. NF casts its net a little wider, in
that it is an attempt to not only do that but to reason about some other sets
as well. It is possible to deﬁne a predicate “is a well-founded set” in NF, and
this predicate2 enables us to reason about well-founded sets in NF. No known NF
theorem about well-founded sets contradicts anything provable in ZF or any large
cardinal upgrade thereof. Models of strong extensions of NFU can be constructed
in which the well-founded sets make up a model of (a strong extension of) ZFC.3 If
2Which of course is unstratiﬁed; were it stratiﬁed, its extension would be a set and we would
have a paradox.
3It is true that NF refutes the Axiom of Choice, but the only known failures of AC involve

Alternative Set Theories
603
you are interested in facts about well-founded sets then you will ﬁnd nothing in NF
to oﬀend you. If you wish to be oﬀended by NF then you will have to believe in the
proposition that all sets are well-founded. Of course a lot of people do believe this
proposition, but one of the most striking things about the set-theoretic literature
is the complete absence of any arguments for it.
Not only does one ﬁnd any
arguments, one is hard put to ﬁnd even an acknowledgement that one might come
in handy. The closest thing we can ﬁnd is Boolos [1971] “There does not seem to
be any argument that is guaranteed to persuade someone who really does not see
the peculiarity of a set’s belonging to itself, or to one of its members etc., that
these states of aﬀairs are peculiar”. NF’s peculiar charm is that it attempts to
axiomatise the behaviour of large collections while taking care not to say anything
that will contradict what we know or believe about well-founded sets. It’s the lover
that the spouse can’t object to. That being so, one would expect NF to be the
toast of Society. But there are several respects in which NF gets what in popular
parlance would be called a bum rap. Admittedly NF does not prove mathematical
induction for unstratiﬁed properties of natural numbers, and it disappoints in
other ways by somehow neglecting to establish that the sets that are conceptually
small have all the nice properties that one might expect them to have. But this
shows merely that we haven’t yet determined what axioms should be added to NF;
that’s our fault not NF’s.4 I think the most illuminating parallel for NF in this
context is with Zermelo set theory, Z. Z is clearly a theory about the cumulative
hierarchy (or at least it has been so interpreted in retrospect)—and although no
one is suggesting that it makes allegations about the cumulative hierarchy that are
false—it does stand accused of not achieving absolutely everything that was asked
of it. NF is an attempt to axiomatise not only the cumulative hierarchy but some
sets beyond it. One shouldn’t expect one’s ﬁrst attempt in this to be successful
any more than one would expect that Z should be not only our ﬁrst word on
the axiomatisation of the cumulative hierarchy but our last as well.5 Clearly we
are going to have to add axioms to NF to ensure that whenever ZF ⊢φ then
NF ⊢φW F (where φW F is the relativisation of φ to the well-founded sets); the
fact that this task has not been completed is no cause to belittle the NF project: it
simply means that there are axioms that remain to be found. One could of course
simply add this aforementioned principle by main force as an axiom scheme, but
the idiomatic and gentler way to achieve this result would be to add judiciously
designed axioms concerning big sets. In NFU the Axiom of Cantorian Sets ensures
that this is true in a certain permutation model. In [Forster, 2006] it is shown how
axioms postulating good behaviour on the part of the T function systematically
correspond to axioms giving the existence of well-founded sets of high rank. Clearly
the sets that in NF studies we call big (following a suggestion of Thomas Forster) as opposed
to large, as in large cardinals in ZF. These are the collections like the universal set, and the set
of all cardinals and the set of all ordinals: collections denoted by expressions which in ZF-like
theories will pick out proper classes. Of course in NFU there is no such problem.
4For NFU, the question of what axioms to add has been extensively investigated, and these
are probably similar to what would be added to NF.
5Why is it that I always ﬁnd my spectacles in the last place I look for them not the ﬁrst?

604
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
this is the way in which we have to go. The reason why nobody has explored this in
the detail which will eventually be needed is that the whole project is stalled—and
will remain stalled until nerves around the consistency question for NF have been
calmed: adding new axioms to a theory not yet known to be consistent invites a
wealth of disparaging metaphors—running before one can walk or building castles
in the air . . . (of course such remarks do not apply to NFU). However, any reason
for disparaging the project-to-ﬁnd-sensible-extensions-for-NF is a reason for trying
to prove NF inconsistent6 and that project seems to have no takers.
In coming to grips with NF the hard part is to fully understand stratiﬁcation,
to know how to recognise a stratiﬁed formula when you see one.
There is an
easy rule of thumb with formulas that are in primitive notation, for one can just
ask oneself whether the formula could become a wﬀof type theory by adding
type indices. It’s harder when one has formulas no longer in primitive notation,
and the reader encounters these diﬃculties very early on, since even something as
basic as the ordered pair is not a set-theoretic notion. How does one determine
whether or not a formula is stratiﬁed when it contains subformulas like y = f(x)?
The technical/notational diﬃculty here lands on top of—as so often—a conceptual
diﬃculty. The answer is that of course one has to ﬁx an implementation of ordered
pair and stick to it. Does that mean that—for formulas involving ordered pairs—
whether or not the given formula is stratiﬁed depends on how one implements
ordered pairs? The answer is ‘yes’ but the situation is not as grave as this suggests.
Let us consider again the formula y = f(x). This is of course a molecular formula,
and how we stratify it will depend on what formula it turns out to be in primitive
notation once we have settled on an implementation of ordered pairs. If we use
Kuratowski ordered pairs then the formula we abbreviate to y = f(x) is stratiﬁed
with x and y having the same type, and that type is three types lower than the type
of f. If we use Quine ordered pairs then the formula we abbreviate to y = f(x) is
stratiﬁed with x and y having the same type, and that type is one type lower than
the type of f. There are yet other implementations of ordered pair under which
the formula we abbreviate to y = f(x) is stratiﬁed with x and y having the same
type, and that type is one or more types lower than the type of f.
The point is that our choice among the possible implementations will aﬀect the
diﬀerence in level between x (and y) and f but will not change the formula from
a stratiﬁed one to an unstratiﬁed one. This is subject to two important provisos:
1. We restrict ourselves to ordered pair implementations that ensure that in
x = ⟨y, z⟩y and z are given the same type.
2. We do not admit self-application: (f(f)).7
6Thus Forster, but Holmes comments that some (not he!) will raise an objection of the form
“NF does not satisfy choice and so is irrelevant to mathematics as she is done”, which does not
necessarily involve doubts about the consistency of NF.
7There is a further important distinction between type diﬀerential 0 and all other cases: the
projection maps are set functions, which allows further constructions which could be construed
as subverting the type security of the pair, though they are mathematically convenient.
For

Alternative Set Theories
605
Thes two provisos are of course related. The second will seem reasonable to
anyone who thinks that mathematics is strongly typed. (The typing system in NF
interacts quite well with the endogenous strong typing system of mathematics; this
is a striking and deep fact that has not so far attracted the attention it should).
If we consider expressions like x = ⟨x, y⟩we see that their truth-value depends
on how we implement ordered pairs. There is a noncontroversial sense (entirely
transparent in the theoretical CS tradition) in which expressions of this kind are
not part of mathematics—in contrast to expressions like x = ⟨y, z⟩which are. The
only formulas whose stratiﬁcation status are implementation-sensitive in this way
are formulas that are not in this sense part of mathematics.
The second one is a bit harder to understand: why should we not have an
implementation that compels y and z to be given diﬀerent types in a stratiﬁcation
of x = ⟨y, z⟩—or even make the whole formula unstratiﬁed?
If we make x = ⟨y, z⟩into something unstratiﬁed then we cannot be sure that
X×Y exists, nor that compositions of relations (that are sets) are sets; converses of
relations might fail to exist; and we will not really be able to do any mathematics.
After all, X × Y is {z | (∃x ∈X)(∃y ∈Y )(z = ⟨x, y⟩)} and if z = ⟨x, y⟩is not
stratiﬁed then the set abstraction expression might not denote a set.
However, even if we muck things up only to the extent of allowing x = ⟨y, z⟩
to be stratiﬁed with y and z of diﬀerent types then we will ﬁnd not only that
some compositions of relations (that are sets) are not sets but also that, for some
big sets X, the identity relation 1X is not a set. For example 1V would not be
a set. Let’s look into this last point a bit more closely. Suppse “x = ⟨y, z⟩” is
stratiﬁed but with y and z being given diﬀerent types. Then X × Y is {z | (∃x ∈
X)(∃y ∈Y )(z = ⟨x, y⟩)} which this time is stratiﬁed, so X × Y is a set. However
if R ⊆X × Y and S ⊆Y × Z then R ◦S is
{w | (∃x ∈X)(∃y ∈Y )(∃z ∈Z)(⟨x, y⟩∈R ∧⟨y, z⟩∈S ∧w = ⟨x, z⟩)}.
This is not stratiﬁed. If the diﬀerence between the types of the two components
of an ordered pair is n, then x and y have types diﬀering by n, and y and z too
have types diﬀering by n, and x and z have types diﬀering by 2n, so although
we can stratify ⟨x, y⟩∈R ∧⟨y, z⟩∈S we will not be able to stratify ⟨x, y⟩∈
R ∧⟨y, z⟩∈S ∧w = ⟨x, z⟩.
The problem with 1X arises because (∃x ∈X)(y = ⟨x, x⟩) is not stratiﬁed, so
its extension is not certain to be a set. By the same token no permutation of a set
can be relied upon to be a set. The (graph of the) relation of equipollence might
fail to be reﬂexive, or symmetrical, or transitive.
The conclusion is that if we want our implementation of mathematical concepts
into set theory to be tractable from the NF point of view, and to deliver the
routine banalities about relational algebra that we take for granted (existence
of 1X, existence of compositions of relations, existence of transitive closures of
example, in NFU the existence of a type-level pair implies Inﬁnity. In either theory, the deﬁnition
of cardinal multiplication is much simpler with a type level pair, but the deﬁnition clearly involves
a subversion of the security of the cartesian product type.

606
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
relations whose graphs are sets, and so on) then we want a pairing/unpairing
function that interprets x = ⟨y, z⟩as a stratiﬁed formula with y and z having the
same type. One such ordered pair is the Kuratowski ordered pair that we all know
and love. As it happens, in NF we usually use the Quine ordered pair which we
deﬁned in section 6.2.3.
Does the diﬀerence between Quine pairs and Kuratowski pairs matter? Much
less than you might think. In some deep sense it doesn’t matter at all.8 Both of
them make the formula “⟨x, y⟩= z” stratiﬁed and give the variables x and y the
same type; z takes a higher type in most cases (never lower). How much higher
depends on the version of ordered pair being used, but there are very few formulas
that come out stratiﬁed on one version of ordered pair but unstratiﬁed on another,
and they are all pathological in ways reminscent of the paradoxes. The best way
to illustrate this is by considering ordinals in NF. (In NF we implement ordinals
as isomorphism classes of well-orderings). For any ordinal α the order type of
the set (and it is a set) of the ordinals below α is well-ordered. In ZF one can
prove that the well-ordering of the ordinals below α is of length α. In NF one
cannot prove this equation for arbitrary α since the formula in the set abstract
whose extension is the graph of the requisite isomorphism is not stratiﬁed for any
implementation of ordered pair. Now any well-ordering R of a set A to length α
gives rise to a well-ordering of {{{a}} | a ∈A}, and if instead one tries to prove
(in NF) that the ordinals below α are isomorphic to the well-ordering of length α
decorated with curly brackets, one ﬁnds that the very assertion that there is an
isomorphism between these two well-orderings comes out stratiﬁed or unstratiﬁed
depending on one’s choice of implementation of ordered pair! This is because, in
some sense, the applications of the pairing function are two deep in well-ordering
of the ordinals below α, but only one deep in the well-ordering of the set of double
singletons. If we use Quine ordered pairs, the assertion is stratiﬁed—and indeed
provable. If one uses Kuratowski ordered pairs (or Wiener ordered pairs) then
the assertion is unstratiﬁed and refutable. However if one uses Kuratowki ordered
pairs there is instead the assertion that the ordinals below α are isomorphic to
the obvious corresponding well-ordering of {{{{{a}}}} | a ∈A}, which comes out
stratiﬁed (and provable). In general for each implementation of ordered pair there
is a depth of nesting of curly brackets which will make a version of this equality
come out stratiﬁed and true. This does not work with deviant implementations of
ordered pair under which “⟨x, y⟩= z” is unstratiﬁed or even with those which are
stratiﬁed but give the variables x and y diﬀerent types.
Let us try to prove Cantor’s theorem.
The key step in showing there is no
surjection f : X →→P(X) by reductio ad absurdum is the construction of the
diagonal set {x ∈X | x ̸∈f(x)}. The proof relies on this object being a set,
which it will be if “x ∈X ∧x ̸∈f(x) ∧f : X →P(X)” is stratiﬁed. This in turn
depends on “(∃y)(y ∈P(X) ∧⟨y, x⟩∈f ∧f : X →P(X))” being stratiﬁed. And
it isn’t stratiﬁed, because “⟨y, x⟩∈f” compels ‘x’ and ‘y’ to be given the same
type, while “f : X →P(X)” will compel ‘y’ to be given a type one higher than
8as long as one does not care whether the projection maps are set functions.

Alternative Set Theories
607
‘x’. This is because we have subformulas ‘x ∈X’ and ‘y ⊆x’. Notice that we can
draw this melancholy conclusion without knowing whether the type of ‘f’ is one
higher than that type of its argument, or two, or three . . . .
However if we try instead to prove that {{x} | x ∈X} is not the same size
as P(X) (the form of Cantor’s theorem appropriate in TST) we ﬁnd that the
diagonal set is deﬁned by a stratiﬁed condition and exists, so the proof succeeds.
This tells us that we cannot prove that |X| = |{{x} | x ∈X}| for arbitrary X:
graphs of restrictions of the singleton function tend not to exist. (If they did, we
would be able to prove Cantor’s theorem in full generality). This gives rise to an
endomorphism T on cardinals, where T(|X|) =: |{{x} | x ∈X}| which we have
seen earlier. T misbehaves in connection with big sets. If |X| = |{{x} | x ∈X}|
we say that X is cantorian. If the singleton function restricted to X exists, we
say that X is strongly cantorian. Sets whose sizes are concrete natural numbers
are strongly cantorian. IN (the set of Frege natural numbers) is cantorian, but
the assertion that it is strongly cantorian (which is the same as the assertion that
every inductively ﬁnite set is cantorian) implies the consistency of NF.
NF has various natural notions of ‘small’. Cantorian and strongly cantorian are
two obvious examples. Strongly Cantorian turns out to be mathematically more
natural. It has nicer closure properties and does more to ensure nice behaviour on
the part of its bearers than cantorian does. Another natural notion is well-founded.
We have recently established [Bowler and Forster, 2009] that every well-founded
set is smaller than T n(|V |) for every concrete n, so there are no big well-founded
sets. Well-Ordered sounds like a notion of smallness too, but there is a theorem
of Hartogs’ that says that there are in some sense arbitrarily large well-ordered
sets. Hartogs’ theorem in the exact form in which it is usually stated in ZF is not
provable in NF but the form of Hartogs’ theorem appropriate to TST is provable.
There is no analogue for well-ordered sets of the result alluded to above for well-
founded sets: there are well-ordered sets whose size is ̸≤T(|V |).
Inductive Deﬁnitions in NF
Mathematics is replete with “inductively” deﬁned sets—sets deﬁned by a recursion.
Any set theory that claims to provide a foundation for mathematics must prove
that these sets exist, and the more transparent the proof is the happier we will all
be. The paradigmatic inductively deﬁned set is IN, the set of natural numbers. It
is the ⊆-least set containing 0 and closed under successor. That is to say it is the
intersection of all sets that contain 0 and are closed under successor. When can
we prove the existence of intersections? Well (as long as Y is nonempty) T Y is a
set because it is a subset of S Y —and that will be a set as long as Y is, because
we have the Axiom of Union. That is the situation in ZF. However we should steel
ourselves for trouble because prima facie there is no reason to suppose that the
collection of all sets-containing-0-and-closed-under-successor is a set. However if
there is even one set X that contains 0 and is closed under successor then we know
that the set IN that we are trying to deﬁne will be a subset of X. If Y is a set-

608
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
containing-0-and-closed-under-successor then X ∩Y will be another such. In these
circumstances the intersection of all sets-containing-0-and-closed-under-successor
is going to be the same as the intersection of all-subsets-of-X-containing-0-and-
closed-under-successor. This last object is certainly going to be a set because it is
a subset of X.
The usual formulation of the Axiom of Inﬁnity in ZF is geared precisely to
the problem of proving that IN—indeed a particular implementation of IN—exists.
It says that there is a set which contains ∅and is closed under λx.x ∪{x}. In
the von Neumann implementation of arithmetic ∅is the implementation of 0 and
λx.x ∪{x} is the implementation of successor. Thus it hands us on a plate an X
containing-0-and-closed-under-successor.
The reader may feel that this is rather ad hoc. It is, and in two ways. For one
thing this form of the Axiom of Inﬁnity is unnecessarily speciﬁc and informative.
It would be equally satisfactory to take the axiom in a form that says merely that
there is an inﬁnite set (one the same size as a proper subset of itself). It is ad
hoc also in the sense that it solves only one case of the problem of proving the
existence/sethood of inductively deﬁned collections. The general problem remains
unsolved: in ZF we cannot in general deﬁne inductively deﬁned sets “top-down”
as the intersection of a suitably closed family of sets; we cannot rely on there auto-
matically being a set that contains the founders and is closed under the operations
in question.9
The predicament can be illustrated by considering two examples of inductively
deﬁned families. In any topological space, the family of Borel sets is the smallest
collection of sets containing all open and closed sets and closed under countable
unions and complementation. In this case we have a set—namely the power set of
the space in question—that contains all open and closed sets and is closed under
complementation and countable union, so we can obtain the family of Borel sets
as a subset of it. In contrast, if we try to prove the sethood of the collection of
hereditarily countable sets (which is the ⊆-least set containing all its countable
subsets) there is no obvious natural set, visible in the light of day, which contains all
its countable subsets.10 What can we do? We can approach the desired collection
“from below” by starting with the set of all the founder objects (which in the case
of HC is empty) and iteratively closing under the operations of interest. In the
case of HC this means adding at each stage—to the stage-in-hand—all countable
subsets of that stage. Then we hope to reach a ﬁxed point. In fact we do reach
one—and after fewer than ω2 steps—but establishing this by purely combinatorial
means requires considerable ingenuity.
Typically these iterative “from below” constructions are done by iteration along
the ordinals. It doesn’t much matter how we implement ordinals, and in principle
9More accurately: we cannot do it as easily. Replacement is a great help but the process is
complex and a known problem for beginners. In Zermelo set theory it is in general impossible,
even with foundation or the Axiom of Rank.
10It is true that Vω1 can be proved to contain all its countable subsets if we use ACω but this
is a red herring, since the existence of HC can be proved without using ACω.

Alternative Set Theories
609
any suﬃciently long well-ordering will do. (This point is not generally appreciated.
The fact that von Neumann ordinals from ω · 2 onwards cannot be proved to exist
in Zermelo doesn’t mean that we cannot in Zermelo prove termination of iterative
processes of arbitrary countable length: we most certainly can). There’s the rub:
how do we know that there always is a suﬃciently long well-ordering?
That’s
where Hartogs’ theorem comes in. Suppose our desired object D can be obtained
as the union of a well-ordered collection of stages that we construct by recursion
over a (any) well-ordering.
Hartogs’ theorem says that for any set X there is
a well-ordering too big to be embeddable into X. Thus if our desired object D
really does exist, then a well-ordering too big to be embeddable into D will be a
well-ordering long enough for us to construct the sequence of stages by recursion
over it. Thus Hartogs’ theorem tells us that if a recursive deﬁnition crashes, it
won’t be because we have run out of ordinals.
Of course we should not expect to be able to prove the sethood of arbitrary
inductively deﬁned collections: some such collections are paradoxical. But what
one would like is to have smooth proofs of the existence/sethood of the nonpara-
doxical collections, and this we do not really have. (A good illustration of this
is the diﬃculty—alluded to above—that we have in proving that the collection of
hereditarily countable sets is a set).
In NF the existence of big sets restores the possibility of direct top-down deﬁni-
tions of inductively deﬁned sets: any inductively deﬁned set that can be deﬁned at
all can be given a direct “top-down” deﬁnition. (This is for the gratifyingly simple
reason that—whatever your founders and operations—the universal set contains
all founders and is closed under all operations, so when we take the intersection of
the set of all sets containing the founders and closed under the operations we are
not taking the intersection of the empty set). Thus we obtain the eﬀect of Har-
togs’ theorem without actually having the theorem itself (as it is usually phrased
in ZF).
That is not to say that every inductively deﬁned collection is a set. An induc-
tively deﬁned collection (least thing containing this and closed under that) will be
a set as long as the property of being-a-set-that-contains-this-and-is-closed-under-
that is stratiﬁed. If that is a stratiﬁed property then the collection of all sets that
contain-this-and-are-closed-under-that is a set and its intersection (which is the
inductively deﬁned collection we want) will be a set. This proviso is important,
because we need somehow to block the existence of arbitrary inductively deﬁned
collections. The trouble is that this stratiﬁcation proviso seems to block too much.
The property of containing-all-your-countable-subsets is not stratiﬁed, so we can-
not use NF axioms to prove the sethood of the intersection of all sets with it.
The existence of HC (the set of well-founded hereditarily countable sets) is not
provable in NF if NF is consistent. One should emphasise here that NF does not
appear to have anything like a proof that HC cannot be a set. There is a suite
of sensible-looking axioms that one can add to NF to get the well-founded sets to
exhibit all the behaviour that ZF says they should. These axioms take the form of
saying that the collections of cantorian (“nice”) cardinals and ordinals are closed

610
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
under certain natural operations.
The stratiﬁcation constraint means that we have to be very careful when im-
plementing these operations. An important example is cardinal exponentiation.
Since (as we have seen) A and {{y} | y ∈A} are not reliably the same size,
the two deﬁnitions of 2α—(i) as |P(A)| where |A| = α or (ii) as |P(A)| where
|{{y} | y ∈A}| = α—are not equivalent as they are in ZF. It makes a diﬀerence
which one we choose. If we choose the second it turns out (easy to check) that the
property of containing a given cardinal α and being closed under exponentiation
is stratiﬁed. This means that the collection {α, 2α, 22α . . .} is a set for all α. Were
we to use the other deﬁnition it wouldn’t be.
However, although such inductive constructions as can be executed at all can
be executed in the direct top-down fashion, it is still possible to import ordinals
into a description of this activity. Suppose our inductive construction starts from
a set X with a stratiﬁed deﬁnition (so it is {x | φ} for some stratiﬁed formula φ
with one free variable) and we want to obtain the least superset of X closed under
some inﬁnitary homogeneous operation. Examples would be: union of countable
subsets; or F(X) =: {y | (∃f : y →→X)( is countable-to-one}. F is the operation
taking us from each stage to the next stage. The collection of F-stages is the least
set containing X, and closed under F and unions of chains. It is of course a set,
and it is—for the usual reasons—well-ordered by ⊆. Therefore one can associate
an ordinal with every F-stage. (As usual there are several ways of doing it: (i) the
set of stages and the set of ordinals are alike well-ordered so there is a canonical
map between them; (ii) each stage bounds an initial segment which has an ordinal
for its length. (ii) is guaranteed to work even though (i) isn’t). Notice that in this
treatment we do not use Hartogs’ theorem.
Now we are in a position to ﬁnd an echo of the ZF way of doing things. The
closure ordinal α is in a weak sense well-behaved. Let f be the map that sends
the ordinal α to the αth stage in the construction. f has a stratiﬁed deﬁnition
without parameters, so the expression
(∀α)(∀β)(f(α) = f(β) ←→f(T(α)) = f(T(β)))
is stratiﬁed (fully stratiﬁed: it has no parameters and only the one free variable)
and so it can be proved by induction on ordinals. This means that if α is the
closure ordinal (that is to say, the least β such that f(β) = f(β + 1)) then so is
T(α).
It would close the circle very nicely if we knew that every closure ordinal of a
stratiﬁed recursion were strongly cantorian, but we see no proof. Perhaps it’s a
very strong assumption.
Armed as we now are with a clearer understanding of recursive deﬁnitions in
NF, we can return to an earlier topic.
There does seem to be a faint chance
that the big sets could yet tell us something about well-founded sets. If we deﬁne
exponentiation of cardinals in NF so that 2α is |P(A)| where α is |{{x} : x ∈A}|—
as we have in fact resolved to do—we ﬁnd that for some cardinals α the cardinal
2α cannot be deﬁned. A brief look at the deﬁnition will reassure us that if α is a

Alternative Set Theories
611
cardinal of the form |{{x} | x ∈A}| then 2α is deﬁned, but that 2α is not deﬁned
if α ̸≤T(|V |). So, for a cardinal α, it may well happen that the sequence
α, 2α, 22α . . .
is ﬁnite.
We now know that this object will always be a set in NF, since the
property of containing α and being closed under exponentiation is stratiﬁed. In
the NF literature this set is called φ(α). Now let A be suitable big set (this is only
ever going to give us interesting results if A is big) and α its cardinal and consider
the sequence
|φ(α)|, |φ(T(α))|, |φ(T 2(α))| . . .
of natural numbers. We can prove that |φ(T(α))| ≥T(|φ(α)|)+1 always; we know
that for some α it can happen that for n suﬃciently large |φ(T n(α))| is ℵ0 but
it is known that, for at least some big α (such as |V |) |φ(T n(α))| is ﬁnite for at
least all concrete n. If |φ(T n(α))| is ﬁnite for all natural numbers n of the model
then the model has a class of natural numbers deﬁnable with a big cardinal α as a
parameter. Prima facie it is a proper class rather than a set because its deﬁnition
is highly unstratiﬁed, but—again prima facie—there is no obvious reason why the
axiom saying that all such classes are sets should be inconsistent. Nor is there
any obvious reason why sets deﬁned in this way with big parameters should be
deﬁnable without them, so we just might have here a way in which big sets can
tell us something about rather more familiar and mundane sets like IN and ℜ.
6
POSITIVE SET THEORY
6.1
Positive set theory from the Fregean notion of set
The Fregean notion of set is about sets as extensions of propositional expressions,
as presented in Frege’s Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. More properly, given that
Frege takes the notion of function as primitive in developing his system, and
particularly in his analysis of propositional expressions, the Fregean notion of
set is about sets as extensions of propositional functions. Anyway, whatever it is
exactly, in its original presentation, it is inconsistent.
This was also true of the ﬁrst systems proposed subsequently by the founders of
the λ-calculus and related combinatory logics, which, like the Fregean paradise of
type-free functions, were aimed at incorporating propositional notions, and which
were thus exposed to paradoxes akin to Russell’s, such as Curry’s paradox.11
Nevertheless, logicians have always been trying to get back into the Fregean
paradise in one way or another. And naturally, since the pure functional part of
Frege’s system, which is essentially the pure λ-calculus, was proved to be consis-
tent, some have been tempted to locate the ﬂaw in Frege’s interpretation of the
propositional component.
11We would here refer the reader to [Seldin, 2009] for a precise account of the history of the
λ-calculus and combinatory logic.

612
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Such a way out is taken in [Aczel, 1980] and followed through in [Flagg and
Myhill, 1987a; Flagg and Myhill, 1987b; Flagg and Myhill, 1989] where consistent
systems of illative λ-calculus are proposed. As noticed in [Flagg and Myhill, 1987a],
that line of research is in fact closely related to much earlier work by Fitch, as
[Fitch, 1948] and papers therein cited. Additionally, a related approach that makes
explicit reference to Fitch’s work as source of inspiration is [Scott, 1975].
All of these proposals apply the ‘method of iterated truth deﬁnitions’, which has
been used successfully (in one variant or another) for consistency proofs of various
systems related to positive set theory, as in [Gilmore, 1974], and whose origin can
thus be traced back to Fitch. However, we shall not elaborate on them herein
as the logics of the corresponding systems are essentially non-classical (excluded
middle fails). That is the price of unrestricted comprehension, after all, to which
one should add the tax of intensionality here, for another drawback common to
those approaches is the loss of the basic principle of extensionality for sets — which
is inherent in the Fregean notion of set.
But was Frege’s original interpretation of the propositional component ﬂawed?
In fact, no, as lately shown in [Libert, 2008b], provided one is willing to restrict
comprehension, of course. And the restriction just consists in proscribing the use
in abstraction of those logical connectives that invalidate the ﬁxed-point theorem,
such as negation and implication, which respectively give rise to Russell’s and
Curry’s paradoxes.
Drastically, but remarkably enough, this indeed suﬃces to
block the paradoxes. The fragment of Frege’s system so obtained is presented as a
system of illative λ-calculus in [Libert, 2008b]. Its pure set-theoretic part, which
is extensional, will provide us with our ﬁrst example of system of (pure) positive
set theory. Here is its axiomatization.
Consider the language of set theory given by the following abstract syntax:
vara :
υ
::=
x, y, z, ...
terma :
τ
::=
υ | {υ | ϕ}
forma :
ϕ
::=
⊥| ⊤| τ1 ∈τ2 |
ϕ1 ∧ϕ2 | ϕ1 ∨ϕ2 | ∀υϕ | ∃υϕ |
¬ϕ | ϕ1 →ϕ2 | ϕ1 ↔ϕ2
Note that the equality relation is not taken as primitive here. As usual, in any
extensional framework, x = y can be deﬁned by ∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y), provided the
following formulation of the Axiom of Extensionality is adopted:
ext :
∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y) →∀z(x ∈z ↔y ∈z)
Positive formulas, which we denote by adding the superscript ‘+’ to metavariables,
are those formulas obtained without using the last line of the formation rules.
Naturally, Positive Comprehension in this language is deﬁned as the Axiom of
Comprehension restricted to the set form+
a of positive formulas, i.e.:
{form+
a } :
∀x(x ∈{x | ϕ+} ↔ϕ+)

Alternative Set Theories
613
And the ﬁrst system of positive set theory on which we shall now focus is:
PSTa :≡ext + {form+
a }
The consistency of PSTa was established in [Hinnion and Libert, 2003], with-
out any reference to Frege’s system. Note that the consistency of {form+
a } can
easily be proved by a term model construction, using the method of iterated truth
deﬁnitions, as in [Gilmore, 1974]; but that extensional term models can indeed
be obtained by that method requires a subtle analysis of it, as shown in [Hinnion
and Libert, 2003]. A historical account of consistency problems for positive com-
prehension principles can be found in [Libert, 2004], where these are traced to
Skolem’s late work, e.g. [Skolem, 1960] which already provides some insight into
another consistency proof of PSTa, as follows.
The appropriate way of looking at sets described by PSTa is as extensions of
propositional functions, indeed.
This was emphasized in [Libert, 2008a] where
natural topological models are considered. And these are obtained in exactly the
same way as the topological models of the pure λ-calculus: they come up from
solutions to the reﬂexive equation U ∼= [U →2] in the category of Scott spaces,
where [U →2] is the set of Scott-continuous functions from U to the Sierpinski
space 2 of truth values12 — whereas we recall that Scott topological models of
the pure λ-calculus appear as solutions to U ∼= [U →U]. Connections with the
λ-calculus being disclosed, it was not long before PSTa could ﬁnally be related in
[Libert, 2008b] to some fragment of Frege’s system.
The condition on a propositional function for its extension to exist here is Scott-
continuity, which can thus be regarded as a safety property for avoidance of the
paradoxes.
Given that [U →2] is naturally isomorphic to the space of Scott
open subsets of U, one may equally look at PSTa as the pure set-theoretic system
associated with the limitation of comprehension to so-called observable predicates.
Moreover, the following ﬁrst-order axiom scheme, whose semantical interpretation
is clear, is then satisﬁed in any topological model of PSTa described above:
(2) :
∃y∀z(z ⊆y ↔∀x(x ∈z →ϕ))
So a natural extension of PSTa as formal system is PST2
a :≡PSTa + (2), which
is our ﬁrst example of a system related to topological set theory.
Any extension of PSTa will, however, be characterized by a rather peculiar
feature:
the non-existence of singletons.
For the reader may have noticed
that the extensional equality relation is not positive, so it cannot be used in
comprehension.
And this seems to be unavoidable, as the consideration of
{x | {y | x ∈x} = {y | ⊥}} will show.13
But this can be related to another
feature of the formalization of PSTa: the use in the object language of the ab-
straction operator ‘{· | −}’, a remnant of the development of that system from
systems with functional abstraction (λ-calculi).
12I.e., 2 := {1, 0}, with 1 as the true, 0 as the false, and where {1} is open, but not {0}.
13Let R := {x | {y | x ∈x} = {y | ⊥}}. We have R ∈R iﬀ{y | R ∈R} = {y | ⊥} iﬀ
R ∈R ↔⊥iﬀ¬(R ∈R).

614
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Although it is related to the Fregean notion of set, such a system as PST2
a
is likely to disconcert anyone who attempts to resurrect Frege’s logicist program
through it. Anyway, as we shall now see, there are more natural versions of positive
set theory which are more appropriate for mathematical purposes.
6.2
Positive set theory seen from the Cantorian point of view
The Cantorian notion of set is sets-as-used-in-mathematics. Despite the emergence
of paradoxes in its na¨ıve formulation, the general understanding was that the
mathematical notion of set should be coherent. This notion is now usually regarded
as being based on an intuitively safe conception of sets as abstract collections,
which we now describe.
In any instance of the abstraction process of set formation, it seems natural to
assume that we must have available all the objects that are to be members of the
set to be constructed, and that this always provides us with a new abstract object,
which therefore cannot be involved in that particular instance of application of the
abstraction process, nor in any previous one, but can be involved in subsequent
ones.
That view is supported by the observation that sets occurring in every clas-
sical ﬁeld of mathematics are indeed obtainable by iterated application of that
“well-founded” abstraction process from some given collection of primitive objects
(e.g. numbers). This gives rise to the intuitive cumulative hierarchy picture: a
universe of sets built up in stages, which appears as the core of any set-theoretic
universe described by what we called ‘ZF-like axiomatizations’ — the underlying
principle of specialized comprehension essentially guaranteeing that that construc-
tion can be carried out.
Let us now have a closer look at sets that can be so obtained ex nihilo in a ﬁnite
number of steps (this will avoid questions about inﬁnity). The collection of those
sets, each of which is obviously ﬁnite, is denoted by Vω. It is called the universe of
hereditarily ﬁnite well-founded sets, which is the ﬁrst limit step of von Neumann’s
implementation of the cumulative hierarchy, i.e.:
V0 := ∅,
Vn+1 := P(Vn),
Vω :=
[
{Vn | n < ω},
where P(·) is the powerset operation available in any ZF-like axiomatization.
As widely known, the set-theoretic structure ⟨Vω; ∈⟩is an inner model of ZF
minus inﬁnity. Note also that ⟨Vω; ∈⟩is somehow captured by the family of (ﬁnite)
set-theoretic structures ⟨Vn; ∈⟩, n > 0, seeing that x ∈y for x, y ∈Vω iﬀthere is
some n > 0 such that x, y ∈Vn and x ∈y. In categorical terms, we say that
⟨Vω; ∈⟩is the inductive (or direct) limit of the ⟨Vn; ∈⟩’s. Let us formalize things
carefully, if perhaps pedantically, in order to make clearer the comparison with
the construction we are going to consider next.
For each n > 0, let in : Vn ֒→Vn+1 : x 7→x be the canonical inclusion
map, and let ⟨Vn; ∈i
n⟩be the set-theoretic structure deﬁned by x ∈i
n y iﬀx ∈
in(y), that is, x ∈y. So ⟨Vn, ∈i
n⟩is nothing but ⟨Vn; ∈⟩. We note that each in

Alternative Set Theories
615
is obviously an injective ∈-morphism of ⟨Vn; ∈i
n⟩into ⟨Vn+1; ∈i
n+1⟩, i.e., x ∈i
n
y implies in(x) ∈i
n+1 in(y).
Thus we have properly deﬁned a direct system
(⟨Vn; ∈i
n⟩, in)0<n<ω of set-theoretic structures, whose so-called direct or inductive
limit is just ⟨Vω; ∈⟩. Indeed, lim
−→i Vn = S{Vn | 0 < n < ω} = Vω, by deﬁnition,
and x ∈i
ω y iﬀthere exists n > 0 such that x ∈i
n y, i.e., iﬀx ∈y.
Given that categorical construction, and the familiar set-theoretic structure that
comes with it, it is natural to look at the dual one, as follows.
Let p1 : V2 ։ V1 : x 7→∅, and then let pn+1 : Vn+2 ։ Vn+1, n > 0, be
inductively deﬁned by pn+1(x) := {pn(y) | y ∈x}. It is easily seen by induction
that pn ◦in = idVn, i.e., the restriction of pn on Vn is idVn, so pn is indeed a
surjection. Now, for each n > 1, let ⟨Vn; ∈p
n⟩be the set-theoretic structure deﬁned
by x ∈p
n y iﬀpn−1(x) ∈y; we conveniently deﬁne ∈p
1 as V1 × V1.
It is easy
to prove that each pn is a surjective ∈-morphism of ⟨Vn+1; ∈p
n+1⟩onto ⟨Vn; ∈p
n⟩,
i.e., x ∈p
n+1 y implies pn(x) ∈p
n pn(y). Thus we have deﬁned an inverse system
(⟨Vn; ∈p
n⟩, pn)0<n<ω of set-theoretic structures, which is naturally associated with
the direct system above. Let ⟨Nω; ∈p
n⟩be the so-called inverse or projective limit
of that system, i.e.,
Nω := lim
←−
p
Vn = {ξ ∈
Y
{Vn | 0 < n < ω} | ∀n > 0, pn(ξn+1) = ξn},
and ξ ∈p
ω ζ iﬀfor all n > 0, ξn ∈p
n ζn. What is that toy, yet natural, set-theoretic
structure a model of?
The ﬁrst thing to note is that ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩is extensional. A proof of this would
make use of the following ‘extension lemma’: given x ∈Vω, ζ ∈Nω, if x ∈p
n ζn for
some n > 0, there exists ξ ∈Nω such that ξn = x and ξ ∈p
ω ζ. We would also
invite the reader to convince himself that ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩is an end-extension of ⟨Vω; ∈⟩.
More precisely, for any x ∈Vω, let ρ(x) be the rank of x, that is, the least n < ω
such that x ∈Vn+1. Then, one can prove that the map e : Vω →Nω deﬁned
by e(x) := (. . . , pρ(x)−1(pρ(x)(x)), pρ(x)(x), x, x, . . .), is an embedding of ⟨Vω; ∈⟩as
initial part of ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩, i.e.: e is an injective ∈-morphism and if ξ ∈p
ω e(y) for
some y ∈Vω, there exists x ∈Vω such that ξ = e(x) and x ∈y. Thereupon we
note that ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩is really a proper extension of ⟨Vω; ∈⟩. For instance, it is easy
to see that pn(Vn) = Vn−1 for all n > 0, so ν := (Vn−1)0<n<ω ∈Nω, and then that
for all ξ in Nω, ξ ∈p
ω ν. Therefore, there is a universal set in ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩, namely ν,
whereas there is no such set in ⟨Vω; ∈⟩. There are by far many other unusual sets
in ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩, simply because Nω has the power of the continuum, whereas Vω is
countable!
As a matter of fact, Nω could have been presented as a topological completion
of Vω, in the same way as the real numbers can be presented as the Cauchy
completion of the rational numbers. The notion of convergence in Nω is deﬁned
so that for all ξ in Nω, ξ = limn→∞e(ξn). In other words, sets in Nω can be
described as limits of hereditarily ﬁnite well-founded sets. Other presentations of
Nω as a mathematical structure can be found in [Abramsky, 1988], where ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩
is depicted as the universe of ﬁnitary non-well-founded sets.

616
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
One precise characterization of Nω is as the solution to a reﬂexive equation of
the form U ∼= Pcl(U) in the category of compact metric spaces, where Pcl(U) is
the set of closed subsets of U. This reminds us of the topological models of PSTa
discussed earlier, which appear as solutions to the equation U ∼= Pop(U) in the
category of Scott spaces, where Pop(U) is the set of open subsets. So this suggests
that set-theoretic universes as ⟨Nω; ∈p
ω⟩could be related to positive set theory
as well.
Actually, such set-theoretic structures turn out to be the topological
models associated with another natural version of positive set theory, which can
be axiomatized as follows.
Consider the language of set theory whose formulation rules are:
varb :
υ
::=
x, y, z, ...
formb :
ϕ
::=
⊥| ⊤| υ1 ∈υ2 |
ϕ1 ∧ϕ2 | ϕ1 ∨ϕ2 | (∀υ1 ∈υ2)ϕ | (∃υ1 ∈υ2)ϕ |
¬ϕ | ϕ1 →ϕ2 | ϕ1 ↔ϕ2
Again, we call positive those formulas obtained without using the last line of the
formation rules, which we indicate by the superscript ‘+’ on metavariables. We
stress the presence of bounded quantiﬁers as primitive positive operators here,
but the absence of the abstractor ‘{· | −}’ as primitive term constructor. Positive
comprehension, that is, the restriction of the Axiom of Comprehension to the set
form+
b of positive formulas, is then expressed in this language by:
{form+
b } :
∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔ϕ+)
And the corresponding system of positive set theory in which we are interested
now is:
PSTb :≡ext + {form+
b }
Note immediately that the equality relation, which is not primitive here, can how-
ever be deﬁned by a positive formula, i.e.,
x = y :≡(∀z ∈y)z ∈x ∧(∀z ∈x)z ∈y.
So singletons are innocent deﬁnable objects in PSTb, in contrast with PSTa.
Thanks to bounded quantiﬁcation, other set-theoretic operations that were not
available in PSTa are now legitimate, as notably the power-set operation, P(y) :=
{x | (∀z ∈x)z ∈y}, which thus can be deﬁned positively according to this crite-
rion. Note also that the usual ‘unbounded’ quantiﬁers can be recovered from the
primitive bounded ones, by deﬁning ∀vϕ as (∀v ∈V)ϕ and ∃vϕ as (∃v ∈V)ϕ,
where V is the universal set, whose existence follows from PSTb.
As said above, the consistency of PSTb can be established by means of Nω,
and more generally of topological models that appear as solutions to the reﬂex-
ive equation U ∼= Pcl(U) in some category of compact Hausdorﬀspaces. These
topological models clearly satisfy the dual of the axiom scheme (2) in Section 2,
namely:
(3) :
∃y∀z(y ⊆z ↔∀x(ϕ →x ∈z))

Alternative Set Theories
617
So the natural extension of PSTb as formal system is PST3
b :≡PSTb + (3).
Interestingly, it was shown in [Esser, 1997]14 that ZF minus inﬁnity can be
interpreted within PST3
b , which deﬁnitely distinguishes that system from PST2
a .
In fact, ZF (with inﬁnity) is naturally interpretable in PST3
b augmented with von
Neumann’s Axiom of Inﬁnity.15
The resulting system, called GPK+
∞in [Esser,
1997], is then proved to be mutually interpretable with a large cardinal extension
of the Kelley-Morse set theory. So there is undoubtedly a natural version of positive
set theory which is at least as suitable as ZF for mathematical purposes.
The relative consistency of GPK+
∞in [Esser, 1997] was essentially established
in [Forti and Hinnion, 1989], which provides a general construction of a hierarchy
of Nα’s, such that for any weakly compact cardinal κ, Nκ is a topological model of
GPK+
∞containing Vκ (the von Neumann hierarchy up to κ). Such structures, sub-
sequently called hyperuniverses, have been extensively studied since then, e.g. in
[Forti and Honsell, 1996a; Forti and Honsell, 1996b]. As is explained in [Forti and
Hinnion, 1989], they were independently investigated in [Weydert, 1989] for the
purpose of topological set theory, to which subject we shall now turn. Note inci-
dentally that the constructions given in [Forti and Hinnion, 1989] and [Weydert,
1989] were both inspired by the pioneering work of Malitz [1976], which can also
be classed as a contribution to topological set theory.
6.3
Topological set theory
We have met two variants of positive set theory, namely PSTa and PSTb, which
can respectively be extended by the (ﬁrst-order) topological axioms schemes (2)
and (3).16 These were suggested by the corresponding topological models, whose
interest is manifest: in such topological set-theoretic structures, even though not
all deﬁnable subsets of the domain can be abstracted (because of Russell’s para-
dox), each of these can at least be optimally approximated by the largest [resp. the
smallest] set contained in [resp. containing] it. So each of the axiom schemes (2)
and (3) provides on its own an approximate version of the na¨ıve comprehension
scheme.
Such an idea of approximation of na¨ıve comprehension — the essence of topo-
logical set theory — originated in a paper by Skala [1974], which was subsequently
reﬁned by Manakos [1984]. Although Skala’s paper is cited in the references of
[Weydert, 1989] and [Malitz, 1976], and so might have been a source of inspiration
in those works, the proposal she made is clearly distinguishable from the others in
that her system is based upon both (2) and (3), together with an axiom for the
14Esser’s thesis was subsequently published in [Esser, 2004]; see also [Esser, 1999] for a related
paper.
15In the form: ‘there exists an inﬁnite von Neumann ordinal’.
16By the way, we mention that PSTa could equally be extended by (3), by duality, that is,
PST3
a is consistent (see [Libert, 2008a] for details). On the other hand, PST2
b is inconsistent
merely because (2) is incompatible with the existence of all singletons (see [Libert and Esser,
2005]).

618
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
existence of complements, which we denote by (C).17 So it is not at all a system of
positive set theory! Besides, Skala’s proposal is purely axiomatic, with no attempt
at giving any topological characterization of the models. As shown in [Libert and
Esser, 2005], the model theory of Skala’s system is quite simple though.
The natural models of (2)+(3)+(C) appear as solutions to a reﬂexive equation
of the form U ≃Pclop(U) in the category of quasi-discrete spaces, where Pclop(U)
is the set of clopen subsets of U, which precisely coincides for quasi-discrete spaces
with both Pcl(U) and Pop(U) – the reason why both (2) and (3) hold in these
models. Thereupon we recall that Pclop(U) is a complete Boolean algebra, so there
is actually no restriction in Skala’s set theory on the use of logical connectives and
quantiﬁers in comprehension, which is in contrast with the situation in positive set
theory. The restriction, for there should be one, is relegated to the atomic level
and is rather of a syntactical nature here, as follows.
Consider the simple language of set theory whose formation rules are:
varc :
υ
::=
x, y, z, ...
formc :
ϕ
::=
⊥| ⊤| υ1 ∈υ2 |
ϕ1 ∧ϕ2 | ϕ1 ∨ϕ2 | ∀υϕ | ∃υϕ |
¬ϕ | ϕ1 →ϕ2 | ϕ1 ↔ϕ2
Let ϕ[υ[ denote any formula of formc in which the variable υ does not appear on
the right-hand side of ∈, and let formc[υ[ be the set of those formulas. Given
a concrete variable, say x, we then naturally deﬁne the restriction of the axiom
scheme of Comprehension to formc[x[ by:
{formc[x[} :
∃y∀x(x ∈y ↔ϕ[x[)
It is proved in [Libert and Esser, 2005] that ext + (2) + (3) + (C) is equivalent
to ext + {formc[x[}. So Skala’s set theory can equally be presented as a type-free
system based on a very simple syntactic criterion for avoidance of the paradoxes,
which, in view of Russell’s paradox, remains the only option if one wants a Boolean
set-theoretic universe in a type-free setting.18 But this has drastic consequences.
Thus we observe that x = y, which was deﬁned by ∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y), is neither
in formc[x[ nor in formc[y[. Hence, the extensional equality relation cannot be
used in instances of comprehension. However, what is called the indiscernibility
relation, which is deﬁned by x .= y :≡∀z(x ∈z ↔y ∈z), can be used instead.
Furthermore, quasi-singletons, i.e., sets of the form {x | x .= y}, appear as atomic
objects in Skala’s set theory, for any set is provably equal to the union of the
quasi-singletons of its members. That the na¨ıve conception of set can somehow
be salvaged when indiscernibility plays the role of equality may not be devoid
of philosophical interest.
This was taken seriously in [Apostoli and Kanda, to
17Manakos [1984] dropped this last assumption in order to consider other possible extensions
of the basic system (2) + (3); see [Libert and Esser, 2005] for details.
18Clearly, the restriction on the abstracted variable to appear on left-hand side of ∈, which is
the other option, would seem even less sensible.

Alternative Set Theories
619
appear; Apostoli and Kanda, 2000], where elaborated quasi-discrete solutions to
U ≃Pclop(U) are constructed, without any reference to Skala set theory, but in
connection with rough set theory.
On the other hand, the non-deﬁnability of the usual operation of forming single-
tons does not entail their non-existence. As a matter of fact, it is proved in [Libert
and Esser, 2005] that any given set-theoretic universe in which all singletons exist
(e.g. a model of ZF) can consistently be embedded as the class of objects admit-
ting singletons in some model of Skala’s set theory. In other words, although it is
intrinsically weak, Skala’s system is very adaptable.
In any case, such an axiomatic set theory should not be regarded as (and then
compared to) a classical axiom system, that is, one for which we have in mind
some standard interpretation — which is the case of ZF for instance. Rather, it
appears as a general axiom system, as the one of the theory of Boolean algebras,
to which it is closely related. After all, thinking of sets as extensions of predicates,
one might expect that some set-theoretic universe or another could reﬂect the
Boolean structure of classical logic.
Hopefully the various set-theoretic systems presented in this survey will have at
least convinced the reader of what mathematicians have discovered through their
investigations, namely that set theory is deﬁnitely not unique.
6.4
A development of mathematics in GPK+
∞
In this section we give a brief self-contained presentation of Oliver Esser’s system
GPK+
∞of [Esser, 1999], the most mathematically eﬀective system of positive set
theory.
GPK+
∞is a ﬁrst-order theory with equality and membership as primitive rela-
tions.
Extensionality: (∀AB.(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B) →A = B)
Deﬁnition: Let the class of (bounded) positive formulas be the smallest class
containing the formula x ̸= x (useful because uniformly false), all atomic for-
mulas, and closed under conjunction, disjunction, bounded universal quan-
tiﬁcation (∀x ∈A.φ) and existential quantiﬁcation (∃x ∈A.φ).
Positive Comprehension: For any positive formula φ in which A does not ap-
pear, (∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)).
Closure: For any formula φ, there is a set C such that (∀D.C ⊆D ↔(∀x.φ →
x ∈D)) (a set minimal in the inclusion order among all sets which include
the possibly proper class {x | φ}). This is what was referred to above as
(3) and it should be noted that this is equivalent to the assertion that any
deﬁnable class of sets has set intersection.
Deﬁnition: The von Neumann ordinal ω is the intersection of all sets which
contain ∅and are closed under the von Neumann successor operation x 7→
x ∪{x}. By Closure, ω is a set.

620
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Deﬁnition: A set x is isolated iﬀ{x}c = {y | y ̸= x} is a set.
Inﬁnity: Each element of ω is isolated. (We have stated this axiom in a form
speciﬁcally designed to make our brief development more eﬃcient).
We start working toward an interpretation of ZF in this theory.
Observation: {x, y} is a set ({z | z = x ∨z = y}) Moreover z = {x, y} is
equivalent to a positive formula x ∈z ∧y ∈z ∧(∀w ∈z.z = x ∨z = y). It is
important in a development of this theory to know what term constructions
can appear freely in positive formulas, as we have just shown the unordered
pair (and so the usual ordered pair) can. Similarly, x ∪y and x ∩y can be
mentioned freely in positive formulas. For any set x, S x = {y | ∃z ∈x.y ∈
z} and P(x) = {y | ∀z ∈y.z ∈x}. Note that the axioms of Pairing, Union,
and Power Set of the usual set theory thus hold. y = S x is known to be
equivalent to a positive formula; y = P(x) is not known to expressible in
positive form. We cannot expect the Axiom of Separation to hold, as the
formula φ determining an instance of the axiom is not necessarily positive.
Observation: Let A be a set all of whose elements are isolated. Then {x ∈A | φ}
exists for every formula φ by an application of Closure (take the intersection
of all the sets A \ {y} such that y ∈A and ¬φ[y/x].
Similarly, if φ(x, y) is a functional formula ((∀x.(∃y!.φ(x, y)))) and A is a
set all of whose elements are isolated, then {y | (∃x ∈A.φ(x, y))} is a set.
Let F ∗be the closure of the class of all (x, y) such that φ(x, y). There is a
set {(x, y) | x ∈A ∧(x, y) ∈F ∗}. Let F(x) denote the unique y such that
φ(x, y). For each x ∈A, there is a set {(u, v) | x ̸= u ∨v = F(x)}. From the
existence of these sets, it follows that the intersection of all sets containing
the class {y | (∃x ∈A.φ(x, y))} is exactly that class, and so the class is a set.
Observation: If all elements of A are isolated, then A is isolated. The function
d such that d(x) = V \ {x} for each x ∈A is a set by the second half of
the previous observation.
We want to show that Ac is a set.
x ̸= A is
equivalent to (∃y ∈A.y ̸= x) ∨(∃y ∈x.y ̸∈A). This is in turn equivalent
to (∃y ∈A.y ∈d(x)) ∨(∃y ∈x.(∀z ∈A.y ∈d(z))). Finally, u ∈d(v) is
equivalent to (u, v) ∈d, and we know that pairs can be mentioned freely in
positive formulas. Since x ̸= A is equivalent to a positive formula, Ac is a
set as desired.
The observations above are suﬃcient to suggest that the class of hereditarily
isolated sets satisﬁes the axioms of ZF, though some additional details would need
to be attended to in a full presentation.
One can then develop an adequate theory of proper classes of hereditarily iso-
lated sets (closures of arbitrary classes of hereditarily isolated sets). This theory
will satisfy Kelley-Morse set theory, with one further surprise: one can prove that

Alternative Set Theories
621
the proper class ordinal in the interpreted Kelley-Morse set theory is weakly com-
pact.
Conversely, there is a construction of a model of GPK+
∞in ZFC with a weakly
compact, and in fact one can show that GPK+
∞is precisely as strong as Kelley-
Morse set theory with the proper class ordinal weakly compact. This is consider-
ably stronger than ZFC.
An interesting weaker theory is obtained if one drops the Axiom of Inﬁnity
(which was referred to above as PST3
b , after the description of its natural model
Nω). This allows ω to have a non-isolated element, namely ω itself (ω becomes
the topological limit point of the ﬁnite von Neumann ordinals). This theory has
the same strength as second-order arithmetic.
7
SYSTEMS MOTIVATED BY NONSTANDARD ANALYSIS
In this section we discuss systems of set theory which can be regarded as motivated
by the nonstandard analysis of Abraham Robinson [1966]. These theories can be
characterized by the presence of what Vopˇenka calls proper semisets: subcollec-
tions of sets which are proper classes. Of course, any set theory with a universal
set must have proper semisets (the Russell class being a subclass of the universe)
but in the theories here we postulate that “small” familiar sets such as N have
proper subclasses.
7.1
Nonstandard analysis
Consider the ﬁrst-order theory of the real numbers (the precise details of this
theory are not important here). The collection of sentences {c > 0, c < 1, c <
1
2, . . . , c < 1
n, . . .}, where c is a new constant, is consistent (any ﬁnite subcollection
is readily satisﬁed by taking c to be positive and suﬃciently small), so by the
compactness theorem the theory of the real numbers has models in which this
collection of sentences is satisﬁed.
In such a model, we can think of c as a positive inﬁnitesimal, for c is smaller than
any of the familiar real numbers, because it is smaller than all the reciprocals of
the familiar natural numbers. But note that of course there are “natural numbers”
N of the model such that
1
N < c.
If we deﬁne an “inﬁnitesimal” as any real (of our nonstandard model) which is
smaller than all standard 1
n in absolute value (a notion which cannot be deﬁned
in terms of the theory of the reals with which we started, because the notion of
a standard natural number does not make sense there), then we can attempt the
program of 17th century analysis.
For example, if f is a function from the reals to the reals deﬁnable in our original
theory of real numbers, with a derivative f ′(x), it is straightforward to show that
f(x+dx)−f(x)
dx
diﬀers inﬁnitesimally from f ′(x). So we can deﬁne f ′(x) for each
standard real x as the unique standard real y which diﬀers inﬁnitesimally from

622
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
f(x+dx)−f(x)
dx
for each inﬁnitesimal dx. A very appealing development of analysis
in this style is possible.
Robinson presented nonstandard analysis in the framework of model theory.
In his approach, one considers a model R∗of the theory of the real numbers,
containing all the usual reals (which are called the “standard” reals) and having
the property that any real of the model which is bounded in absolute value by a
standard real diﬀers inﬁnitesimally from one of the standard reals.
There is an alternative approach, which is to “augment” our set theory with
axioms which ensure that inﬁnite sets such as N or R have the properties we expect
and at the same time have proper subclasses (proper semisets) which can play the
role of the collections of “standard” reals or natural numbers in the discussion
above.
7.2
Nelson’s IST
Without further ado, we present Nelson’s IST (internal set theory, deﬁned in [Nel-
son, 1977]) which is motivated exactly by the desire to streamline the development
of nonstandard analysis.
IST is a ﬁrst-order theory with the familiar predicates of equality and mem-
bership and an additional predicate st(x) of “standardness”. It is convenient to
abbreviate (∀x.st(x) →φ) as (∀stx.φ) and (∃x.st(x) ∧φ) as (∃stx.φ).
The axioms of IST are of two sorts. First we have the axioms of standard set
theory. Nelson uses the axioms of ZFC, but one could equally well use a weaker
theory such as Mac Lane set theory. The axioms of Separation and Replacement of
IST are modiﬁed in that the formulas mentioned in the schemes may not mention
the predicate st: sets may not be deﬁned using the predicate st.
There are three additional axioms in Nelson’s theory which directly support the
program of standard analysis.
Idealization: Let φ(x, y) be a formula not mentioning st or the variable f (it may
have nonstandard parameters). “for every standard ﬁnite set f, (∃x.(∀y ∈
f.φ(x, y)))” is equivalent to “(∃x.(∀sty.φ(x, y)))”.
Corollary: If φ is taken to be the formula “x is ﬁnite and y ∈x”, we observe that
the ﬁrst formula is true and by Idealization equivalent to the second, and so
we assert that there is a ﬁnite set which contains every standard object.
Standardization: For every standard set A, and for any formula φ whatso-
ever (this formula may mention st and nonstandard parameters freely),
(∃stB.(∀stx.x ∈B ↔x ∈A ∧φ)): the standard elements x of B are ex-
actly the standard elements x of A such that φ.
Transfer: For any formula φ not mentioning the predicate st and containing only
standard parameters, (∀x.φ) ↔(∀stx.φ).

Alternative Set Theories
623
The consistency of these axioms is readily established by standard techniques of
model theory. The advantage for the nonstandard analyst is that they can then use
IST as their set-theoretic framework and not have to directly discuss nonstandard
models of (say) the reals at all.
For the set theorist, it is interesting that the axioms of IST are not recognizably
about analysis: they are set-theoretical in character, though certainly what they
assert is rather odd.
We review how these axioms support the program of nonstandard analysis.
Suppose that the reals are implemented as left sets of Dedekind cuts in the rationals
(which can in turn be supposed implemented in set theory in a quuite usual way).
Idealization gives us a positive inﬁnitesimal real number.
We deﬁne an in-
ﬁnitesimal as a real number which is less in absolute value than any standard real
number. Obviously 0 is inﬁnitesimal. But we can deﬁne a positive inﬁnitesimal:
let ǫ be the intersection of all positive reals (considered as left sets of Dedekind cuts
in the rationals) which belong to a speciﬁc ﬁnite set F containing all standard sets
as elements (the existence of such a set being a corollary of Idealization). Clearly
ǫ is a positive real (it is the minimum of a ﬁnite set of reals) but it is also less than
every positive standard real (because all of them belong to F).
Standardization gives us a unique standard real number inﬁnitesimally close to
any real number which is bounded in absolute value by some standard real. Let r
be a real number which is bounded above in absolute value by some standard real.
By Standardization, there is a standard set r∗which contains the same standard
elements (r being a subset of the standard set of rationals). It is straightforward
to use Transfer to verify that r∗is also a real number (since all standard elements
of r∗are rational numbers, all elements of r∗without exception are rational num-
bers; since the standard elements of r∗make up a downward closed subset of the
standard reals without a largest element, r∗itself is a downward closed subset of
the reals without a largest element: it is important here than r is bounded above
in absolute value by some standard real, as otherwise r∗could be either empty
or the entire set of rationals and so of course not a real). If r∗diﬀered from r
by a non-inﬁnitesimal amount, there would be a standard real in their symmetric
diﬀerence, contrary to the choice of r∗.
Transfer (and the restriction of Separation and Replacement to formulas not
mentioning the new predicate st) ensures that the underlying set theory (and
so the implementation of the reals in the underlying set theory) works exactly
as expected, in spite of the obvious weirdness caused by the presence of proper
subclasses in every inﬁnite set (strictly speaking, we do not have a theory of classes
in IST, but we will in the theory considered next, and it would be straightforward
to add a theory of classes to IST itself)
7.3
Vopˇenka’s alternative set theory
The alternative set theory of Vopˇenka [1979] is also usable for nonstandard anal-
ysis, but it is conceptually more diﬀerent from the usual set theories. It is also

624
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
much weaker, but mathematically rather interesting.
Vopˇenka’s theory has sets and classes. We have the usual axioms of Exten-
sionality and Class Comprehension. We follow the convention that capital letters
represent classes and lower-case letters represent sets.
Deﬁnition: “x is a set” means (∃A.x ∈A) as usual.
Extensionality: (∀AB.(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B) →A = B). Classes with the same
elements are the same.
Class Comprehension: For any formula φ in which A is not free, the universal
closure of (∃A.(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ)) is an axiom.
The axioms for sets are quite surprising. The theory asserted of sets is equivalent
to ZFC with the Axiom of Inﬁnity replaced by its negation, though the form
presented has independent interest as a way to present the theory of hereditarily
ﬁnite sets.
Empty set: The empty class ∅(which exists by class comprehension) is a set.
Successor: For any sets x and y, x ∪{y} = {z | z ∈x ∨z = y}, which exists by
class comprehension, is a set.
Induction: For any formula φ in which all parameters are sets and all quantiﬁers
are bounded in the class V of all sets, φ[∅/z] ∧(∀xy ∈V.φ[x/z] ∧φ[y/z] →
φ[x ∪{y}/z]) →(∀z ∈V.φ). This axiom says in eﬀect that all sets are built
up by the iterated application of the successor operation starting with the
empty set.
The Axiom of Foundation for sets is usually listed as an axiom but follows from
Induction.
Now come the peculiarities obviously related to nonstandard analysis.
Deﬁnition: A semiset is a subclass of a set. A proper semiset is a semiset which
is not a set.
Semisets: There is a proper semiset.
Deﬁnition: A set is ﬁnite iﬀall of its subclasses are sets.
Deﬁnition: An order of type ω is a well-ordering whose domain is not ﬁnite but
all initial segments of which have ﬁnite domain. A class is countable if there
is a class bijection between it and the domain of an order of type ω. The
class of ﬁnite von Neumann ordinals is provably an order of type ω.
Prolongation: Each countable function F can be extended to a set function.

Alternative Set Theories
625
The Axiom of Semisets has the eﬀect of the Idealization Axiom in IST (it ensures
that there are nonstandard sets, in this case nonstandard hereditarily ﬁnite sets).
The notion of ﬁnite here can be understood as (roughly) capturing the notion of a
set of standard ﬁnite size. The function of the Axiom of Prolongation is similar to
that of standardization in IST. It is a distinct oddity of the alternative set theory
as an implementation of nonstandard analysis that there is no analogue of the
Axiom of Transfer.
We review the construction of number systems. There are two ﬂavors of natural
numbers: the system of all the von Neumann ordinals (nonstandard naturals) and
the system of ﬁnite von Neumann ordinals (standard naturals). The real numbers
can be deﬁned as Dedekind cuts in the standard rationals (ratios of ﬁnite natural
numbers and their additive inverses): these are not sets, but prolongation can
be used to show that any real can be approximated inﬁnitesimally by nonstan-
dard rationals, and an interesting nonstandard analysis (not really the same as
Robinson’s) can be developed.
There are two more axioms in Vopˇenka’s system.
Vopˇenka considers representations of superclasses of classes using relations on
sets. A class relation R on a class A is said to code the superclass of inverse images
of elements of A under R. A class relation R on a class A is said to extensionally
code this superclass if distinct elements of A have distinct preimages. He “tidies
up” the theory of such codings by adopting the very technical
Axiom of Extensional Coding: Every collection of classes which is codable is
extensionally codable.
The ﬁnal axiom tidies up the theory of inﬁnite cardinality.
Axiom of Cardinalities: Any two uncountable classes are the same size (i.e,
there is a class bijection between them).
Extensional Coding and Cardinalities together can prove Choice (any class can
be well-ordered). Since Choice easily implies Extensional Coding, the former axiom
might seem more natural. As in pocket set theory, there are only two inﬁnite
cardinalities, ℵ0 and c. ℵ0 is here the cardinality of the collection of standard
natural numbers, and c is the cardinality of the collection of all natural numbers
(?!).
A model of the alternative set theory in the usual set theory is a nonstandard
model of Vω of size ω1 in which every countable external function extends to a
function in the model. It might be best to suppose that this model is constructed
inside L (the constructible universe) so that the Axiom of Cardinalities will be
satisﬁed. The Axiom of Extensional Coding follows from Choice in the ambient
set theory.

626
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
8
CURIOSITIES
In this section we introduce two eccentric theories. One of them has the property
which is usually ascribed to New Foundations (we believe not entirely fairly) of
being motivated by a syntactical trick without any semantic motivation.
The
double extension set theory of Andrzej Kisielewicz deﬁnitely has this property
(and it is not known whether it is consistent).
The other is one of the strongest set theories ever proposed. It is known that
it is inconsistent with ZFC that there is a proper elementary embedding from the
universe to itself. But this proof does not work in Zermelo set theory: Zermelo set
theory with an axiom asserting that there is an elementary embedding from V to
V is of the order of consistency strength of the strongest extensions of ZFC that
have been proposed.
8.1
Double extension set theory
Andrzej Kisielewicz has proposed in two papers (describing three systems: the not-
known-to-be-inconsistent one is described in [Kisielewicz, 1998])) that the para-
doxes of set theory can be averted by providing two diﬀerent membership relations,
and allowing extensions for each relation to be deﬁned using formulas in the other
relation. His strongest systems have been shown to be inconsistent by Holmes
[2004]. Holmes [2005] also showed that the ordinals in his weaker system have
startling properties.
We describe the version of Kisielwicz’s theory which is not known to be incon-
sistent. This is a ﬁrst-order theory with equality and two primitive relations ∈
and ǫ, both of which are to be thought of as membership. For any formula φ, the
formula φ∗is obtained by replacing ∈with ǫ and vice versa in φ.
Deﬁnition: A set x is said to be regular iﬀ(∀y, y ∈x ↔y ǫ x) (i.e., if it has the
same extension with respect to both membership relations).
Axiom of Comprehension: For each formula φ which does not mention ǫ, in
which any parameters are regular, and in which the variable A is not free,
(∃A.(∀x.x ǫ A ↔φ)∧(∀x.x ∈A ↔φ∗)). The object A is denoted by {x | φ}.
Axiom of Mixed Extensionality: (∀AB.(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ǫ B) →A = B) Note
that any sets shown to be equal by mixed extensionality are necessarily
regular.
Deﬁnition: We say that x is partially contained in y iﬀ(∀z.z ∈x →z ∈y) ∨
(∀z.z ǫ x →z ǫ y). We say that a set has regular elements iﬀall of its elements
in either sense are regular.
Axiom of Regular Containment: Any set partially contained in a set with
regular elements is regular.

Alternative Set Theories
627
This set theory avoids Russell’s paradox in the following curious way. There is
a set R = {x | x ∈x} by Comprehension, but we have to recall what this means:
x ǫ R ↔x ∈x and x ∈R ↔x ǫ x. Thus we have R ∈R ↔¬R ǫ R: we conclude
that R is not regular.
This theory is at least as strong as ZF (the class of hereditarily regular sets
satisﬁes ZF), but the presentation of the proof is hampered by the extremely
counterintuitive character of the reasoning involved: Holmes has commented that
computer proof checking really recommends itself when reasoning with this system,
because of the curious interchanges of the two membership relations in applica-
tions of comprehension. An important observation is that the proof that double
extension set theory is strong turns out to be driven by a not immediately obvious
formal resemblance of this theory to the Ackermann set theory discussed above.
The most recent result about this theory (whose consistency remains an entirely
open question) is the result of Holmes that the formal symmetry between the two
membership relations is broken: the sequence of von Neumann ordinals in terms
of one of the relations is a proper initial segment of the sequence of von Neumann
ordinals deﬁned in terms of the other.
This theory would have some real interest if it could be showed to be consistent
with respect to ZFC or some generally accepted extension thereof, because it is
remarkably economical in its notions and axioms.
But it is in practical terms
rather hard to reason in.
8.2
Zermelo set theory with an elementary embedding
It is a theorem of ZFC due to Kunen [1971] that there is no nontrivial elementary
embedding from V to V . The status of ZF with an axiom scheme asserting the
existence of such an embedding is unclear (this extension of ZF would be extremely
strong).
Kunen’s proof depends on examination of the limit of the jn(κ)’s, where j is
the elementary embedding and κ is the ﬁrst ordinal moved by j. This suggests
that it might be proﬁtable to consider Zermelo set theory with an elementary
embedding (which would have a model if it were consistent with ZFC that there
is an elementary embedding from a limit rank onto itself, which is among the
strongest “axioms of inﬁnity” ever proposed). The Axiom of Rank is useful here,
as one wants an elementary embedding which moves a rank, not one which merely
moves an ordinal (the latter being not obviously strong in Zermelo set theory).
We present a set of axioms for a ﬁrst-order theory with primitives equality,
membership, and a function j.
An equivalent theory was introduced by Paul
Corazza in private discussions with one of the authors (Holmes): we present it
in a slightly diﬀerent way. The theory presented in [Corazza, 2000] appears to
be essentially the same, but the fact that it is naturally viewed as a version of
Zermelo set theory rather than ZFC seems not to be mentioned.
Extensionality: (∀AB.(∀x.x ∈A ↔x ∈B) →A = B)

628
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
Separation: For any formula φ in which the variable A is not free, (∀B.∃A.(∀x.x ∈
A ↔x ∈B ∧φ)). A is called {x ∈B | φ} as usual.
Power Set: (∀x.(∃y.(∀z.z ∈y ↔z ⊆x)))
Rank: Every set is included in a rank (referring back to the deﬁnition of hierarchy
and rank in our discussion of Zermelo set theory and Mac Lane set theory
above).
Elementarity: For any formula φ in which j is not mentioned and in which no
variable other than x appears free, (∀x.φ ↔φ[j(x)/x]).
Nontriviality: There is a rank r such that j(r) ̸= r.
Choice: Every nonempty collection of disjoint sets has a choice set.
We have enjoyed stating these axioms minimally. It should be noted that Pairing
and Union can be deduced from the axioms given and the Axiom of Rank just as
in Zermelo or Mac Lane set theory with Rank. Inﬁnity is not needed because it is
straightforward to show that a rank moved by j must be inﬁnite.
Further, it is straightforward to prove that the index κ of the ﬁrst rank moved by
j is inaccessible, Mahlo, weakly compact, measurable, etc. It follows further that
the Axiom of Replacement holds for all formulas not mentioning j: the apparent
weakness of this system is illusory. It could further be augmented with classes
(with the embedding j extending to classes, and classes freely deﬁnable using j
just as j can be freely used in instances of Separation in the version given here).
9
CONCLUSIONS
We believe that there are two conclusions to be drawn from this survey, one positive
and one negative, for a program of alternative set theory.
The positive result is that there are mathematically ﬂuent and useful systems
of alternative set theory. The most unequivocal examples of this are quite close to
standard set theory: Nelson’s IST and the theory ZFC– + AFA are modiﬁcations
of ZFC speciﬁcally designed to facilitate certain kinds of mathematics, and they
are ﬁt for their respective purposes. Further, there are at least two systems which
at least appear to be conceptually fundamentally diﬀerent from ZFC in which it is
clear that mathematics can be done. These are the positive set theory GPK+
∞of
Esser and reasonably strong extensions of NFU (practical considerations suggest
that at least the axioms of Choice and Counting would be desirable).
The negative result (which on reﬂection might not be too negative) is that no
fundamentally diﬀerent picture of the mathematical universe emerges from the
alternative theories. Of course certain advocates of some of these theories might
dispute this. Our exact claim is that all these theories are mutually interpretable
in well-understood ways (except where one theory is much stronger than another:
we can interpret the alternative set theory in Mac Lane set theory but of course

Alternative Set Theories
629
not vice versa). There is no mathematics which can be done in one theory but not
in another (except where very low consistency strength is a barrier, as in the case
of pocket set theory or the alternative set theory). We do not agree with the claim
made by some that a theory such as NFU can only be understood to be consistent
via its interpretation in ZFC (and so that it is not an independent approach to
mathematics); we have shown elsewhere that a self-contained motivation of and
development of NFU up to the consistency proof can be made entirely within the
simple theory of types, and motivated in a way which has nothing to do with ZFC.
The one possible exception is NF itself, simply because we do not know what a
model of NF looks like: there might possibly be some fundamental idea quite alien
to the ZF-iste view of things found in a construction of a model of NF (though we
do not expect this). The situation in NFU + Inﬁnity + Choice is well-understood:
the advocate of this theory will discover in the theory of isomorphism classes
of well-founded extensional relations a structure precisely analogous to an initial
segment of the cumulative hierarchy of the usual set theory. In GPK+
∞, the ranks
of the cumulative hierarchy indexed by isolated ordinals are there to be examined,
but there is more stuﬀnot in the hierarchy.
There is no justiﬁcation for a revolution here: the current hegemony of ZFC
as the set theory in which mathematics is done in practice does not hamper the
progress of mathematics.
The most that can be said is that it might beneﬁt
a mathematician interested in foundations to know that things could be done
diﬀerently, and study of one or more of these systems would serve that purpose.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Part of this chapter was written in January 2008 while Thierry Libert was visiting
Thomas Forster at the DPMMS in Cambridge, with the support of the Belgian
‘Fonds National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque’.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abramsky, 1988] S. Abramsky. A Cook’s Tour of the Finitary Non-Well-Founded Sets. In We
Will Show Them: Essays in honour of Dov Gabbay, S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. d’Avila
Garcez, L. C. Lamb, and J. Woods, eds., vol. 1, pp. 1–18, College Publications, 2005.
[Aczel, 1980] P. Aczel. On the notion of proposition, truth and set. In The Kleene Symposium,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
[Aczel, 1988] P. Aczel. Non-well-founded Sets, CSLI Lecture Notes no. 14, Stanford, 1988.
[Apostoli and Kanda, to appear] P. Apostoli and A. Kanda. Parts of the continuum: towards a
modern ontology of science. To appear in The Poznan Studies in the Philosophy of Science
and the Humanities, ed. L. Nowak.
[Apostoli and Kanda, 2000] P. Apostoli and A. Kanda. Approximation spaces of type-free sets.
In Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, J. G. Carbonell and J. Siekmann, eds., vol. 2005,
pp. 98–105, Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[Barwise and Moss, 1996] J. Barwise and L. Moss. Vicious Circles, CSLI Lecture Notes, no. 60,
Stanford, 1996.
[Boﬀa, 1972] M. Boﬀa. Forcing et Negation de l’axiome de Fondement, Mem. Acad. Sci. Belg.,
40:fasc. 7, 1972.

630
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
[Boﬀa, 1988] M. Boﬀa. ZFJ and the consistency problem for NF, Jahrbuch der Kurt G¨odel
Gesellschaft, pp. 102-106, Wien, 1988.
[Boolos, 1971] G. Boolos, The iterative conception of set, Journal of Philosophy, 68:215–31,
1971.
[Bowler and Forster, 2009] N. Bowler and T. Forster. Normal subgroups of inﬁnite symmetric
groups with an application to stratiﬁed set theory, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 74:17–26,
2009.
[Church, 1974] A. Church. Set theory with a universal set. In Proceedings of the Tarski sym-
posium, L. Henkin ed., Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. XXV, American
Mathematical Society, pp. 297–308, 1974.
[Corazza, 2000] P. Corazza. The Wholeness Axiom and Laver Sequences, Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 105:157–260, 2000.
[Crabb´e, 1982] M. Crabb´e. On the consistency of an impredicative subsystem of Quine’s NF,
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47:131–36, 1982.
[Esser, 1997] O. Esser. Interpr´etations mutuelles entre une th´eorie positive des ensembles et une
extension de la th´eorie de Kelley-Morse. Ph. D. Thesis, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, 1997.
[Esser, 1999] O. Esser. On the consistency of a positive theory, Mathematical Logic Quarterly,
45:105–116, 1999.
[Esser, 2004] O. Esser. Une th´eorie positive des ensembles, Cahiers du centre de logique, no.
13, Centre national de recherches en logique, Academia-Bruylant, Louvain-La-Neuve, 2004.
[Fitch, 1948] F. B. Fitch. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 13:95–106, 1948.
[Flagg and Myhill, 1987a] R. Flagg and J. Myhill. Implication and analysis in classical Frege
structures, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 34:33–85, 1987.
[Flagg and Myhill, 1987b] R. Flagg and J. Myhill. κ-continuous lattices and comprehension
principles for Frege structures, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 36: 1–16, 1987.
[Flagg and Myhill, 1989] R. Flagg and J. Myhill. A type-free system extending ZFC, Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic, 43: 79–97, 1989.
[Fraenkel, 1922] A. Fraenkel. ¨Uber den Begriﬀ‘deﬁnit’ und die Unabh¨angigkeit des Auswahlax-
ioms,
Sitzungsberichte
der
Preussischen
Akademie
derWissenschaften,
Physikalisch-
mathematische Klasse, pp. 253–257, 1922. Translated in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 284–289].
[Forster, 1976] T. E. Forster. N.F., Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge, 1976.
[Forster, 2006] T. E. Forster. Permutations and wellfoundedness: the true meaning of the bizarre
arithmetic of Quine’s NF. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 71:227–240, 2006.
[Forti and Hinnion, 1989] M. Forti and R. Hinnion. The consistency problem for positive com-
prehension principles, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54:1401–1418, 1989.
[Forti and Honsell, 1996a] M. Forti and F. Honsell. Choice principles in Hyperuniverses, Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic, 77:35–52, 1996.
[Forti and Honsell, 1996b] M. Forti and F. Honsell. A general construction of hyperuniverses,
Theoretical Computer Science, 156:203–215, 1996.
[Forti and Honsell, 1983] M. Forti and F. Honsell, Set theory with free construction principles,
Annali Scuola normale superiore, Pisa, classe di scienze, 10:493–522, 1983.
[Gilmore, 1974] P. Gilmore. The consistency of partial set theory without extensionality. In
Axiomatic Set Theory, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. 13, American
Mathematical Society, pp. 147–153, Providence, 1974.
[G¨odel, 1940] K. G¨odel. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Con-
tinuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
1940.
[Grishin, 1969] V. N. Grishin. Consistency of a fragment of Quine’s NF system, Sov. Math.
Dokl., 10:1387–1390, 1969.
[Hailperin, 1944] T. Hailperin. A set of axioms for logic, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 9:1–19,
1944.
[Henson, 1973] C. W. Henson. Type-raising operations in NF, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
38:59–68, 1973.
[Hinnion and Libert, 2003] R. Hinnion and T. Libert. Positive abstraction and extensionality,
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 68:828–836, 2003.
[Holmes, 2001] M. R. Holmes. Strong axioms of inﬁnity in NFU, The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
66:87–116, 2001. (Brief notice of errata with corrections appeared later in 2001.)

Alternative Set Theories
631
[Holmes, 1998] M. R. Holmes. Elementary Set Theory with a Universal Set, volume 10 of the
Cahiers du Centre de logique, Academia, Louvain-la-Neuve (Belgium), 1998. A revised and
corrected version is available online.
[Holmes, 2004] M. R. Holmes. Paradoxes in double extension set theories, Studia Logica, 77:41–
57, 2004.
[Holmes, 2005] M. R. Holmes. The structure of the ordinals and the interpretation of ZF in
double extension set theory, Studia Logica, 79:357–372, 2005.
[Jensen, 1969] R. B. Jensen. On the consistency of a slight (?) modiﬁcation of Quine’s ‘New
Foundations’, Synthese, 19:250–263, 1969.
[Kisielewicz, 1998] A. Kisielewicz. A very strong set theory?, Studia Logica 61:171–178, 1998.
[Kelley, 1976] J. Kelley. General Topology, appendix, Springer-Verlag 1976.
[Kemeny, 1950] J. G. Kemeny. Type theory vs. set theory (abstract). The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 15:78, 1950.
[Barwise, 1975] J. Barwise. Admissible Sets and Structures, Springer-Verlag, 1975.
[Levy, 1959] A. Levy. On Ackermann’s set theory. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 24:154–166,
1959.
[Libert, 2004] T. Libert. Semantics for Na¨ıve Set Theory in Many-valued Logics: Technique and
Historical Account. In The Age of Alternative Logics, J. van Benthem and G, Heinzmann eds,
Kluwer Academic, 2004.
[Libert, 2008a] T. Libert. Positive abstraction and extensionality revisited, Log. Anal., 51:149–
165, 2008.
[Libert, 2008b] T. Libert. Positive Frege and its Scott-style semantics, Mathematical Logic
Quarterly, 54:410–434, 2008.
[Libert and Esser, 2005] T. Libert and O. Esser. On topological set theory, Mathematical Logic
Quarterly, 51:263–273, 2005.
[Mac Lane, 1986] S. Mac Lane. Mathematics, Form and Function, Springer-Verlag 1986.
[Malitz, 1976] R. J. Malitz. Set Theory in which the Axiom of Foundation Fails. Ph. D. thesis,
University of California, Los Angeles, 1976.
[Manakos, 1984] Manakos, J., On Skala’s set theory, Zeitschrift f¨ur mathematische Logik und
Grundlagen der Mathematik, 30:541–546, 1984.
[Mathias, 2001a] A. R. D. Mathias. The strength of Mac Lane set theory, Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 110:107–234, 2001.
[Mathias, 2001b] A. R. D. Mathias. Slim models of Zermelo set theory, The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 66:487–496, 2001.
[Nelson, 1977] E. Nelson. Internal set theory, a new approach to nonstandard analysis, Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society, 83:1165–1198, 1977.
[Potter, 2004] M. Potter. Set Theory and its Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2004.
[Quine, 1937] W. V. O. Quine. New Foundations for Mathematical Logic, American Mathemat-
ical Monthly, 44:70–80, 1937.
[Quine, 1945] W. V. O. Quine. On ordered pairs, The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 10:95–96,
1945.
[Ramsey, 1926] F. Ramsey. The foundations of mathematics, Proceedings of the London Math-
ematical Society 2, 25:338–384, 1926.
[Reinhardt, 1970] W. Reinhardt. Ackermann’s set theory equals ZF, Annals of Mathematical
Logic, 2:189–249, 1970.
[Kunen, 1971] K. Kunen. Elementary embeddings and inﬁnitary combinatorics, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 407–413, 1971.
[Robinson, 1966] A. Robinson. Nonstandard Analysis, North-Holland, London, 1966.
[Rosser, 1953] J. B. Rosser. Logic for Mathematicians, second edition, Chelsea, New York, 1973.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell, The Principles of Mathematics, appendix, W. W. Norton Company,
New York, 1996.
[Scott, 1955] D. Scott. Deﬁnitions by abstraction in axiomatic set theory, Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society, 61:442, 1955.
[Scott, 1975] D. Scott. Combinators and classes. In λ-Calculus and computer science, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 37, C. B¨ohm, ed., pp. 1–26, Springer, Berlin, 1975.
[Seldin, 2009] J. Seldin. Logic from Church to Curry. Iin Logic from Russell to Church, Dov
M. Gabbay and John Woods, eds., pp. 819–874. Volume 5 of the Handbook of the History of
Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2009.

632
M. Randall Holmes, Thomas Forster, and Thierry Libert
[Skala, 1974] H. Skala. An alternative way of avoiding the set-theoretical paradoxes, Zeitschrift
f¨ur mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 20:233–237, 1974.
[Skolem, 1960] T. Skolem. Investigations on a comprehension axiom without negation in the
deﬁning propositional functions, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 1:13–22. 1960.
[Solovay, preprint] R. Solovay. The consistency strength of NFUB, preprint, available through
logic e-prints on the WWW.
[Specker, 1953] E. P. Specker. The axiom of choice in Quine’s ‘New Foundations for Mathe-
matical Logic’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 39:972-975,
1953.
[Tarski and Givant, 1987] A. Tarski and S. Givant, A Formalization of Set Theory without Vari-
ables, American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1987.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, (ed). From Frege to Gdel: A Source Book in Mathe-
matical Logic, 1879-1931, Jean van Heijenoort, ed., Harvard University Press, 1967.
[von Neumann, 1925] von Neumann, John, An Axiomatization of Set Theory, (appeared 1925):
English translation in [van Heijenoort, 1967].
[Vopˇenka, 1979] P. Vopˇenka. Mathematics in the alternative set theory, Teubner-Verlag, Leipzig,
1979.
[Wang, 1970] H. Wang. Logic, Computers, and Sets, p. 406, Chelsea, 1970.
[Weydert, 1989] E. Weydert. How to Approximate the Na¨ıve Comprehension Scheme Inside of
[sic] Classical Logic. Ph. D. thesis, Bonner Mathematische Schriften Nr.194, Bonn 1989.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910-13] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell, Principia Mathematica, 3
vols, Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1912, and 1913. The abridgment is generally easier
to ﬁnd: Whitehead, Alfred North, and Russell, Bertrand, Principia Mathematica (to *56),
Cambridge University Press, 1967.
[Wiener, 1914] N. Wiener. A simpliﬁcation of the logic of relations, Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society, 17:387–390, 1914.
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Untersuchen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I, Mathematis-
che Annalen, 65:261–281, 1908.

TYPES, SETS, AND CATEGORIES
John L. Bell
This essay is an attempt to sketch the evolution of type theory from its begin-
nings early in the last century to the present day. Central to the development
of the type concept has been its close relationship with set theory to begin with
and later its even more intimate relationship with category theory. Since it is
eﬀectively impossible to describe these relationships (especially in regard to the
latter) with any pretensions to completeness within the space of a comparatively
short article, I have elected to oﬀer detailed technical presentations of just a few
important instances.
1
THE ORIGINS OF TYPE THEORY
The roots of type theory lie in set theory, to be precise, in Bertrand Russell’s eﬀorts
to resolve the paradoxes besetting set theory at the end of the 19th century. In
analyzing these paradoxes Russell had come to ﬁnd the set, or class, concept itself
philosophically perplexing, and the theory of types can be seen as the outcome of
his struggle to resolve these perplexities. But at ﬁrst he seems to have regarded
type theory as little more than a faute de mieux.
In June 1901 Russell learned of the set-theoretic paradox, known to Cantor by
1899, that issued from applying the latter’s theorem concerning power sets to the
class V of all sets. According to that theorem the class of all subclasses of V would,
impossibly, have to possess a cardinality exceeding that of V . This stimulated
Russell to formulate the paradox that came to bear his name (although it was
independently discovered by Zermelo at about the same time) concerning the class
of all classes not containing themselves (or predicates not predicable of themselves).
Realizing that his paradox applied also to the logical system previously elaborated
by Frege in his Grundgesetze, Russell communicated it to Frege in June 1902,
occasioning, in the latter’s own words, the “greatest surprise, and I would almost
say, consternation, since it has shaken the basis on which I intended to build
arithmetic”.
Frege responded by attempting to patch up the postulate of his
system (Basic Law V) subject to the paradox, fashioning a repair that Russell was
initially inclined to endorse (see the ﬁnal note to Appendix A of The Principles of
Mathematics)1). Frege’s repair in fact proved inadequate; but in any case Russell
had already begun to search for a solution to the paradox as it applied to classes.
This led to his proposing the theory, or doctrine, of types.
1Russell [1903, 1].
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

634
John L. Bell
It is of interest to see how Russell’s doctrine of types emerges from his analysis
of classes in the Principles. He puts forward the following deﬁnition of class (p.
515):
A class is an object uniquely determined by a propositional function,
and determined equally by any equivalent propositional function.
Here Russell is, in essence, adopting an extensional view of classes.2
He then
considers the following possible characterizations of the class notion:
A class may be identiﬁed with (α) the predicate, (β) the class concept,
(γ) the concept of the class, (δ) Frege’s range, (ε) the numerical con-
junction of the terms of the class, (ζ) the whole composed of the terms
of the class.
To understand what Russell intends by the ﬁrst three of these, let us follow
him in considering the term man. Here (α) then corresponds to the predicate
...is human, (β) to the function of man in propositions such as Socrates is a man,
and (γ) to the concept of the class of men. Clearly each of these characteriza-
tions is intensional in nature, so that none of them can be taken as a satisfactory
determination of the notion of the essentially extensional notion of class.
Under (δ), “Frege’s range” refers to the device introduced by Frege in the
Grundgesetze by which each function is assigned an object called its range in
such a way that two functions are assigned the same range precisely when they
have identical values for all values of their arguments. This is Basic Law V, which
Russell had already shown to be inconsistent. In view of this Russell is led to
observe “(δ) suﬀers from a doubt as to their being such an entity, and also from
the fact that, if ranges are terms, the contradiction is inevitable.” Once again,
then, an unsatisfactory determination.
Under (ε) we have the class-as-many. Russell regards this notion as “logically
unobjectionable” since he thinks that the existence of classes-as-many is guaran-
teed ontologically, and so at the very least classes-as-many can always be assumed
to exist without falling into contradiction. But classes-as-many suﬀer from the
drawback that they are not single entities, except when the class has only one
member.
Finally, category (ζ) is the class-as-one. The problem here is that Russell’s
paradox shows that classes-as–one do not always exist.
2But interestingly Russell earlier remarks (p. 513) that he was led to an extensional view of
classes “against [his] inclination”, and only because of “the necessity of discovering some entity
determinate for a given propositional function, and the same for any equivalent propositional
function.” This would seem to be essentially the same reason Frege was led to introduce ranges,
or, more pertinently, their special case extensions of concepts. Russell goes on to say that the
only entities he has been able to discover which meet the requirements are, ﬁrst, the class as one
of all objects making the given propositional function true, and, second, the class (also as one)
of all propositional functions equivalent to the given function. One notes that the ﬁrst expedient
involves a type reduction, and the second a type augmentation.

Types, Sets, and Categories
635
Russell is accordingly left with no satisfactory way of deﬁning classes. Yet, as he
says, “without a single object to represent an extension, Mathematics crumbles.”
In the end he is forced to adopt (ε), the class-as-many, as the deﬁnition of a class.
This requires abandoning the doctrine that the subject of a proposition is always
a single term; instead, it can be essentially many terms. Once this is accepted, one
sees that the plural nature of classes does not prevent them from being “counted
as though each were a genuine unity”.
But in that case, Russell observes, it then becomes necessary “to distinguish (1)
terms, (2) classes, (3) classes of classes, and so on ad inﬁnitum”. Moreover, these
collections will be disjoint, and to able to assert x ∈u requires that the collection
to which x belongs should be of a degree one lower than that to which u belongs.
This expedient leads to a resolution of the paradox, since x ∈x has now been
rendered a meaningless proposition. The hierarchy of collections (1), (2), (3), ...
is the germ of the doctrine of types.
In Appendix B to the Principles, entitled The Doctrine of Types, Russell states
that he is putting forward the doctrine “tentatively, as aﬀording a possible solution
of the contradiction”; but it “requires, in all probability, to be transformed into
some subtler shape before it can answer all diﬃculties.” He proceeds to explain
exactly what he means by a type:
Every propositional function ϕ(x) ... has, in addition to its range of
truth, a range of signiﬁcance, i.e. a range within which x must lie if
ϕ(x) is to be a proposition at all, whether true or false. This is the
ﬁrst point in the theory of types; the second point is that ranges of
signiﬁcance form types, i.e. if x belongs to the range of signiﬁcance
of ϕ(x), then there is a class of objects, the type of x, all of which
must also belong to the range of signiﬁcance of ϕ(x), however ϕ may
be varied; and the range of signiﬁcance is always either a single type
or a sum of several whole types.
As observed above, Russell believed the doctrine of types to be adequate for
resolving the paradox for classes. But according to his deﬁnition of type, proposi-
tions themselves can serve as the constituting objects for types. Russell proceeds
to formulate a paradox for propositions similar to that for classes, which he does
not think is resolved by the doctrine of types as he has formulated it. This paradox
may be stated in the following way. For any class P of propositions, write ⊓P for
the proposition every proposition in P is true. Russell makes the key (but as we
shall see below, questionable) assumption that, for classes P, Q of propositions,
P ̸= Q ⇒⊓P ̸= ⊓Q,
(∗)
or equivalently (in classical logic, at least)
⊓P = ⊓Q ⇒P = Q.
(∗∗)
Now let Q be the class of propositions p for which there is a class P of propositions
such that p = ⊓P and p ̸∈P.
If one now writes q for ⊓Q, then, using (**),
q ∈Q ⇔q ̸∈Q. Faced with this conclusion Russell then remarks

636
John L. Bell
It is possible of course to hold that propositions themselves are of
various types and that their logical products must have propositions of
only one type as factors. But this suggestion seems harsh and highly
artiﬁcial.
A number of years were to pass before Russell came ﬁnally to adopt this “harsh
and highly artiﬁcial” suggestion in the form of the ramiﬁed theory of types.
Russell remarks that if the identity relation is replaced by the relation of logical
equivalence, then there is no reason to uphold implication (*), and the contradic-
tion disappears. But this escape is blocked, according to Russell, because
it is quite self-evident that equivalent propositional functions are often
not identical.
At this point, then, Russell could see no way out of the contradiction.
Now in deriving the contradiction it is (*) (or (**)) that is the culprit. Writing
Prop for the class of all propositions, each asserts that the map P 7→⊓P is one-
one from the class of subclasses of Prop to Prop. And this, as is now well-known
(and likely also then to Russell himself), violates Cantor’s theorem. In Boolos
[1997] it is shown how to prove Cantor’s theorem through the provision of explicit
counterexamples.3 We will adapt his argument to produce a counterexample to
(**). By Boolos’s argument there exists a subclass M of Prop and a strict well-
ordering ≺of M such that (1) ⊓M ∈M and, (2) for p ∈M, p = ⊓{q ∈Prop :
q ≺p}.4 Now let N = {q : q ≺⊓M}. Then ⊓M ̸∈N and so it follows from (1)
that M ̸= N. But, by (1) and (2), ⊓M = ⊓N. The classes of propositions M and
N thus together constitute a counterexample to (**).
It is tempting to speculate that, had Russell known of this argument, he might
have been led to abandon (*) and so perhaps have been more inclined to accept
the adequacy of his early theory of types.
Since Russell was by no means convinced that his initial theory of types would
prove adequate for resolving the logical paradoxes that had arisen in the founda-
tions of mathematics, he developed a number of other theories in attempting to
meet the challenge. But he soon became aware of the inadequacies of these and
returned once more to the theory of types. The reﬁned theory of types which
resulted from his labours was ﬁrst outlined in a paper published in 1908: Math-
ematical logic as based on the theory of types.5
Russell prefaces his paper by
remarking that while the theory he is about to present “recommends itself ... in
the ﬁrst instance, by the ability to solve certain contradictions,” it “seems not
wholly dependent on this indirect recommendation.” For it has also “a certain
consonance with common sense which makes it inherently credible.” It is the the-
3Boolos’s argument is itself an adaptation of the ﬁrst argument Zermelo used to derive the
well-ordering theorem from the axiom of choice.
4If we express the assertion q ≺p by saying that q is below p, then (2) may be expressed as:
for any proposition p ∈M, p is identical with the proposition every proposition below p is true.
5Russell [1908].

Types, Sets, and Categories
637
ory’s latter feature which, in part, led Russell to put it forward as a foundation
for mathematical logic — and so also for mathematics.
Russell oﬀers an account of the various contradictions with which he is con-
cerned, ﬁnding that they all have in common “the assumption of a totality such
that, if it were legitimate, it would at once be enlarged by new members deﬁned
in terms of itself”. This leads to the enunciation of the rule which he calls the
vicious circle principle, to wit:
Whatever involves all of a collection must not be one of a collection, or,
conversely: If, provided a certain collection had a total, it would have
members only deﬁnable in terms of that total, then the said collection
has no total.
Russell recognizes that this principle, being purely negative, “suﬃces to show that
many theories are wrong, but it does not show how the errors are to be rectiﬁed.”
Russell sees a positive theory emerging from an analysis of the use of the term
“all”, and in particular from drawing a careful distinction between it and the term
“any”. While restrictions must, on pain of contradiction, be imposed on the use of
“all”, no such restrictions need be placed on “any”. Thus “all” corresponds to the
bound variable of universal quantiﬁcation, which ranges over a type — the type of
that variable — while “any” corresponds to a free variable for which the name of
anything can be substituted, irrespective of type.
Russell then proceeds to introduce a theory of types for propositions — an ex-
pedient which, it will be recalled, he had shunned in 1903 as being “harsh and
artiﬁcial”. The entities populating Russell’s typed logical universe are in fact of
three kinds: individuals, propositions, and (propositional) functions. He deﬁnes a
type as “the range of signiﬁcance of a propositional function, that is, as the collec-
tion of arguments for which the said function has values.” Individuals are decreed
to occupy the ﬁrst, or lowest type. Types are assigned to propositions through the
device of orders. Thus ﬁrst-order propositions are those whose quantiﬁed variables
(if any) are individuals: these form the second type. Second-order propositions
or functions are then those whose quantiﬁed variables are of at most second type,
and so on.
From the hierarchy of propositions Russell derives a hierarchy of propositional
functions. Now the hierarchy of propositions may be considered one-dimensional
in that just a single number is required to specify its position in the hierarchy.
The hierarchy of propositional functions, however, is multidimensional since the
type of a function involves not just its order as a proposition, but also the orders
of its arguments, or free variables. It is this feature of Russell’s theory of types
which led to its being called the ramiﬁed theory of types.
As Quine6 has pointed out, the logical universe presented by Russell has a
number of ambiguous features. For instance, in Russell’s formulation, individuals
are objects, but propositions and propositional functions are notations, dependent
6In his commentary on Russell’s paper in van Heijenoort [1967].

638
John L. Bell
on the vicissitudes of presentation. That being the case, it is far from clear whether
Russell is “assigning types to his objects or to his notations.”
Russell next addresses the question of whether his theory is adequate for the
development of mathematics. He gives examples from elementary mathematics to
show that the answer is no unless some method is found “of reducing the order
of a propositional function without aﬀecting the truth or falsehood of its values”.
To achieve this he introduces the Axiom of Reducibility, which asserts that every
function is coextensive with a predicative function (in the same arguments). Here
by a predicative function is meant one in which the types of quantiﬁed variables
do not exceed the types of the arguments. (All others are termed impredicative.)
Russell justiﬁes this postulate on the grounds that it has all the useful consequences
ﬂowing from the class concept, without having to go so far as to admit the actual
presence of classes.
As Quine7 observes, this expedient is “oddly devious”. If every propositional
function is coextensive with a predicative one, then attention could have been
conﬁned to these latter from the beginning. In other words, the “ramiﬁcation” of
types is rendered superﬂuous; the types of propositional functions could have been
made dependent solely on their arguments. Indeed, “The axiom of reducibility is
self-eﬀacing: if it is true, the ramiﬁcation it was meant to cope with was pointless
to begin with.”8
In the same year (1908) that Russell published his paper on logical types, Ernst
Zermelo published his paper Investigations in the foundations of set theory I.9
In it he presents the ﬁrst axiomatization of set theory. While both Russell’s and
Zermelo’s theories were intended to furnish a foundation for mathematics — a
framework, that is, within which the usual development of mathematics could
proceed free of contradiction — there are a number of diﬀerences between the
two approaches. Russell had always maintained that mathematics is, at bottom,
logic, and his system naturally reﬂects that conviction.
For Russell, once the
correct logical framework had been found, mathematics would then follow; hence
his concern with the logical paradoxes, and his consequent elaboration of the theory
of types as a strategy for circumventing them. Once this had been taken care of,
the development of mathematics could proceed along the lines mapped out by the
great 19th century German mathematicians Weierstrass, Dedekind, and Cantor,
whose work had so impressed Russell.
In formulating his axiom system for set theory Zermelo was animated by rather
diﬀerent concerns. In 1904 he published his proof that every set could be well-
ordered. The proof excited considerable controversy, because of its use of the axiom
of choice and the vagueness of the set-theoretic background. This led Zermelo to
publish a new, improved proof (again based on the axiom of choice, but in a new
formulation) of the theorem in 1908, which was itself to be underpinned by the
sharpened, axiomatized notion of set presented in Investigations. While designed
7Op. cit.
8Op. cit.
9Zermelo [1908].

Types, Sets, and Categories
639
to avoid the set-theoretic paradoxes, the primary purpose of Zermelo’s system was
to provide the working mathematician with a reliable foundational toolkit.
While for Russell sets or classes were essentially logical entities, Zermelo treated
them as mathematical objects subject to certain axiomatic conditions. The most
interesting of these latter is the third, the Axiom of Separation. This axiom is the
counterpart, for sets considered as mathematical objects, of the principle governing
their introduction as logical entities, namely, as extensions of propositional func-
tions. Zermelo formulates his axiom by introducing the notion of deﬁnite property,
and then stipulating that a deﬁnite property separates a subset from a previously
given set. Sadly, Zermelo’s notion of deﬁnite property is itself far from being deﬁ-
nite, since in its formulation Zermelo invokes “the universally valid laws of logic”,
but neglects to specify what these are. This shortcoming was later rectiﬁed, in
various ways, by Weyl, Fraenkel, Skolem and von Neumann. Zermelo’s system, as
modiﬁed and extended by the latter three as well as G¨odel and Bernays, in due
course became the standard foundation of mathematics, a role it still plays today.
Type theory has, by contrast, undergone a more tortuous development and has
met with a more complex reception. Its initial phase culminated in Whitehead
and Russell’s monumental trilogy Principia Mathematica10 of 1910–13. This is
a fully elaborated treatment of the framework introduced by Russell in his 1908
paper. It includes both an axiom of inﬁnity and an axiom of reducibility.
Classes play a very minor role in Principia. By the time Principia was written,
Russell had come to regard classes as dubious logical entities and so sought to
avoid having to postulate their existence outright. Whitehead and Russell see the
introduction of classes as arising from the necessity to deal with extensions:
It is an old dispute whether formal logic should concern itself mainly
with intensions or with extensions. In general, logicians whose train-
ing was mainly philosophical have decided for intensions, while those
whose training was mainly mathematical have decided for extensions.
The facts seem to be that, while mathematical logic requires exten-
sions, philosophical logic refuses to supply anything except intensions.
Our theory of classes recognizes and reconciles these two apparently
opposite facts, by showing that an extension (which is the same as a
class) is an incomplete symbol, whose use always acquires its meaning
through a reference to an intension.
In order to be able to handle extensions, and yet at the same time avoiding any
untoward ontological commitments, in Principia classes are introduced, then, as
incomplete symbols, that is, symbols whose “uses are deﬁned, but [which] them-
selves are not assumed to mean anything at all”.
Thus, “classes...are merely
symbolic or linguistic conveniences, not genuine objects as their members are if
they are individuals”. In other words, classes are mere shadows.
10Whitehead and Russell [1910–13].

640
John L. Bell
The reconditeness11 of Principia and its focus on philosophical niceties far re-
moved from the concerns of working mathematicians hardly commended it to
them as a practical foundation for their subject. Zermelo’s axiomatic approach to
classes, by contrast, seemed simpler and closer to the actual practice of mathe-
matics.
Nevertheless, the concept of the ramiﬁed hierarchy has been an important, if
usually unremarked, inﬂuence in mathematical logic. For instance, in the 1930s
G¨odel discovered that, if the ramiﬁcation of properties over the natural numbers
is extended into the transﬁnite, the process breaks down at level ω1, the ﬁrst
uncountable ordinal. (This may be considered a provable form of the Axiom of
Reducibility.) This led him to introduce the hierarchy of constructible sets which
he employed to prove the relative consistency of the continuum hypothesis. Here
we have a signiﬁcant, if indirect, application of type-theoretic ideas to set theory.
2
CRITIQUING RAMIFIED TYPES
A number of mathematicians/logicians, notably H. Weyl, L. Chwistek and
F. P. Ramsey, attempted to remedy what they had identiﬁed as technical deﬁ-
ciencies in Principia. In his Das Kontinuum of 1918 Weyl presents a predicative
formulation of mathematical analysis — not, as Russell and Whitehead had at-
tempted, by introducing a hierarchy of logically ramiﬁed types, which Weyl seems
to have regarded as too complicated — but rather by conﬁning the comprehension
principle to formulas whose bound variables range over just the initial given enti-
ties (numbers). Thus he restricts analysis to what can be done in terms of natural
numbers with the aid of three basic logical operations, together with the opera-
tion of substitution and the process of “iteration”, i.e., primitive recursion. Weyl
recognized that the eﬀect of this restriction would be to render unprovable many
of the central results of classical analysis12 — e.g., Dirichlet’s principle that any
bounded set of real numbers has a least upper bound — but he was prepared to
accept this as part of the price that must be paid for the security of mathematics.
In 1925 Chwistek formulated what he called the theory of constructive types.13
This is essentially the system of Principia purged of all existential propositions,
11In this connection it is worth quoting the following extract from a review of Principia in a
1911 number of the London magazine The Spectator:
It is easy to picture the dismay of the innocent person who out of curiosity looks into
the later part of the book. He would come upon whole pages without a single word
of English below the headline; he would see, instead, scattered in wild profusion,
disconnected Greek and Roman letters of every size interspersed with brackets and
dots and inverted commas, with arrows and exclamation marks standing on their
heads, and with even more fantastic signs for which he would with diﬃculty so
much as ﬁnd names.
12This would also have been the case for a ramiﬁed type theory lacking the Axiom of Re-
ducibility.
13Chwistek [1925].

Types, Sets, and Categories
641
including the Axiom of Reducibility. It has the property that each of its symbols
can be obtained by the application of a ﬁnite number of operations applied to a
set of initial symbols. Chwistek’s system is in fact no stronger than Weyl’s.
The year 1926 saw the publication of Ramsey’s important paper The Founda-
tions of Mathematics.14 The core of Ramsey’s paper is a critique of the logical
system of Principia Mathematica, together with a proposal for setting it right.
Ramsey identiﬁes three “great defects in Principia”. The ﬁrst, that in it only
deﬁnable classes are admitted, in violation of “the extensional attitude of modern
mathematics, an essential part of which is “the possibility of indeﬁnable classes
and relations in extension.” He continues
The mistake is made not by having a primitive proposition asserting
that all classes are deﬁnable, but by giving a deﬁnition of class which
applies only to deﬁnable classes, so that all mathematical propositions
about some or all classes are misinterpreted. This misinterpretation is
not merely objectionable on its own account in a general way, but is es-
pecially pernicious in connection with the Multiplicative Axiom, which
is a tautology when properly interpreted, but when misinterpreted after
the fashion of Principia Mathematica becomes a signiﬁcant empirical
proposition, which there is no reason to suppose true.
By the multiplicative axiom Ramsey means the version of the axiom of choice
asserting that, for any nonempty family Kof disjoint nonempty sets, there is a set
having exactly one member in common with each set in K. Ramsey says that
according to the extensional view he takes of classes, “the Multiplicative Axiom
seems... the most evident tautology.” It only becomes really doubtful when “the
class whose existence it asserts must be one deﬁnable by a propositional function of
the sort which occurs in Principia”. Ramsey shows that the multiplicative axiom
(more precisely, its logical equivalent that the cardinalities of any pair of sets are
comparable) can in fact be falsiﬁed in a Principia-like system in which there are
very few atomic propositional functions.
Ramsey’s chief objection against the theory of types presented in Principia
is the fact that, in order to furnish an adequate foundation for mathematics, it
requires the introduction of the “illegitimate” Axiom of Reducibility.
Ramsey
attributes this to the fact that the authors of Principia have failed to observe that
the contradictions whose avoidance is one of the work’s chief purposes actually fall
into two “fundamentally distinct” groups. The ﬁrst of these, of which Russell’s
paradox is representative, “consists of contradictions which, were no provision
made against them, would occur in a logical or mathematical system itself.” They
“involve only logical or mathematical terms such as class and number, and show
that there must be something wrong with our logic or mathematics.”
On the
other hand the contradictions in the second group, of which the Liar Paradox and
the “heterological” paradox are representative, “are not purely logical, and cannot
be stated in logical terms alone; for they all contain some reference to thought,
14Ramsey [1926].

642
John L. Bell
language, or symbolism, which are not formal but empirical terms.” So “they may
be due not to faulty logic or mathematics, but to faulty ideas concerning thought
and language.”
Ramsey points out that the theory of types really consists of two distinct parts
“directed respectively against the two groups of contradictions”, uniﬁed only by
“being both deduced in a somewhat sloppy way from the ‘vicious circle principle’.”
But it is essential, he says, to consider them separately. The contradictions in
the ﬁrst group can be eliminated by noting that a propositional function cannot
meaningfully take itself as argument, which leads to a division of “functions and
classes into a hierarchy of types according to their possible arguments.”
As a
result, there are functions of individuals, functions of functions of individuals, etc.
And then “the assertion that a class is a member of itself is neither true nor false,
but meaningless.” Ramsey regards this part of the theory of types — the part
which would later evolve into the simple theory of types — as “unquestionably
correct.”
As for the second part of the theory, which is designed to contend with the sec-
ond group of contradictions, it “requires further distinctions between the diﬀerent
functions which take the same arguments.” These distinctions are reﬂected in the
orders of Principia, the classiﬁcation of functions according to the level of their
bound variables. Ramsey agrees that the contradictions in the second group are
circumvented by the introduction of orders, but this resolution “lands us in an
almost equally serious diﬃculty, for it invalidates many important mathematical
arguments which appear to contain exactly the same fallacy as the contradic-
tions.” To overcome this deﬁciency, the authors of Principia introduce the Axiom
of Reducibility, a postulate which in Ramsey’s view “there is no reason to suppose
true”, whose truth, indeed, would be merely “a happy accident and not a logical
necessity.” “Such an axiom,” Ramsey asserts, “has no place in mathematics, and
anything which cannot be proved without using it cannot be regarded as proved
at all.”
Ramsey then considers the question of why the Axiom of Reducibility fails to
reproduce the contradictions (those in the second group) the ramiﬁed theory of
types was explicitly designed to avoid. For in asserting that any function is co-
extensive with a predicative function the Axiom of Reducibility “may appear to
lose again whatever was gained by making the distinction.” Ramsey says that
the reason why these contradictions fail to reappear is their “peculiar nature”.
For they “are not purely mathematical, but all involve the ideas of thought or
meaning”, in a word, they are intensional. If any purely mathematical contradic-
tions were to arise through the conﬂating of arbitrary with predicative functions,
or from the identiﬁcation of intensionally diﬀerent, but extensionally equivalent
functions, then these contradictions would, says Ramsey, be “reinstated by the
Axiom of Reducibility, owing to the extensional nature of mathematics, in which
[extensionally] equivalent functions are interchangeable.” The fact that no such
contradictions have been shown to arise underscores the intensional nature of the
contradictions in the second group, making it “even more probable that they have

Types, Sets, and Categories
643
a psychological or epistemological, and not a purely logical or mathematical solu-
tion.” Ramsey’s conclusion is that “there is something wrong with the account of
the matter given in Principia.”
Ramsey’s attitude towards the foundations of mathematics and logic was ro-
bustly extensional, and accordingly realist.
This realist attitude insulated him
from the worries about impredicative deﬁnition that had exercised Russell (and
Weyl). In Ramsey’s view, the distinction of orders of functions is just a compli-
cation imposed by the structure of our language and not, unlike the hierarchy of
types, something inherent in the way things truly are. Ramsey’s suggestion in
The Foundations of Mathematics for repairing the defects in Principia reﬂects his
realist orientation. In essence, his proposal is to render the whole apparatus of
orders superﬂuous through the simple expedient of eliminating quantiﬁers in deﬁ-
nitions. So a universal quantiﬁer is then regarded as indicating a conjunction, and
an existential quantiﬁer a disjunction, of the collection of propositions obtained
from a given propositional function by the substitution of a name of any one of
the members of the collection of objects, itself conceived as existing independently
of any deﬁnition we might envisage, which constitutes the propositional function’s
range of signiﬁcance.15 It does not matter whether it may be impossible in prac-
tice to write out the resulting expressions in full. Once the apparatus of orders is
abandoned, the simple theory of types remains, and Ramsey was convinced that
this would provide an adequate foundation for mathematics.
3
CHURCH’S VERSION OF THE SIMPLE THEORY OF TYPES
When the ramiﬁed structure of the type hierarchy is abandoned, what remains
is, as we have seen, a simple theory of types, similar to that which Russell had
originally proposed for classes-as-many.
Neither Chwistek nor Ramsey produced a detailed formulation of the simple
theory of types, although it seems clear that either could have achieved this had
he so wished.
In fact the ﬁrst fully worked out formulation is that of Carnap
[1929]; later formulations include Tarski [1931] and G¨odel [1931].
The form of the simple theory of types which has proved deﬁnitive was put
forward by Church [1940]. Church’s system is based on functions instead of rela-
tions or classes, and incorporates certain features of the λ-calculus which had been
previously developed by him. Church’s system has had a profound inﬂuence on
computer science, particularly in the areas of automated theorem proving, com-
putational logic, and formal methods. Today the ﬁeld of type theory (in computer
science at least) is largely the study of Church-style systems based on functions
with λ-notation.
A straightforward version of Church’s simple type theory is the following system
15On this reckoning, then, the statement Citizen Kane has all the qualities that make a great
ﬁlm would be taken as an abbreviation for something like Citizen Kane is a ﬁlm, brilliantly
directed, superbly photographed, outstandingly performed, excellently scripted, etc.

644
John L. Bell
T.16
T is equipped with the following types and terms.
Types:
I, the type of individuals
Ω, the type of propositions or truth values
A collection of base types
Function types (A →B), for any types A, B (we omit the parentheses
whenever possible)
Terms:
Terms are introduced according to the following rules, so that each term
t is assigned a type A, written t: A.
Variables xA, yA, zA, ... of each type A (we omit the subscript whenever
possible)
Individuals a, b, c, ... of type I
Function application. If t: A and f: A →B, then f(t) : B
Function abstraction. If t: B, then (λxA.t) : A →B
Equality. If t : A, u : A, then t = u : Ω.
Terms of type Ωare called propositions or formulas.
Notice that T lacks logical operators. It was observed by Henkin [1963] that
they can in fact be deﬁned in a system like T. Let ω, ω′ be variables of type Ω,
and let α, β be propositions. Then we write
⊤
for
(λω.ω) = (λω.ω)
⊥
for
(λω.⊤) = (λω.ω)
¬α
for
α = ⊥
α ⇔β
for
α = β
α ∧β
for
λf.f(⊤)(⊤) = λf.f(α)(β), with f : Ω→(Ω→Ω)
α ⇒β
for
α ∧β ⇔α
∀x.α
for
λx.α = λx.⊤
α ∨β
for
∀ω[[(α ⇒ω) ∧(β ⇒ω)] ⇒ω]
∃x.α
for
∀ω[[∀x(α ⇒ω) ⇒ω]
A simple type theory like T, employing just function application, function ab-
straction, and equality, can serve as a foundation for mathematics in the sense that
the usual mathematical structures, e.g. the natural numbers and the reals, admit
straightforward formulations within it. And with appropriate axioms (including
an axiom of inﬁnity to the eﬀect that the type of individuals is inﬁnite), it can be
shown that simple type theory has the same proof-theoretic strength as bounded
Zermelo set theory.
Church’s formulation of the simple theory of types is evidently far from being
a faute de mieux; it is, rather, the theory that naturally ensues from an analysis
of the function concept. This is well summed up by Robin Gandy:
16Based on the presentation by Farmer [2006]; here we give a version free of the background
assumption of classical logic.

Types, Sets, and Categories
645
The simple theory of types provides a straightforward, reasonably se-
cure foundation for the greater part of classical mathematics. This is
why a number of authors (Carnap, G¨odel, Tarski, Church, Turing) gave
a precise formulation of it, and used it as a basis for metamathemati-
cal investigations. The theory is straightforward because it embodies
two principles which (at least before the advent of modern abstract
concepts) were part of the mathematicians’ normal code of practice.
Namely that a variable always has a precisely delimited range, and
that a distinction must always be made between a function a and its
arguments. [Gandy, 1977, p. 173]
4
TYPES VS. SETS
What is the diﬀerence between a type and a set? A ﬁrst thought, naturally, is
that types resemble the syntactic or grammatical categories forming the basis of
language in that the speciﬁcation of types furnish the conditions for expressions
to be well-formed, or meaningful. Everybody knows (instinctively at least) that
the linguistic phrase “
sees
” becomes grammatical only when the ﬁrst blank is
ﬁlled in with a noun or a noun phrase and the second with a noun, a noun phrase,
or an adverb.
The typing concept also arises in concrete situations. Consider, for example,
an automotive toolkit.
Here one is provided with nuts, bolts and wrench bits
to attach nuts to bolts. This gives three types: N, B,
and S. Then given the
instruction Use
to attach
to
, it is implicit that the blanks be ﬁlled in
with (names of) components of types S, N, and B respectively.
This case points up nicely the diﬀerence between types and sets. For example,
we can consider the concrete set or collection of, say, nuts, of a given toolkit. If
(as is so often the case) a few of these go missing, the set of nuts is changed, but
not the associated type. The set, that is, the concrete embodiment of the type, is
subject to variation, but the type is not.
Here is another illustration. We can take two toolkits and amalgamate them.
Now while it would be possible to do this simply by jumbling their contents to-
gether — that is, to take their set-theoretic union — , in order for the result to
remain a toolkit in the speciﬁed sense typing must be respected: the nuts, bolts
and wrench bits of each toolkit must be conjoined only with the nuts, bolts and
wrench bits, respectively, of the other.
Sets and types, while diﬀerent, are nevertheless clearly related. Indeed, since
each type gives rise to the set of entities of that type, a set may be regarded as a
type considered in extension. Clearly diﬀerent types can give rise to the same set:
for example those old chestnuts the types “rational featherless biped” and “human
being” are distinct, but their associated sets are (terrestrially, at least) identical.
Now sets may also be regarded as properties considered in extension.
This,
conjoined with the fact that sets may be regarded as types considered in extension,
might suggest that types are just properties. But that would be a mistake. For

646
John L. Bell
while the domain of properties is closed under the usual logical operations, these
operations are not (in general) deﬁned for types at all.
For example, we may
consider “natural number” and “circle” as types, but we do not similarly admit
“natural number or circle” as deﬁning a type.
The realm of types is, in fact, now customarily taken to be closed not under
logical operations but under what may be termed mathematical operations. These
may include the Cartesian product ×, the exponential or function type operation
→, and the power type operation P. Here, for types A, B, A × B is the common
type of pairs (a, b) with a of type A and b of type B, PA is the type of sets of
entities of type A, and A →B is the type of correspondences (functions) between
entities of types A, B, respectively.
The idea that a set may be regarded as a type considered in extension suggests a
way of representing (simple) type theory in set theory, viz., just interpret types as
sets, and function types A →B as the set of functions from (the set corresponding
to) A to (the set corresponding to) B.
The representation of set theory within type theory is an altogether subtler
aﬀair. The problem here is to represent within type theory the membership rela-
tion, which is deﬁned for all pairs of sets. An elegant way of doing this has been
elaborated by Miquel [2001] using the notions of pointed graph and bisimilarity.
A pointed graph is a triple A = (A, R, a) with A a set, R a binary relation
on A, and a ∈A. A bisimilarity between two pointed graphs A = (A, R, a) and
B = (B, S, b) is a relation ≈between A and B satisfying the conditions:
• ∀xx′ ∈A∀y ∈B[x′Rx ∧x ≈y ⇒∃y′ ∈B(y′Sy ∧x′ ≈y′)]
• ∀yy′ ∈B∀x ∈A[y′Sy ∧x ≈y ⇒∃x′ ∈A(x′Rx ∧x′ ≈y)]
• a ≈b
Two pointed graphs A, B are bisimilar, written A ∼B, if there is a bisimilarity
between them. It is readily checked that bisimilarity is an equivalence relation.
We shall require the transitive closure τ(A) of a set A: this is the set whose
elements are A itself, the members of A, the members of members of A, etc. Now
let A∗be the pointed graph (τ(A), ∈|τ(A), A). A straightforward induction on
rank argument shows that, for any sets A, B,
A∗∼B∗⇔A = B.
It follows that
A ∈B ⇔∃X(X ∈B ∧X∗∼A∗).
(∗)
This last equivalence,17 which expresses set membership in terms of bisimilarity of
pointed graphs — shifted bisimilarity — furnishes the basis for the representation
17While this equivalence was actually proved only for well-founded sets, its purpose is to suggest
the form of the type-theoretic representation of the membership relationship for arbitrary (i.e.,
not necessarily well-founded) sets.

Types, Sets, and Categories
647
of sets as types. The idea is to interpret sets as pointed graphs, and then to observe
that pointed graphs can be represented as types.
In type-theoretic terms, a pointed graph may be deﬁned as a triple (A, R, a)
with A a type, R a term of type A →(A →Ω), and a a term of type A. The
conditions for a bisimilarity between pointed graphs given above — and so also the
representation of set membership in terms of shifted bisimilarity — are then readily
translated into the language of type theory. This yields a faithful interpretation of
set theory18 in a certain version of type theory19 under which sets correspond to
pointed graphs and the membership relation corresponds to shifted bisimilarity.
5
CATEGORIES AND TYPES
When Eilenberg and Mac Lane ﬁrst introduced (in 1945) the concepts of category
and functor their concerns were far removed from the theory of types. Yet category
theory and type theory have proved to have deep connections. In fact categories
can themselves be viewed as type theories of a certain kind; this fact alone indicates
that type theory is much more closely related to category theory than it is to set
theory. In thinking of a category as a type theory, the objects of a category are
regarded as types (or sorts) and the arrows as mappings between the corresponding
types. Roughly speaking, a category may be thought of a type theory shorn of
its syntax. In the 1970s Lambek20 established that, viewed in this way, cartesian
closed categories correspond to the typed λ-calculus. Later Seely [1984] proved
that locally Cartesian closed categories correspond to Martin-L¨of, or predicative,
type theories. Lambek and Dana Scott independently observed that C-monoids,
i.e., categories with products and exponentials and a single, nonterminal object
correspond to the untyped λ-calculus.
The analogy between type theories and
categories has since led to what Jacobs [1999] terms a “type-theoretic boom”,
with much input from, and applications to, computer science.
5.1
Cartesian closed categories and the typed λ-calculus
As already mentioned, Lambek has shown that the typed λ-calculus corresponds to
a cartesian closed category. Here we give a brief sketch of how this correspondence
is established.
A typed λ-calculus is a theory formulated within a certain kind of formal lan-
guage which we shall call a λ-language. A language Λ of this kind is equipped with
the following basic symbols:
• a type symbol 1
• ground types A, B, C, . . . (possibly none of these)
18I.e., intuitionistic Zermelo (or even Zermelo-Fraenkel) set theory.
19To be precise, polymorphic dependent type theory (see below) with a type of propositions.
20See the reference entries under Lambek and Lambek and Scott.

648
John L. Bell
• function symbols f, g, h, . . . (possibly none of these)
• variables xA, yA, zA, . . . of each type A, where a type is as deﬁned below
• unique entity ⋆of type 1.
The types of Λ are deﬁned recursively as follows:
• 1 and each ground type are types
• A1×. . .×An is a type whenever A1, . . . , An are, where, if n = 1, A1×. . .×An
is A1, while if n = 0, A1 × . . . An is 1 (product types)
• BA is a type whenever A, B are.
Each function symbol f is assigned a signature of the form A →B where A, B
are types. We normally write f : A →B to indicate this.
Terms of Λ and their associated types are deﬁned recursively as follows. We
write τ : A to indicate that the term τ has type A.
Term: type
Proviso
⋆: 1
xA : A (we shall usually omit the
subscript)
f(τ) : b
f : A →B
τ : A
⟨τ1, . . . , τn⟩: A1 × . . . × An, where
⟨τ1, . . . , τn⟩is τ1 if n = 1, and ⋆if
n = 0.
τ1 : A1, . . . , τn : An
(τ)i : Ai where (τ)i is τ if n = 1
τ : A1 × . . . × An, 1 ≤i ≤n
τ ′σ : B
τ : BA
σ : A
λxτ : BA
x : A
τ : B
We write τ(x/σ) or τ(σ) for the result of substituting σ at each free occurrence of
x in τ, where an occurrence of x is free if it does not appear within a term of the
form λxρ. A term σ is substitutable for a variable x in a term τ if no variable free
in σ becomes bound when so substituted.
An equation in Λ is an expression of the form σ = τ, where σ and τ are terms
of the same type. A theory in Λ (or simply a λ-theory) is a set T of equations
satisfying the following conditions:
• σ = σ ∈T
σ = τ ∈T ⇒τ = σ ∈T
σ = τ ∈T & τ = υ ∈T ⇒σ = υ ∈T
• σ = υ ∈T ⇒τ ′σ = τ ′υ ∈T
σ = τ ∈T ⇒λxσ = λxτ ∈T
• T contains all equations of the following forms:
τ = ⋆for τ : 1
(⟨τ1, . . . , τn⟩)i = τi
τ = ⟨(τ)1, . . . , (τ)n⟩

Types, Sets, and Categories
649
(λxτ)′σ = τ(x/σ) for all σ substitutable for x in τ
λx(τ ′x) = τ for all τ : BA, provided x : A is not free in τ.
Now λ-theories comprise the objects of a category λ −T h whose arrows are the
so-called translations between such theories. Let us deﬁne a translation K of a
λ-language L into a λ-language L′ to be a map which assigns to each type A of L
a type KA of L′ and to each function symbol f : A →B a function symbol of L′
of signature KA →KB in such a way that
K1 = 1, K(A1 × . . . × An) = KA1 × . . . KAn, K(BA) = KBKA.
Any translation K : L →L′ may be extended to the terms of L in the evident recur-
sive way — i.e., by deﬁning KxA = xKA, K⋆= ⋆, K(f(τ)) = Kf(Kτ), K(λxτ) =
λKxKτ, etc. — so that if τ : A, then Kτ : KA. We shall sometimes write αK
for Kα. If T, T ′ are λ-theories in L, L′ respectively, a translation K : L →L′ is a
translation of T into T ′, and is written K : T →T ′ if, for any equation σ = τ in
T, the equation Lσ = Kτ is in T ′.
As we shall see, λ-theories correspond to Cartesian closed categories in such a
way as to make the category λ-T h equivalent to the category Cart of Cartesian
closed categories. To establish this, we ﬁrst introduce the notion of an interpreta-
tion I of a λ-language L in a cartesian closed category C. This is deﬁned to be an
assignment
• to each type A, a C-object AI such that:
(A1 × . . . × An)I = (A1)I × . . . × (An)I,
(BA)I = (BI)AI
1I = 1, the terminal object of C,
• to each function symbol f : A →B, a C-arrow fI : AI →BI.
We shall sometimes write AC or just A for AI.
We extend I to terms of L as follows. If τ : B, write x for (x1, . . . , xn), any
sequence of variables containing all variables of τ (and call such sequences adequate
for τ). Deﬁne the C-arrow.
[[τ]]x : A1 × . . . An →B
recursively as follows:
[[⋆]]x = A1 × . . . × An −→1
[[xi]]x = πi : A1 × . . . × An −→Ai
[[f(τ)]]x = fI ◦[[τ]]x
[[⟨τ1, . . . , τn⟩]]x = ⟨[[τ1]]x, . . . , [[τn]]x⟩
[[(τ)i]]x = πi ◦[[τ]]x
[[τ ′σ]]x = ev ◦⟨[[τ]]x, [[σ]]x⟩
[[λyτ]]x = [
[[τ]]xy

650
John L. Bell
Here b denotes exponential transpose and ev the appropriate evaluation arrow in
the deﬁnition of the exponential.21
Next, one shows that any λ-theory T determines a Cartesian closed category
C(T). The objects of C(T) are taken to be the types of the language of T. The
arrows of C(T) are pairs of the form (x, τ), where τ is a term with no free variables
other than x, two such pairs (x, τ) and (y, σ) being identiﬁed whenever the equation
τ = σ is a member of T. The identity arrow on a type A is the pair (xA, xA).
The composite of (x, τ) : A →B and (y, σ) : B →C is given by the pair
(x, σ(y/τ)). It is now readily checked that C(T) is a Cartesian closed category
with terminal object the type 1 and in which products and exponentials are given
by the analogous operations on types. Moreover,
1A = (xA, ⋆)
πi = (z, (z)i) (with z : A1 × .. × An)
⟨(z, σ), (z, τ)⟩= (z, ⟨σ, τ⟩)
[
(z, τ) = (x, λyτ(⟨x, y⟩)) with z : A × B, x : A, y : B
evC,A = (y, (y)′
2(y)1) with y : CA × A.
There is a canonical interpretation of L in C(T) — which we denote by the same
expression C(T) — given by
AC(T ) = A
fC(T ) = (x, f(x)).
A straightforward induction shows that, for any term τ with free variables
x = (x1, ..., xn) of types A1, ..., An, we have
[[τ]]x = (z, τ)
where z is a variable of type A1 × ... × An.
Inversely, each Cartesian closed category E determines a λ-theory T h (E) in the
following way. First, one deﬁnes the internal language LE of E: the ground type
symbols of LE are taken to match the objects of E other than 1, that is, for each
E-object A other than 1 we assume given a ground type A. Next, we with each
type symbol A of LE we associate the E-object AE deﬁned by
AE = A for ground types A, (A × B)E = AE × BE, (BA)E = BA
E E.
As function symbols in LE we take triples of the form (f, A, B) = f with
f : AE →BE in E. The signature of f is A →B.
The natural interpretation — denoted by E — of LE in E is determined by the
assignments
AE = A for ground types A, (f, A, B) = f.
21For these notions see the Appendix.

Types, Sets, and Categories
651
The λ-theory T h (E) of E is now deﬁned in the following way. Given a pair of
terms σ, τ of the same type in LE, write x for the sequence of variables occurring
free in either σ or τ. The theory T h (E) consists of all equations σ = τ for which
the arrows ([[σ]]x)E and ([[τ]]x)E coincide.
It can then be shown that the canonical functor F : E →C(T (E)) deﬁned by
FA = A for each E-object A
Ff = (x, f(x)) for each E-arrow f : A →B
is an isomorphism of categories.
Similarly, for each λ-theory T there is a canonical translation G : T →T h (C(T))
given by
GA = A for each type A
Gf = ((x, f(x), A, B)) for f : A →B.
This translation is clearly an isomorphism in the category λ-T h . Now let Cart be
the category whose objects are Cartesian closed categories and whose arrows are
functors between these preserving terminal objects, products, and exponentials.
The mappings C and T h act as functors λ-T h →Cart and Cart →λ-T h respec-
tively; in view of the fact that, for any objects E of Cart , T of λ-T h , C(Th(E)) ∼= E
and T h (C(T)) ∼= T, these functors are equivalences. Accordingly λ-T h and Cart
are equivalent categories.
This is one exact sense in which a formal theory is
completely representable in categorical terms.
5.2
Logical languages and local set theories
What sort of category corresponds to the simple theory of types22 itself? The
answer to this question — a(n elementary) topos — was provided in 1969 by
Lawvere and Tierney,23 although it was not at ﬁrst grasped that their work in fact
could in fact be seen as answering that question. However, it soon became clear
that toposes are associated with a natural version of simple type theory, based on
intuitionistic logic, which we shall call intuitionistic type theory. The system to
be described here, local set theory, is a modiﬁcation, due to Zangwill [1977], of
that of Joyal and Boileau, later published as their [1981]. It combines the most
convenient features of simple type theory and set theory. A full account is given
in Bell [1988].
A local set theory is a type-theoretic system built on the same primitive symbols
=, ∈, { : } as classical set theory, in which the set-theoretic operations of forming
products and powers of types can be performed, and which in addition contains
a “truth value” type acting as the range of values of “propositional functions”
22It should be stressed that here by the “simple theory of types” is meant the theory of types
in Church’s sense which includes a type of propositions.
Without a type of propositions the
simple theory of types is essentially just the typed λ-calculus.
23See Lawvere [1971, 1972].

652
John L. Bell
on types. A local set theory is determined by specifying a collection of axioms
formulated within a local language deﬁned as follows.
A local language L has the following basic symbols:
• 1 (unit type)
Ω(truth value type)
• S, T, U,... (ground types: possibly none of these)
• f, g, h,... (function symbols: possibly none of these)
• xA, yA, zA, . . . (variables of each type A, where a type is as deﬁned below)
• ⋆(unique entity of type 1)
The types of L are deﬁned recursively as follows:
• 1, Ωare types
• any ground type is a type
• A1×. . .×An is a type whenever A1, . . . , An are, where, if n = 1, A1×. . .×An
is A1, while if n = 0, A1 × . . . × An is 1 (product types)
• PA is a type whenever A is (power types)
Each function symbol f is assigned a signature of the form A →B, where A, B
are types; this is indicated by writing f : A →B.
Terms of L and their associated types are deﬁned recursively as follows. We
write τ : A to indicate that the term τ has type A.
Term: type
Proviso
⋆: 1
xA : A
f(τ) : B
f: A →B
τ : A
⟨τ1, ..., τn⟩: A1 × ... × An, where
⟨τ1, ..., τn⟩is τ1 if n = 1, and ⋆if
n = 0.
τ1 : A1, ..., τn: An
(τ)i: Ai where (τ)i is τ if n= 1
τ : A1 × ... × An, 1 ≤i ≤n
{xA: α}: PA
α : Ω
σ = τ: Ω
σ, τ of same type
σ ∈τ
σ : A, τ: PA for some type A
Terms of type Ωare called formulas, propositions, or truth values. Notational
conventions we shall adopt include:

Types, Sets, and Categories
653
ω, ω′, ω′′
variables of type Ω
α, β, γ
formulas
x, y, z, . . .
xA, yA, zA...
τ(x/σ) or τ(σ)
result of substituting σ at each free
occurrence of x in τ: an occurrence
of x is free if it does not appear
within {x : α}
α ↔β
α = β
Γ : α
sequent notation: Γ a ﬁnite set of
formulas
: α
∅: α
A term is closed if it contains no free variables; a closed term of type Ωis called
a sentence.
The basic axioms for L are as follows:
Unity:
x1 = ⋆
Equality:
x = y, α(z/x) : α(z/y) (x, y free for z in α)
Products:
(⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩)i = xi
x = ⟨(x)1, . . . , (x)n⟩
Comprehension: x ∈{x : α} ↔α
The rules of inference for L are:
Thinning:
Γ : α
β, Γ : α
Restricted Cut:
Γ : α
α, Γ : β
(any free variable of α free in Γ or β)
Γ : β
Substitution:
Γ : α
(τ free for x in Γ and α)
Γ(x/τ) : α(x/τ)
Extensionality:
Γ : x ∈σ ↔x ∈τ
(x not free in Γ, σ, τ)
Γ : σ = τ
Equivalence:
α, Γ : β
β, Γ : α
Γ : α ↔β
These axioms and rules of inference yield a system of natural deduction in L.
If S is any collection of sequents in L, we say that the sequent Γ : α is deducible
from S, and write Γ ⊢S α provided there is a deduction of Γ : α using the basic
axioms, the sequents in S, and the rules of inference. We shall also write Γ ⊢α
for Γ ⊢∅α and ⊢S α for ∅⊢S α.

654
John L. Bell
A local set theory in L is a collection S of sequents closed under deducibility
from S. Any collection of sequents S generates the local set theory S∗comprising
all the sequents deducible from S. The local set theory in L generated by ∅is
called pure local set theory in L.
5.3
Logic in a local set theory
The logical operations in L are deﬁned as follows:
Logical Operation
Deﬁnition
⊤(true)
⋆= ⋆
α ∧β
⟨α, β⟩= ⟨⊤, ⊤⟩
α →β
(α ∧β) ↔α
∀xα
{x : α} = {x : ⊤}
⊥(false)
∀ω.ω
¬α
α →⊥
α ∨β
∀ω[(α →ω ∧β →ω) →ω]
∃xα
∀ω[∀x(α →ω) →ω]
We also write x ̸= y for ¬(x = y), x /∈y for ¬(x ∈y), and ∃!xα for ∃x[α ∧
∀y(α(x/y) →x = y)].
It can now be shown that the logical operations on formulas just deﬁned satisfy
the axioms and rules of free intuitionistic logic.
We present just a few of the
relevant derivations.
We write
Γ1 : α1, . . ., Γn : αn
∆: β
for deducibility of ∆: β from Γ1 : α1, . . ., Γn : αn.
⊢x = x.
Derivation: : (x)1 = x.
α ⊢α
Derivation:
ω, ω = ω : ω
: ω : ω
ω : ω
α : α
Γ : a
Γ : β
Γ : α ∧β

Types, Sets, and Categories
655
Derivation:
β : β = ⊤
α : α = ⊤
α = ⊤, β = ⊤: α ∧β
α, β = ⊤: α ∧β
Γ : α
Γ, β : α ∧β
Γ : α ∧β
Γ : α ↔β
γ : {x : α} = {x : β}
Deriviation:
Γ : α ↔β
/
α, Γ : β
\
β, Γ : α
x ∈{x : α}, Γ : x ∈{x : β}
x ∈{x : β}, Γ : x ∈{x : α}
Γ : x ∈{x : α} ↔x ∈{x : β}
Γ : {x : a} = {x : β
In any local set theory the following Modiﬁed Cut Rule holds:
(i)
Γ : α
α, Γ : β
∃x1(x1 = x1), . . . , ∃xn(xn = xn), Γ : β
where x1, . . . , xn are the free variables of α not occurring freely in Γ or β.
(ii)
Γ : α
α, Γ : β
Γ : β
provided that, whenever A is the type of a free variable of α with no free
occurrences in Γ or β, there is a closed24 term of type A.
5.4
Set theory in a local language
We can now introduce the concept of set in a local language. A set-like term is
a term of power type; a closed set-like term is called an (L−) set. We shall use
upper case italic letters X, Y, Z, ... for sets, as well as standard abbreviations such
as ∀x ∈X.α for ∀x(x ∈X →α). The set theoretic operations and relations are
deﬁned as follows. Note that in the deﬁnitions of ⊆, ∩, and ∪, X and Y must be
of the same type:
24A term is closed if it contains no free variables.

656
John L. Bell
Operation
Deﬁnition
{x ∈X : α}
{x : x ∈X ∧α}
X ⊆Y
∀x ∈X.x ∈Y
X ∩Y
{x : x ∈X ∧x ∈Y }
X ∪Y
{x : x ∈X ∨x ∈Y }
x /∈X
¬(x ∈X)
UA or A
{xA : ⊤}
∅A or ∅
{xA : ⊥}
E −X
{x : x ∈E ∧x /∈X}
PX
{u : u ⊆X}
T U (U : PPA)
{x : ∀u ∈U.x ∈u}
S U (U : PPA)
{x : ∃u ∈U.x ∈u}
T
i∈I
Xi
{x : ∀i ∈I.x ∈Xi}
S
i∈I
Xi
{x : ∃i ∈I.x ∈Xi}
{τ1, . . . , τn}
{x : x = τ1 ∨. . . ∨x = τn}
{τ : α}
{z : ∃x1 . . . ∃xn(z = τ ∧α)}
X × Y
{⟨x, y⟩: x ∈X ∧y ∈Y }
X + Y
{⟨{x}, ∅⟩: x ∈X} ∪{⟨∅, {y}⟩: y ∈
Y }
Fun(X, Y )
{u : u ⊆X × Y ∧∀x ∈X∃!y ∈
Y.⟨x, y⟩∈u}
The standard facts concerning the set-theoretic operations and relations now
follow as straightforward consequences of their deﬁnitions.
Given a term τ such that
⟨x1, ..., xn⟩∈X ⊢S τ ∈Y
we write (⟨x1, ..., xn⟩7→τ) or simply x 7→τ for
{⟨x1, ..., xn⟩, τ : ⟨x1, ..., xn⟩∈X}.
Clearly we have
⊢S (⟨x1, ..., xn⟩7→τ)) ∈Fun(X, Y ),
and so we may think of (⟨x1, ..., xn⟩7→τ) as the function from X to Y determined
by τ.
We now show that each local set theory determines a topos. Let S be a local
set theory in a local language L. Deﬁne the relation ≈S on the collection of all
L-sets by
X ≈S Y iﬀ⊢S X = Y.
This is an equivalence relation. An S-set is an equivalence class [X]S — which
we normally identify with X — of L-sets under the relation ≈S. An S-map f:
X →Y is a triple (f, X, Y ) — normally identiﬁed with f — of S-sets such that
⊢S f ∈Y X. X and Y are, respectively, the domain dom(f) and the codomain

Types, Sets, and Categories
657
cod(f) of f. It is now readily shown that the collection of all S−sets and maps
forms a category C(S), the category of S-sets, in which the composite of two maps
f : X →Y and g : Y →Z is given by
g ◦f = {⟨x, z⟩: ∃y(⟨x, y⟩∈f ∧⟨y, z⟩∈g)}.
In fact, C(S) is a topos, the topos of sets determined by S. It has terminal object
U1, the product of two objects (S-sets) X, Y is the S-set X × Y , with projections
given by
π1 = (⟨x, y⟩7→x) : X × Y →X,
π2 = (⟨x, y⟩7→x) : X × Y →Y,
its truth-value object is (Ω, t), where t : 1 →Ωis the S-map {⟨∗, ⊤⟩}, and the
power object of an object X is (PX, eX), where eX : X × PX →Ωis the S-map
⟨x, z⟩7→x ∈z. All this is proved in much the same way as for classical set theory.
It can also be shown that properties of maps in C(S) are characterized in just
the same way as in ordinary set theory, e.g. a map is monic iﬀit is one-to-one, epic
iﬀit is onto, and an isomorphism iﬀit is both. This fact will be used implicitly in
the sequel.
5.5
Interpreting a local language in a topos: the soundness and com-
pleteness theorems
Let L be a local language and E a topos. An interpretation I of L in E is an
assignment:
• to each type A, of an E-object AI such that:
(A1 × . . . × An)I = (A1)I × . . . × (An)I.
(PA)I = PAI,
1I = 1, the terminal object of E,
ΩI = Ω, the truth-value object of E.
• to each function symbol f : A →B, an E-arrow fI : AI →BI.
We shall sometimes write AE or just A for AI.
We extend I to terms of L as follows. If τ : B, write x for (x1, . . . , xn), any
sequence of variables containing all variables of τ (and call such sequences adequate
for τ). Deﬁne the E-arrow
[[τ]]x : A1 × . . . × An −→B
recursively as follows:
[[⋆]]x = A1 × . . . × −→1
[[xi]]x = πi : A1 × . . . × An −→Ai
[[f(τ)]]x = f1 ◦[[τ]]x
[[⟨τ1, . . . , τn⟩]]x = ⟨[[τ1]]x, . . . , [[τn]]x⟩
[[(τ)i]]x = πi ◦[[τ]]x
[[{y : α}]]x = ([[α(y/u)]]ux ◦can)ˆ

658
John L. Bell
where in this last clause u diﬀers from x1, . . . , xn, is free for y in α, y is of type C,
(so that B is of type PC), can is the canonical isomorphism C × (A1 × ... × An) ∼=
C × A1 × ... × An, and ˆf is as deﬁned for power objects.25 To understand why,
consider the diagrams
C × A1 × . . . An
[[α(y/u)]]ux
- Ω
C × (A1 × . . . An)
can
6
f
-
A1 × . . . × An
ˆ
f
−→PC
In set theory, ˆf(a1, . . . , an) = {y ∈C : α(y, a1, ..., an)}, so we take [[{y : α}]]x to
be ˆf.
Finally,
[[σ = τ]]x = eqc ◦[[⟨σ, τ⟩]]x
(with σ, τ : c)
[[σ ∈τ]]x = ec ◦[[⟨σ, τ⟩]]x
(with σ : C, τ : PC and where ec is as deﬁned for
power objects)
If τ : B is closed, then x may be taken to be the empty sequence ∅. In this case
we write [[τ]] for ⟨τ⟩∅; this is an arrow 1 →B.
We note that
[[⊤]]x = [[⋆= ⋆]]x = eq ◦⟨[[⋆]]x, [[⋆]]x⟩= T.
For any ﬁnite set Γ = {α1, . . . , αm} of formulas write
[[Γ]]I,x for [[α1]]I,x ∧. . . ∧[[αm]]I,x if m ≥1 or T if m = 0.
Given a formula α, let x = (x1, ..., xn) list all the free variables in Γ ∪{α}; write
Γ ⊨1 α for [[Γ]]I,x ≤[[α]]I,x.
Γ ⊨I α is read: “Γ : α is valid under the interpretation I in E.” If S is a local set
theory, we say that I is a model of S if every sequent of S is valid under I. Notice
that
⊨I β iﬀ[[β]]x = T.
So if I is an interpretation in a degenerate topos, i.e., a topos possessing just one
object up to isomorphism, then ⊨i α for all α.
We write:
Γ ⊨α
for
Γ ⊨I α for every I
Γ ⊨S α
for
Γ ⊨I α for every model I of S.
25See Appendix for deﬁnitions of all categorical notions used in the sequel.

Types, Sets, and Categories
659
It can be shown (laboriously) that the basic axioms and rules of inference of any
local set theory are valid under every interpretation. This yields the
Soundness Theorem.
Γ ⊢α ⇒Γ ⊨α
Γ ⊢S α ⇒Γ ⊨S α.
A local set theory S is said to be consistent if it is not the case that ⊢S ⊥. The
soundness theorem yields the
Corollary. Any pure local set theory is consistent.
Proof. Set up an interpretation I of L in the topos Finset of ﬁnite sets as follows:
1I = 1, ΩI = {0, 1} = 2, for any ground type A, AI is any nonempty ﬁnite set.
Extend I to arbitrary types in the obvious way. Finally fI : AI →BI is to be
any map from AI to BI.
If ⊢⊥, then ⊢α, so ⊨I α for any formula α. In particular ⊨I u = v, where
u, v are variables of type P1. Hence [[u]]I,uv = [[v]]I,uv, that is, the two projections
P1 × P1 →P1would have to be identical, a contradiction.
■
Given a local set theory S in a language L, deﬁne the canonical interpretation
C(S) of L in C(S) by:
AC(S) = UA fC(S) = (x 7→f(x)) : UA →UB for f : A →B.
A straightforward induction establishes
[[τ]]C(S),x, = (x 7→τ).
This yields
Γ ⊨C(S) α ⇔Γ ⊢S α.
(∗)
For:
⊨C(S) α
⇔
[[α]]C(S)x = T
⇔
(x 7→α) = (x 7→⊤)
⇔
⊢S α = ⊤
⇔
⊢S α.
Since Γ ⊢S α ⇔
⊢S γ →α, where γ is the conjunction of all the formulas in Γ,
the special case yields the general one.
Equivalence (*) may be read as asserting that C(S) is a canonical model of S.
This fact yields the
Completeness Theorem.
Γ ⊨α ⇒Γ ⊢α
Γ ⊨S α ⇒Γ ⊢S α
Proof. We know that C(S) is a model of S. Therefore, using (*),
Γ ⊨S α ⇒Γ ⊢C(S) α ⇒Γ ⊢S α.
■

660
John L. Bell
5.6
Every topos is linguistic: the equivalence theorem
A topos of the form C(S) is called a linguistic topos. It can be shown that every
topos is, in a certain sense, equivalent to a linguistic one. This fact was apparently
established independently by a number of mathematicians: it appears for example,
in Fourman [1977], Zangwill [1977], and Boileau and Joyal [1981].
Given a topos E, we exhibit a theory Th(E) and an equivalence E ≃C(Th(E)).
The local language LE associated with E — also called the internal language
of E — is deﬁned as follows. The ground type symbols of LE are taken to match
the objects of E other than its terminal and truth-value objects, that is, for each
E-object A (other than 1, Ω) we assume given a ground type A in LE. Next, we
deﬁne for each type symbol A an E-object AE by
AE = A for ground types A,
(A × B)E = AE × BE
26
(PA)E = P(AE).
The function symbols of L are triples (f, A, B) = f with f : AE →BE in E.
The signature of f is A →B.27
The natural interpretation — denoted by E — of LE in E is determined by the
assignments
AE = A for each ground type A
(f, A, B)E = f.
The local set theory Th(E), the theory of E, is the theory in LE generated by the
collection of all sequents Γ : α such that Γ ⊨E α under the natural interpretation
of LE in E. Then we have
Γ ⊢T h(E) α ⇔Γ ⊨E α.
For if Γ ⊢T h(E) α then by Soundness Γ ⊨T h(E) α, i.e., Γ : α is valid in every model
of Th(E). But by deﬁnition E is a model of Th(E).
It can be shown that the canonical functor F : E →C(Th(E)) deﬁned by
FA
=
UA for each E-object A
Ff
=
(x 7→f(x) : UA →UB for each E-arrow f : A →B
is an equivalence of categories. This is the Equivalence Theorem.
Finally, we state two more facts about Th(E).
A local set theory S in a language L is said to be
26Note that, if we write C for A × B, then while C is a ground type, A × B is a product type.
Nevertheless CE = (A × B)E.
27Note the following: if f : A × B →D, in E, then, writing C for A × B as in the footnote
above, (f, C, D) and (f, A × B, D) are both function symbols of LE associated with f. But the
former has signature C →D, while the latter has the diﬀerent signature A × B →D.

Types, Sets, and Categories
661
• well-termed if whenever ⊢S ∃!xα, there is a term τ of L whose free variables
are those of α with x deleted such that ⊢S α(x/τ);
• well-typed if for any S-set X there is a type symbol A of L such that UA ∼= X
in C(S).
Then, for any topos E, Th(E) is well-termed and well-typed.
5.7
Translations of local set theories
A translation K : L →L′ of a local language L into a local language L′ is a map
which assigns to each type A of L a type KA of L′ and to each function symbol
f : A →B of L a function symbol Kf: KA →KB of L′ in such a way that
K1 = 1, KΩ= Ω, K(A)1 × . . . × An) = KA1 × . . . × KAn, K(PA) = PKA.
Any translation K : L →L′ may be extended to the terms of L in the evident
recursive way — i.e., by deﬁning K⋆= ⋆, K(f(τ)) = Kf(kτ), K(σ ∈τ) =
Kσ ∈Kτ, etc — so that if τ : A, then Kτ : KA. We shall sometimes write αK
for Kα.
If S, S′ are local set theories in L, L′ respectively, a translation K : L →L′ is a
translation of S into S′, and is written K : S →S′ if, for any sequent Γ : α of L,
Γ ⊢S α ⇒KΓ ⊢S′ Kα,
(*)
where if Γ = {α1, ..., αn}, KΓ = {Kα1, ..., Kαn}. If the reverse implication to
(*) also holds, K is called a conservative translation of S into S′.
If S′ is an
extension of S and the identity translation of S into S′ is conservative, S′ is called
a conservative extension of S.
There is a natural correspondence between models of S in a topos E and trans-
lations of S into Th(E): in particular the identity translation Th(E) →Th(E)
corresponds to the natural interpretation of Th(E) in E.
Now let E, E′ be toposes with speciﬁed terminal objects, products, projection
arrows, truth-value objects, power objects and evaluation arrows: a functor F :
E →E′ which preserves all these is called a logical functor. It is easily seen that
the canonical functor E →C(Th(E)) is logical.
If K : S →S′ is a translation, then for terms σ, τ of L, ⊢S σ = τ implies
⊢S′ Kσ = Kτ, so that K induces a map CK from the class of S-sets to the class
of S′-sets via
CK([σ]S) = [Kσ]S.
CK is actually a logical functor C(S) →C(S′). Writing Loc for the category
of local set theories and translations, and T op for the category of toposes and
logical functors, C is a functor Loc →T op. And reciprocally any logical functor
F : E →E′ induces a translation Th(F) : Th(E) →Th(E′) in the natural way, so
yielding a functor Th: Loc →T op. C and Th are “almost” inverse, making Loc
and T op “almost” equivalent.

662
John L. Bell
Given a local set theory S in a language L, deﬁne a translation K : L →LL(S)
by
KA = UA, Kf = (f, A, B) if f : A →B.
An easy induction on the formation of terms shows that, for any term τ of
L, [[τ]]C(S), x = [[Kτ]]C(S), Kx.
It follows from this that K is a conservative
translation of S into Th(C(S)). For Γ ⊢S α ⇔Γ ⊢C(S) α ⇔KΓ ⊢C(S) Kα ⇔
KΓ ⊢T h(C(S)) Kα.
Accordingly any local set theory can be conservatively embedded in one which is
well-termed and well-typed.
A particularly important instance of translation is the adjunction of indetermi-
nates to a local set theory. Let us deﬁne a constant of type A in a local language
L to be a term of the form f(⋆), where f : 1 →A. Write L(c) for the language
obtained from L by adding a new function symbol c : 1 →A and write c for
c(⋆). Given a local set theory S in L, and a formula α of L with exactly one free
variable x of type A, write S(α) for the theory in L(c) generated by S together
with all sequents of the form: β(x/c) where α ⊢S β. Since clearly ⊢S(α) α(x/c), it
follows that ⊢S(α) ∃xα. Also, an analysis of derivations establishes that proofs in
S(α) are related to proofs in S by the condition:
Γ(x/c) ⊢S(α) γ(x/c) ⇔α, Γ ⊢S γ.
(∗)
for any sequent Γ : γ of L.
It is not hard to show that:
⊢S ∃xα
⇔
S(α) is a conservative extension of S
⊢S ¬∃xα
⇔
S(α) is inconsistent.
In S(α), c behaves as an indeterminate of sort α in the sense that it can be
arbitrarily assigned any value satisfying α. To be precise, the following can be
proved:
Let S∗be a local set theory in a local language L∗and let K : S →S∗. Then
for any constant c∗of L∗of type KA such tha t⊢S∗αK(c∗), there is a unique
translation K∗: S(α) →S extending K such that K∗(c) = c∗.
If I is an S-set and α the formula x ∈I, we write SI for S(α) and call it the
theory obtained from Sby adjoining an indeterminate element of I. It follows
from (*) above that, for any formula γ of L in which i is free for x,
⊢S(I) γ(x/c) ⇔⊢S ∀i ∈Iγ(x/i).
If α is the formula x = x with x : A, then S(α) is written S(A) and called the
theory obtained from S by adjoining an indeterminate of type A. In particular,
let S0 be the pure local set theory in the local language L0 with no ground types
or function symbols. Evidently S0 is an initial object in the category Loc: there is
a unique translation of L0 into any given local set theory S. (Similarly, the topos
C(S0) is an initial object in the category top.) Now consider the theory S0(A),

Types, Sets, and Categories
663
where A is a type symbol of L0: A may be considered a type symbol of any local
language L. If d is a constant of type A in L, and S a local set theory in L, there
is then a unique translation K : S0(A) →S mapping c to d. So S0(A) may be
considered the universal theory of an indeterminate of type A.
5.8
Classicality and the choice principle
Let S be a local set theory in a language L. We make the following
Deﬁnitions.
• S is classical if ⊢S ∀ω(ω ∨¬ω). This is the full law of excluded middle for
S.
• S is sententially classical if ⊢S α∨¬α for any sentence α. This is a weakened
form of the law of excluded middle.
• For each S−set X : PA let ∆(X) be the set of closed terms τ such that
⊢S τ ∈X. X is standard if for any formula α with at most the variable
x : A free the following is valid:
⊢S α(x/τ) for all τ in ∆(X)
⊢S ∀x ∈Xα
S is standard if every S-set is so.
• S is witnessed if for any type symbol A of L and any formula α with at most
the variable x : A free the following is valid:
⊢S ∃xα
⊢S α(x/τ) for some closed term τ : A
• S is choice if, for any S-sets X, Y and any formula α with at most the
variables x, y free the following rule (the choice rule) is valid:
⊢S ∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y α(x, y)
⊢S ∀x ∈Xα(x, fx) for some f : X →Y
• S is internally choice if under the conditions of the previous deﬁnition
∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y α(x, y) ⊢S ∃f ∈Fun(X, Y )∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y [α(x, y)∧⟨x, y⟩∈f].
• An S-set X is discrete if
⊢S ∀x ∈X∀y ∈X.x = y ∨x ̸= y.

664
John L. Bell
• A complement for an S-set X : PA is an S-set Y : PA such that
⊢S X ∪Y = A ∧X ∩Y = ∅.
An S-set that has a complement is said to be complemented.
Now for some facts concerning these notions. In formulating our arguments we
shall assume that our background metatheory is constructive, in that no use of
the metalogical law of excluded middle will be made.
1. Any of the following conditions is equivalent to the classicality of S:
(i)
⊢S Ω= {⊤, ⊥}
(ii)
⊢S ¬¬ω →ω
(iii)
any S-set is complemented,
(iv)
any S-set is discrete,
(v)
Ωis discrete,
(vi)
⊢S 2 = {0, 1} is well-ordered under the usual ordering,
Proof. (iii) If S is classical, clearly {x : x /∈X} is a complement for X. Conversely,
if {⊤} has a complement U, then
⊢S ω ∈U →¬(ω = ⊤) →¬ω →ω = ⊥.
Hence ⊢S U = {⊥}, whence ⊢S Ω= {⊤} ∪U = {⊤, ⊥}.
(v) If Ωis discrete, then ⊢S ω = ⊤∨¬(ω = ⊤), so ⊢S ω ∨¬ω.
(vi) If S is classical, then 2 is trivially well-ordered under the usual well-ordering.
Conversely, if 2 is well-ordered, take any formula α, and deﬁne X = {x ∈2 : x =
1 ∨α}. Then X has a least element, a, say. Clearly ⊢S a = 0 ↔α, so, since
⊢S a = 0 ∨a = 1, we get ⊢S a = 1 ↔¬α, and hence ⊢S α ∨¬α.
■
2. For well-termed S, S choice ⇔S internally choice and witnessed.
Proof. Suppose S is choice. If ⊢S ∃xα, let u : 1 and deﬁne β(u, x) ≡α(x). Then
⊢S ∀u ∈1∃x ∈Xβ(u, x). Now choice yields an S-map f : 1 →X such that
⊢S ∀u ∈1β(u, f(u)) i.e., ⊢S β(⋆, f⋆) or ⊢S α(f⋆). By well-termedness, f⋆
may be taken to be a closed term τ, and we then have ⊢S α(τ). So S is witnessed.
To derive internal choice from choice, we argue as follows: let
X∗= {x ∈X : ∃y ∈Y α(x, y)}.
Then ⊢S ∀x ∈X∗∃y ∈Y α(x, y). Accordingly choice yields a map f : X∗→Y
such that ⊢S ∀x ∈X∗α(x, fx), i.e. ⊢S ∀x ∈X∗∃y ∈Y [⟨x, y⟩∈f ∧α(x, y)]. Now
∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y α(x, y)] ⊢S X = X∗⊢S f ∈Fun(X, Y )

Types, Sets, and Categories
665
so
∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y α(x, y)] ⊢S ∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y [⟨x, y⟩∈f ∧α(x, y)].
Hence
∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y α(x, y) ⊢S ∃f ∈Fun(X, Y )∀x ∈X∃y ∈Y [α(x, y) ∧⟨x, y⟩∈f],
as required. The converse is easy.
■
3. If S is well-termed and well-typed, then S is choice ⇔SX(= S(X)) is wit-
nessed for every S-set X.
Proof.
Suppose S is choice and ⊢S(X) ∃yα(y).
We may assume that X is
of the form UA, in which case α is of the form β(x/c, y) with x : A.
From
⊢S(X) ∃yβ(x/c, y) we infer ⊢S ∀x∃yβ(x/c, y).
So using choice in S and the
well-termedness of S we obtain a term τ(x) such that ⊢S ∀xβ(x, τ(x)). Hence
⊢S(X) β(c, τ(c)), i.e., ⊢S(X) α(τ(c)). Therefore SX is witnessed.
Conversely, suppose SX is witnessed for every S-set X, and that ⊢S ∀x ∈
X∃y ∈Y α(x, y)]. Then ⊢S(X) ∃y ∈Y α(c, y)], so there is a closed LX-term τ
such that ⊢S(X) τ ∈Y ∧α(c, τ). But τ is σ(x/c) for some L-term σ(x). Thus
⊢S(X) σ(c) ∈Y ∧α(c, σ(c)), whence ⊢S ∀x ∈X[σ(x) ∈Y ∧α(x, σ)]. Deﬁning
f = (x 7→σ) : X →Y then gives ⊢S ∀x ∈Xα(x, fx)] as required.
■
4. Diaconescu’s Theorem. S choice ⇒S classical.
This is the version, for local set theories, of Diaconescu’s [1975] result28 that
any topos in which the axiom of choice holds is Boolean.
Proof. Step 1.
S choice ⇒SI choice for any S-set I.
Proof of step 1. Suppose that S is choice, and
⊢S(I) ∀x ∈X(c)∃y ∈Y (c)α(x, y, c).
Then
⊢S ∀x ∈X(i)∃y ∈Y (i)α(x, y, i).
Deﬁne
X∗= {⟨x, i⟩: x ∈X(i) ∧i ∈I}, Y ∗= S
i∈I
Y (i).
β(u, y) ≡∃x ∈X(i)∃i ∈I[u = ⟨x, i⟩∧α(x, y, i) ∧y ∈Y (i)].
Then
⊢S ∀u ∈X∗∃y ∈Y ∗β(u, y).
So choice yields f ∗: X∗→Y ∗such that
⊢S ∀u ∈X∗β(u, f ∗u).
28First presented in purely logical form in Goodman and Myhill [1978].

666
John L. Bell
i.e.,
⊢S ∀i ∈I∀x ∈X(i)[α(x, f ∗(⟨x, i⟩, i) ∧f ∗(⟨x, i⟩) ∈Y (i)],
whence
⊢S ∀x ∈X(c)[α(x, f ∗(⟨x, c⟩, c) ∧f ∗(⟨x, c⟩) ∈Y (c)],
Now deﬁne f = (x 7→f ∗(⟨x, c⟩)). Then f : X(c) →Y (c) in SI and
⊢S(I) ∀x ∈X(c)α(x, fx, c).
This completes the proof of step 1.
Step 2. S choice ⇒S sententially classical.
Proof of step 2.
Deﬁne 2 = {0, 1} and let X = {u ⊆2 : ∃y.y ∈u}. Then
⊢S ∀u ∈X∃y ∈2.y ∈u.
So by choice there is f : X →2 such that
⊢S ∀u ∈X.fu ∈u.
Now let α be any sentence; deﬁne
U = {x ∈2 : x = 0 ∨α}, V = {x ∈2 : x = 1 ∨α},
Then ⊢S U ∈X ∧V ∈X, so, writing a = fU, b = fV , we have
⊢S [a = 0 ∨α] ∧[b = 1 ∨α],
whence
⊢S [a = 0 ∧b = 1] ∨α,
so that
⊢S a ̸= b ∨α.
(∗)
But α ⊢S U = V ⊢S a = b, so that a ̸= b ⊢S ¬α. It follows from this and (*) that
⊢S α ∨¬α,
as claimed. This establishes step 2.
Moral of step 2: if pair sets have choice functions, then logic is classi-
cal.
Step 3 (obvious). S classical ⇔SΩsententially classical.
Finally, to prove Diaconescu’s theorem, we observe that
S choice ⇒SΩchoice ⇒SΩsententially classical ⇒S classical.
■

Types, Sets, and Categories
667
5.9
Characterisation of Set
We remind the reader that we are assuming that our background metatheory is
constructive. For deﬁniteness we will take that metatheory to be intuitionistic set
theory IST. Now consider the category Set of sets in IST. Its objects are all sets
and its arrows all maps between sets. Set is a topos in with truth-value object
P1. We seek a characterization of Set in terms of its associated local set theory,
that is, a characterization of the category of sets in type-theoretic terms. This is
to be carried out in a constructive manner.
To achieve this, we ﬁrst deﬁne a local set theory S to be full if for each set I
in the background metatheory there is a type symbol bI of the language L of S
together with a collection {bi : i ∈I} of closed terms each of type bI satisfying the
following:
(i)
⊢S bi = bj ⇒i = j.
(ii) For any I-indexed family {τi : i ∈I} of closed terms of common type A,
there is a term τ(x) : A, x : bI such that
⊢S τi = τ(bi) for all i ∈I,
and, for any term σ(x) : A, x : bI, if ⊢S τi = σ(bi) for all i ∈I, then
⊢S τ = σ.
We establish the generalization principle for hatted type symbols:
The following is valid for any formula α(x) with x : bI:
⊢S α(bi) for all i ∈I
⊢S ∀xα
and similarly for more free variables. In particular, bI is standard.
Proof. Assume the premises. Then for any i ∈I we have ⊢S α(bi) = ⊤and it
follows from the uniqueness condition that ⊢S α(x) = ⊤, whence have ⊢S ∀xα. ■
Note the following: (i) if S is well-termed and well-typed, then C(S) is full iﬀ
the I-indexed sum of 1 exists in C(S) for any (intuitive) set I. Here the I-indexed
sum of an object X in a category C is an object I ⊗X together with arrows
σi : X →I ⊗X(i ∈I) such that, for any arrows fi : X →A, there is a unique
arrow f : I ⊗X →A such that fi = f ◦σi for all i ∈I. In Set , I ⊗X is the
disjoint union of I copies of X, so that, in particular, I ⊗1 is essentially I itself.
(ii) S is standard iﬀ1 is a generator in C(S). Here an object A of a category C
is a generator if, for any pair of C-arrows f, g : X →Y, f = g whenever f ◦h = g◦h
for all arrows h : A →X.
Conditions (i) and (ii) are both satisﬁed by Set .

668
John L. Bell
We can now prove the
Theorem. The following conditions on a well-termed, well-typed consistent local
set theory S are equivalent:
(i)
S is full and standard,
(ii) C(S) ≃Set .
Proof. Implication (ii) ⇒(i) has been discussed above. Now assume that S is
full. Since S is well-termed, for any S-map f : X →Y we can write f(τ) for each
closed term τ such that ⊢S τ ∈X.
We deﬁne functors ∆: C(S) →Set , ˆ : Set →C(S), which, under the speciﬁed
conditions, we show to deﬁne an equivalence.
First, ∆(X) is the set of closed terms τ such that ⊢S τ ∈X, where we identify
σ, τ if ⊢S σ = τ. Given f : X →Y , we deﬁne ∆(f) to be the map (τ 7→f(τ)) :
∆(X) →∆(Y ).
Next, given I in Set , we deﬁne bI to be the S-set UbI. Given f : I →J, there is
a term f(x) : bJ with x : bI such that that ⊢S bf(bi) = d
f(i) for all i ∈I. We deﬁne
bf : bI →bJ to be the S-map x 7→bf(x).
For any set I and any S-set X, we have natural maps ηI : I →∆(bI) and
ε : \
∆(X) →X deﬁned as follows:
ηI(i) = bi for i ∈I; ⊢S ε(bτ) = τ for all τ ∈∆(X).
Clearly η is monic. The same is true of ε since for σ, τ ∈∆(X),
⊢S ε(bσ) = ε(bτ) →σ = τ,
whence
⊢S ∀x∀y[ε(x) = ε(y) →x = y]
by generalization for hatted type symbols.
Now suppose that S is standard. We claim that then ε is epic and hence an
isomorphism. For we have, for all τ ∈∆(X), ⊢S ε(bτ) = τ, whence ⊢S ∃yε(y) = τ.
Since X is standard, we infer that
⊢S ∀x ∈X∃yε(y) = x,
so that ε is onto, hence epic.
Using the fact that ε is an isomorphism we can now show that η is epic, and
hence also an isomorphism. To do this we require the readily established fact that,
for f : I →J, bf : bI →bJ is a map in S, and if bf is epic, then so is f.
Now consider bη : bI →c
∆bI. We note that
ε ◦bη = 1bI.
(∗)

Types, Sets, and Categories
669
For if i ∈I, then
⊢S ε(bη(bi)) = ε( bηi) = ηi = bi
It follows by generalization that
⊢S ∀x ∈bI ε(ηx) = x,
whence (*).
Since ε is an isomorphism, it follows easily from (*) that bη is an isomorphism,
hence also epic. Accordingly η is itself epic, and hence also an isomorphism.
We conclude that (∆,ˆ) deﬁne an equivalence between C(S) →Set , as required.
■
6
NEW FORMS OF TYPE THEORY AND THE DOCTRINE OF
“PROPOSITIONS AS TYPES”
Type theory took a remarkable turn in the 1980s with the emergence of the propo-
sitions as types doctrine. Underlying this doctrine is the idealist notion, traceable
to Kant, and central to Brouwerian intuitionism, that the meaning of a proposi-
tion does not derive from an absolute standard of truth external to the mind, but
resides rather in the evidence for its assertability in the form of a mental construc-
tion or proof. Thus the central thesis of the “propositions-as-types” doctrine is
that each proposition is to be identiﬁed with the type, set, or assemblage of its
proofs.29 As a result, such proof types, or sets of proofs, have to be accounted
the only types, or sets. Strikingly, then, in the “propositions as types” doctrine,
a type, or set, simply is the type, or set, of proofs of a proposition, and, recipro-
cally, a proposition is just the type, or set, of its proofs. These are truly radical
identiﬁcations.
In a simple type theory or a local set theory, each type is independent of other
types and is thus, so to speak, absolute or static; this holds in particular of the type
of propositions or truth values. Now formulas or propositional functions in general
manifest variation, since their values vary over, or depend on, the domain(s) of
their free variables.
Because of this they cannot be accurately represented as
static types.
This limitation makes it impossible for a simple type theory to
realize faithfully the “propositions as types” doctrine. In order to achieve this it is
necessary to develop a theory of “variable” or dependent types, wherein types can
depend on, or “vary over” other types. In a dependent type theory, type symbols
may take the form B(x), with x a variable of a given type A : B(x) is then a type
dependent on or varying over the type A.
29This idea was advanced by Curry and Feys [1958] and later by Howard [1980].
As the
Curry-Howard correspondence it has come to play an important role in theoretical computer
science.

670
John L. Bell
Such a theory — constructive dependent type theory (CDTT) — was intro-
duced30 by Per Martin-L¨of [1975; 1982; 1984]. His theory, which has subsequently
undergone much development, is also (as its name indicates) the ﬁrst truly con-
structive theory of types, in the sense of being both predicative (so in particular
it lacks a type of propositions) and based on intuitionistic logic. In introducing
it Martin-L¨of’s purpose was to provide, as he put it in [1975] “a full scale sys-
tem for formalizing intuitionistic mathematics as developed, for example, in the
book by Bishop”.31 Martin-L¨of’s system provides a complete embodiment of the
“propositions-as-types” doctrine.32
Here is Martin-L¨of himself on the latter in
[1975]:
Every mathematical object is of a certain kind or type.
Better, a
mathematical object is always given together with its type, that is it
is not just an object: it is an object of a certain type. . . .
A type
is deﬁned by prescribing what we have to do in order to construct
an object of that type. . . Put diﬀerently, a type is well-deﬁned if we
understand. . . what it means to be an object of that type. . . .
Note
that it is required, neither that we should be able to generate somehow
all the objects of a given type, nor that we should so to say know all
of them individually. It is only a question of understanding what it
means to be an arbitrary object of the type in question.
A proposition is deﬁned by prescribing how we are allowed to prove it,
and a proposition holds or is true intuitionistically if there is a proof
of it. . . . Conversely, each type determines a proposition, namely, the
proposition that the type in question is nonempty. This is the proposi-
tion which we prove by exhibiting an object of the type in question. On
this analysis, there appears to be no fundamental diﬀerence between
propositions and types. Rather, the diﬀerence is one of point of view:
in the case of a proposition, we are not so much interested in what its
proofs are as in whether it has a proof, that is, whether it is true or
false, whereas, in the case of a type, we are of course interested in what
its objects are and not only in whether it is empty or nonempty.
A key element in Martin-L¨of’s formulation of type theory is the distinction,
which goes back to Frege, between propositions and judgments.
Propositions
(which, as we have seen, in Martin-L¨of’s systems are identiﬁed with types) are
syntactical objects on which mathematical operations can be performed and which
30Dependent types were actually ﬁrst studied in the late 1960s by de Bruijn and his colleagues
at the University of Eindhoven in connection with the AUTOMATH project. CDTT has been
employed as a basis for various computational devices employed for the veriﬁcation of mathe-
matical theories and of software and hardware systems in computer science.
31I.e. Bishop [1967].
32Martin-L¨of’s original calculus contained a type of all types. This assumption was shown
to be inconsistent by Girard [1972]. Martin-L¨of accordingly dropped this assumption in later
versions of his theory.

Types, Sets, and Categories
671
bear certain formal relationships to other syntactical objects called proofs. Propo-
sitions and proofs are, so to speak, objective constituents of the system. Judg-
ments, on the other hand, typically involve the idealist notion of “understanding”
or “grasping the meaning of”. Thus, for example, while 2 + 2 = 4 is a proposition,
“2 + 2 = 4 is a proposition” and “2 + 2 = 4 is a true proposition” are judgments.
Martin-L¨of also follows Frege in taking the rules of inference of logic to concern
judgments rather than propositions. Thus, for example, the correct form of the
rule of →-elimination is not
A A →B
B
but
A true
A →B true
B true
.
That is, the rule does not say that the proposition B follows from the propositions
A and A →B, but that the truth of the proposition B follows from the truth of
the proposition A conjoined with that of A →B. In general, judgments may be
characterized as expressions which appear at the conclusions of rules of inference.
Another important respect in which Martin-L¨of follows Frege is in his insistence
that judgments and formal rules be accompanied by full explanations of their
meaning. (This is to be contrasted with the usual model-theoretic semantics which
is really nothing more than a translation of one object-language into another.) In
particular, the judgment A is a proposition may be made only when one knows
what a (canonical) proof of A is, and the judgment A is a true proposition only
when one knows how to ﬁnd such a proof. Judgments, and the notion of truth,
are thus seen to be mind-dependent.
Martin-L¨of’s various systems abound in subtle distinctions. For example, in
addition to the distinction between proposition and judgment, there is a parallel
distinction between type (or set) and category33 (or species). In order to be able to
judge that Ais a category one must be able to tell what kind of objects fall under
it, and when they are equal. To be in a position to make the further judgment that
a category is a type, or set, one must be able to specify what its “canonical” or
typical, elements are. In judging something to be a set, one must possess suﬃcient
information concerning the its elements to enable quantiﬁcation over it to make
sense.
Thus, for example, the natural numbers form a set N, with canonical
elements given by: 0 is a canonical element of N, and if n is a canonical element
of N, then n + 1 is a canonical element of N. On the other hand the collection of
subsets of N forms a category, but not a set.
The “propositions-as-types” doctrine (which for convenience we abbreviate to
PAT) gives rise to a correspondence between logical operators and operations on
(dependent) types .
Let us follow Tait’s [1994] exposition of the idea in set-
theoretic terms. To begin with, consider two propositions/types/sets A and B.
33In this usage, of course, to be distinguished from the term as employed in its mathematical
sense throughout the present article.

672
John L. Bell
What should be required of a proof f of the implication A →B? Just that, given
any proof x of A, f should yield a proof of B, that is, f should be a function from
A to B. In other words, the proposition A →B is just the type of functions from
A to B:
A →B = BA
Similarly, all that should be required of a proof c of the conjunction A ∧B is
that it should yield proofs x and y of A and B, respectively. From this point of
view A ∧B is accordingly just the type A × B of all pairs (x, y), with x of type
A (we write this as x : A) and y : B.
A proof of the disjunction A∨B is either a proof of A or a proof of B together
with the information as to which of A or B it is a proof. That is, if we introduce
the type 2 with the two distinct elements 0 and 1, a proof of A ∨B may be
identiﬁed as a pair (c, n) in which either c is a proof of A and n is 0, or c is a
proof of B and n is 1. This means that A ∨B should be construed as the disjoint
union A + B of A and B.
The true proposition ⊤may be identiﬁed with the one element type 1 = {0} : 0
thus counts as the unique proof of ⊤. The false proposition ⊥is taken to be a
proposition which lacks a proof altogether: accordingly ⊥is identiﬁed with the
empty set ∅. The negation ¬A of a proposition A is deﬁned as A →⊥, which
therefore becomes identiﬁed with the set A∅.
As we have already said, a proposition A is deemed to be true if it (i.e, the
associated type A) has an element, that is, if there is a function 1 →A.Accordingly
the law of excluded middle for a proposition A becomes the assertion that there is
a function 1 →A + ∅A.
If a and b are objects of type A, we introduce the identity proposition or type
a =A b expressing that a and b are identical objects of type A. This proposition
is true, that is, the associated type has an element, if and only if a and b are
identical. In that case id(a) will denote an object of type a.
In PAT one must, as in Martin-L¨of’s system, distinguish sharply between propo-
sitions, which have proofs, and judgments, which do not. For example 0 =2 0 is a
proposition, while “0 is of type 2” is a judgment. Rather than being true or false,
a judgment is either assertable, or nonsensical.
In order to deal with the quantiﬁers we require operations deﬁned on families
of types, that is, types Φ(x) depending on objects x of some type A. By analogy
with the case A →B, a proof f of the proposition ∀x : AΦ(x), that is, an object
of type ∀x : AΦ(x), should associate with each x : A a proof of Φ(x). So f is just
a function with domain A such that, for each x : A, fx is of type Φ(x). That is,
∀x : AΦ(x) is the product Πx : AΦ(x) of the Φ(x)s. We use the λ-notation in
writing f as λxfx.
A proof of the proposition ∃x : AΦ(x), that is, an object of type ∃x : AΦ(x),
should determine an object x : A and a proof y of Φ(x), and vice-versa. So a
proof of this proposition is just a pair (x, y) with x : A and y : Φ(x). Therefore
∃x : AΦ(x) is the disjoint union, or coproduct ` x : AΦ(x) of the Φ(x)s.

Types, Sets, and Categories
673
To translate all this into the language of CDTT,34 one uses the following con-
cordance:
Logical
Operation
Set-theoretic Operation
Type-theoretic Operation
∧
×
×
∨
+
two-term dependent sum
→
set exponentiation
type exponentiation
∀x
Cartesian product Q
i∈I
dependent product Πx:A
∃x
disjoint sum `
i∈I
dependent sum `x:A
Of especial interest is the status of the axiom of choice in this framework. Again
following Tait, we introduce the functions σ, π, π′ of types ∀x : A(Φ(x) →∃x :
AΦ(x)), ∃x : AΦ(x) →A, and ∀y : (∃xΦ(x)).Φ(π(y)) as follows. If b : A and
c : Φ(b), then σbc is (b, c). If d : ∃x : AΦ(x), then d is of the form (b, c) and in
that case π(d) = b and π′(d) = c. These yield the equations
π(σbc) = bπ′(σbc) = cσ(πd)(π′d) = d.
We may take the axiom of choice as the proposition
∀x : A∃y : BΦ(x, y)) →∃f : BA∀x : AΦ(x, fx)).
(AC)
Remarkably, AC is correct under PAT, that is, provable in CDTT , as the following
argument shows. Let u be a proof of the antecedent ∀x : A∃y : BΦ(x, y)). Then,
for any x : A, π(ux) is of type B and π′(ux) is a proof of Φ(x, πux). So s(u) =
λx.π(ux) is of type BA and t(u) = λx.π′(ux) is a proof of ∀x : AΦ(x, s(u)x).
Accordingly λu.σs(u)t(u) is a proof of ∀x : A∃y : BΦ(x, y)) →∃x : BA∀x :
AΦ(x, fx)).
Put informally, what this shows is that in CDTT the consequent of AC means
nothing more than its antecedent. Indeed, in many versions of constructive mathe-
matics the assertability of an alternation of quantiﬁers ∀x∃yR(x, y) means precisely
that one is given a function f for which R(x, fx) holds for all x.
We note that in ordinary set theory this argument establishes the isomorphism
of the sets Q x : A ` y : BΦ(x, y)) and ` f : BA Q x : AΦ(x, fx)), but not the
validity of the usual axiom of choice. In set theory AC is not represented by this
isomorphism, but is rather (equivalent to) the equality in which Q is replaced by
T and ` by S, namely
\
x∈A
[
y∈B
Φ(x, y) =
[
f∈BA
\
x∈A
Φ(x, fx).
34For a complete speciﬁcation of the operations and rules of CDTT, see Chapter 10 of Jacobs
[1999] or Gambino and Aczel [2005].

674
John L. Bell
While in PAT, AC is provable, and so a fortiori has no “untoward” logical con-
sequences, in intuitionistic set theory, or in the internal language of a topos this
is far from being the case, for, as Diaconescu’s theorem shows, in the latter AC
implies the law of excluded middle. In other words, AC interpreted `a la “propo-
sitions as types” is tautologous,35 while construed set-, or topos-theoretically it is
anything but, since so construed its aﬃrmation yields classical logic. This prompts
the question: what modiﬁcation needs to be made to the “propositions-as-types”
paradigm so as to yield the topos-theoretic interpretation of AC? An illuminat-
ing answer to this question has been given by Maietti [2005] through the use of
so-called monotypes (or mono-objects), that is, (dependent) types containing at
most one entity or having at most one proof. In Set , mono objects are singletons,
that is, sets containing at most one element.
Monotypes correspond to monic maps. This can be illustrated concretely by
considering the categories Indset of indexed sets and Set →of bivariant sets. The
objects of Indset are indexed sets of the form M = {⟨i, Mi⟩: i ∈I} and those
of Set →maps A →B in Set , with appropriately deﬁned arrows in each case. It
can be shown that these two categories are equivalent. If we think of (the objects
of) Set as representing simple or static types, then (the objects of) Indset , and
hence also of Set →, represent dependent or variable types. It is easily seen that
a monotype, or object, in Indset , is precisely an object M for which each Mi has
at most one element. Moreover, under the equivalence between Indset and Set →,
such an object corresponds to a monic map- object in Set →.
Now consider Set →as a topos.
Under the topos-theoretic interpretation in
Set →, formulas correspond to monic arrows, which in turn correspond to mono-
objects in Indset . Carrying this over entirely to Indset yields the sought mod-
iﬁcation of the “propositions-as-types” paradigm to bring it into line with the
topos-theoretic interpretation of formulas, namely, to take formulas or proposi-
tions to correspond to mono-objects, rather than to arbitrary objects. Let us call
this the “formulas-as-monotypes” interpretation.
Finally let us reconsider AC under the “formulas-as-monotypes” interpretation
within Set . It will be convenient to rephrase AC as the assertion
∀i ∈I∃j ∈JMij ↔∃f ∈JI∀i ∈IMif(i)
(∗)
where ⟨Mij : i ∈I, j ∈J⟩is any doubly indexed family of propositions (or sets). In
the “propositions as types” interpretation, where (*) corresponds to the existence
of an isomorphism between Q
i∈I
`
j∈J
Mijand `
f∈JI
Q
i∈I
Mif(i). On the other hand, AC
35Precisely as Ramsey (v. supra) asserted, but in this case for quite diﬀerent reasons. Ramsey
construed, and accepted the truth of, the axiom of choice as asserting the objective existence of
choice functions, given extensionally and so independently of the manner in which they might
be described.
But the intensional nature of constructive mathematics, and, in particular, of
CDTT decrees that nothing is given completely independently of its description.
This leads
to a strong construal of the quantiﬁers which, as we have observed, trivializes the axiom of
choice by rendering the antecedent of the implication constituting it essentially equivalent to the
consequent. It is remarkable that the axiom of choice can be considered tautological both from
an extensional and from an intensional point of view.

Types, Sets, and Categories
675
interpreted in the usual way, that is, using the rules of topos semantics, can be
presented in the form of the distributive law
\
i∈I
[
j∈J
Mij =
[
f∈JI
\
i∈I
Mif(i).
(∗∗)
In the “propositions-as-types” interpretation (as applied to Set ), the universal
quantiﬁer ∀i ∈I corresponds to the product Q
i∈I
and the existential quantiﬁer
∃i ∈I to the coproduct, or disjoint sum, `
i∈I
. Now in the “formulas-as-monotypes”
interpretation, wherein formulas correspond to singletons, ∀i ∈I continues to
correspond to Q
i∈I
, since the product of singletons is still a singleton.
But the
interpretation of ∃i ∈I is changed. In fact, the interpretation of ∃i ∈IMi (with
each Mi a singleton) now becomes [`
i∈I
Mi], where for each set X, [X] = {u : u =
0 ∧∃x.x ∈X} is the canonical singleton associated with X.
It follows that, under the “formulas-as-monotypes” interpretation, the proposi-
tion ∀i ∈I∃j ∈JMij is interpreted as the singleton
Y
i∈I
[
a
j∈J
Mij]
(1)
and the proposition ∃f ∈JI∀i ∈IMif(i) as the singleton
[
a
f∈JI
Y
i∈I
Mif(i)].
(2)
Under the “formulas-as-monotypes” interpretation AC would be construed as as-
serting the existence of an isomorphism between (1) and (2).
Now it is readily seen that to give an element of (1) amounts to no more
than aﬃrming that, for every i ∈I, S
j∈J
Mij is nonempty.
But to give an ele-
ment of (2) amounts to specifying maps f ∈JI and g with domain I such that
∀i ∈Ig(i) ∈Mif(i). It follows that to assert the existence of an isomorphism
between (1) and (2), that is, to assert AC under the “formulas-as-monotypes” in-
terpretation, is tantamount to asserting AC in the form (**), so leading in turn to
classical logic. This is in sharp contrast with AC under the “propositions-as-types”
interpretation, where, as we have seen, its assertion is automatically correct and
so has no nonconstructive consequences.
In the “propositions as types” interpretation each logical operation corresponds
to a categorical operation: ∧to ×, ∨to +, →to exponentiation, ⊥to an initial el-
ement 0, ¬ to exponentiation by 0, ∀to product and ∃to coproduct. This suggests
that CDTT should be interpretable in suitable categories, just as local set theories
are interpretable in toposes. For some time it was conjectured that the appropri-
ate categories in this respect were the so-called locally Cartesian closed categories:

676
John L. Bell
these are ﬁnitely complete categories E such that, for each object A of E, the
“slice” category E/A is Cartesian closed. (Any topos is locally Cartesian closed.)
It was already known that many of the mathematical constructions within a topos
could be carried out within a locally Cartesian closed category. In such a category,
the notion of “variable set”, for example an “A-indexed set” , is represented by an
arrow B →A of E, that is, by an object of E/A. In the interpretation of CDTT
that was explicitly worked out by Seely [1984], types are interpreted as objects,
and terms as arrows, of a locally Cartesian closed category E. As Seely points out,
this interpretation engenders a systematic ambiguity among the notions of type,
predicate and term, and between object and proof: indeed a term of type A is an
arrow into A, which is in turn a predicate over A, and an arrow 1 →A may be
regarded either as an object of type A or as a proof of the proposition A. (This
ambiguity is, of course, shared by the “propositions as types” interpretation.) In
precise analogy with the correspondence between local set theories and toposes,
Seely establishes a correspondence between theories formulated in Martin-L¨of’s
system — constructive dependent type theories — and locally Cartesian closed
categories. The relationship between type theories and categories is investigated
in a general setting in Jacobs [1999].
It is natural to ask what form of set theory is interpretable in CDTT. This has
been worked out by Peter Aczel36 and has become come known as constructive
set theory (CST). This is a system of intuitionistic set theory in which the set-
theoretic operations in reﬂect those on types in CDTT. n particular CST will admit
products and exponentials of sets. But, given the predicative nature of CDTT,
CST must also be predicative. This means, in particular, that in CST there can
be no set of propositions, and no power sets. A particularly illuminating form
of CST37 employs the distinction between sets and classes, as in G¨odel-Bernays
set theory. In this version of CST, any predicate determines a class, but only
certain classes are sets. Here a class may be thought of as something like a species
or category in Martin-L¨of’s sense, that is, a range of objects all of which share
a given property, and whose identity relations are fully determinate, but whose
“extent” is not suﬃciently ﬁxed to admit quantiﬁcation over it. A set, on the other
hand, is a class with a fully determinate extent, hence supporting quantiﬁcation.
In CST, the class PA of all subsets — the power class — of a set A is almost
never a set (the only exception being the power class of the empty set). On the
other hand the exponential AB of two sets A, B — the class of maps from B to A
— is always a set, so in particular 2A is always a set. In classical set theory 2A is
essentially the power set of A, which cannot be the case in CST. This means that
in CST 2 cannot represent, as it does in classical set theory, the set of propositions
or truth values. In classical set theory 2 is P1, the power set of a one-element set,
but in CST P1, while of course a class, is not a set. It can be shown that classical
set theory is equivalent to CST augmented by the law of excluded middle and the
assertion that P1 is a set.
36See bibliographic entries under Aczel, Aczel and Gambino, and Aczel and Rathjen.
37See Aczel and Rathjen [2201].

Types, Sets, and Categories
677
Finally, a word on other forms of type theory that have emerged in the past few
decades. Polymorphic type theory admits the presence of type variables, so that
a type variable X may occur inside a type A(X). The assignment of “types” to
type variables (or terms) is achieved by the introduction of a new order of entities
called kinds. Just as each ordinary term is assigned a type, so each type term
is assigned a kind. In particular, there is a kind called Type which represents
the “kind of all types”.38
Any type A then satisﬁes the judgment A: Type,
and Type itself satisﬁes the judgment Type: Kind. In addition to Type, the
presence of arbitrarily arbitrary “subkinds” of Type may be assumed. It is also
assumed that Kind is closed under the operations corresponding to cartesian
product and exponentiation, and that Type is closed under these latter and those
corresponding to product and sum over type variables of an arbitrarily given kind.
Polymorphic and dependent type theories have been combined in various ways.
One form is the Calculus of Constructions of Coquand and Huet [1988]. This
has been extended to what Jacobs [1999] calls Full Higher Order Dependent Type
Theory, or the full theory for short. In dependent type theory types can “depend
on” types; in polymorphic type theory types can “depend on” kinds. In the full
theory, the dependence is extended to the remaining possibilities: those of kinds
on types and kinds on kinds. An account of this, and other amalgamations of
polymorphic and dependent type theories, may be found in Jacobs [1999].
APPENDIX: BASIC CONCEPTS OF CATEGORY THEORY
A category C is determined by ﬁrst specifying two classes Ob(C), Arr(C) — the
collections of C-objects and C-arrows. These collections are subject to the following
axioms:
• Each C-arrow f is assigned a pair of C-objects dom(f), cod(f) called the
domain and codomain of f, respectively. To indicate the fact that C-objects
X and Y are respectively the domain and codomain of f we write f : X →Y
or X
f
−→Y . The collection of C-arrows with domain X and codomain Y is
written C(X, Y ).
• Each C-object X is assigned a C-arrow 1X : X →X called the identity arrow
on X.
• Each pair f, g of C-arrows such that cod(f) = dom(g) is assigned an arrow
g ◦f: dom(f) →cod(g) called the composite of f and g. Thus if f : X →Y
and g : Y →Z then g ◦f : X →Z. We also write X
f
−→Y
g
−→Z for g ◦f.
Arrows f, g satisfying cod(f) = dom(g) are called composable.
• Associativity law. For composable arrows (f, g) and (g, h), we have h ◦(g ◦
f) = h ◦(g ◦f).
38This is, of course, not the same as asserting that there is a type of all types, for to do so
would be to rekindle Girard’s paradox (see note 25 above).

678
John L. Bell
• Identity law. For any arrow f : X →Y , we have f ◦1X = f = 1Y ◦f.
As a basic example of a category, we have the category Set of sets whose objects
are all sets and whose arrows are all maps between sets (strictly, triples (f, A, B)
with domain(f) = A and range(f) ⊆B.) Other examples of categories are the
category of groups, with objects all groups and arrows all group homomorphisms
and the category of topological spaces with objects all topological spaces and
arrows all continuous maps. Categories with just one object may be identiﬁed
with monoids, that is, algebraic structures with an associative multiplication and
an identity element.
A subcategory C of a category D is any category whose class of objects and
arrows is included in the class of objects and arrows of D, respectively, and which
is closed under domain, codomain, identities, and composition. If, further, for
any objects C, C′ of C, we have C(C, C′) = D(C, C′), we shall say that C is a full
subcategory of D.
Basic category-theoretic deﬁnitions
Commutative diagram (in
category)
Diagram of objects and arrows such that the arrow
obtained by composing the arrows of any connected
path depends only on the endpoints of the path.
Initial object
Object 0 such that, for any object X, there is a
unique arrow 0 →X (e.g., ∅in Set )
Terminal object
Object 1 such that, for any object X, there is a
unique arrow X →1 (e.g. any singleton in Set )
Element of an object X
Arrow 1 →X
Monic arrow X ֌ Y
Arrow f : X →Y such that, for any arrows g, h :
Z →X, f ◦g = f ◦h ⇒g = h (in Set , one-one map)
Epic arrow X ։ Y
Arrow f : X →Y such that, for any arrows g, h :
Y →Z, g ◦f = h ◦f ⇒g = h (in Set , onto map)
Isomorphism X ∼= Y
Arrow f : X →Y for which there is g : Y →X such
that g ◦f = 1X, f ◦g = 1Y

Types, Sets, and Categories
679
Product of objects X, Y
Object X × Y with arrows (projections) X
π1
←−X ×
Y
π2
−→Y such that any diagram
•
X

f
Y
g
-
can be uniquely completed to a commutative dia-
gram
•
X 
π1

f
X × Y
⟨f,g⟩
?
π2
- Y
g
-
Product of arrows
f1 : X1 →Y1, f2 : X2 →
Y2
Unique arrow f1 × f2 : X1 × X2 →Y1 × Y2 making
the diagram
X1 × X2
X1

π1
X2
π2
-
Y1 
π′
1

f1
Y1 × Y2
f1×f2
?
π′
2
- Y
f2 -
commute. I.e., f1 × f2 = ⟨f1 ◦π1, f2 ◦π2⟩.
Diagonal arrow on object
X
Unique arrow δX : X →X × X making the diagram
X
X 
π1

1X
X × X
δX
?
π2 - X
1X
-
commute. I.e., δX = ⟨1X, 1X⟩.

680
John L. Bell
Coproduct of objects X, Y
Object X + Y together with a pair of arrows X
σ1
−→
X +Y
σ2
←−Y such that for any pair of arrows X
f
−→
A
g
←−Y , there is a unique arrow X + Y
h
−→A such
that the diagram
X
σ1- X + Y
σ2
- Y
A
h
?

g
f
-
commutes.
Pullback
diagram
or
square
Commutative diagram of the form
■
- •
•
h
?
g
- •
f
?
such that for any commutative diagram
♦
- •
•
?
g
- •
f
?
there is a unique ♦
!
−→■such that
♦
■
-
!
-
•
-
•
h
?
g
-
-
•
f
?
commutes. h is called the pullback of f (along g).

Types, Sets, and Categories
681
Equalizer of pair of arrows
• −→
−→
f
g ■
Arrow ♦
e
−→• such that f ◦e = g ◦e and, for any
arrow ▲
e′
−→• such that f ◦e′ = g ◦e′ there is a
unique ▲
u
−→♦such that
▲
u
- ♦
•
e
?
e′
-
commutes.
Subobject of an object X
Pair (m, Y ), with m a monic arrow Y ֌ X
Inclusion of subobjects
For m : Y ֌ X, n : Z ֌ X, m ⊆n iﬀthere is
f : Y →Z such that n ◦f = m.
Truth value object or sub-
object classiﬁer
Object Ωtogether with arrow t : 1 →Ωsuch that
every monic m : • ֌ ♦(i.e., subobject of ♦) can be
uniquely extended to a pullback diagram of the form
•
- l
♦
m
?
χ(m) - Ω
t
?
χ(m) is the characteristic arrow of m.
Conversely, any diagram of the form ♦
u
−→Ω
t
←−1
must have a pullback.
The pullback of u will be written u. It is necessarily
monic.
The next few deﬁnitions assume that the ambient category has a terminal object,
products and a subobject classiﬁer. It can be shown that in any such category,
every monic arrow has a pullback.

682
John L. Bell
Partial ordering ≤on ar-
rows to Ω.
For u, v : A →Ω, u ≤v iﬀu ⊆v.
Intersection of subobjects
For monics m, n with common codomain A, form the
pullback square
•
v
- ■
♦
u
?
m
- A
n
?
Then the map m◦u(= n◦v) is the intersection m∩n
of m and n.
Meet of two maps to Ω.
For u, v : A →Ω, u ∧v = χ(u ∩v).
Equality arrow A×A →Ω
eqA = χ(δA)
Power object of an object
X.
An object PX together with an arrow (“evaluation”)
eX : X ×PX →Ωsuch that, for any f : X ×PX →
Ω, there is a unique arrow bf : Y →PX such that
X × Y
X × PX
1X× ˆ
f
?
eX - Ω
f
-
commutes. (In Set , PX is the power set of X and
eX the characteristic function of the membership re-
lation between X and PX.)
Exponential object of ob-
jects Y, X
An object Y X, together with an arrow ev: X×Y X →
Y such that, for any arrow f : X × Z →Y there
is a unique arrow bf : Z →Y X — the exponential
transpose of f — such that the diagram
X × Z
X × Y X
1X× ˆ
f
?
ev
- Y
f
-
commutes. In Set , Y X is the set of all maps X →Y
and ev is the map that sends (x, f) to f(x).

Types, Sets, and Categories
683
Product
of
indexed
set
{Ai : i ∈I} of objects
Object Q
i∈I
Ai together with arrows Q
i∈I
Ai
πi
−→Ai(i ∈
I) such that, for any arrows fi : B →Ai(i ∈I) there
is a unique arrow h : B −→Q
i∈I
Ai such that, for each
i ∈I, the diagram
B
h- Q
i∈I Ai
Ai
πi
?
fi
-
commutes.
Coproduct of indexed set
{Ai : i ∈I} of objects
Object `
i∈I
Ai together with arrows Ai
σi
−→`
i∈I
Ai (i ∈
I) such that, for any arrows fi : Ai →B(i ∈I) there
is a unique arrow h : `
i∈I
Ai −→B such that, for each
i ∈I, the diagram
Ai
σi- `
i∈I Ai
B
πi
?
fi
-
commutes.
A category is Cartesian closed if it has a terminal object, as well as products
and exponentials of arbitrary pairs of its objects. It is ﬁnitely complete if it has a
terminal object, products of arbitrary pairs of its objects, and equalizers. A topos
is a category possessing a terminal object, products, a truth-value object, and
power objects. It can be shown that every topos is cartesian closed and ﬁnitely
complete (so that this notion of topos is equivalent to that originally given by
Lawvere and Tierney). The category Set of sets is a topos.
More on products in a category. A product of objects A1, ..., An in a category C
is an object A1×...×An together with arrows πi : A1×...×An →Ai for i = 1, ..., n,
such that, for any arrows fi : B →Ai, i = 1, ..., n, there is a unique arrow, denoted
by ⟨f1, ..., fn⟩: B →A1 × ... × An such that πi ◦⟨f1, ..., fn⟩= fi, i = 1, ..., n. Note
that, when n = 0, A1×...×An is the terminal object 1. The category is said to have
ﬁnite products if A1 × ... × An exists for all A1, ..., An. If C has binary products, it
has ﬁnite products, since we may take A1 × ... × An to be A1 × (A2 × (... × An)...).
It is easily seen that the product operation is, up to isomorphism, commutative

684
John L. Bell
and associative. The relevant isomorphisms are called canonical isomorphisms.
A functor F : C →D between two categories C and D is a map that “preserves
commutative diagrams”, that is, assigns to each C-object A a D-object FA and to
each C-arrow f : A →B a D-arrow Ff : FA →FB in such a way that:
A
FA
F
-
B
f ?
FB
F f
?
1A
A
"
F- FA b
1F A
•
f
- •
•
F f - •
F
-
•

g
h -
•

F g
F h-
commutes
commutes
A functor F : C →D is an equivalence if it is “an isomorphism up to isomor-
phism”, that is, if it is
• faithful: Ff = Fg ⇒f = g.
• full: for any h : FA →FB there is an f : A →B such that h = Ff.
• dense: for any D-object B there is a C-object A such that B ∼= FA.
Two categories are equivalent, written ≃, if there is an equivalence between them.
Equivalence is the appropriate notion of “identity of form” for categories.
Given functors F, G : C →D, a natural transformation between F and G is a
map η from the objects of C to the arrows of D satisfying the following conditions.
• For each object A of C, ηA is an arrow FA →GA in D
• For each arrow f : A →A′ in C,
FA
ηA - GA
FA′
F f
?
ηA′- GA′
Gf
?

Types, Sets, and Categories
685
Finally, two functors F : C →D and G : D →C and are said to be adjoint
to one another if, for any objects A of C, B of D, there is a “natural” bijection
between arrows A →GB in C and arrows FA →B in D. To be precise, for
each such pair A, B we must be given a bijection ϕAB : C(A, GB) →D(FA, B)
satisfying the “naturality” conditions
• for each f : A →A′ and h : A′ →GB, ϕAB(h ◦f) = ϕA′B(h) ◦Ff
• for each g : B →B′ and h : A →GB′, ϕAB(Gg ◦h) = g ◦ϕAB′(h).
Under these conditions F is said to be left adjoint to G, and G right adjoint to F.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Aczel, 1978] P. Aczel. The type-theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory. In A. Man-
Intyre, L. Pacholski, and J. Paris. eds., Logic Colloquium ’77., pp. 55–66. North-Holland,
1978.
[Aczel, 1982] P. Aczel. The type-theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory: choice prin-
ciples. In A. S. Troelstra and D. van Dalen, eds., The L.E.J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium,
pp. 1–40. North-Holland, 1982.
[Aczel, 1986] P. Aczel. The type-theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory: inductive
deﬁnitions. In R. Barcan Marcus, G.J.W. Dorn and P. Weingartner, eds., Logic, methodology
and Philosophy of Science VII, pp. 17–49. North-Holland, 1986.
[Aczel and Gambino, 2002] P. Aczel and N. Gambino. Collection principles in dependent type
theory. In P. Callaghan, Z. Luo, J. McKinna and R. Pollack, eds. Types for Proofs and
Programs, vol. 2277 of Lecture Notes on Computer Science, pp. 1–23. Springer, 2002.
[Aczel and Gambino, 2005] P. Aczel and N. Gambino. The generalized type-theoretic inter-
pretation of constructive set theory, 2005. Manuscript available on ﬁrst author’s webpage
www.cs.man.ac.uk/~petera/papers
[Aczel and Rathjen, 2001] P. Aczel and M. Rathjen. Notes on Constructive Set Theory. Tech-
nical Report 40, Mittag-Leﬄer Institute, The Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences, 2001.
Available on ﬁrst author’s webpage www.cs.man.ac.uk/~petera/papers
[Bell, 1988] J. L. Bell. Toposes and Local Set Theories: An Introduction. Oxford Logic Guides
14. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.
[Bishop, 1967] E. Bishop. Foundations of Constructive Analysis. McGraw-Hill, 1967.
[Boileau, 1975] A. Boileau. Types vs. Topos. Thesis, Univesit´e de Montreal, 1975.
[Boileau and Joyal, 1981] A. Boileau and A. Joyal. La logique de topos. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 46:6–16, 1981.
[Boolos, 1997] G. Boolos. Constructing Cantorian counterexamples. Journal of Philosophical
Logic 26:37–39, 1997.
[Carnap, 1929] R. Carnap. Abriss der Logistik. Vienna, 1929.
[Church, 1940] A. Church. A formulation of the simple theory of types. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 1:56–68, 1940.
[Chwistek, 1924] L. Chwistek. Theory of Constructive Types. Cracow, 1924.
[Coquand, 2006] T. Coquand. Type Theory. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2006
[Coquand and Huet, 1988] T. Coquand and G. Huet. The calculus of constructions. Information
and Computation, 76:95–120, 1988.
[Crole, 1993] R. Crole. Categories for Types. Cambridge University Press, 1993.
[Curry and Feys, 1958] H. B. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic. North Holland, 1958.
[Diaconescu, 1975] R. Diaconescu. Axiom of choice and complementation. Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society 51, 176–8, 1975.
[Eilenberg and Mac Lane, 1945] S. Eilenberg and S. Mac Lane. General theory of natural equiv-
alences. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 58:231–294, 1945. Reprinted in
Eilenberg, S. and S. Mac Lane, Eilenberg-Mac Lane: Collected Works. New York: Academic
Press, 1986.

686
John L. Bell
[Farmer, 2006] W. Farmer. The Seven Virtues of Simple Type Theory, 2006. Manuscript avail-
able online at imps.mcmaster.ca/doc/seven-virtues.pdf
[Fourman, 1974] M. P. Fourman. Connections between category theory and logic. D. Phil. Thesis,
Oxford University, 1974.
[Fourman, 1977] M. P. Fourman. The logic of topoi. In J. Barwise (ed.) Handbook of Mathe-
matical Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1053–90, 1977.
[Fourman et al., 1979] M. P. Fourman, C. J. Mulvey, and D. S. Scott, eds. Applications of
Sheaves. Proc. L.M.S. Durham Symposium 1977. Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics
753, 1979.
[Gandy, 1977] R. O. Gandy. The simple theory of types. In R. Gandy, M. Hyland, eds., Logic
Colloquium 76, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 173–181, 1977.
[Girard, 1972] J.-Y.
Girard.
Interpr´etation
fonctionelle
´elimination
des
coupures
dans
l’arithm´etique d’ordre sup´erieure. Ph.D. thesis, Universit´e Paris VII, 1972.
[G¨odel, 1931] K. G¨odel. ¨Uber formal untenscheidbare S¨atze der Principia Mathematica und ver-
wandter Systeme I. Monatsh. Math. Phys., 38:349–360, 1931. Reprinted in English translation
in Godel, Collected Works vol. I., S. Feferman et al., eds. Oxford University Press, 1986.
[Goodman and Myhill, 1978] N. Goodman and J. Myhill. Choice implies excluded middle. Z.
Math Logik Grundlag. Math., 24:461, 1978.
[Henkin, 1963] L. Henkin. A theory of propositional types. Fund. Math., 52:323–344, 1963.
[Howard, 1980] W. A. Howard. The formulae-as-types notion of construction. In J. R. Hindlet
and J. P. Seldin (eds.), To H. B. Curry: Essays on Combinatorial Logic. Lambda Calculus
and Formalism, pp. 479-490. New York and London: Academic Press, 1980.
[Jacobs, 1999] B. Jacobs. Categorical Logic and Type Theory. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999.
[Johnstone, 1977] P. T. Johnstone. Topos Theory. London: Academic Press, 1977.
[Johnstone, 2002] P. T. Johnstone. Sketches of an Elephant: A Topos Theory Compendium,
Vols. I and II. Oxford Logic Guides Vols. 43 and 44, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002.
[Lambek, 1974] J. Lambek. Functional completeness of Cartesian categories. Annals of Mathe-
matical Logic, 6:259–92, 1974.
[Lambek, 1980a] J. Lambek. From λ-calculus to Cartesian closed categories. In J.P. Seldin and
J.R. Hindley, eds., To H.B. Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus and
Formalism. London, Academic Press, pp. 375–402, 1980.
[Lambek, 1980b] J. Lambek. From types to sets. Adv. In Math., 36:113–164, 1980.
[Lambek and Scott, 1980] J. Lambek and P. J. Scott. Intuitionist type theory and the free topos.
Journal Pure and Applied Algebra
19:215–257, 1980.
[Lambek and Scott, 1981] J. Lambek and P. J. Scott. Intuitionist type theory and foundations.
Joural of Philosophical Logic, 10:101–115, 1981.
[Lambek and Scott, 1986] J. Lambek and P. J. Scott. Introduction to Higher-Order Categorical
Logic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
[Lawvere, 1971] F. W. Lawvere. Quantiﬁers and sheaves. In Actes du Congr`es Intern. Des Math.
Nice 1970, tome I. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, pp. 329–34, 1971.
[Lawvere, 1972] F. W. Lawvere. Introduction to Toposes, Algebraic Geometry and Logic.
Springer Lecture notes in Math. 274, pp. 1–12, 1972.
[Maietti, 2005] M. E. Maietti. Modular correspondence between dependent type theories and
categories including pretopoi and topoi. Math. Struct. Comp. Sci., 15:1089–1145, 2005.
[Maietti and Valentini, 1999] M. E. Maietti and S. Valentini. Can you add power-sets to Martin-
L¨of’s intuitionistic set theory? Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 45:521–532, 1999
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. An Intuitionistic theory of types; predicative part. In H. E.
Rose and J. C. Shepherdson (eds.), Logic Colloquium ’73, pp. 73-118. Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 1975.
[Martin-L¨of, 1982] P. Martin-L¨of. Constructive mathematics and computer programming. In L.
C. Cohen, J. Los, H. Pfeiﬀer, and K.P. Podewski (eds.), Logic, Methodology and Philosophy
of Science VI, pp. 153–179. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1982.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic Type Theory. Naples: Bibliopolis, 1984.
[Miquel, 2001] A. Miquel. A strongly normalising Curry-Howard correspondence for IZF set the-
ory. Computer Science Logic, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2803, pp. 441–54. Springer,
2001.
[Nordstr¨om et al., 1990] B. Nordstr¨om, K. Petersson, and J. M. Smith. Programming in Martin-
L¨of’s Type Theory. Oxford University Press, 1990.

Types, Sets, and Categories
687
[Ramsey, 1926] F. P. Ramsey. The foundations of mathematics. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, 25:338–84, 1926.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 1903.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. Am. J. Math.,
30:222–262, 1908. Reprinted in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 150–182].
[Seely, 1984] R. A. G. Seely. Locally Cartesian closed categories and type theory. Math. Proc.
Camb. Phil. Soc., 95:33–48, 1984.
[Seely, 1987] R. A. G. Seely. Categorical semantics for higher order polymorphic lambda calcu-
lus. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:969–989, 1987.
[Tait, 1994] W. W. Tait. The law of excluded middle and the axiom of choice. In Mathematics
and Mind, A. George, ed., pp. 45–70. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
[Tarski, 1931] A. Tarski. Sur les ensembles deﬁnissable de nombres r´eels I. Fundamenta Math-
ematicae, 17:210–29, 1931.
[van Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathe-
matical Logic, 1879-1931. Harvard University Press, 1967.
[Weyl, 1918] H. Weyl. Das Kontinuum. Leipzig: Veit, 1918. English translation by S. Pollard
and T. Bole as The Continuum: A Critical Examination of the Foundation of Analysis, tr.
Kirksville, Mo.: Thomas Jeﬀerson University Press, 1987.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910–13] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica. 3
vols., Cambridge University Press, 1910–13.
[Zangwill, 1977] J. Zangwill. Local Set Theory and Topoi. M. Sc. thesis, Bristol University, 1977.
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I. Matema-
tische Annalen, 59:261–81, 1908. Reprinted in [van Heijenoort, 1967, 199–215].


THE HISTORY OF CATEGORICAL LOGIC:
1963–1977
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Categorical logic, as its name indicates, is logic in the setting of category the-
ory. But this description does not say much. Most readers would probably ﬁnd
more instructive to learn that categorical logic is algebraic logic, pure and simple.
It is logic in an algebraic dressing. Just as algebraic logic encodes propositional
logic in its diﬀerent guises (classical, intuitionistic, etc.) by their Lindenbaum-
Tarski algebras (Boolean algebras, Heyting algebras and so on), categorical logic
encodes ﬁrst-order and higher-order logics (classical, intuitionistic, etc.) by cate-
gories with additional properties and structure (Boolean categories, Heyting cate-
gories and so on). Thus, from the purely technical point of view, categorical logic
constitutes a generalization of the algebraic encoding of propositional logic to ﬁrst-
order, higher-order and other logics. Furthermore, we shall present and discuss
arguments (given by the main actors) to show that this encoding constitutes the
correct generalization of the well-known algebraic encoding of propositional logics
by the Lindenbaum-Tarski algebras.
The proper algebraic structures are not only categories, but also morphisms
between categories, mainly functors and more specially adjoint functors. A key
example is provided by the striking fact that quantiﬁers, which were the stumbling
block to the proper algebraic generalization of propositional logic, can be seen to
be adjoint functors and thus entirely within the categorical framework.
As is
usually the case when algebraic techniques are imported and developed within
a ﬁeld, e.g. geometry and topology, vast generalizations and uniﬁcation become
possible. Furthermore, unexpected concepts and results show up along the way,
often allowing a better understanding of known concepts and results.
Categorical logic is not merely a convenient tool or a powerful framework.
Again, as is usually the case when algebraic techniques are imported and used
in a ﬁeld, the very nature of the ﬁeld has to be thought over. Furthermore, var-
ious results shed a new light on what was assumed to be obvious or, what turns
out to be often the same on careful analysis, totally obscure. Thus, categorical
logic is philosophically relevant in more than one way. The way it encodes logical
concepts and operations reveals important, even essential, aspects and properties
of these concepts and operations. Again, as soon as quantiﬁers are seen as ad-
joint functors, the traditional question of the nature of variables in logic receives
a satisfactory analysis.
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

690
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Furthermore, many results obtained via categorical techniques have clear and
essential philosophical implications. The systematic development of higher-order
logic, type theory under a diﬀerent name, and various completeness theorems are
the most obvious candidates. But there is much more. Many important questions
concerning the foundations of mathematics and the very nature of mathematical
knowledge are inescapable. In particular, issues related to abstraction and the
nature of mathematical objects emerges naturally from categorical logic.
This paper covers the period that can be qualiﬁed as the birth and the consti-
tution of categorical logic, that is the time span between 1963 and 1977. No one
will deny that categorical logic started with Bill Lawvere’s Ph.D. thesis written in
1963 under S. Eilenberg’s supervision and widely circulated afterwards. (It is now
available on-line on the TAC web-site.) In his thesis, Lawvere oﬀered a categorical
version of algebraic theories. He also suggested that the category of categories
could be taken as a foundation for mathematics and that sets could be analyzed
in a categorical manner. In the years that followed, Lawvere tried to extend his
analysis and sketched a categorical version of ﬁrst-order theories under the name
of elementary theories. Then, in 1969, in collaboration with Myles Tierney, Law-
vere introduced the notion of an elementary topos, making an explicit connection
with higher-order logic and type theories. Both Lawvere and Tierney were aim-
ing at an elementary, that is ﬁrst-order, axiomatic presentation of what are now
called Grothendieck toposes, a special type of categories introduced by Alexandre
Grothendieck in the context of algebraic geometry and sheaf theory. Soon after,
connections with intuitionistic analysis, recursive functions, completeness theo-
rems for various logical systems, diﬀerential geometry, constructive mathematics
were made. We have decided to end our coverage in 1977 for the following rea-
sons. First, we had to stop somewhere, otherwise we would have to write a book.
Second, and this is a more serious reason, three independent events in 1977 mark
more or less a turning point in the history of categorical logic. First, the book
First-Order Categorical Logic, by Makkai and Reyes appears, a book that more
or less codiﬁes the work done by the Montreal school in the period 1970-1974 and
now constitutes the core of categorical ﬁrst-order logic. Second, the same year
witnesses the publication of Johnstone’s Topos Theory, the ﬁrst systematic and
comprehensive presentation of topos theory as it was known in 1974-75.
(The
reader should compare this edition with Johnstone’s recent Sketches of an Ele-
phant, a comprehensive reference on topos theory in three volumes.) Third, 1977
was also the year of the Durham meeting on applications of sheaf theory to logic,
algebra and analysis, whose proceedings were published in 1979. We submit that
around the end of the nineteen seventies, categorical logic was on ﬁrm ground and
could be developed in various directions, which is precisely what happened, from
theoretical computer science, modal logic and other areas.
The usual warnings, caveat and apologies are now necessary. It is impossible to
cover, even in a long article such as this one and for such a short time period, all
events involved in the history of categorical logic. This paper is but a ﬁrst attempt
at a more precise and detailed history of a complicated and fascinating period in

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
691
the history of ideas. We hope that it will stimulate more work on the topic. We
hasten to add that it also reﬂects our interests and (hopefully not too limited)
knowledge of the ﬁeld. It is our hope that it will nonetheless be useful to logicians
and philosophers alike. We sincerely apologize to mathematicians, logicians and
philosophers whose names ought to have appeared in this history but have not
because of our ignorance.
1
THE BIRTH OF CATEGORY THEORY AND ITS EARLY
DEVELOPMENTS
Category theory as a discipline in itself and was born in the context of algebraic
topology in the nineteen forties. We will brieﬂy sketch the history of category
theory before the advent of categorical logic and rehearse the fundamental notions
of the theory required for the exposition of the following sections.
1.1
Category theory: its origins
We will here only rehearse the ingredients required for the history of categorical
logic. The reader is referred to [Landry and Marquis, 2005], [Marquis, 2006] and
[Kr¨omer, 2007] for more details.
Category theory made its oﬃcial public appearance in 1945 in the paper enti-
tled “General Theory of Natural Equivalences” written by Samuel Eilenberg and
Saunders Mac Lane.
This “oﬀbeat” and “far out” paper, as Mac Lane came
to qualify it later [Mac Lane, 2002, 130], was meant to provide an autonomous
framework for the concept of natural transformation, a concept whose generality,
pervasiveness and usefulness had become clear to both of them during their col-
laboration on the clariﬁcation of an unsuspected link between group extensions
and homology groups. Such a general, pervasive and conceptually useful notion
seemed to deserve a precise, rigorous, systematic and abstract treatment.
Eilenberg and Mac Lane decided to devise an axiomatic framework in which the
notion of natural transformation would receive an entirely general and autonomous
deﬁnition. This is where categories came in. Informally, a natural transformation
is a family of maps that provides a systematic “translation” or a “deformation”
between two systems of interrelated entities within a given framework. But in
order to give a precise deﬁnition of natural transformations, one needs to clarify
the systematic nature of these deformations, that is, one has to specify what these
deformations depend upon and how they depend upon it. Eilenberg and Mac Lane
introduced what they called functors — the term was borrowed from Carnap —
so that one could say between what the natural transformations were acting: a
natural transformation is a family of maps between functors. Clearly, one has
to deﬁne the notion of a functor: the concept of category was tailored for that
purpose. The systematic nature of natural transformations was also made clear
by categories themselves. Thus categories were introduced in 1945 and, as Mac

692
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Lane reported (see [Mac Lane, 2002]), Eilenberg believed that their paper would
be the only paper written on “pure” category theory.
As we have already mentioned, Eilenberg and Mac Lane gave a purely axiomatic
deﬁnition of category in their original paper. It is worth mentioning that they
explicitly avoided using a set-theoretical terminology and notation in the axioms
themselves.
Here is how their deﬁnition unfolds (only with a slightly diﬀerent
notation):
A category C is an aggregate of abstract elements X, called the objects of the
category, and abstract elements f, called mappings of the category. Certain pairs
of mappings f, g of C determine uniquely a product mapping g ◦f, satisfying the
axioms C1, C2, C3 below. Corresponding to each object X of C, there is a unique
mapping, denoted by 1X satisfying the axioms C4 and C5. The axioms are:
C1 The triple product h ◦(g ◦f) is deﬁned if and only if (h ◦g) ◦f is deﬁned.
When either is deﬁned, the associative law
h ◦(g ◦f) = (h ◦g) ◦f
holds. This triple product will be written as h ◦g ◦f.
C2 The triple product h◦g ◦f is deﬁned whenever both products h◦g and g ◦f
are deﬁned. A mapping 1 of C will be called an identity of C if and only
if the existence of any product 1 ◦f and g ◦1 implies that 1 ◦f = f and
g ◦1 = g.
C3 For each mapping f of C there is at least one identity 1r such that f ◦1r is
deﬁned, and at least one identity 1l such that 1l ◦g is deﬁned.
C4 The mapping 1X corresponding to each object X is an identity.
C5 For each identity 1 of C there is a unique object X of C such that 1X = 1.
The last two axioms “assert that the rule X
/ 1X provides a one-to-one cor-
respondence between the set of all objects of the category and the set of all its
identities. It is thus clear that the objects play a secondary role, and could be
entirely omitted from the deﬁnition of a category.
However, the manipulation
of the applications would be slightly less convenient were this done.” [Eilenberg
and Mac Lane, 1945, 238] Thus, from a theoretical point of view, a category is
determined by its mappings, but from a practical point of view, it is convenient
to distinguish the objects from the mappings. Eilenberg and Mac Lane then state
as a lemma that each mapping f has a unique domain (source) X and a unique
codomain (target or range) Y and write f : X
/ Y .
Eilenberg and Mac Lane proceed to deﬁne equivalences in a category, nowadays
called isomorphisms, thus: a mapping f is an isomorphism if it has an inverse, i.e.
if there is a mapping g such that g ◦f and f ◦g are deﬁned and are identities. Two
objects X1 and X2 are said to be isomorphic if there is an isomorphism between
them.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
693
Eilenberg and Mac Lane gave four basic examples of categories: the category Set
of sets with functions between them, the category Top of topological spaces with
continuous functions, the category TopGrp of topological groups with continuous
homomorphisms and the category Ban of Banach spaces with linear transforma-
tions with norm at most 1. This is a surprisingly short list of examples. They
give more examples by deﬁning the notion of a subcategory in the obvious fash-
ion. Thus, they point out that given a category C, the subcategory composed of
the same objects as C but with mappings only the isomorphisms is a category,
nowadays called a groupoid. The category of ﬁnite sets is also mentioned as well
as other subcategories of the category of sets, e.g. for a ﬁxed cardinal k, there
is a category of all sets of power less than k together with all the mappings. By
restricting the mappings between sets to be onto or injective, one obtains diﬀerent
subcategories of sets. Similarly, if one restricts the continuous maps to open maps
between topological spaces, then one obtains a diﬀerent subcategory of topological
spaces. In §11 of their paper, Eilenberg and Mac Lane observe that any group G
can be thought of as a category: it has only one object and its mappings are the
elements of the group. They also point out in §20 that any preorder P can be
viewed as a category.
It should be emphasized how truly secondary categories were for Eilenberg and
Mac Lane at that point. In that respect, categories had an ambiguous status. It
is clear that categories are conceptually required for the systematic and rigorous
deﬁnition of natural transformations, but at the same time, they cannot be legit-
imate mathematical entities unless certain precautions are taken with respect to
their size. Eilenberg and Mac Lane explicitly recognized this fact in §6 where they
discuss foundational issues related to categories, e.g. the category of all sets is not
a set, thus not a legitimate entity from the standard set-theoretical point of view.
It should be observed ﬁrst that the whole concept of a category is es-
sentially an auxiliary one; our basic concepts are essentially those of a
functor and of a natural transformation (. . . ). The idea of a category
is required only by the precept that every function should have a def-
inite class as domain and a deﬁnite class as range, for the categories
are provided as the domains and ranges of functors. Thus one could
drop the category concept altogether and adopt an even more intuitive
standpoint, in which a functor such as “Hom” is not deﬁned over the
category of “all” groups, but for each particular pair of groups which
may be given. The standpoint would suﬃce for the applications, inas-
much as none of our developments will involve elaborate constructions
on the categories themselves. [Eilenberg and Mac Lane, 1945, 247]
Although the deﬁnition of category was conceptually necessary, categories them-
selves were not doing any mathematical work. They were simply a way of sys-
tematizing the required data. However, it did not take long, approximately ten to
ﬁfteen years, before elaborate constructions on categories themselves became es-
sential and thus the question concerning their nature became more pressing and we

694
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
indeed see, for instance, Mac Lane, going back to the problem of the foundations
of categories in the late ﬁfties and early sixties. (See [Mac Lane, 1961].)
Eilenberg and Mac Lane’s deﬁnition of a functor is given for n arguments. We
will give the deﬁnition of a functor with one argument.
A functor F between categories C and D is a pair of functions, an object-function
which associates to each object X of C an object Z = F(X) in D and a mapping
function which associates to each mapping f of C a mapping h = F(f), such that
1.
F(1X) = 1F (X)
2.
F(g ◦f) = F(g) ◦F(f)
Such a functor is said to be covariant. Whenever a functor satisﬁes the equality
2o.
F(g ◦f) = F(f) ◦F(g)
instead of 2, it is said to be contravariant.
Functors with the same domain category and the same codomain category can
be connected to one another systematically or “naturally”. This is precisely what
the notion of natural transformation captures. Here is Eilenberg and Mac Lane’s
deﬁnition, restricted to functors F, G : C
/ D in one argument.
A natural transformation τ : F
/ G between functors F, G : C
/ D is a
function that associates to each object X of C a mapping τX : F(X)
/ G(X) of
D such that for any mapping f : X
/ Y , the following diagram commutes
F(Y )
G(Y )
τY /
F(X)
F(Y )
F (f)

F(X)
G(X)
τX / G(X)
G(Y )
G(f)

that is, G(f) ◦τX = τY ◦F(f).
If each τX is an isomorphism, then τ is said to be a natural isomorphism (Eilen-
berg and Mac Lane said natural equivalence).
Given functors and natural transformations, it is possible to deﬁne categories
of functors: its objects are functors F : C
/ D and its mappings are natural
transformations τ : F
/ G. Eilenberg and Mac Lane ﬁnd categories of functors
“useful chieﬂy in simplifying the statements and proofs of various facts about
functors” [Eilenberg and Mac Lane, 1942, 250] and not in themselves. This is one
of the key elements that was about to change drastically in the following years.
Eilenberg and Mac Lane deﬁned two other important notions in their original
paper: the dual Co of a category C in §13 and limits and colimits for directed sets
in §21 and §22. Dual categories play an important conceptual role in category
theory and categorical logic. Given a category C, the dual category Co has as its
objects those of C; the mappings f o of Co are in one-to-one correspondence f →
←f o

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
695
with the mappings of C. If f : X
/ Y is in C, then f o : Y
/ X is in Co. The
composition law is deﬁned by the equation f o ◦go = (g ◦f)o, whenever g ◦f is
deﬁned in C.
Before we move on, let us now quickly underline what one does not ﬁnd in
Eilenberg and Mac Lane’s paper.
First, although the notion of a subcategory
is clearly deﬁned in the paper, properties of the inclusion functor, or for that
matter, basic properties of functors in general, for instance being faithful, full and
essentially surjective, are not identiﬁed.
Although Eilenberg and Mac Lane did deﬁne the notion of isomorphism of cate-
gories, they did not deﬁne the notion of equivalence of categories. The distinction
between the two concepts might seem to be formally subtle, but it is crucial in the
applications of category theory. The notion of isomorphism between categories is
just the same as the notion of isomorphism between objects in a category: two
categories C and D are said to be isomorphic if there is an isomorphism between
them, that is if there are functors F : C
/D and G : D
/C such that G◦F = 1C
and F ◦G = 1D, where 1C and 1D denote the obvious identity functors. Two
categories C and D are said to be equivalent if there is an equivalence between
them, that is if there are functors F : C
/ D and G : D
/ C and natural isomor-
phisms τ : G ◦F
˜ / 1C and ρ : F ◦G ˜ / 1D. Thus, in the case of an equivalence,
composing the functors F and G does not yield the identity functors, but there
are systematic translations, namely natural isomorphisms, of the compositions to
the identity functors. From the point of view of category theory, the notion of
equivalence of categories is fundamental.
Although Eilenberg and Mac Lane introduced functor categories, they do not
mention the possibility of a category of categories nor do they notice that natural
transformations compose in two diﬀerent ways. Of course, they did not need these
concepts and therefore did not have to consider them at all. Interestingly enough,
all these notions — functors with speciﬁc properties, equivalence of categories
and, in a certain sense, the category of categories — will play a crucial role in the
development of categorical logic in the nineteen sixties. But it can certainly be
said without hesitation that the construction that will occupy the center stage of
the development of categorical logic is the construction of functor categories.
1.2
Category theory from 1945 until 1963
We will now sketch the development of category theory from 1945 until 1963,
underlying the points that will prove to be indispensable for the development of
categorical logic.
Although, Eilenberg and Mac Lane introduced and deﬁned the basic concepts
of category theory, we believe that it is reasonable to claim that they did not
introduce category theory as such. Category theory started in the late ﬁfties and
early sixties. For the theory to get oﬀthe ground, properties of categories and
functors had to be introduced and used systematically. Those arose naturally in
speciﬁc applications.

696
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Eilenberg and Steenrod quickly applied category theory to algebraic topology.
Their book Foundations of Algebraic Topology was published in 1952, but it cir-
culated in the form of notes well before that date. It was extremely inﬂuential
in many diﬀerent ways. First, because it provided a systematic presentation of
algebraic topology and clariﬁed immensely how algebraic topology had to be or-
ganized and developed. Second, many students learned algebraic topology from
their book and thus assimilated basic categorical concepts along the way. Eilen-
berg and Steenrod did not develop category theory itself, all the deﬁnitions are
taken directly from Eilenberg and Mac Lane’s paper, but they did use it in such
a way that diagrams became a fundamental tool in the proofs of various results.
Third, homology and cohomology theories were now functors and comparing the-
ories amounted to looking at natural transformations between them. Thus, some
mathematical objects were now best thought of as being functors between cate-
gories.
The same remarks apply to the equally inﬂuential book by Cartan and Eilenberg
Homological Algebra, published in 1956. This book more or less created the subject
of homological algebra. It relied heavily on the language of categories and in the
use of diagrams in proofs.
Both books brought a shift of focus with respect to the original paper by Eilen-
berg and Mac Lane. First, it can be said that functors were moving to the front
stage or were at the very least just as important as natural transformations. Sec-
ond, both presented an obvious problem that was about to become a fundamental
and general heuristic principle: to ﬁnd the appropriate category to deﬁne and
develop a certain aspect of mathematics. In the ﬁrst case, it was the appropriate
setting to express clearly and precisely the duality between homology and coho-
mology theories. In the second case, it was the search for the appropriate setting
for the notion of derived functor.
This last heuristic principle led to a second
fundamental shift: categories could now be considered in themselves, not only as
domains and codomains of functors, but as formal contexts with speciﬁc categori-
cal properties in which one could identify, deﬁne and develop a speciﬁc portion of
mathematics.
Thus, these last two problems led to the use of categories within an axiomatic
framework. More precisely, it became imperative to deﬁne certain concepts, de-
velop speciﬁc theories by stipulating that a category satisﬁed appropriate categori-
cal properties. [Buchsbaum, 1955], [Grothendieck, 1957] and [Heller, 1958] deﬁned
the notion of an Abelian category in which a large portion of homological algebra
can be carried out from a purely abstract or formal point of view. Furthermore,
functor categories became a prominent tool in various ﬁelds: algebraic topology,
especially homotopy theory, homological algebra, algebraic geometry and more
and more constructions on categories were required and seen to be useful. Finally,
in 1958, Daniel Kan introduced the notion of adjoint functor, arguably the core
concept of the whole theory and which plays a key role in categorical logic as well.
Informally and as a rough heuristic guide, adjoint functors can be thought
of as conceptual inverses. The formal deﬁnition goes as follows. Two functors

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
697
F : C
/ D and G : D
/ C together with natural transformations η : 1C
/ G ◦F
and ξ : F ◦G
/ 1D determine an adjunction if Gξ ◦ηG = 1G and ξF ◦Fη = 1F ,
that is the following triangles commute:
G
GFG
ηG
/
G
G
1G
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
GFG
G
Gξ

F
FGF
F η
/
F
F
1F
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
FGF
F
ξF

In the foregoing adjunction the functor F is said to be a left adjoint to G, denoted
by F ⊣G, and G is said to be a right adjoint to F. As is usual in category theory,
adjoints are determined up to a unique isomorphism, that is if F ⊣G and F ⊣G′,
then there is a unique natural isomorphism G
/ G′.
When Kan introduced the concept of adjoint functor in 1958, he immediately
saw the generality of the concept, its usefulness and power in unifying various and
apparently diﬀerent results. Many important theorems and almost all fundamental
mathematical constructions can be cast in the frame of adjoint functors. It is also
a surprise to see that many fundamental constructions simply appear as adjoints
to basic functors. (See [Mac Lane, 1998]; [Adamek et al., 1990]; [Taylor, 1999] for
many examples.)
By the time Grothendieck and Kan wrote their seminal papers, in 1955-56,
constructions on categories, and in particular the construction and use of functor
categories, had become pivotal. Their use of functor categories may not be totally
unrelated to the fact that both mathematicians were coming from mathemati-
cal ﬁelds, namely functional analysis and homotopy theory respectively, in which
functional spaces and their properties played a key role.
Adjoint functors and functor categories occupied right from the start a central
role in categorical logic. The idea that logical operations, all logical operations,
should appear as adjoints to basic functors was one of Lawvere’s convictions and
motivation.
2
LAUNCHING THE PROGRAM: 1963–1969
When they introduced the theory of categories in 1945, Eilenberg and Mac Lane
suggested the possibility of “functorizing” the study of general algebraic systems.
The author has carried out the ﬁrst steps of this program, making extensive use

698
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
of the theory of adjoint functors, as introduced by Kan and reﬁned by Freyd
[Lawvere, 1963, 869].
2.1
Basic principles
We now turn to logic proper. It is unquestionable that one person sparked the
whole program of thinking about logic and the foundations of mathematics in
general in a categorical spirit: F. William Lawvere. He did so in his very ﬁrst
work, namely his PhD thesis defended at Columbia under Eilenberg’s supervision
in 1963. It can certainly be said that the thesis already contains all the basic
ideas that have guided Lawvere throughout his career and that have inﬂuenced
the categorical community greatly. These ideas are in a nutshell:
1. To use the category of categories as a framework for mathematics, i.e. the
category of categories should be the foundations of mathematics;
2. Every aspect of mathematics should be representable in one way or another
in that framework; in other words, categories constitute the background to
mathematical thinking in the sense that, in this framework, essential features
of that thinking are revealed;
3. Mathematical objects and mathematical constructions should be thought of
as functors in that framework;
4. In particular, sets always appear in a category, there are no such thing as
sets by themselves, in fact there is no such thing as a mathematical concept
by itself;
5. But sets form categories and the latter categories play a key role in the
category of categories, i.e. in mathematics;
6. Adjoint functors occupy a key position in mathematics and in the devel-
opment of mathematics; one of the guiding principles of the development
of mathematics should be “look for adjoints to given functors”; in that way
foundational studies are directly linked to mathematical practice and the dis-
tinction between foundational studies and mathematical studies is a matter
of degree and direction, it is not a qualitative distinction;
7. As the foregoing quote clearly indicates, Lawvere is going back to the claim
made by Eilenberg and Mac Lane that the “invariant character of a mathe-
matical discipline can be formulated in these terms” [i.e. in terms of func-
toriality], [Eilenberg and Mac Lane, 1945, 145]. But now, in order to reveal
this invariant character, extensive use of adjoint functors is made.
8. The invariant content of a mathematical theory is the “objective” content
of that theory; this is expressed at various moments throughout his publica-
tions. To wit:

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
699
As posets often need to be deepened to categories to accurately
reﬂect the content of thought, so should inverses, in the sense of
group theory, often be replaced by adjoints. Adjoints retain the
virtue of being uniquely determined reversal attempts, and very
often exist when inverses do not. [Lawvere, 1994, 47] (our empha-
sis)
9. Not only sets should be treated in a categorical framework, but also logical
aspects of the foundations of mathematics should be treated categorically,
in as much as they have an objective content. In particular, the logical and
the foundational are directly revealed by adjoint functors.
As we have said, these ideas, as well as others, are more or less implicit in Lawvere’s
thesis. Lawvere’s goal is general in the sense that it aims at incorporating the whole
of mathematics.
Furthermore, Lawvere’s usage of categories reﬂects a change
in their status among category theorists in the sixties and seventies.
Lawvere
recognizes explicitly that categories deﬁned axiomatically constitute autonomous
kinds or types and are, as such, independent of any underlying set-theoretical
structures and structure preserving functions.
Furthermore, categories become
polymorphic: in addition to their usual role, they become the algebraic descriptions
of formal systems and, as such, can be thought of as formal systems; but they also
provide the underlying framework for semantics and, as such, can be thought of
as universe of interpretations.
A summary of the main results of the thesis was communicated to the Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA by Mac Lane and published in 1963.
Essentially the same summary was presented at Berkeley in 1963 at a symposium
on model theory and later published in 1965 in the proceedings of the meeting.
Mac Lane also communicated Lawvere’s axiomatization of the elementary theory
of the category of sets in the same Proceedings in 1964. That axiomatization was
not in the thesis as such. The following year, Lawvere presented an explicit ax-
iomatization of the category of categories, published again in the Proceedings in
1966. Another paper, published in 1968, gives an account of the main elements of
the thesis together with some new extensions.
In the early and mid-sixties, a certain methodological shift in attention can
be detected in the work done by many category theorists. Following Kan and
Grothendieck, certain mathematical theories are developed within categories, e.g.
homotopy theory, algebra, and the development of these theories is done using
the properties of categories more directly.
(To mention but a few cases, all
published in 1963: B´enabou with his categories with multiplication, C. Ehres-
mann with his structured categories and Eckmann and Hilton with their group-
like structures in categories.) At the same time, adjoints receive more attention
and are used more systematically, in particular to deﬁne and characterize vari-
ous structures. Examples are once again provided by B´enabou’s work on cate-
gories with multiplication, but others, slightly diﬀerent examples can be found in
Eilenberg and Moore and Kleisli on triples, as well as Eilenberg and Kelly with

700
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
the notion of closed category. (See [B´enabou, 1963; Eilenberg and Kelly, 1966;
Kleisli, 1965]). Needless to say, Grothendieck’s work in algebraic geometry, based
on the use of sheaf theory, is extraordinarily inﬂuential, but it is not in pure
category theory.
Going back to his original program of clarifying the conceptual content of se-
mantics, Lawvere realized that certain types of categories can be deﬁned purely by
stipulating that certain adjoint functors to given elementary functors exist. The
deﬁnitions can be given by this data and nothing else. In a loose sense, deﬁning
a category via the existence of adjoints amounts to the claim that certain basic
conceptual operations can be represented in that category. This in itself would
probably not be of foundational relevance, were it not for the fact that the cat-
egories so deﬁned correspond in a precise technical sense to logical concepts and
theories. Thus the existence of certain adjoints to speciﬁc elementary functors
amounts to a speciﬁcation of logical structures and resources. With these ideas
and results in his pocket, Lawvere could see that a program of “functorizing” the
study of mathematical concepts in general could be formulated.
The presentation of these fundamental facts and the program that ensued were
made at various conferences in the mid-sixties, published in the form of abstracts
in 1966 and a series of papers published in 1969 and 1970. Among the latter, the
paper entitled Adjoints in Foundations [Lawvere, 1969a] deserves special atten-
tion for its general philosophical orientation. It contains the seeds of a categor-
ical program in logic and the foundations of mathematics. Two other papers of
that period also contain important parts of that program: the paper [Lawvere,
1969b] on diagonal arguments presented in 1968 and published in 1969 and the
paper [Lawvere, 1970b] on quantiﬁers and the comprehension schema as adjoints
also presented in 1968 and published in 1970. The two abstracts [Lawvere, 1966;
Lawvere, 1967] are also revealing and inﬂuential, for they concentrate on ﬁrst-order
logic. Finally, the discovery of the notion of elementary topos in collaboration with
Tierney in 1969/70 provided the general framework in which the whole program
could be cast and opened vast and rich possibilities that were unforeseen [Lawvere,
1970a].
We will now look more carefully at the details of this program. We will start
with Lawvere’s study of algebraic categories, look brieﬂy at the elementary theory
of the category of sets and then move to the so-called elementary theories. We will
ignore Lawvere’s axiomatization of the category of categories, since it did not have
a direct impact on the development of categorical logic. Lawvere’s work on the
category of categories and the category of sets did not have the same fate as his
work on universal algebra. Despite the fact that Lawvere’s work on the category
of categories suﬀered from a slight technical ﬂaw, both it and his work on the
category of sets were essentially metamathematical and category theory was not
yet seen as a potentially useful framework for the latter. Studies on the category of
categories that followed Lawvere’s pioneering work were mathematically motivated
and we speculate that no one saw what to do with the category of sets. It simply
did not have a clear function. His work on algebraic theories, however, inspired

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
701
much of what was to follow in logic, including Lawvere’s own work, and it still
constitutes the starting point of what are now called “doctrines”, a term suggested
to Lawvere by John Beck, in categorical logic and the categorical approach to
universal algebra.
2.2
Lawvere’s thesis: 1963
Lawvere’s imaginative thesis at Columbia University, 1963 contained
his categorical description of algebraic theories, his proposal to treat
sets without elements and a number of other ideas. I was stunned when
I ﬁrst saw it; in the spring of 1963, Sammy and I happened to get on
the same airplane from Washington to New York. He handed me the
just completed thesis, told me that I was the reader, and went to sleep.
I didn’t. ([Mac Lane, 1988, 346].)
Essentially, algebraic theories are an invariant notion of which the usual
formalism with operations and equations may be regarded as “presen-
tation”. [Lawvere, 1963, ii]
The main concept of Lawvere’s thesis is the notion of algebraic category. The
main result of the thesis is a categorical characterization of algebraic categories.
Together with algebraic categories, Lawvere also introduced algebraic theories and
algebraic functors. The three notions are intimately connected to one another. As
Lawvere pointed out himself, there is a strong analogy between the way his work
is developed and the theory of sheaves that had been just introduced at that time:
in the same way that Grothendieck had provided an abstract characterization of
categories of sheaves on topological spaces, Lawvere’s goal was to characterize
algebraic categories in a similar manner. The main tool of the thesis and what
provides the key to the connections between these notions are adjoint functors.
Thus, they constitute the methodological core of the thesis and of the whole ap-
proach. The framework is presented as a new foundation for universal algebra. In
the very ﬁrst chapter of the thesis, thus the underlying context of the work, there
is a sketch of a ﬁrst-order theory of the category of categories. Within that con-
text sets are deﬁned in categorical terms, the notion of equivalence of categories is
given, as well as the category of small categories, the category of large categories,
the category of ﬁnite sets, the category of small sets, and the category of large sets.
A categorical version of the Peano postulates is also given.1 But the bulk of that
chapter is occupied by the presentation and development of the notions of adjoint
functors and limits. In the second chapter, algebraic theories are introduced and
the category of algebraic theories is deﬁned and various properties of the category
are proved, e.g. the existence of an adjoint that corresponds to the existence of
free algebraic theories. Chapter three deals with algebraic categories (and here
Lawvere explicitly exploits the analogy with sheaves). The notions of algebraic
1These axioms are sometimes called the Peano-Lawvere axioms. See for instance [Birkhoﬀ
and Mac Lane, 1967, 67].

702
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
semantics and algebraic structure are deﬁned and a categorical characterization of
algebraic categories is given. Chapter IV deals with algebraic functors and their
adjoints. Finally, in chapter V, particular cases and extensions are considered.
Let us look at the central concepts and results of the thesis and see how the
invariant content of universal algebra is analyzed.
First comes the notion of an algebraic theory. A group is usually thought of as a
set together with some speciﬁed operations, e.g. multiplication, inverse and unit,
satisfying certain identities, e.g. associativity, unit law and inverses. Formally,
this is encoded by a signature, e.g. (×, (−)−1, e) or some other, with the standard
axioms. But it is clear that the signature can in general vary and so does the
choice of axioms. These choices determine, though, the same theory, in the sense
that all the deﬁnable operations and all the theorems are the same.2 Lawvere’s
idea is to deﬁne a category which will encode all the information at once, thus
independently of the choice of signature and axioms and call that category the
theory. Thus, the latter category would in some sense be the objective encoding
of the theory, independent of any presentation of it. This is in stark contrast with
the traditional logical approach in which a theory T depends directly on a choice
of primitive symbols, its signature, and a choice of axioms.
Strictly speaking,
changing the axioms changes the theory, although, for instance we still talk about
the theory of groups.
Here is the general deﬁnition:3
Deﬁnition: an algebraic theory is a (small) category A such that:
(i) the objects of A is a denumerable set {A0, A1, A2, . . . , An, . . .} of distinct
objects;
(ii) each object An is the product of A1 with itself n times; thus, for each n, the
projection maps π(n)
i
: An
/ A, for i = 0, 1, . . . , n −1, exist;
(iii) for any n morphism Am
ϑi
−→A, for i = 0, 1, . . . , n −1, in A, there exists ex-
actly one morphism Am
⟨ϑ0,ϑ1,...,ϑn−1⟩
−−−−−−−−−−→An such that π(n)
i
◦⟨ϑ0, ϑ1, . . . , ϑn−1⟩=
ϑi, for i = 0, 1, . . . , n −1.
The arbitrary morphisms An
η−→A are the n-ary operations of A.
Thus, the theory, thought of as a category, contains all the possible operations
systematically.
The underlying motivation is very simple and makes perfect sense once the
notion of an algebra of type A, also called an A-algebra, has been given: it is
2The second author recalls that in one of his courses in the late 60’s at Berkeley, Tarski told
the class that there wasn’t such a thing as the theory of groups, but there were inﬁnitely many
theories of groups.
3We are here presenting the direct deﬁnition given by Lawvere in his published papers. In
his thesis, Lawvere deﬁnes the category of algebraic theories as a subcategory of the category of
ﬁnite sets, which is itself a category in the category of categories. Pareigis’ presentation is, in
this respect, more faithful to Lawvere’s original work. See [Pareigis, 1970].

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
703
simply a product preserving functor from an algebraic theory to the category of
sets, F : A
/Set. Thus, F(A) picks a set, and F(An) is simply an n-fold product
of F(A), i.e. F(A)×· · ·×F(A) n-times. An operation An
η−→A becomes a standard
set-theoretical operation F(A)×· · ·×F(A)
F (η)
−−−→F(A). Notice that an algebra of
type A is a functor. It is also called a model of the theory A. Thus, in particular,
if A is the theory of groups, then each and every group is a functor.
Two categories can now be deﬁned: 1. The category ℑof algebraic theories
whose objects are algebraic theories, morphisms are functors preserving products
and taking 1 to 1; 2. The functor category Set(A) of all product preserving functors
A
/ Set, which can be thought of as the category of models of the theory A.
The latter category is called an algebraic category.
A morphism f : A
/ B of algebraic theories induces a functor Set(f) :
Set(B)
/ Set(A) by composition. The latter functor is called an algebraic func-
tor. Furthermore, for any algebraic category Set(A), there is an obvious forgetful
functor UA : Set(A)
/ Set which sends to each object F(An) the underlying set
and to each morphism the underlying set map. Notice that the forgetful functor
is an algebraic functor.
Algebraic functors lead to another construction, named algebraic semantics: it
assigns to each algebraic theory A, the forgetful functor UA and to each morphism
f : A
/ B of algebraic theories the algebraic functor Set(f) : Set(B)
/ Set(A).
This is in fact itself a functor, sometimes called the semantic functor,
S : ℑop
/ K
where K is the category of algebraic categories.
With these deﬁnitions, Lawvere’s main results are:
1. Every algebraic functor has a (left) adjoint.
This is the conceptual and
uniﬁed formulation of various constructions in universal algebra, e.g. free
algebras, tensor algebras, monoid rings, etc.
2. Algebraic semantics has a (left) adjoint, which can be called algebraic struc-
ture. This means that it is possible to recover an algebraic theory from the
semantics, i.e. from the category of models.
3. The categorical characterization of algebraic categories: if C is a category
with ﬁnite limits, has an abstractly ﬁnite regular projective generator G and
every precongruence in C is a congruence, then there is an algebraic theory
A and an equivalence Φ : C
/Set(A). (There is no need to specify what the
second and third conditions mean here. They are technical conditions that
we do not have to look into.)
These results were not only remarkable for what they accomplished, but also for
the research avenues they opened. These three points in themselves will become
guidelines in categorical logic. There were some obvious generalizations that were

704
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
taken up rapidly by others and not so obvious generalizations that had to wait for
other concepts to be fully worked out.
1. The obvious generalization was to consider inﬁnitary operations and related
work in universal algebra. This was done quickly by Linton. (See [Linton,
1966b], [Linton, 1966a].)
2. One of the great advantages of the categorical language is that it is possible
to replace the category Set of sets by an arbitrary category C with appropri-
ate properties. [Eilenberg and Moore, 1965] and [Barr and Beck, 1966] used
triples (monads) to extend Lawvere’s work over an arbitraty base category.
[B´enabou, 1968] considered the case of many-sorted theories. The identiﬁca-
tion of the properties of C required to do the work, expressed in categorical
terms, leads to a classiﬁcation of logical categories in categorical terms. The
category Set of sets becomes a special, but very important, case of a type
of category deﬁned abstractly. Lawvere has given a characterization of alge-
braic categories. Further work lead to characterizations of similar categories,
i.e. categorical characterization of semantic frameworks.
3. An algebraic theory as deﬁned by Lawvere can be thought of as a data
type.4 Lawvere’s work shows how syntactical information of a speciﬁc kind
can be encoded by categories.
The search for a proper generalization to
cover all types of logical theories, not only the algebraic or equational case,
is irresistible. More speciﬁcally, the task is to ﬁnd a general procedure to
move from a theory written in a given formal system to a category that would
be the invariant formulation of the latter. The notion of algebraic theory
was speciﬁcally tailored for algebraic structures and it is not clear how one
can go from there to other cases, e.g. cases with quantiﬁers and relations.
In particular, Lawvere considered single-sorted theories and a generalization
to many-sorted seems natural, although in traditional logical presentations,
we are used to the single-sorted case.
4. Once an element of one or all the previous points have been settled, the next
task consists in looking at the various adjoint situations and see what one
can obtain from them. For instance, it appears clearly from Lawvere’s work
that the adjoint situation is a special case of an algebraic duality and its
importance is due to the fact that it is the very ﬁrst case of such a duality
where the category of sets appears as the dualizing object.
Mathematicians and logicians took up these tasks soon after Lawvere’s thesis. Im-
portant results were obtained in the late sixties by Lawvere himself, but also by
Lambek, Freyd, Linton, Isbell and by Gabriel and Ulmer. (See [Gabriel and Ulmer,
1971].) Parallel and independent developments were obtained by Ehresman and
4This is more than a metaphor. There is indeed a formal connection with data bases. See for
instance [Plotkin, 2000].

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
705
his students, most notably B´enabou, also during that period. Ehresman’s motiva-
tion was diﬀerent and was mainly oriented towards the foundations of diﬀerential
geometry, but it lead him to the notion of sketch which was developed by his stu-
dents C. Lair and R. Guitart in the seventies and independently rediscovered by
M. Makkai and R. Par´e in the eighties. (See [Makkai and Par´e, 1989].)
2.3
The elementary theory of the category of sets
Let us now brieﬂy turn to Lawvere’s axiomatization of the category of sets.
We should emphasize right from the start the fact that Lawvere never tried to
eliminate sets altogether from the foundational landscape, but rather he tried to
provide a categorical analysis of sets, that is a characterization of the category of
sets. Mac Lane, for one, at ﬁrst thought that the idea was absurd.
. . . and then [Lawvere] conceived the idea of giving a direct axiomatic
description of the category of all categories. In particular, he proposed
to do set theory without using the elements of a set.
His attempt
to explain this idea to Eilenberg did not succeed; I happened to be
spending a semester in New York (at the Rockefeller University), so
Sammy asked me to listen to Lawvere’s idea.
I did listen, and at
the end I told him “Bill, you can’t do that. Elements are absolutely
essential to set theory.” After that year, Lawvere went to California.
[Mac Lane, 1988, 342]
Lawvere’s basic insight is that, even for sets, one can know them by looking at the
invariant content of the category of sets.
Thus we seem to have partially demonstrated that even in founda-
tions, not Substance but invariant Form is the carrier of the relevant
mathematical information. [Lawvere, 1964, 1506]
Some years ago I began an introductory course on Set Theory by at-
tempting to explain the invariant content of the category of sets, for
which I had formulated an axiomatic description. [Lawvere, 1994, 5]
(our emphasis)
Let us brieﬂy look at this invariant content, at least as Lawvere saw it in the early
sixties.
Lawvere assumes the standard axioms for a category and then postulates that
the category of sets has a terminal object 1, an initial object 0, binary products
and coproducts, equalizers and coequalizers, thus all ﬁnite limits and colimits
(axiom 1). He also assumes that it is Cartesian closed, i.e. that the object BA,
together with the known morphism and universal property, exist for any A and B
(axiom 2). These two axioms are “structural” and are satisﬁed by many categories.
Thus, as such they do not characterize a category of sets.

706
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
The next axiom is known as the Peano-Lawvere characterization of the natural
numbers.
It is therefore an axiom of inﬁnity, but it contains more when it is
assumed with the previous axioms.
Axiom 3:
There is an object N together with morphisms 1
z
−→N
s
−→N such
that given any object X together with mappings 1
x0
−→X
s
−→X, there
is a unique morphism N
x
−→X such that x0 = z ◦x and x ◦t = s ◦x.
This is now the standard characterization of the natural number system by a
universal property.
A theorem on primitive recursion follows from it and the
preceding axioms. However, Lawvere points out that it is satisﬁed, as well as the
ﬁrst two axioms, by the category 1, i.e. the category with one object and one
morphism. Thus, more is needed, both structurally and in terms of existence.
The next axiom is false in the category of categories, for it says that the terminal
object 1 is a generator, i.e. if the morphisms A
f
−→
−→
g
B are diﬀerent, then there is
a morphism x : 1
/ A such that f ◦x ̸= g ◦x. In more colloquial language, this
axiom states that if f and g are diﬀerent, then there is an element x, or a point,
in A such that f and g are diﬀerent on that element.
The ﬁfth axiom is the axiom of choice. The last three axioms are not expressed
in a categorical fashion. Surprisingly perhaps, Lawvere reintroduced the ∈nota-
tion in his axiomatization. Since there is a one-to-one correspondence between the
morphisms x : 1
/ A and the elements x ∈A in the universe of sets, it seems
reasonable to say that x is an element of A if and only if x : 1
/A. The remaining
axioms are then expressed as follows:
Axiom 6:
If A is not an initial object, then A has elements.
Axiom 7:
An element of a sum is a member of one of the injections.
Axiom 8:
There exists an object with more than one element.
Lawvere underlined the fact that the ﬁrst seven axioms are satisﬁed by the
category 1 with one morphism, thus the need for the eighth axiom. One could
certainly object to the introduction of the ∈relation and the notion of element in
a categorical framework and claim that this part of the axiomatization does not
capture the invariant form of the category of sets.
Be that as it may, the claim that the invariant form of the concept of set is cap-
tured by the axioms is substantiated by a metatheorem and its corollary. Indeed,
the metatheorem asserts that any two categories satisfying the eight axioms are
equivalent, thus in particular any (complete) category satisfying the eight axioms
is equivalent to the category of sets. Lawvere is in a position to state precisely
what it means to be “the” category of sets: the properties are (mainly) expressed in
categorical terms and the invariance amounts to the claim that any other category
satisfying these properties is equivalent to it.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
707
Lawvere’s work did not open the door to further investigation along similar
lines. The category of sets was not taken as a foundational framework. It was
not studied and explored.
Although there is no clear explanation of this fact,
Johnstone suggested that the category of sets is simply too “rigid”:
In retrospect, the answer is that Lawvere’s axioms were too specialized:
the category of sets is an extremely useful object to have as a foun-
dation for mathematics, but as a subject of axiomatic study it is not
(pace the activity of Martin, Solovay et al.!) tremendously interesting
— it is too “rigid” to have any internal structure. [Johnstone, 1977,
xiii]
It is not exactly clear why it is such “an extremely useful object to have as
a foundation for mathematics” if nothing is developed in it and no one proceeds
to do more research within it. It seems that one of the most common reactions
at the time was that ETCS was merely a translation in categorical terms of the
standard axioms of set theory and that, as such, did not provide any genuinely
new insight into the nature of sets (in contrast with the analysis provided with
the axioms of elementary toposes, which was about to appear). Sociological and
historical factors must probably be invoked also. Lawvere’s paper appeared in
1964, very shortly after Cohen’s proof of the independence of the continuum hy-
pothesis was published. (See [Cohen, 1963].) Cohen’s result, and probably most
notably his method of forcing, deservedly attracted much attention. There is very
little doubt that one of the key advantages of topos theory over ETCS is precisely
that the former bridges the gap between a categorical description of sets and the
method of forcing, whereas the latter is a category of sets satisfying the axiom of
choice. It should be recorded that Miles Tierney’s proof of the independence of
the continuum hypothesis in a topos theoretical setting is done with respect to
Lawvere’s ETCS. The latter is taken to be the categorical expression of ZF set
theory, reinforcing the impression that ETCS is nothing more than a translation.
Although the ETCS did not attract much attention, the general program was
launched and it did not take long for Lawvere and others to see how logic could
be and perhaps should be developed in a categorical setting.
2.4
Categorical logic: the program
Categorical logic, in a very broad sense, can be seen to derive from
the completeness and exactness properties of the category of sets, in
a manner paralleling the earlier development of Abelian categories.
[Makkai and Par´e, 1989, 5]
Lawvere pursued his work in the categoriﬁcation of logic and presented two
papers at the Meeting of the Association of Symbolic Logic, one in 1965 and the
other in 1966. Abstracts of these talks were published in The Journal of Symbolic
Logic in the following year. The ﬁrst one was received the 17 August 1965 and the

708
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
second almost a year later, the 12 August 1966. They were published a year later.
(See [Lawvere, 1966; Lawvere, 1967].) The second note oﬀers a simpliﬁcation of
the ﬁrst attempt. It is entirely clear that Lawvere is trying to extend his results
obtained for algebraic theories to ﬁrst-order theories in general. In these two notes,
three elements stand out. First, it is the ﬁrst time in print that the existential
quantiﬁer is presented as an adjoint. Second, every ﬁrst-order theory with equality
corresponds to a category with certain properties that Lawvere calls an elementary
theory. In particular, certain elements of how semantics of ﬁrst order languages
ought to be done in a category are suggested.
Third, in the second abstract,
Lawvere sketches a categorical proof of the completeness theorem that amounts to
the existence of speciﬁc adjoint functors. These abstracts were in fact inﬂuential
and did serve as guides in the late sixties and early seventies for a categorical
analysis of ﬁrst-order logic. Here are the essential elements.
We will here present the notions as they are deﬁned in 1966, for it is the latter
that were referred to by various logicians who followed Lawvere’s footsteps.
An elementary theory T is a small category with ﬁnite products, including the
empty product 1, satisfying three conditions:
1. There is a distinguished object B together with two morphisms 1
⊤
−→
−→
⊥
B
such that for all objects X, the morphisms ⟨1X, ⊤X⟩: X
/ X × B and
⟨1X, ⊥X⟩: X
/ X × B, where ⊤X : X −→1
⊤
−→B and ⊥X : X −→1
⊥
−→
B, constitute a categorical coproduct of X with itself, that is X×B = X+X;
it follows that for each object X of T, the functor Hom(X, B)5 is in fact a
Boolean algebra;
2. For any f : X
/ Y, ϕ : X
/ B, there is a morphism ∃f[ϕ] : Y
/ B such
that for all ψ : Y
/ B, ∃f[ϕ] ≤Y ψ if and only if ϕ ≤X ψ ◦f;
3. There is a second distinguished object A of T such that every object X of T
has a unique representation of the form An × Bk, where n, k are ﬁnite non
negative integers.
Morphisms An
/A are thought of as n-ary terms and morphisms An
/B are
thought of as n-ary formulas. In particular, HomT(1, B) is the set of sentences
of T. A model of T is any product preserving functor M : T
/ Set which takes
B to a two-element sets and which takes each ∃f[ϕ] to the image of ϕ under f,
that is if, as above f : X
/ Y and ϕ : X
/ B, then identifying M(B) with the
two-elements set 2, we have that an element y ∈M(Y ) is in M(∃f[ϕ])−1(1) if and
only if there exists x ∈M(ϕ)−1(1) such that M(f)(x) = y. The set M(A) is called
the universe of the model. Morphisms of models are natural transformations, thus
yielding a category ModSet(T) of set-models. Notice that the category Set satisﬁes
all the axioms, with the only exception that it is not small. A morphism of theories
I : T
/ T′ is a product preserving functor that preserves quantiﬁcation. Lawvere
5Hom(X, Y ) denotes the collection of morphisms from X to Y in the category.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
709
notices that there is an induced functor I∗: ModSet(T′)
/ ModSet(T) which
preserves universes.
In his ﬁrst abstract, Lawvere extends the claim we ﬁnd in his thesis to ele-
mentary theories as follows. Let T be the category of elementary theories with
morphisms of theories I : T
/ T′ and M the category of set-models. Then, as
indicated in the foregoing paragraph, there is a functor Φ : Top
/ M, called ele-
mentary semantics and Lawvere claims that it has an adjoint, called elementary
structure. No details are given.
The main claim of the second abstract is a completeness theorem. The precise
statement of the theorem is not given in the abstract. Lawvere enumerates three
conditions that constitute the core of the proof of the theorem: it sketches how,
given an elementary theory T, a model M of T can be constructed.
As we will see, the notion of an elementary theory served as a guide in the search
for the correct categorical characterization of ﬁrst-order logic. Also, the description
of the quantiﬁers as adjoints to substitution, more generally the description of the
logical operations as adjoints and the basic element of the semantics left a deﬁnitive
impact. Interestingly enough, Lawvere himself suggests, in his ﬁrst abstract, that
a given theory T, as a category, could be thought of as the “Sinn” of a theory
presented in a ﬁrst order language, and the category ModSet(T) could be thought
as the “Bedeutung” of the theory.
Whether this can be defended and how it
compares to other analyses of sense and reference, for instance Frege’s, remains
to be clariﬁed and as far as we know, no one took it up afterwards. (But look
at Bell’s Epilogue in his textbook on topos theory, i.e. [Bell, 1988, chapter 8].
Awodey’s paper on structuralism is also relevant here, [Awodey, 1996].)
Here is how quantiﬁers can be thought of as adjoints to substitution. Recall
that if f : X
/ Y is a function between sets and B ⊆Y , then the pullback of B
along f is the subset of X deﬁned by f ∗(B) = {x ∈X : f(x) ∈B}. By considering
B as a predicate of Y , say B(y), the pullback may be considered as the predicate
of X obtained from B(y) by substituting f(x) for y. Lawvere’s remark was that
the pull-back formation
f ∗: ℘(Y )
/ ℘(X)
which is a functor between posets has a left adjoint and a right adjoint
∃f ⊣f ∗⊣∀f
Indeed, one can easily check that
∃f(A) = {y ∈B : ∃xf(x) = y and x ∈A} and
∀f(A) = {y ∈B : ∀xf(x) = y implies x ∈A}.
This was a key observation that convinced many mathematicians that this was
the right analysis of quantiﬁers. They arise naturally as adjoints to an elementary
operation, namely substitution, which appears as the basic operation of ﬁrst-order
logic, contrary to the classical view which deﬁnes this operation by recursion, as
a derived one. By the way, this recursive deﬁnition is not universally valid. In

710
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
particular, it gives wrong results in some non-classical logics (e.g. co-Heyting).
Again, apart from the intrinsic interest of the conceptual analysis it provides,
this point of view generalizes to categories other than the category of sets. Once
the categorical properties of sets used in the characterization have been identiﬁed
and deﬁned, it is possible to transpose the analysis in new contexts, i.e. in other
categories.
After 1966, Lawvere’s own published work extends the connections between
categories and logic.
Three papers published in 1969 and 1970 are extremely
important since they contain the seeds and the statement of a vast foundational
program which was taken up and is still alive. One of the surprising features of
these papers is that none of them contain a bibliography. There is no reference to
other papers, books or earlier related work, which we believe can be taken as an
sign of the originality of the work presented. Here are the basic methodological
elements underlying this program.
1.
The use of adjoint functors is emphasized both in practice and also from a
more general point of view. In his paper Diagonal arguments and Cartesian closed
categories, Lawvere deﬁnes a CC category as a category C equipped with three
kinds of right adjoints:
1. a right adjoint 1 to the unique C
/ 1;
2. a right adjoint (−× −) to the diagonal functor ∆: C
/ C × C;
3. and for each object A in C, a right adjoint (−)A to the functor A×−: C
/C,
[Lawvere, 1969b]].
Before that paper, adjoints were used by Lawvere to show that any category
satisfying certain speciﬁcations was equivalent to a ﬁxed category of interest or
to establish certain properties of given functors in a context. In this Lawvere was
following the examples of Abelian categories and sheaves. As we have seen, the
axioms for the category of sets did not mention adjoints explicitly and the notion
of elementary theories stipulated the existence of two distinguished objects of a
category. Right from the beginning, Lawvere emphasized the fact that Cartesian
closed categories are algebraic versions of type theories. Notice two important facts
in the foregoing characterization of a CC category: ﬁrst, the ﬁrst two adjoints are
adjoints to basic functors or structural functors and as such arise “naturally” and
express fundamental connections; second, the third adjoint depends on the second
and, in this way, there is a hierarchy or an order in the way the fundamental
operations are deﬁned or related to one another. This is a key element of the
analysis of logical operations in a categorical setting.
2.
In connection with the role of adjoint functors, there is an explicit recogni-
tion of the levels of abstraction introduced by category theory, more speciﬁcally
the fact that category theory now allows for purely abstract characterizations of
mathematical domains.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
711
More recently, the search for universals has also taken a conceptual
turn in the form of Category Theory, which began with viewing as a
new mathematical object the totality of all morphisms of the mathe-
matical objects of a given species A, and then recognizing that these
new mathematical objects all belong to a common non-trivial species
C which is independent of A. [Lawvere, 1969a, 281]. (our emphasis)
What is described by Lawvere should be clear : in the beginning, mathematicians
started with already deﬁned mathematical objects and structure-preserving func-
tions and moved to a new object, namely the category of these objects of species A.
But it was soon realized that such a category participated in a diﬀerent species,
namely a category of type C, which can be described independently of A. The
ﬁrst historical example of this phenomenon was provided by Abelian categories:
one started with Abelian groups (or modules over a commutative ring), the latter
constituting the objects of species A, moved to the category of Abelian groups
(or modules over a commutative ring) and then to an Abelian category, which
is a category of type C. From a conceptual and as well as a foundational point
of view, the crucial step is that the latter can be described independently of the
former. Thus, although a category of type C arises from given structures, and in
the last century, that meant more often than not, structured sets with structure-
preserving functions between them, once the abstract description has been given,
it is possible to develop mathematics directly from categories of type C. Lawvere
makes a bold generalization: he sees this case as a general phenomenon, even
as a framework that should guide the development and analysis of mathematics.
Of course, Abelian categories did not constitute his only example, e.g. algebraic
theories and categories, Cartesian closed categories and hyperdoctrines, etc.
3.
Lawvere uses Cartesian closed categories to present an analysis of well-known
diagonal arguments, i.e. those of Cantor, Russell, G¨odel and Tarski. The moti-
vation is similar to the one indicated in the foregoing paragraph: these diagonal
arguments are similar and thus seem to form a species of argument.
Lawvere
hopes to be able to disclose the common abstract structure underlying them. This
abstract structure takes the form of a ﬁxed point theorem based on the properties
of Cartesian closed categories. (For an excellent presentation of these results to-
gether with work inspired by Lawvere along these lines, see [Yanofsky, 2003].) In
the process of his analysis, Lawvere introduces an object of truth-values 2, for this
object appears in one way or another in all the arguments. This object, which will
be called the object of truth-values and had already been introduced in the con-
text of elementary theories, as well as the Cartesian closed structure, will become
pivotal in his characterization of the notion of elementary topos in 1969. However,
the object of truth-values will constitute an obstacle for the characterization of
ﬁrst-order logic.
4.
In all three papers, Lawvere suggests extensions of his earlier work on alge-
braic theories to theories written in higher-order type theories and, as a special
case, ﬁrst-order theories. We should point out immediately that he was no longer

712
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
alone in looking for connections between categories and logic. Lambek’s work on
categorical analysis of deductive systems has to be mentioned at this stage. (See
[Lambek, 1968a; Lambek, 1969; Lambek, 1972].) We will get back to Lambek’s
work later.) Lawvere’s extensions are based on the following fundamental facts:
1.1. As we have already seen, the logical quantiﬁers can be presented as adjoint
functors to the simple and fundamental operation of substitution (the anal-
ysis is extended in [Lawvere, 1969c; Lawvere, 1970b]);
1.2. The comprehension principle can be presented as an adjoint functor in a
proper context [Lawvere, 1969a; Lawvere, 1970b];
1.3. Lawvere sketches how one can construct a category from a given theory
formalized in higher-order logic [Lawvere, 1969b; Lawvere, 1970b].
We have to underline the fact once more that a categorical analysis of logical
systems not only provided a novel and unifying understanding of logical operations
and systems, but by the same token, it initiated a shift in the status of categories
themselves. It is now possible to identify a type of category with a type of deductive
system. The claim that category theory can be seen as a language can now be made
more precise: category theory can be seen as a formal language for mathematics.
However, it should also be emphasized that in 1969, these were all programmatic
claims.
5. All these constructions are incorporated in a general framework that constitutes
nothing less than the scaﬀolding of categorical logic as it developed afterwards.6
This framework is presented in very broad strokes at the beginning and the end
of the papers entitled “Adjointness in Foundations” and is itself of considerable
philosophical interest.
Lawvere identiﬁed two aspects, which he qualiﬁes as being “dual”, since they
appear to obey some sort of general duality inherent to mathematics, namely the
Formal and the Conceptual. The Formal is more or less identiﬁed with the manip-
ulation of symbols, either in deduction or calculations, whereas the Conceptual is
identiﬁed with the content of these symbols, the subject matter of the Formal or
what they refer to. Thus, at ﬁrst sight, Lawvere’s terminology coincides with the
classical distinction between the syntax and the semantics of formal languages.
However, Lawvere has the actual practice of mathematics in mind and therefore
does not equate his distinction with the fundamental metamathematical distinc-
tion. In fact, he sees foundational research as being part of mathematics: “Being
itself part of Mathematics, Foundations also partakes of the Formal-Conceptual
duality.” [Lawvere, 1969a, 281]. Thus, the syntax of a logical system is part of
the Formal, whereas the semantics is part of the Conceptual. However, his pre-
sentation of the semantics is somewhat odd: “Naturally the formal tendency in
6At least before categorical logic became a standard tool in theoretical computer science. But
even in this context, one can see the inﬂuence of Lawvere’s suggestions.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
713
Foundations can also deal with the conceptual aspect of mathematics, as when the
semantics of a formalized theory T is viewed itself as another formalized theory
T′, or in a somewhat diﬀerent way, as in attempts to formalize the study of the
category of categories.” [Lawvere, 1969a, 281]. Category theory is clearly put on
the conceptual side of mathematics and, in fact, one can see that Lawvere sees his
work on the foundations of universal algebra and the subsequent work on Carte-
sian closed categories and extensions thereof as being part of the conceptualization
of the formal aspect of mathematics.7 Indeed, he claims explicitly that “Foun-
dations may conceptualize the formal aspect of mathematics, leading to Boolean
algebras, cylindric and polyadic algebras, and certain of the structures discussed
below.” [Lawvere, 1969a, 282]. At the center of this conceptualization appear
adjoint functors.
Adjoints are present in Foundations in two senses.
1. Lawvere introduces Cartesian closed categories and what he calls hyperdoc-
trines in that paper. The main property of these two concepts is that they are
entirely given by adjoint functors. However, as we have already mentioned,
Cartesian closed categories and hyperdoctrines correspond in a precise tech-
nical sense to logical frameworks. Thus, both Cartesian closed categories
and hyperdoctrines are categorical codiﬁcations of logical structures, the al-
gebraic counterpart of these structures. Adjoint functors are used to deﬁne
the conceptual content of foundations;
2. However, adjoint functors also play a more general role. The Formal and the
Conceptual mentioned above should be, but we are clearly at a programmatic
stage here, related by adjoint functors. Lawvere is in fact more precise in
the way these adjoints should show up and here we see Lawvere generalizing
the work contained in his thesis. First, Lawvere suggests that one should
consider categories of models of a theory, thus framing model theory in the
context of category theory.8
More speciﬁcally, a model, in the standard
model theoretic sense, can de described as a functor from a category T to
the category Set of sets. The category of such models is then a subcategory
of the functor category SetT, or also written Mod(T, Set) or, ModSet(T) as
we have already done. Second, the category T is the categorical encoding
of a given formal theory.
In Lawvere’s own term “The invariant notion
of theory here appropriate has, in all cases considered by the author, been
expressed most naturally by identifying a theory T itself with a category
of a certain sort” [Lawvere, 1969a]. We emphasize the fact that Lawvere
is looking, once again, for an invariant notion of a theory and that this
invariant notion is provided by a category. Third, and adjoint functors enter
7Indeed, in the nineties Lawevere published, in collaboration with Steve Schanuel, a book
entitled “Conceptual Mathematics” (see [Lawvere and Schanuel, 1997]).
8We have to point out that Freyd had made explicit connections between category theory and
model theory before. See [Freyd, 1965].

714
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
the picture explicitly at this stage, in principle there ought to be an adjoint
pair of functors encapsulating the general duality expressed above
Theoriesop semantics
−→
←−
structure
Conceptual.
The conceptual is identiﬁed with the category of models of T.9
However, the
formal is not identiﬁed with the invariant formulation of the theory, since clearly
there are aspects of the formal, e.g. speciﬁc rules of computation or derivation,
that are inherent to a formal framework. Therefore, Lawvere suggests that there
is a further adjoint situation, left unspeciﬁed this time
Formal
−→
←−Theories
which describes “the presentation of the invariant theories by means of the formal-
ized languages appropriate to the species” [Lawvere, 1969a, 295]. Since adjoint
functors compose, one should get a family of adjoint functors
Formalop −→
←−Conceptual
which we started with.
As such, this description is completely programmatic. It is clearly a bold gen-
eralization of Lawvere’s thesis. It is given as a completely general framework for
foundational research. It is taken as being faithful to the essential elements of
mathematical knowledge. Logicians who were about to enter the scene picked up
that program and started to develop it systematically. It lead to what were called
afterwards “categorical doctrines” and is presented as such by Kock and Reyes in
their survey paper (see [Kock and Reyes, 1977]). Thus, we strongly disagree with
the claim made by Corry:
Lawvere himself proposed in an article of 1969 to connect the concept
of duality, and other categorical concepts, with the epistemological
issues related to the philosophy of mathematics. In order to do that,
he identiﬁed two “dual aspects” of mathematical knowledge — the
conceptual and the formal aspects — which appear in many domains
of mathematics. . . . . Now Lawvere proposed to dedicate eﬀorts to
develop the second aspect, the conceptual one, embodied in category
theory. This proposal, however, remained at the programmatic level
and no one seems to have developed it further. [Corry, 1996, 388].
It is true that diﬀerent mathematicians may have interpreted the formal and the
conceptual according to their own convictions, but the mathematical content of
Lawvere’s proposal, including the sketch of the mathematical duality involved,
9We are not entirely faithful to Lawvere here.
He takes the conceptual to be the functor
category Mod(Cat, [SetT]), which is of course slightly more general than what we have been
describing.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
715
lead very quickly to a host of important results. The fact is, no one had to quote
Lawvere explicitly or say that their work was part of that program — and in
fact, no one did quote Lawvere’s paper —, for in a sense the program was already
implicit in the manner Lawvere had set up his own work on universal algebra and
that work, as we have seen, called for various generalizations and expansions that
were taken up by various mathematicians.
6.
One has to contrast categorical logic with other attempts at developing an
algebraic framework for logic around the same time, e.g. Halmos’s polyadic alge-
bras and Tarski et. al.’s cylindrical algebras. The advantages of the categorical
approach over the latter have been explicitly argued by Joyal and Reyes in the
mid-seventies:
1. the concept of category is used in all branches of mathematics,
whereas the structure of polyadic algebra is exotic. Thus, we may
hope to extend the application of logic in mathematics
2. certain categories, used in diﬀerent ﬁelds of mathematics are in
fact theories and is useful [sic!] to consider them as such
3. as we shall see in this paper, constructions which are actually
used in model theory are specializations of general categorical
constructions (hence logic is no exception to the generalized use
of categories in mathematics). [Joyal and Reyes, 1978, 5]
These considerations boil down to one fundamental fact: whereas cylindric alge-
bras and polyadic algebras are isolated in the conceptual realm of mathematics,
categories are omnipresent. The heuristic gain of using categories is therefore clear
and powerful.
There are indications that the gain of categorical logic is more than heuristic. It
is well known that the algebraic expression of propositional logic is given by lattice
theory and in the latter adjoint functors are usually called Galois connections. Dis-
agreements appear when higher-order operations like quantiﬁers are considered, in
other words, disagreements appear as to how to generalize the algebraic framework
to higher-order logical operations. The fact that categories are a generalization of
posets suggests that they might yield the correct generalization. Indeed:
i.
Concepts and results about propositional logic are special cases of concepts
and results in the categorical setting;
ii. It is possible to extend naturally proofs in the propositional setting to the
categorical setting;
iii. It is possible to obtain new results in the categorical setting;
iv. It is possible to make contacts with other areas of mathematics either by using
results of diﬀerent ﬁelds in the new context or by applying the new results in
diﬀerent ﬁelds.

716
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
It is a remarkable fact that the categorical machinery introduced for algebraic
topology, homological algebra, homotopy theory and algebraic geometry consti-
tutes at the same time the proper setting for an algebraic analysis of logic.
Thus, towards the end of the sixties and early seventies, the following ‘dictio-
nary’ was being elaborated:
Logic
Category Theory
(many-sorted) theory
category
Sort
Object (of a category)
(sorted) formula
Sub-object
(sorted) term
Morphism
Interpretation
Functor
Set-theoretical model
Functor into Sets
Homomorphism
Natural transformation
In this table, category refers to categories with ﬁnite limits (pull-backs and
terminal object) with possibly further structure satisfying some exactness condi-
tions. This extra structure is determined by the choice of the logical connectives
considered, as we will see.
3
1969–1970 ELEMENTARY TOPOS THEORY
From the logical point of view, Lawvere’s thesis and subsequent work had intro-
duced a starting point in two senses. First, it is the ﬁrst systematic attempt to give
a categorical version of logical concepts and second, the theories at ﬁrst captured
by Lawvere were purely equational theories. When Lawvere and Tierney intro-
duced the concept of elementary topos, they introduced, in some sense, the other
end of the spectrum, namely higher order theories or type theories. Of course, the
relationships between elementary toposes and type theories still had to be clariﬁed
fully, but it was clear to everyone that there were intermediate cases to consider
and characterize, or as they became called at that time, there were ‘doctrines’ to
be deﬁned categorically, in particular, the doctrine of ﬁrst-order logic.
3.1
Elementary topos theory: 1969–1970
The unity of opposites in the title is essentially that between logic
and geometry, and there are compelling reasons for maintaining that
geometry is the leading aspect. At the same time, in the present joint
work with Myles Tierney there are important inﬂuences in the other
direction. . . [Lawvere, 1970a, 329]
The program of investigating the connections between algebraic geom-
etry and “intuitionistic” logic under the guidance of the form of ob-

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
717
jective dialiectics known as category theory was discussed and moved
forward at a conference in January 1971 at Halifax, . . . . (. . . ) Brieﬂy
we may say that the notion of topos summarizes in objective categori-
cal form the essence of “higher-order logic” (we will explain below how
the logical operators become morphisms in a topos) with no axiom of
extensionality. This amounts to a natural and useful generalization
of set theory to the consideration of “sets which internally develop”.
In a basic example of algebraic geometry, the development may be
viewed as taking place along a parameter which varies over “rings of
deﬁnition”; in a basic example from intuitionistic logic, the parameter
is interpreted as varying over “stages of knowledge”. [Lawvere, 1972,
1–3].
As the ﬁrst sentence of the ﬁrst foregoing quote indicates, in the early seventies,
Lawvere insisted again and again on the dual nature of toposes: a geometric
aspect and a logical aspect. As the quote suggests clearly, the geometric aspect
was thought to be more important than the logical aspect at the beginning and
that, to a certain extent, it subsumed the logical aspect. Even to this day, Lawvere
presents the situation in similar terms:
In spite of its geometric origin, topos theory has in recent years some-
times been perceived as a branch of logic, partly because of the contri-
butions to the clariﬁcation of logic and set theory which it has made
possible. However, the orientation of many topos theorists could per-
haps be more accurately summarized by the observation that what is
usually called mathematical logic can be viewed as a branch of alge-
braic geometry, and it is useful to make this branch explicit in itself.
[Lawvere, 2000, 717].
Going back to the ﬁrst quote above, an explicit ideology associated with category
theory can be discerned. Indeed, Lawvere himself talks about “unity of opposites”
and of the “form of objective dialectics”. This paper, published in the Actes du
Congr`es International des Math´ematiciens 1970, was the ﬁrst public presentation
of elementary topos theory. In the bibliography, for this paper contains a short and
cryptic bibliography, the ﬁrst reference is to Mao Tsetung and his work entitled
On contradiction — Where do correct ideas come from? Notice also that the title
of the paper — Quantiﬁers and Sheaves — does not refer directly to toposes. This
was probably not the original or the intended title of the paper, for as we have
seen the ﬁrst sentence of the paper refers to “the unity of opposites in the title”.
It is worth quoting a short passage of the ﬁrst paragraph, for it weaves all these
elements together in an interesting manner.
We ﬁrst sum up the principal contradictions of the Grothendieck-
Giraud-Verdier theory of topos in terms of four or ﬁve adjoint functors,
signiﬁcantly generalizing the theory to free it of reliance on an external

718
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
notion of inﬁnite limit (in particular enabling one to claim that in a
sense logic is a special case of geometry). (our emphasis)
Notice that the axiomatization of the notion of elementary topos is not only seen
as a signiﬁcant generalization of the notion introduced by Grothendieck, but also
as a way of giving the concept an autonomy, as a way of liberating the notion of
topos from its reliance on an external notion.
For Lawvere, then, category theory was the objective form of dialectical materi-
alism and adjoint functors were the exact formulation of principal contradictions.
Lawvere felt that the logical and the geometric aspects of toposes were its main
contradictions. Geometry was considered to be progressive and Logic was, at least
for some time and in some circles, considered to be reactionary. Thus, many cat-
egory theorists came to the conclusion that it was preferable to avoid the logical
aspect altogether, by subsuming it under the geometrical aspect. This was cer-
tainly not Lawvere’s own proposal if only because it would not be faithful to a
dialectical outlook, it became natural to think that way in the early seventies. In
particular, using logical techniques to solve a problem was sometimes considered
to be reactionary or fascist. It is even said that set theory was considered to be
essentially bourgeois since it is founded on the relationship of belonging. This
background ideology might partly explain the diﬃcult relationships that category
theorists developed with the other parts of the mathematical and logical com-
munities. Political ideas are rarely thought of as being inherent to mathematical
theories.
Nowadays, people recognize that two faces are simply not enough to capture
toposes, that toposes are multifaceted objects with many complementary aspects.
(See, for instance, the introduction in [Johnstone, 2002].) The geometric aspect of
toposes comes directly from their origins: Grothendieck deﬁned toposes in the early
sixties in the context of algebraic geometry via the use of sheaves. Grothendieck
presented them as a generalization of the concept of topological spaces and, in
fact, as potentially being the real object of study of topology. Grothendieck had
already noted that a topos inherited many of the properties of the category of sets
and, as such, could be considered to be a generalization of the latter. Thus, a
topos was at the same time a generalization of the idea of a topological space and
of the idea of a category of sets. However, Grothendieck and his students did not
see or perhaps pay attention to its logical aspect.
Lawvere suggested thinking of a topos as a universe of variable sets, among
which the standard sets are conceived as being without variation, or constant. He
later suggested thinking of the standard sets as being abstract. (See [Lawvere,
1975a; Lawvere, 1976; Lawvere, 1994; Lawvere, 2003].) Once this viewpoint is
adopted, one starts looking at the elementary properties of a topos as a universe
of variable sets. As we have seen, Lawvere had already tried to axiomatize the
universe of sets, or of constant sets. He had a larger class of universes to capture.
When the main contradictions of a thing have been found, the scientiﬁc
procedure is to summarize them in slogans which one then constantly

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
719
uses as an ideological weapon for the further development and transfor-
mation of the thing. Doing this for “set theory” requires taking account
of the experience that the main pairs of opposing tendencies in mathe-
matics take the form of adjoint functors, and frees us of the mathemat-
ically irrelevant traces (∈) left behind by the process of accumulating
(∪) the power set (P) at each stage of a metaphysical “construction”.
Further, experience with sheaves, permutation representations, alge-
braic spaces, etc., shows that a “set theory” for geometry should apply
not only to abstract sets divorced from time, space, ring of deﬁnition,
etc., but also to more general sets which do in fact develop along such
parameters. [Lawvere, 1970a, 329].
The hope was that these “geometric sets”, or sets for geometry, would provide an
adequate foundation for analysis, in particular functional analysis, as is illustrated
by the very last sentence of the same paper: “In any topos satisfying (ω) [an
additional condition satisﬁed by the topos of the so-called evolutive sets] each
deﬁnition of the real numbers yields a deﬁnite object, but it is not yet known
what theorems of analysis can be proved about it.” [Lawvere, 1970a, 334].
Already in 1967, Lawvere was moving towards the notion of an elementary topos
(as can be witnessed in his 1969 paper on diagonal arguments). As he himself
made clear, his motivation was coming from continuum mechanics, whereas Myles
Tierney’s motivation was coming from sheaf theory.
What was the impetus which demanded the simpliﬁcation and general-
ization of Grothendieck’s concept of topos, if indeed the applications to
logic and set theory were not decisive? Tierney had wanted sheaf the-
ory to be axiomatized for eﬃcient use in algebraic topology. My own
motivation came from my earlier study of physics.
The foundation
of the continuum physics of general materials, in the spirit of Trues-
dell, Noll, and others, involves powerful and clear physical ideas which
unfortunately have been submerged under a mathematical apparatus
including not only Cauchy sequences and countably additive measures,
but also ad hoc choices of charts for manifolds and of inverse limits of
Sobolev Hilbert spaces, to get at the simple nuclear spaces of inten-
sively and extensively variable quantities. But, as Fichera lamented, all
this apparatus may well be helpful in the solution of certain problems,
but can the problems themselves and the needed axioms be stated in a
direct and clear manner? And might this not lead to a simpler, equally
rigorous account? [Lawvere, 2000, 726].
Thus in 1969, in collaboration with Myles Tierney, the correct axiomatization of
the notion came about. Although the axioms given by Lawvere in 1970 at the Nice
Congress are redundant, for the assumption that a topos has all ﬁnite colimits will
be shown quickly afterwards to be a consequence of the other axioms, it contains
the key ingredients of the characterization. In a nutshell, an elementary topos is

720
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
a Cartesian closed category E with a subobject classiﬁer. Formally, the deﬁnition
is as follows.
DEFINITION
An elementary topos is a category E such that
1. it has pullbacks;
2. it has a terminal object 1;
3. the functor X × −: E
/ E has a right adjoint, denoted by (−)X : E
/ E;
4. it has an object Ω, called the subobject classiﬁer, together with a monic arrow
⊤: 1 ֌ Ωsuch that for any monic m : A ֌ X there is a unique morphism
φ : X
/ Ωin E for which the following square is a pullback:
X
Ω
φ
/
A
X

m

A
1
!
/ 1
Ω

⊤

The morphism φ : X
/ Ωis called the characteristic morphism of A and we
will sometimes denote it by φA.
The third axiom could be replaced by the following:
(3′)
it has, for each object X, an object PX and an arrow ∈X: X ×PX
/Ωsuch
that for every arrow f : X × Y
/ Ωthere is a unique arrow g : Y
/ PX
for which the following diagram commutes:
Y
P(X)
g

X × P(X)
Ω
ǫX /
X × Y
X × P(X)
1×g

X × Y
Ω
f
/ Ω
Ω
Notice that the deﬁnition can be given entirely in terms of the existence of
adjoint functors to given functors. The notion of being a Cartesian closed category,
as we have already mentioned, was introduced earlier by Lawvere in this spirit.
The existence of the subobject classifer Ωcan also be presented via the existence of
an adjoint functor to a given functor. Since the adjoints whose existence is required
by the axioms are adjoints to “structural” functors whose nature is fundamental or
elementary, depending on the point of view, the notion of elementary topos ought
to be seen as arising naturally from elementary constraints. We have to emphasize
this fact once again: in a categorical set up, certain notions arise naturally from

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
721
elementary functors in a hierarchical manner. They are not ad hoc nor do they
depend on complicated contraptions. This is taken by many as being an indication
of the fundamental character of the analysis provided by categorical logic and of
the notions themselves.
Examples of toposes abound. The category of sets, as deﬁned by the axioms
of ZFC for instance, is a topos. Given a set X, the functor X × −is deﬁned in
the obvious way and its right adjoint is given by the set XY = {f : Y
/ X}.
The subobject classiﬁer Ωcan be taken to be the set 2 = {0, 1} together with the
map ⊤: 1
/ 2, deﬁned by ⊤(∗) = 1. It should be observed that these sets are
canonical choices and that from a purely categorical point of view, any isomorphic
set with the appropriate function would do just as well. Thus, there is nothing
special about the set 2 = {0, 1}, any two elements set would do just as well (with
an appropriate function picking out an element into it).
The other examples of toposes are more involved, but there is a class of examples
that have the same general form: given a topos E and a small category C (“small”
in a sense that can be made precise with respect to the topos E) the functor
category ECop is a topos. Notice that it is a functor category. Speciﬁc important
cases of this construction are the following. Let E be the category Set of sets and
C be the lattice of open sets O(X) of a topological space X. The functor category
SetO(X)op is a topos, called the topos of presheaves over X. There is an important
subcategory of SetO(X)op, denoted by Sh(X), the category of sheaves over X and
it can also be shown to be a topos (we will come back to sheaves in a very short
while). A related class of toposes, especially important from the point of view of
the history of logic, are those of the form SetP op, where P is a poset. Lawvere and
Tierney saw that the usual models of intuitionistic logic and mathematics known
at that time as well as the forcing method of Cohen were speciﬁc cases of these
toposes. Finally, let C be a group G or, more generally a groupoid, then the functor
category SetGop, also denoted by BG and called the category of representations of
G, can also be shown to be a topos. These examples were all mentioned by Lawvere
in his conference at the International Congress of Mathematicians held in Nice in
1970 (see [Lawvere, 1970a]).
Lawvere emphasized right from the start the logical structure of toposes. First,
for any category C with ﬁnite limits, it is possible to deﬁne an internal lattice
object L of C as an object of C together with two morphisms making certain
diagrams commute. (See, for details, [Mac Lane and Moerdijk, 1994, IV.8].) If,
furthermore, there is an additional binary morphism ⇒: L×L
/L satisfying the
usual identities, then L is an internal Heyting algebra. It can be shown that for
any object X of a topos E, the power object PX is an internal Heyting algebra. In
particular, it follows from the deﬁnition that Ω≈P1 and thus that the subobject
classiﬁer Ωis also an internal Heyting algebra. (See [Mac Lane and Moerdijk, 1994,
201] for details.) Thus all the propositional operations are deﬁnable in a topos E
as morphisms of the subobject classiﬁer: 1
⊤
−→Ω, Ω
¬−→Ω, ⊥= ¬ ◦⊤: 1 −→Ω,
Ω×Ω
∧−→Ω, Ω×Ω
⇒
−→Ω, Ω×Ω
∨−→Ω. Furthermore, for any morphism f : X
/Y
of E, there is a morphism Pf : PY
/ PX and the latter has a left adjoint

722
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
∃f : PX
/ PY and a right adjoint ∀f : PX
/ PY or, equivalently, for any
morphism f : X
/ Y of E, there are morphisms ΩX
∀f
−→ΩY and ΩX
∃f
−→ΩY .
Hence, quantiﬁers are also deﬁnable in any elementary topos. Needless to say, the
logic of an arbitrary topos E is intuitionistic.
In certain speciﬁc toposes E, the power object PΩcan be shown to be a Boolean
algebra. In this case, we say that E is Boolean. Lawvere and Tierney noted that
this condition is equivalent to the following:
1. the negation operator Ω
¬−→Ωsatisﬁes ¬ ◦¬ = 1Ω;
2. for every object X of E, the Heyting algebra PX is a Boolean algebra;
3. every suboject is complemented, i.e. for every AX in E, A ∨¬A = X;
4. the morphisms 1
⊤
−→Ωand 1
⊥
−→Ωinduce an isomorphism 1 + 1 ≃Ω, which
means that the subobject classiﬁer is two-valued.
In 1971, Radu Diaconescu gave a suﬃcient condition for a topos E to be Boolean.
We say that a topos satisﬁes the axiom of choice (AC) if every epimorphism p :
X
/ Y has a section s : Y
/ X, that is p ◦s = 1Y . It can easily be seen that
this is only a diﬀerent way of formulating the usual axiom of choice expressed
in term of the existence of a choice function deﬁned on a family of disjoint sets.
Diaconescu showed that any topos E satisfying AC is necessarily Boolean. It was
quickly observed afterwards that this statement has an “internal” version, in the
sense that this property can be expressed solely in terms of the internal language of
the topos. (We will come back to the internal language later.) A topos E satisﬁes
the internal axiom of choice (IAC) if for any epimorphism p : X
/ Y and for
any object Z of E, the morphism XZ
/Y Z is also an epimorphism. Any topos E
satisfying AC also satisﬁes IAC, but the converse is false. It was shown that any
topos E satisfying IAC is necessarily Boolean.
Given the foregoing deﬁnition of an elementary topos, it is natural to deﬁne a
morphism of toposes as a functor preserving all the speciﬁed structure. Lawvere
and Tierney called these morphisms logical morphisms. More speciﬁcally, a functor
T : E
/ E′ which preserves, up to isomorphism, all ﬁnite limits, the subobject
classiﬁer and the exponential is a logical morphism. Such morphisms preserve the
logical structure of a topos “on the nose”.
However, Lawvere and Tierney considered and used primarily a diﬀerent class
of morphisms between toposes, those coming from the geometric side of toposes
and already deﬁned and heavily used by the Grothendieck school. The deﬁnition,
directly lifted from sheaf theory, goes thusly: a geometric morphism f : F
/ E
between toposes is a pair of functors f ∗: E
/ F and f∗: F
/ E such that
f ∗⊣f∗and f ∗is left exact, that is it preserves all ﬁnite limits. The functor
f ∗: E
/ F is called the inverse image part of the geometric morphism and the
functor f∗: F
/ E is called the direct image part of the geometric morphism.
Lawvere and Tierney then claimed that any geometric morphism f : F
/ E
between toposes can be factored into

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
723
F
E′
f ′
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
F
E
f
/ E
E′
?
f ′′

where f ′ and f ′′ are geometric morphisms such that f ′′
∗is full and faithful
while f ′∗reﬂects isomorphisms. Lawvere and Tierney observed that the geometric
morphism f ′′ is entirely determined by a single morphism j : Ω
/ Ωin E. This
morphism, in turn, determines what Lawvere and Tierney called a Grothendieck
topology, now also known as a Lawvere-Tierney topology. The formal deﬁnition is
as follows.
DEFINITION
Let E be a topos and Ωbe its subobject classiﬁer. A Lawvere-Tierney topology on
E is a morphism j : Ω
/ Ωin E satisfying the following three properties:
(i)
j ◦⊤= ⊤;
(ii) j ◦j = j;
(iii) j ◦∧= ∧◦(j × j).
This deﬁnition was central to Lawvere and Tierney since it allowed them to
make the connection to sheaf theory and Grothendieck toposes and, thus, putting
the geometry at the forefront of the theory. For, one would not be able to see from
the axioms of a topos alone that they have this essentially geometric character. (In
the same way, perhaps, that one would not be able to see the geometric content of
Lie groups from their axioms alone.) After all, the properties stated in the axioms
are very much set-like or logical: taking products and ﬁnite limits in general,
having the possibility to classify subobjects and forming function spaces (or power
sets, depending on the choice of axioms). The deﬁnition of a Lawvere–Tierney
topology does not look geometrical either. Since the subobject classiﬁer Ωcan
be thought of as an object of truth-values, the morphism j can be viewed in a
loose sense as a modal operator. However, the main examples of such topologies
are given by sheaves of sets over a site, the latter being a category equipped
with a Grothendieck topology which, in turn, is a categorical generalization of
the notion of topology. It is precisely this connection between logic and algebraic
geometry that Lawvere and Tierney were trying to capture: to give an elementary
characterization of toposes in terms of adjoint functors that would allow them
to recover Grothendieck’s toposes. But not all examples of such topologies are
geometrical in that sense. A more logical example is the double negation topology:
as we have mentioned, any topos E has a negation operator Ω
¬−→Ωand it is easy
to verify that the double negation Ω
¬◦¬
−−−→Ωis a Lawvere-Tierney topology.

724
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Before we give the deﬁnition of a j-sheaf, recall that a sheaf is, informally, a
tool that allows one to look at a concept of local character from a global point of
view. In other words, an object is a sheaf if it is possible to extend a local notion
to the whole space in which it is deﬁned.
The formal connection with sheaves comes in two steps. First, the morphism j
determines a closure operator on the subobjects of each object X of E. Given a
subobject A
/ X, its j-closure ¯A is given by the following pullback:
X
Ω
j◦φA
/
¯A
X

¯A
1/ 1
Ω
⊤

It can be shown that j is a Lawvere–Tierney topology if and only if the closure
operator A 7→¯A has the following properties for all subobjects A, B of X : A∧¯A =
A, ¯¯A = ¯A, A ∧B = A ∧B.
Second, the closure operator allows us to characterize ‘concepts of a local char-
acter’ as follows. Given a monomorphism i : A
/ X, we say that i is a dense
monomorphism if ¯A = X. Whenever such a dense monomorphism exists, the sub-
object A is said to be dense in X. A dense subobject represents a concept of local
character. A j-sheaf is an object F of E such that any representation of a concept
of local character in it can be extended to the whole space in which the concept
lies. Formally, we say that an object F of E is a j-sheaf (for the Lawvere–Tierney
topology) if for every dense monomorphism i : A
/ X in E and every morphism
f : A
/ F, there is a unique morphism g : X
/ F making the following diagram
commute:
A
X
i
/
A
F
f
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
X
F
g

The full subcategory ShjE of j-sheaves of E can be shown to be a topos. As
Lawvere and Tierney have indicated, every Grothendieck topos arises in this way.
Moreover, there is a geometric morphism ShjE
/ E.
At that point, Lawvere indicates in his paper how Cohen’s proof of the inde-
pendence of the continuum hypothesis from the axioms of ZF could be translated
into the language of topos theory. It was left to Tierney to present the full proof
of this translation in 1972. (See [Tierney, 1972].)
This was the ﬁrst public and printed presentation of elementary topos theory.
The study and presentation of elementary toposes were taken up quickly afterwards

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
725
by various mathematicians: Peter Freyd, Jean B´enabou, Gavin Wraith, Anders
Kock, Andr´e Joyal, Chris Mikkelsen.
It is interesting to see what the ﬁrst volume published in 1972 and dedicated
to toposes, algebraic geometry and logic contains. (See [Lawvere, 1972].) Apart
from Lawvere’s introduction, which goes over the basic deﬁnition and concepts
we have mentioned and Tierney’s paper on the independence of the continuum
hypothesis in the topos theoretical framework, there is nothing about the inter-
actions between toposes, algebraic geometry and logic! The remaining papers are
in order of appearance: Giraud on the classifying topos (not in the logical sense
of that expression), Lambek on deductive systems and categories, Goodman and
Myhill on a formalization of Bishop’s constructive mathematics, Scott’s paper on
continuous lattices, Bucur on the applications of formalism of duality in algebraic
geometry and Illusie on cotangent complex and deformations of torsors and group
schemes. All these papers touch on issues that are clearly relevant and will even
become important in their own right, e.g. classifying toposes or domain theory,
but they do not constitute direct contributions to the subject at hand. This was
about to change rapidly.
4
FOCUSING ON FIRST-ORDER LOGIC
Part I of this volume consists of three of the ﬁrst papers on functorial
model theory, developing concretely the approach to algebraic logic
according to which a “theory” (understood in a sense invariant with
respect to various “presentations” by means of particular atomic for-
mulas and particular axioms) is actually a category T having certain
properties P and a model of T is any set-valued P-preserving functor.
As a rough general principle, one could choose for P any collection of
categorical properties which the category of sets satisﬁes, the choice
determining the “doctrine” of theories of kind P, which is thus a (non-
full) subcategory of the category of small categories. For example, the
doctrine of universal algebra thus springs from the fact that the cat-
egory of sets has the property P of having ﬁnite Cartesian products,
while the doctrine of higher-order logic springs from the property of
being a topos. [Lawvere, 1975a, 3].
Lawvere had emphasized right from the start the idea of replacing the cate-
gory of sets by an arbitrary topos to develop mathematics, in particular analysis.
The ﬁrst publication on the application of topos theoretical methods to analy-
sis appeared in 1974, but the ideas had been presented already in 1972.
(See
[Kock and Mikkelsen, 1974].) At the same time, there was a lot of work to do.
Very quickly, presentations of topos theory became available. (See [Freyd, 1972;
Kock and Wraith, 1971; Wraith, 1975] (presented in 1973)].) Since the axioms of
topos theory are very much set-like, early works were concerned with clarifying
the relationships between toposes and set theory. Of course, in this case, it is

726
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
necessary to add axioms to the theory, e.g. an axiom of inﬁnity and an axiom
to guarantee that the toposes considered were Boolean. Thus, J. C. Cole and W.
Mitchell both explored categories of sets and models of set theory independently
and about the same time (see [Cole, 1973], in fact his PhD thesis defended at the
University of Sussex in 1971; [Mitchell, 1972] (also presented in 1971)) and Osius
followed closely. (Osius presented his results in 1973; they were published in 1974
and 1975.) As we will see, Mitchell introduced a method that had a direct impact
on the development of categorical logic. Around the same time, Marta Bunge gave
a topos theoretical proof of the independence of Souslin hypothesis in set theory
and Kock, Lecouturier and Mikkelsen investigated the concepts of ﬁniteness in
toposes. (See [Bunge, 1974] and [Kock et al., 1975].)
As far as logic, and in particular ﬁrst-order logic, is concerned, the development
of its history is extremely diﬃcult to document accurately. When Gray wrote his
history of sheaf theory, he already lamented on the situation:
Perhaps the main aspect which is diﬃcult to document in published
works is the connection with logic. The best sources are Lawvere [1975]
and [1976], together with Reyes [1974; 1975], and [1976], Lambek [un-
published when Gray wrote] and Makkai and Reyes [1976] and [1977],
and also the articles in this volume. Unfortunately one of the most
inﬂuential ﬁgures in this development, A. Joyal, has thus far not given
us a written record of his work; however see [Labelle, 1971]. Besides
topics discussed at the present meeting, future developments seem to
be going in the directions of B´enabou [1975] . . . , and recent unpub-
lished work of Cole and Tierney on pseudolimits in the category of
topoi. [Gray, 1979, 63].
This was presented in 1977 and published in 1979! When one consults the biblio-
graphical sources mentioned in this paragrah, one discovers how poor and inacces-
sible these sources are in general. Lawvere’s papers are important in themselves
and do refer to Joyal, B´enabou, Reyes and others, but they do not allow one
to reconstruct precisely who did what when and while [Reyes, 1974] and [Reyes,
1977] were easily available, [Reyes, 1975/1976] was not. Labelle [1971] was just
as diﬃcult to obtain, although Labelle’s long exposition was inﬂuential among
students at Montreal in the early seventies. B´enabou’s paper was about ﬁbered
categories and, although relevant, could certainly not constitute an introduction
to, or a survey of, his work in the area. Makkai and Reyes papers published in
1976 already build up on previous material, only sketch proofs and they certainly
do not constitute and entry point to the ﬁeld. The fact is, two of the main actors,
namely Jean B´enabou in Paris and Andr´e Joyal in Montr´eal, never even wanted
to publish their results. It seems that they simply did not believe in publishing at
that time. Recall that we are in the late sixties and early seventies and events like
Mai 68 in Paris and the Crise d’octobre in 1970 in Qu´ebec were still very much
in the air. B´enabou and Joyal did present their results during colloquia, seminars
and at informal gatherings and thus people learned and knew what they had done,

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
727
but the details of these contributions and the manner in which they were done are
not available. What we do have is a list of talks given by B´enabou and Joyal
during this period, collected from various bibliographical sources, mostly theses
written during that period. First, here is the list of talks given by B´enabou and
his students.
B´enabou and
Celeyrette
G´en´eralit´es sur les topos de Law-
vere et Tierney
Paris
1971
B´enabou
Structures syntaxiques
Montreal
April 1973
Cat´egories et logiques faibles
Oberwolfach
April 1973
Michel Coste
Logique du premier ordre dans les
topos ´el´ementaires
Paris
1973
Logique d’ordre sup´erieur dans les
topos ´el´ementaires
Paris
November
1973
Here is the list of Joyal’s talks:
Joyal
Dogmes Bool´eens
Montreal
4
talks,
Decem-
ber
1969,
January
1970
Topos
Montreal
24
April
1971
Topos et Logique
Montreal
5
October
and
27
October
1971
Th´eor`emes de descente ﬁnitaire;
th´eor`eme de compl´etude
Montreal
Summer
1972
Ind´ependance
de
l’hypoth`ese
du
continu
Montreal
7 November
1972
Une
m´ethode
uniforme
pour
d´emontrer les th´eor`emes de G¨odel,
Kripke, Freyd, Mitchell, Barr
Montreal
14
Novem-
ber 1972
Homotopie
dans
les
topos
(le
th´eor`eme de Giraud)
Montreal
28
Novem-
ber 1972
Qu’est-ce
qu’une
th´eorie
´equationnelle g´en´erale?
Montreal
January
1973
Mod`ele
universel
d’une
th´eorie
´equationnelle g´en´erale
Montreal
January
1973

728
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Th´eorie cat´egorique des fonctions
r´ecursives
Montreal
February
1973
Forcing=Interpr´etation
dans
un
Topos (I et II)
Montreal
23 February
and 2 March
1973
Univers r´ecursifs
Montreal
March 1973
Th´eorie formelle des topos et lan-
gage d’ordre sup´erieur
Montreal
2 April 1974
Alg`ebre constructive
Montreal
15
Novem-
ber 1974
Alg`ebre constructive et th´eorie des
faisceaux
Montreal
2 December
and
9
De-
cember 1974
Th´eor`eme de Chevalley-Tarski
Montreal
10 July 1975
The lists are not complete. Notice that these talks, except for the ﬁrst one in
Joyal’s list, were given after the introduction of elementary topos theory. There
was work done before, as we will see.
Some of this work, for instance Joyal’s
recursive universes (also called ‘arithmetic universes’), have simply vanished for
a long period of time (they are now coming back in circulation). They are men-
tioned en passant in some of Lawvere’s papers, but there is no available systematic
exposition of what they were and how they were developed.
There was a particularly important period in April 1973. Lawvere was in Mon-
treal for that month, away from Perugia.
Dana Schlomiuk had invited many
category theorists for a month during which there were many seminars and dis-
cussions. It was an intense informal gathering and not an organized, planned and
disciplined meeting. Another decisive event for the dissemination of categorical
logic was the meeting of the summer of 1974, called S´eminaire de math´ematiques
sup´erieures, organized by Shuichi Takahashi. During this meeting, Andr´e Joyal
gave a series of talks on all the topics mentioned above, Gonzalo Reyes gave a
series of talks on what was to become his collaborative book with Mihaly Makkai,
Jean B´enabou gave a series of talks on ﬁbered categories. Freyd presented tau-
categories, what were to become allegories much later. (See [Freyd and Scedrov,
1990].) Eilenberg started a “bilingual’ talk: one sentence in french, one sentence
in english and alternating between the languages until the audience pleaded him
to stick to one language. Also in the audience, a contingent of Italians coming
with Lawvere: Meloni, Carboni, Riccioli (Feit). As far as we know, there is no
oﬃcial record of that meeting either.
The ﬁrst published results appeared in 1973, although the work was done in
1970: one of Lawvere’s student, Hugo Volger, presented a categorical version of
a ﬁrst-order logic and of the completeness theorem by following the leads given
earlier by Lawvere himself, e.g.
[Lawvere, 1966; Lawvere, 1967]; also in 1971,

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
729
Orville Keane, in his PhD thesis (under Freyd’s supervision at the University of
Pennsylvania), gave a categorical characterization of universal Horn theories. (See
[Keane, 1975].)
4.1
Volger’s work
It is instructive to look more closely at Volger’s work, for although he obtained
signiﬁcant results, the community did not adopt them. Many category theorists
felt that the notions deﬁned were not the “right” notions, mostly because his
results were not easily generalizable to non-Boolean cases. Volger modiﬁed the
deﬁnitions given in the ﬁrst paper “because my friends in Aarhus insisted that the
construction should work in this [e.g. non-Boolean] more general case” [Volger,
1975b, 87]. Alas for Volger, the modiﬁed deﬁnitions suﬀered the same fate as the
original ones.
In his ﬁrst paper, Volger introduced three types of categories: logical categories,
elementary theories and semantical categories. Elementary theories were meant
to be the categorical encoding of ﬁrst-order theories with equality, as Lawvere had
already presented them. Logical categories were introduced to allow a generaliza-
tion to higher-order logic and, ﬁnally, semantical categories were suppose to play
the role of categories of sets, but the notion is weaker than the concept of topos.
We will restrict ourselves to the notion of logical categories, for it contains the
seeds of the demise of these notions and even of Volger’s subsequent attempt to
rescue them.
Volger’s deﬁnition is based on Lawvere’s notion of an elementary theory. How-
ever, Volger added two further conditions, for his “proof of the completeness the-
orem requires the addition of two new conditions to the original deﬁnition of
elementary theories.” [Volger, 1975a, 52]. A category C is said to be logical if it
satisﬁes the following conditions:
i.
C has ﬁnite products (in particular a terminal object 1);
ii. C has an object Ωwhich is a Boolean algebra with mappings 1
⊤
−→
−→
⊥
Ω;
iii. For every f : X
/Y in C, there is a functor ∃f : HomC(X, Ω)
/HomC(Y, Ω),
left adjoint to the functor Hom(f, Ω) : Hom(Y, Ω)
/ Hom(X, Ω);
iv. Given the following pullback
Y
X × Y
∆Y
/
X
Y
f

X
X × Y
(X,f) / X × Y
X × Y
f×Y


730
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
then we have that ∃(X,f) [1Y f] = ∃∆Y [1Y ] (f × Y ), where 1Y = ⊤◦!Y and
given the other pullback
X × Y
Y
πY
/
X × Z
X × Y
1X×g

X × Z
Z
πZ
/ Z
Y
g

then we have that ∃πY [ϕ] g = ∃πZ [ϕ (X × g)].
v.
a) Let eY = ∃∆Y [1Y ] denote the equality on Y. If eY (f1, f2) = 1X, then
f1 = f2;
b) eΩ=⇔, where ⇔denotes the bi-implication.
This is Volger’s working deﬁnition, for all the results in his paper are for logical
categories. Notice that the distinguished object A, what was meant to become the
universe of interpretation, has now disappeared. The only distinguished object left
is the Boolean algebra Ω. Notice that the category S of sets is a logical category
but that an arbitrary topos E is not (which is somewhat disappointing given the
inherent logical structure of an arbitrary topos). A functor F : C
/ D between
logical categories is said to be logical if it preserves ﬁnite products, the Boolean
algebra object Ωtogether with 0, 1, ¬, ∧and quantiﬁcation. A Set-model of a
logical category C is a logical functor M : C
/ Set and a natural transformation
α : M
/ N between two Set-models is called a C-embedding.
However, Volger also gives a slightly modiﬁed deﬁnition of elementary theories.
An elementary theory T is a category such that
i)
T has two basic objects A and Ωsuch that every object X diﬀerent from Ω
has a speciﬁed representation as a ﬁnite power An of A, and HomT(Ω, X) is
empty.
ii) HomT(An, Ω) is a Boolean algebra for every object An and HomT(f, Ω) is a
Boolean homomorphism for every f : An
/ Am.
iii) For every f : An
/ Am in T, there exists an existential quantiﬁer ∃f which
satisﬁes the conditions iii), iv) and v) of the deﬁnition of a logical category.
Although all the results are given for logical categories, Volger remarks that all
the proofs given still hold, provided that appropriate but slight modiﬁcations are
made.
The most important result, naturally, is the completeness theorem for
logical categories, formulated as follows:
THEOREM.
Let C be a small logical category such that ⊥X ̸= ⊤X and ∃!X [⊤X] = ⊤for every
object X of C.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
731
1. For every pair of morphisms f, g : X
/ Y there exists a Set-model M such
that M(f) ̸= M(g)
2. There exists a Set-model M such that card(M(X)) ≤card(C) for every object
X of C.
The proof is a categorical adaptation of Henkin’s completeness proof to a cat-
egorical framework along the lines indicated by Lawvere in his second abstract.
The basic idea is to construct an extension I : C
/ C′ for the given logical cate-
gory C for which HomC′(1, −) : C′
/ Set has a model, in fact a canonical model.
One obtains the required model by composition. It is shown that a logical cat-
egory C has a canonical model if and only if 1) it is maximally consistent, that
is HomC(1, Ω) = {0, 1} and 2) it is rich, that is for every ϕ : X
/ Ωsuch that
∃!X [ϕ] = ⊤, there exists k : 1
/ X with ϕ ◦k = ⊤.
As we have mentioned, Volger’s proposal, although technically irreproachable,
was not received favorably.
The main problem was that it was too contrived,
perhaps too ad hoc. While Volger was following Lawvere’s path and suggestions,
Andr´e Joyal together with Gonzalo Reyes were looking at categorical logic from a
slightly diﬀerent perspective.
4.2
The Montreal school
Category theory had a distinctive status in Montreal in the late sixties and early
seventies.
Joachim Lambek, who graduated from McGill under Zassenhaus in
1950, was already a distinguished algebraist at McGill in the sixties. He had spent
his 1965–66 sabbatical year in Zurich at the ETH, where Beno Eckmann had asked
him to give a graduate seminar in category theory, a subject that he was learning
at the time. In his audience, he found Fritz Ulmer, John Beck, John Gray and
Bill Lawvere. Also showing up were Eckmann himself, Peter Hilton, Pierre Andr´e
and Paul Bernays.
His seminar led to his Springer Lecture Notes Completion
of Categories published in 1966.
It is also during period that Lambek wrote
his ﬁrst paper on category theory, a generalization of Tarski’s ﬁxpoint theorem to
categories. (See [Lambek, 1968b].) Before coming back to McGill, he invited one of
the post-doctoral students at the ETH, Marta Bunge, who came in the fall of 1966
and was soon to join faculty. She had oﬃcially worked under Freyd’s supervision
but she had in fact been supervised both by Freyd and Lawvere and done category
theory right from the start. Michael Barr, who started as an homological algebraist
under the supervision of David Harrison at the University of Pennsylvania, had
spent two years at Columbia as a post-doctoral fellow where he met Eilenberg
before moving to Urbana where he found John Beck, John Gray, Alex Heller and
Max Kelly and then spent the fall of 1967 in Zurich with Eckmann. He joined the
McGill faculty in the fall of 1968. The logician Mih`aly Makkai, who contributed
rapidly to the development of categorical logic, arrived in Montreal in the fall of
1973 at the Centre de recherches math´ematiques of the Universit´e de Montr´eal and
joined the McGill mathematics faculty in the fall of 1974.

732
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
At the Universit´e de Montr´eal, one ﬁnds an unusual, interesting and perhaps
unique combination of algebraic logic and category theory that might explain
in part why Lawvere’s ideas quickly found a good reception.
Maurice Labb´e,
a student of Church from Princeton in the early ﬁfties, acted as chair of the
department during most of the sixties.
Another student from Princeton, also
supervised by Church and who graduated in 1959, Aubert Daigneault, took interest
in Lawvere’s approach right from the beginning. L´eon LeBlanc, who graduated in
1960 from Chicago under Halmos’ supervision in algebraic logic, was there in the
early sixties until his untimely death in 1968. Thus, in the sixties, Daigneault and
Leblanc were active in algebraic logic. Gonzalo Reyes, after completing his thesis in
model theory at Berkeley under Craig’s supervision, was hired by the Universit´e de
Montr´eal in 1967, in replacement of L´eon Leblanc. In the late sixties, there was also
an important number of category theorists. Jean Maranda, who graduated from
McGill in 1953 under Zassenhaus, was closely following developments in category
theory and had published some papers on the subject in the sixties, but died
in 1971. (See [Maranda, 1962; Maranda, 1965; Maranda, 1966].) Two students
who had written Ph.D. theses on category theory under Lambek’s supervision
were also hired in the sixties: ﬁrst, Pierre Berthiaume in 1964 and then Dana
Schlomiuk in 1967. When Reyes arrived, Andr´e Joyal was a graduate student at
the same institution. Joyal arrived in 1963 as an undergraduate student and did his
masters between 1967 and 1969, under Q.I. Rahman’s supervision. Joyal joined the
mathematics faculty of the Universit´e du Qu´ebec `a Montr´eal (UQAM) in 1970.
Also important for his inﬂuence on colleagues was Shuichi Takahashi who was
interested in category theory, topos theory and logic, among other things, already
in the sixties. (See, for instance [Takahashi, 1965; Takahashi, 1969; Takahashi,
1974].) There were also a number of post-doctoral students, for instance Michel
Jean who had also graduated from Berkeley under Henkin and Craig’s supervision
and Diana Dubrovsky, a student of Yiannis Moschovakis coming from UCLA,
participating in the seminars.
There was an intense activity in Montreal in the seventies. McGill University,
the Universit´e de Montr´eal and the Universit´e du Qu´ebec `a Montr´eal, had their
own seminars in category theory and there was also a Montreal Category The-
ory research seminar held at that time during weekends. Freyd, Lawvere, Beck,
Tierney and, sometimes, even Eilenberg would show up at the latter seminar.
Often, when no one was ready to speak, Joyal would go to the blackboard and
present new ideas, new results and new theories. Although a student of Adrian
Mathias at Cambridge, Robert Seely spent the year 1974–1975 in Montr´eal and
interacted with Joyal, Reyes, Makkai, Lambek and their students. He came back
to Montr´eal in 1977. Philip Scott, who had written his thesis under the supervi-
sion of Denis Higgs at the University of Waterloo, came to McGill in the fall of
1976 as a post-doctoral student. Reﬂecting all this activity, eight theses, Master’s
and PhDs, were written on categorical logic between 1973 and 1977 at the Uni-
versit´e de Montr´eal. Thus, categorical logic was a very active ﬁeld in Montreal
from the early seventies until about 1977, the year of the publication of Makkai

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
733
and Reyes book on categorical logic and of the Durham meeting on applications
of sheaves. Afterwards, for reasons that are not entirely clear, there are very few
theses submitted in categorical logic. Andr´e Joyal concentrated his eﬀorts on the
conceptual foundations of combinatorics, leading to his beautiful and inﬂuential
work on species of structures. (See [Joyal, 1981].) Gonzalo Reyes, in collaboration
with Anders Kock, started to work actively in synthetic diﬀerential geometry. (See,
for instance, [Kock and Reyes, 1979].) Logic moved from the French speaking part
of Montreal to the English speaking universities, mainly McGill University where
Makkai, Lambek, Scott and Seely continued to do original and important work.
(Scott left for Ottawa in 1982.) Reyes came back to logic in the late eighties and
nineties in collaboration with the psychologist John Macnamara and Joyal also
returned to foundational issues in the nineties, mainly in collaboration with Ieke
Moerdijk [Macnamara and Reyes, 1994]; [Joyal and Moerdijk, 1997]. However, in
contrast with the situation that prevailed in the seventies, few graduate students
followed.
The inﬂuence of Grothendieck’s work on logical research done during the seven-
ties has to be underlined, and this, for two completely diﬀerent reasons. The ﬁrst
reason is purely conceptual: many of the logical concepts developed were aimed
at ﬁnding a purely logical translation of concepts of algebraic geometry. Thus, for
instance, we read in the introduction of Makkai and Reyes:
Finally, our treatment of categorical logic is geared towards establish-
ing a link with Grothendieck’s theory of (Grothendieck) topoi as it is
exposed in SGA4. One of our main points is that some of the fun-
damental properties of notions in this theory (notably the notions of
topos, coherence of, and in, topoi and pretopos) are purely logical. . . .
It is a very interesting fact that notions originally developed for the
purposes of (abstract) algebraic geometry turn out to be intimately
related to logic and model theory. Compared to other existing ver-
sions of algebraic logic, categorical logic has the distinction of being
concerned with objects that appear in mathematical practice. [Makkai
and Reyes, 1977, 3].
Thus, Grothendieck’s work was seen as central to development of algebraic geom-
etry (and coincidentally to homological algebra, sheaf theory and category theory
itself) and was part of the development of mathematics. Key notions of categor-
ical logic were directly related to these developments, in fact they were seen as a
conceptual clariﬁcation of some of it, e.g. coherent topos or the notion of a site,
and thus justiﬁed almost as such.
The second reason is sociological but just as important: while category the-
orists were developing topos theory and categorical logic with toposes in mind,
in France, Grothendieck had quit the mathematical scene altogether in 1970 and
his successors were in fact playing down the importance of some of his mathe-
matical ideas, in particular the concept of (Grothendieck) topos. Whereas the
notion of schemes, Grothendieck’s analysis of the foundations of algebraic geome-

734
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
try, slowly but surely came to constitute the bedrock of algebraic geometry — as
witnessed by [Shafarevich, 1974; Hartshorne, 1977] and more recently [Eisenbud
and Harris, 2000] —, toposes were more or less banished from the mathematical
establishment, even from algebraic geometry. Indeed, they are not even deﬁned in
Shafarevich and Hartshorne. Thus, although categorical logic was directly linked
to important ideas of Grothendieck’s program, it was not linked to the ideas that
the mathematical community was judging as being central. Hence, in a sense, the
attempt to build bridges between logic and algebraic geometry did not bear its
fruits, although mostly it seems, for sociological reasons.
4.3
The background
Let us come back to the late sixites and early seventies. Among Joyal’s multiple
interests in late sixties was Algebraic Geometry that he was studying by himself in
the formidable treatise EGA, ´El´ements de g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique, of Grothendieck
and Dieudonn´e and SGA, S´eminaire de G´eom´etrique Alg´ebrique, in particular
SGA4 on topos theory, which was held in 1963/64 and circulated in limited form
before its publication by Springer in the Lecture Notes. Sheaf theory and more
generally category theory were omnipresent in these treatises. Reyes learned cate-
gory theory including early work of Lawvere (along with some algebraic geometry)
from Joyal, who in turn learned model theory `a la Berkeley, in particular some
of the results and ideas included in his PhD thesis, from Reyes. There are some
indirect indications of the work done in 1969 and 1970, before the introduction of
the notion of elementary topos hit the community.
We have already indicated that in 1968, Aubert Daigneault had started to look
for relationships between Lawvere’s elementary theories and polyadic and cylindric
algebras. He considered both approaches in a categorical framework and proved
some equivalences the category of elementary theories and the category of polyadic
algebras. As far as we know, Daigneault’s paper is the only published paper whose
purpose is to investigate properties of Lawvere’s elementary theories. Daigneault’s
motivation, in this paper, was explicitly “to call attention to Lawvere’s important
contribution to Algebraic Logic” [Daigneault, 1969/1970, 307]. Thus, Lawvere’s
contribution is ackowledged as being a contribution to algebraic logic. It is worth
mentioning that Volger refers explicitly to Daigneault’s paper in the introduction
of his article on logical categories. In fact, Daigneault’s proof of the equivalence
between elemetary theories and polyadic algebras is taken by Volger as evidence
in favor of the algebraic character of Lawvere’s work.
This concept of an elementary theory may also be viewed as an al-
gebraization of ﬁrst-order logic by categorical means in the following
sense. The elementary theory and the structure preserving functors
between them correspond to polyadic algebras and homomorphisms
between them. . . . The connections between elementary theories and
polyadic algebras have been studied by Daigneault. . . . [Volger, 1975a,
51–52].

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
735
Daigneault uses Lawevere’s second characterization of elementary theories to con-
struct the relevant categories and the equivalence between them. Recall that in
Lawvere’s analysis, Boolean algebras play a key role and the existential quantiﬁer
is part of the data. Daigneault reformulates Lawvere’s completeness theorem (and
uses it) as follows:
THEOREM.
For any elementary theory T and ϕ : 1
/B, where B is the distinguished Boolean
algebra (Volger’s Ω) in T such that ϕ ̸= ⊥, there exists a model M of T such that
M(ϕ) = ⊤.
Daigneault also gives the representation theorem for polyadic algebras. Let X
be a non-empty set and I a denumerably inﬁnite set (taken to represent individual
variables). Then it is noted that the Boolean algebras of all functions XI
/ 2 is
a polyadic algebra CX. The representation theorem is then:
Theorem: For any polyadic algebra P and any q ∈P such that q ̸= 0 (the small-
est element of P), there exists a non empty set X and a 2-valued representation
f : P
/ CX such that f(q) = 1.
Although Daigneault uses Lawvere’s theorem in his paper, he points out that
Lawvere’s completeness theorem could be reduced to the representation theorem
for polyadic algebras and ultimately to the ordinary completeness theorem for
polyadic algebras. Thus, already in 1968, one can see the connections between the
various theorems, a theme that will become central in the early 1970’s.
A second paper of Daigneault deserves to be looked at carefully, for it contains
a key component of what is about to come. It is his paper entitled Injective En-
velopes [1969], published in the American Mathematical Monthly. In this paper,
Daigneault gives conditions that are suﬃcient to ensure the existence of injective
envelopes in a category. The existence of enough injectives played a key role in the
development of Abelian categories ten years earlier. In his paper, Daigneault gives
a list of six equivalent conditions on a category C that are suﬃcient in order that,
for any object of C, there exists an injective essential extension. The ﬁrst of these
conditions is that for each morphism f : X
/ Y , there exists an epi-mono factor-
ization, i.e. there is an epimorphism g : X
/Z and a monomorphism h : Z
/Y
such that f = h ◦g. This condition is satisﬁed by any Abelian category. But it
is satisﬁed in some non-additive categories as well. In particular, Daigneault con-
siders the category of Boolean algebras with unit preserving homomorphism and
shows that it satisﬁes the given conditions. (It should be mentioned at this point
that the Stone duality theorem, and thus the category Stone of Stone spaces, is
used to prove that surjective homomorphisms are indeed epimorphisms.) It is also
shown that the injectives are precisely the complete Boolean algebras. Although
Daigneault’s paper makes no connection with Lawvere’s elementary theories nor
to polyadic algebras, it is known that the concept of an extension of a map played
a role in the latter. The proof that complete Boolean algebras are injectives is
attributed to Vincent Papillon, Reyes’ ﬁrst graduate student.
Vincent Papillon Master’s thesis [1969] is entitled Quelques aspects de l’enveloppe

736
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
injective d’une alg`ebre de Boole. The ﬁrst chapter of the thesis starts oﬀby pre-
senting the results of the foregoing paper. In the remaining two chapters of the
thesis, Papillon gives two diﬀerent constructions of the injective envelope of a
Boolean algebra: one follows Reyes’s alternative deﬁnition of a complete ring of
quotients of a ring A and the other follows Joyal’s suggestion of using the Stone
space associated to the Boolean algebra A. The thesis was submitted in April
1969.
We mention Daigneault’s work and Papillon’s thesis for two reasons.
First,
it shows that certain categories, which were not necessarily Abelian, satisfying
certain simple exactness conditions like the existence of images, had interesting
consequences, e.g. the existence of injective envelopes. Furthermore, the conditions
revealed here are directly linked to the category of Boolean algebras, certainly
relevant for classical propositional logic. Indeed, if one were to start with classical
propositional theories, construct their Lindenbaum–Tarski algebras and consider
the resulting category of such algebras, one would obtain a category satisfying these
exactness conditions. Second, as Papillon’s thesis shows clearly, Joyal and Reyes
were probably aware of Lawvere’s elementary theories and they were immersed in
category theory, Boolean algebras and Stone spaces.
Indeed, in August of 1969, the Notices of the American Mathematical Society re-
ceived an abstract from Joyal entitled Boolean algebras as functors. A γ-complete
Boolan algebra, for γ an inﬁnite regular cardinal, is a Booleal algebra closed un-
der sups of power less than γ. A γ-ﬁeld is a Boolean algebra isomorphic to a
γ-complete ﬁeld of sets. A γ-representable Boolean algebra, is a Boolean algebra
isomorphic to a quotient of a γ-ﬁeld by a γ-ideal. Let Setγ denote the full sub-
category of the category Set of sets, generated by sets of power less than γ. The
functor category SetSetγ where the functors Setγ
/ Set commute with limits is
equivalent to the category of γ-ﬁelds with γ-isomorphisms. When limits are re-
stricted to diagrams of power less than γ, then there is an equivalence between
the functor category SetSetγ and the category of γ-representable Boolean algebras
(and γ-homomorphisms). Joyal obtains a similar equivalence between the category
of complete Boolean algebras with a functor category SetSetγ, thus showing that
Boolean algebras can be described as functors. A particular case of this result is
attributed to Lawvere. What is interesting here is the kind of result Joyal is after:
to be able to represent certain fundamental mathematical concepts as functors.
As we have seen in the foregoing sections, this was very much in the spirit of
Lawvere’s work.
Approximately one year later, on November 4 1970, the same Notices receive
ﬁve abstracts from Joyal. Three of them are put in the section of algebra and two
of them are placed in the section on logic and foundations. The ﬁrst three are enti-
tled Spectral Spaces and Distributive Lattices, Spectral Spaces II and Cohomology
of Spectral Spaces respectively. They are directly related to Grothendieck’s work
in algebraic geometry, in particular to results about schemes and sheaves. The
two abstracts on logic and foundations are entitled Polyadic Spaces and Elemen-
tary Theories and Functors which preserve elementary operations. Thus, Joyal

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
737
indeed knew about Lawvere’s elementary theories from early on and was pursuing
their study. Despite the fact that they were inserted in diﬀerent sections by the
editors of the Notices and that their titles suggest that they are about diﬀerent
topics altogether, they are in fact related to one another, illustrating how, already
before the advent of elementary toposes, Joyal was connecting algebraic geometry
and logic together. Furthermore, it is clear that Joyal’s earlier work on Boolean
algebras and Stone spaces played a role in his subsequent work.
Let us start with the two abstracts on logic and foundations. The ﬁrst abstract
is about polyadic spaces, not algebras, and elementary theories. Let Set0 be the
category of ﬁnite sets. A polyadic space is a functor E : Setop
0
/ Stone, where
Stone is the category of Stone spaces and continuous maps such that
i) For each f : n
/ m in Set0, E(f) : E(m)
/ E(n) is open and
ii) E transforms push-out squares in Set0 into quasi pull-back squares in Stone.
A morphism α : E
/ E′ of polyadic spaces is a natural transformation such that
for any f : n
/ m in Set0, the square
E′(m)
E′(n)
E′(f)
/
E(m)
E′(m)
αm

E(m)
E(n)
E(f) / E(n)
E′(n)
αn

is a quasi pull-back. (Recall, that given a category C with pullbacks, a square
X
Z
/
P
X

P
Y
/ Y
Z

if the morphism P
/ X ×Z Y is an epimorphism.)
Given a ﬁnite set X, Joyal deﬁnes a polyadic space ˜X by ˜X(n) = β(Xn), the
Stone-˘Cech compactiﬁcation of Xn, and a model of a polyadic space E(based on
X) to be a morphism e
X
/ E. He then claims that it is possible to associate
canonically a polyadic space to an elementary theory and vice-versa. No details
are given. It is asserted that under this correspondence, the two concepts of model
coincide and that classical theorems of logic are interpreted and proven. We are
not told which classical theorems of logic are interpreted and proven. Finally, and
this is an important remark, it is claimed, without any detail, that polyadic spaces
arise naturally in algebraic geometry.
The second abstract does not mention polyadic spaces. But it contains a fun-
damental result that will turn out to be central later on. Consider the category

738
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
E = SetSet with functors Set
/ Set preserving ﬁnite limits and ﬁnite (disjoint)
sums. It is claimed that these functors are precisely those preserving elementary
operations of ﬁrst-order logic. We are not told precisely what the latter operations
are, except for projection and complement. But this is not the result reported, it
is simply mentioned in the opening sentence of the abstract. The statement of the
main result requires additional data. Let U denote the category whose objects are
pairs (I, F), with F an ultraﬁlter over the set I and whose morphisms are mappings
preserving ultraﬁlters. Given two objects (I, F) and (J, G), deﬁne an equivalence
relation on morphisms (I, F)
/ (J, G) by f ≡g if and only if ∃F ∈F such that
f|F = g|F. Let UP, called the category of ultrapoints, be the quotient category
U/ ≡. The main theorem is that there is an equivalence between Eop and the
category of pro-objects of UP of ultrapoints. This is in itself an interesting duality
theorem, but Joyal points out immediately afterwards that “the straightforward
proof of this theorem can be adapted to prove a theorem of Keisler on elementary
extensions of complete structures” [Joyal, 1971d, 967]. The theorem refered to
here appeared in 1960 and states that an elementary class K is closed with re-
spect to colimits if and only if K is characterized by a set of sentences constructed
from ﬁnite conjunctions, ﬁnite disjunctions and existential quantiﬁers. We will
give a more precise statement of the theorem later. Keisler’s proof is model the-
oretical whereas Joyal’s result stated here is purely categorical. The reference to
the category of pro-objects is revealing, for the latter construction was introduced
by Grothendieck and Deligne in SGA4, thus showing that Joyal was already well
versed in Grothendieck toposes and related constructions.
This work was seen by Joyal and Reyes as being part of the search for an
algebraic approach to logic. Indeed, in his paper published in 1972, Reyes used
Joyal’s work on Boolean algebras and talks about “Joyal’s functorial approach to
algebraic logic”, which refers to the ﬁrst abstract quoted above. In the bibliography
of the same paper, Reyes announced a paper in preparation entitled “´El´ements de
logique alg´ebrique”, which never saw the day.
Let us now turn to the three abstracts in algebraic geometry. A spectral space
X is a topological space satisfying two conditions: i) the quasi-compact open
subsets of X form a base closed under ﬁnite (possibly empty) intersections; ii)
every irreducible closed subset F possesses one and only one generic point x, i.e.
{x} = F. A morphism of spectral spaces is a quasi-compact mapping. A theorem
asserting that a topological space X is a spectral space if and only if X is a limit
of ﬁnite T0-spaces is stated. The main theorem is, once more, an equivalence of
categories between the opposite of the category DLat of distributive lattices and
the category Sp of spectral spaces. Nowadays, the so-called category of coherent
locales is used instead of the category of spectral spaces to prove the duality
theorem.
(See [Johnstone, 1982, 65].)
The link to Stone’s duality theorem is
immediate. Furthermore, as Joyal mentions himself, the underlying space of a
quasi-compact quasi-separated scheme is a spectral space, making explicit once
more the connection with algebraic geometry `a la Grothendieck, this time with
EGA.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
739
The second abstract is exactly in the same vein: the main theorem asserts the
existence of a right adjoint to the inclusion functor Stone
/ Sp. Furthermore,
there is a covariant full embedding from the category of spectral spaces and the
category of ordered Stone spaces.
Finally, Joyal claims that a Stone space is
ordered if and only if it is a limit of ﬁnite partially ordered sets. (See [Johnstone,
1982, 75] for details.)
Only the last abstract is directly related to algebraic geometry: in it, Joyal
generalizes results of Grothendieck on the cohomology of quasi-compact schemes
to spectral spaces.
What these abstracts show clearly is that Joyal was juggling with three con-
ceptual realms during this period: algebraic geometry, including Grothendieck
toposes, Stone-type dualities and Lawvere’s elementary theories in the spirit of
algebraic logic. Thus, when Lawvere and Tierney introduced the concept of ele-
mentary topos, Joyal already had results that could easily be seen to be directly
related to that development. The notion of elementary topos simply provided the
general framework to develop these ideas systematically.
Joyal, but not Reyes, was present at the meeting held at Dalhousie between
January 16 and January 19, 1971. The goal of this meeting, according to Lawvere,
was to investigate
. . . the connecctions between algebraic geometry and “ intuitionistic ”
logic under the guidance of the form of objective dialectics known as
category theory. . . .
Our own hopes in the success of the above general program were
strengthened by initial progress in carrying out a more special program
which will be outlined in the introduction. This is the development on
the basis of elementary (ﬁrst-order) axioms of a theory of “ toposes ”
just good enough to be applicable not only to sheaf theory, algebraic
spaces, global spectrum, etc. as originally envisaged by Grothendieck,
Giraud, Verdier, and Hakim but also to Kripke semantics, abstract
proof theory, and the Cohen-Scott-Solovay method for obtaining inde-
pendence results in set theory. [Lawvere, 1972, 1].
According to Lawvere, seventy mathematicians participated in this meeting,
among others Jean B´enabou, Marta Bunge, Jim Lambek, William Mitchell, Dana
Schlomiuk, Dana Scott, Hugo Volger, to mention but those who are directly in-
volved in our story. In the concept of elementary topos, geometry and logic are
woven together in one structure, thus providing a natural setting for logic and
algebraic geometry.
Let us now look carefully at the characterization of ﬁrst-order logic developed
by Joyal and Reyes.

740
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
4.4
From logical theories to categories
Joyal and Reyes realized that Volger’s mistake had been to include the object Ωin
the data of a logical category. They came to the conclusion that this object does
not belong to ﬁrst-order logic, neither in its syntax nor in its semantics. The key
methodological insight was to start from a logical theory and build a category from
it. The beauty of this approach is that in this way, one introduces, simultaneously,
a hierarchy of logical theories together with a hierarchy of categories. Furthermore,
the very ﬁrst type of category thus obtained turned out to be an important type of
abstract categories that had just been introduced and developed by Michael Barr
for entirely diﬀerent purposes, namely regular categories. (See [Barr et al., 1971].)
In addition, Joyal and Reyes made connections with elementary toposes and Joyal
gave a uniform categorical treatment of the various completeness theorems. In
fact, Lawvere reported that much himself in the introduction of the volume where
Volger’s papers were published. Indeed, in the very ﬁrst page of the introduction,
we read that the “much-researched intermediate doctrine of (classical) ﬁrst-order
logic corresponds to the fact P that the category of sets has ﬁnite limits, com-
plements of subsets, and images of mappings (related by the condition of being a
“regular” category. . . ).” [Lawvere, 1975a, 3]. Volger himself acknowledges Joyal’s
work and remarks that Joyal has shown that his semantical categories are regular
categories. (See [Volger, 1975a, 82].)
Joyal and Reyes started a joint paper that was ﬁnally published under Reyes’s
name in 1974, but a preliminary version of it was already circulating in 1972.
(See [Reyes, 1974].) This is one of the very few published articles that present
Joyal’s work during that period. In the introduction, Reyes explicitly acknowledges
Joyal’s contribution. However, there is more literature that gives a portrait of the
situation: as we have already mentioned, eight theses, Master’s and PhDs, were
written at the Universit´e de Montr´eal on categorical logic between 1973 and 1977.
Here is the complete list with the authors, subject, supervisors, degree and year:
Name
Title
Supervisor
Degree and year
Jean Dionne
Des th´eories ´el´ementaires
aux
categories
con-
ceptuelles
Gonzalo
Reyes
MSc July 1973
Andr´e Boileau
Les multiples splendeurs
du forcing
Gonzalo
Reyes
MSc
December
1973
Christiane
Rousseau
Triples,
localization
et
topos
Pierre
Berthiaume
MSc July 1974
Roch Ouellet
Axiomatization
de
la
logique interne du premier
ordre des topos, version
inclusive et multisorte
Aubert
Daigneault
PhD
August
1974

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
741
Name
Title
Supervisor
Degree and year
Monique
Robitaille-
Gigu`ere
Mod`eles d’une cat´egorie
logique
dans
des
topos
de
pr´efaisceaux
et
d’ensembles
de
Heyt-
ing
Gonzalo
Reyes
MSc
January
1975
Wedad
Anto-
nius
Th´eories
coh´erentes
et
pr´etopos
Gonzalo
Reyes
MSc June 1975
Andr´e Boileau
Types versus Topos
Gonzalo
Reyes
PhD July 1976
Christiane
Rousseau
Th´eorie des topos et anal-
yse complexe
Dana
Schlomiuk
PhD April 1977
We assume that the work presented in Dionne, Ouellet, Robitaille-Gigu`ere,
Antonius and Boileau’s Ph.D. thesis roughly reﬂects the chronological development
and assimilation of the work done by Joyal and Reyes, although with a time shift.
Also relevant are Reyes’ later publications in 1977 and 1978 as well as Makkai and
Reyes’s papers published in 1976 which builds on the work done by Reyes and
Joyal. Boileau’s thesis is particularly interesting since it gives a general portrait
of the work done in categorical logic at the time. Indeed, he refers to almost all
the results presented in the theses by his colleagues.
Joyal and Reyes’s strategy was to start with a ﬁrst-order theory T, construct a
small category CT from it and then characterize in an abstract manner the type
of category thus obtained. One of the goals was then to work with categorical
methods to obtain signiﬁcant results about the theory T or the underlying logic.
There was an additional philosophical motivation. The very ﬁrst formal step in
the construction is to identify formulas of a theory T in a given language relative
to their logical strength. More speciﬁcally, given a language L and a theory T in
L, one deﬁnes an equivalence relation between formulas of L by
ϕ ∼ψ if and only if T ⊢(∀x1) · · · (∀xn)(ϕ ↔ψ)
where x1, . . . , xn are the free variables of ϕ and ψ.
The objects of the con-
structed category are the equivalence classes determined by the equivalence re-
lation. One quickly recognizes that this construction is the categorical extension
of the usual Lindenbaum–Tarski construction for propositional logic. One of the
key insights here, which builds on Lawvere’s work on quantiﬁers, is the fact that
the Lindenbaum-Tarski construction can be lifted in a natural way so that when
applied to ﬁrst-order logic, it yields a category. Since categories are, among other
things, generalizations of partial orders, this constitutes evidence that categorical
logic provides a natural setting for the algebraic treatment of logic.
From the
point of view of Joyal, Reyes and other categorical logicians of that period, one
of the underlying motivations was that logically equivalent formulas “mean” the
same thing, that is we are dealing with concepts instead of their speciﬁc linguistic
expressions. For that reason, these categories were labeled conceptual categories

742
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
or categories of concepts (or sometimes syntactical categories). Morphisms be-
tween concepts are also equivalence classes of functional relations deﬁnable in the
language.
As Jean Dionne underlies in the introduction of his thesis, it was believed that
by replacing the theory T by the category CT, the object of study would be at the
same time simpler and more complete. The latter fact amounts to the claim that
categories allow for more relations between concepts than the usual set-theoretical
inclusion. Furthermore, models of theories can now be taken in various categories,
in particular in toposes. The very last sentence of Dionne’s thesis summarizes the
belief that a categorical presentation CT of a theory T in a given formal system
allows logicians to concentrate on the conceptual aspects of a theory and less on
the syntactical details of a chosen presentation:
Our method is therefore general enough to apply to a large variety of
languages and we can conclude that it constitutes the true link between
logic in the traditional sense and categorical logic : with the advantage
that we can now work without using the axioms, rules of inference,
formal demonstrations and the rest. We can even forget about vari-
ables, which were always inconvenient. Moving to categories, we can
do logic in an “ abstract ” fashion in terms of objects, arrows, functors
and diagrams, which is, among all the advantages mentioned in this
work, not the least, since the logician is naturally more interested by
concepts than by the indices to give to variables. [Dionne, 1973, 110]
(our translation)
Thus, in the early seventies, the belief was that categorical methods were more
objective or invariant than logical methods and that they would fruitfully replace
logical methods.
As far as we can tell, it was in April 1973, while he was in
Montreal, that B´enabou showed that in some cases logical methods, via the so-
called internal language, were more simple and direct than categorical methods to
prove categorical properties of categories, in particular of certain toposes.
As we have already said, Joyal and Reyes’ approach lead to a hierarchy of
conceptual categories, the ﬁrst of which resulting from the weakest ﬁrst-order log-
ical language yielding a category in the foregoing construction: regular categories.
It was also quickly conjectured that the converse would be true, i.e.
that one
could start from a regular category C and obtain a theory TC in the appropriate
language. Furthermore, it was common at that point to consider logic in a many-
sorted language. (Indeed, Lawvere, Lambek, B´enabou and as we will see Mitchell
had already indicated that many-sorted languages were natural in a categorical
context.) For the presentation of many-sorted languages, Dionne refers to Fefer-
man’s lecture notes in proof theory published a few years earlier. (See [Feferman,
1968].) The same reference is found in [Makkai and Reyes, 1976b; Reyes, 1977;
Makkai and Reyes, 1977]. We will here essentially follow [Boileau, 1976], for he
gives a general and uniﬁed presentation that, as we have indicated, constitutes
in our opinion a comprehensive synthesis of the work done by Joyal and Reyes

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
743
between 1971 and 1973 approximately. (For a slightly diﬀerent presentation and
terminology, see [Johnstone, 2002].)
A (ﬁrst-order) primitive language L0 is given by:
1. A set S of sorts. The set T of types is build from the set of sorts as follows:
(a) if S ∈S, then S ∈T ;
(b) if S1, ..., Sn ∈T , then S1 × · · · × Sn ∈T , where n can be 0; whenever it
is 0, we denote it by the symbol 1; (notice that S1 × · · · × Sn is merely
a formal expression, not a product);
(c) nothing else is a type.
2. A set F of function symbols, to each function symbol f, we associate its type
S1 × · · · × Sn × S (with the last sort having a distinguished status); we write
f : S1 × · · · × Sn
/ S to indicate the type of f. Whenever n is 0, f is a
constant of type S and we write 1
f−→X.
3. A set R of relation symbols, each such relation symbol R has a type S1×· · ·×
Sn; we write R ֌ S1 × · · · × Sn to indicate that R has type S1 × · · · × Sn.
Terms and formulas are deﬁned by recursion as follows:
Deﬁnition of terms:
1. Every variable of type S is a term of type S;
2. If f : S1 × · · · × Sn
/ S is a function symbol and t1, . . . , tn are terms of
type S1, . . . , Sn respectively, then f(t1, . . . ., tn) is a term of type S; (if f is
a constant, we simply write f);
Deﬁnition of formulas:
1. If t1 and t2 are terms of type S, then t1 = t2 is a formula;
2. If R ֌ S1 × · · · × Sn is a relation symbol and t1, . . . , tn are terms of type
S1, . . . , Sn, then R(t1, . . . , tn) is a formula;
3. ⊤is a formula (‘true’ is a formula);
The notions of free variable, bound variable, closed formula and closed terms are
deﬁned in the usual manner. This completes the deﬁnition of L0. There are no
logical connectives so far. But there are logical rules associated to it, as we will
see.
However, interpreting logical systems in a categorical framework forced categori-
cal logicians to reconsider basic and simple assumptions in a diﬀerent light. Indeed,
in a set-theoretical setting, sorts are assumed to be non-empty. In a categorical
setting, the situation is diﬀerent. For one thing, in certain toposes, in particular

744
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
toposes of sheaves, there are objects without elements that are nonetheless inhab-
ited. To illustrate the situation, consider the simple case of the topos Set2 whose
objects are pairs ⟨X, Y ⟩of sets and a morphism ⟨f, g⟩: ⟨X, Y ⟩
/ ⟨V, W⟩is given
by a pair of functions f : X
/ V and g : Y
/ W. Consider now any object of
the form ⟨∅, X⟩where X is any non-empty set. Such an object is not empty (nor
is it an initial object in the language of categories), but it is not like an arbitrary
object ⟨X, Y ⟩either. From the categorical point of view, an element x of a set
X corresponds to a morphism 1
x−→X from the terminal object 1, that is any
singleton set, to the set X in the category Set of sets. It is therefore reasonable
to generalize this fact to categories with a terminal object (or ﬁnite limits in gen-
eral): a (global) element of an object X in a category C is a morphism 1
x−→X.
In the topos Set2, the terminal object is the pair ⟨1, 1⟩and there is no morphism
⟨1, 1⟩
/ ⟨∅, X⟩. In this sense, we can say that the latter object does not have
any (global) element, although it is not empty. In his introduction to the volume
on model theory and toposes, Lawvere underlines this fact and comments rather
harshly on the classical solution:
Since a variable set may be partly empty and partly non-empty, the tra-
ditional model-theoretic banishment of empty models cannot be main-
tained, bringing to light a certain diﬃculty which the banishment ob-
scured. Some claim that this diﬃculty is the “fact” that “entailment
is not transitive”, contrary to mathematical experience. However, the
actual “diﬃculty” is that the traditional logical way of dealing with
variables is inappropriate and hence should be abandoned. This tradi-
tional method (which by the way is probably one of the reasons why
most mathematicians feel that a logical presentation of a theory is an
absurd machine strangely unrelated to the theory or its subject mat-
ter) consists of declaring that there is one set I of variables on which
all ﬁnitary relations depend, albeit vacuously on most of them; . . .
[Lawvere, 1975b, 5]
Various people, among others Mostowski, Hailperin in the ﬁfties, and B´enabou
and Joyal in 1973, had observed the failure of the transitivity of entailment with
empty sorts. (See [Mostowski, 1951; Hailperin, 1953].) A simple case is as follows:
the following two sequents are always valid, no matter what:
∀xP(x) ⊢P(x)
P(x) ⊢∃xP(x)
Thus, by transitivity of entailment, we obtain:
∀xP(x) ⊢∃xP(x)
which is an invalid entailment when interpreted in an empty sort.
Mostowski
suggested to simply dropping the transitivity of entailment. Hailperin gave an

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
745
axiomatization in which entailments are restricted to sentences. Ideally, one would
keep the transitivity of entailments and give a presentation of a logical system for
arbitraty formulas.
As far as we can tell, the current solution to the problem was ﬁrst presented in
print in Roch Ouellet’s PhD thesis [1974] defended at the Universit´e de Montr´eal
in 1974. (See also his [1981].) He explicitly attributes the key observation leading
to the solution to Joyal. The solution consists in introducing the notion of the
support of a sequent or what is now called a context: a context is a ﬁnite list
⃗x = x1, . . . , xn of distinct variables. Notice that a context can be empty, i.e. n
can be 0. The type of a context ⃗x is the string of (not necessarily distinct) sorts of
the variables appearing in it. A term-in-context is an expression of the form ⃗x · t
where t is a term and ⃗x is a context containing all the free variables of t. Similarly,
a formula-in-context is an expression of the form ⃗x · φ, where φ is a formula and
⃗x is a context containing all the free variables occurring in φ.
The notion of logical consequence is then deﬁned with respect to a context ⃗x. A
sequent is a sequence of symbols of the form (φ ⊢⃗x ψ), where φ and ψ are formulas
and ⃗x is a context containing all the free variables of φ and ψ. It is now easy to
see that the foregoing failure of transitivity is eliminated, since the sequent of the
conclusion, namely ∀xP(x) ⊢∃xP(x), has an empty context whereas the premises
do not. Hence, if we require, as we will do, that entailments have to be done over
uniform contexts or that a change of context has to obey certain restrictions, the
conclusion will not follow. It should be emphasized that, as is done by Ouellet
himself in his thesis, the process of ﬁnding a solution was guided all along by
categorical semantics. Thus, in this case, the correct syntactical constraint was
derived from categorical constraints.
Recall that in a sequent calculus, a deductive rule has the form Γ
α(R), where
Γ is a (possibly empty) list of sequents and α is a sequent. The horizontal bar
means that the rule R allows the move from Γ to α. The intended meaning is that
whenever the sequents of Γ are valid, then α is valid. When Γ is empty, then in
this case α is a logical axiom. Here are the axioms and rules of L0, which are in
fact the rules of equational logic:
1. Structural rules:
1.1. φ ⊢⃗x φ (identity axiom)
1.2.
φ ⊢⃗x ψ
ψ ⊢⃗x θ
φ⊢⃗xθ
(cut)
1.3.
φ⊢⃗xψ
φ[⃗s/⃗x]⊢⃗yψ[⃗s/⃗x] (substitution) where ⃗s = s1, . . . , sn is a list of (not nec-
essarily distinct) terms of the same length and type as the context ⃗x,
φ [⃗s/⃗x] denotes the usual operation of simultaneous substitution with
the usual proviso and ⃗y is any string of variables including all the vari-
ables occurring in the terms ⃗s.
2. Logical rule:

746
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
2.1. φ ⊢⃗x ⊤;
3. Rule for equality:
3.1. ⊤⊢⃗x x = x.
The next step consists in introducing logical connectives in a certain order. The
ﬁrst extension of L0 is denoted by L1 by Boileau, but we will denote it by Lreg
for regular logic.
Deﬁnition of formulas of Lreg: formulas of Lreg consist of formulas of L0 to-
gether with the following additional clauses:
4. If φ and ψ are formulas, then (φ ∧ψ) is a formula;
5. If φ is a formula, then ∃xφ is formula (where x is variable of some type; we
sometimes write (∃x : S)φ to indicate the type of x).
Axioms and rules of Lreg: the axioms and rules of Lreg are those of L0 together
with:
2. Logical rules:
3. φ ∧ψ ⊢⃗x φ
φ ∧ψ ⊢⃗x ψ
φ ⊢⃗x ψ
φ ⊢⃗x θ
φ⊢⃗xψ∧θ
;
4.
φ ⊢⃗x,y ψ
∃yφ ⊢⃗x ψ
where y is not free in ψ and where a double line indicates that
we can go either way;
5. φ ∧∃yψ ⊢⃗x ∃y (ϕ ∧ψ) where y is not free in φ.
6. Rule for equality:
3.2. ((x1 = y1) ∧. . . ∧(xn = yn)) ∧φ ⊢⃗z φ [⃗y/⃗x] where ⃗z is a context con-
taining ⃗x, ⃗y and the free variables of φ.
A regular theory T is a set of regular sequents, i.e. sequents in which the formulas
are all regular formulas. The elements of T are called the axioms of T. There are
no examples of regular theories in [Dionne, 1973], nor in [Reyes, 1974]. Of course,
there are numerous examples of regular categories.
The next extension quickly became the center of attention because of its met-
alogical properties. It is the language Lcoh, labeled L2 by Boileau, of coherent
logic.
Deﬁnition of formulas of Lcoh: formulas of Lcoh consist of formulas of Lreg
together with the additional clauses:
6. ⊥is a formula (‘false’ is a formula);
7. If φ and ψ are formulas, then (φ ∨ψ) is a formula.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
747
Axioms and rules of Lcoh are those of Lreg together with:
2. 2.1. ⊥⊢⃗x φ;
2.2. φ ⊢⃗x φ ∨ψ
ψ ⊢⃗x φ ∨ψ
φ ⊢⃗x θ
ψ ⊢⃗x θ
φ∨ψ⊢⃗xθ
;
2.3. φ ∧(ψ ∨θ) ⊢⃗x (φ ∧ψ) ∨(φ ∧θ).
A coherent theory T is a set of coherent sequents. Although the language of co-
herent logic might seem to be rather weak at ﬁrst, it was quickly seen that many
mathematical theories are in fact axiomatized in that language. Thus, every equa-
tional theory is coherent, e.g. the theory of groups, the theory of rings, Boolean
algebras, etc., provided one writes the axioms appropriately. The theory of ﬁelds
of characteristic p, p ≥0, is coherent, as well as the theory of algebraically closed
ﬁelds. It was proved that any classical theory can be translated in the language of
coherent logic provided that the latter is enriched with suﬃciently many relational
symbols. The latter claim is a corollary of the proof of the completeness theorem
for coherent theories attributed to Makkai by Antonius. (See [Antonius, 1975,
35–36].) Coherent logic was seen has having an interesting position with respect
to intuitionistic logic and classical logic. In the words of Reyes:
If the reader looks at the formal system for coherent logic . . . , he will
notice that all axioms as well as rules of inference are intuitionistically
valid (. . . ) as well as classically valid. The distinction between the
intuitionistic and classical interpretations of logical operations become
irrelevant for this “absolute” logic.
Furthermore, this logic besides being a part [sic], may be considered
as a generalization of classical logic. Indeed, any classical theory may
be rendered coherent by extending the language [Antonius]. The idea
is trivial and may be seen from the following example : take
∃x∃y(x ̸= y)
as our theory. Adding a new binary relation symbol D (to be thought
of as ̸=), the desired coherent theory is
⊤⊢∃x∃yD(x, y)
⊤⊢x = y ∨D(x, y)
x = y ∧D(x, y) ⊢⊥
The point is : the models which respect the coherent logic of the new
theory are the usual classical models (respecting the full logic) of the
old one. [Reyes, 1977, 23].
(Reyes did not specify the support of the sequents.)
As we can see from the
last sentence, the charms of coherent logic were particularly obvious from the
model-theoretic point of view. But we should point out that the insistence on the

748
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
formal system itself is something that came during the academic year 1973–74, for
absolutely nothing is said about it before that date. As we have already pointed
out, they were merely used as a springboard in order to rise to the categorical
level.
The next two levels are the intuitionistic and the classical levels.
Deﬁnition of formulas of Lint (Boileau’s L3): the formulas of Lint are those of
Lcoh together with:
8. If φ and ψ are formulas, then (φ ⇒ψ) is a formula;
9. If φ is a formula, then ∀xφ is formula (or (∀x : S)φ).
Axioms and rules of Lint are those of Lcoh together with:
2.8
φ ∧ψ ⊢⃗x θ
ψ ⊢⃗x φ ⇒θ
2.9
φ ⊢⃗x,y ψ
φ ⊢⃗x ∀yψ
where y is not free in φ.
Intuitionistic theories are deﬁned in the obvious manner.
Finally, we come to classical ﬁrst-order logic LBool (Boileau’s L4).
We now
allow formulas of the form ¬φ, which can be deﬁned as φ ⇒⊥.
Axioms and rules of LBool are those of Lint together with:
2.10
φ ∧ψ ⊢⃗x ⊥
ψ ⊢⃗x ¬φ
; a special case of the rule 2.8;
2.11 ⊤⊢⃗x φ ∨¬φ.
A proof in these systems is deﬁned in the usual fashion. We will write T ⊢: α,
where α is a sequent φ ⊢⃗x ψ, to indicate that there is a proof of α from the axioms
of T. Whenever we will have to specify the underlying logic, we will write for
instance T ⊢:
coh α, meaning that the proof is in coherent logic.
Dionne [1973] describes these languages for one-sorted systems and sketches the
extension to many-sorted systems in the conclusion of his thesis. Furthermore,
coherent logic does not receive a name: it is simply called regular logic with stable
sup (for reasons that will appear clear once we look at categories corresponding to
this language). This is also how they are called in Reyes [1974]. (Remember that
the latter was already circulating in 1972.) This does suggest that in 1972 and
1973, coherent logic had not quite acquired its status or at least no one thought
that it deserved to receive a name.
There is an obvious partial order between the foregoing logical systems: deﬁne
Li ≤Lk if and only if Li ⊆Lk and for any set of sequents T ∪α of Li, we have
T ⊢:
Li α if and only if T ⊢:
Lk α. It can be proved that resulting order relation is:

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
749
L0
Lreg
Lcoh
Lint








Lbool
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
From a given theory T in a formal system Li, 0 ≤i ≤4, a category of con-
cepts CT can be built. The construction of CT always follows the same pattern.
(It should be pointed out that Makkai and Reyes introduced a slightly diﬀerent
construction later on, although the result is equivalent. See [Antonius, 1975, 14–
15]. In their book, Makkai and Reyes sketch a method that uses a completeness
theorem proved earlier but claim that the construction is described in great detail
in Dionne’s thesis, whereas the latter proceeds in a purely syntactic manner. See
[Makkai and Reyes, 1977, 241–242].) As we have already indicated, the objects of
CT are equivalence classes of formulas, where the equivalence relation is deﬁned
by:
φ(⃗x) ∼ψ(⃗x) if and only if φ(⃗x) ⊢⃗x ψ(⃗x) and ψ(⃗x) ⊢⃗x φ(⃗x) are derivable sequents
of T.
The equivalence class of φ(⃗x) is denoted by [φ(⃗x)] and it is sometimes called a
formal set.
A morphism of formal sets is a formal function.
Informally, a formal func-
tion is given by a formula that deﬁnes, in each model of the theory T, an actual
morphism between the interpreted formal sets. In particular, when the theory is
interpreted in the category of sets, it deﬁnes a set-theoretical function between
sets. Speciﬁcally, let [φ(⃗x)] and [ψ(⃗y)] be two formal sets such that the contexts
⃗x and ⃗y are disjoint and let ρ be a formula with free variables in the context ⃗x; ⃗y.
Then we say that ρ(⃗x, ⃗y) deﬁnes a formal function from [φ(⃗x)] to [ψ(⃗y)], denoted
by ⟨⃗x 7→⃗y : ρ⟩: [φ(⃗x)]
/ [ψ(⃗y)], if
1. ρ(⃗x, ⃗y) ⊢⃗x,⃗y (ϕ(⃗x) ∧ψ(⃗y))
2. ρ(⃗x, ⃗y) ∧ρ(⃗x,⃗z) ⊢⃗x,⃗y,⃗z ⃗y = ⃗z
3. ϕ(⃗x) ⊢⃗x ∃⃗yρ(⃗x, ⃗y)).
To ﬁnish the deﬁnition of morphisms, we identify formal functions that are prov-
ably equivalent: that is, whenever we have
ρ(⃗x, ⃗y) ⊢⃗x,⃗y o(⃗x, ⃗y) and o(⃗x, ⃗y) ⊢⃗x,⃗y ρ(⃗x, ⃗y)
where (⃗x, ⃗y, o) deﬁnes a function from [φ(⃗x)] to [ψ(⃗y)], then (⃗x, ⃗y, ρ) and (⃗x, ⃗y, o)
belong to the same equivalence class ⟨⃗x 7→⃗y : ρ⟩: [φ(⃗x)]
/ [ψ(⃗y)]. In a nutshell,

750
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
the morphisms of CT are equivalence classes of formulas that are provably equiv-
alent functional relations of T. Composition of morphisms is deﬁned by following
the same general strategy. Given formal sets and formal functions
[φ(⃗x)]
⟨⃗x7→⃗y:ρ⟩
−→
[ψ(⃗y)]
⟨⃗y7→⃗z:o⟩
−→
[θ(⃗z)]
the composition ⟨⃗y 7→⃗z : o⟩◦⟨⃗x 7→⃗y : ρ⟩: [φ(⃗x)]
/ [θ(⃗z)]is given by the formal
function ⟨⃗x 7→⃗z : κ⟩where κ = ∃⃗y(ρ∧o). The veriﬁcations that composition is as-
sociative and that the identity morphisms exist and satisfy the required properties
are extremely tedious. The moral is that one obtains a genuine small category CT
for each theory T in a given language. The results can be summarized with the
following table:
If T is in
then CT is a
Lreg
Regular category
Lcoh
Coherent category
Lint
Heyting category
LBool
Boolean category
The foregoing construction can be seen to be a direct generalization of the
standard Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra for a propositional theory. Indeed, it can be
seen that if T is a propositional coherent theory, then CT is a preorder, in fact
a distributive lattice. In the general case of a coherent theory T, the standard
Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra is simply a part of CT, that is the part restricted to
sentences, e.g. formulas in the empty context. This provides further evidence to
the claim that categorical logic is algebraic logic.
Notice, and this is an important philosophical point, that a category of con-
cepts CT is not a category of structured sets and structure preserving functions:
morphisms are equivalence classes of morphisms. Thus, one of the main tools of
categorical logic is the construction of categories that are in a sense very diﬀerent
from the categories arising in the practice of mathematics, e.g. the category of
groups or the category of vector spaces.
Whereas Dionne’s thesis consists in a detailed description of the constructions
of conceptual categories from theories and a proof, in each case, that the result-
ing category has the appropriate properties, Reyes [1974] starts right from the
start with a description of the categories. Of course, as we have already empha-
sized, within the categorical community, it was assumed that replacing a theory
T by its category of concepts CT was not only mathematically fruitful but also
philosophically motivated. One of the goals was to give a purely categorical char-
acterization of these categories and then work with these instead of the syntactical
presentations of the theories.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
751
4.5
Algebraic logic: from regular to Boolean categories
Regular categories are categories in which any morphism factors uniquely as a
(regular) epimorphism followed by a monomorphism. In contrast with Volger’s
logical categories and elementary theories, any topos E turns out to be a regular
category and, furthermore, ﬁrst-order logic becomes completely integrated in the
overall framework at the center of which sits the notion of topos.
In order to state the deﬁnition of a regular category, we need to recall a few
simple notions. The pullback of a pair of equal morphisms X
f
−→Y
f
←−X, when
it exists, is called the kernel pair of f. Given two parallel morphisms X
f
−→
−→
g
Y ,
a coequalizer of ⟨f, g⟩is a morphism q : Y
/ E such that q ◦f = q ◦g and for
any morphism h : Y
/ Z such that h ◦f = h ◦g, there is a unique morphism
h′ : E
/ Z such that h′ ◦q = h. A morphism f : X
/ Y is said to be a regular
epimorphism when it is the coequalizer of a pair of arrows.
Deﬁnition: a category C is said to be regular if it satisﬁes the following proper-
ties:
1. It has all ﬁnite limits;
2. Coequalisers of kernel pairs exist;
3. Regular epimorphisms are stable under pullback.
The last condition simply means that if f : X
/ Y is a regular epimorphism and
g : Z
/ Y is a morphism of C, then the morphism g′ : X ×Y Z
/ X obtained
by pulling back f along g as in the following diagram
X
Y
f
/
X ×Y Z
X
g′

X ×Y Z
Z
f ′ / Z
Y
g

is also a regular epimorphism.
The category Set of sets is a regular category and, in fact, so is any elementary
topos E.
This is not the deﬁnition given by Reyes in his [1974], but it is equivalent to it.
In Reyes’ paper, a regular category is a category with ﬁnite limits, ﬁnite sups of
subobjects of a given object and images, which we will deﬁne. As we have already
indicated, one of the main properties of a regular category is that any morphism
f : X
/ Y can be factored uniquely, up to isomorphism,

752
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
X
E
e
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
X
Y
f
/ Y
E
?
m

where e : X
/ E is a regular epimorphism and m : E
/ Y is a monomorphism.
The latter monomorphism is called the direct image of f and is denoted Im(f).
Im(f) is deﬁned only up to a unique isomorphism, but as such it determines a
unique subobject of Y , which we denote ∃f(X). The choice of terminology is not
a coincidence. Given any momomorphism i : A ֌ X, we can deﬁne ∃f(A) =
Im(f ◦i) and in this way ∃f is a well deﬁned morphism from the subobjects of X
to the subobjects of Y and it can be shown that, in fact, for any arrow f : X
/Y
of a regular category C, ∃f ⊣f ∗.
Properties of the existential quantiﬁer then
follow immediately. In particular, what is now called the Frobenius identity holds
in any regular category C: for any morphism f : X
/ Y and monomorphisms
iA : A ֌ X, iB : B ֌ Y , ∃f(A ∧f ∗B) = ∃fA ∧B, where both sides of the
equality are subobjects of Y .
Notice how the latter characterization weaves together Lawvere’s characteriza-
tion of elementary theories and Daigneault’s characterization of the condition for
the existence of injective envelopes.
It is natural to consider regular functors between regular categories: a functor
F : C
/D between regular categories is said to be regular if it preserves ﬁnite limits
and coequalizers of kernel pairs. We can therefore deﬁne the category RegCat
with objects (small) regular categories and with morphisms regular functors. (We
should point out that it was immediately clear that it is a 2-category.)
Joyal and Reyes then introduced regular categories with stable ∨, now called
coherent categories, but they were also called logical categories from 1974 until
1977 inclusively.
It should be emphasized that all these categories are regular
categories with additional properties and not additional structure.
A category C is said to be a coherent category if:
1. It is a regular category;
2. For each object X of C, Sub(X) has ﬁnite sups;
3. The inverse image morphism f ∗: Sub(Y )
/ Sub(X) preserves ﬁnite sups,
i.e. ﬁnite sups are stable under pullbacks.
A functor F : C
/ D between coherent categories is said to be coherent if it is
regular and if it preserves ﬁnite sups. Again, we can consider the category Coh of
coherent categories and coherent functors between them.
A category C is said to be a Heyting category if:
1. It is a regular category;

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
753
2. For every morphism f : X
/ Y , the inverse image morphism
f ∗: Sub(Y )
/ Sub(X) has a right adjoint ∀f : Sub(X)
/ Sub(Y );
3. For every object X of C, Sub(X) is a lattice with smallest element.
It should be noted that the existence of the right adjoint ∀f, for every f, implies
the existence of the operation ⇒of implication in every lattice of subobjects. A
Heyting functor between Heyting categories is a regular functor preserving ∀f and
the lattice operations (in fact, supremums and implication suﬃce). The category
of Heyting categories and Heyting functors will be denoted by Heyt.
A category C is said to be a Boolean category if
1. It is a Heyting category;
2. For every object X of C, Sub(X) is a Boolean algebra.
A Boolean functor is a Heyting functor preserving all the lattice operations. The
category of Boolean categories and Boolean functors will be denoted by Bool.
Thus, a theory T in a language Li is now replaced by an i-category CT. The
goal is now to use concepts and methods of category theory to obtain results about
logic. As usual, in a categorical framework, one ﬁrst investigates the existence of
adjoint functors to naturally given functors.
Thus, there are obvious forgetful
functors (in fact 2-functors):
Bool
/ Heyt
/ Coh
/ Reg.
Two questions arise immediately: 1. Are there adjoints to these natural forgetful
functors? 2. How are these categories related to toposes? In other words, what
are the functors between these categories and the category of toposes?
These questions are in part answered in [Reyes, 1974]. Let us now summarize
the content of that paper, since it reﬂects in part the knowledge of the ﬁeld as of
1971-1972 approximately. The ﬁrst section, written essentially by Joyal, deﬁnes the
various foregoing categories and proves some of their important properties. The
second section, written by Reyes, gives a deﬁnition of Grothendieck toposes, proves
that every Grothendieck topos is a Heyting category and deﬁnes the category Top
of toposes with geometric morphisms as functors.
Section three of the paper
investigates the links between Grothendieck toposes and logic, in particular the
existence of (left-)adjoints to forgetful functors from Top to other logical categories.
Reyes attributes to Joyal the observation that there is a left adjoint Sh(−) :
Coh
/ Top to the forgetful functor Top
/ Coh deﬁned by: for each coherent
category C, Sh(C) is the topos of sheaves for the so-called ﬁnite cover topology
and for any regular functor C
u
−→D, we get a geometric morphism of toposes bu
given by the pair of adjoints Sh(C)
u∗
−→
←−
u∗
Sh(D). Furthermore, and this is the key
observation that will lead to important concepts and results, although it is not
emphasized nor put in perspective in the paper, the functor Sh(−) satisﬁes the

754
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
following universal property: for every coherent functor u : C
/ E into a topos,
there is a unique (up to isomorphism) morphism of topos Sh(−)
u∗
−→
←−
u∗
E such that
the triangle
C
Sh(C)
h
/
C
E
u
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Sh(C)
E
u∗

commutes, where the functor h : C
/ Sh(C) is the standard Yoneda embedding.
As we will see, this result introduces without naming it what will be called the
classifying topos of C.
It is then shown in the next paragraph that there is no such left adjoint between
the category of toposes and the category of Heyting categories. There is however
a left adjoint to the forgetful functor from the category of Boolean toposes and the
category of Boolean categories, provided that the functors in the latter category,
that is the Boolean functors, preserve arbitrary sups.
In the last section of the paper, Reyes presents Joyal’s completeness theorem
for Boolean categories and explores links with models of non-standard analysis.
We will only comment the completeness theorem.
Here is the formulation given in the paper: Let C be a small Boolean category.
If X is distinct from the smallest object of ℘(X), then there is a Boolean model
M : C
/ Set such that M(X) ̸= ∅. Three points have to be underlined. First,
notice the similarity between this formulation and Daigneault’s formulation of the
completeness theorem and, thus, with Lawvere’s formulation. Second, the proof of
the completeness theorem given in the paper relies on what is essentially the same
construction as the one stated in the second abstract on logic and foundations in
the Notices, although there is no mention of pro-objects in the 1974 paper. This
strongly suggests that Joyal had a proof of the completeness theorem by purely
categorical means already in the fall of 1970. Third, although it is not worded
in this manner in the paper, the theorem amounts to the following representation
theorem: let C be a (small) coherent category. Then there is a set I and a con-
servative coherent functor M : C
/ SetI. Being “conservative” means, in this
context, that M reﬂects isomorphisms, that is if M(f) is an isomorphism in SetI,
then f is an isomorphism in C. Notice here the similarity with the representa-
tion theorem for polyadic algebras, as formulated by Daigneault. It is striking
that the set X in the latter formulation is replaced by the category Set of sets in
this new formulation. Although the theorem is strictly speaking a representation
theorem, it implies the completeness theorem, since the coherent category C is a
conceptual category, i.e. a theory. Furthermore, since coherent functors between
Boolean categories are in fact Boolean, a fact used explicitly by Joyal in his proof,
the representation theorem for Boolean categories is a special case the theorem

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
755
for coherent categories. Thus, one obtains directly the completeness theorem for
classical ﬁrst-order logic.
When compared to Volger’s attempt at characterizing the doctrine of ﬁrst-order
logic, two elements standout in Joyal and Reyes’s work. First, the elegance and
simplicity of the hierarchy of categories deﬁned, starting with regular categories,
reveals a global conceptual coherence, no pun intended, of logical categories. Sec-
ond, as we have already pointed out, regular categories also have an important
status in category theory in general and thus their classiﬁcation establishes impor-
tant links between logical notions and categorical notions. Third, the approach
seems to be at the right level of generality and ﬂexibility, in contrast with Volger’s
work. In particular, it did not presuppose the existence of a subobject classiﬁer,
or an object of truth-value and still ﬁtted in perfectly with toposes. The key was
to ﬁnd a way to articulate together fragments of ﬁrst-order logic that would allow
a categorical passage from one type of category to another and in such a way that
one would not have to import additional structure, in the way Volger had done.
It was certainly seen as an important gain that only properties were added to
move from one level to the next. Finally, the connections with toposes made it
possible to construct a dictionary between algebraic geometry and logic and one
could hope that results and methods from both ﬁelds could interact and yield new
and useful insights. Thus, a central piece of the puzzle of algebraic logic was now
in place. The other parts were being added quickly. One of the pieces, already
hinted at in Dionne’s thesis, was to ﬁnd a way to construct a theory TC from a
category C in such a way that there is a canonical interpretation of TC in C. But
for the latter, one needs to have a general notion of interpretation of a theory in a
category, which is the second piece. Once these have been deﬁned appropriately,
they ﬁt together smoothly and the general conceptual picture emerging is of great
beauty.
4.6
Constructing theories from categories
As early as 1971, the idea of interpreting a logical theory in a topos appeared in
William Mitchell’s work on the relation between Boolean toposes and set theory. In
his paper, communicated by Mac Lane in October 1971 and published in 1972, he
explicitly introduced a language L(E) for a topos E and two types of interpretations
of L(E) : an external interpretation and an internal interpretation. The internal
interpretation would soon become the internal language of a topos and it would
be used like any other deductive system to prove results in that speciﬁc theory,
whereas the external interpretation would amount to using certain toposes as
models of certain speciﬁed theories of sets. Both methods evolved quickly, but
it seems clear that B´enabou, in his talk at Oberwolfach and Joyal in his talk in
Montreal, both in early 1973, found a way to deﬁne the internal language L(C) for
a weaker category C. Makkai and Reyes quickly used these methods in 1973 and
1974. Their ﬁrst joint papers were presented in November 1974 and published in
1976.

756
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Before we look at the internal language of a category C, we have to consider
the notion of an interpretation M of a many-sorted language L in a category C
with ﬁnite limits. The basic idea was to lift to categories the traditional Tarskian
semantics as deﬁned with sets. The translation requires, as usual, that clauses
stated in terms of elements and subsets be reformulated in terms of morphisms
and subobjects.
Assume C is a category with ﬁnite limits and L0 is deﬁned as above. A C-
interpretation M of L0 consists of:
1. an object MS of C for each sort S;
2. a morphism Mf : MS1 × · · · × MSn
/ MS for each function symbol f :
S1 × · · · × Sn
/ S; in particular, when n = 0 a morphism 1
f
−→MS;
3. a subobject MR ֌ MS1 × · · · × MSn for each relation symbol R ֌ S1 ×
· · · × Sn.
Notice immediately that when C is the category Set of sets, then a Set-interpre-
tation is an ordinary many-sorted structure of similarity type L0. Homomorphisms
h : M
/ N between interpretations are deﬁned in the obvious fashion, i.e. they
preserve the interpretations of functions and relations. As usual, interpretations
are extended to all terms and formulas of the language Li, where the value of
i, 0 ≤i ≤4, will be clear from the context below.
Let ⃗x = x1, . . . , xn be a
context with types S1, . . . , Sn respectively, t a term of type S and ⃗x · t a term-
in-context over Li. To every such term-in-context ⃗x · t, we assign a morphism
[[⃗x · t]]M : MS1 × · · · × MSn
/ MS by recursion as follows:
1. If t is a variable, then it is a variable xi of type Si, and thus [[⃗x · t]]M = 1Si ◦πi
(we are being pedantic: a variable is interpreted as the appropriate identity
morphism on the relevant type, the projection morphism πi is there to get
rid of the ‘dummy’ variables in the context);
2. If t is f(t1, . . . , tm), ti terms of type Ti, then by induction we have that
[[⃗x · ti]]M : MS1×· · ·×MSn
/MTi for each ti, and [[⃗x · f(t1, . . . , tm)]]M is the
composite MS1×· · ·×MSn
⟨[[⃗x·t1]]M,...,[[⃗x·tm]]M⟩
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→MT1×· · ·×MTm
Mf
−−→MS;
3. In particular, when t is a constant f, then [[⃗x · t]]M is the composite morphism
MS1 × · · · × MSn −→1
Mf
−−→MS.
A formula-in-context ⃗x·φ is interpreted as a subobject [[⃗x · φ]]M ֌ MS1 ×· · ·×
MSn as follows:
1. If φ is (t1 = t2), and t1 and t2 are of type T, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the equalizer
of MS1 × · · · × MSn
[[⃗x·t1]]
−−−→
−−−→
[[⃗x·t2]]
MT.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
757
2. If φ is R(t1, . . . , tm) with t1, . . . , tm of types T1, . . . , Tm respectively, [[⃗x · φ]]M
is the pullback
MS1 × · · · × MSn
MT1 × · · · × MTm
<⟨[[⃗x·t1]]M,...,[[⃗x·tm]]M⟩>
/
[[⃗x · φ]]
MS1 × · · · × MSn


[[⃗x · φ]]
MR
/ MR
MT1 × · · · × MTm


3. If φ is ⊤, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is MS1 × · · · × MSn or equivalently, the top element
of Sub(MS1 × · · · × MSn);
4. If φ is (ψ ∧θ), then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the pullback (in this case, since we are dealing
with subobjects, it is the intersection or the inf)
[[⃗x · θ]]M
MS1 × · · · × MSn
/
/
[[⃗x · φ]]M
[[⃗x · θ]]M


[[⃗x · φ]]M
[[⃗x · ψ]]M
/
/ [[⃗x · ψ]]M
MS1 × · · · × MSn


5. If φ is ⊥and C is a coherent category, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the bottom element
of Sub(MS1 × · · · × MSn);
6. If φ is (ψ ∨θ) and C is a coherent category, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the union of the
subobjects [[⃗x · ψ]]M and [[⃗x · θ]]M;
7. If φ is (ψ ⇒θ) and C is a Heyting category, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the implication
[[⃗x · ψ]]M ⇒[[⃗x · θ]]M is the Heyting algebra Sub(MS1 × · · · × MSn);
8. If φ is ¬ψ (which is the same as (ψ ⇒⊥)), and C is a Heyting category, then
[[⃗x · φ]]M is the Heyting negation ¬[[⃗x · ψ]]M;
9. If φ is (∃y)ψ, where y is a sort T, and C is a regular category, then [[⃗x · φ]]M =
∃π[[⃗x, y · ψ]]M which is the image of the composite
[[⃗x, y · ψ]]M ֌ MS1 × · · · × MSn × MT
π⟨1,...,n⟩
−−−−−→MS1 × · · · × MSn
where ‘⃗x · y’ denotes the context resulting from the juxtaposition of y to the
list ⃗x;

758
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
10. If φ is (∀y)ψ, where y is a sort T, and C is a Heyting category, then
[[⃗x · φ]]M
= ∀π[[⃗x, y · ψ]]M where π is the projection
MS1 × · · · × MSn × MT
π⟨1,...,n⟩
−−−−−→MS1 × · · · × MSn.
Again, when C is the category Set of sets, then all these deﬁnitions translate into
Tarski’s usual semantics for a many-sorted ﬁrst-order language. With all these
deﬁnitions at hand, we deﬁne the notion of satisfaction and model as follows.
Let M be a C-interpretation. We say that M is a model of a sequent σ = (φ ⊢⃗x
ψ) or that σ is satisﬁed in M, we write as usual M |=C σ or simply M |= σ, if
[[⃗x · φ]]M ≤[[⃗x · ψ]]M in Sub(MS1 × · · · × MSn). We say that M is a model of a
theory T if all the axioms of T are satisﬁed in M.
We denote the category of models of T in C by ModC(T). An important feature
of this framework is that it is possible to transfer models of T in C in an appro-
priate category D along appropriate functors. More speciﬁcally, if T is a (regular,
coherent, etc.) theory, then any (regular, coherent, etc.) functor F : C
/ D
induces a functor Mod(F) : ModC(T)
/ ModD(T) in the obvious way.
Let C be a category with ﬁnite limits.
Then the internal language LC of C
is given as follows: for each object X of C, there is a sort ⌜X⌝, the name of
X; for each morphism f : X1 × · · · × Xn
/ Y in C, a function symbol ⌜f⌝:
⌜X1⌝× · · · × ⌜Xn⌝
/ ⌜Y ⌝and for each subobject R ֌ X1 × · · · × Xn, a relation
symbol ⌜R⌝֌ ⌜X1⌝× · · · × ⌜Xn⌝. (This is called the extended internal language
in [Makkai and Reyes, 1977].) In other words, the language LC is nothing less
than C. There is a canonical interpretation of LC in C, which is nothing less than
the identity interpretation: each sort ⌜X⌝is sent to the object X named by it,
each function symbol ⌜f⌝: ⌜X1⌝× · · · × ⌜Xn⌝
/ ⌜Y ⌝is sent to the morphism
f : X1×· · ·×Xn
/Y it denotes and each relation symbol ⌜R⌝֌ ⌜X1⌝×· · ·×⌜Xn⌝
is sent to the subobject R ֌ X1 × · · · × Xn it refers to. A sequent σ over LC
will therefore have a canonical interpretation in C. Whenever the sequent σ is
veriﬁed in C, we write C |= σ. Thus, diagrams of C can be replaced by sequents
over LC. The theory TC of C is given by the collection of sequents of the internal
language that are veriﬁed in C by the canonical interpretation. This is of course the
purely model-theoretical point of view of a theory. The point of this apparently
tautologous game is that it is possible to use the appropriate deductive system
introduced above to prove properties of C. More speciﬁcally, we can reproduce the
foregoing system of theories as follows. Let C be a category. Then, the internal
language LC is a special case of a primitive language L0. We can construct the
theory TC, denoted by T0(C) by Boileau, by taking the axioms
i) ⊤⊢f(a) = a whenever f : A
/ A is an identity morphism in C;
ii) ⊤⊢g(f(a)) = h(a) whenever

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
759
A
B
f
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
A
C
h
/ C
B
?
g

is a commutative triangle in C.
If C is a regular category, then, to the axioms of T0(C), the axioms
iii) ⊤⊢∃a(a = a) and ⊤⊢a1 = a2 whenever A is a terminal object of C;
iv) ⊤⊢∃a(h(a) = b ∧k(a) = c) and h(a1) = h(a2) ∧k(a1) = k(a2) ⊢a1 = a2
whenever
C
k
←−A
h
−→B
is a product diagram in C;
v) f(b) = g(b) ⊢∃a(h(a) = b), ∃a(h(a) = b) ⊢f(b) = g(b) and h(a1) = h(a2) ⊢
a1 = a2 whenever
A
h
−→B
f
−→
−→
g
C
is an equalizer diagram in C
to obtain the theory T1(C). By adding the appropriate axioms, we associate a
speciﬁc theory Ti(C) to coherent, Heyting and Boolean categories.
Using the appropriate rules, together with the axioms of TC, one can deduce
formally results about C. Proceeding in this manner, we obtain the following table:
If C is a
Then LC is
And TC is
Category
L0(C)
T0(C)
Regular category
L1(C)
T1(C)
Coherent category
L2(C)
T2(C)
Heyting category
L3(C)
T3(C)
Boolean category
L4(C)
T4(C)
It is straightforward to prove a soundness theorem for the various logical systems
involved. More speciﬁcally, given a (regular, coherent, Heyting, Boolean) theory,
M a model of T in a (regular, coherent, Heyting, Boolean) category C, if σ is
a sequent (in the appropriate fragment of the ﬁrst-order language L) which is
provable in T, then M |=C σ.

760
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
4.7
Building bridges
The resulting situation was somewhat surprising and to some, perhaps, uncom-
fortable. Whereas we saw Dionne constructing categories from logical theories in
order to apply categorical methods and obtain in this manner results about the
original theories, it became possible to use logical methods to obtain results about
categories. In a sense, the frontier between logical theories as categories and cat-
egories as logical theories is thereby vanishing. When Mih´aly Makkai arrived in
Montreal in the fall of 1973, he solved some of the problems considered by Joyal
and Reyes by using purely logical methods. These results lead to two joint papers
with Reyes submitted in the fall of 1974. The ﬁrst paragraph of their second paper
is revealing in this respect:
Here, just as in [9] [their previous paper], our method consists in trans-
lating any given problem for categories into a purely logical problem
via the mechanism described in Sec. 1 in [9], and then using familiar
methods developed in logic. (. . . )
Our point of view here is that categories provide an algebraic formula-
tion of logic, in the spirit of equating theories with categories and mod-
els with certain (“logical”) functors. We contend that much of logic
(model theory) can and should be expressed this way. On the other
hand, we freely use methods tied to the concrete “presentations”, i.e.,
to primitive symbols, formulas, etc., usually employed in model theory;
in fact, this is the novelty of our approach from the point of view of
the category theorist. There is an obvious analogy to abstract groups
versus groups deﬁned by generators and relations. Just as in groups,
the abstract formulation (categories) may (and does) point up exam-
ples of “theories” in branches of mathematics quite distant from logic.
[Makkai and Reyes, 1976a, 385].)
Thus, we see again the claim that a category is the abstract algebraic expression of
theory presented in a speciﬁc language with speciﬁc axioms. The main advantage
underlined here, however, is that the abstract expression opens up unforeseen
connections with other branches of mathematics. But the tension was certainly still
present. In a paper written in 1975-76 while he was on sabbatical from Montreal,
Reyes opens with the following claims:
The goal of topos theory is to develop a language and an eﬃcient
method for the study of concepts of local character (as well as con-
structions on such concepts) that are found in diverse branches of
mathematics : topology, algebraic geometry, analytic geometry, . . . .
To the geometric aspect (or topological), which is the dominant as-
pect, another is dialectically opposed : the logical aspect.([Reyes, 1978,
156].)(our translation)

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
761
We are back to the early rhetoric with the emphasis, once again, on the geometric
aspect, although at this stage it is clear that there is some sort of dictionary
between the two. It is more as if the geometric and the logical are two faces of the
same coin (but in fact, there are other faces as well, so it is more a cube than a
coin).
But developing the logical machinery required to present Makkai and Reyes’
results has its costs. Presenting all the preliminary details and the proofs contained
in the ﬁrst paper published in 1976 will constitute the bulk of the chapters 2, 3,
4, 5 and 6 (out of 9) of their book published in 1977. Chapters 7, 8 and 9 present
the proofs of the second paper.
Here are the key results presented in the two papers presented in 1974 by Makkai
and Reyes.
Having presented the foregoing notion of interpretation, of the internal lan-
guage and the theory TC of a category C, Makkai and Reyes proved the following
completeness theorems for categories.
Theorem: i) let C be a small category with ﬁnite limits and with ﬁnite stable
sups (i.e. each ﬁnite family of subobjects of an object has a stable sup). Then
there is a complete Boolean algebra B and a functor
M : C
/ Sh(B)
such that M preserves all ﬁnite limits, (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) stable sups, stable images
(ﬁnite or inﬁnite), distributive infs, and distributive ∀f(C)’s, and such that M is
conservative.
ii) If C has ﬁnite limits only, the same conclusion holds without the clauses for
infs and ∀f’s.
The proof rests entirely on logical methods. In the paper, it is barely sketched.
It proceeds by replacing C by TC and then using properties of the canonical in-
terpretation adapting completeness results in the literature, e.g. Mansﬁeld 1972
and an unpublished manuscript of Higgs. We should emphasize at this stage the
importance of Higgs’s (still) unpublished manuscript, widely read and extremely
inﬂuential at the time, on a categorical version of Boolean-valued models.
The theorem has, among others, the following corollaries:
Corollary 1 (an improvement of Barr’s theorem): every Grothendieck topos E
has a surjective Boolean point, i.e. there is a complete Boolean algebra B and
a geometric morphism p : Sh(B)
/ E of toposes such that p∗: E
/ Sh(B) is
faithful. Moreover, and this is the improvement, B and p can be chosen so that p∗
preserves all (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) distributive infs and all distributive ∀f(C)’s in E.
Corollary 2: (i) Let C be a coherent category. Then there is a set Y and a
functor M
M : C
/ Sh(℘(Y )),
where ℘(Y ) denotes the Boolean algebra of subsets of Y , such that M is as in the
foregoing theorem except that the sups and infs to be preserved by M are only
the ﬁnite stable (distributive) ones.

762
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
The main theorem implies, together with a compactness argument, Deligne’s
theorem: every coherent topos E has a surjective Boolean point p : Sh(℘(Y ))
/E
for some set Y . In chapter six of their book, the formulation of the theorem takes
the more eloquent form: if E is a coherent topos, then there is a conservative model
M : E
/ SetI into a Boolean topos of the form SetI, with I a set. In the third
chapter, the theorem is stated for coherent categories as follows:
Let C be a (small) coherent category. Then:
1. If A and B are two subobjects of X in C such that A ≰B, then there is a
coherent functor M : C
/ Set such that M(A) ≰M(B) as subobjects of
M(X).
2. There is a set I and a faithful coherent functor M : C
/ SetI.
The foregoing results follow from the main theorem in which one considers dis-
tributive infs and distributive ∀’s. When one turns to models that preserve all infs
and all ∀’s, then one obtains similar results for intuitionistic logic. The results
become:
Theorem: For every Grothendieck topos E there is a complete Heyting algebra
H and a surjective H-valued point p : Sh(H)
/ E such that p∗: E
/ Sh(H)
preserves all (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) infs and all ∀f(C)’s in E.
Theorem: If the topos E has a surjective Boolean point of the form
Sh(℘(Y ))
/ E
for a set Y , then the topos Sh(H) can be taken to be the category of sheaves over
a topological space.
These are completeness results for intuitionistic logic.
Again the proofs use
purely logical methods. (See chapter 6.3 of [Makkai and Reyes, 1977].) In this
setting, Joyal’s completeness theorem, closely related to Kripke’s completeness
theorem for intuitionistic logic, takes the following form:
Theorem (Joyal, as we saw, probably in 1970): Let C be a coherent category
and let ModSet(C) the category of coherent functors C
/ Set, thus the category
of set-models of C. There is a small full subcategory P of ModSet(C) such that the
evaluation functor ev : C
/ SetP is conservative and preserves all ﬁnite limits,
stable ﬁnite sups, stable images and stable ∀f(C) existing in C.
Some important remarks are in order.
First, it is now possible to see that
completeness theorems for certain logical theories are equivalent to representa-
tion theorems for categories. Thus, for instance, the completeness theorem for
ﬁrst-order classical theories is equivalent to the representation theorem for co-
herent categories. As we have already pointed out, the key construction for the
implication from the representation theorem to the completeness theorem is the
construction of the category of concepts of a theory. To prove the other direction,
one uses the internal theory TC of a small coherent category C. Thus, one can say
that the completeness theorem and the representation theorem are translation-
equivalent to one another. Second, Joyal’s theorem has a remarkable feature: the

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
763
link between a theory and its category of models is provided by a canonically de-
ﬁned functor, the evaluation functor. Given two categories C and D, the evaluation
functor ev : C
/ D(DC) is always deﬁnable by ev(X, F) = F(X) (and similarly
for morphisms). Furthermore, the fact that, whenever C and D are coherent cate-
gories, ev is a coherent functor follows by abstract general nonsense. The speciﬁc
observation is that it is also conservative.
In the early sixties, Lubkin-Freyd-Mitchell-H´eron proved an important represen-
tation theorem for Abelian categories. The latter are categories satisfying certain
abstract properties suﬃcient for the development of a large part of homological
algebra. It is fair to say that Abelian categories together with the representation
theorem just mentioned occupied a central position in the development of category
theory in the sixties. Not only were they extremely powerful in their applications,
but they also served as a model of the power of category theory itself. It should
be mentioned at this point that the category Set is not an Abelian category. The
typical example of an Abelian category is the category of Abelian groups or a
category of modules over a (commutative) ring. Michael Barr, then at McGill
University, was looking for non-additive versions of the Abelian notion as well
as the corresponding representation theorem. As we have already mentioned, he
succeeded in this attempt and introduced regular and exact categories in 1970 to-
gether with a representation theorem for exact categories, from which the known
representation theorem for Abelian categories can be deduced. In contrast with
the situation found with Abelian categories, the category Set is regular and exact.
A fascinating fact is that a category is Abelian if and only if it is both additive
and exact. It should be pointed out immediately that the notion of an exact cat-
egory is simply a strengthening of the notion of a regular category and that only
the latter property was used in Barr’s proof of the representation theorem. Thus
the category Set is regular (as well as coherent, Heyting, Boolean and a topos.)
Barr’s representation theorem for regular categories turns out to be equivalent to
a completeness theorem for coherent logic when it is looked at from the proper
angle.
First, the property of being conservative is crucial and captures a form of com-
pleteness. To understand this, it is imperative to see what the property of re-
ﬂecting isomorphisms means in this particular case. The category Set is coherent
and thus so is the category SetModSet(C). Thus, the latter category inherits all
its coherent properties from the category Set. Furthermore, the property of re-
ﬂecting isomorphisms of the functor e : C
/ SetModSet(C) implies that whatever
coherent property the category SetModSet(C) has, so does the category C. Hence
the property of reﬂecting isomorphisms implies that any coherent category C has
all coherent properties that Set has.
Second, the latter claim has to be compared with the Stone representation
theorem for distributive lattices and Boolean algebras. The usual formulation of
the Stone representation theorem is that any distributive lattice has an embedding
into a power-set algebra. This statement can be shown to be equivalent to the claim
that for any distributive lattice D, there is a 2-valued homomorphism f : D
/ 2

764
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
that reﬂects the order, i.e. if f(x) ≤f(y), then x ≤y. This last statement can
be interpreted as saying that any distributive lattice shares all the universal Horn
properties of the 2-element lattice. Thus, moving from the propositional case to
the ﬁrst-order case requires that we replace the 2-element lattice by the category
Set.
Finally, let us see how the representation theorem is equivalent to a complete-
ness theorem. Assume the representation theorem for coherent categories and let
C be the conceptual category [T]coh for some coherent theory T. Then the repre-
sentation theorem yields automatically the completeness theorem. For the other
direction, assume we have a coherent category C and let TC be its internal theory.
Applying the classical completeness theorem for TC, we get the representation the-
orem for C, since the coherent functors C
/ Set are identical to the models of the
internal theory TC.
Let us come back to the evaluation functor e : C
/ SetModSet(C). Joyal showed
that the functor e preserves all the existing Heyting structure that happens to exist
in SetModSet(C). In other words, if C is a Heyting category, then e is automatically
a conservative Heyting functor. Hence, a representation theorem for Heyting cate-
gories is obtained for free: every small Heyting category has a conservative Heyting
functor to a Heyting category of the form SetP , where P is a small category (it
has to be extracted from the large category ModSet(C)). Kripke’s completeness
theorem for ﬁrst-order intuitionistic logic can be deduced from Joyal’s theorem.
Let us close this section by coming back to Barr’s representation theorem for
regular categories. Joyal showed that Barr’s theorem is equivalent to the claim
that the evaluation functor e : C
/ SetModSet(C) is full and faithful for any
small regular category C and where ModSet(C) is the category of regular functors
C
/Set. This is of course equivalent to a completeness result for ﬁrst-order logic.
The second paper published in 1976 is important not only for the results it
contains, but also for the question it asks.
Indeed, one can argue that only a
categorical formulation of logic allows the question to be stated precisely. Thus, in
this case, it is not only the fact that we obtain a new result, but the very statement
could not have been formulated without the categorical framework.
Since Lawvere’s thesis, it was common to consider functors I : T1
/T2 between
theories and the induced functors between models of theories
I∗: Mod(T2)
/ Mod(T1).
One of the questions that can be asked in this context is this: how are properties
of I∗reﬂected in I? If the “logical” properties of I∗are indeed reﬂected in I,
then certainly this is a kind of completeness. Since, T1 and T2 are thought of
as categories of concepts, it becomes natural to talk about a form of conceptual
completeness whenever one can recover the properties of I from those of I∗. Let
us now see how these are stated in Makkai and Reyes’s paper.
First, they ﬁx the categories they are working with: T1 and T2 are assumed
to be small coherent categories and I : T1
/ T2 is assumed to be a coherent
functor. Furthermore, the category Mod(T) is the category of all coherent functors

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
765
F : T
/ Set, it is a full subcategory of SetT. Thus we have the usual induced
functor I∗: Mod(T2)
/ Mod(T1). The following results, although interesting
in themselves, are used to prove what will be call the conceptual completeness
theorem. The ﬁrst theorem is an application of the completeness theorem obtained
in their ﬁrst paper:
Theorem 1A: Assume I∗is surjective, that is for every model M in Mod(T1)
there is a model N in Mod(T2) such that I∗(N) ≃M. Then I is injective on
subobjects, i.e.
if X1 ֌ X and X2 ֌ X in T1 and I(X1) ≤I(X2) (in the
ordering of subobjects of I(X)), then X1 ≤X2. In particular, I is faithful.
Theorem 1B (Beth deﬁnability theorem): Assume that T1 and T2 are Boolean
categories. Assume also that if f : I∗(N1)
/ I∗(N2) is an isomorphism, then
there is a morphism g : N1
/ N2 such that I∗(g) = f. Then I is full with respect
to subobjects, i.e. if Y ֌ I(X) in T2, then there is X1 ֌ X in T1 such that
Y ≃I(X1).
Theorem 1.1: if I∗is full, then I is full with respect to subobjects. If in addition
I∗is surjective, then I is full.
Whereas theorem 1B is closely related to the Beth deﬁnability theorem, theorem
1.1 comes naturally in a categorical framework and does not require that the
theories be Boolean. (See [Makkai and Reyes, 1977, 195–197] to see how theorem
1B is related to the classical Beth deﬁnability theorem.)
The conceptual completeness theorem is formulated for pretoposes, a notion
introduced by Grothendieck in the sixties. A pretopos is a small coherent category
having ﬁnite disjoint sums (coproducts), and eﬀective equivalence relations.
Theorem (conceptual completeness): Assume T1 is a pretopos, T2 is coherent
and I : T1
/ T2 is a coherent functor. Then, if I∗is an equivalence of categories,
then so is I.
Two facets of the result have to be emphasized. First, the conceptual complete-
ness theorem provides a characterization of pretoposes among coherent categories.
Indeed, the result fails whenever T1 is not a pretopos. Second, the theorem can
be read as follows: suppose that I : T1
/ T2 is thought of an interpretation and
that T2 is considered to be an extension of T1. One could say that I is strongly
conservative whenever I* is an equivalence. Then the theorem asserts that pre-
toposes and only pretoposes do not have proper strongly extensions.
Still put
diﬀerently, one could say that although T2 is an extension of T1, it has the same
category of models. The result shows, and this was in fact part of the motivation
underlying the original conjecture formulated by Reyes, that ﬁnite disjoint sums
of formulas and quotients of a formula by a provable (in the theory) equivalence
relation are coherent logical operations (although not representable in ordinary
logic), but there are no others, whence the conceptual completeness. It should be
emphasized, once more, that all the proofs rely on logical methods. Andrew Pitts
gave purely categorical proofs of these results in the eighties. (See [Pitts, 1987;
Pitts, 1989].)
The next theorem is Keisler’s theorem, but now stated explicitly for coherent
logic.

766
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Theorem 2.1. Let K be an elementary class, i.e. deﬁned by any set of sentences
in L2. Then the following are equivalent:
1. K is the class of models of a coherent theory over L2.
2. CatK, the category generated by K, i.e. whose objects are the many-sorted
structures of similarity type L2 and homomorphisms between them, is the
dual of the category of points of some coherent topos.
3. K contains the colimit of any directed family taken from CatK.
It is pointed out that the equivalence between (1) and (3) was proven by Keisler.
It is not mentioned that the equivalence with (2), although formulated diﬀerently
and using diﬀerent means, was announced by Joyal in 1970. Makkai and Reyes’
proof relies on the notion of classifying topos.
4.8
Classifying topos and generic model of a theory
The notion of classifying topos has its own complex history. The ﬁrst appearance
of the concept is usually attributed to Monique Hakim in the sixties, but her work
was published only in 1972. (See [Hakim, 1972].) The term explicitly appears
in Giraud’s contribution to the ﬁrst meeting dedicated to elementary toposes in
Dalhousie in the winter of 1971. In this paper, Giraud presents three diﬀerent
constructions of what he calls the classifying topos of a stack C and states a
universal property characterizing classifying toposes in the bicategory of toposes.
Needless to say, in this form, the notion has no explicit connection with logic.
As we have already mentioned, an implicit version of the notion also appeared
in Reyes 1974, this time having a direct connection to logic. Thus, the notion
was implicitly used by Joyal and Reyes already in 1971-1972. Myles Tierney and
Jean B´enabou also discovered a version of the notion in the spring of 1975, as
reported by Tierney himself in 1976. (See [Tierney, 1976, 211, 216 and 217]. See
also [B´enabou, 1975], where the notion is mentioned but not deﬁned.) Johnstone
and Wraith introduced particular cases of the notion independently also in 1974.
To introduce the concept of classifying topos, we digress and recall some im-
portant facts of ring theory.
Up until the middle of the 19th century, even
people like Gauss, Galois and Abel took for granted that any polynomial with
coeﬃcients in a ring A had a zero somewhere, in an extension of A, although
this had not been proved.
Kronecker, following the lead of Cauchy, pointed
out that the ring A [X]/(p) contains the ‘generic’ zero G = X + (p). Further-
more, this solution is universal in the sense that (taking A = Z to simplify),
G∗: RING(Z [X]/(p), R) ≃ZeroR (p), where G∗(ϕ) is the obvious zero of p in R
obtained from ϕ, namely ϕ(G). Clearly, all of this can be generalized to ideals of
polynomials, rather than single polynomials.
This result may be interpreted as showing that although the ‘domain’ A may
fail to have a zero of a proper ideal I ⊂A [X1, X2, . . . , Xn] there is an extension

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
767
of this ‘domain’ namely A [X1, X2, . . . , Xn]/I which results from A by adding the
generic zero G of I.
These ideas underline a far reaching analogy stressed by Joyal between rings
and toposes and which can be summarized in the following table:
Ring theory
Categorical logic
Ring
Topos
Finitely presented ring
Coherent topos
Z
Set
Ideal
Theory
Zero
Model
Proper ideal
Consistent theory
Generic zero
Generic model
Notice, once more, the algebraic inspiration underlying the analogy. The cat-
egory Set plays a role analogous to the ring of integers Z in ring theory. The
various constructions to be developed in topos theory are analogous to fundamen-
tal operations of ring theory, especially constructing from the data generic zero’s
to polynomials.
The classifying topos provided the context in which the notion of generic model
could be deﬁned and developed. Joyal and Reyes showed in the early seventies
that for any coherent theory T, there is a topos B(T) and a generic model G of T
in B(T) satisfying the universal property: G∗: TOP(E, B(T)) ≃ModE(T) where
G∗is the functor which sends a geometric morphism (p∗, p∗) into a model p∗◦G
of T in E.
The topos B(T) is called the classifying topos of the theory T and it is a co-
herent topos in the sense of Grothendieck, that is roughly a topos deﬁned by a
topology having the property that every covering family is ﬁnite. The analogy
with Kronecker’s construction should be obvious. On the basis of this analogy we
may view the classifying topos of T as the ‘universe’ B(T) which results from Set
by forcing the existence of a generic model of T.
One construction of B(T) proceeds as follows.
First, given T, construct the
category of concepts [T]coh. Deﬁne a Grothedieck topology J in [T]coh by taking
all ﬁnite families {fi : Xi
/ X : 1 ≤i ≤n} such that the union of the images
of the fi is the whole of X.
This yields a site
 [T]coh , J

and the topos of
sheaves Sh
 [T]coh , J

. The latter is the classifying topos B(T) of T. The Yoneda
embedding [T]coh
/ Sh
 [T]coh , J

can be shown to be a coherent functor and
it automatically yields the generic model G.
It turns out that every coherent topos is the classifying topos of a coherent
theory (the details of this claim were worked out in Makkai & Reyes 1977). One
of the ﬁrst and important examples is the classifying topos of the theory of local
rings, also called the Zariski topos. (This example goes back to Monique Hakim,
although not from a logical point of view. See Hakim 1972.) Remember that the

768
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
theory of local rings may be axiomatized by the following coherent theory. We
add to the axioms for the theory of commutative rings with unity, the following
two coherent axioms:

i. 0 = 1 ⊢[] ⊥
ii. (∃z)((x + y)z = 1) ⊢x,y ((∃z)(xz = 1) ∨(∃z)(yz = 1))
The topology of the site can be described explicitly and a description of the generic
local ring can also be given explicitly.
A diﬀerent but equally important example was given by Joyal. Joyal has shown
that the topos of simplicial sets is the classifying topos of the theory of linear
orders with diﬀerent bottom and top elements. (See Mac Lane & Moerdijk 1994
for details.) Other examples have appeared in several investigations.
An important tool to ﬁnd the coherent theory classiﬁed by a coherent topos is
the conceptual completeness theorem mentioned above. In more detail, if T is a co-
herent theory which has a coherent model M in a coherent topos E such that there
is an equivalence of categories given by the obvious functor M ∗: TOP(E, Set) ≃
ModSet(T), then E is equivalent to B(T).
From the existence of the classifying topos and its ‘converse’, it follows that any
coherent topos results from Set by adding a generic model of a suitable coherent
theory in strict parallel to the fact that any ﬁnitely presented ring may be obtained
as a quotient of a ring of polynomials with coeﬃcients in Z divided by a suitable
ideal.
The classifying topos theorem has an inﬁnitary extension, as Makkai and Reyes
have shown in their book. In fact, it turns out that every geometric theory has also
a classifying topos and, furthermore, that every topos is the classifying topos of a
geometric theory. Thus, every Grothendieck topos appears as the extension of Set
obtained by adding a generic model of a suitable geometric theory; in complete
analogy with the representation of an arbitrary ring as a ring of polynomials (in
a possibly inﬁnite number of indeterminates) modulo some ideal, showing how
fruitful the analogy between topos theory and ring theory is. And it is far from
clear that it has been fully exploited. For instance, is there any topos theoretical
analog to Hilbert’s celebrated Nullstellensatz?
All this work brought to the forefront the logical aspects of the work done by
the Grothendieck School. For instance, as shown by Makkai and Reyes in their
book, Deligne’s theorem that coherent toposes have enough points turns out to
be, modulo the theory of classifying toposes, equivalent to G¨odel’s completeness
theorem for ﬁrst order logic. Apart from Deligne’s proof, there is a purely cate-
gorical proof given by Joyal that has strong similarities to Henkin’s proof of the
completeness theorem.
Another result of Grothendieck about point of a topos
being obtained as colimits of a set of points is a consequence of the downward
L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem.
Here is the version presented by Makkai and Reyes in November 1974. Consider
the functor category EE0 of all geometric functors u∗: E0
/E, called the category
of all E-models of E0 and denoted by Mod(E0, E). Let T be a coherent theory

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
769
and CT its corresponding conceptual category. A E-model of T in a topos E can
be taken to be a coherent functor M : CT
/ E. Let Mod(T, E) denote the full
subcategory of the functor category ET whose objects are the E-models of T. As
usual, any E0-model M0 : T
/E0 induces a functor M ∗
0 : Mod(E0, E)
/ET. Now,
E0 is a classifying topos of T with canonical model M0 : T
/ E0 if the induced
functor M ∗
0 : Mod(E0, E)
/ Mod(T, E) is an equivalence of categories, for any
topos E.
A slightly weaker deﬁnition of a classifying topos is given in their book: E0 is
a classifying topos of T with canonical model M0 : T
/ E0 if for every E-model
M : T
/ E, for any topos E, there is an E-model of E0 and a unique (up to
isomorphism) geometric functor u∗: E0
/ E such that the diagram
T
E0
M0
/
T
E
M
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
E0
E
u∗

commutes.
The main fact is that every coherent theory T has a classifying topos E0 together
with a canonical model, also called a generic model in their book, M : T
/E0. In
the paper, it is stated that the classifying topos E0 can be constructed in a purely
syntactical manner.
The ﬁrst part of the construction consists in constructing
the small coherent category CT from T. One then constructs, by formal means, a
pretopos ET and a coherent functor I : CT
/ET satisfying the universal property
for pretoposes. It can then be shown that the pretopos ET is in fact a topos.
Two other important facts about classifying toposes are stated. First, if E is a
coherent topos, as deﬁned by Grothendieck, then there is a coherent theory T such
that ET ≃E. In other words, every coherent topos is the classifying topos of some
coherent theory. It is for this reason that Makkai and Reyes claimed that the notion
of coherent topos is a logical notion. Second, let E be a coherent topos and Coh(E)
be the pretopos of coherent objects of E. (See, for instance, Makkai & Reyes 1977,
p. 276 for a deﬁnition of coherent objects.) Let M be an interpretation of L2 in
Coh(E). Suppose that M induces an equivalence c
M : Mod(E, S)
/ Mod(T, S).
Then M is a Coh(E)-model of T and E is the classifying topos for T with canonical
model M. This result is usually interpreted as saying that points are enough for
classifying.
Makkai and Reyes, following suggestions given by Mulvey and Lawvere, used
the above results to prove results of Hakim, which amounts to the claim that the
so-called Zariski topos is the classifying topos for the coherent theory of nontrivial
local rings and that the Etale topos is the classifying topos for the coherent theory
of separably closed local rings.
The second paper does not end there. The last section mentions that some of
the results obtained have an obvious generalization to models preserving inﬁnite

770
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
sups, a generalization to certain inﬁnitary sentences. It is worth mentioning that
when Makkai arrived in Montreal, he was already an expert in inﬁnitary logic,
more speciﬁcally model theory of formulas with denumerably long disjunctions and
denumerably long conjunctions. Furthermore, Reyes’ thesis was partly dedicated
to inﬁnitary languages.10 However, the full presentation of the generalization to
what is now called geometric logic will only be introduced in their book. Their
paper contains only one illustration of the generalization, a special case of the
conceptual completeness theorem that we will not state here. (For the statement
of the theorem and the complete proof, see [Makkai and Reyes, 1977, 217–236].)
Although it was not mentioned explicitly in their papers, the completeness result
for coherent logic, in fact as we will see for geometric logic, had an interesting and
potentially very useful metalogical consequence. Here is how Reyes formulated it
later:
Let T be a coherent theory in a language L and σ the universal closure of a
formula ϕ ⇒ψ, where ϕ and ψ are coherent. Then if T |= σ in the classical sense
(every set-model of T is a set-model of σ), then for any Grothendieck topos E, σ
is valid in any E-model of T [Reyes, 1978, 166, our translation].
The result means that to check that a ﬁrst-order coherent sequent is valid in-
tuitionistically, it is enough to check its validity in the topos of sets. Thus, the
metatheorem allows direct and potentially interesting generalizations from a clas-
sical setting, where presumably the computations are easy and straightforward, to
an arbitrary intuitionistic context. Reyes himself gives an application by proving
that Swan’s theorem is valid in any topos by giving a coherent formulation of it
and verifying it in the topos Set. In fact, the metatheorem is true for geometric
logic as well, to which we now turn.
4.9
Geometric logic
The notion of geometric logic appeared in print, although not as a full-blown
formal system, in Reyes’s paper on sheaves and logic in which it is presented as
the logic of sheaves. Lawvere mentioned the idea in his conference in 1973 and in
the published version of that conference. Underlying the idea of geometric logic is
the concept of geometric morphisms between toposes introduced in the sixties by
Grothendieck and was emphasized right from the start by Lawvere in 1970. In a
nutshell, geometric logic is the logic preserved by a geometric morphism between
toposes. Let us ﬁrst give a precise deﬁnition of geometric logic.
Let L0 be as above. Then the class of geometric formulas Lgeo over L0 is the
class closed under those of coherent logic except that inﬁnitary disjunctions ∨i∈Iϕi
are now admitted. The inﬁnitary rules are the obvious generalizations of the ﬁnite
cases:
φ ⊢⃗x ∨i∈Iφi if φ ∈{φi}i∈I and
10In a paper published in 1972, Reyes proved that every theory in Lµ,ω is equivalent to a
theory in Lω1,ω in a speciﬁc technical sense that we won’t clarify. Interestingly enough, Reyes
used Joyal’s Polyadic Spaces to prove his result. See [Reyes, 1972].

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
771
φ ⊢⃗x θ
∨i∈Iφi ⊢⃗x θ
∨j∈Jφj⊢⃗xθ
where {φj}j∈J = {φ} ∪{φi}i∈I.
A sequent φ ⊢⃗x ψ is geometric if both φ and ψ are geometric formulas.
A
geometric theory T is a theory in which all sequents are geometric. Two interesting
examples of geometric theories are the theory of torsion Abelian groups and the
theory of ﬁnite sets.
Many of the results obtained by Joyal, Reyes and Makkai generalize to the
case of geometric logic. Certainly the most important result is that any geometric
theory T has a classifying topos ET together with a generic model M0 : T
/ ET.
Furthermore, every topos E is the classifying topos of a geometric theory, that is
for any topos E, there is a geometric theory TE such that E ≃ETE.
5
HIGHER-ORDER LOGIC AND TOPOSES
As we have already mentioned, the very axioms of elementary toposes point to-
wards a certain conception of sets or more naturally a type theory. Accordingly,
connections between previous set theories and elementary toposes were explored
immediately showing that it is possible to construct models of a weak set theory
from various extensions of elementary toposes. For that purpose and already in
1971, W. Mitchell, Cole and Osius developed an internal language for toposes.
Here is how Osius characterizes the situation in 1973 at the Colloque sur l’alg`ebre
des cat´egories in Amiens in France.
Concerning the relationship between set theory and elementary topoi
we consider two problems :
1. Find a general procedure of proving set-theoretical results inter-
nally in a topos (internal aspect).
2. Characterize certain topoi as “ the category of sets ” arising from
certain types of models for set theory, thus generalizing the well-
known results of Cole, W. Mitchell, Osius (external aspect). ([Os-
ius, 1974b, 157])
In his lectures on elementary toposes given in the fall of 1973, Gavin Wraith writes:
There are certain developments, due to J. B´enabou, which I should
have liked to have included. Until recently, when one wished to carry
out a construction in an elementary topos that was well enough under-
stood in S, the category of sets and functions, one had to wrestle with
pullback diagrams and the like. B´enabou’s formal language permits
one to dispense with these problems, and to proceed directly to the
construction from its formal description. I believe that these methods
must displace the older, clumsier ones. ([Wraith, 1975, 115–116])

772
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Thus B´enabou had also developed a method that allowed the use of a language
to prove results about toposes. It goes without saying that Wraith’s opinion that
this new method should replace the older, clumsier one was polemical at the time.
But, indeed, it appeared quickly that the use of logical methods could be of real
value in the development of topos theory. In some cases, the geometrical methods
were convoluted, long and diﬃcult to follow and their logical counterpart were
direct, simple and almost immediate. Thus, there was a practical dimension to
the problem that seemed to be worth developing fully. Since an elementary topos
E can be thought of as a universe of sets, although not the usual sets of ZF in
general, it should be possible to treat it as such, that is to use a topos E in the
same way that one uses the category of sets. In particular, one would like to treat
objects of E as sets with “elements” and write down deﬁnitions just as in the
category of sets with the usual set-theoretical language.
As we have said, various people gave a positive answer to this question. But
B´enabou and his student Michel Coste, Michael Fourman and Andr´e Joyal in
collaboration with Andr´e Boileau, all in 1973-1974, are usually credited with the
introduction of a full, rigorous description of an appropriate formal system. The
striking fact is that the resulting higher-order type theory is purely algebraic.
5.1
Interpreting higher-order logic in toposes
We will ﬁrst present Boileau and Joyal’s approach, based on Joyal’s talk given in
April 1974, expanded and developed by Boileau in his Ph.D. thesis submitted in
1976 and then in a joint paper received by the editors of The Journal of Symbolic
Logic in July 1977 but published only in 1981. (See [Boileau and Joyal, 1981].)
A (higher-order) similarity type or signature T is given by
1. A set S of sorts (which does not include the symbol Ω). The set T of types
is build from the set of sorts as follows:
(a) if S ∈S, then S ∈T ;
(b) if S1, ..., Sn ∈T , then Ω(S1, . . . , Sn) ∈T , where n can be 0;
(c) nothing else is a type.
The type Ω( ) is denoted by Ω.
1. A set F of function symbols, to each function symbol f, we associate its type
S1 × · · · × Sn × S (with the last sort having a distinguished status); we write
f : S1 × · · · × Sn
/ S to indicate the type of f. Whenever n is 0, f is a
constant of type S and we write 1
f
−→X. Furthermore, a functional symbol
f : S1 × · · · × Sn
/ Ωwith codomain Ωwill be called a relational symbol.
Given a signature T , the language L(T ) consists of the signature, for each type
S, a countable list of variables. Terms and formulas are deﬁned by recursion as
follows:
Deﬁnition of terms:

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
773
1. every variable of type S is a term of type S;
2. if f : S1 × · · · × Sn
/ S is a function symbol and t1, . . . , tn are terms of
type S1, . . . , Sn respectively, then f(t1, . . . ., tn) is a term of type S; (if f is
a constant, we simply write f);
3. if φ is a formula and if x1, . . . , xn is a list of distinct variables of type
S1, . . . , Sn, then {(x1, . . . , xn) : φ} is a term of type Ω(S1, . . . , Sn);
Deﬁnition of formulas:
1. if t1 and t2 are terms of type S, then t1 = t2 is a formula;
2. if t1, . . . , tn are terms of type S1, . . . , Sn and if t is a term of type Ω(S1, . . . , Sn)
then (t1, . . . , tn) ∈t is a formula;
3. ⊤is a formula (‘true’ is a formula);
4. if φ and ψ are formulas, then (φ ∧ψ) is a formula;
The reader will have noticed how the higher-order structure emerges: it is the
recursive nature of 1.b for types that leads to higher types.
The remaining connectives can be deﬁned as follows:
D1. ∀xφ ≡({x : φ} = ⊤);
D2. (φ ⇒ψ) ≡((φ ∧ψ) = φ);
D3. (φ ∨ψ) ≡∀w [((φ ⇒w) ∧(ψ ⇒w) ⇒w) = ⊤]
D4. ⊥≡∀w (w = ⊤);
D5. ∃xφ ≡∀w [∀x ((φ ⇒w) ⇒w) = ⊤].
Notice that the foregoing deﬁnitions are all equational, whence the purely alge-
braic character of logical operations in this framework. A sequent over a signature
T is deﬁned as above, that is as a sequence of symbols of the form (φ ⊢⃗x ψ), where
φ and ψ are formulas over T and ⃗x is a context containing all the free variables
of φ and ψ. The deductive system is again a sequent calculus, only shorter since
there are fewer cases to cover.
1. Axiom schemas:
A1. ϕ ⊢⃗x ϕ.
A2. ϕ ⊢⃗x ⊤.
A3. ⊤⊢⃗x x = x.
A4. ϕ ∧(x = t) ⊢⃗x ϕ(t/x) provided t is free for x in ϕ.
A5. ϕ ⊢⃗y (x1, . . . , xn) ∈{(x1, . . . , xn) : ϕ}.
A6. (x1, . . . , xn) ∈{(x1, . . . , xn) : ϕ} ⊢⃗y ϕ.
2. Rules of inference:
R1.
ϕ⊢⃗xψ
ϕ⊢⃗x,⃗yψ.
R2.
ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ
ψ ⊢⃗x θ
ϕ⊢⃗xθ
.
R3.
ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ
ϕ ⊢⃗x θ
ϕ⊢⃗xψ∧θ
.

774
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
R4.
ϕ⊢⃗xψ∧θ
ϕ⊢⃗xψ
ϕ⊢⃗xψ∧θ
ϕ⊢⃗xθ .
R5.
ϕ⊢⃗xψ
ϕ(t/x)⊢⃗yψ(t/x)
where t is a term of the same type as ⃗x, and ⃗y is any string of variables including
all the variables occurring in the term t.
R6.
φ∧(x1,...,xn)∈t1⊢⃗x,⃗y(x1,...,xn)∈t2 φ∧(x1,...,xn)∈t2⊢⃗x,⃗y(x1,...,xn)∈t1
φ⊢⃗yt1=t2
where the distinct variables x1, . . . , xn are not free in φ, t1, t2.
Axioms 5 and 6 are sometimes called “comprehension axioms” and R6 is some-
times referred to as “extensionality”.
This presentation is admittedly somewhat awkward. For instance, it is far from
obvious that we are dealing with an intuitionistic logic. But it was tailored in such a
way that its interpretation in a topos becomes almost direct and, furthermore, the
categorical manipulations to be done afterwards are few and almost trivial. It was
shown by Boileau to be equivalent to the following, more standard, intuitionistic
type theory (see [Kleene, 1952] or [Hatcher, 1968]);
Axioms:
1. A ⊃(B ⊃A)
2. (A ⊃B) ⊃((A ⊃(B ⊃C) ⊃(A ⊃C))
3. A ⊃(A ∨B)
4. B ⊃(A ∨B)
5. (A ⊃C) ⊃((B ⊃C) ⊃((A ∨B) ⊃C))
6. A ⊃(B ⊃(A ∧B))
7. (A ∧B) ⊃A
8. (A ∧B) ⊃B
9. (A ⊃B) ⊃((A ⊃¬B) ⊃¬A)
10. ¬A ⊃(A ⊃B)
11. ∀xA(x) ⊃A(t) provided that x is free in A(x) and t is free for x in A(x).
12. A(x) ⊃∃xA(x) provided that xis free in A(x)
13. x = x
14. x1 = x2 ⊃(A(x1) ⊃A(x2)) provided that x2 is free for x1 in A(x1)
15. QxA ≡Qx(A ∧x = x) where Q ∈{∀, ∃}
16. ∀x1 · · · ∀xn((x1, . . . , xn) ∈X1 ≡(x1, . . . , xn) ∈X2) ⊃X1 = X2
17. A ≡(x1, . . . , xn) ∈{(x1, . . . , xn) : A}.
Rules of inference:
R1.
A
A ⊃B
B
provided that all free variables in A are free in B.
R2.
C⊃A
C⊃∀xA provided that x is not free in C.
R3.
A⊃C
∃xA⊃C provided that x is not free in C.
The ﬁrst fourteen axioms are the standard axioms for ﬁrst-order intuitionistic
logic. Axiom 15 together with the restriction on the rule of modus ponens reﬂects
the fact that there may be empty types. The higher-order axioms are also standard.
(See also [Osius, 1975] for what amounts to an equivalent proof of the same claim
and [Fourman, 1977]. We will come back to the later in a short while.)

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
775
The interpretation of a language L(T ) in a topos E is an extension of the
interpretation of ﬁrst-order language in a category of the appropriate type. Thus,
a T -structure or an interpretation M in E consists of:
1. an object MS of E for each sort S of T ; this is extended to types by stipu-
lating that M(Ω(S1, . . . , Sn)) = P(MS1 × · · · × MSn) where P(X) denotes
the power-object of X in E;
2. a morphism Mf : MS1 × · · · × MSn
/ MS for each function symbol f :
S1 × · · · × Sn
/ S of T ; in particular, when n = 0 a morphism 1
f
−→MS.
Variables-in-context, functional symbols-in-context and conjunction-in-context are
interpreted as in the foregoing section.
1. If t is {(y1, . . . , ym) : φ}, then [[⃗x · t]]M is the morphism
MS1 × · · · × MSn
/ P (MS1 × · · · × MSn) ;
1. If φ is t1 = t2, and t1 and t2 are of type T, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the composite
MS1×· · ·×MSn
⟨[[⃗x·t1]],[[⃗x·t2]]⟩
−→
MT×MT
δMT
−→Ω, where the morphism MT×MT
δMT
−→
Ωis the characteristic morphism of the diagonal MT
∆MT
−→MT × MT;
1. If φ is (t1, . . . , tm) ∈tm+1, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the composite
MS1×· · ·×MSn
⟨[[⃗x·t1]],...,[[⃗x·tm]]⟩
−→
(MT1 × · · · × MTm)×P (MT1 × · · · × MTm)
e
−→Ω;
1. If φ is ⊤, then [[⃗x · φ]]M is the composite
MS1 × · · · × MSn −→1
⊤
−→Ω.
As is obvious from the deﬁnition, every formula in context is interpreted as a
morphism into the subobject classiﬁer Ω.
Let M be a T -structure in a topos E. We say that M is a model of a sequent
σ = (φ ⊢⃗x ψ) or that σ is satisﬁed in M, we write as usual M |=E σ or simply
M |= σ, if [[⃗x · φ]]M ≤[[⃗x · ψ]]M in P(MS1 ×· · ·×MSn). We say that M is a model
of a theory T if all the axioms of T are satisﬁed in M.
As usual, a soundness theorem can now be proved: if T ⊢: (ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ), then
T |= (ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ).
Given a theory T in the language L(T ), it is once again possible to construct the
conceptual category CT and show that it is in fact a topos, which we will denote
by ET. This yields the following:
Completeness Theorem: Let T be a higher-order type theory of similarity type
T . Then, T has a canonical model M0, the canonical interpretation, in a topos ET
such that T ⊢: (ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ) if and only if M0 |=ET (ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ).
Starting with an elementary topos E, it is possible to deﬁne a higher-order
signature TE from E by transposing the foregoing procedure appropriately and
similarly the internal language LE and the type theory TE of E can be deﬁned.
The language LE is deﬁned as follows:

776
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
1. To each object X of E, we attribute a sort ⌜X⌝
2. To each morphism f : X
/ Y , we associate the function symbol ⌜f⌝:
⌜X⌝
/ ⌜Y ⌝.
3. To each relation (or monomorphism) ⌜R⌝
/ ⌜X⌝.
(There are slight technical diﬃculties one has to take care of here, in particular
with products, but we will skip these formal details.) There is then a canonical
interpretation M : LE
/ E deﬁned in the obvious way, i.e.
M(⌜X⌝) = X,
M(⌜f⌝: ⌜X⌝
/ ⌜Y ⌝) = f : X
/ Y , M(⌜R⌝
/ ⌜X⌝) = R
/ X. The theory
TE is also deﬁned in the obvious way, i.e. it is the collection of sequents ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ
such that M |= ϕ ⊢⃗x ψ.
One could be a little more speciﬁc and describe TE
with explicitly deﬁnable axioms in such a way that its theorems are precisely the
valid sequents of the canonical interpretation M. For instance, one could take the
collection of sequents of LE obtained from the categorical properties of E with a
dictionary that would include, for instance:
X
f
−→X is the identity morphism in E is translated into ⊤⊢x ⌜f⌝(x) = x, and
so on, as we have seen above.
One can then verify that indeed M |= TE.
It follows from the foregoing procedure, that given any topos E, one can show
that there is a theory, the internal theory of E, such that E |= TE.
Joyal proved in 1974 that every elementary topos E arises from a higher-order
theory (this is called the “th´eor`eme d’engendrement” in Boileau & Joyal 1981).
More speciﬁcally, the statement is that for any elementary topos E, there is a
higher-order theory, naturally TE such that E is equivalent (as a category) to CTE,
the category of concepts of TE. In this sense, a topos is nothing but a higher-
order type theory. One can therefore use TE to prove properties of E and working
internally means working in TE. For instance, Boileau shows that any topos E has
ﬁnite colimits, exponentiation from TE. He also shows Cantor’s theorem, i.e. if in
a topos E, there is an object X and an epimorphism X ։ ΩX, then E is trivial,
that is 1 ≃0, from TE.
The reader will have noticed that we have not included an object N of natural
numbers in our theory. This constitutes an extension of the fundamental theory.
Other extensions include being Boolean, being two-valued, or satisfying the axiom
of choice, which can be formulated in diﬀerent ways.
We can now see the unity underlying Joyal’s work from regular categories to
elementary toposes. Indeed, we start with the language L0 presented in section 4.4
and deﬁne four new higher-order languages: L5, L6, L7 and L8 from L0 as follows.
First, for L5. We close the set of sorts with the operation Ω(−, . . . , −) to obtain the
set of types. Terms and formulas are deﬁned as before, with the symbols ∃, ∨, ⊥,
⊃, ∀to form new formulas. The language L6 is deﬁned like L5, except that we now
allow the negation operator ¬ in the construction of formulas. L7 is constructed
from L0 by adding a new sort N and two new functional symbols, 0 and s. Types
and formulas are constructed as in L5. To construct L8, we proceed as with L7,

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
777
but by including all types and formulas of L6 instead of L5. The logical systems
corresponding to these languages are then deﬁned in the expected manner, i.e. by
adding the appropriate sequents at each stage. Recall that L0 is purely equational
logic, L1 is regular logic, L2 is coherent logic, L3 is ﬁrst order intuitionistic logic,
L4 is ﬁrst order classical logic. As we have seen, L5 is intuitionistic type theory,
L6 is classical type theory, L7 is intuitionistic type theory with N and L8 classical
type theory with N. One can then prove that:
L0
L1
L2
L3



















L5








L6
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
L4
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
L7








L8
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Needless to say, one can then move to conceptual categories and construct a
diagram of functors between the respective categories thus obtained.
5.2
Fourman’s approach
Let us now brieﬂy consider Fourman’s approach, since it diﬀers from the foregoing
in important and interesting ways.
Fourman starts with a primitive predicate, denoted by E, called the existence
predicate. Thus, given a term t, one reads “Et” as “t exists”. There is another
primitive relation, namely a notion of equivalence between terms, i.e.
t ≡s.
Equality of terms is then deﬁned from the two primitive notions by t = s ⇔
(t ≡s) ∧Et ∧Es. The deﬁnition of the formal system proceeds as follows. For
convenience, another term is introduced, the deﬁnite description Ixϕ, which is
read “the unique x such that ϕ”.
Deﬁnition: A higher-order language L is speciﬁed by the following data:
1. Two sets Sort and Const of sorts and constants.

778
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
2. A power-type map from S
n∈ω Sortn
/ Sort, written as (S1, . . . , Sn) 7→
[S1, . . . , Sn].
3. A map assigning a sort to each constant, # : Const
/ Sort.
As in the foregoing case, for each sort S, there is a countable list of variables and
each variable x has a sort #x.
Deﬁnition of terms:
1. Every variable of sort S is a term of type S;
2. Every constant c of sort #c is a term;
3. If x is a variable of sort S and ϕ a formula, then Ixϕ is a term of sort S.
Deﬁnition of formulas:
1. If t is a term, then Et is a formula;
2. If t1 and t2 are terms of sort S, then t1 ≡t2 is a formula;
3. If t is a term of sort [S1, . . . , Sn] and t1, . . . , tn are of sorts S1, . . . , Sn respec-
tively, then t (t1, . . . , tn) is a formula;
4. If ϕ and ψ are formulas, then so are (ϕ ∧ψ) and (ϕ ⊃ψ);
5. If x is a variable and ϕ is a formula, then ∀xϕ is a formula.
The empty power sort [] can be thought of as consisting of truth-values. Thus if t
is a term of sort [], then t () is a formula and it asserts the proposition t.
The remaining connectives are also deﬁnable in this system, but we will skip
the deﬁnitions.
1. Axioms
A1. ϕ ⊃(ψ ⊃ϕ),
A2. (ϕ ⊃(ψ ⊃θ)) ⊃((ϕ ⊃ψ) ⊃(ϕ ⊃θ)),
A3. (ϕ ∧ψ) ⊃ϕ
A4. (ϕ ∧ψ) ⊃ψ
A5. (ϕ ⊃(ψ ⊃(ϕ ∧ψ)))
A6. (ϕ [y/x] ∧y ≡z) ⊃ϕ [z/x] (Substituvity of equivalents),
A7. ∀x(x ≡y ⇔x ≡z) ⊃y ≡z (Extensionality),
A8. (∀xϕ ∧Ex) ⊃ϕ (Universal instantiation),
A9. ∀y(y ≡Ixϕ ⇔∀x(ϕ ⇔x ≡y)) (Description),
A10. EIy∀⃗x(ϕ ⇔y(⃗x)) (Comprehension)
A11. y(⃗x) ⊃Ey ∧
n∧
i=1 Exi (Predication).
2. Rules of inference:
R1.
ϕ
ϕ ⊃ψ
ψ
,
R2.
ϕ
ϕ[t/x],

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
779
R3.
(ψ∧Ex)⊃ϕ
ψ⊃∀xϕ
where x is not free in ψ.
The notion of derivability is deﬁned as usual: Γ ⊢ϕ means that ϕ is derivable
from the set Γ of formulas. A theory T is a set of formulas such that if T ⊢ϕ,
then ϕ ∈T. Also, a theory T has an underlying language denoted by LT.
The reader will have noticed that types haven’t been mentioned. They are in
fact deﬁned: a type is a term of the form Iy∀x(ϕ ⇔y(x)). If x is of sort X,
then this term is of sort [X]. It is abbreviated as {x : ϕ}. Thus, types are seen as
“subsets” of sorts. A type is deﬁnable if and only if it is a closed term.
Fourman proceeds to prove that the conceptual category CT of a theory T in
the higher-order language LT is in fact a topos, denoted as usual ET. He explicitly
attributes the construction of CT to Joyal. He then deﬁnes the interpretation of a
language L in a topos E and proves soundness and completeness theorems. Finally,
given a topos E, he deﬁnes the internal language LE of E and its theory TE and
proves that E ≃ETE. Various extensions, including toposes with a natural number
object, are then considered.
5.3
Revising logic: the debate
An interesting debate between Fourman and Boileau & Joyal followed. We will
simply summarize the main points raised in the debate.
Here are Fourman’s arguments in favor of his system:
1. Fourman’s approach contains an original component, namely an existence
predicate;
2. Because their approach lacks this predicate, Boileau and Joyal are forced to
make awkward restrictions on the rule of modus ponens;
3. In the words of Fourman’s himself: “we emphatically do not agree that
because of this [i.e. the modiﬁcations to the rule of modus ponens] “the
traditional logical way of dealing with variables . . . should be abandoned”.
The traditional use of variables has much to commend it and there are far
less drastic remedies to hand.” [Fourman, 1977, 1054])
In a nutshell: Fourman insists on the original component of his system, which
allows him to avoid revising the way variables are used in deductions. Still in other
words, the basic principles of deduction stay the same and there is an original
component to the theory.
It seems only fair to bring in Dana Scott’s voice to the debate, since he was
Fourman’s thesis advisor and did write on related issues around the same time.
Scott’s position ﬁnds its justiﬁcation in a certain interpretation of intuitionism.
Standard formulations of intuitionistic logic, whether by logicians or by
category theorists, generally do not take into account partially deﬁned
elements. (For a recent reference see [Makkai and Reyes, 1977, esp. pp.
144–163].) Perhaps there is a simple psychological reason : we dislike

780
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
talking of those things not already proved to exist. Certainly we should
not assume that things exist without making this assumption explicit.
In classical logic the problem is not important, because it is always
possible to split the deﬁnition (or theorem) into cases according as
the object in question does or does not exist. In intuitionistic logic
this way is not open to us, and the circumstance complicates many
constructions, the theory of descriptions, for example. Many people I
ﬁnd do not agree with me, but I should like to advocate in a mild way in
this paper what I consider a simple extension of the usual formulation
of logic allowing reference to partial elements. (. . . )
Technically the idea is to permit a wider interpretation of free vari-
ables. All bound variables retain their usual existential import (when
we say something exists it does exist), but free variables behave in a
more “ schematic ” way. Thus there will be no restrictions on the use
of modus ponens or on the rule of substitution involving free variables
and their occurrences. The laws of quantiﬁers require some modiﬁ-
cation, however, to make the existential assumptions explicit.
The
modiﬁcation is very straightforward, and I shall argue that what has
to be done is simply what is done naturally in making a relativization
of quantiﬁers from a larger domain to a subdomain.
(. . . )
The idea of schematic free variables is not new for classical logic, and
the literature on “ free ” logic (or logic without existence assumptions)
is extensive. (. . . ) All I have done in this essay is to make what seems to
me to be the obvious carryover to intuitionistic logic, because I think it
is necessary and convenient. For those who do not like this formulation,
some comfort can be taken from the fact that in topos theory both
kinds of systems are completely equivalent, and the domains of partial
elements can be deﬁned at higher types (. . . ). However, in ﬁrst-order
logic something is lost in not allowing partial elements, as I shall argue
along the way.
(. . . )
Is the existence predicate E an illusion? Was the equality predicate
an illusion? No. We shall ﬁnd in the section, with a full statement of
the laws of equality, that E can always be deﬁned in terms of quan-
tiﬁcation :. . .
. However, both in conception and in the models of
(intuitionistic) logic we have in mind, the existence predicate is more
basic than equality and prior to it. [Scott, 1979, 660–662])
The psychological reason can probably be dismissed altogether. From an an-
thropological point of view, it is hard to sustain the claim that “we dislike talking
of those things not already proved to exist”. In fact, the contrary seems to be
the case: as a whole, we seem to enjoy very much talking of those things whose

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
781
actual existence is completely unknown. Of course, Scott is here talking about
mathematicians, a diﬀerent cultural group if there is one and he might be for-
mulating a deontological maxim for mathematicians than anything else. Notice
that Scott acknowledges the fact that as far as higher-order intuitionistic logic
is concerned, that is topos theory, the various systems presented can be shown
to be formally equivalent. We should emphasize, in the same vein, the fact that
Fourman also “regards topos theory as the “algebraic” form of this higher-order
intuitionistic logic” [Fourman, 1977, 1054]. First-order logic seems to be the real
issue, although it is not so easy to separate the various logical systems in such a
way.
Here is Boileau and Joyal’s rebuttal.
1. First, as Fourman explicitly admits (see Fourman 1977, 1070), his system is
an abstract codiﬁcation of a category of H-sets, where H is a Heyting algebra,
which was shown by Higgs to be equivalent to a topos of sheaves over the
Heyting algebra of open sets of a topological space. Fourman is thus lead to
consider a sheaf as a set with a complementary structure. Boileau and Joyal
believe that the formal presentation should not present the objects as sets
with a structure, but simply as sets with a speciﬁc logic.
2. The logical system developed by Boileau and Joyal is claimed to be more
simple and natural than Fourman’s system. One can work with the objects
as if they were sets, provided that the logical rules, constructive in their
workings if not in their spirit, are respected.
3. Fourman’s system is perfectly legitimate for toposes, but the underlying
intuition does not generalize to other cases. By adding the idea of the support
of a sequent, one can treat logical systems in various categories.
4. The last point brings us to the underlying unity of Boileau and Joyal’s ap-
proach. Although the notion of deduction is modiﬁed or restricted in contrast
with the classical notion, one can treat various logical systems in a uniﬁed
manner.
In a nutshell, Boileau and Joyal insists on the fact that Fourman’s approach is
somewhat ad hoc and that their approach is simpler and provides a uniﬁed frame-
work to do and develop categorical logic in general. Furthermore, but this point
is not underlined by the actors involved in the dispute, it is clear that Joyal’s
approach was right from the start motivated by the desire to minimize the dis-
tance between the syntax of categories and the syntax of logic. Evidence for this
is easy to ﬁnd: the choice of a Gentzen type presentation of logic, the choice of
a multi-sorted system, the choice of rules which are simply rewriting of adjunc-
tions between functors, and as we have seen, the higher-order type theory itself,
which was chosen so that the interpretation of the connectives is simple and almost
immediate in toposes. Stipulating the context of a deduction is nothing neither
more nor less than the idea that a function necessarily has an underlying domain

782
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
and codomain, although set theorists never conceived of functions that way. In
contrast, Fourman and Scott are more preoccupied by purely logical issues and
categories, in particular toposes, are seen as providing new metalogical resources
in the study of intuitionistic and more generally constructive systems. An illustra-
tion of this position is found in their joint paper entitled Sheaves and Logic, also
published in the proceedings of the Durham meeting and related to Scott’s paper.
Scott’s paper in this volume describes a system of higher-order logic
which may be interpreted in any topos. Here we describe the models
of this logic given by sheaves over a complete Heyting algebra (cHa).
These sheaf models subsume the more familiar Beth, Kripke and topo-
logical interpretations of intuitionistic logic, which correspond to in-
terpretations in sheaves over the appropriate cHa of “truth values”.
They also provide a uniform way of extending these interpretations
to higher-order logic and thus help to explain the models of analysis
of Scott, Moschovakis and van Dalen. Once we go beyond ﬁrst-order
logic, these sheaf models are more general than Beth, Kripke or topo-
logical models. Models over a site (. . . ) provide yet more generality.
(. . . ) Sites also arise naturally in ﬁrst-order model theory once we take
into account the comparisons between various models made possible by
geometric morphisms. For a presentation of this theory see Makkai and
Reyes 1977. However, we ﬁnd a full-blown categorical presentation is
often too abstract and results in very heavy machinery’s being brought
to bear on very simple problems. By restricting our attention to the
special case of models over a cHa, we hope to make what is simple
look simple. Models over cHa show clearly the link with traditional
models for intuitionistic logic and are suﬃcient for many applications.
([Fourman and Scott, 1979, 303])
Thus, according to Fourman and Scott, logic has precedence over categorical
ideas and methods. The latter are certainly useful, but there is no need to look
for the most general result in that framework nor to ﬁnd a uniﬁed framework that
would be based on the categorical framework. Two speciﬁc rebuttals are in order.
First, as Lawvere has emphasized in the eighties, one has to distinguish between
petit toposes and gros toposes. Examples of petit toposes are precisely toposes of
sheaves over a cHa (or a locale) and examples of gros toposes are toposes of all
spaces of a certain type or the topos of simplicial sets. The point is that gros
toposes have very diﬀerent properties from petit toposes. Scott is here ignoring
the class of gros toposes, which nonetheless are important not only in mathematics
in general but for logic too. (See [Lawvere, 1986; Lawvere, 1989].) Second, for
some applications, classifying toposes (“models over a site” in Scott’s terminology)
constitute a powerful tool. A classical example of this sort was given by Joyal in
the seventies with his construction of the so-called formal reals for which local
compactness fails.
(See, [ˇSˇcedrov, 1984, section 4.2] and the whole paper for
various examples or [Johnstone, 2002].)

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
783
6
THE METHOD OF FORCING IN TOPOSES: KRIPKE-JOYAL
SEMANTICS
In the foregoing sections, the relationship between a topos E and its associated
theory TE might seem to be, in some sense, too close for comfort.
For E can
be given in the form of TE and it is thus diﬃcult to see how E could be useful
in order to understand TE. However, Grothendieck toposes were given and can
be given independently of a theory and they are, in a precise technical sense
that we will not clarify here, incompatible with ﬁnitary theories. Furthermore,
Joyal quickly showed that Grothendieck toposes encompasses the usual semantics,
at least for intuitionistic and classical logic: algebraic, topological and Kripke
models. Joyal generalized Kripke’s semantics for intuitionistic logic in the context
of Grothendieck toposes. The interesting feature of the Kripke-Joyal semantics is
that it can be manipulated classically. It should be emphasized immediately that
Joyal’s work was not a generalization for the sake of generalizing; it was seen and
presented as an eﬃcient method to prove results about toposes in the same way
that Kripe semantics was used to prove results about intuitionistic logic.
Let E be an elementary topos, L an higher-order language and M : L
/ E an
interpretation of L in E. Let G be a full sub-category of E such that
i) G is closed under subobjects, i.e. given i : A ֌ X of E and X in G, then i
and therefore A is in G;
ii) |G| is a set of generators for E, that is if X
h
−→
−→
k
Y are such that h ̸= k in E,
then there is an object G in G and a morphism A
f
−→X such that h ◦f ̸= k ◦f.
Deﬁnition (Kripke-Joyal semantics): Let G be an object of G, ϕ(x1, . . . , xn) a
formula of L and G
ai
−→Xi, 1 ≤i ≤n, where Xi = M (“the sort of x′′
i ). The
morphism ai is sometimes called a generalized element of Xi at stage G. We deﬁne
the relation G ||−ϕ(a1, . . . , an) and say that ‘ϕ(a1, . . . , an) holds at stage G’ or
that ‘G forces ϕ(a1, . . . , an)’ as follows:
(1) G ||−a1 = a2 if and only if a1 = a2 : G
/ X;
(2) G ||−a ∈A if and only if the diagram
X × ΩX
Ω
eX /
G
X × ΩX
(a,A)

G
1
!
/ 1
Ω
⊤

commutes;
(3) G ||−R(a1, . . . , an) if and only if the triangle

784
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
G
X1 × · · · × Xn
(a1,...,an)
/
G
M(R(x1, . . . , xn))
%L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
X1 × · · · × Xn
M(R(x1, . . . , xn))
O
commutes;
(4) G ||−ϕ(⃗a) ∧ψ(⃗b) if and only if G ||−ϕ(⃗a) and G ||−ψ(⃗b);
(5) G ||−ϕ(a1, . . . , an) ∨ψ(b1, . . . , bm) if and only if there are morphisms t1 :
G1
/G and t2 : G2
/G in G such that t1 +t2 : G1 +G2 ։ G is an epimorphism
and G1 ||−ϕ(a1t1, . . . , ant1) and G2 ||−ψ(b1t2, . . . , bmt2);
(6) G ||−ϕ(a1, . . . , an) ⊃ψ(b1, . . . , bm) if and only if for all t : G′
/ G in G, if
G′ ||−ϕ(a1t, . . . , ant), then G′ ||−ψ(b1t, . . . , bmt);
(7) G ||−¬ϕ(⃗a) if and only if for all t : G′
/ G in G, if G′ ||−ϕ(a1t, . . . , ant),
then G′ ≃0;
(8) G ||−∀zϕ(z, a1, . . . , an) if and only if for all t : G′
/G in G and b : G′
/Z,
G′ ||−ϕ(b, a1t, . . . , ant);
(9) G ||−∃zϕ(z, a1, . . . , an) there is
n
Gi
ti
−→G : i ∈I
o
in G and there is
n
Gi
bi
−→Z : i ∈I
o
such that
• (∀i ∈I)(Gi ||−ϕ(bi, a1ti, . . . , anti)
• ∀X in E∀h, k ∈HomE(G, X)(h ̸= k ⊃∃i ∈I(hti ̸= kti)).
The full subcategory G comes from the case of a Grothendieck topos generated
by a site, whose image in the topos is G. One can also consider special cases of
interest. First, for an arbitrary topos E, it is always possible to let G = E. Two
other cases worth mentioning are: 1) G = Sub(1), which corresponds to toposes
of sheaves over a topological space and yields a particularly simple formulation of
the semantics and 2) the case when G = 1, that is when the terminal object is a
generator. In the latter case, the topos E is Boolean and it can be shown that the
semantics “is” the classical set-theoretical semantics (this is not quite precise, but
can be clariﬁed easily).
One natural question to ask is how the internal semantics of a topos E relates
to the Kripke-Joyal semantics. In fact, they coincide in the following sense:
Theorem: Let L′ be the language build from L by adding to the latter new
sorts, one for each G of G and new functional symbols, one for each G
a
−→M(S),
where S is a sort of L, and let M ′ be the obvious extension of M to L′. Then:
(i) G ||−ϕ(a1, . . . , an) if and only if M ′ |= ⊤⊢⃗a ϕ(a1(g), . . . , an(g))
(ii) If ϕ is a sentence of L, then M |= ⊤⊢ϕ if and only if ∀G in G(G ||−ϕ).

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
785
7
FIBRED CATEGORIES AND LOGIC
Although this development found its full expression in the late eighties and early
nineties, it has to be mentioned since it has become an important part of categorical
logic and it has its roots in work done in the late sixties and mid-seventies. We
will concentrate on the roots themselves and only point to certain presentations
of the contemporary literature.
As we have mentioned, Lawvere and Lambek were both in Zurich in 1965-66
and at that time Lawvere was developing his ideas on categorical logic while, as we
have seen, Lambek was generalizing results about posets to categories. Lawvere
asked Lambek whether he had noticed that Tarski’s ﬁxed point theorem for posets
generalized to categories and Lambek answered by showing him his manuscript of
A ﬁxpoint theorem for complete categories, published in 1968. (A result that is
now better known by theoretical computer scientists than by category theorists,
although the distinction between these two groups is nowadays more and more
diﬃcult to make.) Lawvere, as we have also mentioned, returned to the issue of
ﬁxed point theorems in 1968 and published his Diagonal Arguments and Carte-
sian Closed Categories, in the proceedings of the meeting of the Batelle Institute
in 1969. This paper not only contains the deﬁnition of a Cartesian Closed Cate-
gory (CCC), but it also suggests explicitly that a CCC is an algebraic version of
type theory, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, that a theory gives rise to a
category with ﬁnite products, now called a Cartesian category. There is, further-
more, an indication that Lawvere saw a connection between CCCs and Church’s
λ-calculus. Although there is no explicit mention of this connection in the paper,
there is a clear indication that Lawvere did indeed see a connection. It is presented
right from the start, in the very deﬁnition of a Cartesian Closed category. The
key ingredient is in the deﬁnition of what Lawvere called the λ-transform of a
morphism. Let C be a CCC and h : X
/ Y A be a morphism. Then h is said to
be the λ-transform of f if and only if the diagram
A × Y A
Y
ev /
A × X
A × Y A
1×h

A × X
Y
f
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
is commutative. In particular, when X = 1, the terminal object, it follows that
every f : A
/ Y gives rise to a unique morphism f : 1
/ Y A, called the ‘name
of f’. Lambek was to use this connection systematically later.
At the same conference, Lambek presented his second paper on the relationships
between categories and deductive systems and certainly took note of this connec-
tion, since it comes back in his third paper on the topic. Although these papers
were not inﬂuential at ﬁrst, they contain ideas that were to become important
later.

786
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Already in the mid-ﬁfties, Lambek, together with his colleague Findley, had
noticed a similarity between certain results in the theory of bimodules and deduc-
tive systems. Lambek and Findley developed a notation for certain concepts and
wrote a paper on the subject, entitled Calculus of Bimodules, that was never pub-
lished, since the results contained therein were supposedly subsumed by Cartan
and Eilenberg’s work that was about to appear in their book on homological alge-
bra. (There is, however, a published trace of their work in a M.Sc. thesis submitted
under Maranda’s supervision at the Universit´e de Montr´eal, done by Vaillancourt.
See [Vaillancourt, 1968].) Lambek used the same notation in his ﬁrst investigation
of linguistics in a paper published in 1958. (See [Lambek, 1958].) Once he had
learned category theory, Lambek realized that they were in fact looking at certain
morphisms in speciﬁc concrete categories and that the results could be reformu-
lated and developed in a categorical context. Lambek published three papers on
deductive systems and categories, the ﬁrst one in 1968, the second one in 1969 and
the third one in 1972. Although the three papers have the same title and seem
to be forming a complete whole, they are in fact independent from one another.
They are simply on the same theme and constitute various attempts at developing
the same ideas, which is formulated at the beginning of the very ﬁrst paper:
Roughly speaking, the situation is this: While deductive systems may
be viewed as free algebra on the category of pre-ordered sets, they may
also be used to construct free algebras on the category of all categories
in some universe. The crucial step in the argument is the construction
of a category whose objects are terms of a given deductive system and
whose maps are equivalence classes of proofs. ([Lambek, 1968a, 287].)
In modern terminology, the main problem could be formulated as follows: how
to construct all arrows A
/ B in the free biclosed monoidal category generated
by a graph and to decide when two such arrows are equal. The ﬁrst problem,
namely the construction of the free category of the right sort, was solved by gener-
alizing Gentzen’s cut-elimination theorem, ﬁrst to substructural logic and then to
certain structured categories. The second problem, deciding when two arrows are
equal, was attacked in full generality in the second paper Deductive Systems and
Categories II. Standard Constructions and Closed Categories. It also introduces
explicitly the notion of a free biclosed monoidal category. However, the paper
contains a certain number of mistakes. The satisfactory solution to the second
problem was ﬁnally presented in a paper published in 1993. (See [Lambek, 1993].)
In his third paper, Deductive systems and categories III, presented at Dalhousie
in January 1972, Lambek starts with Cartesian closed categories and tries to es-
tablish an equivalence with combinatory logic. More speciﬁcally, he shows how to
go from combinatory logic, deﬁned in the paper as ontologies, to Cartesian closed
categories, but he was unable to verify that one could go in the opposite direction.
This problem was solved later, in fact in the early eighties. It is here that Lam-
bek developed systematically the connection between CCCs and typed λ-calculi.
Modifying slightly the foregoing notation (and the formal context somewhat, but

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
787
we won’t give the details), given a morphism ϕ(x) : 1
/ Y , there exists a unique
morphism f : A
/ Y such that fx = ϕ(x), where x : 1
/ A. The name of
f can in this case be written as λx∈Aϕ(x) in the corresponding λ-calculus. In
collaboration with Phil Scott, they showed that the category of typed λ-calculi
(with translations as morphisms) and the category of Cartesian closed categories
with weak natural number objects (and Cartesian closed functors preserving weak
natural numbers objects on the nose) are equivalent. ([Lambek and Scott, 1986,
79, Theorem 11.3].)
However, the main moral of all these papers is already stated in the foregoing
quote: it is the correspondence between propositions of a deductive system with
the objects of a corresponding category and the (equivalence classes of) proofs of
the deductive system and the morphisms of the corresponding category. This cor-
respondence is now summarized by the slogan propositions-as-objects and proofs-
as-morphisms. This fundamental correspondence constitutes the ﬁrst element of
three essential ideas at the heart of developments of categorical logic that took
part from the mid to the late eighties. The other two ideas were, in the ﬁrst place,
Lawvere’s analysis of the comprehension principle and B´enabou’s work on ﬁbred
categories.
Later in 1968, at the conference on applications of categorical algebra that
took place in New York, Lawvere extended the connections between CCCs and
logic in the direction of higher-order logic and type theory.
The goal was to
provide an analysis of equality and the comprehension schema as adjoint functors
to elementary functors, thus including them in the algebraic approach.
Lawvere’s basic strategy was to organize the logical data in a more complicated
structure, now called an hyperdoctrine, given by the following data. First, one
starts with a category T of types assumed to be Cartesian closed. This is, in
a sense, the base category with its underlying logic.
The morphisms of T are
thought of as terms. Then, the additional structure is given “over” the types,
so to speak. For each type X, there is a Cartesian closed category P(X), whose
morphisms are “deductions over X”, and which is thought of as the “attributes
of type X”. Furthermore, for every term f : X
/ Y , there is a functor f ∗:
P(Y )
/P(X), called by Lawvere “substitution along f”, such that (gf)∗= f ∗g∗
(strictly speaking the last equality should be an isomorphism, but Lawvere notes
that equality holds in all the examples he considers). Finally, the operation of
substitution has two adjoints, left and right, which are, respectively, the existential
and the universal quantiﬁcation along f. Again, Lawvere emphasizes the fact that
the concept of hyperdoctrine is purely equational.
Lawvere then gives a series of examples, some of which are barely sketched. For
instance, he suggests that any multi-sorted higher-order theory, intuitionistic or
classical, yields an hyperdoctrine. The objects are the basic types of the theory,
closed under the operations of product and exponentiation and the morphisms
are equivalence classes of (tuples) of terms from the theory.
The equivalence
class is not deﬁned nor the construction presented. Given an object X, P(X)
consists of all formulas of the theory whose free variables correspond to the type

788
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
X. Morphisms of P(X) can be taken to be entailments and in this case P(X) is
a preordered set or “one may take suitable “homotopy classes” of deductions in
the usual sense.” [Lawvere, 1970b, 4] Needless to say, the last claim still has to be
clariﬁed. Lawvere himself cautiously writes that “one can write down an inductive
deﬁnition of the “homotopy” relation, but the author does not understand well
what results (some light is shed on this question by the work of L¨auchli and
Lambek cited above).” [Lawvere, 1970b, 4] Lambek’s work referred to here is the
work on coherence that was ﬂawed. But Lawvere immediately moves on to add
that “although such syntactically presented hyperdoctrines are quite important,
it is fortunate for the intuition that there are also semantically-deﬁned examples,
as below.” [Lawvere, 1970b, 4] And indeed, the examples involving sets are clear,
interesting and support the basic intuition.
The simplest example, but perhaps not the most interesting, is the case when
T = Set, the category of (small) sets and mappings and, for each set X, P(X) =
2X, the set of subsets of X, or equivalently the set of characteristic functions
deﬁned on X. In this case, f ∗is simply the inverse image and the existential
quantiﬁer is the image. As such, this example is not surprising. More interesting
perhaps is the case when T is the same but P(X) = SetX. An attribute of X is
then a family ϕx of sets indexed by the elements x ∈X. A deduction ϕ
/ψ over
X is any family of functions ϕx
/ ψx. In particular, P(1) is the category Set of
sets and can be thought of as the category of truth-values (an unusual many-valued
logic). Lawvere conceives this example as “a kind of set-theoretical surrogate of
proof theory” (Lawvere 1970, 4) and proceeds to speculate that “honest proof
theory would presumably also yield a hyperdoctrine with nontrivial P(X), but a
syntactically-presented one.” [Lawvere, 1970b, 4] It is precisely this insight that
was about to become central to the developments in the eighties.
Going up on the ladder of abstraction, the next example consists in taking
a category of small categories, which is Cartesian closed, and consider functor
categories P(C) = SetC for the attributes over the type C. Remember that Lawvere
presented this material before the discovery of elementary toposes and he does
not make an explicit connection with Grothendieck toposes. Needless to say, the
connection has become important afterwards.
From a conceptual point of view, the important point is that hyperdoctrines
are related to another categorical concept, although Lawvere did not exploit the
connection.
Indeed, he explicitly made a reference to ﬁbred categories in the
opening statement of his paper.
The notion of hyperdoctrine was introduced (. . . ) in an initial study of
systems of categories connected by speciﬁc kinds of adjoints that arise
in formal logic, proof theory, sheaf theory, and group-representation
theory. . . . . Since then the author has noticed that yet another “logical
operation”, namely that which assigns to every formula ϕ its “exten-
sion” {x : ϕ(x)} is characterized by adjointness, and that the “same”
adjoint in a diﬀerent hyperdoctrine leads to the notion of ﬁbered cat-
egory. [Lawvere, 1970b, 1]

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
789
What he says there is that the concept of hyperdoctrine leads to the notion
of ﬁbred category.
Later in the same paper, Lawvere reports that “Gray, by
introducing the appropriate notion of 2-dimensional adjointness, has shown that
all the features of a hyperdoctrine, including our comprehension scheme, can be
obtained by deﬁning a type to be an arbitrary category and an attribute of type
B to be any ﬁbration over B.” [Lawvere, 1970b, 3] Thus, from a purely conceptual
point of view, one could start with ﬁbrations and use the later framework to
develop the connection between type theory and categorical logic.
What was
lacking at ﬁrst, perhaps, was a clear motivation and the right tools to do so. As
early as 1974, Jean B´enabou pushed the idea that ﬁbrations should be taken as
the foundation of category theory itself and laid the groundwork that was to lead,
when combined with Lawvere’s ideas on hyperdoctrines, the groundwork done in
the seventies on ﬁrst-order and higher-order logics and results by Lambek, Scott,
Seely, Hyland, Pitts and others, to the developments of categorical logic in this
direction in the eighties. (The reference on the subject is [Jacobs, 1999].)
B´enabou had already given a series of talks on ﬁbrations and logic in the sum-
mer of 1974 in Montr´eal. In the fall of 1975, he presented in Paris two related
papers. In the ﬁrst one, he describes, explicitly in the context of 2-categories,
the hierarchy of categorical doctrines, e.g. Cartesian, regular, coherent, etc., the
notion of a generic model of a theory and results on ﬁnitary objects in a topos.
The second paper is about small and locally small ﬁbrations and ends with a proof
of a classifying topos for geometric theories. (See [B´enabou, 1975].) Three aspects
are striking in B´enabou’s papers. First, the papers are thoroughly categorical: all
deﬁnitions and methods are categorical. For instance, the various types of cate-
gorical doctrines are deﬁned not by specifying a formal ﬁrst-order language, but
by giving properties on diagrams, thus in the spirit of Ehresmann and of what
are now called sketches. Second, all the results are expressed in the context of
2-categories and 2-functors, and some in bicategories. B´enabou himself had in-
troduced earlier a study of bicategories, an important generalization of category
theory that was to come back on the scene in the late eighties and nineties. At the
time, even some category theorists were reluctant to “higher-dimensional” cate-
gories (although 2-categories are strict and not as such higher-dimensional in the
way bicategories are). Third, the use of ﬁbrations for the conceptual clariﬁcation
of fundamental issues related to categories. We underline these three aspects to
emphasize the originality, coherence and rigor of B´enabou’s work at the time. We
will now summarize some of the results on ﬁbrations contained in the papers.
B´enabou presupposes the deﬁnition of a ﬁbration in his papers. First, we in-
troduce a notational but very suggestive convention. In the context of ﬁbred cat-
egories, we use the vertical notation
E
↓p
B
to denote a functor p : E
/ B. Given
an object X in B, the ﬁbre p−1(X) over X is the category whose objects are those
objects A of E such that p(A) = X and the morphisms are those f : A
/ B in
E such that p(f) = 1X in B. An object A in E such that p(A) = X is said to be

790
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
above X and, similarly, a morphism f in E such that p(f) = u is said to be above
u. The category B is called the base category and E the total category. This termi-
nology goes back to the early 1940’s when the notion of ﬁbration was introduced
in homotopy theory. Grothendieck extended it to categories in the early sixties.
Deﬁnition: Let p : E
/ B be a functor.
1. A morphism f : A
/ B in E is said to be Cartesian over u : X
/ Y in
B if p(f) = u and if for every g : C
/ B such that p(g) = u ◦w for some
w : p(C)
/ X, then there is a unique h : C
/ A in E above w such that
f ◦h = g. This situation is best depicted by the following diagram:
E
B
p

A
B
f
/
C
A
h



C
B
g
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
X
Y
u
/
p(C)
X
w

p(C)
Y
u◦w=p(g)
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
2. The functor p : E
/ B is a ﬁbration if for every B in E and u : X
/ p(B)
in B, there is a Cartesian morphism f : A
/ B in E above u. A ﬁbration is
also called a ﬁbred category.
B´enabou gave conditions for a ﬁbration to be small or locally small. These are
important conceptual clariﬁcations. Up to that day, category theorists, and in
particular those working in topos theory, were assuming an ambient universe that
allowed one to assume what being small and locally small meant. Thus, a category
of sets was more or less assumed for certain foundational purposes, in particular
for issues of size. What B´enabou showed, and developed later in a paper published
in 1985 is that the concept of ﬁbration was precisely what was needed to give a
conceptually sound analysis of these problems. In a ﬁbration p : E
/ B, the base
category B provides the “universe” for the total category E. Thus, being locally
small in E means that the Hom-sets of E can be represented as objects of B. As we
have said, the most interesting result with respect to categorical logic announced
by B´enabou is the proof of the existence of classifying toposes from the fact that
certain ﬁbrations are small. See [B´enabou, 1985].
In the eighties, categorical logicians picked up on the notion of hyperdoctrines
and the conceptual framework provided by B´enabou, sometimes in terms of in-
dexed categories, as a semantical framework and developed the syntactical as-
pects of the work to obtain more speciﬁc type theories and completeness the-

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
791
orems for them in this framework.
(See [Seely, 1983; Seely, 1984; Seely, 1987;
Lamarche, 1991; Moggi, 1991] and, of course, [Jacobs, 1999].)
8
THE DURHAM MEETING
It seems more than appropriate to end with a brief survey of the Durham meeting
that took place from July 9 to July 21 in the summer of 1977. It constitutes in
our mind the endpoint of the ﬁrst period initiated by Lawvere in 1963. The title
of the meeting was Applications of Sheaves and the subtitle was Applications of
Sheaf Theory to Logic, Algebra, and Analysis. It was edited by M.P. Fourman,
C.J. Mulvey and D.S. Scott. Among the participants, we ﬁnd P. Aczel, B. Ba-
naschewski, M. Barr, J.M. Beck, J. B´enabou, M. Bunge, J.C. Cole, M. Coste,
M.-F. Coste, R. Diaconescu, E.J. Dubuc, M.P. Fourman, P.J. Freyd, J.W. Gray,
R.J. Grayson, J.M.E. Hyland, J. Isbell, P.T. Johnstone, A. Joyal, G.M. Kelly,
J.F. Kennison, A. Kock, J. Lambek, R. Lavendhomme, W. Lawvere, M. Makkai,
R.B. Mansﬁeld, C.J. Mulvey, G.E. Reyes, D. Schlomiuk, D.S. Scott, R. Seely, G.
Takeuti, M. Tierney, D. Van Dalen, H. Volger, G.C. Wraith and J.J. Zangwill.
The list of talks is quite impressive but it does not correspond exactly to the list
of papers published.
For instance, G.E. Reyes gave two lectures on models in
sheaves, but published a joint paper with Anders Kock on manifolds in formal
diﬀerential geometry and a paper on Cramer’s rule in the Zariski topos. Some of
the talks were never transformed into papers. As usual, B´enabou and Joyal gave
talks but did not submit papers. B´enabou talked about ﬁbrations and Joyal gave
a talk entitled A topos as a space and a theory. Makkai gave a talk on the syn-
tactical constructions and basic properties of classifying toposes and Lambek gave
a talk entitled From λ-calculus to free topoi. Peter Freyd presented results about
complete higher-order theories. When one considers the published papers, one
element stands: it is dominated by papers that are either about or in the context
of sheaves over a topological space X, or equivalently H-sets, for H a complete
Heyting algebra. Out of 33 papers (we exclude Gray’s paper on the history of sheaf
theory), at least 12 are clearly in the framework of a category of sheaves over a
topological space X. The other striking feature is, as the title indicates, the search
for concrete, precise applications of sheaf theory to various ﬁelds of mathematics.
This second feature probably explains the ﬁrst one. However, the underlying re-
striction, that is sheaves over a topological space or, more generally, sheaves over
a complete Heyting algebra, certainly did not reﬂect the extent of the potential
applications of the methods available. A more striking example, which we will
simply mention, was given by Marie-Fran¸coise Coste and Michel Coste shortly af-
terwards, using in an essential manner the classifying topos of a geometric theory.
(See [Coste and Coste, 1979].) The search for applications continued for some
time after and lead to interesting developments: models for synthetic diﬀerential
geometry, the eﬀective topos and Freyd’s models for the independence of the ax-
iom of choice, to mention but the most obvious. (See, for instance, [Kock, 1981;
Moerdijk and Reyes, 1991] for synthetic diﬀerential geometry, [Hyland, 1982;

792
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
Hyland, 1991; van Oosten, 2008] for the eﬀective topos and [Freyd, 1980; Blass and
Scedrov, 1989] for Freyd’s models.) But by the early eighties, it seems that the
mathematical community was shunning away from abstract and general methods.
With hindsight, two elements stand out when we look at the early history of
categorical logic. First, a categorical analysis of certain of the key concepts of logic
and set theory is not only possible – an idea that was at ﬁrst seen as being absurd
since it was thought that logical and set theoretical concepts were too primitive for
such an analysis – , but fruitful in as much as they naturally fall under the central
notions of the theory, e.g.
adjoint functors.
What this analysis amounted to
was an adequate algebraic treatment of these notions. Although the analysis was
associated with a distinctive ideological component, strongly political in the late
sixties and early seventies, according to which logic and geometry were opposites,
the fabric weaving together these facets was nonetheless thoroughly algebraic and
this was acknowledged by all the parties involved and seen as a potentially powerful
gain. Second, the development of categorical logic was not, in contrast for instance
with Grothendieck’s program in algebraic geometry which was carried on with the
Weil conjectures as the ﬁnal target, fueled by speciﬁc problems or conjectures
deemed to be important by the community of logicians or mathematicians.
A
large part of the work done consisted, at ﬁrst, in ﬁnding what one would consider
being an adequate categorical “translation” of concepts and results of logic. The
surprise was to see that so many notions coming from algebraic geometry and
algebraic topology were mathematically equivalent to logical notions when they
were formulated adequately in a categorical framework. This in itself opened new
avenues of research, new ways of thinking about certain problems and theories.
For those who were not charmed by the beauty and elegance of categorical
manners, who were convinced that category theorists had put the cart before
the horses or had fallen prey to a complicated and terrifying new gadget whose
purpose was far from being clear, the standard objection was simply: can you
prove something by these means that cannot be proved by other, meaning more
“traditional”, means? If what one does in categorical logic is simply the same
but in a diﬀerent, more complicated and ultimately irrelevant guise, why bother
learning this general abstract nonsense in the ﬁrst place? If one does not care about
a grand unifying picture of mathematics and its foundations, of unsuspected links
between domains resulting in a complex and rich network of abstract structures,
then is there any genuine value in the categorical toolbox?
It should be pointed out immediately that these complaints strangely resemble
what mathematicians often ask logicians in general. What is original here is that it
is a complaint coming from mathematical logicians towards categorical logicians.
If logicians can or could reply to mathematicians that they were interested in a
speciﬁc kind of analysis of mathematical notions, namely a foundational analysis,
categorical logicians had a hard time convincing logicians that their analyses are
genuinely foundational. Notice, however, that many logicians, including Tarski
for instance, do want to use logic as a tool for mathematics and not speciﬁcally
as a foundational tool.
Be that as it may, in our speciﬁc case, the culprit is

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
793
certainly related to the algebraic nature of a categorical analysis and algebraic
logic has been seen, at least since Frege, as being foundationally misguided since it
implicitly subsumes logic as a part of mathematics, when Frege and his successors
assumed – not without reasons, it should be added – that the opposite must
be true and we are back, once again, to an ideological, or perhaps some would
prefer to say philosophical, debate. One possible answer to logicians, but that
we will develop elsewhere, is that categorical logic does indeed oﬀer a genuine
foundational analysis of various mathematical concepts, no matter how logicians
deﬁne the notion of “foundational analysis”. One can start with various formal
systems, whether propositional, ﬁrst-order or higher-order, coherent, constructive
or classical, develop them systematically, deﬁne semantics for these formal systems
and prove various completeness or other kinds of theorems.
Moreover, as we
have already mentioned, categorical logic provides bridges between constructive
and classical approaches, geometry and logic, topology and logic, to name but
the most obvious links. The fate of categorical logic is presently intimately tied
to theoretical computer science, and to a certain extent to the foundations of
homotopy theory and its place in mathematics and mathematical physics.
No
matter how categorical logic develops, no matter what route it travels along, its
algebraic roots will always reveal themselves.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Michael Barr, Luc B´elair, Andr´e Boileau, Bill
Boshuk, Marta Bunge, Bernard Hodgson, Andr´e Joyal, Joachim Lambek, Marie
La Palme Reyes, Bill Lawvere, Mih´aly Makkai, Phil Scott and Robert Seely for
their help. The ﬁrst author would like to thank the SSHRC of Canada for its
ﬁnancial support while this research was done. Part of this work was done while
the ﬁrst author was on sabbatical at the Mathematics Research Center at Stanford.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adamek et al., 1990] J. Adamek, H. Herrlich, and G. E. Strecker. Abstract and concrete cate-
gories. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, 1990.
[Antonius, 1975] W. Antonius.
Th´eories coh´erentes et pr´etopos.
PhD thesis, Universit´e de
Montr´eal, 1975.
[Awodey, 1996] S. Awodey.
Structure in mathematics and logic:
a categorical perspective.
Philos. Math., 4:209–237, 1996. 0031-8019.
[Barr and Beck, 1966] M. Barr and J. Beck. Acyclic models and triples. Proc. Conf. Categorical
Algebra (La Jolla, Calif., 1965), pp. 336–343, Springer, New York, 1966.
[Barr et al., 1971] M. Barr, P. A. Grillet, and D. H. Van Osdol. Exact Categories and Categories
of Sheaves. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York,, 1971.
[Bell, 1988] J. L. Bell. Toposes and Local Set Theories, Oxford Logic Guides, volume 14. The
Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, 1988.
[B´enabou, 1963] J. B´enabou. Cat´egories avec multiplication. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 256:1887–
1890, 1963.
[B´enabou, 1968] J. B´enabou.
Structures alg´ebriques dans les cat´egories.
Cahiers Topologie
G´eom. Diﬀ´erentielle, 10:1–126, 1968.

794
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
[B´enabou, 1975] J. B´enabou. Fibrations petites et localement petites. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris
S´er. A-B, 281:A897–A900, 1975.
[B´enabou, 1985] J. B´enabou. Fibered categories and the foundations of naive category theory.
J. Symbolic Logic, 50:10–37, 1985.
[Birkhoﬀand Mac Lane, 1967] G. Birkhoﬀand S. Mac Lane.
Algebra.
Macmillan, London,
1967.
[Blass and Scedrov, 1989] A. Blass and A. Scedrov. Freyd’s models for the independence of the
axiom of choice. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, 79:1–134, 1989.
[Boileau and Joyal, 1981] A. Boileau and A. Joyal. La logique des topos. J. Symbolic Logic,
46:6–16, 1981.
[Boileau, 1976] A. Boileau. Types versus topos. PhD thesis, Montr´eal, 1976.
[Buchsbaum, 1955] D. A. Buchsbaum. Exact categories and duality. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
80:1–34, 1955.
[Bunge, 1974] M. Bunge. Topos theory and Souslin’s hypothesis. Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra, 4:159–187, 1974.
[Cartan and Eilenberg, 1956] H. P. Cartan and S. Eilenberg. Homological algebra. Princeton
University Press, Princeton,, 1956.
[Cohen, 1963] P. J. Cohen. The independence of the continuum hypothesis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA, 50:1143–1148, 1963.
[Cole, 1973] J. C. Cole.
Categories of sets and models of set theory.
In J. L. Bell, J. C.
Cole, G. Priest, and A. Slomson, eds., The Proceedings of the Bertrand Russell Memorial
Conference (Uldum 1971), pp. 351–399. Bertrand Russell Memorial Conference, Leeds, 1973.
[Corry, 1996] L. Corry. Modern Algebra and the Rise of Mathematical Structures, volume 17 of
Science Networks. Historical Studies. Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1996.
[Coste and Coste, 1979] M.-F. Coste and M. Coste. Topologies for real algebraic geometry. In
Topos Theoretic Methods in Geometry, volume 30, pp. 37–100. Aarhus University, Aarhus,
1979.
[Coste, 1974] M.-F. Coste.
Construction d’un mod`ele bool´een de la th´eorie des ensembles `a
partir d’un topos bool´een. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er. A, 278:1073–1076, 1974.
[Daigneault, 1969] A. Daigneault.
Injective envelopes.
American Mathematical Monthly,
76:766–774, 1969.
[Daigneault, 1969/1970] A. Daigneault. Lawvere’s elementary theories and polyadic and cylin-
dric algebras. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 66:307–328, 1969/1970.
[Deligne, 1977] P. Deligne.
Cohomologie ´etale.
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 569.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977.
[Demazure and Grothendieck, 1962/1964a] A. Demazure and M. Grothendieck, eds. Sch´emas
en groupes. II: Groupes de type multiplicatif, et structure des sch´emas en groupes g´en´eraux.
S´eminaire de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique du Bois Marie 1962/64 (SGA 3). Dirig´e par M. De-
mazure et A. Grothendieck. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 152. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1962/1964.
[Demazure and Grothendieck, 1962/1964b] A. Demazure and M. Grothendieck, eds. Sch´emas
en groupes. III: Structure des sch´emas en groupes r´eductifs.
S´eminaire de G´eom´etrie
Alg´ebrique du Bois Marie 1962/64 (SGA 3). Dirig´e par M. Demazure et A. Grothendieck.
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 153. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1962/1964.
[Demazure and Grothendieck, 1970] A. Demazure and M. Grothendieck, eds.
Sch´emas en
groupes. I: Propri´et´es g´en´erales des sch´emas en groupes. S´eminaire de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique
du Bois Marie 1962/64 (SGA 3). Dirig´e par M. Demazure et A. Grothendieck. Lecture Notes
in Mathematics, Vol. 151. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1960] J.
Dieudonn´e
and
A.
Grothendieck.
´El´ements
de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique I, volume 4. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES, Paris, 1960.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1961a] J. Dieudonn´e and A. Grothendieck.
´El´ements de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique II, volume 8. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES, Paris, 1961.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1961b] J. Dieudonn´e and A. Grothendieck.
´El´ements de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique III. Premi`ere partie, volume 11. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES,
Paris, 1961.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
795
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1963] J.
Dieudonn´e
and
A.
Grothendieck.
´El´ements
de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique III. Seconde partie, volume 17. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES,
Paris, 1963.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1964] J.
Dieudonn´e
and
A.
Grothendieck.
´El´ements
de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique IV. Premi`ere partie, volume 20. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES,
Paris, 1964.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1965] J.
Dieudonn´e
and
A.
Grothendieck.
´El´ements
de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique IV. Seconde partie, volume 24. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES,
Paris, 1965.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1966] J.
Dieudonn´e
and
A.
Grothendieck.
´El´ements
de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique IV. Troisi`eme partie, volume 28. Publications Math´ematiques de l’IH´ES,
Paris, 1966.
[Dieudonn´e and Grothendieck, 1967] J.
Dieudonn´e
and
A.
Grothendieck.
´El´ements
de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique IV. Quatri`eme partie, volume 32.
Publications Math´ematiques de
l’IH´ES, Paris, 1967.
[Dionne, 1973] J. Dionne. Des th´eories ´el´ementaires aux cat´egories conceptuelles. PhD thesis,
Universit´e de Montr´eal, 1973.
[Eilenberg and Kelly, 1966] S. Eilenberg and G. M. Kelly. Closed categories. Proc. Conf. Cat-
egorical Algebra (La Jolla, Calif., 1965), pp. 421–562. Springer, New York, 1966.
[Eilenberg and Mac Lane, 1942] S. Eilenberg and S. Mac Lane. Natural isomorphisms in group
theory. Proeedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 28:537–543, 1942.
[Eilenberg and Mac Lane, 1945] S. Eilenberg and S. Mac Lane.
A general theory of natural
equivalences. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 58:231–294, 1945.
[Eilenberg and Moore, 1965] S. Eilenberg and J. C. Moore. Adjoint functors and triples. Illinois
J. Math., 9:381–398, 1965. 0019-2082.
[Eilenberg and Steenrod, 1952] S. Eilenberg and N. E. Steenrod. Foundations of algebraic topol-
ogy. Princeton mathematical series, 15. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1952.
[Eisenbud and Harris, 2000] D. Eisenbud and J. Harris. The Geometry of Schemes, volume 197
of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New York, 2000.
[Feferman, 1968] S. Feferman. Lectures on Proof Theory. Proceedings of the Summer School in
Logic (Leeds 1967). Springer Verlag, New York, 1968.
[Fourman, 1977] M. P. Fourman. The logic of topoi. In J. Barwise, ed., Handbook of Mathe-
matical Logic, pp. 1053–1090. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1977.
[Fourman and Scott, 1979] M. P. Fourman and D. S. Scott. Sheaves and logic. In Applications of
Sheaves (Proc. Res. Sympos. Appl. Sheaf Theory to Logic, Algebra and Anal., Univ. Durham,
Durham, 1977), volume 753 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 302–401. Springer, Berlin, 1979.
[Freyd and Scedrov, 1990] P. J. Freyd and A. Scedrov. Categories, Allegories, volume 39. North-
Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1990.
[Freyd, 1965] P. Freyd. The theories of functors and models. Theory of Models (Proc. 1963
Internat. Sympos. Berkeley), pp. 107–120. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Freyd, 1972] P. Freyd. Aspect of topoi. Bulletin of the Autralian Mathematical Society, 7:1–76,
1972.
[Freyd, 1980] P. Freyd. The axiom of choice. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 19:103–125,
1980.
[Gabriel and Ulmer, 1971] P. Gabriel and F. Ulmer. Lokal pr¨asentierbare Kategorien. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, New York,, 1971.
[Gray, 1979] J. W. Gray. Fragments of the history of sheaf theory. In M. P. Fourman, C. J.
Mulvey, and D. S. Scott, eds., Applications of Sheaves, volume 753 of Lecture Notes in Math-
ematics, pp. 1–79. Springer, Berlin, 1979.
[Grothendieck, 1957] A. Grothendieck.
Sur quelques points d’alg`ebre homologique.
Tˆohoku
Math. J. (2), 9:119–221, 1957.
[Grothendieck, 2003] A. Grothendieck.
Revˆetements ´etales et groupe fondamental (SGA
1).
Documents Math´ematiques (Paris) [Mathematical Documents (Paris)], 3. Soci´et´e
Math´ematique de France, Paris, 2003.
[Hailperin, 1953] T. Hailperin. Quantiﬁcation theory and empty individual-domains. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 18:197–200, 1953.

796
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
[Hakim, 1972] M. Hakim.
Topos Annel´es et Sch´emas Relatifs, volume 64 of Ergebnisse des
Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1972.
[Hartshorne, 1977] R. Hartshorne. Algebraic Geometry. Springer, New York, 1977.
[Hatcher, 1968] W. S. Hatcher. Foundations of Mathematics. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1968.
[Heller, 1958] A. Heller. Homological algebra in abelian categories.
Annals of Mathematics,
68:484–525, 1958.
[Hyland, 1982] J. M. E. Hyland.
The eﬀective topos.
In A.S. Troelstra and D. Van Dalen,
eds., The L.E.J. Brouwer Centerary Symposium, volume 110 of Studies in Logic and the
Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 165–216. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1982.
[Hyland, 1991] J. M. E. Hyland. First steps in synthetic domain theory. In A. Carboni, M.C.
Pedicchio, and G. Rosolini, eds., Category Theory (Como 1990), volume 1488, pp. 131–156.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991.
[Jacobs, 1999] Bart Jacobs. Categorical Logic and Type Theory, volume 141. North-Holland
Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1999.
[Johnstone, 1977] P. T. Johnstone. Topos Theory. Academic Press [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
Publishers], London, 1977.
[Johnstone, 1982] P. T. Johnstone. Stone Spaces, volume 3 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced
Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982.
[Johnstone, 2002] P. T. Johnstone. Sketches of an elephant: a topos theory compendium. Vol.
1, volume 43. The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, 2002.
[Joyal and Moerdijk, 1997] A. Joyal and I. Moerdijk.
Algebraic Set Theory, volume 220 of
London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1997.
[Joyal and Reyes, 1978] A. Joyal and G. E. Reyes. Forcing and generic models in categorical
logic. Manuscript, 1978.
[Joyal, 1970] A. Joyal. Boolean algebras as functors. Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, 17, 1970.
[Joyal, 1971a] A. Joyal. Cohomology of spectral spaces. Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, 18:793, 1971.
[Joyal, 1971b] A. Joyal. Functors which preserve elementary operations. Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 18:967, 1971.
[Joyal, 1971c] A. Joyal.
Polyadic spaces and elementary theories.
Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 18:563, 1971.
[Joyal, 1971d] A. Joyal.
Spectral spaces and distributive lattices.
Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 18:393, 1971.
[Joyal, 1971e] A. Joyal.
Spectral spaces ii.
Notices of the American Mathematical Society,
18:618, 1971.
[Joyal, 1981] A. Joyal.
A combinatorial theory of formal series.
Advances in Mathematics,
42:1–82, 1981.
[Kan, 1958] D. M. Kan. Adjoint functors. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 87:294–329, 1958. 0002-
9947.
[Keane, 1975] O. Keane. Abstract Horn theories. In F. W. Lawvere, C. Maurer, and G. C.
Wraith, eds., Model Theory and Topoi, volume 445, pp. 15–50. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Kleene, 1952] S. C. Kleene.
Introduction to Metamathematics.
D. Van Nostrand Co., New
York, 1952.
[Kleisli, 1965] H. Kleisli. Every standard construction is induced by a pair of adjoint functors.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 16:544–546, 1965. 0002-9939.
[Kock and Mikkelsen, 1974] A. Kock and C. J. Mikkelsen.
Topos-theoretic factorizations of
non-standard extensions. In A. Hurd and P. Loeb, eds., Victoria Symposium on Nonstandard
Analysis 1972, volume 369 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pp. 122–143. Springer, Berlin,
1974.
[Kock and Reyes, 1977] A. Kock and G. E. Reyes. Doctrines in categorical logic. In J. Barwise,
ed., Handbook of Mathematical Logic, pp. 283–313. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1977.
[Kock and Reyes, 1979] A. Kock and G. E. Reyes. Manifolds in formal diﬀerential geometry. In
M. P. Fourman, C. J. Mulvey, and D. S. Scott, eds., Applications of Sheaves, volume 753 of
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pp. 514–533. Springer, Berlin, 1979.
[Kock and Wraith, 1971] A. Kock and G. C. Wraith. Elementary Toposes, volume 30 of Lecture
Notes in Mathematics. Matematisk Institut, Aarhus Universitet, Aarhus, 1971.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
797
[Kock et al., 1975] A. Kock, P. Lecouturier, and C. J. Mikkelsen. Some topos theoretic concepts
of ﬁniteness. In F. W. Lawvere, C. Maurer, and G. C. Wraith, eds., Model Theory and Topoi,
volume 445 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pp. 209–283. Springer, Berlin, 1975.
[Kock, 1981] A. Kock.
Synthetic Diﬀerential Geometry, volume 51 of London Mathematical
Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
[Kr¨omer, 2007] R. Kr¨omer. Tool and object, volume 32 of Science Networks. Historical Studies.
Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 2007.
[Lamarche, 1991] F. Lamarche. Modelling Polymorphism with Categories. PhD thesis, McGill
University, 1991.
[Lambek and Scott, 1986] J. Lambek and P. J. Scott. Introduction to Higher Order Categorical
Logic, volume 7 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1986.
[Lambek, 1958] J. Lambek.
The mathematics of sentence structure.
Amer. Math. Monthly,
65:154–170, 1958.
[Lambek, 1968a] J. Lambek. Deductive systems and categories. I. syntactic calculus and resid-
uated categories. Mathematical Systems Theory, 2:287–318, 1968.
[Lambek, 1968b] J. Lambek. A ﬁxpoint theorem for complete categories. Math. Z., 103:151–161,
1968.
[Lambek, 1969] J. Lambek. Deductive systems and categories II. standard constructions and
closed categories. In P. J. Hilton, ed., Category Theory, Homology Theory, and their Appli-
cations, I, volume 86 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pp. 76–122, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
New York, 1969.
[Lambek, 1972] J. Lambek. Deductive systems and categories III. Cartesian closed categories,
intuitionistic propositional calculus, and combinatory logic. In F. W. Lawvere, ed., Toposes,
Algebraic Geometry and Logic, volume 274 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pp. 57–82,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York, 1972.
[Lambek, 1993] J. Lambek. From categorial grammar to bilinear logic. In Substructural logics
(T¨ubingen, 1990), volume 2 of Stud. Logic Comput., pp. 207–237. Oxford Univ. Press, New
York, 1993.
[Landry and Marquis, 2005] E. Landry and J.-P. Marquis. Categories in context: Historical,
foundational, and philosophical. Philos. Math., 12:1–43, 2005.
[Lawvere and Schanuel, 1997] F. W. Lawvere and S. H. Schanuel.
Conceptual mathematics.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997. Reprint of the 1991 original.
[Lawvere, 1963] F. W. Lawvere. Functorial Semantics of Algebraic Theories. Ph.d., Columbia,
1963.
[Lawvere, 1964] F. W. Lawvere. An elementary theory of the category of sets. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, 52:1506–1511, 1964.
[Lawvere, 1965] F. W. Lawvere. Algebraic theories, algebraic categories, and algebraic functors.
Theory of Models (Proc. 1963 Internat. Sympos. Berkeley), pp. 413–418. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1965.
[Lawvere, 1966] F. W. Lawvere. Functorial semantics of elementary theories. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic, 31:294–295, 1966.
[Lawvere, 1967] F. W. Lawvere. Theories as categories and the completeness theorem. Journal
of Symbolic Logic, 32:562, 1967.
[Lawvere, 1969a] F. W. Lawvere. Adjointness in foundations. Dialectica, 23:281–296, 1969.
[Lawvere, 1969b] F. W. Lawvere. Diagonal arguments and cartesian closed categories. In Peter
Hilton, editor, Category Theory, Homology Theory and their Applications II, volume 92 of
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pp. 134–145. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1969.
[Lawvere, 1969c] F. W. Lawvere. Ordinal sums and equational doctrines. Sem. on Triples and
Categorical Homology Theory (ETH, Z¨urich, 1966/67), pp. 141–155, Springer, Berlin, 1969.
[Lawvere, 1970a] F. W. Lawvere.
Quantiﬁers and sheaves.
In M. Berger, J. Dieudonn´e, J.
Leray, J.-L. Lions, P. Malliavin, and J. P. Serre, eds., Actes du congr`es international des
math´ematiciens, pp. 329–334, Gauthier-Villars, Nice, 1970.
[Lawvere, 1970b] F. W. Lawvere. Equality in hyperdoctrines and comprehension schema as an
adjoint functor. Applications of Categorical Algebra (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XVII,
New York, 1968), pp. 1–14, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1970.
[Lawvere, 1972] F. W. Lawvere. Introduction. Toposes, algebraic geometry and logic (Conf.,
Dalhousie Univ., Halifax, N.S., 1971), pp. 1–12. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 274, Springer,
Berlin, 1972.

798
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
[Lawvere, 1975a] F. W. Lawvere. Introduction. In F. W. Lawvere, C. Maurer, and G. C. Wraith,
eds., Model Theory and Topoi, volume 445, pp. 3–14. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Lawvere, 1975b] F. W. Lawvere. Variable sets etendu and variable structure in topoi. Depart-
ment of Mathematics, Univeristy of Chicago, Chicago, Ill., 1975.
[Lawvere, 1976] F. W. Lawvere. Variable quantities and variable structures in topoi. Algebra,
topology, and category theory (a collection of papers in honor of Samuel Eilenberg), pp. 101–
131, Academic Press, NY, 1976.
[Lawvere, 1986] F. W. Lawvere. Categories of spaces may not be generalized spaces as exem-
pliﬁed by directed graphs. Rev. Colombiana Mat., 20:179–185, 1986.
[Lawvere, 1989] F. W. Lawvere. Qualitative distinctions between some toposes of generalized
graphs.
In Categories in computer science and logic (Boulder, CO, 1987), volume 92 of
Contemp. Math., pp. 261–299. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1989.
[Lawvere, 1994] F. W. Lawvere. Tools for the advancement of objective logic: closed categories
and toposes. The logical foundations of cognition, 4:43–56, 1994.
[Lawvere, 2000] F. W. Lawvere. Comments on the development of topos theory. In J.-P. Pier,
ed., Development of Mathematics: 1950-2000, volume II, pp. 715–734. Birkh¨auser, Basel,
2000.
[Lawvere, 2003] F. W. Lawvere. Foundations and applications: axiomatization and education.
Bull. Symbolic Logic, 9(2):213–224, 2003.
[Linton, 1966a] F. E. J. Linton. Autonomous equational categories. J. Math. Mech., 15:637–642,
1966.
[Linton, 1966b] F. E. J. Linton. Some aspects of equational categories. Proc. Conf. Categorical
Algebra (La Jolla, Calif., 1965), pp. 84–94, Springer, New York, 1966.
[Mac Lane and Moerdijk, 1994] S. Mac Lane and I. Moerdijk. Sheaves in Geometry and Logic.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994. Corrected reprint of the 1992 edition.
[Mac Lane, 1961] S. Mac Lane. Locally small categories and the foundations of set theory. Inﬁni-
tistic Methods (Proc. Sympos. Foundations of Math., Warsaw, 1959), pp. 25–43, Pergamon,
Oxford, 1961.
[Mac Lane, 1988] S. Mac Lane.
Concepts and categories in perspective.
In P. Duren, ed.,
A Century of Mathematics in America, I, volume I, pp. 323–365. American Mathematical
Society, Providence, 1988.
[Mac Lane, 1998] S. Mac Lane. Categories for the working mathematician, volume 5 of Graduate
Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2 edition, 1998.
[Mac Lane, 2002] S. Mac Lane. Samuel Eilenberg and categories. Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra, 168:127–131, 2002.
[Macnamara and Reyes, 1994] J. Macnamara and G. E. Reyes, eds. The Logical Foundations
of Cognition, volume 4 of Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science. Oxford University Press,
New York, 1994.
[Makkai and Par´e, 1989] M. Makkai and R. Par´e. Accessible Categories: The Foundations of
Categorical Model Theory, volume 104.
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI,
1989.
[Makkai and Reyes, 1976a] M. Makkai and G. E. Reyes. Model-theoretical methods in the the-
ory of elementary topoi and related categories. II.
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des
Sciences. S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques, 24:385–392, 1976.
[Makkai and Reyes, 1976b] M. Makkai and G. E. Reyes.
Model-theoretical methods in the
theory of topoi and related categories I.
Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Polonaise des Sciences.
S´erie des Sciences Math´ematiques, Astronomiques et Physiques, 24:379–385, 1976.
[Makkai and Reyes, 1977] M. Makkai and G. E. Reyes. First Order Categorical Logic, volume
611 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer Verlag, New York, 1977.
[Maranda, 1962] J. M. Maranda. Some remarks on limits in categories. Canad. Math. Bull.,
5:133–146, 1962.
[Maranda, 1965] J. M. Maranda. Formal categories. Canad. J. Math., 17:758–801, 1965.
[Maranda, 1966] J. M. Maranda. On fundamental constructions and adjoint functors. Canad.
Math. Bull., 9:581–591, 1966.
[Marquis, 2006] J.-P. Marquis. What is category theory? In Giandomenico Sica, editor, What
is Category Theory?, pp. 221–255. Polimetrica, Monza, 2006.
[Mitchell, 1972] W. Mitchell.
Boolean topoi and the theory of sets.
J. Pure Appl. Algebra,
2:261–274, 1972.

The History of Categorical Logic: 1963–1977
799
[Moerdijk and Reyes, 1991] I. Moerdijk and G. E. Reyes. Models of Smooth Inﬁnitesimal Anal-
ysis. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991.
[Moggi, 1991] E. Moggi. A category-theoretic account of program modules. Mathematical Struc-
tures in Computer Science, 1:103–139, 1991.
[Mostowski, 1951] A. Mostowski. On the rules of proof in the pure functional calculus of the
ﬁrst order. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 16:107–111, 1951.
[Osius, 1974a] G. Osius.
Categorical set theory: a characterization of the category of sets.
Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 4:79–119, 1974.
[Osius, 1974b] G. Osius. The internal and external aspect of logic and set theory in elementary
topoi. Cahiers de topologie et g´eom´etrie diﬀ´erentielle, 15:157–180, 1974.
[Osius, 1975] G. Osius. Logical and set theoretical tools in elementary topoi. In F. W. Lawvere,
C. Maurer, and G. C. Wraith, eds., Model Theory and Topoi, volume 445 of Lecture Notes in
Mathematics, pp. 297–346. Spinger, Berlin, 1975.
[Ouellet, 1974] R. Ouellet. Axiomatization de la logique interne du premier ordre des topos,
version inclusive et multisorte. PhD thesis, Universit´e de Montr´eal, 1974.
[Ouellet, 1981] R. Ouellet. Inclusive ﬁrst-order logic. Studia Logica, 40:13–28, 1981.
[Papillon, 1969] V. Papillon. Quelques Aspects de l’Enveloppe Injective d’une Alg`ebre de Boole.
PhD thesis, Universit´e de Montr´eal, 1969.
[Pareigis, 1970] B. Pareigis. Categories and Functors. Academic Press, New York, 1970.
[Pitts, 1987] A. M. Pitts. Interpolation and conceptual completeness for pretoposes via category
theory. In D. W. Kueker, E. G. K. Lopez-Escobar, and C. H. Smith, editors, Mathematical
Logic and Theoretical Computer Science, volume 106 of Lecture Notes in Pure and Applied
Mathematics, pp. 301–327. Dekker, New York, 1987.
[Pitts, 1989] A. M. Pitts. Conceptual completeness for ﬁrst-order intuitionistic logic: an appli-
cation of categorical logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 41:33–81, 1989.
[Plotkin, 2000] B. Plotkin. Algebra, categories and databases. In M. Hazewinkel, ed., Handbook
of Algebra, volume 2, pp. 79–148. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2000.
[Reyes, 1972] G. E. Reyes. Lw1w is enough: A reduction theorem for some inﬁnitary languages.
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 37:705–710, 1972.
[Reyes, 1974] G. E. Reyes. From sheaves to logic. In A. Daigneault, ed., Studies in Algebraic
Logic, volume 9, pp. 143–204. The Mathematical Association of America, 1974.
[Reyes, 1975/1976] G. E. Reyes.
Sheaves and concepts:
a model-theoretic introduction to
Grothendieck topoi. Technical Report 2, Aarhus University, 1975/1976.
[Reyes, 1977] G. E. Reyes.
Sheaves and concepts:
A model-theoretic interpretation of
Grothendieck topoi. Cahiers de topologie et g´eom´etrie diﬀ´erentielle, XVIII:1–33, 1977.
[Reyes, 1978] G. E. Reyes. Th´eorie des mod`eles et faisceaux. Adv. in Math., 30:156–170, 1978.
[ˇSˇcedrov, 1984] A. ˇSˇcedrov. Forcing and classifying topoi. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 48:x+93,
1984.
[Scott, 1979] D. Scott. Identity and existence in intuitionistic logic. In Applications of sheaves
(Proc. Res. Sympos. Appl. Sheaf Theory to Logic, Algebra and Anal., Univ. Durham,
Durham, 1977), volume 753 of Lecture Notes in Math., pp. 660–696. Springer, Berlin, 1979.
[Seely, 1983] R. A. G. Seely.
Hyperdoctrines, natural deduction and the beck condition.
Z.
Math. Logik Grundlag. Math., 29:505–542, 1983.
[Seely, 1984] R. A. G. Seely. Locally cartesian closed categories and type theory. Math. Proc.
Cambridge Philos. Soc., 95:33–48, 1984.
[Seely, 1987] R. A. G. Seely. Categorical semantics for higher order polymorphic lambda calcu-
lus. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 52:969–989, 1987.
[Shafarevich, 1974] I. R. Shafarevich. Basic Algebraic Geometry. Springer, Berlin, 1974.
[Takahashi, 1965] S. Takahashi.
A characterization of group rings as a special class of hopf
algebras. Canad. Math. Bull., 8:465–475, 1965.
[Takahashi, 1969] S. Takahashi.
Analysis in categories.
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont.,
1969.
[Takahashi, 1974] S. Takahashi.
M´ethodes logiques en g´eom´etrie diophantine, volume 48 of
S´eminaire de math´ematiques sup´erieures. Les Presses de l’Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montr´eal,
1974.
[Taylor, 1999] P. Taylor. Practical foundations of mathematics, volume 59. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, 1999.

800
Jean-Pierre Marquis and Gonzalo E. Reyes
[Tierney, 1972] M. Tierney. Sheaf theory and the continuum hypothesis. In Toposes, algebraic
geometry and logic (Conf., Dalhousie Univ., Halifax, N.S., 1971), pp. 13–42. Lecture Notes
in Math., Vol. 274. Springer, Berlin, 1972.
[Tierney, 1976] M. Tierney. Forcing topologies and classifying topoi. In Alex Heller and Myles
Tierney, editors, Algebra, Topology and Category Theory (a collection of papers in honor of
Samuel Eilenberg), pp. 211–219. Academic Press, New York, 1976.
[Vaillancourt, 1968] P. Vaillancourt. Cat´egories et Syst`emes D´eductifs. PhD thesis, Universit´e
de Montr´eal, 1968.
[van Oosten, 2008] J. van Oosten. Realizability: an introduction to its categorical side, volume
152 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam,
2008.
[Volger, 1975a] H. Volger.
Completeness theorems for logical categories.
In F. W. Lawvere,
C. Maurer, and G. C. Wraith, eds., Model Theory and Topoi, volume 445, pp. 51–86. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Volger, 1975b] H. Volger. Logical categories, semantical categories and topoi. In F. W. Law-
vere, C. Maurer, and G. C. Wraith, eds., Model Theory and Topoi, volume 445, pp. 87–100.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[Wraith, 1975] G. C. Wraith. Lectures on elementary topoi. In F. W. Lawvere, C. Maurer, and
G. C. Wraith, eds., Model Theory and Topoi, volume 445 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
pp. 114–206. Springer, Berlin, 1975.
[Yanofsky, 2003] N. Yanofsky. A universal approach to self-referential paradoxes, incompleteness
and ﬁxed points. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 9:362–386, 2003.

RUSSELL’S ORDERS IN
KRIPKE’S THEORY OF TRUTH AND
COMPUTATIONAL TYPE THEORY
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
ABSTRACT
In Russell’s Ramiﬁed Theory of Types rtt as presented in Principia Mathematica
by Whitehead and Russell [1910, 1927], two hierarchical concepts dominate: orders
and types. The class of propositions over types is divided into diﬀerent orders
where a propositional function can only depend on objects of lower orders. The
use of orders renders the logic part of rtt predicative. Ramsey [1926] and Hilbert
and Ackermann [1928] considered the orders to be too restrictive and therefore
removed them. This led to the development of Church’s Simple Type Theory stt
[1940] which uses types without orders. Since, numerous type systems abandoned
the hierarchy of orders. For example, all the eight inﬂuential Pure Type Systems
(PTSs) of the Barendregt cube [1992] avoid orders. Despite this lack of explicit
use of orders in some modern type systems, orders still play an inﬂuential role
in understanding hierarchy in modern type systems. In this chapter, we reﬂect
on the use of orders in providing an adequate foundation for basic concepts in
computer science and computational mathematics as expressed in Computational
Type Theory ctt [Constable et al., 1986; Allen et al., 2006; Kamareddine and
Laan, 2001] and in explaining the truth levels in Kripke’s Theory of Truth ktt
[Kripke, 1975; Kamareddine and Laan, 2001].
1
INTRODUCTION
The role of type theory in logic and mathematics has always been a restrictive one.
In computer science it is used both to protect against errors and to code knowledge.
The need for restrictions was realised at the beginning of the twentieth century,
when Bertrand Russell showed that Frege’s formalisation of logic was inconsistent.1
Russell considered self-application to be the cause of the contradictions in Frege’s
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik [1892], and hence excluded all possibilities of self-
application in his Ramiﬁed Theory of Types rtt [Russell, 1908; Whitehead and
1An English translation of Russell’s letter to Frege in which this inconsistency is described
can be found in [Heijenoort, 1967].
Handbook of the History of Logic: Sets and Extensions in the Twentieth Century.
Volume editor: Akihiro Kanamori. General editors: Dov M. Gabbay, Paul Thagard and John
Woods.
c⃝2012 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

802
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
Russell, 1910, 1927].2 This was done through rtt’s double hierarchy: one of types
which can be seen as an elementary version of Church’s well-known Simple Theory
of Types stt [1940], and one of orders which can be compared with the truth
hierarchy in Kripke’s Theory of Truth ktt as we will see in this chapter (see also
[Kamareddine and Laan, 1996]). Logic based on the double hierarchy of orders and
types is usually called predicative. In 1925, Ramsey [1926] showed that, by making
a distinction between language and meta-language, the orders can be removed from
the system without re-introducing any known paradox. This led to many modern
type systems being impredicative and to the pervasive belief that orders are too
restrictive.
For instance, the systems of the Barendregt cube [1992] that have
the rule “(2, ∗)” are all impredicative. Hence, a proof checker like Coq [The Coq
Development Team, 2004], based on the Calculus of Constructions [Coquand and
Huet, 1988], is itself founded on impredicative logic.
The diﬀerence between predicative and impredicative logic leads to fundamen-
tal diﬀerences in the development of mathematics in these logics. For instance,
when constructing the real numbers out of the rationals (with Dedekind-cuts),
the Theorem of the Least Upper Bound,3 is not provable in predicative logic (see
[Weyl, 1918]). This theorem is, however, a fundamental tool in real analysis as
is illustrated in the work of Feferman (see for instance his [1964]). Nevertheless,
mathematics with predicative logic is possible, and from a constructive point of
view it is even attractive and a simpler basis for some fundamental notions in
computer science. For instance, the proof assistant Nuprl [Constable et al., 1986;
Allen et al., 2006] for ctt, a predicative type theory with orders, has been used
to develop parts of constructive real analysis including the intermediate value the-
orem and other basic results [Chirimar and Howe, 1991]. It is likely that all of
Bishop’s book [1967] could be developed in this theory as well as in itt, Martin-
L¨of’s Intuitionistic Type Theory [1975; 1982; 1984].
Although the role of orders has been well understood in the proof theory com-
munity, the hierarchy of orders is less known than the hierarchy of types, as it be-
came unpopular when Ramsey [1926] and Hilbert and Ackermann [1928] showed
that one can avoid the paradoxes without this hierarchy.
Despite this, orders
help explain some hierarchies in modern systems. As a matter of fact, although
Church followed Ramsey’s [1926] simpliﬁcation of rtt into stt, he still attempted
to explain orders in his book [1941] and as late as in his [1976]. In this chapter
we illustrate the use of orders to explain Kripke’s hierarchy of truths and to rea-
son about classiﬁcations of functions and objects in Nuprl, a modern system of
computer mathematics.
Kripke’s Hierarchy of Truths. As paradoxical sentences in natural language
play a role similar to that of the paradoxes in logic and mathematics, type theory
was used to eliminate the paradoxical sentences from natural language (see for
2Further details on the development of type theory can be found in [Kamareddine et al.,
2004].
3This theorem states that any non-empty set of real numbers with an upper bound has a least
upper bound.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
803
instance [Montague, 1973] and [Ranta, 1994]).
Paradoxes moreover have been
classiﬁed in two categories (see [Ramsey, 1926]): the logical and the semantical.
The famous Russell’s Paradox is logical whereas the famous Liar’s Paradox is
semantical. The semantical paradoxes usually involve the truth predicate T which
gives the truth value of a proposition. Tarski [1936] shows that truth is undeﬁnable
and that having the truth predicate inside the language leads to contradictions.
For this reason, he distinguishes between (object-) language and meta-language
and allows the truth predicate only at the meta-level. Now, to talk about the
truth of sentences in the meta-language, one needs a meta-meta-language and so
on. Kripke [1975] considers Russell’s Ramiﬁed Theory of Types and the theory of
truth of Tarski to be too restrictive for a proper formalisation of natural language
and presents a type-free theory where the truth predicate belongs to the language,
in which nevertheless the known paradoxes do not occur. Kripke proposed to follow
a certain hierarchy as with Russell but to take the ﬁxed point of his hierarchy
of languages to reach a language which has its own truth predicate with three
values. We show in this chapter that this hierarchy can be elegantly explained
via the notion of orders. We carefully compare Russell’s rtt and Kripke’s ktt.
As Russell’s system is said to be more restrictive than Kripke’s, our comparison
is carried out by coding Russell’s expressions in Kripke’s theory. The stronger
restrictions in the Ramiﬁed Type Theory can be seen clearly: at several parts in
the deﬁnition of the embedding the reader will notice that some type-theoretic
properties of Russell’s expressions are mentioned, but not used in this deﬁnition.
We show that the embedding is conservative, i.e. that truth in Russell’s theory
and in Kripke’s theory are the same, as far as formulas expressible in Russell’s
(more restrictive) system are concerned. In particular, we show that:
• At level n of ktt the truth or falsehood of all order-n propositions of rtt
can be established.
• There are order-n propositions of rtt that get a truth value at an earlier
stage in ktt.
• rtt is more restrictive than ktt: as some type restrictions are not needed
in ktt, more formulas can be expressed in the latter.
• ktt can be regarded as the dual of stt where types have been removed and
orders are maintained.
Computational Type Theory was created and implemented in 1984. The ini-
tial version is described in the 1986 book Implementing Mathematics with the
Nuprl Proof Development System [Constable et al., 1986] where the authors de-
scribe it on page 9 as “an expressive foundational theory for mathematics and
computer science” which “uniﬁes many diverse ideas from modern computing.”
Many of its fundamental concepts were also elaborated in a series of PhD the-
ses and articles including [Allen, 1987; Howe, 1987; Howe, 1989; Howe, 1998;
Harper, 1992; Mendler, 1987; Basin and Howe, 1991; Jackson, 1994; Jackson, 1995;

804
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
Murthy, 1991; Kopylov, 2003; Kreitz, 2003; Allen et al., 2006]. ctt was also im-
plemented in MetaPRL [Hickey et al., 2003].
After 1995 Nuprl became a dis-
tributed system [Allen et al., 2006; Kreitz, 2003] organized around a database
architecture; in the Nuprl community this version is called Nuprl-5. Since 1984
considerable experience has been gained in using Nuprl and MetaPRL to for-
malize parts of mathematics, e.g. algebra [Jackson, 1995] and computing the-
ory [Constable and Crary, 2001], to solve open problems [Howe, 1987; Murthy,
1991] in computer science and mathematics, and to apply the method of soft-
ware design and implementation called correct-by-construction programming that
involves extracting programs from constructive proofs of design speciﬁcations.
Nuprl was also used to verify systems (among many examples are [Howe, 1996;
Bickford, 2010]) and optimize systems [Liu et al., 1999; Kreitz, 2004], for pro-
viding formal semantics for modern programming languages (including modules,
dependent record, and objects) and for natural language, automating many tasks
needed to verify and explain protocols, algorithms, and systems, and creating
courseware that is grounded in fully formalized and computer checked explana-
tions of key computing concepts (see booklets by Stuart Allen in the Math Library
at www.nuprl.org). This experience sheds light on the viability of orders in a wide
variety of useful work. In particular, we show here that:
• The PTS version of ctt, explicitly typed, shows the correctness of orders.
• rtt orders correspond to ctt orders which are universes.
• ctt admits an internal deﬁnition of proof valid for all orders.
• ctt is implicitly typed, and the power of polymorphism compensates for
predicativity in deﬁning basic notions from computing theory, including the
class of all general recursive functions over any type.
Summary of the Chapter. In Section 2 we present a modern formalization of
rtt and logical truth for rtt in Tarski’s style. In Section 3 we brieﬂy describe
Kripke’s Theory of Truth ktt. In Section 4 we describe rtt within ktt and
investigate the similarity between the hierarchy of orders in rtt and the hierarchy
of truths in ktt.
We show that rtt is more restrictive with respect to self-
reference than ktt and reﬂect on the use of orders versus types. In Section 5 we
review a formal description of a part of the type system of Nuprl as a Pure Type
System (PTS) [Terlouw, 1989]. The systems of the Barendregt cube are examples
of PTSs. We also review how Nuprl in PTS style enables one to formalize the
concept of order in Nuprl and to show its correctness. This order classiﬁes types
and terms of Nuprl into their relevant hierarchy of universes Ui. In Section 6 we
introduce ctt, an implicitly typed extensional type theory with orders whose logic
is based on the propositions-as-types principle. This theory is implemented in the
Nuprl proof assistant which has been in continuous use since 1984, and its wide
variety of applications demonstrates the viability of ctt in logic, mathematics,
and informatics. The applications have led to the addition of several new types

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
805
and concepts to support computing theory and practice, including the deﬁnition
of an internal proof type discussed here. These results and applications show the
freedom and power allowed in a predicative theory with orders. We conclude in
Section 7. Some parts of this chapter appear in greater detail in [Kamareddine et
al., 2004].
2
THE RAMIFIED THEORY OF TYPES RTT
The basic aim of rtt is to exclude the logical paradoxes from logic by eliminating
all self-references. An extended philosophical motivation for rtt can be found in
Principia Mathematica [Whitehead and Russell, 1910, 1927], pages 38–55. In this
section we review a formal description of rtt that is both faithful to Russell’s
original informal presentation and compatible with the present formulations of
type theories (see [Laan and Nederpelt, 1996; Kamareddine and Laan, 1996]).
In Subsection 2a we introduce propositional functions, the logical formulas of
the “na¨ıve” system of logic. In Subsection 2b we present a rule to assign a type
to some of these propositional functions. The propositional functions that lead to
the logical paradoxes are, of course, not typeable. In Subsection 2c substitution
for rtt is discussed. This part is rather technical, but we need it in the proof
of Lemma 5, which is essential in the proof of one of our fundamental results
(Theorem 4.9). Lemma 5 helps us show that ktt can be regarded as a system
based on rtt of which the types and not the orders have been removed.
2a
Propositional functions
In this section we shall describe the set of propositions and propositional functions
which Whitehead and Russell use in Principia.
We give a modernised, formal
deﬁnition which corresponds to the description in Principia.
At the basis of the system of our formalization there is
• an inﬁnite set A of individual-symbols;
• an inﬁnite set V of variables;
• an inﬁnite set R of relation-symbols together with a map a : R →IN+
(indicating the arity of each relation-symbol).
0-ary relations are not explicitly used in Principia but could be added without
problems. Since functions are relations in Principia, we will not introduce a special
set of function symbols.
We assume that:
• {a1, a2, . . .} ⊆A;
• {x, x1, x2, . . . , y, y1, . . . , z, z1, . . .} ⊆V;
• {R, R1, . . . , S, S1, . . .} ⊆R.

806
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
We will use the letters x, y, z, x1, . . . as meta-variables over V, and R, R1, . . . as
meta-variables over R. Note that variables are written in typewriter style and
that meta-variables are written in italics: x denotes one, ﬁxed object in V whilst
x denotes an arbitrary object of V. We assume that there is an order (e.g. alpha-
betical) on the collection V, and write x < y if the variable x is ordered before the
variable y. In particular, we assume that
x < x1 < . . . < y < y1 < . . . < z < z1 < . . .
We also have the logical symbols ∨, ¬ and ∀in our alphabet, and the non-logical
symbols: parentheses and the comma.
Deﬁnition 2.1. (Propositional Functions) We deﬁne a collection F of propo-
sitional functions, and for each element f of F we simultaneously deﬁne the col-
lection fv(f) of free variables of f:
1. If R ∈R and i1, . . . , ia(R) ∈A ∪V then R(i1, . . . , ia(R)) ∈F.
fv(R(i1, . . . , ia(R)))
def
= {i1, . . . , ia(R)} ∩V;
2. If z ∈V, n ∈IN and k1, . . . , kn ∈A ∪V ∪F, then z(k1, . . . , kn) ∈F.
fv(z(k1, . . . , kn))
def
= {z, k1, . . . , kn} ∩V.
If n = 0, we write z() so as to distinguish the propositional function z() from
the variable z;4
3. If f, g ∈F then f ∨g ∈F and ¬f ∈F.
fv(f ∨g)
def
= fv(f) ∪fv(g);
fv(¬f)
def
= fv(f);
4. If f ∈F and x ∈fv(f) then ∀x[f] ∈F. fv(∀x[f]) = fv(f) \ {x}.
5. All propositional functions can be constructed by using the rules 1, 2, 3 and
4 above.
We use the letters f, g, h as meta-variables over F.
Convention 2.2. (Variable Convention) We make the usual convention that
a variable x in a propositional function f that is bound by the quantiﬁer ∀does
not occur as a free variable in f. Moreover, diﬀerent bound variables in f have
diﬀerent names.
A propositional function f must be seen as a proposition in which some parts
(the free variables) have been left undetermined. It will turn into a proposition
as soon as we assign values to all the free variables occurring in it. In this light,
a proposition can be seen as a degenerate propositional function (with 0 free vari-
ables). It will be clear now what the intuition behind propositional function of the
form R(i1, . . . , ia(R)), f ∨g, ¬f and ∀x[f] is. The intuition behind propositional
4It is important to note that a variable is not a propositional function.
See for instance
[Russell, 1903], Chapter viii: “The variable”, p. 94 of the 7th impression.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
807
functions of the second kind is not so obvious. z(k1, . . . , kn) is a propositional
function of higher-order: z is a variable for a propositional function with n free
variables; the argument list k1, . . . , kn indicates what should be substituted5 for
these free variables as soon as one assigns such a propositional function to z.
Notice that there are propositional functions of the form z(k1, . . . , kn) (where
z ∈V) but that expressions of the form f(k1, . . . , kn), where f ∈F, are not
propositional functions. Even substituting f for z in z(k1, . . . , kn) does not lead to
f(k1, . . . , kn), as the notion of substitution in rtt will appear to be quite diﬀerent
from the usual notion of substitution in ﬁrst-order logic (see Subsection 2c for
more details).
Example 2.3.
Here are some higher-order propositional functions from ordinary
mathematics.
• The propositional functions z(x) and z(y) in the deﬁnition of Leibniz equal-
ity:
∀z[z(x) ↔z(y)]
• The propositional functions z(0), z(x) and z(y) in the formulation of com-
plete induction:
[z(0) →(∀x∀y[z(x) →(S(x, y) →z(y))])] →∀x[z(x)]
• z() in the formulation of the law of the excluded middle:
∀z[z() ∨¬z()]
2b
Ramiﬁed types
Not all propositional functions should be allowed in our language. For instance, the
expression ¬x(x) is a perfectly legal element of F, nevertheless, it is the propo-
sitional function that makes it possible to derive Russell’s Paradox. Therefore,
types are introduced.
Deﬁnition 2.4. (Ramiﬁed Types)
1. ι0 is a ramiﬁed type (0 is called the order of this type);
2. If t1, . . . , tn are ramiﬁed types of orders a1, . . . , an respectively, and a >
max(a1, . . . , an), then (t1, . . . , tn)a is a ramiﬁed type of order a;
3. All ramiﬁed types can be constructed using the rules 1 and 2.
5In Principia, it is not made clear how we should carry out such substitutions. We must
depend on our intuition and on the way in which substitution is used in Principia. Nevertheless,
it is hard and elaborate to give a proper deﬁnition of substitution. We present a short overview of
this deﬁnition in Subsection 2c; for a motivation of this deﬁnition and its relation to β-reduction
in the λ-calculus the reader should consult [Kamareddine et al., 2004].

808
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
ι0 represents the type of the individuals, and one can think of (t1, . . . , tn)a as
being the type of the propositional functions with n free variables, say x1, . . . , xn,
such that if we assign values k1 of type t1 to x1, . . . , kn of type tn to xn, then we
obtain a proposition. The type ()a stands for the type of propositions of order a.
Russell strictly divides his propositional functions in orders. For instance, both
∀p[p()∨¬p()] and R(a) are propositions, but they are of diﬀerent level: The earlier
one presumes a full collection of propositions, hence (according to Russell) it can-
not belong to the same collection of propositions as the propositions p over which
it quantiﬁes (among which R(a)). This made Russell decide to let ∀p[p() ∨¬p()]
belong to a type of a higher order (level) than the order of R(a).
This can already be seen in the deﬁnition of ramiﬁed types: (t1, . . . , tn)a can
only be a type if a is strictly greater than each of the orders of the tis.
Deﬁnition 2.5. Let x1, . . . , xn be a list of distinct variables, and t1, . . . , tn be a
list of ramiﬁed types. We call x1:t1, . . . , xn:tn a context and call {x1, . . . , xn} its
domain.
We write Γ ⊢f : t to express that f ∈F has type t in context Γ, and extend
the variable convention to contexts: If x is bound in f, then x does not occur in
the domain of Γ.
We use Γ, ∆to range over contexts and t1, t2, . . . to range over types.
We now present a set of typing rules for rtt. These rules are derived from and
equivalent to the rules in [Laan, 1997], which are as close as possible to Russell’s
original ideas. We change our notation for propositional functions slightly: Instead
of ∀x[f] we write ∀x:t[f], where t is some ramiﬁed type.
Deﬁnition 2.6. (Typing Rules for rtt)
• If c ∈A, then Γ ⊢c : ι0 for any context Γ;
• If f ∈F, and x1 < . . . < xn are the free variables of f, and t1, . . . , tn are
types such that xi:ti ∈Γ, then Γ ⊢f : (t1, . . . , tn)a if and only if
– If f ≡R(i1, . . . , ia(R)) then ti = ι0 for all i, and a = 1 (if n > 0) or
a = 0 (if n = 0);
– If f ≡z(k1, . . . , km) then there are u1, . . . , um such that
z:(u1, . . . , um)a−1 ∈Γ, and Γ ⊢ki:ui for all ki ∈A ∪F, and ki:ui ∈Γ
for all ki ∈V;
– If f ≡f1 ∨f2 then there are ua1
1 , ua2
2
such that Γ ⊢fi : uai
i
and
a = max(a1, a2);
if f ≡¬f ′ then Γ ⊢f ′ : (t1, . . . , tn)a.
– If f ≡∀x:t0[f ′] then there is a j such that
Γ, x:t0 ⊢f ′ : (t1, . . . , tj−1, t0, tj, . . . , tn)a.
Example 2.7.
¬x(x) is not typeable in any context Γ.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
809
Assume that we would have Γ ⊢¬x(x) : t. Then t must be of the form (u)a,
with x:u ∈Γ, as ¬x(x) has one free variable. This implies Γ ⊢x(x) : (u)a, hence
by unicity of types below, u ≡(u′)a−1, with x : u′ ∈Γ. As Γ is a context, we have
u ≡u′, hence u ≡(u)a−1, which is impossible.
An important result (whose proof follows directly from the deﬁnition of Γ ⊢f :
t) is the following:
Theorem 2.8. (Unicity of Types) If Γ ⊢f : t and Γ ⊢f : u then t ≡u.
2
2c
Substitution in rtt
Substitution in rtt is not simply a syntactic operation of replacing a variable by
an object, as is usual in ﬁrst-order logic. This can be understood if we read the
interpretation of the propositional function z(k1, . . . , km). Substituting a proposi-
tional function f for the variable z should have as a result f, in which k1, . . . , km
are substituted for the free variables in f. So a substitution may result in a new
substitution (and we may wonder whether this process will ever terminate). Be-
low, we give a formal deﬁnition of substitution in rtt (needed in the proof of the
Substitution Lemma 5).
Deﬁnition 2.9. Let f ∈F, Γ ⊢f : t, k1, . . . , km ∈A ∪V ∪F and x1, . . . , xn ∈V
such that
• If ki ∈A then xi:ι0 ∈Γ;
• If ki ∈V then there is a t such that both ki:t ∈Γ and xi:t ∈Γ;
• If ki ∈F then there is a t such that Γ ⊢ki:t and xi:t ∈Γ.
We deﬁne f[x1, . . . , xm:=k1, . . . , km], the (simultaneous) substitution of k1, . . . , km
for x1, . . . , xm in f (shorthand f[xi:=ki] if no confusion arises) by a double induc-
tion on the order and structure of f:
• f ≡R(i1, . . . , ia(R)). Deﬁne i′
j
def
=
 kℓ
if ij ≡xℓ
ij
if ij ̸∈{x1, . . . , xm}
f[xi:=ki]
def
= R(i′
1, . . . , i′
a(R)).
• f ≡z(h1, . . . , hn). We distinguish two cases:
1. z ̸∈{x1, . . . , xm}. Deﬁne h′
j
def
=

kℓ
if hj ≡xℓ
hj
if hj ̸∈{x1, . . . , xm}
f[xi:=ki]
def
= z(h′
1, . . . , h′
n).
2. z ∈{x1, . . . , xm}, assume z ≡xp.
Deﬁne h′
j
def
=

kℓ
if hj ≡xℓ
hj
if hj ̸∈{x1, . . . , xm}
Notice that, as z, xp and kp have the same type, kp is a propositional
function with n free variables, say y1 < . . . < yn. Now: f[xi:=ki]
def
=

810
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
kp[y1, . . . , yn:=h′
1, . . . , h′
n]. Note that the object on the right is a correct
substitution (with respect to the types of the yj and the h′
j) and has
already been deﬁned, as kp has the same order as z, which is exactly
one less than the order of z(h1, . . . , hn).
• f ≡f1 ∨f2. Then f[xi:=ki]
def
= f1[xi:=ki] ∨f2[xi:=ki].
• f ≡¬f ′. Then f[xi:=ki]
def
= ¬f ′[xi:=ki].
• f ≡∀x:t[f ′]. Then f[xi:=ki]
def
= ∀x:t[f ′[xi:=ki]].
(We assume that x ̸∈{x1, . . . , xm}.)
Substitution in rtt is quite diﬀerent from usual notions of substitution in, for
example, ﬁrst-order logic or λ-calculus. For a good understanding of the rest of
this chapter it is essential to see these diﬀerences.
There is no deﬁnition of substitution in Principia Mathematica.
The above
deﬁnition is based on what happens in Principia when a substitution seems to
take place. The hardest part of the deﬁnition is a substitution of the form
z(h1, . . . , hn)[x1, . . . , xm:=k1, . . . , km]
where z is among the xi: say, z ≡xp. We can assume that kp is a propositional
function with n free variables, say, y1 < . . . < yn.
According to the deﬁnition, we ﬁrst carry out the substitutions that have noth-
ing to do with z (the deﬁnition of the h′
js). This part is similar to a usual ﬁrst-order
substitution. Now we must substitute kp for z in z(h′
1, . . . , h′
n). The intuition on
the propositional function z(h′
1, . . . , h′
n), that was explained at the end of Subsec-
tion 2a, prescribes that the arguments h′
1, . . . , h′
n must be substituted for the free
variables y1, . . . , yn of kp, as soon as kp is substituted for z. This leads to a new
substitution kp[y1, . . . , yn:=h′
1, . . . , h′
n]. As the order of kp is lower than the order
of z(h1, . . . , hp), we may assume that the ﬁnal result of this new substitution has
already been deﬁned.
To understand the notion better it may be helpful to treat the substitution
z(h1, . . . , hn)[xi:=ki]
ﬁrst as if it was a usual, ﬁrst-order substitution, and write down kp(h′
1, . . . , h′
n) as
an informal, intermediate result. Then the substitution of the h′
j for the yj in kp
can be seen as the contraction of the n β-redexes in (λy1 · · · yn.kp)h′
1 · · · h′
n. Notice,
however, that kp(h′
1, . . . , h′
n) is not a propositional function (see the explanation
in Subsection 2a).
We give some examples of rtt-style substitutions in order to make the reader
more familiar with this notion.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
811
Example 2.10.
• R(x1, x2)[x1:=a1] = R(a1, x2). On the ﬁrst-order level, rtt substitution is the
same as in ﬁrst-order logic.
• z(R(x), y)[x:=a] = z(R(x), y). Note that x is not a free variable of z(R(x), y)!
The substitution does not “continue” in the arguments of
z(R(x), y): z(R(x), y)[x:=a] ̸= z(R(x)[x:=a], y).
• z(a)[z:=R(x)] = R(x)[x:=a] = R(a).
• z1(R(x))[z1:=z2(a)] = z2(a)[z2:=R(x)] = R(x)[x:=a] = R(a).
• z1(x2, R(x1))[x2, z1:=a, z2(y)] = z2(y)[y, z2:=a, R(x1)] = R(x1)[x1:=a] = R(a).
The reader might want to make some informal, intermediate steps in this
substitution (as explained above): z1(x2, R(x1))[x2, z1:=a, z2(y)] ﬁrst leads to
(z2(y))(a, R(x1)) as an intermediate result, and then to z2(y)[y, z2:=a, R(x1)].
Similarly, this new substitution ﬁrst leads to (R(x1))(a)[z2:=R(x1)] and then
to R(x1)[x1:=a].
We will need the following results about substitutions.
LEMMA 1. The order of f is greater than or equal to the order of the substitution
f[xi:=ki].
2
LEMMA 2. fv(f[xi:=gi]) = (fv(f) \ {x1, . . . , xn}) ∪{gi|gi ∈V and xi ∈fv(f)}.
2
2d
Logical truth for rtt in Tarski’s style
With substitution properly deﬁned, we can give a deﬁnition of logical truth in
Tarski’s style for rtt:
Deﬁnition 2.11. (Logical Truth for rtt) Let f ∈F and assume fv(f) = ∅.
We deﬁne rtt |= f:
• If (a1, . . . , am) ∈R then rtt |= R(a1, . . . , am), for all individuals a1, . . . , am.
• If rtt |= f1 or rtt |= f2 then rtt |= f1 ∨f2.
• If not rtt |= f, then rtt |= ¬f.
• If f ≡∀x:t[h] and for all g of type t, rtt |= h[x:=g],6 then rtt |= ∀x:t[h].
Remark 2.12. At ﬁrst sight, the reader might expect a clause for the case f ≡
z(k1, . . . , km) in the above deﬁnition. However, since fv(z(k1, . . . , km)) ⊇{z},
we have fv(z(k1, . . . , km)) ̸= ∅. Propositional functions of the form z(k1, . . . , km)
only occur in the above deﬁnition in a form in which the variable z has been bound
6fv(h[x:=g]) = ∅by Lemma 2.

812
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
by a quantiﬁer. As was noted earlier (in Subsection 2a), expressions of the form
f(k1, . . . , kn), where f is a propositional function, do not exist in rtt.
Remark 2.13.
This deﬁnition of logical truth is quite informal. For example, the
ﬁrst clause “If (a1, . . . , am) ∈R then rtt |= R(a1, . . . , am)” requires the symbol
R to be already fully interpreted and to denote a relation independently of any
Tarskian assignment function. This is faithful to Russell, for whom the Tarskian
notion of an uninterpreted formal language was quite alien.
3
KRIPKE’S THEORY OF TRUTH KTT
In this section, we describe Kripke’s Theory of Truth ktt ([Kripke, 1975]). Kripke
expresses higher-order formulas within a ﬁrst-order language, using the fact that
many interesting languages are rich enough to reﬂect their own syntax (for in-
stance, via a G¨odel numbering).
Let us assume a ﬁrst-order language L, with variables ranging over a domain
D, and primitive predicates interpreted by (totally deﬁned) relations on D. Let
us also assume two subsets S1 and S2 of D such that S1 ∩S2 = ∅. Kripke extends
L to L(S1, S2) by adding a monadic predicate T. The main idea is to interpret T
as a “truth predicate”. S1 contains the elements d of D for which T(d) holds (so
it contains the (codes of) formulas which we consider to be “true”); S2 contains
those d ∈D for which ¬T(d) holds (hence it contains the (codes of) formulas which
we consider to be “false”). We do not demand that S1 ∪S2 = D, hence T is a
partial predicate over D.
Deﬁnition 3.1. (Logical Truth for ktt) Let L be a ﬁrst-order language over
a domain D with R as set of primitive predicates. Let f be a sentence in L. We
deﬁne L |= f as follows:7
f
L |= f
L |= ¬f
R(d1, . . . , dm)
(d1, . . . , dm) ∈R
(d1, . . . , dm) ̸∈R
g1 ∧g2
L |= g1 and L |= g2
L |= (¬g1) ∨(¬g2)
g1 ∨g2
L |= g1 or L |= g2
L |= (¬g1) ∧(¬g2)
∀x[g]
L |= g[x:=d] for all d ∈D
L |= ∃x[¬g]
∃x[g]
L |= g[x:=d] for some d ∈D
L |= ∀x[¬g]
¬¬g
L |= g
L |= ¬g
Here, R ∈R; d, d1, . . . , dm ∈D, and g, g1, g2 are formulas of L. Now let S1, S2 ⊆D
such that S1 ∩S2 = ∅. ktt ≡L(S1, S2) is the ﬁrst-order language over D with
R ∪{T} as the set of primitive predicates (T ̸∈R). We extend the deﬁnition of
L |= f to ktt |= f by putting ktt |= T(d) iﬀd ∈S1 and ktt |= ¬T(d) iﬀd ∈S2.
7Notice that even though this deﬁnition is diﬀerent from Tarski’s deﬁnition, especially with
respect to the deﬁnition of L |= ¬f, it is easy to prove the equivalence of both deﬁnitions. This
is because all primitive predicates of L are totally deﬁned. We took this deﬁnition however as
we need to extend it for the partial predicate T.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
813
It is important (and easy) to notice that the extension of L to L(S1, S2) is
conservative:
LEMMA 3. Let L be a ﬁrst-order language over a domain D, let S1, S2 ⊆D such
that S1 ∩S2 = ∅, and assume that f is a sentence in L. Then L |= f if and only
if L(S1, S2) |= f.
2
Now Kripke uses T as a predicate expressing truth by deﬁning a hierarchy of
languages. This hierarchy has much in common with Russell’s hierarchy of orders.
L was assumed to be able to reﬂect its own syntax, hence so is L(S1, S2), for
any S1, S2. Notice that the sentences of L(S1, S2) do not depend on the sets S1
and S2, so we can take one G¨odel numbering ⟨⟩, being a map from the formulas
of L(S1, S2) to D. The Kripke hierarchy of languages is deﬁned by presenting a
hierarchy of pairs of sets (S1, S2):
Deﬁnition 3.2.
For any ordinal α we deﬁne a pair of sets (Sα,1, Sα,2) and a
language kttα.
• S0,1
def
= ∅; S0,2
def
= ∅; ktt0
def
= L(S0,1, S0,2).
• If Sα,1, Sα,2 and kttα have been deﬁned, then we deﬁne:
Sα+1,1
def
=
{⟨f⟩| f is a sentence and kttα |= f}
Sα+1,2
def
=
{⟨f⟩| f is a sentence and kttα |= ¬f} ∪
{d ∈D | d ̸≡⟨f⟩for all sentences f of kttα}
kttα+1
def
=
L(Sα+1,1, Sα+1,2)
• If α is a limit ordinal and Sβ,1, Sβ,2 and kttβ have been deﬁned for all
β < α, then
Sα,i
def
=
[
β<α
Sβ,i
kttα
def
=
L(Sα,1, Sα,2)
LEMMA 4. (Conservation of Knowledge) If α < β then Sα,1 ⊆Sβ,1 and
Sα,2 ⊆Sβ,2.
2
We can see the construction of the languages kttα as a process of obtaining
knowledge. At the initial stage, ktt0, T(d) is not deﬁned for any d ∈D. There
is no knowledge at all. Applying the deﬁnition of truth given for ktt0, we ob-
tain knowledge: Some sentences f can be judged true (ktt0 |= f; we store the
code of f in S1,1), some other sentences g can be judged false (ktt0 |= ¬g; the
code of g is stored in S1,2).
It is not possible to judge all sentences.
For in-
stance, neither ktt0 |= ∀x[T(x) ∨¬T(x)] nor ktt0 |= ¬∀x[T(x) ∨¬T(x)] hold, so
⟨∀x[T(x) ∨¬T(x)]⟩belongs neither to S1,1 nor to S1,2.

814
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
The knowledge we obtained is expressed by the predicate T in ktt1. In ktt1 we
know more about T than in ktt0. Hence more sentences can be judged true or false;
we store their codes in S2,1 and S2,2 respectively. The Lemma on Conservation of
Knowledge 4 guarantees that this process only extends our knowledge, i.e.:
• Sentences that were judged to be true at level ktt1 remain true at level
ktt2;
• Sentences that were judged to be false at level ktt1 remain false at level
ktt2.
By iterating this process we arrive at the levels ktt3, ktt4, . . . , kttω, kttω+1, . . ..
This limit does terminate however in that it has a ﬁxed point.
4
RTT IN KTT
Both in rtt and in ktt we are confronted with a hierarchy. Russell constructs a
hierarchy by dividing propositions and propositional functions into diﬀerent orders,
taking care that a propositional function f can only depend on objects of a lower
order than the order of f.
Kripke does not make this distinction beforehand.
He has only one truth-
predicate (T), but decisions about truth of propositions are split into diﬀerent
levels: At the ﬁrst level only decisions about propositions that do not involve T
are made, at the second level decisions about propositions involving T for codes of
ﬁrst-level propositions are made, and so on.
In Subsection 4a we investigate the similarity between both hierarchies, by
describing rtt within ktt. In Subsection 4b we investigate in which way rtt is
more restrictive with respect to self-reference than ktt.
4a
rtt embedded in ktt
To embed rtt in a ﬁrst-order language L, we have to cope with two technical
problems:
• We need to encode the notion of and the manipulation with (higher-order)
propositional functions into a ﬁrst-order language. The manipulation is es-
pecially important with respect to substitution, which in the higher-order
situation is much more complicated than in the ﬁrst-order case (cf. the deﬁ-
nition of substitution 2.9).
• In Russell’s theory, it is possible (and, due to the hierarchy of orders, in fact
only possible) to quantify over only a subtype of all propositions. This makes
it impossible to translate, for instance, the proposition ∀p:()1[p() ∨¬p()]
directly by ∀x[T(x) ∨¬T(x)], as the quantiﬁer in the latter also quantiﬁes
over (codes of) higher-order propositions.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
815
As we do not want contexts to be involved in this coding, we assume that each
variable in V has (implicitly) a superscript t, indicating its type. This makes it
possible to do without contexts, as the types of the variables are now clear from
the function in which they occur. For reasons of clarity, we will not write this
superscript explicitly, as long as no confusion arises.
We propose the following solutions to the problems sketched above (we ﬁrst give
the deﬁnition and afterwards explain the thinking behind it):
Deﬁnition 4.1.
Let ktt be the language L with domain D = A, extended
with for each ramiﬁed type t a monadic predicate Typt, for each n ∈IN a (n+1)-
ary function Appn, and the monadic predicate T (T will play the same role as in
Section 3). We code the typeable propositional functions f of F to formulas f in
the language ktt. We do this by induction on the structure of f.
• If f ≡R(i1, . . . , ia(R)), then f is present in the original language L and we
take f
def
= f.
• If f ≡z(k1, . . . , km), write Ki ≡⟨ki⟩for ki ∈F, and Ki ≡ki for ki ∈A ∪V.
Deﬁne f
def
= T(Appm(z, K1, . . . , Km)).
• If f ≡f1 ∨f2, then f
def
= f1 ∨f2.
• If f ≡¬f ′, then f
def
= ¬f ′.
• If f ≡∀x : u[f ′], then f
def
= ∀x[¬Typu(x) ∨f ′].
We now give a formal interpretation to the newly introduced predicates Typt
and Appn.
Deﬁnition 4.2.
For all ramiﬁed types t ̸= ι0, let Typt
def
= {⟨f⟩| f ∈F and f : t}
and Typι0
def
= D.
Assume: n ∈IN, f ∈F is of type (t1, . . . , tn) and has free variables x1 < . . . <
xn. Assume also that for i = 1, . . . , n, ki : ti and either di = ki (if ti = ι0) or
di = ⟨ki⟩(if ti ̸= ι0). We deﬁne:
Appn(⟨f⟩, d1, . . . , dn)
def
= ⟨f[x1, . . . , xn:=k1, . . . , kn]⟩.
From now on, we will interpret the function symbol Appn as the function Appn,
and the relation symbol Typt as the relation Typt.
We make some remarks with respect to these deﬁnitions.
Remark 4.3.
It is clear that the newly introduced functions Appn are used for
carrying out substitutions, thus solving the ﬁrst of the technical problems stated
at the beginning of this subsection. The predicates Typt solve the second problem,
as can be seen in the deﬁnition of ∀x[f].

816
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
Remark 4.4.
Notice that we did not deﬁne the functions Appn on the full
domain Dn+1. We could have done that, but will not need Appn on other elements
of Dn+1 than deﬁned above.
Remark 4.5.
At this point, our work is related to (but independent of) Paul
Gilmore’s work on NaDSet 1. NaDSet 1 is a theory of generalized abstraction which
makes n-ary predication a primitive of the system, with the unary truth predicate
being trivially deﬁnable upon this basis. For a useful connection between ktt and
NaDSet 1, see [Feferman, 1984].
Remark 4.6.
The extensions suggested above are of a mere technical character.
Therefore, we think that we can still speak of an embedding of rtt within ktt.
Notation 4.7.
To keep notations uniform, we sometimes want to speak about
⟨x⟩when we only intend to mention x, for x ∈V, and about ⟨a⟩when only meaning
a, for a ∈A. Hence, we formally deﬁne: ⟨x⟩
def
= x and ⟨a⟩
def
= a for all x ∈V and
all x ∈A.
Below, we work in two systems: rtt and ktt. These systems have a diﬀerent
notion of substitution, though they use the same notation for expressing substitu-
tion. From the context, however, it will always be clear which kind of substitution
is meant.
The language ktt above is similar to that presented in Section 3, and we
construct kttα for each ordinal α as described in that section.
We need the
following lemma:
LEMMA 5. (Substitution Lemma) Assume g is a propositional function of
order m and g[x:=k] is a proposition of order n. If kttn |= g[x:=k] then kttm |=
g[x:=⟨k⟩].
Proof: We make the proof a little easier by proving that if: If g is a propositional
function of order m and g[x1, . . . , xp:=k1, . . . , kp] is a proposition of order n, then
1 and 2 hold where
1. kttn |= g[x1, . . . , xp:=k1, . . . , kp] implies
kttm |= g[x1, . . . , xp:=⟨k1⟩, . . . , ⟨kp⟩]
2. kttn |= ¬g[x1, . . . , xp:=k1, . . . , kp] implies
kttm |= ¬g[x1, . . . , xp:=⟨k1⟩, . . . , ⟨kp⟩]
We write g[xi:=ki] as a shorthand for g[x1, . . . , xp:=k1, . . . , kp] as long as no con-
fusion arises, and use similar abbreviations for other substitutions. The proof is
by induction on the structure of g.
• g ≡R(i1, . . . , ia(R)). Then, by deﬁnition of g[xi:=ki], g[xi:=ki] ≡g[xi:=⟨ki⟩].
As n ≤m, the lemma follows by the Lemma on Conservation of Knowledge
4.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
817
• g ≡z(h1, . . . , hq). If z ̸∈{x1, . . . , xp} then again g[xi:=ki] ≡g[xi:=⟨ki⟩]8
and again the lemma follows from n ≤m and the Lemma on Conservation
of Knowledge 4.
The interesting case is when g ≡z(h1, . . . , hq) and z ∈{x1, . . . , xp}. To keep
notations clear, we assume p = 1 and z = x1. The reader may verify that the
case p > 1 only complicates notation, not the proof. We only show 1 as 2 is
similar. Assume kttn |= g[xi:=ki].
As k1 and z have the same type, k1 has q free variables, say y1 < . . . < yq,
and by deﬁnition of substitution in rtt, z(h1, . . . , hq)[x1:=k1] ≡k1[yi:=hi].
Notice that z and k1 have the same order (m−1), and that n, the order of
k1[yi:=hi], is at most the order of k1 (Lemma 1). This means: n ≤m −1.
Using Lemma 4: kttm−1 |= k1[yi:=hi].
By the deﬁnition of T we have: kttm |= T
D
k1[yi:=hi]
E
. We are now done
because:
g[x1:=⟨k1⟩]
≡
z(h1, . . . , hq)[z:=⟨k1⟩]
≡
T(Appq(z, ⟨h1⟩, . . . , ⟨hq⟩))[z:=⟨k1⟩]
≡
T(Appq(⟨k1⟩, ⟨h1⟩, . . . , ⟨hq⟩))
≡
T
D
k1[yi:=hi]
E
• g ≡g1 ∨g2. First, assume kttn |= g[xi:=ki]. As g[xi:=ki] ≡g1[xi:=ki] ∨
g2[xi:=ki], there is j such that kttn |= gj[xi:=ki]. By the induction hypoth-
esis, there is a j such that kttm |= gj[xi:=⟨ki⟩], as the order of gj is ≤m.
Hence kttm |= g1[xi:=⟨ki⟩] ∨g2[xi:=⟨ki⟩], so we are done.
Now assume kttn |= ¬g[xi:=ki]. Hence: kttn |= ¬(g1[xi:=ki] ∨g2[xi:=ki]),
and kttn |= ¬gj[xi:=ki] for j = 1, 2, and by the induction hypothesis, this
means (again the order of the gjs are ≤m) kttm |= ¬gj[xi:=⟨ki⟩] for j = 1, 2,
hence kttm |= ¬g1[xi:=⟨ki⟩] ∧¬g2[xi:=⟨ki⟩]. So kttm |= ¬(g1[xi:=⟨ki⟩] ∨
g2[xi:=⟨ki⟩]), and kttm |= (¬(g1 ∨g2))[xi:=⟨ki⟩].
• g ≡¬g′.
If kttn |= g[xi:=ki] then use the induction hypothesis for g′.
If kttn |= ¬g[xi:=ki] then kttn |= g′[xi:=ki], so by induction
kttm |= g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩], so kttm |= ¬¬g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩].
• g ≡∀x:t[g′].
If kttn |= g[xi:=ki], then for all d such that
Typt(d) and kttn |= g′[xi:=ki][x:=d],
hence for all these d, kttm |= g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩][x:=d], so
kttm |= ∀x[g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩]], and kttm |= g[xi:=⟨ki⟩].
8This is because in this case, no higher-order substitutions occur, and the notion of rtt
substitution coincides with ordinary, ﬁrst-order substitution.

818
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
If kttn |= ¬g[xi:=ki] then there is a d ∈D such that
Typt(d) and kttn |= ¬g′[xi:=ki][x:=d],
hence kttm |= ¬g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩][x:=d], and kttm |= ∃x[¬g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩]].
Hence kttm |= ∃x[¬g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩]] and kttm |= ¬∀x[g′[xi:=⟨ki⟩]].
2
Remark 4.8.
We have actually proven a stronger fact: Assume g is a propo-
sitional function of order m and g[x:=k] is a proposition of order n. If kttn |=
g[x:=k] then kttp |= g[x:=⟨k⟩], where p = min(m, n + 1). This tells us more
about the role of the predicate T: Although a substitution may lower the order of
a propositional function by more than one, only one application of the predicate T
is involved (hence only one level in the hierarchy of truths). However, in the theo-
rem below we only need the (weaker) form in which we presented the Substitution
Lemma originally.
Theorem 4.9. Let f : ()n ∈F. Then: rtt |= f if and only if kttn |= f.
Proof:
⇐Due to the use of ¬ in the deﬁnition of kttn |= f, we prove a little bit more:
• If rtt |= f then kttn |= f;
• If rtt |= ¬f then kttn |= ¬f.
These claims are proved simultaneously by induction on the deﬁnition of
rtt |= f.
• f ≡R(d1, . . . , da(R)) for a R ∈R and some d1, . . . , da(R) ∈D. Then
f ≡f. As rtt |= f, we know that (d1, . . . , da(R)) ∈R, hence kttn |= f.
The proof is similar for ¬f.
• f ≡g1 ∨g2. Then the orders of the gis are either equal to, or smaller
than n.
First assume rtt |= f.
Then we know that rtt |= gi for i = 1 or
i = 2. By the induction hypothesis (and Conservation of Knowledge, if
the order of g is < n), kttn |= gi, As f ≡g1 ∨g2, kttn |= f.
Now assume rtt |= ¬f. Then it is not true that rtt |= f, so it is not
true that rtt |= gi for i = 1 or i = 2. So rtt |= ¬gi for i = 1, 2. By the
induction hypothesis (and, again, possibly Conservation of Knowledge),
we have kttn |= ¬gi, hence, kttn |= ¬gi for i = 1, 2.
So kttn |= ¬g1 ∧¬g2, and hence kttn |= ¬f.
• f ≡¬g.
If rtt |= f then use the induction hypothesis on g to get
kttn |= ¬g, hence kttn |= f.
If rtt |= ¬f, then rtt |= g, so by induction kttn |= g, so kttn |= ¬¬g,
so kttn |= ¬f.
• f ≡∀x:t[g]. Notice that g has order n.
If rtt |= f then for all k:t, rtt |= g[x:=k]. By the induction hypothesis,
we know that for all k : t, kttmk |= g[x:=k], where mk is the order of
g[x:=k].

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
819
By the Substitution Lemma 5 we have: For all k : t, kttn |= g[x:=⟨k⟩].
Hence, for all d ∈D, kttn |= ¬Typt(d) ∨g[x:=d].
Hence kttn |=
∀x : t[g].
The argument for rtt |= ¬f is similar.
⇒This is easy now. Assume, for the sake of the argument, not rtt |= f. Then
rtt |= ¬f, hence kttn |= ¬f and kttn |= f, which is a contradiction.
2
This theorem clearly shows the relation between the orders in rtt and the levels
of truth in ktt. The heart of the proof of Theorem 4.9 is in the proof of case
z(h1, . . . , hq) of the Substitution Lemma 5. This is the only place in the proof
where the properties of the predicate T are used. It is understandable that these
properties must be used at exactly this place when we look at the deﬁnition of
propositional functions and the typing rules for propositional functions. Exactly
the possibility of constructing a propositional function of the form z(h1, . . . , hq)
makes it possible to arrive at higher-order propositional functions and higher-order
propositions. So exactly at this spot, Kripke’s predicate T must appear, in order
to raise one level in ktt as well.
Corollary 4.10. Rtt |= f if and only if kttω |= f.
2
We cannot improve the result of Theorem 4.9 in general: There are propositions
f of order n in rtt whose code is provable at level kttn in ktt, but not at any
lower level.
Theorem 4.11. Let n > 0, and fn be the nth-order proposition
∀p:()n−1[p() ∨¬p()]. Then:
kttm |= fn if and only if m ≥n.
Proof: ⇐follows from Theorem 4.9 and Lemma 4. ⇒is by induction on n.
Observe that
fn ≡∀p[¬Typ()n−1(p) ∨(T(App0(p)) ∨¬T(App0(p)))].
• n = 1. Let g be any proposition of order 0 in rtt. Then ktt0 |= Typ()0(g)
but as T is completely undeﬁned at level 0, ktt0 ̸|= T(App0(g)) ∨¬T(App0(g)).
Hence, ktt0 ̸|= f1.
• Assume the theorem has been proved for all n′ < n. Assume m < n and
kttm |= fn.
By deﬁnition of |=, we have: kttm |= T(App0(⟨fn−1⟩)) ∨
¬T(App0(⟨fn−1⟩)), and for reasons of consistency: kttm |= T(App0(⟨fn−1⟩)),
hence kttm |= T(fn−1), so, by the deﬁnition of T: kttm−1 |= fn−1, which
contradicts the induction hypothesis, as m −1 < n −1.
2
There are, however, propositions f of order n in rtt for which kttm |= f or
kttm |= ¬f can already be established for m < n.
Example 4.12.
Consider a proposition g ≡g1∨g2 where g1 is a true proposition
of order m and g2 is any proposition of order n. As g1 is true in rtt, we have
kttm |= g1, and therefore kttm |= g.

820
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
4b
The restrictiveness of Russell’s theory
We illustrate the diﬀerent approaches of Russell and Kripke by an example given
by Kripke himself.
Example 4.13.
Let D, R, L, Sα,i and kttα be as in Section 3 where R contains
two monadic predicates V and W which are collections of (codes of) utterances of
persons V and W. Now deﬁne
P ≡∀x[¬W(x) ∨¬T(x)]
Q ≡∀x[¬V(x) ∨¬T(x)]
(informally, P denotes: All utterances of W are false, and Q denotes: All utterances
of V are false). Now distinguish two situations. In both situations, we want to
know whether P and Q become true or false when passing through the hierarchy
of languages ktt0, ktt1, . . . . Or, more formally, whether there is an α such that
⟨V⟩and ⟨W⟩belong to Sα,1 ∪Sα,2.
1. V = {⟨P⟩} and W = {⟨Q⟩} (notice that V and W are just subsets of D).
In this case, P is logically equivalent to ¬T(⟨Q⟩) and Q is logically equivalent
to ¬T(⟨P⟩). As a consequence we have: if ⟨Q⟩∈Sα,i then ⟨P⟩∈Sβ,3−i for
some β < α, and if ⟨P⟩∈Sα,i then ⟨Q⟩∈Sβ,3−i for some β < α. Hence
⟨P⟩, ⟨Q⟩̸∈Sαi, for all α, i, so neither the truth of P nor the truth of Q will
ever be established.
2. In the situation above, the only utterance of V was that anything said by
W is false, and vice versa. In that case, it is also intuitively clear that it is
impossible to say anything about the truth of P or Q. Now we change the
situation. We assume that R also contains a third monadic predicate R, and
that d is an element of R. We redeﬁne W:
W
def
= {⟨Q⟩, ⟨R(d)⟩}.
This has drastic consequences. As ktt0 |= R(d), ⟨R(d)⟩∈S1,1, so ktt1 |=
T(⟨R(d)⟩), hence ktt1 |= ¬P. Therefore, ⟨P⟩∈S2,2, so ktt2 |= ¬T(⟨P⟩),
hence:
ktt2
|=
¬P
ktt2
|=
Q
The fact that W utters a true sentence makes it possible to conclude at level
1 that P is false, irrespective of the fact that W has also uttered another
sentence Q, of which we cannot establish the truth at level 1. The falsehood
of P makes it possible to decide about Q at the next level, so the falsehood
of P and the truth of Q could have been established at level 2.
In Russell’s terminology it would not be possible to write expressions like P and
Q at all: They are excluded beforehand, as P involves Q, therefore has to be of

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
821
higher-order than Q, and Q involves P, therefore has to be of higher-order than
P.
This indicates an important diﬀerence between rtt and ktt: Kripke allows
much more expressions to be written down. In some situations these expressions
will never obtain any truth-value (like P and Q in the ﬁrst example), but in
other situations (so: with other deﬁnitions of the primitive predicates) the same
expressions will get a truth-value.
Kripke concludes: “it would be fruitless to
look for an intrinsic criterion that will enable us to sieve out – as meaningless, or
ill-formed – those sentences which lead to paradox”.
Example 4.14.
Another, more formal, example of a proposition f in ktt for
which there is no g ∈F with g ≡f is the proposition f
def
= ∀x[T(x) ∨¬T(x)]:
Assume, for the sake of the argument, that g ≡f. Let m be the order of g. Then
kttm |= f or kttm |= ¬f. This implies kttm |= T(fm) ∨¬T(fm), where fm is as
in Theorem 4.11. By deﬁnition of T this means kttm−1 |= fm or kttm−1 |= ¬fm,
both contradicting Theorem 4.11.
4c
Orders and types
rtt is based on a double hierarchy: One of types and one of orders. This double
hierarchy is too restrictive. It is possible to develop Logic and Mathematics within
rtt, but for instance the proof of the Supremum Theorem, which is fundamental
in real analysis, cannot be given.
The origin of the problem is the use of the
so-called predicative and impredicative propositional functions.
Deﬁnition 4.15. Let f ∈F be typeable in rtt. Assume f has free variables
x1, . . . , xn of orders m1, . . . , mn respectively. f is called predicative if its order is
equal to max(m1, . . . , mn)+1; if its order is greater then f is called impredicative.
As the impredicative propositional functions cause problems, the “Axiom of
Reducibility” is proposed in Principia Mathematica. This axiom is given by the
following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 4.16. (Axiom of Reducibility)
For each f ∈F there is a predicative g ∈F that is logically equivalent to f
This axiom has been controversial from the moment it was introduced. Russell
himself admits that “it has a purely pragmatic justiﬁcation: it leads to the desired
results, and to no others. But clearly it is not the sort of axiom with which we
can rest content.” Though serious eﬀorts have been made to develop mathematics
within rtt (for instance by Weyl [1918]), this has not become the usual practice.
Ramsey [1926] shows that, by making distinction between language and meta-
language, the orders can be removed from the system without re-introducing any
known paradox.
Hilbert and Ackermann [1928] present a similar idea.
With
this remark the type-theoretic fundamentals for the Simple Theory of Types stt,
introduced by Church [1940], were laid, and orders have remained out of the
important modern type systems up until now.

822
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
It is therefore interesting to notice the relation between orders in rtt and levels
of truth in ktt, as formulated in Theorem 4.9. It shows that Kripke’s system can
be regarded as a system based on rtt, of which not the orders, but the types have
been removed. In this way, ktt can be seen as a system that is dual to stt.
ktt, however, has a more subtle approach than many type theories as it does
not exclude any, possibly “paradoxical”, expression from the syntax, which is the
usual type-theoretic approach. If an expression is paradoxical, it will not get a
truth value at any level α of the hierarchy of Truths. Whether an expression is
paradoxical or not does not only depend on its syntactic structure, but also on
the domain D (see Example 4.13). So paradoxes are only excluded at the level of
semantics.
The discussion above shows that the orders of rtt are not to be blamed for
the restrictiveness of rtt. ktt is a system which contains orders but has only
few restrictions towards self-application. It is the combination of orders and types
that makes rtt restrictive.
5
THE NUPRL AND MARTIN-L¨OF TYPE THEORIES
Martin-L¨of’s type theory itt (see [Martin-L¨of, 1975; Martin-L¨of, 1982] and also
[Nordstr¨om et al., 1990]) was originally developed as a foundation of constructive
mathematics, and the ctt relative of it was developed and implemented in Nuprl
[Jackson, 1995; Constable et al., 1986] to formalize and unify many basic concepts
in computer science as well as constructive mathematics.
A fundamental idea
common to both theories is the interpretation of logic within type theory through
the propositions-as-types principle (also called the Curry-Howard-de Bruijn iso-
morphism) where (roughly speaking), a proposition is interpreted as a type whose
elements represent the computational content of proofs of the proposition. Hence,
a false proposition is interpreted as the empty set and a true proposition is in-
terpreted as a non-empty set. In order to prove that a proposition is true, we
need to show that the proposition is inhabited. Nuprl can extract from proved
propositions their computational content and treat proofs as programs [Bates and
Constable, 1985].
This idea has proved extremely attractive from the computational point of view
and has been exploited in many theorem provers (e.g., Alf, Agda, Nuprl, MetaPRL,
and Coq). This idea was already exploited in de Bruijn’s Automath which played
an inﬂuential role in both provers Coq and Nuprl. In this section, we concentrate
on a PTS-style variant of core Nuprl from 1984.9
9Since 1984 many new types and type constructors have been added to ctt; much of that
work is summarized in [Allen et al., 2006] and reported in several PhD theses available at
www.nuprl.org.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
823
5a
A fragment of Nuprl in PTS style
We give a PTS style description of a variant of the earliest ctt type theory on
which Nuprl was based (see [Jackson, 1995; Constable et al., 1986]). We do not
give a full presentation even of all of the early Nuprl type constructors, as we will
only need parts of it. The description of the typing rules is given in a natural
deduction style similar to that used in the Barendregt cube [1992], and Pure Type
Systems [Terlouw, 1989]. This assumes an explicit typing of this subset of Nuprl’s
terms, but in Section 8 we will examine the actual implicit typing used in ctt.
For full details the reader is referred to [Kamareddine and Laan, 2001]. Here,
we review the results that are relevant for our section on Computational Type
Theory (see Section 6) and for the role of orders in achieving powerful type theory
which remain computational.
In the next deﬁnition, V, Z and S = {∗1, ∗2, . . .} represent the sets of variables,
integers and sorts respectively. In an extension to the tradition of PTSs, the sort
∗a represents the propositions (and, more general, the types) of order ≤a. The
sort ∗a corresponds to the Universe of Types Ua in [Jackson, 1995; Martin-L¨of,
1982]. The symbol ⊥represents the undeﬁned or a contradiction. Again as in
PTSs, abstraction is represented by λ and Π. The remaining notions represent
application, Cartesian products, pairing, and ﬁrst and second projections.
Deﬁnition 5.1.
The set of terms T is deﬁned by the following abstract syntax:
T ::= S | V | ⊥| Z | TT | λV:T.T | ΠV:T.T | T × T | ⟨T, T⟩| π1(T) | π2(T)
We let α, β, x, y, z, . . . range over V; m, n, . . . over Z and A, B, M, N, a, b over T.
When x does not occur free in B, we write A →B for Πx:A.B. Free and bound
variables are deﬁned as usual. fv(A) and bv(A) denote the set of free and bound
variables of A. A[x:=B] denotes the term in which all the free occurrences of x in
A have been replaced by B. Syntactic equality of terms is taken modulo renaming
of bound variables and as is standard, we adopt the Barendregt’s convention where
names of bound variables diﬀer from the free ones in a term and where we use
diﬀerent bound names for diﬀerent bound variables.
The next deﬁnition gives for each term A the order-free term |A| (where all
orders are collapsed into ∗1), introduces the various notions of reduction on our
Nuprl segment, and deﬁnes the typing relation of the PTS version of Nuprl.
Deﬁnition 5.2.
• For each term A we deﬁne a term |A| (where we collapse orders) as follows:
| ∗m | = ∗1
|Πx:A.B| = Πx:A.|B|
|x| = x
|A × B| = |A| × |B|
|⊥| = ⊥
| ⟨A, B⟩| = ⟨|A|, |B|⟩
|Z| = Z
|π1(M)| = π1(|M|)
|MN| = |M||N|
|π2(M)| = π2(|M|)
|λx:A.b| = λx:A.|b|

824
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
• We take the axioms:
(→β) : (λx:T.A)B →β A[x:=B]
(→σ) : π1(⟨A, B⟩) →σ A and π2(⟨A, B⟩) →σ B.
• The reduction relations →β, →σ and →βσ generated respectively by the
axioms (→β), (→σ) and their combination.
• The reﬂexive transitive closures →
→β, →
→σ and →
→βσ of →β, →σ and →βσ.
• The symmetric closure =βσ of →
→βσ.
• Contexts as ﬁnite lists x1:A1, . . . , xn:An of declarations xi:Ai with domain
{x1, . . . , xn}. Let Γ, ∆range over contexts and Γ ⊆∆if all declarations in
Γ are also in ∆.
• A statement Γ ⊢A : B is derivable if it can be deduced by repeated appli-
cation of the rules given in Figure 1.
• Γ is called legal if there are A, B such that Γ ⊢A : B;
• A is called legal if there are Γ, B such that Γ ⊢A : B or Γ ⊢B : A;
• A is called a Γ-term if there is a B such that Γ ⊢A : B or Γ ⊢B : A;
• A is called a Γ-type if there is an n such that Γ ⊢A : ∗n.
Note that the rule (⊆) of Figure 1 simpliﬁes the formulation without sacriﬁcing
expressivity. This can be seen through the simplicity of the rule (Π-form) without
being restrictive.
The next theorem shows that important properties of PTSs also hold for the
Nuprl formulation as a PTS except for the unicity of types. This is consistent
with Nuprl and Martin-L¨of’s type theory where unicity of types does not hold.
However, we have a weak unicity of types in the sense that if we collapse orders
(using the collapse function |.|) then unicity of types will hold.
Theorem 5.3.
1. (Church-Rosser Theorem for →β, →σ and →βσ) Let r ∈{β, σ, βσ}. If
A →
→r B1 and A →
→r B2 then there is a C such that B1 →
→r C and B2 →
→r C.
2. (Correctness of Types) If Γ ⊢A : B then there is an n ≥1 such that
Γ ⊢B : ∗n.
3. (Subject Reduction) If Γ ⊢A : B and A →βσ A′ then Γ ⊢A′ : B.
4. (→
→βσ Preserves Γ-terms) If A is a Γ-term and A →
→βσ A′ then A′ is a
Γ-term.
5. (Weak Unicity of Types) If Γ ⊢A : B1 and Γ ⊢A : B2 then |B1| =βσ |B2|.
6. If A is a Γ-term then there is a Γ-term B and an n ≥1 such that Γ ⊢A :
B : ∗n.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
825
(Axioms)
⊢⊥: ∗1
⊢∗n : ∗n+1
(n ∈IN)
⊢Z : ∗1
⊢n : Z
(n ∈Z)
(Start)
Γ ⊢A : ∗n
Γ, x:A ⊢x:A
(x is Γ-fresh)
(Weak)
Γ ⊢M : N
Γ ⊢A : ∗n
Γ, x:A ⊢M : N
(x is Γ-fresh)
(Π-form)
Γ ⊢A : ∗n
Γ, x:A ⊢B : ∗n
Γ ⊢(Πx:A.B) : ∗n
(λ)
Γ, x:A ⊢b : B
Γ ⊢(Πx:A.B) : ∗n
Γ ⊢(λx:A.b) : (Πx:A.B)
(App)
Γ ⊢M : (Πx:A.B)
Γ ⊢N : A
Γ ⊢MN : B[x:=N]
(×-form)
Γ ⊢A : ∗n
Γ ⊢B : ∗n
Γ ⊢(A × B) : ∗n
(Pairs)
Γ ⊢a : A
Γ ⊢b : B
Γ ⊢(A × B) : ∗m
Γ ⊢⟨a, b⟩: (A × B)
(Left)
Γ ⊢M : (A × B)
Γ ⊢π1(M) : A
(Right)
Γ ⊢M : (A × B)
Γ ⊢π2(M) : B
(Conv)
Γ ⊢M : A
Γ ⊢B : ∗n
A =βσ B
Γ ⊢M : B
(⊆)
Γ ⊢A : ∗n
Γ ⊢A : ∗n+1
Figure 1. Rules of Nuprl as PTSs

826
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
5b
Orders in Nuprl
[Kamareddine and Laan, 2001] adopts the position that the order of a term A is
the smallest natural number n such that the type of A is of type ∗n+1. By (⊆),
this means that for any m > n, the type of A is also of type ∗m. This captures
the notion of orders `a la Russell. Here is the formal deﬁnition of orders.
Deﬁnition 5.4.
• (Γ-terms modulo A) We deﬁne [A]Γ = {A′ | A′ is Γ-term and A =βσ A′}.
• (Order of a Term) Assume A is a Γ-term. We deﬁne ordΓ(A), the order
of A in Γ, as the smallest natural number a (i.e. a ≥0 ) for which there are
A′ ∈[A]Γ and B such that Γ ⊢A′ : B : ∗a+1.
The next lemma shows that any element =βσ to A has the same order as A
(item 1). Even better, the lemma shows that there is an A′ where A →
→βσ A′
rather than only A =βσ A′ (item 2). Furthermore, If A itself is a type and n is
the order of A, then not only the type of A is of type ∗n+1, but also A →
→βσ A′ for
some A′ of type ∗n (see item 3). Moreover, ∗n can be regarded as the type of types
of order ≤n (item 4) and a term is always of a lower order than its type (item 5).
Note however that if Γ ⊢A : B then ordΓ(A) = ordΓ(B) −1 may not hold: take
Γ = ∅, A ≡∗1 and B ≡∗3. This is as expected because, by the inclusion rule (⊆),
once A is of type ∗n, it is of type ∗m for any m ≥n.
LEMMA 6. Let A be a Γ-term and ordΓ(A) = a. The following holds:
1. If A′ ∈[A]Γ then ordΓ(A) = ordΓ(A′).
2. There are A′ and B such that Γ ⊢A′ : B : ∗a+1 and A →
→βσ A′.
3. (A type B reduces to a type B′ of type ∗ord(B)) Let B be a Γ-type and
b = ordΓ(B). ∃B′ such that Γ ⊢B′ : ∗b and B →
→βσ B′.
4. (∗a is the type of types of order ≤a) If P is a Γ-type in βσ-normal
form, then Γ ⊢P : ∗a ⇔ordΓ(P) ≤a.
5. (A term is of a lower order than its type) If Γ ⊢A : B then ordΓ(A) <
ordΓ(B).
[Kamareddine and Laan, 2001] provides a procedure that almost evaluates the
order of Nuprl terms. In particular, it explains how the order of almost all complex
terms (like A × B) is evaluated in term of the orders of the components (A and
B). The only case that fails is that of an application since one cannot evaluate
the order of AB precisely in terms of the orders of A and B. Rather, in the case
of an application AB, one can only establish that the order of AB is ≤the order
of A. More importantly also is the fact that a function can never take arguments
of a higher-order than itself (Lemma 4).

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
827
LEMMA 7.
1. (Order of Projections) For a Γ-term ⟨A, B⟩, ordΓ(π1(⟨A, B⟩)) = ordΓ(A)
and ordΓ(π2(⟨A, B⟩)) = ordΓ(B).
2. (Orders of Constants and Sorts) Let Γ be a legal context. Then ordΓ(∗a)
= a + 1, ordΓ(⊥) = 1, ordΓ(Z) = 1, and ordΓ(n) = 0.
3. Let C be a Γ-term. The following holds:
(a) If C ≡x where x:A ∈Γ then ordΓ(x) = ordΓ(A) −1.
(b) If C ≡Πx:A.B then ordΓ(Πx:A.B) = max(ordΓ(A), ordΓ,x:A(B)).
(c) If C ≡λx:A.b then ordΓ(λx:A.b) = max(ordΓ(A) −1, ordΓ,x:A(b)).
(d) If C ≡A × B or C ≡⟨A, B⟩then ordΓ(C) = max(ordΓ(A), ordΓ(B)).
4. (Order of an Application) If Γ ⊢M : Πx:P.Q and Γ ⊢N : P then
ordΓ(N), ordΓ(MN) ≤ordΓ(M).
Proof: For full details see [Kamareddine and Laan, 2001]. We only show the
case of application: Let m = ordΓ(M). ∃M ′, R such that Γ ⊢M ′ : R : ∗m+1
and M →
→βσ M ′. By Subject Reduction, Γ ⊢M ′ : Πx:P.Q, so by Weak Unic-
ity of Types, |R| =βσ |Πx:P.Q| ≡Πx:P.|Q|. By Church-Rosser ∃R′ such that
R →
→βσ R′ and Πx:P.|Q| →
→βσ |R′|.
Also, R′ must be of the form Πx:P ′.Q′,
where P →
→βσ P ′ and |Q| →
→βσ |Q′|.
By Subject Reduction and Conversion,
Γ ⊢M ′ : (Πx:P ′.Q′) : ∗m+1. As m is minimal, ordΓ(Πx:P ′.Q′) = m + 1. Now,
m = ordΓ(M) = ordΓ(Πx:P ′.Q′) −1 = max(ordΓ(P ′) −1, ordΓ,x:P ′(Q′) −1) ≥
ordΓ(P ′) −1 = ordΓ(P) −1 ≥ordΓ(N).
By conversion, Γ ⊢N : P ′, so Γ ⊢M ′N : Q′[x:=N]. As MN =βσ M ′N, we have
ordΓ(MN) = ordΓ(M ′N) < ordΓ(Q′[x:=N]) ≤ordΓ,x:P ′(Q′) ≤ordΓ(Πx:P ′.Q′) =
m + 1, so ordΓ(MN) ≤m.
2
This shows that a function can never take an argument of higher-order, and
that the order of a term cannot increase when applying an argument to that term.
Finally, we state that our study of orders is diﬀerent from the approach of
[Harper and Pollack, 1991] whose main concerns were type checking and well-
typedness in Coquand’s CCω, extending CCω with anonymous universes to model
Russell and Whitehead’s typical ambiguity convention, and with deﬁnitions.
Another example that orders and universes play an inﬂuential role in powerful
modern systems can be found in [Harper and Pollack, 1991].
6
COMPUTATIONAL TYPE THEORY CTT
In this section we look at Computational Type Theory as implemented in Nuprl
and MetaPRL, the implicitly typed extensional theory ctt [Constable et al., 1986;

828
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
Allen et al., 2006] which supports proofs as programs. We will show how the implic-
itly typed theory oﬀers expressive advantages that compensate for its predicative
character. We point out how results from Section 5 apply to this theory. Implicit
typing also supports polymorphism, and we show the advantages of polymorphism
by deﬁning subtyping as used in object oriented programming. Polymorphism is
the basis for ctt deﬁnitions of dependent records, inheritance and objects [Kopy-
lov, 2003].
This is another example of the fact that orders do not limit us in
expressing concepts that apply to types at all orders, i.e. in all ctt universes. It is
precisely such concepts that one would expect to be hard to express predicatively.
For comparison with ktt we create an internal deﬁnition of proof using a syntactic
ﬁxed point and mention in that context how orders provide a stratiﬁed internal
notion of truth.
We begin by presenting the intuitive ideas behind Computational Type Theory.
This presentation will show that ctt is an extensional type theory in contrast
to the Calculus of Inductive Constructions (cic) [The Coq Development Team,
2004; Bertot and Cast´eran, 2004] which is considered an Intensional Type Theory.
Extensionality is also compatible with orders even though it is a notion associated
with set theory, another impredicative approach to mathematics that does not use
orders. But extensionality comes at a cost, as it does in set theory, namely there
is no type checking algorithm for membership in a type (nor in a set) because that
question is undecidable for ctt and for standard set theories such as ZFC [Zermelo,
1908]. Computer scientists, unlike mathematicians, are accustomed to working
in programming languages with type disciplines supported by strong static type
checkers, such as Java, or type inference algorithms in the case of ML. Nevertheless,
Nuprl has been used by computer scientists in many very practical ways, providing
additional evidence that the concept of orders in an extensional theory is not overly
restrictive.
6a
Origins
Computational Type Theory, like all formal type theories, is related to rtt (which
was never completely formalized). Moreover, ctt has been implemented as a soft-
ware system, in both Nuprl and MetaPRL; of course rtt could not be implemented
in 1927 for lack of computers and programming languages!10 However Church’s
simple types in his 1940 Simple Theory of Types stt [1940] are essentially the
ramiﬁed types of rtt without orders. A variant of stt was implemented as HOL
[Gordon and Melham, 1993]; it was not designed to formalize all classical math-
ematics, but rather applied classical mathematics. In contrast to rtt, stt is an
elegantly small theory whose semantics can either be taken as intuitive or modeled
in Zermelo set theory.
For Russell a type is the domain of signiﬁcance of a propositional function, i.e.
those objects that the proposition is about. In rtt that domain cannot include
the proposition itself. Russell believed that it is not consistent to postulate a single
10Randel Holmes implemented this theory in 2000.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
829
universal type of all meaningful objects on which propositions are deﬁned because
such a universal type would include the propositions being deﬁned, creating a
vicious circle in the deﬁnition. Instead, the universe must be divided into types.
Computational type theory builds on these design decisions.
However, even before types are considered, a very key subsystem of ctt is de-
ﬁned, the computation system on terms. The computation system is deﬁned using
small step operational semantics `a la Plotkin [Plotkin, 1981; Kahn, 1987]. The
terms include all untyped lambda calculus expressions, and the operational seman-
tics means that the term language can express all general computable functions
and is thus Turing complete.11 So the computation system includes all computable
functions among its primitives, and to reason about one of them, it must have a
domain which is a type of the theory. If P(x) is a propositional function on a type
T, then those objects for which it is true form a class denoted {x | P(x)} in rtt
and {x | T|P(x)} in ctt. Classes are fundamental in rtt and are used to deﬁne
the natural numbers; however, in ctt the integers are elements of a primitive type.
We have seen in Section 5 that ctt allows compound types built with type
forming operations such as product, union, and function, and so forth starting
with atomic types such as the integers. To characterize such operations on types
as functions, the domain of the function would need to include types. If we allowed
a type of all types, then we could do this, but as we have discussed, Russell pointed
out obstacles to construction of such a type, and following rtt we do not allow
such a type of all types. Instead we build large collections of types called universes,
each closed under all the usual type constructors; the ﬁrst universe U1 is formed
by collecting all the types that do not require universes. The second universe U2
is built the same way except that we now add U1 as a new type allowed in the
constructions, and allow U1 as an element of U2. In general, the nth universe Un
allows type expressions of universe level i < n, and each such Ui belongs to Un.
This was presented in Section 5 by the axiom (⊆) where ∗n represents Un.
We see that the universe hierarchy is cumulative, so Ui ⊆Ui+1. To express
that an expression of the theory is a type, it is necessary that it belongs to a
universe (see Deﬁnition 5.2). If an expression includes operators on Ui, then it
is in Ui+1 as in this assertion about propositional functions, ∀T : Ui.∀P : T →
Ui.∀x : T. P(x) →P(x). The universe hierarchy corresponds to orders in rtt,
and it renders the theory predicative.
Unlike in Section 5, in the extensional type theory, equality on the dependent
function type and dependent product type is not syntactic equality but extensional
equality.
Thus Πx:A.B
=
Πx:A′.B′ iﬀA
=
A′ and for all x:A we have
B(x) = B′(x).
6b
Philosophical issues
Principia Mathematica was also designed to demonstrate that mathematics could
be reduced to logic, say to truth values and higher-order functions over them,
11These are also called general recursive functions in much of the literature.

830
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
speciﬁcally to predicative logic which avoids the concept of all functions or all
propositions. This is one reason that Principia Mathematica did not start with
a primitive notion of natural numbers nor with speciﬁc individuals as in HOL;
namely, Russell and Whitehead wanted to derive mathematical concepts such as
natural numbers from purely logical concepts. Unfortunately, the core rtt foun-
dation is inadequate for classical mathematics, even for number theory, without an
axiom of reducibility (see Deﬁnition 4.16) among the typing rules, which is a way
to introduce controlled impredicative notions, those whose deﬁnition quantiﬁes
over a collection including the concept being deﬁned. The axiom of reducibility
which we exhibited above, proved to be unpopular among mathematicians and
other logicians (see [Kamareddine et al., 2004]). Poincar´e wrote harshly about
it and about the cumbersome nature of rtt. There were no computer scientists
around to make the case that machines could ﬁll in vast amounts of detail and use
editors to present a version that would read much more like ordinary mathematics
than the raw formalism.
It is noteworthy that theories like ctt harmonize some of the philosophical dis-
putes about the foundations of mathematics summarized well in Dummett’s book
on intuitionism [2000]. For example, serious use of implemented formal theories
such as ctt and cic illustrate David Hilbert’s belief that mathematical truth can
be reduced to mechanically checkable claims in a formal system, a belief called
formalism. Founding ctt and cic on the irreducible concepts of natural number
and computation validates Brouwer’s claim, to be discussed below, that number
and computation are fundamental intuitions on which meaningful mathematics
rests.
ctt and cic also follow Brouwer in equating mathematical truth with
proof. Finally, the fact that among the primitive constructions of ctt are those
that validate the laws of logic shows that logic is inseparable from mathematics,
not quite in the way Russell imagined in his belief called logicism, but in a way
that makes his notion of type fundamental to both logic and mathematics. Thus
through the lens of ctt and cic we recognize that each of the major philosoph-
ical schools contributed part of the underlying foundations of mathematics and
computing. We see the interplay of these philosophical ideas in the next section.
These points are discussed in the Scholarpedia article.12
6c
Computation and data types
Building computation into the basic primitives
The small set of irreducible primitive notions in Church’s Simple Type Theory
stt does not include primitive concepts from computational mathematics, yet
computational ideas have been an integral part of mathematics since the Greeks
with their stress on ruler and compass constructions and since the Arabs with their
stress on written algorithmic processes executed by humans; this is the tradition
of eﬀective mathematics.
12www.scholarpedia.org/article/Computational type theory

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
831
Algorithms and computation are central to intuitionism, a speciﬁc philosophy
of mathematics originating circa 1907 with L. E. J. Brouwer (see [Heyting, 1975])
which accounts for computational concepts, especially computable functions. A
key principle of this philosophy is that the primitive truths of mathematics are
based on innate human intuitions about natural numbers and constructions on
them, that logical reasoning is justiﬁed by the most general constructions, and
that propositions are true only if we can prove them by these general constructions
from the primitive truths.
Thus intuitionistic mathematics includes among its
primitive concepts eﬀective computation on the natural numbers, and its logic is
based on constructing evidence that can be grounded in computation. Brouwer
developed this mathematics beyond law-like computation on numbers to include
other mental constructions encompassing inﬁnite sets and free choice sequences as
objects of mathematics. He used free choice sequences to deﬁne real numbers (the
continuum). Many of these concepts can be deﬁned in ctt.
Constructive mathematics
What is nowadays called constructive mathematics is closely related to eﬀective
mathematics and intuitionistic mathematics. One of the seminal publications in
(American) constructive mathematics is the book Foundations of Constructive
Analysis by Errett Albert Bishop [1967]. In philosophical remarks in this book,
Bishop disagreed with Brouwer about the continuum and deﬁned real numbers
using standard data types, in the way that they are now implemented as “inﬁnite
precision numbers” in some programming languages. For Bishop, a real number
r is a computable function from the natural numbers to the rational numbers
such that the absolute value of the diﬀerence between r(n) and r(m) is less or
equal to 1/n + 1/m. Many basic concepts and theorems from analysis have been
implemented in ctt [Chirimar and Howe, 1991].
Bishop believed that constructive mathematics could be consistent with clas-
sical mathematics, something Brouwer denied. For example, in Brouwer’s theory
of real numbers, all functions from reals to reals are continuous (as is the case in
recursive mathematics as well), in Bishop’s account they are not, and indeed one
can read Bishop’s book as a valid account of the classical real numbers, but one
that inherently provides information about how to compute with them. One of
the goals of ctt is to formalize the concepts in Bishop’s book and to formalize all
of mathematics constructively in such a way that the account can be understood
classically yet there is enough information provided to enable practical computa-
tion.13
13Thus far this approach has failed only when it comes to understanding the partial com-
putable functions on a type in the sense that computer scientists prefer versus the sense in which
mathematicians prefer. To the computer scientist, a partial function from A to B is a computing
procedure that applies to elements of type A but might fail to terminate on some (or all) ele-
ments. To a mathematician, a partial function with this typing is a total function from a subset
of A into B.

832
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
Like intuitionistic and constructive mathematics, Computational Type The-
ory axiomatizes digital computation on natural numbers and other recursive data
types, but it does not adopt the Church-Turing Thesis; instead the theory relies
on Bishop’s insight that unless a person is interested in studying what cannot be
computed, it is suﬃcient to specify a natural universal (Turing-complete) comput-
ing formalism and leave it open-ended allowing the possibility of extending the
underlying programming framework yet preserving the mathematical theorems.
Many logical questions can be explored starting from ctt because it can be ex-
tended in many directions, toward classical mathematics by adding the law of the
excluded middle P ∨¬P (shown to be consistent with core ctt [Howe, 1996]), to-
ward recursive mathematics by adding the Church-Turing Thesis [Beeson, 1985] as
a logical principle, toward intuitionistic mathematics by axiomatizing free choice
sequences, and towards domain theory [Scott, 1976] by typing partial functions in
the sense of computer science as functions which may not converge on all elements
of their domain type [Constable and Smith, 1993].
In ctt, the collection of all types is also left open-ended, and it is possible to
deﬁne the standard data types such as numbers, tuples, arrays, lists, trees, etc. as
well as the higher-order types such as functions from one type to another, inﬁnite
lists (streams), inﬁnite trees, and so forth. The delicate point from a foundational
point of view is whether to include the partial types such as all partially computable
functions from a type to a type.14
In the extension of ctt with a logic of events [Bickford and Constable, 2008],
say CTT-E, the programs include distributed systems, and proofs can be treated
as processes; thus the programming logic applies to virtually all known important
classes of programs. This connection to programming explains why ctt has been
used extensively in important areas of computer science, namely formal meth-
ods and mathematical software engineering. CTT-E also connects to the logic of
knowledge and the theory of agents in AI.
ctt is expressive enough to account for the idea of computational complexity
of algorithms [Constable and Crary, 2001]; so it is possible to express the ideas
of complexity theory such as the famous P=NP problem. It can also account for
libraries of theorems and thus for systems [Allen et al., 2006].
6d
Elements of computational type theory
Terms and programs
In ctt all terms have a simple uniform syntax which is essentially an operator
identiﬁer followed by a list of subterms (possibly empty) each of which is in the
14Nuprl implements partial types using its concept of a bar type [Constable and Smith, 1993],
and that extension provides a constructive domain theory. However, this extension of ctt is not
consistent with classical mathematics, just as intuitionistic mathematics is not. The extension
is not classically consistent because it is possible to show that the halting problem for partial
functions on nontrivial types, say the natural numbers, is not decidable by any function of the
theory; classically it is decidable by a noncomputable function.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
833
scope of a list of binding variables (possibly empty), e.g. op(¯x1.t1; ...; ¯xn.tn). For
example, the notation for functions has the form λ(¯x.b) where the body b can use
the binding variables in the list ¯x. The identity function in this notation is λ(x.x).
Notice that this function is untyped and thus polymorphic, meaning that it be-
longs to many types, in particular to all types A →A . This feature of starting
with an untyped programming language that includes all algorithms (even non-
terminating ones) distinguishes ctt and Martin-L¨of’s Intuitionistic Type Theory
itt [1975; 1982; 1984].15
In ctt, even the famous Y combinator is allowed in
assertions and used to deﬁne recursive functions. Thus as we mentioned above,
the computation system over terms in ctt is Turing complete. We can use these
untyped lambda terms to guarantee eﬃcient execution of programs extracted from
proofs. Moreover, ctt supports reasoning about these untyped functions in vari-
ous ways, such as stating a theorem that an untyped term inhabits a certain type
without knowing this fact in advance and thus discovering that it is a realizer for a
proposition. The fact that the basic objects are untyped makes it possible to anno-
tate terms with types for speciﬁc purposes, such as annotations that support good
compilation or annotations that approximate the most informative typing and al-
low fast “annotation checking” as an extensible approximation to type checking;
see [Howe, 1998] for an implementation of some of these ideas. These untyped
terms not only live outside the type system, they live outside the system of orders,
yet even self-referential terms are perfectly safe and extremely useful. Thus for
some purposes, the system of orders is not at all restrictive.
The application of a function f to an argument a is the operator ap(f; a). To
make the oﬃcial syntax readable, the Nuprl implementation of ctt uses display
forms that allow terms to be displayed in a variety of ways, e.g. we could display
the identity function as λx.x if we wished, and display function application as f(a)
or even as fa.
ctt takes the decimal numerals as primitive terms, they are oﬃcially written
in the uniform syntax and displayed in the standard way. There are also terms
for the basic arithmetic operations on integers, and a computable term for the
induction principle on integers.
As with itt, ctt speciﬁes a computation system on terms deﬁned by Plotkin-
style operational semantics (small step) [Plotkin, 1981; Kahn, 1987].
In most
presentations of ctt, this type of all terms is not made explicit, but it is possible
to deﬁne a type Base whose elements are all closed terms of the theory, and to
deﬁne the primitive equality relation on Base to be Howe’s “squiggle” relation
from his fundamental 1989 LICS paper [1989]. We say a ∼b iﬀeither term can be
obtained from the other by rewriting any subexpression by any number of steps
of symbolic computation.
Deﬁnition 6.1. Base is the type of all closed terms where x = y in Base is s ∼y.
15In cic and HOL, all terms are explicitly typed as in programming languages such as Java, and
unlike the terms of ML for which types are inferred or for Lisp and Scheme, which are considered
essentially typeless.

834
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
A key feature of ctt and itt is that all types come with an equality relation; for
type A it is usually written a = b in A. Results from Howe establish the following
theorem:
Theorem 6.2. If a = b in Base, a and b are in type A, then a = b in A.
For some types such as the integers, Int (displayed as Z), we have a = b in Int
implies a ∼b in Base. We call these types “squiggle types” – see the book Nuprl
Basics by Stuart Allen in the Math Library at www.nuprl.org. Reasoning about
equality in these types is especially easy because it can be done by computation
which does not introduce any new proof subgoals.
Another type for which it is easy to reason about equality is Top.
Deﬁnition 6.3. Top is the type of all closed terms with the trivial equality rela-
tion that all terms are equal. Thus Top has only one element.
ctt has a type constructor that produces a separation type or reﬁnement type
{x : A|B(x)} which is the collection of all elements of A that satisfy the proposition
B(x). For any type A we can deﬁne the set of elements of Base on which it rests,
namely {x : Base | x in A}. This is a subtype of Base, and a subtype of A because
for C to be a subtype of A it is suﬃcient that for all a and a′, if a = a′ in C, then
a = a′ in A. We write this subtyping relation as C ⊑A.
The following theorems hold:
Theorem 6.4. For all A : Ui we have A ⊑Top.
Theorem 6.5. For all types A, we have that {x : Base | x in A} ⊑A.
Deﬁning a type
To deﬁne a type, we specify a unique canonical name for it, an irreducible term.
The type is denoted by terms that reduce to this canonical name, e.g. the type of
integers has canonical name Int. To deﬁne the elements of a type we specify terms
that are irreducible in the computation system which are the canonical elements
of the type, and we deﬁne an equality relation declaring when two canonical terms
denote the same abstract object. The equality relation creates abstract objects
out of terms. Moreover, any term which reduces to a canonical term of the type is
itself a member of the type. For example, the type of integers includes the decimal
numbers with the normal equality, and it also includes terms such as ap(λ(x.x); 0)
which reduces to the canonical integer 0.
Likewise, 1 + 2 is an integer whose
canonical form is 3.
A short version of this deﬁnition is to say that the extension of a type is a
collection of equivalence classes of terms. These equivalence classes are understood
in a computational way, not as sets of sets, but as types distinguished by their
equality relations. This concept is formalized in ctt as the quotient type, a type
that overcomes some of the computational limitations of the standard deﬁnition
of equivalence classes to which Bishop objected. Instead of deﬁning the elements
of the quotient type as equivalence classes, they are simply elements of the type

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
835
on which a new equality is imposed. The role of equality leads to the so-called
PER semantics, for partial equivalence relation semantics. Stuart F. Allen [1987]
gave a very elegant and precise semantics for ctt and itt using this approach,
and Robert W. Harper [1992] reformulated the method.
Truth and reﬂected proof
In order to compare how ktt and ctt handle notions of truth and use orders
in deﬁning truth, we look at the results in the 1990 article “The semantics of
reﬂected proof” [Allen et al., 1990] which builds a reﬂection of the type of proofs
into the object language by taking a ﬁxed point between the object language L,
which is ctt, and its meta-language, which is the ClassicML [Gordon et al., 1979]
formalization of ctt described in the Nuprl book, Implementing Mathematics
[Constable et al., 1986]. The proof mechanism for Nuprl is essentially Milner’s
LCF mechanism [Gordon et al., 1979], but using tactic-tree proofs [Griﬃn, 1988].
We see immediately a similarity with our presentation of Kripke’s ktt, namely,
we must start with a reﬂection of the syntax into the object logic In the case of
ctt we must also reﬂect the notion of sequent and proof.
Deﬁnition 6.6. In all LCF-like proof systems [Gordon et al., 1979], proofs are
built using tactics. Indeed, in ctt proofs are tactic-trees [Griﬃn, 1988], and they
use two languages, one for the proof object and one for the tactic program. We
can say that justiﬁcations involve primitive rules, coded in the object language,
and tactics, written in ML, the meta logic.
justification = rule + tactic.
But if programs can be constructed from proofs, then perhaps one language
will suﬃce, and the tactics can be programs in the object language extracted from
proofs. The question we consider here is whether there can be a single notion of
tactic-tree proofs, in which the tactics are the programs coming from the tactic-
trees as program principle, i.e.
justification = rule + tactic −from(proof).
We will show how this is done in [Allen et al., 1990].
A basic concept for all that follows is the notion that a type of the language L
represents a mathematical class S deﬁned on the terms of L.
Deﬁnition 6.7. Given a relation t reps s between terms t and members of a
class of objects S, we say that a type T of the language L represents class S (via
reps) iﬀthere are computable maps, rep from objects of S to terms such that
rep(t) reps t and unrep a partial function from objects of S to terms such that
unrep(rep(t) = t.
In the case of the class of terms itself from the meta-language, there is a natural
representation relation that can be designed into the object language. To do this,

836
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
let the class of terms be the least class containing variables and operation names,
and such that if ti are terms and op an operator name, then op(v1.t1; . . . ; vn.tn)
is a term where the vi are lists of variables. We say that ti is a subterm; the vis
are binding variables with scope ti and they bind the variables occurring in ti.
Operator names are included among the terms in anticipation of the need for a
term to represent each operator name. This is the approach taken by Howe [1987].
Let us suppose that there are types in L that represent variables and opera-
tor names; call them V ar and Op. Then the natural representation of a term
op(v1.t1; . . . ; vn.tn) is a pair ⟨OP, (⟨V 1.T1⟩, . . . , ⟨V 1.T1⟩)⟩where OP represents op,
V i represents vi and Ti represents ti. Using this we can show that if L admits
recursive types, as ctt does, then there is a type, call it Term, which represents
term.
Deﬁnition 6.8. Term
def
= rec t.Op | V ar | (Op × ((V ar list × t)list)).
The informal concept of proof that we start with is called a primitive proof;
it is essentially a ﬁnite tree of sequents justiﬁed by rules or taken as premises.
A primitive rule is basically a function from a sequent so to a list of premises
s1, . . . , sn such that if s1, . . . , sn are true, then so is true. We say that a primitive
rule justiﬁes s from l provided the rule applied to s yields the sequents at the roots
of the subproofs in the list l. A premise of a proof is an unproved sequent at a
leaf.
It is easy to see that in a language L with recursive types, the class of primitive
proofs can be represented by a type, namely:
Deﬁnition 6.9.
PrimProofTree
def
=
rec p.Sequent × ({1} | PrimRule × p list
IsPrimProof
def
=
rec-ind(P; h, ⟨s, j, l⟩.map-list(h; l) × case; j of
inl(l) →l = nil ∈Sequent list;
inr(l) →PrimJustifies(s; p; roots(l))
PrimProof
def
=
{p : PrimProofTree | IsPrimProof(p)},
where PrimRule is a type containing representatives of the primitive rules, and
PrimJustifies(g; j; s) is a predicate that represents the primitive justiﬁcation
relation, that is, it is inhabited exactly when the sequent represented by g is
justiﬁed by the list of sequents represented by s using the primitive rule represented
by j.
In building a tactic−tree, there are diﬀerent ways to check that a tactic produces
the right thing. We ask whether such proofs of tactic correctness could be part of
this proof type. That is, can we extend the justiﬁcation to include
Deﬁnition 6.10.
justification
=
leaf + prim−rule + {t : term | unreps(t) ∈proof}
+ reflection−rule

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
837
The reﬂection rule should require that we build a representation of the class of
proofs whose goal is a representation of the sequent we are trying to prove, say s.
That is, we want to require:
Deﬁnition 6.11.
∃p : Proof.goal(p) = reps(s)
where Proof is intended to be a type of the object logic (L−type) which represents
the class of proofs which we are trying to deﬁne from outside of L. Proof is an
internal version of the very type we are now attempting to design. We already
know a great deal about this type, and we could write down a formal deﬁnition of
most of it except for the clause we are examining now.
Before writing the clause, we note that one understanding of this reﬂection
proceeds in levels, as in Kripke. We ﬁrst reﬂect those proofs which do not use
any reﬂection in them, say proof0. Then having grasped that type, and deﬁned
it internally, we understand a new level of proof, say proof1. We can now reﬂect
these proofs to obtain proof2 and so forth. The reﬂection rule will be indexed by
an integer i which provides this level. We will give a non-hierarchical deﬁnition
below.
Deﬁnition 6.12. Notice that the reﬂected proof may be incomplete, so it will
have subgoals. These subgoals are the goals of the subproofs in the list l that prove
them. So the requirement on the subgoals of a proof step to prove s by reﬂection
is that the ﬁrst subgoal has the special form:
∃p : Proof.
goal(p)
=
rep(s)
&
premises(p)
=
“roots of the remaining subproofs of l” &
“all uses of reﬂection in p are of level j < i.”
The name of the reﬂection rule will have an integer to denote the level and a
term t to represent the subgoals generated by the rule application.
Deﬁnition 6.13.
justification
=
leaf + prim−rule + {t : term | unreps(t) ∈proof}
+ (N × term)
where if j is a reﬂection rule, that is ⟨i, t⟩, then the goal of the ﬁrst subproof of l,
call it Po, has the form:
∃p :
Proofroot(p) = rep(s) &
premises(p) = goals(rest(l)) &
reflection level(p) < i.
We can see this more clearly if we depict the relationship between s, j and l in
this fourth clause of j.

838
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
s
⟨i, t⟩
s1
. . .
sn
∃p : PF.
root(p) = rep(s)
P1
. . .
Pn
& premise(p) =
(s1, . . . , sn)
& reflection−level(p) < i
P0
Proof is a type in L which we can express except for the clause that mentions
Proof itself.
To deal with this self-reference we will take a ﬁxed point and to
facilitate that we replace the entire ﬁrst subgoal of the reﬂection rule, the one
mentioning Proof, by a piece of syntax, the expression PF.
Deﬁnition 6.14.
ProofTree
def
=
rec p.Sequent
×
({1} | PrimRule | {t : Term | unreps(t) ∈p} | (int × Term))
×
p list
IsProof
def
=
rec-ind(P; h, ⟨s, j, l⟩.map-list(h; l) × case; j of
in1(l) →l = nil ∈Sequent list;
in2(l) →PrimJustifies(s; p; roots(l))
in3(l) →s = root(unreps(r)) ∈Sequent×
l = frontier(unreps(r)) ∈Sequent list;
in4(l) →cons(⟨nil, PFof(s; t; i; PF)⟩; unreps(t)) = l
∈Sequent list
Proof
def
=
{p : PrimProofTree | IsPrimProof(p)}.
To be more precise about proofs and proof representation, notice that in the
reﬂection rule used in proofs as described earlier, a term Proof was used in the
reﬂection subgoal. The intention was that it should be a term which is a type
representing this very class of proofs. Here we shall construct such a term directly
as a syntactic ﬁxed point.
We parameterize the notion of proof by a term to be used where proof was used
above; call this family of classes proofR. Our aim is to ﬁnd a term R which is a type
representing the class proofR (thereafter using proofR as our proof class). Now,
consider the deﬁnition of the term Proof given above. It can be parameterized by
a term analogously to the parameterisation of the class of proofs, namely, replace
PF by another term r; let us call this family of terms Proofr. Proofr represents
the class ProofR whenever r represents the term R.
Consider the family of terms Proofr; it should be clear that we can ﬁnd a term
q such that whenever a represents term r, then the application q(a) represents the

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
839
term Proofr. There is a term AP such that AP(a)(b) represents the application
c(d) whenever a and b represent the terms c and d.
Also the standard repre-
sentation function on terms can be represented by a term Rep such that Rep(a)
represents the standard representation of b if a represents b.
Now for a familiar construction.
Let B be the term λu.q(AP(u)(Rep(u))).
Let b be the standard representation of term B, then B(b) has the same value
as q(AP(u)(Rep(u))).
Let b be the standard representation of term B.
Then
B(b) has the same value as q(AP(u)(Rep(u)), which represents ProofB(b), hence,
so does B(b). Letting the term Proof be B(b), and letting the class proof be
ProofP roof, we can now state that:
Theorem 6.15. Proof represents the class proof.
Another less mysterious approach to deﬁning a proof type which contains a rep-
resentation of itself is to exploit the library. The library can contain speciﬁcations
for how to expand deﬁned terms to primitive terms. The truth of a sequent is
then parameterized by libraries to mean that the sequent is simply true after all
terms of the sequent have been expanded using that library. Representation is
parameterized by libraries so that a term represents whatever the term it expands
to represents. Because representation will be relevant to some of the rules, the
class of proofs will become parameterized by libraries. Let proofΛ be this family
of classes.
Now, what we shall do is let the term PF stand for a ﬁxed deﬁnable non-
primitive in the deﬁnition of the term Proof above. Hence we have the following
theorem:
Theorem 6.16. With respect to any library Λ:
1. Proof represents proofΛ.
2. If PF expands to the standard representation of the term Proof, PF rep-
resents proofΛ.
The following deﬁnition and theorems are to be considered under both the
above interpretations of proof and truth; viz., proof as deﬁned for theorem 6.15
with simple truth and proof and truth implicitly parameterized by libraries as in
theorem 6.16.
Deﬁnition 6.17. A proof is valid iﬀthe goal sequent is true whenever the premise
sequents are.
Now we have the following basic results:
Theorem 6.18.
1. All proofs are valid.
2. Without the level restriction, the class proof is not valid.
Here we can adapt L¨ob’s theorem to prove a contradiction.

840
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
Theorem 6.19. Every proof can be reduced to a primitive proof.
This metatheorem could prove quite useful because it allows us to keep all proofs
at level o if we wish.
One might want to take Theorem 6.19 as a reducibility axiom for proofs. But
the fact is that adding it as an axiom makes it false!
We could use this reﬂection mechanism to increase the power of the logic, e.g.,
by adding rules asserting the consistency of the logic. We have chosen to provide
a logically conservative extension with considerable practical beneﬁts which we
discuss next.
In Nuprl tactics are used to build signiﬁcant parts of a proof tree. Sometimes
they are costly to run because they are building a large piece of data; this often
happens in circumstances in which it is easy to discover beforehand whether or
not the tactic will succeed. For example, there is a type checking tactic, called
get−type, which will prove all sequents of the form H ⊢T in Type, for example
A : Type ⊢A × B in Type, as long as the type T is of restricted form, say ﬁrst-
order. In the reﬂected system we can express this as a metatheorem, assuming
that the relation First-order and Well-formedness are deﬁned.
Theorem 6.20.
∀s : sequent .
First −order(S) ⇒Well −formedness(s) ⇒
∃p : Proof.goal(p) = s & complete(p)
Now in the course of any proof in which the well-formedness goal H ⊢T in Type
appears, we can prove it by reﬂection. The cost of checking that a type is ﬁrst-order
and recognizing a well-formedness goal will often be vastly simpler than proving
the theorem; checking will be linear in size of T whereas building the proof is
quadratic. The reﬂection mechanism will enable users of tactic-based proof assis-
tants with reﬂection to provide eﬃcient type checking for those subclasses of terms
for which a good algorithm is discovered, e.g., for ordinary logic.
These results use a syntactic ﬁxed point to avoid a tower of levels while Kripke
used a semantic ﬁxed point to avoid them. We have not considered in detail a
formalization of the notion of truth used in this discussion, but it is possible to
formalize truth in universe Ui at the next level, Ui+1.
It is less clear whether we need to reﬂect the structure of terms and proofs
from the meta logic to accomplish semantic results. It might be possible to take
the approach of Lisp and include terms directly in the object logic along with
mechanisms like quoting to prevent operators from reducing terms when they are
viewed as syntax. Our use of the type Base shows that such an idea is sensible
in computational theories. For ctt we can introduce the object type Term with
syntactic equality and then deﬁne Base as a quotient type over Term or over Term
quotiented by alpha-equality.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
841
7
CONCLUSIONS
At the beginning of the 20th century, the paradoxes led to many new formulations
of logical systems and an amazing variety of ideas and approaches. Later on, some
of these ideas were abandoned when they should not have been. Even more, some
of the ideas proposed were found later to contribute nothing to the solution of the
paradoxes. For example, even though ZF set theory uses the foundation axiom, it
is clear now that it is the separation rather than the foundation axiom which was
responsible for the avoidance of the paradoxes.
Our standpoint in this chapter is not to defend one line against another. Rather,
we aim to clarify the diﬀerent notions and philosophies assumed in the foundation
of logic, mathematics, and computing. In this chapter, our chosen notion is that of
Russell’s orders as found in the famous Ramiﬁed Theory of Types rtt. This idea
appears also in the diﬀerent foundational approaches to informatics and computer
science. Russell, whose contribution to modern logic is historical, avoided the self-
reference paradox (that he himself discovered) by adopting two layers: types and
orders.
Later it was found that orders contributed nothing to the avoidance of the
paradox and Ramsey’s work led to the abandonment of Russell’s orders. Later still
with ctt it was realized that self-reference in the computation system could be
safely allowed in the logic using implicit typing. It is not clear to us whether Russell
did actually know at the time that orders do not contribute to the avoidance of the
paradox. We believe however that his intuition of using orders (as well as types)
is a solid one and we have seen this intuition being repeated in many predicative
style logics. In this chapter, we show that Russell’s orders come back in Kripke’s
account of levels of truths and are also present in Martin-L¨of’s type theory and in
Computational Type Theory implemented by the Nuprl proof assistant. Of course
the word “orders” is not used by Kripke, Martin-L¨of, and Constable. Our study
however shows that formally representing (with orders) the informal hierarchies of
these systems is informative about these hierarchies, about the systems themselves
and about the philosophies behind them, especially about notions of truth and
proof.
We conclude this chapter, as so often has been concluded in logic, mathematics,
and natural language semantics that Russell’s theory of types is too restrictive.
However, the usual objections against rtt in logic and mathematics is the use of
orders since Ramsey [1926] and Hilbert and Ackerman [1928] had given motivations
for leaving out these orders (though Weyl [1918] tried to build-up mathematics
within rtt). Here we show that the situation is completely diﬀerent. Orders in
rtt and truth levels in ktt go hand in hand; while the types do not appear in
ktt. This establishes ktt as the dual to Church’s Simple Type Theory stt which
removes the orders from rtt. In particular we show that
1. A proposition of rtt of order n is true if and only if it is true at level n in
Kripke’s truth hierarchy (Theorem 4.9).

842
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
2. The truth of some propositions of order n of rtt cannot be established in
ktt at a level of truth hierarchy smaller than n (Theorem 4.11). Yet for
some other propositions, it can be established at an earlier level (Example
4.12).
We also saw that Russell’s theory has many restrictions. On the one hand, all
propositional functions of rtt can be coded in Kripke’s theory; on the other hand
there are formulas of Kripke’s theory that cannot be expressed in rtt, respecting
both hierarchies. Our conclusion is that, contra Ramsey, it is the restriction of
the mixture of orders and types on predication rather than order restriction on
quantiﬁcation alone that accounts for the very restrictive nature of rtt.16
Kripke’s theory has a transﬁnite hierarchy of orders whereas Russell did not
investigate such transﬁniteness. It would be interesting hence to see how far one
can build types in Russell’s theory and what properties would hold at such level.
We concluded that some order-n properties of rtt get their truth-value only
at level n of ktt whilst others get it already at an earlier level.
This divides
propositions into two classes, and an accurate description of these classes may be
interesting.
As to the question of Kripke being more liberal in that any well-formed sentence
can be expressed but its truth value may not be calculated (think of the paradoxical
sentences), one may compare this approach to the implicit typing of Curry’s Type
Theory [Curry and Feys, 1958; Curry et al., 1972] where self-referential sentences
may be expressed but are not typeable and to ctt where implicit typing allows
controlled self-reference. Hence, even though we said that ktt is the dual of stt,
it may be the twin brother of ctt where only truth or falsehood of typeable terms
can be determined.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abramsky et al., 1992] S. Abramsky, D. M. Gabbay, and T. S. E. Maibaum, eds. Handbook
of Logic in Computer Science, Volume 2: Background: Computational Structures, Oxford
University Press, 1992.
[Allen et al., 1990] S. F. Allen, R. L. Constable, D. J. Howe, and W. E. Aitken. The semantics
of reﬂected proof. In LICS90, pp. 95–105. IEEE Computer Society, 1990.
[Allen et al., 2006] S. Allen, M. Bickford, R. L. Constable, R. Eaton, C. Kreitz, L. Lorigo, and
E. Moran. Innovations in computational type theory using Nuprl. Journal of Applied Logic,
4:428–469, 2006.
[Allen, 1987] S. F. Allen. A non-type-theoretic deﬁnition of Martin-L¨of’s types. In Gries [1987],
pp. 215–224.
[Barendregt, 1992] H. P. Barendregt. Lambda calculi with types. In [Abramsky et al., 1992],
pp. 117–309. Oxford University Press, 1992.
[Basin and Howe, 1991] D. A. Basin and D. J. Howe. Some normalization properties of Martin-
L¨of’s type theory, and applications. In Theoretical Aspects of Computer Software, Interna-
tional Conference TACS ’91, Sendai, Japan, pp. 475–494. LNCS Vol 526, Springer-Verlag,
1991.
16This is important and takes on an added signiﬁcance when seen in the context of the logici-
sation of second order arithmetic in a type free ﬁrst-order logic utilizing Kripke-Gilmore models
which realises the hope of Russell’s earlier type free substitutional theory.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
843
[Bates and Constable, 1985] J. L. Bates and R. L. Constable. Proofs as programs. ACM Trans-
actions on Programming Languages and Systems, 7:53–71, 1985.
[Beeson, 1985] M. J. Beeson. Foundations of Constructive Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, 1985.
[Bertot and Cast´eran, 2004] Y. Bertot and P. Cast´eran. Interactive Theorem Proving and Pro-
gram Development; Coq’Art: The Calculus of Inductive Constructions. Texts in Theoretical
Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[Bickford and Constable, 2008] M. Bickford and R. L. Constable. Formal foundations of com-
puter security. In Formal Logical Methods for System Security and Correctness, volume 14,
pp. 29–52, 2008.
[Bickford, 2010] M. Bickford. Automated proof of authentication protocols in a logic of events.
VERIFY-2010, 6th International Workshop, Edinburgh, 2010.
[Bishop, 1967] E. Bishop. Foundations of Constructive Analysis. McGraw Hill, New York, 1967.
[Chirimar and Howe, 1991] J. Chirimar and D. J. Howe. Implementing constructive real analy-
sis: a preliminary report. In Symposium on Constructivity in Computer Science, pp. 165–178.
Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[Church, 1940] A. Church. A formulation of the simple theory of types. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 5:56–68, 1940.
[Church, 1941] A. Church.
The Calculi of Lambda Conversion.
Princeton University Press,
1941.
[Church, 1976] A. Church. Comparison of Russell’s resolution of the semantic antinomies with
that of Tarski. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41:747–760, 1976.
[Constable and Crary, 2001] R. L. Constable and K. Crary.
Computational complexity and
induction for partial computable functions in type theory.
In W. Sieg, R. Sommer, and
C. Talcott, eds., Reﬂections on the Foundations of Mathematics: Essays in Honor of Solomon
Feferman, Lecture Notes in Logic, pp. 166–183. Association for Symbolic Logic, 2001.
[Constable and Smith, 1993] R. L. Constable and S. F. Smith. Computational foundations of
basic recursive function theory. Theoretical Computer Science, 121:89–112, December 1993.
[Constable et al., 1986] R. L. Constable, S. F. Allen, H. M. Bromley, W. R. Cleaveland, J. F.
Cremer, R. W. Harper, D. J. Howe, T. B. Knoblock, N. P. Mendler, P. Panangaden, J. T.
Sasaki, and S. F. Smith.
Implementing Mathematics with the Nuprl Proof Development
System. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1986.
[Coquand and Huet, 1988] T. Coquand and G. P. Huet. The calculus of constructions. Infor-
mation and Computation, 76:95–120, 1988.
[Curry and Feys, 1958] H. B. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic I. Studies in Logic and
the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1958.
[Curry et al., 1972] H. B. Curry, J. R. Hindley, and J. P. Seldin. Combinatory Logic II. Studies
in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1972.
[Dummett, 2000] M. Dummett. Elements of Intuitionism. Oxford logic guides 39. Clarendon
Press, 2nd edition, 2000.
[Feferman, 1964] S. Feferman. Systems of predicative analysis. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
29:1–30, 1964.
[Feferman, 1984] S. Feferman.
Toward useful type-free theories I.
The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 49:75–111, 1984.
[Frege, 1892] G. Frege.
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, begriﬀschriftlich abgeleitet, volume I.
Pohle, Jena, 1892. Reprinted 1962 (Olms, Hildesheim).
[Gordon and Melham, 1993] M.J.C. Gordon and T.F. Melham, eds. Introduction to HOL: A
Theorem Proving Environment for Higher Order Logic. Cambridge University Press, Lon-
don/New York, 1993.
[Gordon et al., 1979] M. Gordon, R. Milner, and C. Wadsworth. Edinburgh LCF: a mechanized
logic of computation, volume 78 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, NY,
1979.
[Gries, 1987] D. Gries, ed.
Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
Science. IEEE Computer Society Press, June 1987.
[Griﬃn, 1988] T. Griﬃn. Notational deﬁnition - a formal account. In LICS88, pp. 372–383,
Edinburgh, UK, 1988. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[Harper and Pollack, 1991] R. Harper and R. Pollack. Type checking with universes. Theoretical
Computer Science, 89:107–136, 1991.
[Harper, 1992] R. Harper. Constructing type systems over an operational semantics. Journal
of Symbolic Computation, 14:71–84, 1992.

844
Fairouz Kamareddine, Twan Laan, and Robert Constable
[Heijenoort, 1967] J. van Heijenoort, ed. From Frege to G¨odel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1967.
[Heyting, 1975] A. Heyting, ed. Brouwer: Collected Works, volume 1. North-Holland, Amster-
dam, 1975.
[Hickey et al., 2003] J. Hickey, A. Nogin, R. L. Constable, B. E. Aydemir, E. Barzilay,
Y. Bryukhov, R. Eaton, A. Granicz, A. Kopylov, C. Kreitz, V. Krupski, L. Lorigo, S. Schmitt,
C. Witty, and X. Yu. Metaprl - a modular logical environment. In D. A. Basin and B. Wolﬀ,
eds., TPHOLs, volume 2758 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 287–303. Springer,
2003.
[Hilbert and Ackermann, 1928] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann. Grundz¨uge der Theoretischen
Logik. Die Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften in Einzeldarstellungen, Band
XXVII. Springer Verlag, Berlin, ﬁrst edition, 1928.
[Howe, 1987] D. J. Howe. The computational behaviour of Girard’s paradox. In Gries [1987],
pp. 205–214.
[Howe, 1989] D. J. Howe.
Equality in lazy computation systems.
In LICS89, pp. 198–203,
Asilomar Conference Center, Paciﬁc Grove, California, June 1989. IEEE Computer Society
Press.
[Howe, 1996] D. J. Howe. Semantic foundations for embedding HOL in Nuprl. In M. Wirsing
and M. Nivat, eds., Algebraic Methodology and Software Technology, volume 1101 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pp. 85–101. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996.
[Howe, 1998] D. J. Howe. A type annotation scheme for Nuprl. In Theorem Proving in Higher-
Order Logics. Springer, 1998.
[Jackson, 1994] P. B. Jackson. The Nuprl Proof Development System, Version 4.1 Reference
Manual and User’s Guide, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 1994.
[Jackson, 1995] P. B. Jackson. Enhancing the Nuprl Proof Development System and Applying it
to Computational Abstract Algebra. PhD thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 1995.
[Kahn, 1987] G. Kahn. Natural semantics. In G. Vidal-Naquet F. Brandenburg and M. Wirsing,
eds. STACS ’87, volume 247 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 22–39. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1987.
[Kamareddine and Laan, 1996] F. Kamareddine and T. Laan. A reﬂection on Russell’s ramiﬁed
types and Kripke’s hierarchy of truths. Journal of the Interest Group in Pure and Applied
Logic, 4:195–213, 1996.
[Kamareddine and Laan, 2001] F. Kamareddine and T. Laan.
A correspondence between
Martin-L¨of type theory, the ramiﬁed theory of types and pure type systems.
Journal of
Logic, Language and Information, 10:375–402, 2001.
[Kamareddine et al., 2004] F. Kamareddine, T. Laan, and R. Nederpelt. A Modern Perspective
on Type Theory. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.
[Kopylov, 2003] A. Kopylov. Dependent intersection: A new way of deﬁning records in type
theory. In Proceedings of 18th IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pp. 86–95,
2003.
[Kreitz, 2003] C. Kreitz. The Nuprl Proof Development System, Version 5.1 Reference Manual
and User’s Guide. Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, February 2003.
[Kreitz, 2004] C. Kreitz.
Building reliable, high-performance networks with the nuprl proof
development system. Journal of Functional Programming, 14:21–68, 2004.
[Kripke, 1975] S. Kripke. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy, 72:690–716, 1975.
[Laan and Nederpelt, 1996] T. Laan and R. P. Nederpelt. A modern elaboration of the Ramiﬁed
Theory of Types. Studia Logica, 57:243–278, 1996.
[Laan, 1997] T. Laan. The Evolution of Type Theory in Logic and Mathematics. PhD thesis,
Eindhoven University of Technology, 1997.
[Liu et al., 1999] X. Liu, C. Kreitz, R. van Renesse, J. J. Hickey, M. Hayden, K. Birman, and
R. L. Constable. Building reliable, high-performance communication systems from compo-
nents. In D. Kotz and J. Wilkes, eds., 17th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
(SOSP’99), volume 33(5) of Operating Systems Review, pp. 80–92. ACM Press, December
1999.
[Martin-L¨of, 1975] P. Martin-L¨of. An intuitionistic theory of types: predicative part. In H. E.
Rose and J. C. Shepherdson, eds., Logic Colloquium ’73, volume 80 of Studies in Logic and
the Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 73–118, Amsterdam, 1975. North-Holland.

Russell’s Orders in Kripke’s Theory of Truth and Computational Type Theory
845
[Martin-L¨of, 1982] P. Martin-L¨of. Constructive mathematics and computer programming. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Congress for Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of
Science, pp. 153–175, Amsterdam, 1982. North Holland.
[Martin-L¨of, 1984] P. Martin-L¨of. Intuitionistic Type Theory. Studies in Proof Theory. Bib-
liopolis, Napoli, 1984.
[Mendler, 1987] P. F. Mendler. Recursive types and type constraints in second-order Lambda
calculus. In D. Gries, ed., Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
Science, pp. 30–36, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1987.
[Montague, 1973] R. Montague. The proper treatment of quantiﬁcation in ordinary English.
In J. Hintikka, J. M. E. Moravcsik, and P. Suppes, eds., Approaches to Natural Language.
Dordrecht, 1973.
[Murthy, 1991] C. Murthy. An evaluation semantics for classical proofs. In LICS91, pp. 96–109,
Vrije University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, July 1991. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[Nordstr¨om et al., 1990] B. Nordstr¨om, K. Petersson, and J. M. Smith. Programming in Martin-
L¨of’s Type Theory. Oxford Sciences Publication, Oxford, 1990.
[Plotkin, 1981] G. D. Plotkin. A structural approach to operational semantics. Technical Re-
port DAIMI-FN-19, Aarhus University, Aarhus University, Computer Science Department,
Denmark, 1981.
[Ramsey, 1926] F. P. Ramsey.
The foundations of mathematics.
Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, 2nd series, 25:338–384, 1926.
[Ranta, 1994] A. Ranta.
Type-theoretical grammar.
Oxford Science Publications. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, England, 1994.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. The Principles of Mathematics. Allen & Unwin, London, 1903.
[Russell, 1908] B. Russell.
Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types.
American
Journal of Mathematics, 30:222–262, 1908. Also in [Heijenoort, 1967], pp. 150–182.
[Scott, 1976] D. S. Scott. Data types as lattices. SIAM J. Comput., 5:522–587, 1976.
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀin den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia Philo-
sophica, 1:261–405, 1936. German translation by L. Blauwstein from the Polish original (1933)
with a postscript added.
[Terlouw, 1989] J. Terlouw.
Een nadere bewijstheoretische analyse van GSTT’s.
Technical
report, Department of Computer Science, University of Nijmegen, 1989.
[The Coq Development Team, 2004] The Coq Development Team.
The Coq Proof Assistant
Reference Manual – Version V8.0, April 2004.
[Weyl, 1918] H. Weyl. Das Kontinuum. Veit, Leipzig, 1918. German; also in: Das Kontinuum
und andere Monographien, Chelsea Publishing Company, New York, 1960.
[Whitehead and Russell, 1910, 1927] A. N. Whitehead and B. Russell. Principia Mathematica,
volumes I,II,III. Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1927. All references are to the ﬁrst volume,
unless otherwise stated.
[Zermelo, 1908] E. Zermelo. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. Mathema-
tische Annalen, 65:261–281, 1908.


INDEX
0#, 374, 419, 466, 551
0†, 390
<∗, 96
≤∗, 90
Cλ
κ, 479
Gω(A), 458
J<λ[A], 405
KDJ, 389
L, 40, 466
L(A), 364, 466
L[A], 466
Q–set, 81, 125
deﬁnition, 81
[S]<ℵ0, [S]<ω, 219
∆-System Lemma, 194, 211
∆Γ, 464
Γ-correct model, 466
Γ-determinacy, 464
Ψ–space, 128
Θ, 477
add(M), 110–112, 117, 118
deﬁnition, 107
add(N), 110–112, 133
deﬁnition, 107
non(M), 108, 117
deﬁnition, 107
non(N), 109, 117, 119, 131
deﬁnition, 107
cof(M), 111, 117
deﬁnition, 107
cof(N), 111
deﬁnition, 107
cov(M), 109, 110, 112, 117
deﬁnition, 107
cov(N), 109, 112, 117
deﬁnition, 107
δ1
n (= δ
∼
1
n), 383, 478
♦, 82, 83, 88, 105, 243, 244, 307, 377,
426
♦(E), 261
♦+, 243, 244
♦∗, 243, 244
♦∗(E), 243
♦′, 244
♦κ, 377, 426
♦κ(E), 243
α-Π1
1(a), 485
η–set, 91
γ–limit, 81, 96, 97, 99–102, 125
deﬁnition, 81
λ–set, 94–98, 100, 101, 106
deﬁnition, 94
λ′–set, 95, 98
deﬁnition, 95
PκX, 379, 480
a, 128–132
deﬁnition, 128
as, 130, 131
deﬁnition, 130
b, 76, 89, 93–95, 101, 106, 107, 117,
133
deﬁnition, 95
d, 76, 83, 89, 107, 117, 133, 135
deﬁnition, 100
h, 120, 130, 131, 133
deﬁnition, 130
i, 128, 132
p, 99–102, 119, 124, 125, 128, 130,
131, 134, 135
deﬁnition, 94
s, 128, 130, 131
deﬁnition, 131
t, 99–102, 112, 120, 128, 131, 134, 135
deﬁnition, 99
u, 132, 133

Index
848
deﬁnition, 132
¬Γ, 464
σE, 190
σQ, 150, 151, 190, 297
□κ, 377, 426
o(κ), 386
p[T], 472
M, 107
N, 107
Col(ω, δ), 491
Col(ω, <δ), 490
pcf(A), 405, 540
(κ,λ∗)–gap, 75, 77, 80, 81, 84, 88, 90,
91, 97–100, 102–106, 108, 123,
126, 161
deﬁnition, 96
cic, 828, 830, 833
ctt, 801, 804, 828–835, 840
itt, 802, 822, 833–835
ktt, 801–805, 812, 814–816, 819, 821,
822, 841, 842
rtt, 801–805, 807–812, 814, 816, 817,
819, 821, 822, 841, 842
stt, 801–803, 821, 822, 828, 841, 842
ℵ1-dense set of reals, 152, 284, 285,
307, 308, 326, 327
ℵ1-dense Specker type, 307
Abraham, U., 88, 127, 280, 286, 290,
298, 301, 304–306, 308, 319,
322
ACY , 461
Ackermann set theory, 560, 573, 627
Ackermann, W., 37, 801, 802, 821,
841
Aczel, P., 584, 676
AD, 381, 458
AD+, 491
ADR, 477
Addison, J., 459, 463, 467, 469, 470,
472
adequate pointclass, 465
ADL(R), 381
admits a pair, 229
Agda, 822
Aharoni, R., 309
Alexandroﬀ, P., 27, 75, 79, 94, 154,
165, 166, 173, 181, 523
Alexandrov, see Alexandroﬀ
Alf, 822
All Finite Subsets Problem, 219, 252
almost disjoint coding, 317
almost disjoint sets, 150, 168, 177,
180, 181, 248, 256, 262
almost free group, 531
Alternative Set Theory (AST), 561,
623
analytic set, 27, 464
Andretta, A., 498
antichain, 486
Aronszajn line, 285, 286
Aronszajn tree, 45, 122, 150, 186, 190,
191, 193, 244, 258, 280, 283,
307, 363
κ+-special, 281
near, 305, 306
non-special, 297
special, 150, 177, 277
universal, 306
Aronszajn, N., 45, 189
arrow notation, 214
arrow relation, 216
atom, 560, 582
Axiom A, 103, 119, 393
Axiom of Anti-Foundation (AFA), 584
Axiom of Cantorian Sets, 598
Axiom of Choice, 12, 13, 75, 80, 84,
89, 94–96, 113, 114, 120, 131,
461, 514, 561, 563, 564, 570,
586, 591
disproved by Specker in NF, 599,
602
Axiom of Class Comprehension, 569,
573, 624
Axiom of Comprehension, 560, 562
Axiom of Constructibility, 40
Axiom of Counting (Rosser), 597
Axiom of Dependent Choices, 475, 600

Index
849
Axiom of Determinacy (AD), 381, 458
Axiom of Extensionality, 562, 564, 569,
573, 582, 619, 624
Weak, 582, 588
Axiom of Foundation, 34, 35, 559,
565
Axiom of Idealization (IST), 622
Axiom of Inﬁnity, 563, 564, 590, 593,
620
Axiom of Limitation of Size, 569
Axiom of Ordered Pairs (in NFU),
592
Axiom of Pairing, 564, 570
Axiom of Positive Comprehension, 616,
619
Axiom of Power Set, 564
Axiom of Rank, 567, 627
Axiom of Reducibility, 18, 563, 638,
821, 830, 840
Axiom of Replacement, 32, 35, 41,
565, 568, 570, 577
modiﬁed for IST, 622
Axiom of Separation, 15, 564, 639
modiﬁed for IST, 622
Axiom of Small Ordinals, 598
Axiom of Standardization (IST), 622
Axiom of Stratiﬁed Comprehension,
588, 589, 601
Axiom of Transfer (IST), 622
Axiom of Union, 564
Baire Category Theorem, 21, 76, 94,
112, 121–124, 128, 136
Baire property, 21, 112, 115, 116, 462
Baire space, 458
Baire, R., 20, 76, 77, 79, 80, 94, 96,
99, 109, 112, 121, 136
balanced partition relation, 176, 216
Balcar, B., 130, 132, 228, 528, 529
Baldwin, S., 403, 440, 441, 447
Balogh, Z., 527
Banach space, 103
Banach, S., 77, 121, 122, 170, 458,
461
Banach–Tarski Paradox, 23
Barendregt, H., 801, 802, 804, 823
Bartoszynski’s Theorem, 109, 111, 118
Bartoszynski, T., 109–111, 115
Base, 833, 834, 840
basis (of a class of orders), 161, 285
Baumgartner, J., 86, 102, 118, 119,
125, 156, 228, 256, 257, 260,
262, 264–266, 269, 270, 275,
277, 278, 280, 281, 284, 285,
288, 289, 294, 297, 305, 307,
309, 311–314, 393, 394, 399,
430, 484, 529, 538
Baumgartner-Hajnal Theorem, 155,
258, 263, 264, 293, 297, 312–
314
Baumgartner-Hajnal-Todorcevic The-
orem, 156, 312, 326
Becker, H., 475, 480, 490, 496
Bell, M., 124
Bendixson, I., 8
Bernays, P., 33, 40, 41
Bernstein set, 75
Bernstein, F., 12, 22, 75, 83, 112, 158,
159, 510
Besicovitch, A., 76, 92, 93, 95, 98,
101, 102
better-quasi-order (bqo), 151, 235, 236,
282, 283, 304
BH, 534, 535
Bing, R. H., 81, 125, 210, 222, 230
binomial, 533
Binomial Hypothesis, see BH
Birkhoﬀ, G., 193
Bishop, E. A., 802, 831, 832, 834
Blackwell, D., 381, 458, 459, 468
Blass, A., 76, 120, 132–134, 156, 257,
270, 272, 484, 493
Blumenthal, O., 511
Boﬀa’s anti-foundation axiom, 586
Boﬀa, M., 585, 589
boldface pointclass, 464
boldface projective pointclass, 464
Bolyai prize, 518

Index
850
Boolean-valued model, 372
Boolos, G., 636
Booth, D., 125, 130, 131, 230, 256,
257
Borel Conjecture, 103, 119, 125, 391
Borel set, 20, 21, 462, 464, 608
Borel, E., 20, 77, 91, 92, 169, 511
Borsuk, K., 526
Bourbaki, N., 221
bqo, 151, 235, 236, 282, 283, 304
Brendle, J., 90, 129, 134, 136, 321
Brouwer, L. E. J., 473, 830, 831
Bruijn, N. G. de, 822
Bukovsk´y, L., 228, 247, 533
Burali–Forti Paradox, 17, 594
Burke, M., 101–103
Busche, D., 498
Buzyakova, R., 526
c-sequence, 296, 303
Cabal Seminar, 401
Caicedo, A., 328
Calculus of Constructions, 802, 828
canonical equivalence relation, 212
canonical partition relation, 212
canonization, 251
Canonization Lemma, 155, 251
Cantor normal form, 159
Cantor’s Paradox, 17, 594
Cantor’s Theorem, 9, 581, 606
Cantor, G., 2–19, 73–76, 83, 84, 89–
91, 97, 98, 159, 510, 522,
559, 614
cantorian set (cardinal, ordinal), 594,
598, 607
cardinal characteristics, 32, 76
Cardinal Comparability, 10, 29
cardinal invariants, 76, 89, 107
cardinal number, 8, 566, 567, 593,
602
cardinal transfer, 229
Carlson, T., 268, 274, 299–301, 431
category, 677
Cartesian closed, 647–651, 683
equivalence of, 684
isomorphic, 651
c.c.c., 241
ˇCech, E., 131, 132
ˇCech–Stone compactiﬁcation, 128, 131–
133
cellularity, 169, 187, 188, 196
Chang’s Conjecture, 229, 317
Chang, C. C., 155, 161, 266, 268, 285,
314, 320
Chudnovsky, G., 292
Church, A., 643–644, 801, 802, 821,
828, 830, 841
Chwistek, L., 640
Cicho´n’s diagram, 107–111, 113, 117,
118, 121, 130
Cicho´n, J., 85, 107
closed unbounded ﬁlter, 361, 476
closed unbounded set, 360, 476
club ﬁlter, 476
co-ideal, 256, 325
Coding Lemma, 477
coﬁnal set, 160
coﬁnality, 161
coﬁnality (of a cardinal), 360
coﬁnality type, 519
Cohen real, 53, 87, 109, 113, 115–118,
368
Cohen Real to Suslin Tree Theorem,
304
Shelah, 302
Todorcevic construction, 303, 321
Cohen subset, 368
Cohen, P., 51–56, 79, 82, 98, 100,
108, 111–118, 121, 123–125,
228, 237, 238, 253, 254, 367–
368, 468, 517
coherent mapping, 302, 303
coherent tree, 303
coinitial set, 160
Comfort, W., 290
Compactness Theorem, 37, 621
completely Ramsey set, 254, 255, 276
Completeness Theorem, 37

Index
851
computation system, 829
Computational Type Theory, 801, 803,
823, 827–829, 832, 841
concentrated set, 76, 93–95, 98, 99,
101, 102, 106, 107
deﬁnition, 92
condensation, 376, 416, 417, 421, 428,
447
cone of Turing degrees, 476
consistency question for NF, 589, 598
constructibility, 416
relative, 417
constructible universe, 40, 81, 82, 84,
88, 116, 362
constructive set theory, 676
continuous coloring, 298, 317–319
Continuum Hypothesis, 5, 11, 74, 78,
178, 210
Second, 80–82
Continuum Problem, 6, 43
Coq, 802, 822
Corazza, P., 561, 627
core model
Dodd-Jensen, 389, 433
for sequences of ultraﬁlters, 390,
435
Steel, 450
countable chain condition, 77, 104,
105, 116, 124–127, 169, 202,
203, 241, 368
deﬁnition, 113
countable choice for sets of reals, 465
countable support iteration, 393
revised, 398
Countryman line, 152, 286, 306, 307
Countryman, R., 286, 290
covering lemma
for KDJ, 390, 433
for L, 388, 431, 538, 542
for sequences of ultraﬁlters, 436
covering property, 389
weak, 389
Crabb´e, M., 602
critical point, 366, 486
Crossley, J., 256
Cummings, J., 309, 321, 322, 328
cumulative hierarchy, 34, 565, 566,
614
Curry’s Paradox, 611
Curry, H., 822, 842
Darboux, J.-G., 76, 518
Darby, C., 315
Dauben, W., 510
David, S., 304
Davis, M., 462, 464
DC, 475
DC(ωω), 479
Decision Problem, 37
Dedekind, R., 3–4, 15, 16, 19
Denjoy, A., 203, 225
dense set, 372
density, 187, 188
denumerable base, 81
dependent records, 804, 828
derived model, 492
descriptive set theory, 22, 26
Det(Γ), 464
determined set, 458
Deuber, W., 297
Devlin, D., 271
Devlin, K., 82, 88, 258, 260, 261, 278,
280, 289, 538
Di Prisco, C., 317
Diaconescu, R., 665
diagonal argument, 8
Diamond Principle, 243, 259
Dilworth’s chain decomposition the-
orem, 225, 247, 301, 319
Dilworth, R., 225
distributed system, 804, 832
Dodd, A., 389, 423, 432, 440, 539
Dodd-Jensen lemma, 396, 441
Doddage, 423
domain theory, 832
Donder, H.-D., 292
double extension set theory, 561, 626
doubly universal set, 469

Index
852
Dow, A., 270, 309
Dowker space, 124, 223, 526
Dowker, C., 223, 237, 527
downward extension of embeddings,
428
du Bois-Reymond, P., 76, 80, 89–92,
94–97, 99, 100, 128, 129, 132,
133
Dual Ellentuck Theorem, 299
Dual Ellentuck topology, 299
Dual Galvin-Prikry Theorem, 299
Dual Ramsey Theorem, 299
Dushnik, B., 150, 154, 181, 194, 196,
197, 204, 205, 210, 223, 324
Dushnik-Miller Theorem, 156, 202, 205,
214, 217, 249, 297, 311
Dˇzamonja, M., 260, 271, 322
Easton, W., 54, 369, 429, 517, 533,
549
Eda, K., 133
Egorov, D., 164
Ehrenfeucht, A., 220, 224, 253, 254,
374
Eisworth, T., 88, 309
elementary embedding, 363, 366
Σn-elementary, 376
elementary submodel method, 312
Ellentuck topology, 299
Ellentuck, E., 155, 156, 258, 276
equal comparison, 425
Erd˝os, P., 45, 86, 112, 115, 156, 164,
177, 182, 183, 194–196, 199,
204–207, 209–221, 234, 235,
248–251, 253, 258, 264, 265,
268, 270, 274, 285, 291, 293–
295, 311, 312, 315, 316, 363,
419, 477, 479, 529, 530
Erd˝os–Rado Theorem, 46, 156, 218,
312, 313
Erd˝os cardinal, 250, 296, 418, 420
Esser, O., 561, 617, 619
eventual domination, 161
everywhere dense set, 157, 160
extender, 395, 396, 439
Extensional Type Theory, 804, 827–
829
Farah, I., 161, 308
Feferman, S., 54, 369, 467
Feng, Q., 401, 489
Fichtenholz, G., 132
ﬁlter, 360
λ-complete, 360
normal, 479
ﬁne structure, 376, 378, 426
Finite Unions Theorem, 275, 276
First Periodicity Theorem, 471
ﬁrst-order, 807, 809–814, 817, 840,
842
ﬁrst-order deﬁnable set, 361
Fitch, F., 612
Fleissner, W., 258, 280, 289, 397
Fodor, G., 47, 219, 226, 249, 324
forcing, 51, 367
in NF, 601
Foreman, M., 156, 287, 313, 321, 322,
326, 394, 397–398, 408, 444,
459, 487, 488, 552
Forti, M., 561, 583
Fraenkel, A., 30, 33
Fraenkel–Mostowski models, 31, 54
Fra¨ıss´e Conjecture, 199, 236
Fra¨ıss´e, R., 198, 199, 223, 225
Franˇek, F., 528
Fr´echet, M., 189
Frege natural number, 587, 591
Frege, G., 17, 24, 590, 611, 633–634,
801
Fremlin, D., 107, 109
Friedman, H., 228, 253–255, 286, 477,
484
FRS Finite Sums Theorem, 274
Fuchs, G., 499
functor, 684
Fundamental Relation, 187, 192, 215
fundamental sequence, 160
Furstenberg, H., 277, 298

Index
853
Gaifman, H., 228, 245, 279, 280, 374,
419, 551
Gale, D., 381, 458, 459, 461, 462, 482
Galvin, F., 156, 228, 236, 252–255,
257, 258, 262–265, 267, 268,
270–272, 274–277, 283, 286,
291, 295, 297, 301, 311, 314,
318, 325, 388, 539
Galvin-Hajnal Theorem, 262
Galvin-Prikry Theorem, 299, 301, 318
Gandy, R., 237, 426, 427
gap, see (κ,λ∗)–gap
GCH, 151, 209, 294, 312, 316, 416,
520
Generalized Continuum Hypothesis,
23, see GCH
generic elementary embedding, 372
generic ﬁlter, 372
generic set, 53, 368
Geschke, S., 509
gimmel function, 533
Ginsburg, S., 224
Gispert, H., 76
Gitik, M., 405, 406, 408, 439, 467,
498, 520, 546, 553
Glazer, S., 275
Gleyzal, A., 224
goal (of a partition relation), 216
G¨obel, R., 132
G¨odel, K., 37–44, 81, 82, 84, 88, 90,
135, 136, 193, 204, 206, 361,
362, 415, 416, 419, 467–548
Goldstern, M., 134, 282
Gottschalk, W., 204
Graham, R. L., 153, 156, 274
Graham-Rothschild Parameter Sets The-
orem, 155, 273, 299
Graph Problem, 207
Green, J., 485
Gregory’s Theorem, 281
Grishin, V., 601
Gruenhage, G., 290, 526
Hadamard, J., 89, 471
Haddad, L., 268
H´ajek, P., 228
Hajnal’s Set Mapping Theorem, 211
Hajnal, A., 46, 48, 155, 156, 211, 212,
216, 219, 221, 227, 228, 248–
251, 258, 262–264, 266–268,
270, 290, 291, 294, 295, 297,
311–313, 316, 318, 326, 327,
364, 388, 417, 419, 466, 477,
479, 521, 530, 539, 548
Hales, A., 249
Hales-Jewett Theorem, 249, 274
Hall’s Marriage Theorem, 179, 204,
225
Hall, M., 204
Hall, P., 179, 204, 225
Halmos, P., 204
Halpern, J., 151, 220, 228, 231, 232
Halpern-L¨auchli Theorem, 156, 230–
233, 272, 297, 325
Hamburger, P., 227
Hamel, G., 29
Hanf, W., 49, 151, 250
happy family, 256
Hardy, G. H., 76, 89
Hardy, T., 181
Harrington, L., 463, 467, 475, 480,
485, 496, 497, 545
Hartogs’ Theorem, 29, 607
Hartogs, F., 29
Harzheim, E., 224
Hasenjaeger, G., 425
Hausdorﬀgap, 75, 77, 80, 81, 88, 91,
97, 99, 100, 103–106, 123,
127, 129, 136, 516, 518
deﬁnition, 96
Hausdorﬀhierarchy, 162, 236, 250
Hausdorﬀmeasure, 92, 102
Hausdorﬀ’s Paradox, 23
Hausdorﬀ, F., 20, 22–25, 29, 75, 76,
79, 80, 83, 84, 89–91, 94–
100, 102–106, 108, 110, 123,
127–129, 135, 136, 149, 159–
163, 166, 171, 173, 178, 180,

Index
854
195, 215, 222, 224, 270, 285,
320, 359, 509, 511, 519, 544,
554
Hausdorﬀ-Urysohn Inequality, 173, 192
Heath, R., 230
Hechler real, 117, 118
Hechler, S., 95, 101–103, 117, 118,
128, 129, 132, 135, 228, 530
Henkin, L., 47
Henle, J., 480
Henrard, P., 601
Henson, C. W., 598
hereditarily countable set, 467, 608
hereditarily ﬁnite set, 614
Hessenberg product, 159
Hessenberg sum, 159
Hessenberg, G., 14, 158, 320, 519
higher-order, 807, 808, 812, 814, 817,
819, 821, 826, 827, 829, 832
Higman, G., 199, 235
Hilbert cube, 87
Hilbert space, 133
Hilbert, D., 11, 36, 74–76, 83, 84,
153, 511, 518, 801, 802, 821,
830, 841
Hildebrandt, T., 181
Hill, P., 532
Hindman’s Finite Sums Theorem, 155,
274, 298–300
Hindman, N., 153, 155, 156, 274, 275,
298, 301
Hjorth, G., 495, 496
HOD, 416, 482
Hodges, W., 257, 547
HOL, 828, 830, 833
Holmes, M. R., 585, 626
homogeneous set, 216
begin-homogeneous, 177
end-homogeneous, 177, 217, 325
homogeneous tree, 190, 483
homogeneous type, 160
homogeneously Suslin set, 483
homogeneously Suslin tree, 483
Honsell, F., 583
Howard, W., 822
Howe, D., 834, 836
Hrb´aˇcek, K., 51, 117, 228
huge cardinal, 379, 385, 486
Huntington, E., 157
Huuskonen, T., 321
hyperset, 559
hyperuniverse, 561, 617
ideal, 361, 486
(λ, µ, ν)-saturated, 265
ℵ1-dense on ω2, 313
ℵ1-dense on ω1, 313
κ-ideal, 265
κ-saturated, 371
λ-complete, 361
λ-dense, 407
free, 256
non-stationary, 262, 313
precipitous, 388, 486
saturated, 371
implicit typing, 804, 823, 827, 828,
841, 842
impredicative, 569, 802, 821, 828, 830
inaccessible cardinal, 35, 360, 466
Incompleteness Theorem, 37
indescribable cardinal, 49
inductive set of reals, 474
ineﬀable cardinal, 377
inﬁnitesimal, 621, 623, 625
inner model, 40, 48, 362
integer game, 458
Intensional Type Theory, 828
intuitionism, 830, 831
Intuitionistic Type Theory, 802, 833
IST (internal set theory), 561, 622
iterability, 425
iterated ultrapower, 374, 375
iterating least diﬀerence, 424
iteration tree, 442
Jackson, S., 460, 481
Jech, T., 123, 221, 227, 228, 237, 240,
246, 247, 257, 262, 280, 290,
307, 376, 388, 401, 539

Index
855
Jensen, R., 81, 82, 88, 123, 124, 228,
242, 243, 247, 252, 255, 257,
259, 262, 263, 270, 280, 292,
321, 376–378, 388, 391, 399,
425, 429, 432, 474, 488, 498,
516, 537, 538, 560, 589, 601
Habilitationsschrift, 425
Jewett, R., 249
Johnsbr˚aten, H., 279
Jones, A., 314, 316
Jones, F. B., 80, 81, 124, 177, 184,
185, 214, 222, 230
J´onsson algebra, 251, 254, 541, 544
J´onsson cardinal, 251
J´onsson, B., 224, 228
Jordan, C., 76
Judah, H., 119
Juh´asz, I., 124, 282, 288, 290 524,
526, 548
Jullien, P., 236
k-regular system, 181, 204
K´almar, L., 457, 461
Kakutani, S., 86
Kale, K., 547
Kamburelis, A., 107
Kanamori, A., 85, 239, 292, 293, 328,
460, 509, 537, 538, 549
Kanovei, V., 90, 97
Kanterovich, L., 132
Kaplansky’s Conjecture, 391, 394
Kaplansky, I., 238
Katˇetov, M., 100
Kechris, A., 465, 470, 475, 476, 478–
480, 490, 496
Keisler, H. J., 50, 161, 251, 266, 285,
320, 366, 537
Kelley, J., 223, 572
Kelley-Morse set theory, 560, 572, 598,
617, 620
Kemeny, J., 566
Ketonen, J., 307, 538
KH, 200, 244
Kisielewicz, A., 561, 626
Kleene, S., 238, 465, 473, 478
Klein, F., 518
Kleinberg, E., 479, 480
Knaster, B., 183, 201, 210
Koepke, P., 90, 97, 317, 327
Kojman, M., 173, 229, 262, 263, 320,
321, 529, 554
Komj´ath, P., 156, 211, 229, 311, 318
Kondo, M., 471
K˝onig’s inequality, 510, 532
K˝onig’s Lemma, 151, 171, 193, 246,
259, 326, 363
K˝onig, D., 44, 149, 171, 178, 179,
182, 195, 326, 457, 460
K˝onig, J., 12, 83, 112, 510–514, 518
Kozen, D., 283
Kripke, S., 427, 801, 803, 812, 814,
819–822, 837, 840–842
Kruskal’s Tree Theorem, 233, 234
Kruskal, J., 151, 233–235
Kuhlmann, S., 509
Kunen, K., 86, 104–106, 110, 117,
125, 126, 217, 220, 227, 242–
244, 256–258, 264, 265, 269,
277, 283, 288, 301, 319, 385,
399, 420–422, 477–479, 481,
483, 486–488
Kunen-Martin Theorem, 478
Kuratowski, K., 26, 30, 42, 77, 78,
94, 112, 170, 178, 179, 381,
459, 468–470
Kurepa tree, 45, 200, 243, 244, 377,
426
κ-Kurepa, 377
Kurepa’s First Miraculous Problem,
150, 190
Kurepa’s Graph Relation, 207
Kurepa’s Hypothesis, 45, 200, 243,
244, 363, 376
Kurepa, ¯D., 45, 46, 88, 122, 177, 186–
192, 195–197, 200, 201, 203,
204, 207–213, 215, 220, 221,
224, 241, 243, 245, 247, 280,
281, 297, 326, 363

Index
856
Laﬂamme, C., 132–134, 314
λ-calculus, 611
typed, 647
Larson, J., 268, 269, 271, 315
Larson, P., 90, 136, 276, 494, 495
L¨auchli, H., 151, 231, 232, 248
Laver HLω Theorem, 299
Laver HLd Core, 231, 271, 272
Laver HLd Theorem, 233, 271, 272,
299
Laver real, 119
Laver, R., 102–104, 118, 119, 151,
156, 228, 257, 263–266, 270,
272, 277, 278, 282, 283, 292,
297, 304, 311, 314, 325, 327,
393
Lawvere, F. W., 700
Lebesgue measure, 21, 462
Lebesgue, H., 20–22, 77, 112, 166,
470
Leeb, K., 274, 299
Leibniz equality, 807
Levy collapse, 54, 115, 116
Levy hierarchy, 465
Levy, A., 48, 49, 54, 56, 114, 228, 231,
280, 364, 369, 371, 375, 417,
465–467, 472, 481, 533
lexicographic order
left, 303
right, 303
lightface pointclass, 465
limitation of size, 570, 581
Lindel¨of property, 525
Lindenbaum, A., 30
Lindstr¨om, I., 307
linear order
σ-scattered, 236
complete, 169
near, 287
scattered, 161, 197, 198, 236
separable, 169
universal, 322
in power λ, 284, 320
Liouville, J., 4
Lisp, 833, 840
local set theory, 651–655
localization theorem, 544
 Lo´s, J., 50, 228
Losada, M., 307
Louveau, A., 276, 318
L¨owenheim, L., 34
L¨owenheim–Skolem Theorem, 34
Lusin set, 26, 31, 76, 79, 84, 86, 87,
93, 94, 106, 109
deﬁnition, 73
Lusin, N., 26–28, 76–82, 86, 88, 93–
97, 100, 101, 106, 107, 109,
112, 117, 123, 129, 135, 136,
164, 165, 178, 276, 464, 469–
471
Luzin, see Lusin
M-ultraﬁlter, 486
MA, 241
MAκ, 241, 314, 316
Mac Lane set theory, 566, 589
Mac Lane, S., 238, 566
MAD family, 256
Magidor, M., 287, 321, 322, 387, 391,
397–398, 400, 406, 431, 444,
459, 487–489, 517, 537, 539,
553
Maharam, D., 203, 204
Mahlo cardinal, 23, 49, 120, 360, 598
Mahlo, P., 23, 76, 84, 360
Malitz, H. J., 228, 257, 277, 284
Malitz, I., 617
Manakos, J., 617
Mansﬁeld, R., 257, 473, 481, 482
Marczewski, E., 179, 202, 207
Marginalia, 429
Martin L¨of, P., 802, 822, 824, 833,
841
Martin’s Axiom, 80, 82, 87, 88, 104,
105, 107, 121, 122, 124–129,
131, 152, 241, 242, 288, 306,
326, 373, 532, 536
deﬁnition, 124

Index
857
Martin’s Maximum, 397
Martin, D. A., 57, 115, 117, 124, 241,
242, 257, 270, 373, 382–383,
401, 420, 443, 445, 459, 462–
465, 467, 470, 471, 474–486,
488–490, 493, 495
Martin-L¨of, P., 670–671
master condition, 385
M´at´e, A., 156, 291, 295
Mathias forcing, 120
Mathias, A., 117, 120, 156, 228, 236,
252, 253, 255–258, 275, 276,
477, 480, 566
Mazur, S., 458, 461, 462
Mazurkiewicz, S., 121, 179, 183
McAloon, K., 228
McCutcheon, R., 301
McKenzie, R., 228
meager (meagre) set, 21
measurable cardinal, 36, 171, 193, 242,
247, 251, 252, 255, 317, 360,
418, 476, 550
meta logic, 835, 840
MetaPRL, 804, 822, 827, 828
Miˇsˇcenko, A., 526
Miller, A., 87, 108–110, 112, 118–120,
301
Miller, E., 150, 194, 196, 197, 202–
205, 210, 223, 241, 247
Milliken’s Complete Ramseyness for
Trees Theorem, 298
Milliken’s Ramsey Theorem for Trees,
271, 272
Milliken, K., 156, 271, 276, 298, 300,
325
Milliken-Taylor Theorem, 276
Milner, E., 199, 219, 220, 248, 250,
261, 267, 268, 293, 301, 314
Milner, R., 835
Mirimanoﬀ, D., 32, 33
Mitchell ordering ⊳, 386, 423
Mitchell, W., 228, 257, 271, 281, 284,
385, 390, 391, 395, 403, 423,
447
Mittag-Leﬄer, G., 518
Miyamoto, T., 295, 321
MM, 397
model
saturated, 161, 285, 320
universal, 224, 229, 285, 288, 320
Monk, D., 220, 228, 257, 528
Monk, L., 476
monochromatic set, 216
Montague, R., 49
Montalb´an, A., 283
Moore space, 80, 81, 125, 172, 184,
195, 202, 222, 230, 258, 391,
397
Moore, G., 84, 163, 239, 511
Moore, J., 127, 290, 298, 308, 309,
318, 322, 326, 328, 553
Moore, R. L., 149, 167, 172, 178, 184,
185, 196, 222
morass, 295, 428
Morayne, M., 85
Morgan, C., 295
Morgenstern, O., 457, 461
Morley, M., 123, 161, 229, 237, 521
Moschovakis, Y., 382, 459, 460, 470–
475, 477–480, 490, 491
Mostowski Collapsing Lemma, 364,
584
Mostowski, A., 30, 47, 48, 180, 210,
220, 221, 224, 237, 250, 364,
374
mouse, 390
moving generators, 425, 440
Mycielski, J., 257, 272, 381, 458, 463,
465–468, 482, 484, 493
n-huge cardinal, 379
Nash-Williams Partition Theorem, 234,
253, 254, 315
Nash-Williams, C., 151, 234–236, 253–
255, 275, 283, 309, 315
natural number, 563, 565
natural product, 159
natural sum, 159, 320

Index
858
NCF, 133
Near Coherence of Filters, see NCF
Neeman, I., 460, 480, 484, 489, 495,
496, 498, 553
Negrepontis, S., 290
Nelson, E., 561, 622
Neˇsetˇril, J., 301
Neumer’s Theorem, 226, 324
Neumer, W., 226, 227, 324
New Foundations (NF), 560, 563, 586,
598
NF3, 601
NFI (mildly impredicative NF), 602
NFP (predicative NF), 602
NFU, 560, 588, 601
model construction for, 589
nonstandard analysis, 561, 621–623
nonstandard natural number, 590, 625
nonstationary ideal, 361
norm, 470
Normal Moore Space Conjecture, 150,
184, 210, 230, 258, 280, 289
normal ultraﬁlter, 367
normal ultraﬁlter on PκX, 480
Nosal, E., 268
Novak, I., 48
Nov´ak, J., 221, 225, 324
Novikov, P., 469–471
Nuprl, 802, 804, 822–824, 826–828,
832–835, 840, 841
Nyikos, P., 185, 258, 289, 397
object logic, 835, 837, 840
Ohkuma, T., 233
Open Coloring Axiom (OCA), 126,
127
OCAT , 308
OCAARS, 308
open game, 461
operational semantics, 829, 833
order, 801–811, 813, 814, 816–819,
821–824, 826–829, 833, 835,
841, 842
order type, 156, 173
ordered pair, 563
Kuratowski deﬁnition of, 591, 606
Quine deﬁnition of, 592, 600, 606
ordered pair of classes, 573
Ordered Pigeonhole Principle, 183
Ordering Problem, 195
ordinal, 32
ordinal deﬁnable set, 49
hereditarily, 49, 416
ordinal number, 11, 566, 567, 593
ordinary partition symbol, 216
oscillation, 271, 295, 296
Osofsky, B., 86
Ostaszewski, A., 83, 88, 260
Ouellet, R., 745
Oxtoby, J., 111, 112, 115
P–point, 120, 133
deﬁnition, 120
Pabion, 602
pantachie, 76, 80, 89, 91, 95–97, 99,
100, 103, 110, 127, 135
paradox, 802, 803, 805, 807, 821, 822,
841
logical, 803, 805
semantical, 803
Paris, J., 422, 464, 484
Paris-Harrington Theorem, 299
partial equivalence relation, 835
partial order
special, 191, 258
universal
in power λ, 284
partition ordinal, 155
partition property, 44, 362
partition relation
balanced, 176, 216
canonical, 212
polarized, 219, 316
square bracket, 269
unbalanced, 205, 216
Pawlikowski, J., 107, 110, 111
payoﬀset, 458
pcf theorem, 540

Index
859
pcf theory, 515, 518, 539
PD, 381
Peano axioms, 591
Peano, G., 17, 24, 591
Peirce, C.S., 24
Pelant, J., 130, 132
PER semantics, 835
Perfect Set Partition Theorems, 236,
272
perfect set property, 8, 26, 79, 462
deﬁnition, 92
PFA, see Proper Forcing Axiom, 394
Pigeonhole Principle, 147, 174, 250,
272, 324
Pincherle, S., 90
Piotrowski, Z., 112
Platek, R., 427
pocket set theory, 578
Poincar´e, H., 518
pointclass, 464
adequate, 465
boldface, 464
boldface projective, 464
continuously closed, 464
eﬀective, 465
lightface, 465
relativized lightface projective, 465
selfdual, 464
universal member of a, 465
pointed graph, 646
bisimilarity, 646
polarized partition relation, 219, 316
Polish space, 463
polymorphism, 804, 828, 833
Poset Partition Theorem, 325
positive formula, 612, 616
positive set theory, 560, 561, 612, 619
Posp´ıˇsil, B., 132
possible coﬁnalities (pcf), 405
Potter, M., 567
Pouzet, M., 235, 307
precipitous ideal, 388, 486
predicative, 569, 801, 802, 821, 828–
830, 841
predictor, 133
Preining, N., 282
prewellordering, 382, 470
Prikry forcing, 384, 551
Prikry’s Theorem, 264, 266, 313
Prikry, K., 156, 228, 247, 252–255,
257, 258, 262–264, 266, 270,
275, 276, 293, 299, 301, 313,
314, 384, 388, 430, 433, 517,
537–539
program extraction, 804, 833, 835
projection (of a set of reals), 469
projection (of a tree), 472
Projective Determinacy (PD), 381, 471
projective ordinal, 383, 478
projective set, 27
projectum, 427
Pr¨omel, H., 274, 299, 301
proofs-as-processes, 832
proofs-as-programs, 822, 828
proper class, 560, 568
proper forcing, 393
Proper Forcing Axiom, 76, 88, 125,
126, 128, 135, 136, 152, 288,
308, 310, 322, 323, 326, 327,
394, 498
Property of Knaster, 151, 201
Property Θ, 98
deﬁnition, 98
Property C, 87, 92, 93, 101, 102, 106,
119
deﬁnition, 93
propositional function, 801, 805–812,
814–816, 818, 819, 821, 828,
829, 842
pseudointersection number, 195, 230,
297
PTS, 801, 804, 822–824
Pure Type Systems, 801, 804, 823
Q-embeddable partial order, 186, 277,
278
Q-set, 195, 210, 222, 230

Index
860
quasi-order, 198, 199, 234–236, 282,
322
Quine, W. V., 25, 560, 586, 588, 590,
601, 602, 637–638
quotient type, 834, 840
R-embeddable partial order, 186, 277,
278
Radin forcing, 552
Radin, L., 394
Rado Selection Principle, 194, 204
Rado’s Conjecture, 126
Rado’s Disjoint Interval Theorem, 196
Rado’s Theorem for Linear Systems,
154
Rado, R., 46, 154, 156, 177, 181, 183,
194, 196, 204, 210, 212–219,
221, 229, 231, 235, 249–251,
253, 265, 285, 291, 293, 295,
298, 302, 316, 530
Raisonnier, J., 110, 115
ramiﬁcation, 188, 195
Ramiﬁcation Problem, 195, 207
ramiﬁed set, 188
ramiﬁed suite, 190
distinguished, 190
ramiﬁed table, 188
Ramsey cardinal, 213, 252, 418, 419,
480
Ramsey property, 253–255, 257, 477
Ramsey’s Theorem, 175–177, 183, 204,
207, 216, 218, 231, 234, 253,
254, 274, 299
Finite, 154, 177, 183
Inﬁnite, 177
Ramsey, F. P., 44, 153, 175–177, 214,
362, 477, 641–643, 801, 802,
821, 841, 842
random real, 87, 93, 94, 107, 109,
111–117, 119, 131, 370
rank in a hierarchy, 575
rank of a set, 567
rariﬁed set, see Sierpi´nski set
rational perfect set forcing, 120
real game, 458
real numbers, 2
real type, 180
real-valued measurable cardinal, 242,
246
Rebholz, J., 265
Rectangle Reﬁning Theorem, 214
recursive function on a Polish space,
465
recursive set of reals, 465
reduction property, 469
Reﬂection Principle for ZF, 48
regressive function, 173, 304
Regressive Function Theorem, 154, 173,
181, 210, 225–227, 248, 323,
324
regular cardinal, 360, 467
regularity property, 22, 462
Reinhardt, W., 228, 257, 277, 378,
418
resource (of a partition relation), 216
reversed Easton forcing, 385
revised GCH, 547, 550
Ricabarra, R., 211, 227
Rieger-Bernays permutation method,
598, 600
Riesz, F., 131
Robinson, A., 47, 79, 621
R¨odl, V., 301
Roitman, J., 88, 129, 289, 290, 319
Ros lanowski, A., 116
Rosser, J. B., 48, 597
Rothberger, F., 31, 76, 81, 82, 86, 89,
93–103, 105, 106, 108, 109,
111, 119, 120, 125, 127, 130,
131, 134, 135, 195, 230, 517
Rothschild, B., 153, 156, 274
Rotman, B., 229
Rowbottom cardinal, 419
Rowbottom, F., 241, 242, 246, 247,
251, 252, 281, 419, 551
Rubin, M., 127, 298, 308, 319
Rucker, R., 578
Rudin, M. E., 172, 216, 222, 223, 230,

Index
861
237, 246, 256–258, 277, 289,
290, 373, 526
Rudin, W., 222
Russell’s Paradox, 17, 19, 560, 627
Russell, B., 17, 18, 24, 563, 586, 602,
633–639, 801, 803, 805, 808,
812–814, 820, 821, 826–830,
841, 842
Ruziewicz, S., 78, 108
S–space, 125
Sabbagh, G., 268
Sacks forcing, 87, 118–120
Sacks, G., 118, 236
ˇSanin, N., 194, 211
saturated ideal, 371
Sauer, N., 235
scale, 94–97, 100, 106, 117, 135, 136,
161, 405, 515, 536, 542, 544
deﬁnition, 96
scale (on a set of reals), 383, 472
Γ-scale, 472
Γ-semiscale, 473
scale property, 472
scattered linear order, 161, 197, 198,
236
scattered tree, 233, 283
SCH, 370, 429, 517, 530, 533, 537,
546, 552, 553
Schimmerling, E., 404, 498
Schindler, R., 321, 498
Schipperus, R., 156, 314, 315
Schlindwein, C., 305
Schoenﬂies, A., 510
Schr¨oder, E., 19, 24
Schur’s Theorem, 153, 154, 168, 181,
274
Schur, I., 153, 168, 175, 181
Scott’s trick, 566
Scott, D., 49, 50, 56, 116, 228, 231,
242, 253, 254, 366, 372, 419,
537, 551, 613
Second Continuum Hypothesis, 80–
82
Second Periodicity Theorem, 472
Seely, R., 676
self-application, 801, 822
self-reference, 804, 805, 814, 833, 838,
841, 842
selfdual pointclass, 464
Semi-Open Coloring Axiom, see SOCA
semiproper forcing, 398
Semiproper Forcing Axiom (SPFA),
398
semirecursive set of reals, 465
semiset, 621, 624
separation property, 469
sequent, 835, 836
set picture, 584
set-theoretic topology, 396
sethood predicate, 624
SH, 169
Sharon, A., 553
sharp of a set, 466
Shelah cardinal, 487
Shelah’s Canonization, 266
Shelah’s Finite Basis Problem, 287
Shelah, S., 82, 83, 88, 103, 111, 112,
115, 116, 119, 120, 127, 129,
131–135, 156, 211, 229, 258,
260–262, 265, 266, 280, 284–
287, 291, 292, 294, 295, 298,
302, 304–309, 311, 312, 318–
322, 392–395, 397–398, 401,
402, 404, 408, 444, 459, 468,
487, 488, 494, 495, 515–518,
531, 532, 536, 539, 544, 554
Shepherdson, J., 47, 48, 223
Shoenﬁeld, J., 48, 56, 372, 475
Shore, R., 270
Sierpi´nski set, 31, 109
deﬁnition, 93
Sierpi´nski partition, 183, 192, 232,
251, 296
Sierpi´nski poset, 192, 205, 278
Sierpi´nski, W., 26, 28, 31, 77, 78, 80–
82, 85–88, 92–98, 103, 106,
108, 109, 111, 112, 115, 119,

Index
862
128, 130, 136, 163, 164, 168,
173, 177–180, 184, 192, 197,
202, 203, 206, 210, 211, 216,
223, 241, 242, 278, 284, 373,
464, 468–471, 522, 536
Sikorski, R., 201, 282
Silver indiscernible, 374, 420
Silver’s theorem, 387, 517, 538
Silver, J., 125, 156, 228, 230, 242,
243, 246, 252–258, 262–264,
275, 276, 281, 374, 384, 419–
422, 427, 429, 431, 466, 517,
537
similarity
for ordered sets, 159
for ramiﬁed tables, 190
Simon, P., 130, 132, 529
Simpson, S., 266, 299, 301
singular cardinal, 360
singular cardinal compactness, 531,
532
Singular Cardinals Hypothesis, see SCH
Singular Cardinals Problem, 370
Skala, H., 617
Skolem hull, 376
Skolem’s Paradox, 34
Skolem, T., 33, 34, 41, 53, 154, 183,
613
slalom, 110
Soare, R., 255
SOCA, 127
Sochor, A., 228
Solomon, R. C., 102, 128, 129
Solovay’s model, 239, 255, 256
Solovay, R., 54–57, 75, 81, 88, 94,
102, 103, 107, 112–118, 123–
126, 128, 131, 228, 237–242,
247, 264, 265, 269, 279, 281,
283, 369–373, 381, 389, 390,
418, 420–422, 426, 458, 459,
465–468, 471, 474–477, 479,
481–483, 486, 489, 490, 496,
517, 537, 598
Souslin, see Suslin
Specker order, 286
Specker type, 285
Specker, E., 55, 132, 151, 201, 217,
219, 245, 247, 268, 279, 280,
371, 586, 589, 598, 601
Spencer, J., 153
square bracket partition relation, 269
standard real, 622
standardness predicate, 622
Stanley, L., 294, 295
stationary set, 226, 227, 243, 259, 261,
262, 266, 269, 296, 304, 309,
322, 324, 360, 476
non-reﬂecting, 259, 281, 321
stationary set reﬂection, 398
stationary tower forcing, 402, 444
Steel, J., 401, 404, 443, 459, 460, 474,
476, 479, 480, 484, 488–490,
493, 495–498
Steinhaus, H., 77, 78, 85, 170, 381,
458, 466, 467
Steiniz, E., 29
ˇStˇep´anek, P., 228
Stepping Up Lemma, 154, 155, 218,
220, 251
Negative, 155, 251
Positive, 155, 210, 217, 218, 251
Stern, J., 110, 115, 276
Stewart, D., 377
Stewart, F., 458, 459, 461–463, 482
Stewart, J., 381
Stone, M., 131, 132
strategy in an integer game, 458
stratiﬁed formula, 587, 591, 600, 604
Strauss, D., 274
strong cardinal, 490
α-strong, 395
strong measure zero, 92–94, 102, 136
deﬁnition, 92
strong partition property, 480
strongly cantorian set (cardinal, or-
dinal), 594, 597, 607
strongly compact cardinal, 49, 258,
364, 418

Index
863
γ-compact, 380
structure
saturated, 161
universal, 224, 229, 288, 322
substitution, 805, 807, 809–811, 814–
819
supercompact cardinal, 379, 418, 486
γ-supercompact, 379
superposition (of orderings), 192, 205
Suslin continuum, 169, 243
Suslin line, 169, 202, 222, 237
Suslin set, 383, 473
Z-Suslin, 473
homogeneously, 483
weakly homogeneously, 483
Suslin tree, 45, 82, 88, 122, 123, 150,
186, 191, 200–202, 237, 239,
240, 242–244, 307, 321, 363,
376, 426
ℵ2-Suslin, 304
κ-Suslin, 270, 378
deﬁnition, 122
Suslin’s Hypothesis, 45, 169, 204, 242,
363, 376
Suslin’s Problem, 149, 150, 177, 186,
187, 194, 200, 201, 203, 211,
221, 222, 237, 241
Suslin, M., 27, 77, 88, 117, 122, 123,
149, 166, 169, 187, 464, 472
´Swierczkowski, S., 458, 463
symmetric diﬀerence, 462
syntactic equality, 823, 829, 840
Szekeres, G., 154, 183
Szemer´edi, E., 298
Szentmikl´ossy, Z., 524, 526, 548
Szpilrajn’s Theorem, 179
Szyma´nski, A., 112
Talagrand, M., 110
Tall, F., 117, 125, 126, 222, 230, 257,
289, 319
Tarkowski, S., 233
Tarski, A., 30, 38, 42, 49, 86, 111,
128, 169, 178, 195, 196, 206,
210, 211, 220, 228, 250, 361,
363, 371, 418, 803, 804, 812
Taylor, A., 258, 261, 298, 300
Taylor, W., 257
Tennenbaum, S., 88, 115, 123, 126,
237, 238, 240–242, 279, 369,
373, 426
theory of types
ramiﬁed, 637, 640, 801, 803, 841
simple, 643
Thompson, K., 322
Todorcevic Poset Partition Theorem,
297
Todorcevic’s Coherent Tree Theorem,
303
Todorcevic, S., 75, 87, 88, 90, 106,
123, 125–128, 136, 156, 200,
222, 256, 271, 279, 280, 283,
287, 289–292, 295–298, 302,
303, 305, 307–309, 311–313,
317, 321–323, 325, 326, 397,
401, 498
topological compactness, 523
topological set theory, 560, 561, 613,
617
topos
elementary, 651
linguistic, 660
tower, 97, 129
deﬁnition, 97
transfer property, 428
transﬁnite numbers, 6
transitive closure, 466, 574, 646
transitive set, 466, 568, 580
transversal, 179, 211, 248, 262, 309
tree, 172, 363, 472
ℵ2-Suslin, 304
κ-Aronszajn, 190, 304
κ-Suslin, 270
κ-tree, 190, 363
κ+-Aronszajn, 281
λ-full, 245
Q-embeddable, 186, 191, 192
R-embeddable, 186, 191, 307

Index
864
ω1-tree, 200, 245
σ-scattered (Laver), 283
σ-scattered (Todorcevic), 283
Aronszajn, 150, 186, 190, 191,
193, 244, 258, 278, 280, 283,
307
branch, 172
club-embeddable, 307
full, 245, 278
Hausdorﬀ, 245, 278, 307, 326
height, 172, 189
homogeneous, 190, 483
homogeneously Suslin, 483
Kurepa, 200, 243, 244
length, 189
level, 172
Lipschitz, 283
non-special Aronszajn, 297
normal, 245
rooted, 231, 307
scattered, 233, 283
special, 191, 258, 281, 385
special κ-Aronszajn, 304
special Aronszajn, 150, 277, 307
subtree, 245
Suslin, 150, 186, 191, 200–202,
237, 239, 240, 242–244, 307,
321
tree on ω × κ, 382
uniformly branching, 190, 245
well-pruned, 245, 278, 307
tree property, 45, 246, 363, 386
Truss, J., 110, 117, 118, 259
truth predicate, 803, 812–814, 816,
818, 839, 840
Tukey function, 109, 111
deﬁnition, 109
Tukey, J., 118
Turing complete, 829, 832, 833
Turing determinacy, 477
Tychonoﬀ’s Theorem, 204
Tychonoﬀ, N., 204
Tychonov, A., 131
type ring, 161–163
type theory, 560, 561, 604
ramiﬁed, 18, 562, 563, 602, 801,
803, 841
simple, 18, 562, 564, 565, 586
typical ambiguity, 564, 586, 601
Ulam, S., 36, 112, 116, 131, 171, 183,
360, 418, 457, 458, 461, 550
ultraﬁlter, 257, 360, 468
κ-complete, 476
ﬁne, 380
nonprincipal, 468
normal, 367, 380, 418, 480
Ramsey, 256, 276
selective, 256, 257
ultrapower, 365, 418
ultraproduct construction, 50, 365
unbalanced partition relation, 205, 216
unicity of types, 809, 824, 827
uniform indiscernible, 481
uniformization, 471
uniformization property, 471
universal class, 574
universal linear order, 149, 152, 158,
162, 198, 320, 521
in power λ, 152, 284
universal partial order, 150, 152, 180,
211
in power λ, 152, 284
universal set, 594
universal structure, 224, 229
universally Baire set, 489
untyped lambda calculus, 829, 833
upward extension of embeddings, 430
urelement, 560, 582
Urysohn, P., 77, 150, 154, 173, 181,
523
V¨a¨an¨anen, J., 322
van der Waerden’s Theorem, 153, 154,
182, 249, 274, 298
van der Waerden, B., 153, 175, 181,
182, 249, 298
van Douwen, E., 128–130
Van Wesep, R., 476, 495

Index
865
Vaughan, H., 204
Vaughan, J., 288
Vaught, R. L., 211, 228, 521
Veliˇckovi´c, B., 203, 287, 318, 319, 498
Velleman, D., 295, 302, 317, 321
Viale, M., 553
vicious circle principle, 637
Vitali, G., 22
Voigt, B., 274, 299, 301
von Neumann ordinal, 568, 580
von Neumann, J., 32–34, 172, 416,
457, 461, 568, 569
von Neumann-G¨odel-Bernays class the-
ory, 560, 569
Vopˇenka, P., 51, 117, 228, 237, 528,
561, 621, 623
Vuksanovi´c, V., 271
Wadge, W., 475, 476
Wald, B., 132
walks on ordinals, 295, 296, 303
characteristic, 303
rho function, 303
Wang, H., 48, 257, 564
Watson, S., 222
weak covering property, 389, 436
weak Diamond, 261
weak partition property, 477
weakly compact cardinal, 49, 246, 294,
364, 365, 484, 598, 621
weakly homogeneously Suslin set, 483
weakly inaccessible cardinal, 23, 360
weakly Mahlo cardinal, 360
Weiss, B., 277
Weiss, W., 282, 288, 289, 301
well-founded sets, 34
well-ordering, 6, 461, 565, 566
Well-Ordering Theorem, 12, 561
well-quasi-order (wqo), 151, 198, 199,
233, 235, 282, 283, 285, 288,
304
Weyl, H., 640
Whitehead group, 82, 83, 391, 392,
531
Whitehead, A. N., 563, 602, 639, 801,
805, 827, 830
width (of a ramiﬁed table or tree),
189
Wiener, N., 25, 563
Williams, N., 268
winning strategy, 458
Wolfe, P., 464
Wolfsdorf, K., 300
Wolk, E., 234
Woodin cardinal, 402, 444, 487
Woodin, W. H., 89, 103, 119, 135,
283, 313, 319, 321, 394, 401,
402, 406, 407, 444, 459, 467,
477, 479, 480, 486–498, 543,
546, 552
wqo, 151, 198, 199, 233, 235, 282,
283, 285, 288, 304
Y combinator, 833
Yesenin-Volpin, A., 221, 238
Zarankiewicz, K., 207
Zeman, M., 498
Zermelo set theory (Z), 14, 561, 564,
565
Zermelo, E., 12–17, 19, 32, 34–36, 39,
360, 457, 460, 461, 510, 511,
514, 564, 565, 828
ZF, 35
ZFA, 583
ZFC, 35
ZFC–, 584
Zorn’s Lemma, 23

