
Handbook of Evolution 
Edited by 
Franz M. Wuketits 
Christoph Ant weiler 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

Handbook of Evolution 
Edited by 
Franz M. Wuketits 
Christoph Ant weiler 

Related Titles 
D. R. Brothwell, A. M. Pollard (Editors) 
Handbook of Archaeological Sciences 
782 pages 
2001 
ISBN 0-471-98484-1 
Howard Bloom 
Global Brain: The Evolution of Mass Mind 
from the Big Bang to the 21st Century 
384 pages 
~ 2000 
1 ISBN 0-471-29584-1 
Cerhard Roth, Mario F. Wullimann 
Brain Evolution and Cognition 
616 pages 
2000 
ISBN 0-471 -33 170-8 

Handbook of Evolution 
The Evolution of Human Societies 
and Cultures 
Edited by 
Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
WILEY- 
VCH 
WILEY-VCH Verlag CmbH & Co. KCaA 

Edited by 
Pro$ Dr. Christoph Antweiler 
Universitat Trier 
Fachbereich IV, Ethnologie 
54286 Trier 
Germany 
Pro$ Dr. Franz M. Wuketits 
Institut fur Wissenschaftstheorie 
Universitat Wien 
Sensengasse 8 
1090 Wien 
Austria 
This book was carefully produced. Neverthe- 
less, editors, authors and publisher do not 
warrant the information contained therein to 
be free of errors. Readers are advised to keep 
in mind that statements, data, illustrations, 
procedural details or other items may 
inadvertently be inaccurate. 
Library ofcongress Card No.: applied for 
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library. 
1 
Bibliographic information published by 
Die Deutsche Bibliothek 
Die Deutsche Bibliothek lists this publication 
in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; 
detailed bibliographic data is available in the 
internet at http://dnb.ddb.de. 
0 
2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co 
KGaA, Wemheim 
All rights reserved (including those of 
translation in other languages). No part of 
this book may be reproduced in any form - 
nor transmitted or translated into a machine 
language without written permission from 
the publishers. Registered names, trade- 
marks, etc. used in this book, even when not 
specifically marked as such, are not to br 
considered unprotected by law. 
Printed in the Federal Republic of Germany. 
Printed on acid-free paper. 
Urnschlaggestaltung SCHULZ Grafik- 
Design, FuRgonheim 
Composition Manuela Treindl, Laahel- 
Printing Strauss Offsetdruck GmbH, 
Morlenbach 
Bookbinding Litges & Dopf Buchbinderci 
GmbH, Heppenheim 
ISBN 3-527-30839-3 

I" 
,,Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution." This famous 
statement by Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900-1975) is not only true in biology but 
applies - at least to a certain extent - also to other disciplines. In search for an 
understanding of human societies and cultures, including their particular expres- 
sions in moral systems and languages, we cannot dispense with evolutionary think- 
ing. A proper treatment of these phenomena requires some lessons from evolu- 
tionary theory. However specific their cultural activities may be, humans are deeply 
rooted in the animal kingdom, and their capacity for culture has been formed and 
constrained in the course of evolution by means of natural selection. 
The editors and authors of this Handbook claim that evolution in the broadest 
sense of the word is a universal principle. They try to reveal its specific meaning at 
different levels of the organization of our world. Therefore, this work is to be un- 
derstood as an interdisciplinary treatment of evolution: The meaning of evolution 
is discussed from the point of view of cosmology, physics, chemistry, geology, biol- 
ogy, anthropology, social and political sciences, economics, linguistics, and phi- 
losophy of science. Also, the impact of evolutionary thinking on (philosophical) 
disciplines that are not traditionally connected with - and do not refer to - evolu- 
tion (particularly epistemology and moral philosophy or ethics) is elaborated. 
The aim of the Handbook is, first, to inform about the state of affairs, i. e., the 
current theories, problems, and results of evolutionary thinking in different disci- 
plines, and, second, to show some close connections and interrelations between 
the disciplines sub specie evolutionis. Hence, the Handbook can serve as a reference 
work, but should also be seen as an attempt to yield an evolutionary synthesis. Its 
very purpose is to meet the urgent need of various scientific and philosophical 
disciplines for a comprehensive up-to-date treatise of our knowledge about evolu- 
tion and its many facets. We hasten to say that we do not want to give the impres- 
sion that evolutionary theory is a ,,finished case". Of course, it is not. As can be 
learned from different contributions to this work, evolutionary thinking is still in 
flux, so to speak, and it includes many controversial issues. So, the reader of this 
Handbook may, finally, also get some ideas about unsolved problems and impor- 
tant tasks for the future. 
The present volume is devoted to human social and cultural evolution. It in- 
cludes 8 Chapters, dealing with the basic data, concepts and models of evolution- 
ary thinking in the human sciences and discussing their most important conse- 

VI 
Preface 
I 
quences. Chapter 1 explains the human adaptation for culture. Michael Tomasello 
shows how humans have developed cultural skills in ways that are unique in the 
animal kingdom. In Chapter 2 Olaf Diettrich presents evolutionary conceptions 
of (human) cognition and knowledge, and gives an account of what has been 
discussed, for some decades, under the label of evolutionary epistemology. In 
Chapter 3 Harald Haarmann extends the evolutionary approach to language and 
languages, and points out the wealth of cultural resources that are stored in each 
language. Social evolution is the topic of Chapter 4. Peter Meyer discusses the 
meaning of evolutionary thinking in the social sciences, connects social evolution 
with biological evolution and also gives to understand that the former has always 
led to new and unprecedented characteristics of cultural institutions. Chapter 5, by 
Camilo J. Cela-Conde and Francisco Ayala, tackles the problem of evolution and 
morality which recently has been revived in different forms of evolutionary ethics. 
In Chapter 6, Peter Corning pays tribute to Homo sapiens as a political animal and 
explains evolutionary mechanisms in politics. Chapter 7, by John M. Gowdy, is 
devoted to evolution of economics and outlines the intricate relations between hu- 
man biology and economy. Finally, in Chapter 8, Erhard Oeser espouses an evolu- 
tionary model of the history and development of scientific method. 
The idea for this Handbook is mainly due to Dr. Hans-Martin Schmidt (Cologne). 
With his characteristic enthusiasm for evolutionary theory as an interdisciplinary 
project, he encouraged us to finalize this work, carefully watched its gestation, and 
offered financial support from his Stijung ‘Apjilbaum”. Without him and his St$ung 
‘Apjilbaum” some important preparatory work could not have been done. We ac- 
knowledge with gratitude all his efforts. Our thanks also go to the staff of Wiley- 
VCH (Weinheim) for their patience and competent production of this work. Last, 
but not least, we have to express our thanks to the authors of the present volume 
who, in spite of many other obligations, devoted much time and energy to this 
project and supplied us with excellent contributions. 
October 2003 
Franz M. Wuketits, Vienna (Austria) 
Christoph Antweiler, Trier (Germany) 

I "I' 
Contents 
Preface V 
List of Contributors XI 
1 
The Human Adaptation for Culture 1 
Michael Tomasello 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.3.1 
1.3.2 
1.3.3 
1.4 
1.4.1 
1.4.2 
1.4.3 
1.4.4 
1.4.5 
1.5 
1.6 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
2.3.3 
2.3.4 
2.4 
Introduction 
1 
Primate and Human Cognition 
3 
The Ontogeny of Human Cultural Learning 
Joint Attention 5 
Imitative Learning 6 
Linguistic Symbols and Cognitive Representation 8 
Nonhuman Primate Culture 
10 
Japanese Macaque Potato Washing 
11 
Chimpanzee Tool Use 
12 
Chimpanzee Gestural Communication 
13 
Nonhuman Primate Social Learning and Social Cognition 
Enculturated Apes 
16 
Conclusions 
18 
References 
19 
5 
15 
Cognitive Evolution 25 
Olaf Diettrich 
Introduction 
25 
The Equivalence Postulate 
27 
Our Inborn World View 
29 
Induction 
30 
Reality 
32 
The Conservation of Identity 33 
The 3D Structure of Visual Perception 
The Cognitive Operator Theory 35 
33 

Vlll 
Contents 
2.5 
2.5.1 
2.5.2 
2.5.3 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.8.1 
2.8.2 
2.9 
2.10 
2.11 
2.12 
2.13 
2.14 
2.15 
3 
I 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
3.10 
4 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
The Operational Definitions of Space, Time, and Causality 37 
Space 37 
The Arrow of Time 38 
Causality 39 
Induction and the Compressibility of Observational and Theoretical 
Terms 40 
Communication, Meaning, and the Compressibility of Semantic 
Terms 42 
Extensions 45 
Physical Extensions of Perceptions and the Notion of Reality 45 
Algorithmic Extensions of Mathematical Thinking 48 
Action, Perception, and the Role of ‘Cyclic Variables’ in Cognitive 
Evolution 53 
Adaptation and Assimilation vs. Action and Perception 
Epistemological Autoreproduction 
59 
Is Cultural/Scientific Evolution Really Lamarckian? 
Physical and Social Problem-Solving in Cognitive Evolution 
Summary 69 
References 72 
56 
62 
65 
Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
77 
Harald Haarmann 
Introduction 
77 
Identification through Language and its Impact on Culture 
Processes 79 
Variation and Variability: 
The Organizational Principle Par Excellence in Processes of 
Evolution 82 
Variation 1: Language and the Evolution of Communicational Skills 
Variation 2: Language and the Evolution of Linguistic Structures 
Variation 3: Language and the Evolution of Functional Variety 
Variation 4: Languages and their Genetic Affiliations 
Variation 5: Language Evolution and Linguistic Diversity 108 
Variation 6: Globalization and the Future of Language Evolution 
References 115 
85 
88 
96 
101 
110 
Social Evolution 121 
Peter Meyer 
Introduction 
121 
Typologies of Societies 130 
Cultural Institutions in Social Evolution 
Causes of Social Evolution 155 
References 164 
137 

Contents I IX 
5 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
6 
6.1 
6.2 
6.2.1 
6.2.2 
6.2.3 
6.2.4 
6.3 
6.3.1 
6.3.2 
6.3.3 
6.3.4 
6.3.5 
6.4 
6.4.1 
6.4.2 
Evolution of Morality 
171 
Carniloj. Cela-Conde and Franciscoj. Ayah 
Explaining Moral Behavior 171 
Deep Capacities 172 
Sociobiological Models of Altruism 
174 
Kin Selection: Genetic Altruism and Moral Altruism 
An Evolutionary Model of Moral Behavior -
1
7
7
 
Interpretation 
Early Moral Behavior 179 
Gene-Culture Coevolution 181 
Group Selection Reborn 183 
References 187 
176 
The Evolution of Politics 
191 
Peter A. Corning 
Introduction 
191 
Defining Politics 192 
The Idealist Model 192 
The Realist Model 194 
The Ethological Model 196 
The Cybernetic Model 199 
Theories of Politics 202 
Human (and Animal) Nature in Politics 
Neo-Darwinism, Sociobiology, and Political Theory 
The Synergism Hypothesis 209 
Explaining Political Evolution 213 
Explaining Political Devolution 216 
The Evolution of Political Systems 
Animal Politics 220 
The Evolution of the ‘Political Animal’ - A Synopsis 
202 
204 
220 
223 
6.4.2.1 The Rise of the Australopithecines 
6.4.2.2 Enter Homo Erectus 226 
6.4.2.3 The Emergence of Homo Sapiens 
6.4.3 
The Evolution of Complex Societies 230 
6.4.3.1 Prime Mover Theories 230 
6.4.3.2 The Case for the Synergism Hypothesis 
6.5 
The Future of Politics 240 
6.6 
References 241 
223 
228 
235 
7 
Evolution of Economics 253 
john M. Gowdy 
7.1 
Introduction: Economics and Biology 253 
7.2 
The Evolution of the Human Economy 255 
7.2.1 
Hunter-Gatherers: Humanity’s First Two Million Years 256 

X 
Contents 
7.2.2 
The First Divide: The Rise of Agriculture 258 
7.2.2.1 Intensification of Production and Environmental Decline: 
The Tehuacan Valley 259 
7.2.2.2 Intensification of Production and Environmental Decline: 
Easter Island 262 
7.2.3 
The Second Divide: The Rise of Industrial Society 263 
7.2.3.1 Intensification of Production and Environmental Decline: Nauru 
265 
I 
7.3 
7.4 
7.4.1 
7.4.2 
7.4.3 
7.4.4 
7.4.5 
7.5 
7.6 
7.6.1 
7.6.2 
7.6.3 
7.6.4 
7.6.5 
7.7 
7.8 
8 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
Theories of the Evolution of the Industrial Economy 266 
Economic Man and Economic Change 
Methodological Individualism 
270 
Commensurability of Wants 272 
Marginal Valuation 272 
Consumer Sovereignty and International Trade 
The Evolutionary Roots of Economic Man 
274 
Contemporary Evolutionary Economics 275 
Beyond Methodological Individualism in Biology and Economics 
Beyond the Selfish Gene 278 
The Evolution of Cooperation and Multilevel Selection 280 
Social Cognition and Economic Theory 281 
Evolutionary Game Theory 283 
Cooperation as Evolutionary Progress 284 
Coevolution, Evolutionary Theory, and Economic Policy 
References 289 
269 
273 
278 
286 
The Evolution of Scientific Method 299 
Erhard Oeser 
Introduction 299 
Historical Background 300 
Objective Scientific Knowledge as a Break with the Ratiomorphic 
Past 304 
The Systematic Relationship of Empirical-Evolutionary Epistemology 
and Meta-Empirical or Pure ‘Transcendental’ Epistemology 
Information and Knowledge 309 
Science as an Evolutionary Information System 321 
The ‘Law of Three Stages’ of the Evolution of Method 
References 330 
307 
324 
Index 
333 

List of Contributors 
Prof. Dr. Christoph Antweiler 
Fachbereich IV, Ethnologie 
Universitat Trier 
54286 Trier 
Germany 
Prof. Dr. Francisco J. Ayala 
Department of Ecology and 
Evolutionary Biology 
321 Steinhaus Hall 
University of California 
lrvine, CA 92697 
USA 
Prof. Dr. Camilo J. Cela-Conde 
Laboratory of Human Systems 
University of Balearic Islands 
07071 Palma de Mallorca 
Spain 
Prof. Dr. Peter Corning 
Institute for the Study of Complex 
Systems 
119 Bryant St. Ste. 212 
Palo Alto, CA 94301 
USA 
Dr. Olaf Diettrich 
C. Math., FIMA 
Ave. des 4 Bonniers 20 
1348 Louvain-la-Neuve 
Belgium 
Prof. Dr. John Gowdy 
Department of Economics 
Rensselaer Poytechnic Institute 
Sage Building 3rd Floor 
Troy, NY 12180 
USA 
Prof. Dr. Harald Haarmann 
Unioninkatu 6 A1 
00130 Helsinki 
Fin 1 and 
Prof. Dr. Peter Meyer 
Universitat Augsburg 
Lehrstuhl fur Soziologie 
Universitatsstrage 16 
86159 Augsburg 
Germany 
Prof. Dr. Erhard Oeser 
Institut fur Wissenschaftstheorie 
Universitat Wien 
Sensengasse 8 
1090 Wien 
Austria 
Prof. Dr. Michael Tomasello 
Max-Planck-Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology 
InselstraRe 22 
04103 Leipzig 
Germany 
Prof. Dr. Franz M. Wuketits 
Institut fur Wissenschaftstheorie 
Universitat Wien 
Sensengasse 8 
1090 Wien 
Austria 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

I’ 
1 
The Human Adaptation for Culturefc 
Michael Tomasello 
Abstract 
Human beings are biologically adapted for culture in ways that other primates are 
not, as evidenced most clearly by the fact that only human cultural traditions accu- 
mulate modifications over historical time (the ratchet effect). The key adaptation is 
one that enables individuals to understand other individuals as inrentional agents 
like the self. This species-unique form of social cognition emerges in human on- 
togeny at approximately 1 year ofage, as infants begin to engage with other per- 
sons in various kinds of joint attentional activities involving gaze following, social 
referencing, and gestural communication. Young children’s joint attentional skills 
then engender some uniquely powerful forms of cultural learning, enabling the 
acquisition of language, discourse skills, tool-use practices, and other conventional 
activities. These novel forms of cultural learning allow human beings to, in effect, 
pool their cognitive resources both contemporaneously and over historical time in 
ways that are unique in the animal kingdom. 
1.1 
Introduction 
All animal species have unique characteristics and human beings are no excep- 
tion. Perhaps most important, human beings have some unique cognitive skills 
The precise nature of these skills is unknown, but they must be such that they 
enable a number of species-unique and easily observable behavioral practices in- 
cluding the following: (a) the creation and use of conventional symbols, including 
linguistic symbols and their derivatives, such as written language and mathemati- 
cal symbols and notations, (b) the creation and use of complex tools and other 
instrumental technologies, and (c) the creation of and participation in complex 
;’( 
Wiley-VCH thanks the Annual Review of Anthropology, Palo Alto CA, USA, for the permission to 
republish this contribution. 
Handbook of Evolution, Val. I: The Evolution ofHuman Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Frariz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
Copyright @ 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 
ISBN: 3-527-30839-3 

2 
I The Human Adaptation for Culture 
social organizations and institutions. It is difficult to imagine a more fundamental 
anthropological question than that of where these complex and species-unique 
behavioral practices, and the cognitive skills that underlie them, came from. 
Recent research on human evolution has provided some important facts that 
may help us to answer this most basic of questions. First, human beings shared 0 
common ancestor with their nearest primate relatives, Pan troglodytes and Pan 
paniscus, a mere 6 million years ago -about the same time there existed a common 
ancestor for horses and zebras, lions and tigers, and rats and mice (King and Wilson, 
1975). Second, for almost two thirds of this 6 million years, the human lineage 
consisted of one or more species of Australopithecine, which in most recent re- 
search are characterized as ape-like in both brain size and behavior (Klein, 1989). 
Third, although controversial, many anthropologists now believe that in the 2 mil- 
lion years of the existence of genus Homo, it has only been during the past several 
hundred thousand years, with the rise of something like modern humans, that the 
unique aspects ofhuman cognition have come into full bloom (Stringer and McKie, 
1996). What these new facts and interpretations establish is the rapidity with which 
the species-unique aspects of human cognition must have arisen: within the past 6 
million years for certain, within the past 2 million years in all likelihood, and within 
the past half million years according to some respectable theories. The main point 
is that under none of these scenarios - especially the last-has there been sufficient 
time for a large number of major cognitive adaptations (contra most of so-called 
evolutionary psychology) (Tooby and Cosmides, 1989; Pinker, 1997). Ifwe are search- 
ing for the origins of uniquely human cognition, therefore, our search must be for 
some small difference that made a big difference - some adaptation, or small set of 
adaptations, that changed the process of primate cognitive evolution in fundamen- 
tal ways. 
In my view there is only one candidate for this small difference that made a big 
difference and that is human culture. Other primates and mammals are certainly 
social, and some may even have social organizations for which it is useful to apply 
the term culture (McGrew, 1998). But human social organization is something 
else again, and this organization was, in my view, an integral part of the process by 
which human cognition came to have many of its most distinctive characteristics. 
That is, although the cognition of many mammalian and primate species is influ- 
enced in important ways by their social environments, human cognition, at least 
in its species-unique aspects, is actually socially constituted. In this paper, I at- 
tempt to explicate this proposition more fully and to explore some of its most im- 
portant anthropological implications by systematically comparing the social learn- 
ing, social cognition, and cultural organization of human beings and their nearest 
primate relatives. 
I 

1 3  
1.2 Primate and Human Cognition 
1.2 
Primate and Human Cognition 
Human cognition is a species, in the literal meaning of the word, of primate cogni- 
tion. Tomasello and Call (1997) reviewed all of the most important studies of pri- 
mate cognition over the past century and established that a vast array of cognitive 
skills are common to all primates, including humans. Thus, in their cognition of 
the physical world, all primate species remember ‘what’ is ‘where’ in their local 
environments, take novel detours and shortcuts in navigating through space (cog- 
nitive mapping), predict where food will be located in the future based on a number 
of current cues, follow the visible and invisible displacements of objects (Piaget’s 
object permanence), categorize objects on the basis of perceptual similarities, un- 
derstand relational categories and perform mental rotations of objects in space, 
match (and perhaps add) small numerosities of objects independent of spatial cues, 
and use creative strategies and perhaps insight in problem solving (sometimes in 
tool use). The major conclusion is that all primates live in basically the same 
sensory-motor world of permanent objects - and categories and relations of per- 
manent objects - arrayed in a representational space, and they all have some in- 
sightful problem-solving skills (in some cases involving the making and using of 
tools) to affect that sensory-motor world. 
There are also many similarities in the way all primate species understand their 
social worlds. Thus, all primate species recognize individuals in their social groups; 
form direct relationships with other individuals based on such things as kinship, 
friendship, and dominance rank; understand the third-party social relationships 
that hold among other members of their groups - again based on such things as 
kinship, friendship, and dominance rank, predict the behavior of individuals based 
on a variety of social and physical cues, and sometimes novel insights; use many 
types of social and communicative strategies to solve social problems and so to 
out-compete groupmates for valued resources; cooperate with conspecifics in 
problem-solving tasks and in forming social coalitions and alliances, and engage 
in various forms of social learning, in which they learn valuable things from 
conspecifics. The major conclusion again is that all primates live in basically the 
same type of social world, in which they individually recognize conspecifics and 
appreciate both the vertical (dominance) and horizontal (affiliative) relationships 
that hold among group members. They also have the ability to predict the behavior 
of conspecifics in many situations based on a variety of cues and insights, and in 
some cases to affect the behavior of groupmates via various social and communi- 
cative strategies. 
So what makes human cognition different? What enables human beings to cre- 
ate and use language and other symbols, to create and maintain complex instru- 
mental technologies, and to create and maintain complex social organizations and 
institutions? The first and most obvious observation is that individual human be- 
ings do not do any of these things. These are all collective cognitive products in 
which human beings have in some way pooled their cognitive resources. If we 
imagine the forbidden experiment in which a human child grows up on a desert 

4 
1 The Human Adaptation for Culture 
island, miraculously supplied with nutritional and emotional sustenance but in 
the total absence of contact with other human beings, this child would not invent 
a language or a complex technology or a complex social institution. Even if there 
were a group of such abandoned children, it is unlikely that together, in their own 
lifetime, they could invent anything resembling the range of material and sym- 
bolic artifacts that characterizes even the least artifactually complex human soci- 
ety. The reason that no single child or group of children could on their own in their 
own lifetimes create any version of a modern human culture and its material and 
symbolic artifacts is that human cultures are historical products built up over many 
generations. Indeed, the most distinctive characteristic of human cultural evolu- 
tion as a process is the way that modifications to an artifact or a social practice 
made by one individual or group of individuals often spread within the group, and 
then stay in place until some future individual or individuals make further modifi- 
cations - and these then stay in place until still further modifications are made 
(Tomasello et al., 1993a; Boesch and Tomasello, 1998). This process of cumulative 
cultural evolution works because of a kind of ‘ratchet effect’: individual and group 
inventions are mastered relatively faithfully by conspecifics, including youngsters, 
which enables them to remain in their new and improved form within the group 
until something better comes along. 
The major part of the ratchet in the cumulative cultural evolution of human 
societies takes place during childhood. That is, each new generation of children 
develops in the ‘ontogenetic niche’ characteristic of its culture (including in some 
cases explicitly pedagogical niches), mastering the artifacts and social practices 
that exist at that time. It is only because human children are so good at social 
learning (and in some cases adults are so good at teaching) that an artifact or social 
practice may conserve its form over many generations of stasis, until eventually a 
modification that group members find worthwhile is made and the cycle starts 
anew. For this process to work, therefore, human beings not only need to be inven- 
tive, they need to be good at preserving those inventions by imitatively learning, 
and sometimes explicitly teaching, the inventions of others. This process is more 
complex than it might seem at first glance, however. Imitative learning does not 
just mean mimicking the surface structure of a poorly understood behavior, the 
way a parrot mimics human speech, with no understanding of its communicative 
significance, it also means reproducing an instrumental act understood intention- 
ally, that is reproducing not just the behavioral means but also the intentional end 
for which the behavioral means was formulated. This requires some specially 
adapted skills of social cognition. 
The main point is that unlike the young of any other primate species, human 
children grow up in the midst of the accumulated wisdom of their social group, as 
embodied in its material artifacts, symbolic artifacts, and conventional social prac- 
tices, and children are specifically adapted to appropriate this wisdom as embod- 
ied in these forms. Although we have yet to explore the details, these facts provide 
a sufficient explanation for the existence of many of the most distinctive cognitive 
products that human beings produce. But there is more. As a result of participat- 
ing in social and communicative interactions with other persons understood in- 
I 

7.3 The Ontogeny ofHurnan Cultural Learning 
tentionally, human children also come to cognitively represent the world in some 
uniquely powerful ways. The most important of these involves the use of linguistic 
symbols that are both intersubjectively understood and perspectival, in the sense 
that that a single item or situation may be construed linguistically in many differ- 
ent ways. For example, a single event may be seen as X sold Y to Z or Z bought Y 
from X; or a single object may be an apple, a fruit, or some food. Intersubjective 
and perspectival cognitive representations are unique in the animal kingdom, and 
they enable human beings to deal with their worlds in some uniquely flexible and 
powerful ways. 
To appreciate fully (a) the social cognitive skills necessary for children to partici- 
pate fully in their cultures and (b) the transforming effect of cultural participation 
on individual cognition, we must follow out key aspects of the human ontogenetic 
scenario - and then compare it with the basic scenario of nonhuman primate cog- 
nitive ontogeny. 
5 I 
1.3 
The Ontogeny of Human Cultural Learning 
Human children grow up in the ontogenetic niche of their culture, which, in a 
sense, exists before they are born. But children also need to have some social cog- 
nitive skills if they are to exploit the preexisting cultural resources in a species- 
typical manner. These skills cannot be simply presupposed, as is often the case in 
cultural psychology (e.g., Rogoff, 1990; Shweder, 1990). This point is most clearly 
demonstrated by the unfortunate case of children with autism, the vast majority of 
whom lack the social cognitive skills necessary to participate fully in or to appropri- 
ate the artifacts and social practices characteristic of those around them (Baron- 
Cohen 1993; Hobson, 1993). For typically developing children, the ontogeny of 
these social cognitive skills begins at the end of the first year of life. 
1.3.1 
Joint Attention 
Six-month-old infants interact dyadically with objects, grasping and manipulat- 
ing them, and they interact dyadically with other people, expressing emotions 
back-and-forth in a turn-taking sequence. But at approximately 9-12 months of 
age, infants begin to engage in interactions that are triadic in the sense that they 
involve the referential triangle of child, adult, and some outside entity to which 
they share attention. Thus, infants at this age begin to flexibly and reliably look 
where adults are looking (gaze following), use adults as social reference points 
(social referencing), and act on objects in the way adults are acting on them (imi- 
tative learning) - in short, to ‘tune in’ to the attention and behavior of adults to- 
ward outside entities. At this same age, infants also begin to use communicative 
gestures to direct adult attention and behavior to outside entities in which they 
are interested - in short, to get the adult to ‘tune in’ to them. In many cases, sev- 

6 I The Human Adaptation for Culture 
era1 of these behaviors come together as the infant interacts with an adult in a 
relatively extended bout of joint engagement with an object (Bakeman and 
Adamson, 1984). Most often the term joint attention has been used to character- 
ize this whole complex of triadic social skills and interactions (Moore and 
Dunham, 1995), and it represents something of a revolution in the way infants 
relate to their worlds. 
Infants begin to engage in joint attentional interactions when they begin to un- 
derstand other persons as intentional agents (Tomasello, 1995). Intentional agents 
are animate beings with the power to control their spontaneous behavior, but they 
are more than that. Intentional agents also have goals and make active choices 
among behavioral means for attaining those goals. It is important to note that 
intentional agents also make active choices about what they pay attention to in 
pursuing those goals (for the argument that attention is intentional perception, 
see Gibson and Rader, 1979). All of the specific joint attentional behaviors in which 
infants follow, direct, or share adult attention and behavior are not separate activi- 
ties or cognitive domains, they are simply different behavioral manifestations of 
this same underlying understanding of other persons as intentional agents. Strong 
support for this view comes from a recent study by Carpenter et al. (1998b), who 
followed a group of infants longitudinally from 9 to 15 months of age and found 
that for any individual child these skills emerged together as a group, with some 
predictable orderings among individual skills. 
I 
1.3.2 
Imitative Learning 
The social-cognitive revolution at 1 year of age sets the stage for infants’ second 
year of life, in which they begin to imitatively learn the use of all kinds of tools, 
artifacts, and symbols. For example, in a study by Meltzoff (1988), 14-month-old 
children observed an adult bend at the waist and touch its head to a panel, thus 
turning on a light. They followed suit. Infants engaged in this somewhat unusual 
and awkward behavior, even though it would have been easier and more natural 
for them simply to push the panel with their hand. One interpretation of this 
behavior is that infants understood that (a) the adult had the goal of illuminating 
the light and then chose one means for doing so, from among other possible means, 
and (b) if they had the same goal, they could choose the same means. Cultural 
learning of this type thus relies fundamentally on infants’ tendency to identify 
with adults, and on their ability to distinguish in the actions of others the underly- 
ing goal and the different means that might be used to achieve it. This interpreta- 
tion is supported by the more recent finding of Meltzoff (1995) that 18-month-old 
children also imitatively learn actions that adults intend to perform, even if they 
are unsuccessful in doing so. Similarly, Carpenter et al. (1998a) found that 
16-month-old infants will imitatively learn from a complex behavioral sequence 
only those behaviors that appear intentional, ignoring those that appear acciden- 
tal. Young children do not just mimic the limb movements of other persons, they 
attempt to reproduce other persons’ intended actions in the world. 

17 
7.3 The Ontogeny of Human Cultural Learning 
Although it is not obvious at first glance, something like this same imitative 
learning process must happen if children are to learn the symbolic conventions of 
their native language. Although it is often assumed that young children acquire 
language as adults stop what they are doing, hold up objects, and name these 
objects for them, this is empirically not the case. Linguistics lessons such as these 
are (a) characteristic of only some parents in some cultures and (b) characteristic 
ofno parent in no culture for words other than concrete nouns and some actions, 
i.e., no one names for children acts of ‘giving’ or prepositional relationships such 
as ‘on’ or ‘for’. In general, for the vast majority ofwords in their language, children 
must find a way to learn in the ongoing flow of social interaction, sometimes from 
speech not even addressed to them (Brown, 1999), In some recent experiments, 
something of this process has been captured, as children learned words in situa- 
tions in which the adult was not specifically intending that they learn a word, the 
referent was not perceptually available when the word was said, and there were 
multiple potential referents in the situation that the child had to choose among 
based on various kinds of adult social-pragmatic cues. 
In the context of a finding game, an adult announced her intentions to ‘find the 
toma’ and then searched in a row of buckets all containing novel objects. Some- 
times she found it in the first bucket searched, smiling and handing the child 
the object. Sometimes, however, she had to search longer, rejecting unwanted 
objects by scowling at them and replacing them in their buckets until she found 
the one she wanted (again indicated by a smile and the termination of search). 
Children learned the new word for the object the adult intended to find regard- 
less of whether or how many objects were rejected during the search process 
(Tomasello and Barton, 1994). 
Also in the context ofa finding game, an adult had the child find four different 
objects in four different hiding places, one of which was a distinctive toy barn. 
Once the child had learned which objects went in which places, the adult an- 
nounced her intention to ‘find the gazzer’. She then went to the toy barn, but it 
turned out to be ‘locked‘. She thus frowned at the barn and then proceeded to 
another hiding place, saying ‘Let’s see what else we can find‘ (taking out an 
object with a smile). Later, children demonstrated that they had learned ‘gazzer’ 
for the object they knew the experimenter wanted in the barn - even though they 
never saw the object after they heard the new word, and even though the adult 
had frowned at the barn and smiled at a distractor object (Akhtar and Tomasello, 
1996; Tomasello et al., 1996). 
An adult announced her intention to ‘dax Mickey Mouse’ and then proceeded to 
perform one action accidentally and another intentionally (or sometimes in re- 
verse order). Children learned the word for the intentional not the accidental 
action regardless of which came first in the sequence (Tomasello and Barton, 
1994). 
Tomasello et al. (1993a) called this kind of imitative learning cultural learning be- 
cause the child is not just learning things from other persons, she is also learning 

8 
7 The Human Adaptationfor Culture 
things through them - in the sense that she must know something of the adult’s 
perspective on a situation to learn the active use of this same intentional act. The 
adult in the above scenarios is not just moving and picking up objects randomly, 
she is searching for an object and the child must know this in order to make enough 
sense ofher behavior to connect the new word to the adult’s intended referent. The 
main theoretical point is that an organism can engage in cultural learning of this 
type only when it understands others as intentional agents, like the self, who have 
a perspective on the world that can be followed into, directed, and shared. Indeed, 
a strong argument can be made that children can only understand a symbolic 
convention in the first place if they understand their communicative partner as an 
intentional agent with whom one may share attention - since a linguistic symbol 
is nothing other than a marker for an intersubjectively shared understanding of a 
situation (Tomasello, 1995, 1998, 1999). As a point of comparison, children with 
autism do not understand other persons as intentional agents, or they do so to 
only an imperfect degree, and so they do poorly at imitative learning of intentional 
actions in general (Smith and Bryson, 1994): only half of them ever learn any lan- 
guage at all, and those who do learn some language do poorly in word-learning 
situations such as those just described (Baron-Cohen et al., 1997). As we see be- 
low, nonhuman primates are not very human-like in these kinds of social-cognitive 
and cultural learning skills either. 
I 
1.3.3 
Linguistic Symbols and Cognitive Representation 
One of the most interesting things about the process of language acquisition is 
that the adults from whom the child is learning went through the same process 
earlier in their lives, and across generations the symbolic artifacts that comprise 
English or Turkish, or whatever language, accumulate modifications as new lin- 
guistic forms are created by grammaticization and other processes of language 
change (e.g., Traugott and Heine, 1991). Thus, today’s child is learning the whole 
historically derived conglomeration. Consequently, when the child learns the con- 
ventional use of these well-traveled symbols, what she is learning is the ways her 
forbears in the culture found useful for manipulating the attention of others in the 
past. And because the peoples of a culture, as they move through historical time, 
evolve many and vaned purposes for manipulating the attention of one another 
(and because they need to do this in many different types of discourse situations), 
today’s child is faced with a whole panoply of different linguistic symbols and 
constructions that embody many different attentional construals of any given situ- 
ation. As a sampling, languages embody attentional construals based on the fol- 
lowing (for more specifics, see Langacker, 1987): generality-specificity (‘thing’, ‘fur- 
niture’, ‘chair’, ‘desk chair’); perspective (‘chase-flee’, ‘buy-sell’, ‘come-go’, 
‘borrow-lend’); function (‘father’, ‘lawyer’, ‘man’, ‘American’) (‘coast’, ‘shore’. 
‘beach‘). There are many more specific perspectives that arise in grammatical com- 
binations ofvarious sorts: “She smashed the vase” versus “The vase was smashed. 
It is at about 18 months of age that children first begin to predicate multiple things 

19 
7.3 The Ontogeny of Human Cultural Learning 
about objects to which they and the adult are jointly attending, for example by 
saying that this ball is either ‘wet’ or ‘big’ or ‘mine’ - all about one and the same 
object (Reed, 1995; Tomasello, 1988, 1995). 
Consequently, as a young child internalizes a linguistic symbol, as she learns 
the human perspective embodied in that symbol, she cognitively represents not 
just perceptual or motoric aspects of a situation but also one way, among other 
ways of which she is also aware, that the current situation may be attentionally 
construed by ‘us’, the users of the symbol. The way that human beings use linguis- 
tic symbols thus creates a clear break with straightforward perceptual or sensory- 
motor cognitive representations. It is true that a prelinguistic child, or a nonhuman 
primate, may construe situations in more than one way: one time a conspecific is 
a friend and the next time an enemy, one time a tree is for climbing to avoid preda- 
tors and the next time it is for making a nest in. In these different interactions with 
the same entity, the individual is deploying its attention differentially, depending 
on its goal at that moment. But shifting attention sequentially in this manner as a 
function of goal is not the same thing as knowing simultaneously a number of 
different ways in which something might be construed - in effect, imagining at 
the same time a number of different possible goals and their implications for at- 
tention. An individual language user looks at a tree and, before drawing the atten- 
tion of her interlocutor to that tree, must decide, based on her assessment of the 
listener’s current knowledge and expectations, whether to say “that tree over there”, 
“it”, “the oak, “that hundred-year-old oak”, “the tree”, “the bagswing tree”, “that 
thing in the front yard, “the ornament”, “the embarrassment”, or any of a number 
of other expressions. She must decide whether the tree is in, is standing in, is 
growing in, was placed in, or is flourishing in the front yard. And these decisions 
are not made on the basis of the speaker’s direct goal with respect to the object or 
activity involved, but rather they are made on the basis of her goal with respect to 
the listener’s interest and attention to that object or activity. This means that the 
speaker knows that the listener shares with her these same choices for construal - 
again, all available simultaneously. Indeed, the fact is that while she is speaking, 
the speaker is constantly monitoring the listener’s attentional status (and vice versa), 
which means that both participants in a conversation are always aware that there 
are at least their two actual perspectives on a situation, as well as many more that 
are symbolizable in currently unused symbols and constructions. 
The point is not just that linguistic symbols provide handy tags for human con- 
cepts, or even that they influence or determine the shape of those concepts, though 
they do both of these things. The point is that the intersubjectivity of human lin- 
guistic symbols - and their perspectival nature as one offshoot of this inter- 
subjectivity - means that linguistic symbols do not represent the world directly, in 
the manner of perceptual or sensory-motor representations, but rather they are 
used by people to induce others to construe certain perceptual/conceptual situa- 
tions -to attend to them - in one way rather than in another. This breaks symbols 
away from the sensory-motor world of objects in space and puts them instead in 
the realm of the human ability to view the world in whatever way is convenient for 
the communicative purpose at hand. The most important point in the current 

10 
7 The Human Adaptation for Culture 
context is that as children participate in these communicative exchanges, they in- 
ternalize, in something like the way Vygotsky (1978) envisioned the process, the 
perspectives of other persons. The internalization process is not something mysti- 
cal or unanalyzable, as it is sometimes characterized, but rather it is just the nor- 
mal process of imitative learning when linguistic (and perhaps other communica- 
tive) conventions are involved. That is, in imitatively learning a linguistic symbol 
from an adult, the child comprehends that by using a particular symbol she in- 
tends for another to pay attention to some specific aspect of their shared experi- 
ence. When the child attempts to appropriate the use of this communicative con- 
vention for her own use, she must reverse roles: If others wish her to focus on this 
same aspect of reality, they must use that same symbol toward her. This learning 
process is indeed what creates the communicative convention in the first place, in 
the sense that it initiates the child into the convention. Because linguistic symbols 
are perspectival, i.e., used to focus the attention of others on specific aspects of 
situations as opposed to other aspects, if the child is to use the symbol in its con- 
ventionally appropriate manner she must understand something of the adult’s 
perspective. It is in this sense and only in this sense that internalization involves a 
special form of social learning - cultural learning - in which the child internalizes 
the perspective of another person. 
Some of the effects of operating with symbols of this type are obvious, in terms 
of flexibility and relative freedom from perception. But some are more far reaching 
and quite unexpected, in the sense that they give children truly new ways of con- 
ceptualizing things, such as treating objects as actions (“he porched the newspa- 
per”), actions as objects (“skiing is fun”), and all kinds of metaphorical construals 
of things (“love is a journey”) (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980; Johnson, 1987; Lakoff, 
1987). These new ways of conceptualizing and thinking result from the accumu- 
lated effects of engaging in linguistic communication with other persons for some 
years during early cognitive development. More extended bouts of discourse inter- 
action with other persons also create opportunities for explicitly exploring and com- 
paring differing verbally expressed perspectives on situations. Perhaps of special 
importance are discourse interactions in which the communicative partner pro- 
vides a verbally expressed perspective on the child’s previous verbally expressed 
perspective, since in this case the internalization of the other’s perspective helps to 
create children’s ability to self-regulate, self-monitor, and reflect on their own cog- 
nition (Vygotsky, 1978). 
I 
1.4 
Nonhuman Primate Culture 
McGrew (1998) claims that nonhuman primates engage in social activities that are 
best characterized as cultural in that they share all the essential features of human 
culture. I agree with this (Tomasello, 1990,1994,199Ga). Nevertheless, at the same 
time I insist that human culture has, in addition, some unique characteristics (as 
may the cultures of other primate species). The most important of these, at the 

I l1 
7.4 Nonhuman Primate Culture 
macro level, is the fact that many human cultural traditions and artifacts accumu- 
late modifications over time, whereas this does not seem to be the case for 
nonhuman primate cultural traditions (Tomasello et al., 1993a; Tomasello and Call, 
1997). The reason for this difference resides in the micro-level processes by which 
individuals learn things from and through one another, and as just elaborated, it 
may be the case that in their early ontogenies, human beings do this in some 
species-unique ways. To see whether these skills are indeed unique to humans, we 
should look briefly at nonhuman primate culture, nonhuman primate social learn- 
ing, and nonhuman primate social cognition. 
1.4.1 
Japanese Macaque Potato Washing 
The most often-cited case of nonhuman primate culture is the case of Japanese 
macaque potato washing (Kawainura, 1959; Kawai, 1965). In 1953, an 18-month- 
old female named Imo was observed to take pieces of sweet potato, given to her 
and the rest of the troop by researchers, and to wash the sand off of them in some 
nearby water (at first a stream and then the ocean). About 3 months after she 
began to wash her potatoes, the practice was observed in Imo's mother and two of 
her playmates (and then their mothers). During the next 2 years, 7 other young- 
sters also began to wash potatoes, and within 3 years of Imo's first potato washing 
approximately 40% of the troop was doing the same. It was thought significant 
that it was Imo's close associates who learned the behavior first, and their associ- 
ates directly after, in that it suggested that the means of propagation ofthis behavior 
was some form of imitation, in which one individual actually copied the behavior 
of another. 
The interpretation of these observations in terms of culture and imitation has 
two main problems, however. The first is that potato washing is much less unu- 
sual a behavior for monkeys than was originally thought. Brushing sand off food 
turns out to be something that many monkeys do naturally, and indeed this had 
been observed in the Koshima monkeys prior to the emergence of washing. It is 
thus not surprising that potato washing was also observed in four other troops of 
human-provisioned Japanese macaques soon after the Koshima observations 
(Kawai, 1965), which implies that at least four individuals learned on their own. 
Also, in captivity, individuals of other monkey species learn quite rapidly on their 
own to wash their food when provided with sandy fruits and bowls of water 
(Visalberghi and Fragaszy, 1990), The second problem has to do with the pattern of 
the spread of potato washing behavior within the group. The spread of the behavior 
was relatively slow, with an average time of over 2 years for acquisition by all the 
members of the group who learned it (Galef, 1992). Moreover, the rate of spread 
did not increase as the number of users increased. If the mechanism of transmis- 
sion was imitation, an increase in the rate of propagation would be expected as 
more demonstrators became available for observation over time. In contrast, if 
processes of individual learning were at work, a slower and steadier rate of spread 
would be expected - which was in fact observed. The fact that Imo's friends and 

12 
I The Human Adaptation for Culture 
relatives were first to learn the behavior may be due to the fact that friends and 
relative stay close to one another, and thus Imo’s friends very likely went near the 
water more often during feeding than other group members, increasing their 
chances for individual discovery. 
I 
1 A.2 
Chimpanzee Tool Use 
Perhaps the best examples to examine in the current context are humans’ closest 
primate relatives, the chimpanzees -especially with regard to tool use and gestural 
communication, the two behaviors for which cultural transmission has been most 
often claimed. First, there are a number of population-specific tool-use traditions 
that have been documented for different chimpanzee communities, for example 
termite-fishing, ant-fishing, ant-dipping, nut-cracking, and leaf-sponging (for a 
review, see McGrew, 1992). Sometimes the ‘same’ tradition even shows variability 
between groups. For instance, members of the Kasakela community at Gombe (as 
well as some other groups elsewhere) fish for termites by probing termite mounds 
with small, thin sticks, whereas in other parts ofAfrica there are chimpanzees who 
perforate termite mounds with large sticks and attempt to scoop up the insects by 
the handful, One possible explanation is that the chimpanzees in the western parts 
of Africa are able to destroy termite mounds with large sticks because the mounds 
are soft from much rain, whereas in the east they cannot use this strategy because 
the mounds are too hard. Each individual thus reinvents the wheel for itself, with 
population differences due to the different local ecologies of the different groups - 
so-called environmental shaping. 
Although environmental shaping is likely a part of the explanations for group 
differences of behavior for all species, experimental studies have demonstrated 
that more than this is going on in chimpanzee culture (see also Boesch et al., 
1994). Tomasello (199Ga) reviewed all the experimental evidence on chimpanzee 
imitative learning of tool use (a total of five studies) and concluded that chimpan- 
zees are good at learning about the dynamic affordances of objects they see being 
manipulated by others, but they are not skillful at learning from others a new 
behavioral strategy per se. For example, if a mother rolls over a log and eats the 
insects underneath, her child will likely follow suit. This is simply because the 
child learned from the mother’s act that there are insects under the log - a fact she 
did not know and very likely would not have discovered on her own. But she did 
not learn how to roll over a log or to eat insects, these are things she already knew 
how to do or could learn how to do on her own. (Thus, the youngster would have 
learned the same thing if the wind, rather than its mother, had caused the log to 
roll over and expose the ants.) This is what has been called emulation learning 
because it is learning that focuses on the environmental events involved - the 
results or changes of state in the environment that the other produced - rather 
than on the actions that produced those results (Tomasello, 1990, 199Ga). 
Emulation learning is a very intelligent and creative learning process that, in 
some circumstances, is a more adaptive strategy than imitative learning. For ex- 

1 1 3  
7.4 Nonhuman Primate Culture 
ample, Nagell et al. (1993) presented chimpanzees and 2-year-old human children 
with a rake-like tool and an out-of-reach object. The tool was such that it could be 
used in either of two ways, leading to the same end-result of obtaining the object. 
For each species, one group of subjects observed a demonstrator employ one method 
of tool use (less efficient) and another group of subjects observed another method 
of tool use (more efficient). The result was that whereas human children in gen- 
eral copied the method of the demonstrator in each of the two observation condi- 
tions (imitative learning), chimpanzees used the same method or methods to ob- 
tain the object no matter which demonstration they observed (emulation learning). 
The interesting point is that many children insisted on this reproduction of adult 
behavior even in the case of the less-efficient method, leading to less successful 
performance than the chimpanzees in this condition. Imitative learning is not a 
‘higher’ or ‘more intelligent’ learning strategy than emulation learning, it is sim- 
ply a more social strategy - which, in some circumstances and for some behaviors, 
has some advantages. This emulation learning explanation also applies to other 
studies of chimpanzee social learning oftool-use activities, such as those by Russon 
and Galdikas (1993) and Whiten et al. (1996). 
Chimpanzees are intelligent and creative in using tools and understanding 
changes in the environment brought about by the tool use of others, but they do 
not seem to understand the instrumental behavior of conspecifics the same way as 
do humans. For humans, the goal or intention ofthe demonstrator is a central part 
of what they perceive, and indeed the goal is understood as something separate 
from the various behavioral means that may be used to accomplish the goal. An 
observer’s ability to separate goal and means serves to highlight for herself the 
demonstrator’s method or strategy of tool use as an independent entity - the 
behavior she is using in an attempt to accomplish the goal, given the possibility of 
other means of accomplishing it. In the absence of this ability to understand goal 
and behavioral means as separable in the actions of others, chimpanzee observers 
focus on the changes of state (including changes of spatial position) of the objects 
involved during the demonstration, with the motions of the demonstrator being, 
in effect, just other motions. The intentional states of the demonstrator, and thus 
her behavioral methods as distinct behavioral entities, are simply not a part oftheir 
experience. 
1.4.3 
Chimpanzee Gestural Communication 
The other well-known case is the gestural communication of chimpanzees, for 
which there are also some population-specific behaviors (Goodall, 1986; Tomasello, 
1990). There is one reasonably well-documented example from the wild. Nishida 
(1980) reported ‘leaf-clipping’ in the Mahale K group of chimpanzees - thought to 
be unique to that group but later observed by Sugiyama (1981) in another group 
across the continent. The reporting of data for individuals in these studies showed 
that there were marked individual differences within the groups in how (toward 
what end) the signal was used, for example for sexual solicitation, aggression to- 

14 
7 The Human Adaptation for Culture 
ward groupmates, or aggression toward humans. One hypothesis is that after one 
individual used leaf-clipping to make noise (the tearing of the rigid dead leaves 
makes a very loud noise), others learned via emulation to make the same noise 
(i.e., they learned the affordances of the leaf). This had different attention-getting 
effects on conspecifics in the different groups, however, and these were then learned 
as contingencies. The fact that leaf-clipping has been observed in more than one 
group, who have had no opportunity to observe one another, raises the possibility 
of some such process. 
This possibility is also supported by studies with captive chimpanzees. In ongo- 
ing studies of the gestural signaling of a captive colony of chimpanzees, Tomasello 
and colleagues have asked whether youngsters acquire their gestural signals by 
imitative learning or by a process of ontogenetic ritualization (Tomasello et al., 
1985, 1989, 1994, 1997). In ontogenetic ritualization, a communicatory signal is 
created by two organisms shaping each other’s behavior in repeated instances of a 
social interaction. For example, an infant may initiate nursing by going directly for 
the mother’s nipple, perhaps grabbing and moving her arm in the process. In 
some future encounter the mother might anticipate the infant’s impending 
behavioral efforts at the first touch of her arm, and so become receptive at that 
point, leading the infant on some future occasion still to abbreviate its behavior to 
a touch on the arm while waiting for a response (‘arm-touch’ as a so-called inten- 
tion movement). Note that there is no hint here that one individual is seeking to 
reproduce the behavior of another; there is only reciprocal social interaction over 
repeated encounters that results eventually in a communicative signal. This is pre- 
sumably the way that most human infants learn the ‘arms-overhead gesture to 
request that adults pick them up (Lock, 1978). 
All of the available evidence suggests that ontogenetic ritualization, not imita- 
tive learning, is responsible for chimpanzees’ acquisition of communicative ges- 
tures. First, there are a number of idiosyncratic signals that are used by only one 
individual (see also Goodall, 1986). These signals could not have been learned by 
imitative processes and so must have been individually invented and ritualized. 
Second, longitudinal analyses have revealed quite clearly, by both qualitative and 
quantitative comparisons, that there is much individuality in the use of gestures, 
with much individual variability both within and across generations, which sug- 
gests something other than imitative learning. It is also important that the ges- 
tures that are shared by many youngsters are gestures that are also used frequently 
by captive youngsters raised in peer groups with no opportunity to observe older 
conspecifics. Finally, in an experimental study, Tomasello et al. (1997) removed an 
individual from the group and taught her two different arbitrary signals by means 
ofwhich she obtained desired food from a human. When she was then returned to 
the group and used these same gestures to obtain food from a human in full view 
of other group members, there was not one instance of another individual repro- 
ducing either of the new gestures. 
The clear conclusion is that chimpanzee youngsters acquire the majority, if not 
the totality, of their gestures by individually ritualizing them with one another. The 
explanation for this learning process is analogous to the explanation for emulation 
I 

115 
7.4 Nonhuman Primate Culture 
learning in the case of tool use. Like emulation learning, ontogenetic ritualization 
does not require individuals to understand the behavior of others as separable into 
means and goals in the same way as does imitative learning. Imitatively learning 
an arm-touch as a solicitation for nursing would require that all infant observe 
another infant using an arm-touch and know what goal it was pursuing (viz. nurs- 
ing), so that when it had the same goal it could use the same behavioral means 
(viz. arm-touch). Ritualizing an arm-touch, on the other hand, only requires the 
infant to anticipate the future behavior of a conspecific in a context in which it (the 
infant) already has the goal of nursing. Ontogenetic ritualization is thus, like emu- 
lation learning, an intelligent and creative social learning process that is important 
in all social species, including humans. But it is not a learning process by means of 
which individuals attempt to reproduce the behavioral strategies of others. 
1.4.4 
Nonhuman Primate Social Learning and Social Cognition 
Chimpanzee tool use and gestural communication thus provide us with two very 
different sources of evidence about nonhuman primate social learning. In the case 
of tool use, it is likely that chimpanzees acquire the tool use skills they are exposed 
to by a process of emulation learning. In the case of gestural signals, it is likely that 
they acquire their communicative gestures through a process of ontogenetic 
ritualization. Both emulation learning and ontogenetic ritualization require skills 
of cognition and social learning, each in its own way, but neither requires skills of 
imitative learning, in which the learner comprehends both the demonstrator’s goal 
and the strategy she is using to pursue that goal - and then in some way aligns this 
goal and strategy with her own. Indeed, emulation learning and ontogenetic 
ritualization are precisely the kinds of social learning one would expect of organ- 
isms that are intelligent and quick to learn, but that do not understand others as 
intentional agents with whom they can align themselves. 
The other main process involved in cultural transmission as traditionally de- 
fined is teaching. Whereas social learning comes from the ‘bottom up’, as ignorant 
or unskilled individuals seek to become more knowledgeable or skilled, teaching 
comes from the ‘top down’, as knowledgeable or skilled individuals seek to impart 
knowledge or skills to others. The problem in this case is that there are few system- 
atic studies ofteaching in nonhuman primates. The most thorough study is that of 
Boesch (1991), in which chimpanzee mothers and infants were observed in the 
context of tool use (nut cracking). Boesch discovered that a mother does a number 
ofthings that serve to facilitate the infant’s activities with the tool and nuts, such as 
leaving the tools idle while she goes to gather more nuts (which she would not do 
if another adult were present). But the interpretation of the mother’s intention in 
such cases is far from straightforward. Moreover, in the category of ‘active instruc- 
tion‘, in which the mother appears to be actively attempting to instruct her child, 
Boesch observed only two possible instances (over many years of observation). 
These two instances are also difficult to interpret, in the sense that the mother may 
or may not have had the goal of helping the youngster learn to use the tool. On the 

16 
I The Human Adaptation or Culture 
other hand, although there is much variability across different human societies, 
adult humans in all cultures actively instruct their young on a regular basis in one 
way or another (Kruger and Tomasello, 1996). Along with imitative learning, the 
process of active instruction is likely crucial to the uniquely human pattern of 
cumulative cultural evolution as well. 
It should be acknowledged, of course, that this way of viewing nonhuman pri- 
mate culture and social learning is not the only way of viewing them, and indeed 
researchers such as McGrew (1998) and Boesch (1999) would likely disagree with 
many of the current conclusions. Indeed, there are also a number of widely publi- 
cized studies purportedly demonstrating that nonhuman primates have theories 
ofmind, deceive their conspecifics, and engage in many other kinds of ‘mindreading’ 
activities (e.g., Byrne, 1995). If these studies represented the true picture of 
nonhuman primate social cognition, it would be a complete mystery why they did 
not engage in more powerful forms of cultural learning. However, there are in 
actuality surprisingly few of these studies, and as in all scientific paradigms, a few 
studies is not enough to settle opinion. My own interpretation of these studies is 
that they represent cases in which nonhuman primates have acquired clever strat- 
egies to manipulate the behavior, not the mental states, of others (for detailed analy- 
ses of all the relevant studies, see Tomasello, 199Gb; Tomasello and Call, 1994, 
1997). If they are not dealing with mental or intentional states, but only behavior, 
nonhuman primates will not engage in the kinds of cultural learning, that lead to 
the ratchet effect - and that thus create human-like cultural niches full of symbolic 
artifacts and instructional formats for the cognitive ontogeny of their offspring. 
With regard to nonhuman primate culture in particular, Boyd and Richerson 
(1996), in a paper entitled “Why culture is common, but cultural evolution is rare”, 
hypothesize that humans and other animals both engage in the same kinds of 
social and imitative learning but with a quantitative difference. Thus, chimpan- 
zees may have some imitative learning abilities, but they may display them less 
consistently or in a narrower range of contexts than do humans -or it may even be 
that only some individuals have these skills. These authors go on to make a quan- 
titatively based evolutionary argument that this rarity itself can make cultural evo- 
lution of the cumulative type impossible. So it might be that a quantitative differ- 
ence in social learning leads to a qualitative difference in the nature of cultural 
traditions, and in particular how they change and evolve over time. Although there 
are currently no easy ways to quantify the frequency of imitative learning in the 
societies of different species, this hypothesis is intriguing because it posits the 
existence of the kind of variation that might have characterized the human-chim- 
panzee common ancestor and with which subsequent evolutionary processes might 
have worked. 
I 
1.4.5 
Enculturated Apes 
It may be objected that there are a number of convincing observations of chimpan- 
zee imitation in the literature, and indeed there are a few. It is interesting, how- 

I” 
1.4 Nonhuman Primate Culture 
ever, that basically all the clear cases in the exhaustive review of Whiten and Ham 
(1992) concern chimpanzees that have had extensive amounts of human contact. 
In many cases, this has taken the form of intentional instruction involving human 
encouragement of behavior and attention, and even direct reinforcement for imi- 
tation for many months [e.g., 7 months of training in the case of Hayes and Hayes 
(1952) and 4 months of training in the case of Whiten and Custance (1996)]. This 
raises the possibility that imitative learning skills may be influenced, or even ena- 
bled, by certain kinds of social interaction during early ontogeny. 
Confirmation for this point of view is provided in a study by Tomasello et al. 
(1993b). It compared the imitative learning abilities of mother-reared captive h i m -  
panzees, enculturated chimpanzees (raised like human children and exposed to a 
language-like system of communication), and 2-year-old human children. Each 
subject was shown 24 different and novel actions on objects, and each subject’s 
behavior on each trial was scored as to whether it successfully reproduced (a) the 
end result of the demonstrated action and/or (b) the behavioral means used by the 
demonstrator. The major result was that the mother-reared chimpanzees repro- 
duced both the end and the means of the novel actions (i.e., imitatively learned 
them) hardly at alt. In contrast, the enculturated chimpanzees and the human 
children imitatively learned the novel actions much more frequently, and they did 
not differ from one another in this learning. Interesting corroboration for this 
latter finding is the fact that earlier in their ontogeny, these same enculturated 
chimpanzees seemed to learn many of their human-like symbols by means of 
imitative learning (Savage-Rumbaugh, 1990). 
For the issue of chimpanzee culture in the wild, these results raise an important 
question. Which group of captive chimpanzees is more representative of chim- 
panzees in their natural habitats: mother-reared or enculturated? Are enculturated 
chimpanzees simply displaying more species-typical imitative learning skills be- 
cause their more enriched rearing conditions more closely resemble those of wild 
chimpanzees than do the impoverished rearing conditions of other captive chim- 
panzees? Or might it be the case that the human-like socialization process experi- 
enced by enculturated chimpanzees differs significantly from the natural state and, 
in effect, helps to create a set of species-atypical abilities more similar to those of 
humans?. There can be no definitive answer to these questions at this time, but 
one possibility is that a human-like sociocultural environment is an essential com- 
ponent in the development of human-like social-cognitive and imitative learning 
skills, no matter the species. That is, this is true not only for chimpanzees but also 
for human beings - a human child raised in an environment lacking intentional 
interactions and other cultural characteristics in all likelihood would also not de- 
velop human-like skills of imitative learning. 
The hypothesis is thus that the understanding of the intentions of others, neces- 
sary for reproducing another’s behavioral strategies, develops in, and only in, the 
context of certain kinds of intentional interactions with others (Tomasello et al., 
1993a). More specifically, to come to understand others in terms of their inten- 
tions requires that the learner him- or herself be treated as an intentional agent in 
which another organism encourages attention to and specific behaviors toward 

18 
7 The Human Adaptation for Culture 
some object of mutual interest - often reinforcing in some manner the learner’s 
successful attempts in this direction (Call and Tomasello, 1994, 1996). Such inter- 
actions are not sufficient, of course, as many animals are subjected to all kinds of 
human interaction, and even direct instruction, without developing human-like 
skills of imitative learning (and the same is true of human children with autism). 
The important point for current purposes is that in terms of these dimensions of 
social interaction, captive chimpanzees raised by conspecifics are a better model 
for wild chimpanzees than are chimpanzees raised in human-like cultural envi- 
ronments - since wild chimpanzees receive little in the way of direct instruction 
from conspecifics. 
A corollary hypothesis is thus that the learning skills that chimpanzees develop 
in the wild in the absence of human interaction (i.e., skills involving individual 
learning supplemented by emulation learning and ritualization) are sufficient to 
create and maintain their species-typical cultural activities, but they are not suffi- 
cient to create and maintain human-like cultural activities displaying the ratchet 
effect and cumulative cultural evolution. The fact that chimpanzees and other great 
apes raised from an early age and for many years in human-like cultural environ- 
ments may develop some aspects of human social cognition and cultural learning 
demonstrates the power of cultural processes in ontogeny in a particularly dra- 
matic way. The effect of cultural environments on nonhuman primate cognitive 
development is thus a question that deserves more empirical investigation. 
I 
1.5 
Conclusions 
It is easy to observe a human behavior and posit a specific gene for that behavior 
with no research into the genetics of the situation. Many scholars and popularists 
of biological and social sciences make their living doing just that. But when we 
have behaviors that are unique to a species, we have serious time constraints on 
such hypotheses, and so the positing of a large number of significant genetic events 
becomes highly implausible. In the case of humans, the time frame for the emer- 
gence of their unique cognitive skills is almost certainly in the range of 2 to 0.3 
million years ago with my own theoretical bias being toward the smaller of those 
figures. But the genetic event that happened at that time was not an everyday ge- 
netic event. It was not an everyday genetic event because it did not just change one 
relatively isolated characteristic, it changed the nature of primate social cognition, 
which changed the social-cultural transmission process characteristic of primates. 
which led to a series of cascading sociological and psychological events in histori- 
cal time. The new form of social cognition that started the entire process involved 
understanding other persons as intentional agents like the self, and the new proc- 
ess of social-cultural transmission involved several forms of cultural learning, the 
first and most important being imitative learning. These new forms of cultural 
learning created the possibility of a kind of ratchet effect in which human beings 
not only pooled their cognitive resources contemporaneously, they also built on 

1.6 References I19 
one another’s cognitive inventions over time. This new form of cultural evolution 
thus created artifacts and social practices with a history, so that each new genera- 
tion of children grew up in something like the accumulated wisdom of their entire 
social group, past and present. 
And so, while not denying that a significant genetic event happened in human 
cognitive evolution, probably fairly recently, I would deny that this event specified 
the detailed outcomes we see in adult humans today. In my view, that genetic event 
merely opened the way for some new social and cultural processes that then, with 
no further genetic events, created many, if not all, of the most interesting and 
distinctive characteristics of human cognition. Perhaps of special importance was 
a new form of perspectively based cognitive representation that emerged when 
children began to learn and use linguistic symbols, evolved over historical time for 
inducing others to construe certain situations in certain ways, which necessitated 
an internalization and representation of the different perspectives of other per- 
sons. This story is not as simple as the ‘genes create all novelties’ story, but it ac- 
cords better with data from both anthropological and developmental psychological 
investigations. Modern human adult cognition is a result not just of processes of 
biological evolution, but also of other processes that human biological evolution 
made possible in both cultural historical time and individual ontogenetic time. 
1.6 
References 
AKHTAR, N., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1996) Twenty-four month old children learn words 
for absent objects and actions. Br. J Dev. Psychol. 14, 79-93. 
BAKEMAN, R., ADAMSON, 
L. (1984) Coordinating attention to people and objects 
in mother-infant and peer-infant interactions. Child Dev. 55, 1278-1289. 
BARON-COHEN, 
S. (1993) From attention-goal psychology to belief-desire 
psychology: the development of a theory of mind and its dysfunction. 
In: Understanding Other Minds: Perspectivesfiom Autism (Eds. S. BARON- 
COHEN, 
H. TAGER-FLUSBERG, 
D. J. COHEN). New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 
BARON-COHEN, 
S., BALDWIN, D., CROWSON, 
M. (1997) Do children with autism 
use the speaker’s direction of gaze to crack the code of language? Child Dev. 
BOESCH, C. (1991) Teaching among wild chimpanzees. Anim. Behau. 41,530-532. 
BOESCH, C. (1999) The Chimpanzees ofthe Tai Forest. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. 
Press. 
BOESCH, C., MARCHES, P., MARCHESI, 
N., FRUTH, B., JOULIAN, F. (1994) Is nut 
cracking in wild chimpanzees a cultural behavior? J Hum. Evol. 26, 325-338. 
BOESCH, C., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1998) Chimpanzee and human culture. Contemp. 
Anthropol. 39, 591-611. 
BOWERMAN, M., LEVINSON, S. (Eds.) (1999) Language Acquisition and Conceptual 
Development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
pp. 59-82. 
68,48-57. 

20 
7 The Human Adaptationfor Culture 
BOYD, R., RICHERSON, P. (1996) Why culture is common but cultural evolution 
is rare. Proc. Br. Acad. 88, 77-93. 
BROWN, P. (1999) The conversational context for language acquisition: a Tzeltal 
(Mayan) case study. In: Language Acquisition and Conceptual Development 
(Eds. BOWERMAN and LEVINSON). Cambridge, UK Cambridge Univ. Press. 
BYRNE, R. (1995) The Thinking Ape: Evolutionary Origins oflntelligence. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford Univ. Press. 
CALL, 
J., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1994) Production and comprehension of referential 
pointing by orangutans (Pongo pyginaeus). 1. Comp. Psychol. 108, 307-317. 
CALL, J., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1996) The role of humans in the cognitive development 
of apes. In: Reaching into Thought: The Minds of the Great Apes (Ed. A. RUSSON). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, pp. 371-403. 
CARPENTER, 
M., AKHTAR, 
N., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1998a) Sixteen-month-old infants 
differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behav. Dev. 21, 
I 
315-330. 
CARPENTER, 
M., NAGELL, K., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1998b) Social cognition, joint 
attention, and communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. 
Monogv. Soc. Res. Child Dev. 63. 
GALEF, 
B. (1992) The question of animal culture. Hum. Nat. 3, 157-178. 
GIBSON, 
E., RADER, N. (1979) Attention: the perceiver as performer. In: Attention 
and Cognitive Development (Eds. G. HALE, 
M. LEWIS). New York Plenum, 
pp. 6-36. 
GOODALL, 
J. (1986) The Chimpanzees of Gombe. Patterns of behavior. Cambridge, 
HAYES, 
K. J., HAYES, 
C. (1952) Imitation in a home-raised chimpanzee. 
HEYES, 
C., GALEF, 
B. (Eds.) (1996) Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of 
HOBSON, 
P. (1993) Autism and the Development of Mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
JOHNSON, M. (1987) The Body in the Mind. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. 
KAWAI, M. (1965) Newly-acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural troop of 
Japanese monkeys on Koshima Islet. Primates 6, 1-30. 
KAWAMURA, S. (1959) The process of subcultural propagation among Japanese 
macaques. Primates 2, 43-60. 
KING, M., WILSON, 
A. (1975) Evolution at two levels in humans and 
chimpanzees. Science 188,107-116. 
KLEIN, R. (1989) The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins. 
Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. 
KRUGER, A., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1996) Cultural learning and learning culture. 
In: Handbook of Education and Human Development: New Models of Teaching, 
Learning, and Schooling (Ed. D. OLSON). 
London: Blackwell, pp. 169-187. 
JAKOFF, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal 
About the Mind, Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. 
LKOFF, 
G., JOHNSON, M. (1980) Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: Univ. Chicago 
Press. 
MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
j Comp. Psychol. 45, 450-459. 
Culture. New York: Academic. 

7.G References I 2 1  
LANGACKER, R. (1987) Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Vol. 1. Stanford, CA 
Stanford Univ. Press. 
LOCKE, A. (1978) The emergence of language. In: Action, Gesture, and Symbol: 
the Emergence of Language (Ed. A. LOCKE). New York: Academic, pp. 3-20. 
MCGREW, W. C. (1992) Chimpanzee Material Culture. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
Univ. Press. 
MCGREW, W. C. (1998) Culture in nonhuman primates? Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 
MELTZOFF, 
A. (1988) Infant imitation after a one week delay: long term memory 
for novel acts and multiple stimuli. Dev. Psychol. 24, 470-476. 
MELTZOFF, 
A. (1995) Understanding the intentions of others: re-enactment of 
intended acts by 18-month-old children. Dev. Psychol. 31, 838-850. 
MOORE, C., DUNHAM, P. (1995) Joint Attention: Its Origins and Role in 
Development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
NAGELL, K., OLGUIN, 
K., TOMASELLO, 
M. (1993) Processes of social learning 
in the tool use of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and human children 
(Homo sapiens). J. Comp. Psychol. 107, 174-186. 
NISHIDA, T. (1980) The leaf-clipping display: a newly-discovered expressive 
gesture in wild chimpanzees. J Hum. Evol. 9, 117-128. 
PINKER, 
S. (1997) How the Mind Works. London: Lane. 
REED, E. (1995) The ecological approach to language development. 
ROGOFF, B. (1990) Apprenticeship in Thinking. Oxford, UK Oxford Univ. Press. 
RUSSON, A., GALDIKAS, 
B. (1993) Imitation in excaptive orangutans. J. Comp. 
SAVAGE-RUMBAUGH, 
S. (1990) Language as a cause-effect communication 
SHWEDER, 
R. (1990) Cultural psychology: What is it? In: Cultural Psychology 
27, 301-328. 
Lang. Commun. 15,l-29. 
Psychol. 107, 147-161. 
system. Philos. Psychol. 3, 55-76. 
(Ed. J. STIGLER, 
R. SHWEDER, 
G. HERDT). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. 
Press, pp. 1-46. 
SMITH, I. M., BRYSON, S. E. (1994) Imitation and action in autism: a critical 
review. Psychol. Bull. 116, 259-273. 
STRINGER, 
C., MCKIE, R. (1996) African Exodus. The Origins ofModem Humanity. 
London: Cape. 
SUGIYAMA, 
Y. (1981) Observations on the population dynamics and behavior of 
wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea, 1979/1980. Primates 22,432444. 
TOMASELLO, 
M .  (1988) The role of joint attentional process in early language 
development. Lang. Sci. 10,69-88. 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1990) Cultural transmission in the tool use and communicatory 
signaling of chimpanzees? In: ‘Language’ and Intelligence in Monkeys and Apes: 
Comparative Developmental Perspectives (Eds. S. PARKER, 
K. GIBSON). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, pp. 274-311. 
Cultures (Eds. R. WRANGHAM, 
W. MCGREW, F. DE WAAL, P. HELTNE). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, pp. 301-317. 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1994) The question of chimpanzee culture. In: Chimpanzee 

22 
I The Human Adaptationfor Culture 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1995) Joint attention as social cognition. In: Joint Attention: 
I 
Its Origins and Role in Development (Eds. C. MOORE, P. DUNHAM). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 103-130. 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1996a) Do apes ape? See HEYES 
and GALEF 
1996, pp. 319-346. 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1996b) Chimpanzee social cognition. Comment. SOC. Res. Child 
Dev. Monog. 61(3), 161-173. 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1998) Reference: intending that others jointly attend. 
Pragmat. Cogn. 6,219-234. 
TOMASELLO, 
M. (1999) Perceiving intentions and learning words in the second 
year of life. In: BOWERMAN and LEVINSON (Eds.) Language Acquisition and 
Conceptual Development. Cambridge, U K  Cambridge Univ. Press. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., BARTON, M. (1994) Learning words in non-ostensive contexts. 
Dev. Psychol. 30, 639-650. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., CALL, 
J. (1994) Social cognition of monkeys and apes. 
Yearb. Phys. Anthropol. 37, 273-305. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., 
CALL, J. (1997) Primate Cognition. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., CALL, 
J., NAGELL, K., OLGUIN, 
R., CARPENTER, 
M. (1994) 
The learning and use of gestural signals by young chimpanzees: 
a trans-generational study. Primates 37, 137-154. 
(1997) The ontogeny of chimpanzee gestural signals: a comparison across 
groups and generations. Evol. Commun. 1,223-253. 
The development of gestural communication in young chimpanzees. 
J .  Hum. Evol. 14,175-186. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., 
GUST, D., FROST, T. (1999) A longitudinal investigation of 
gestural communication in young chimpanzees. Primates 30, 35-SO. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., KRUGER, A., RATNER, H. (1993a) Cultural learning. Targel Artic. 
Behav. Brain Sci. 16, 495-552. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., SAVAGE-RUMBAUGH, 
S., KRUGER, A. (1993b) Imitative learning 
of actions on objects by children, chimpanzees and enculturated chimpanzees. 
Child Dev. 64, 1688-1705. 
learn words in non-ostensive contexts. ] Child Lang. 23, 157-176. 
culture, Part 1. Ethol. Sociobiol. 10, 29-49. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
capuchin monkeys, Cehus opella, and crabeating macaques, Macaca fascicularis. 
Anim. Behav. 40,829-836. 
Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
children. See HEYES 
and GALEF 1996, pp. 291-318. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., CALL, J., WARREN, 
J., FROST, T., CARPENTER, 
M., NAGELL, K. 
TOMASELLO, 
M., GEORGE, 
B., KRUGER, A., FARRAR, 
J., EVANS, A. (1985) 
TOMASELLO, 
M., STROSBERG, 
R., AKHTAR, N. (1996) Eighteen-month-old children 
TOOBY, 
J., COSMIDES, 
L. (1989) Evolutionary psychology and the generation of 
TRAUGOTT, 
E., HEINE, 
B. (1991) Approaches to Grammaticalization, Vols. 1 and 2. 
VISALBERGHI, 
E., FRAGASZY, 
D. M. (1990) Foodwashing behaviour in tufted 
VYGOTSKY, 
L. (1978) Mind in society. In The Development of Higher Psychological 
WHITEN, 
A., CUSTANCE, 
D. (1996) Studies of imitation in chimpanzees and 

1.6 References I 23 
WHITEN, 
A., CUSTANCE, 
D. M., GORNEZ, 
J. C., TEIXIDOR, 
P., BARD, K. A. (1996) 
Imitative learning of artificial fruit processing in children (Homo supiens) and 
chimpanzees (Pun troglodytes). 
WHITEN, 
A., HAM, R. (1992) On the nature and evolution of imitation in the 
animal kingdom: reappraisal of a century of research. In: Advances i n  the Study 
ofBehuvior (Eds. P. J. B. SLATER, 
J. S. ROSENBLATT, 
C. BEER, M. MILINSKY). 
New York Academic Press, pp. 239-283. 
Comp. Psychol. 110, 3-14. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

I 25 
2 
Cognitive Evolution 
Olaf Diettrich 
2.1 
Introduction 
One may ask what kind of rationale can justify a handbook on evolution in so 
many different areas. We might answer that there is a sort of unity to evolution, 
saying that the various evolutions have more in common than just the fact that 
something evolves. In some cases this is easy to show, in others not, and in still 
others we believe that there is no commonalty at all. I think we should focus our 
attention on whether the various areas are inherently linked to each other, and on 
why and how, rather than writing independent essays on the state of the art in the 
various areas. As to cognitive evolution, this means that we accept -tacitly or ex- 
plicitly - the premise that cognitive evolution is the continuation of organic evolu- 
tion by equal or (perhaps) other means. Cognitive capabilities contribute to sur- 
vival as much as organic tools do. There seems to be no a priori reason why cognitive 
evolution should ‘use’ different strategies than organic evolution. This applies at 
least to the cognitive ‘hardware’, i.e., the various sense organs. It seems, indeed, 
reasonable to believe that sense organs evolved according to (neo)Danvinian prin- 
ciples to increase their sensitivity for physical input data. 
But does it hold also for the ‘software’ concerned, i.e., for the mental interpreta- 
tion of sensorial input (i.e., our perceptions) which we use to come to useful deci- 
sions? Does it hold also for the regularities we find in our perceptions, which we 
condense to what we call the laws of nature? Does it hold also for the higher, scien- 
tific, interpretation ofwhat we experience, which we use to construct our scientific 
world picture? 
How relevant is the fact that we can transfer knowledge not only genetically but 
also culturally? That is, do the evolution of science and culture follow the same 
principles as organic evolution? Or do we have to follow Gould (1979), Hayek (1983) 
and Medawar (1988) in saying that organic evolution is Darwinian whereas cul- 
tural evolution is Lamarckian? 
What about epistemology in its quality as physical metatheory: can we follow 
Campbell (1974a) who speaks of a natural selection epistemology? If so, what sort 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 1: f i e  Evolution of Human Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
.
.
 
- 
. . 
--. 
. 

26 
2 Cognitive Evohtion 
of metaphysical commitment, such as realism, do we have to make before we can 
allow nature to select the way we see it? And if selection really does come into play: 
to what extent does it act on the mental mechanisms that transform sensorial 
input into knowledge, or does it act primarily on what is brought about by these 
mechanisms, i.e., on the resultant theories? In other words, what is the relation- 
ship between the so-called literal and analogical versions of evolutionary episte- 
mology? The literal version emphasizes that cognitive mechanisms evolved bio- 
logically and thus affect what kind of innate knowledge can be acquired. This is 
described by Bradie (1986) in his evolution of cognitive mechanisms program (EEM) 
and Ruse (1986). The analogical version emphasizes the aspect that human knowl- 
edge (by analogy to organic evolution) is governed by natural selection processes. 
This is represented by Campbell’s (1974a, b) natural selection epistemology as well 
as by Bradie’s (1986) evolution of theories program and the Spencerian approach 
of Ruse (1986). I will return to this point when discussing more generally how 
action and perception may be linked to each other. 
And what about the teleological question? According to general understanding, 
epistemic evolution progresses towards a goal (truth). So does scientific evolution 
which is said to be teleological in character, in so far as it will converge (though in 
sometimes rather roundabout ways) toward the hoped-for end that physicists call 
the theory ofeverything (Barrow, 1990). In contrast, organic evolution obviously has 
no specific focus towards which all species will converge, the pride ofcreation so to 
say (Campbell, 1974a). 
Another discrepancy, already emphasized by Piaget (1974), is that we see or- 
ganic evolution in terms of autonomous internal modifications (mutation, recom- 
bination, etc.), to which the external world reacts by means of selection mecha- 
nisms. However, in cognitive evolution we speak in terms of an autonomously 
existing and changing world to which intelligent beings react by forming theories 
and learning. So, the attribution of action and reaction is opposite in the theories 
we use to describe organic and cognitive evolution. 
Here is another difference: in the organic area we can modify our environment 
by means of inborn or technologically acquired tools (assimilation) with a view to 
modifying the selection pressure so as to cope more easily by our adaptive efforts. 
(This is a rather successful tool in all instances where we have no time to wait for 
evolution to increase our adaptive competence.) In the cognitive area the selection 
pressure is given by the laws of nature (a theory is ‘true’ and thus successful if it 
reflects the laws of nature). So far as these laws are seen to be ontologically objec- 
tive (and invariant in time), cognitive evolution, as opposed to organic evolution, 
has no chance to modify its selection pressure. If so, cognitive evolution would be 
the better playground for adaptationists, because there are clearly defined objects 
of adaptation, whereas organic evolution contributes considerably to constructing 
its own adaptive boundary conditions. 
In addition to the mechanisms and the ‘software’ in the narrow sense that we 
use to improve our knowledge, we have to deal with the more general strategies 
applied. This is, first of all, induction. Next to induction, rationality enjoys the 
highest credibility of the various cognitive strategies. To improve and strengthen 

I 27 
2.2 The Equivalence Postulate 
the methods of rational thinking is indeed seen to be of general utility, not only in 
science but also in the world of day-to-day living. From what we understand as the 
success of rationality, it is often derived that it must be based on the constitution of 
the world we live in, and, consequently, that the worlds order can be decoded only 
by means of rational methods. From this assumption, then, we conclude that even 
when a consciously applied rationality can be excluded (as in the workings of the 
subconscious or the behavior of animals), the success of organs is guaranteed only 
insofar as they meet rational criteria, i.e., insofar as they are ratiomorphic (Brunswik, 
1955). This means that strategies and construction principles (concerning both 
the physical and the cognitive contexts) have to consider all relevant facts in the 
same manner as an accordingly informed analyst would do. 
The question here is: are there alternatives to rational thinking that are neverthe- 
less useful in the human context? 
We see that there are discrepancies between the various theorists advocating the 
discussion of cognitive evolution within the wider context of general evolution and 
those attributing a strategic autonomy to cognitive evolution. This would be of 
minor relevance insofar as we can describe both evolutions by means of similar 
notions and categories, such as natural selection. But it becomes problematic if we 
would find out that notions such as the DanvinianlLamarckian dichotomy cannot 
be applied equally well in the cognitive area or in the area of induction, which 
obviously cannot be translated into a sort of organic analogue. 
I cannot deal here with all the previous approaches to solve one or the other of 
these problems. Those who are interested in this can find ample information in 
the Blackwell Companions to Philosophy, particularly A Companion to Epistemol- 
ogy (Dancy and Sosa, 1992) and A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind (Guttenplann, 
1994). Rather, I will concentrate on approaches that, in my opinion, throw some 
light on the contradictions involved, hoping that this will provide us with new 
evidence for the concept of the unity of evolution. 
2.2 
The Equivalence Postulate 
At the beginning of all efforts to see the development of cognition in biological 
terms, i.e., as cognitive evolution, was the idea that there is a certain equivalence 
between elements of organic and cognitive evolution. In particular, some have 
postulated that adaptational processes in the organic area correspond to the acqui- 
sition of knowledge in the cognitive area (equivalence postulate, see Wagner, 1984). 
This led to comparing the organic and cognitive devices concerned. 
Phylogenetically acquired cognitive devices, i.e. learning programs have been 
compared with organic instruments such as homeostatic mechanisms, antlers, or 
limbs. Lorenz (1971, pp. 231-262) and Popper (1973, p. 164) classed theories and 
organic devices under the common concept of survival tools and considered both 
to be theories in a broad sense (defined below). This suggests that we need to 
distinguish two kinds of theories: 

28 
2 Cognitive Euohtion 
Theories in the structural sense are considered to be a picture, an image, or a map- 
ping of a given or created object. This understanding of a theory is mainly found 
in the natural sciences and in mathematics. Such theories are considered true 
insofar as they are isomorphic with the structures they describe. Structural theo- 
ries require that the objects concerned have an independent if not ontological 
character. 
I 
Theories in thebnctional sense: Lorenz (ibid.) and Popper (ibid.) suggested ex- 
panding the notion oftheory to include all kmds of problem-solving instruments. 
This concept of theory would include physical theories insofar as they help us to 
master technical problems and to control physical nature, the inborn categories 
of space and time we use to interpret perceptions and to coordinate mechanical 
activities, limbs as instruments for locomotion, biological species as an instru- 
ment to meet the particular requirements of a special biotope, and social com- 
munication and social entities as tools to meet the requirements of the broad 
social environment. 
1 call all these various kinds of theories ‘theories in the broader sense’, as opposed 
to rationally generated theories in the usual sense, such as physical theories. The 
latter can include both structural theories (if they claim to depict structures of the 
world) and functional theories (if they provide us with correct predictions). 
The alleged equivalence between organic devices, which have to meet functional 
requirements, and cognitive tools, which have to provide us with true statements 
on the world, is here reduced to an equivalence between functional and structural 
theories. 
Functional theories are better the more they meet the given requirements. Struc- 
tural theories, however, are better the more isomorphic they are with the struc- 
tures they have to depict. These statements are equivalent, in the sense that a struc- 
tural theory that is isomorphic with the structures of reality (Popper, 1982) speaks 
in terms of truth and verisimilitude) also has functional qualities. In other words, 
structurally true theories are considered to be functionally helpful theories. The 
opposite is not necessarily true. A theory that is seen to be structurally false may 
nevertheless provide us with useful forecasting power. For example, Galileo found 
many of the regularities of the paths of the planets. But lacking the concept of 
Newtonian gravitation, he came to a false conclusion in explaining the paths of the 
planets as circular inertial orbits around the sun. 
The alleged equivalence of structure and function or of truth and efficiency is 
the main legitimization of all empirical science. Although we often start from func- 
tional experiences that we try to explain a posteriori by means of structural theo- 
ries, the general strategy for mastering nature, particularly in the basic sciences, is 
to search for the structures of nature. This is considered as a heuristic imperative. 
Hence it follows that an independently existing nature as summed up in the no- 
tion of reality is the only possible source of competent criteria for evaluating any 
empirical theory. 
Theories in the usual sense must be teleological in character. Their progress is 
said to be guided by the structure of reality or, more precisely, by boundary condi- 

2.3 Our Inborn World View 
29 I 
tions that reflect these structures, rather than being the result of autonomous, 
independent development. Scientific evolution, therefore, must converge - not 
necessarily monotonously but at least asymptotically - toward a final state that will 
constitute the definitive, correct description of nature. Davies (1990b) sees this 
view as follows: 
Let me express this point in a somewhat novel way. Hawking (1979) has 
claimed that ‘the end of theoretical physics may be in sight’. He refers to 
the promising progress made in unification and the possibility that a ‘theory 
of everything’ might be around the corner. Although many physicists flatly 
reject this, it may nevertheless be correct. As Feynman (1965) has remarked, 
we can’t go on making discoveries in physics at the present rate forever. 
Either the subject will bog down in seemingly limitless complexity and/or 
difficulty, or it will be completed. 
What has been said here can be summarized as follows: The alleged relationship 
between structure and function means not only (1) that a theory’s structure deter- 
mines its functional qualities, but also (2) that the structure ofwhat we call nature 
determines the theories we have to apply in order to cope functionally with this 
nature. 
The first allegation says that the functional success of a theory may depend on 
its structure. But from its success we cannot conclude that a theory is true, as long 
as the only criterion is nothing but its success - unless we agree that ‘true’ and 
‘successful’ are synonymous. (Similar reasoning applies to fitness which could be 
considered the organic analog of truth: If fitness is defined by nothing but its con- 
tribution to survival, it is synonymous with survival and cannot be an independent 
category, i.e., we are led to the well known tautology of the ‘survival of the fittest’.) 
The second allegation is based on the suggestion that a problem determines the 
methods needed for its solution, i.e., that functional adaptation determines the 
structures and procedures by means of which adaptation will be achieved. This is 
obviously not true. Horses and snakes, for example, although they may have devel- 
oped in exactly the same physical environment, have entirely different organs of 
locomotion, which have no structural element in common. So, the hooves ofhorses 
cannot be considered, as suggested by Lorenz (1966), to be a kind of image of the 
steppes on which they live (see Wuketits, 1990, 1998). 
2.3 
Our Inborn World View 
To the cognitive tools (as included in what Riedl (1980) called the cognitive appa- 
ratus) belong what we usually view as metatheories, i.e., the categorical reference 
frame we use to describe the world. Metatheories are neither universal meta- 
languages by means of which we can portray all we like, nor do they determine 
the theories brought into existence under their authority. They rather constitute 
important boundary conditions. A metatheory stating that the world is made of 

30 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
particles having independent identity and moving around in three-dimensional 
(3D) space cannot deal with subatomic processes. In the same sense, cells can be 
seen as metatheories for metazoa. Cells of course do not determine a certain phe- 
notype, but they constitute boundary conditions. For example, because cells do 
not know about remote interaction, plants and animals must be physically com- 
pact entities. 
Before discussing how metatheories come into being and whether selection 
mechanisms are involved, we have to take a more detailed look at what metatheories 
are. Describing something, whether by means oflanguage, a theory, or mathematical 
formulae, means a notional mapping within a notional reference frame, i.e., within 
a metalanguage, metaphysics, metamathematics, or more generally, within a 
metatheory. (The theories that themselves do the mapping within a metatheory are 
called object-theories.) Such a reference frame is a prerequisite for any description, 
in the same way as spatial localization requires a geometrical reference frame. 
However, it is not always necessary to be explicitly aware of the metatheory con- 
cerned. Particularly in ordinary languages, all people make unconscious, but more 
or less correct, use of the same (or nearly the same) metalanguage. Otherwise no 
meaningful communication would be possible. For a long time, philosophers (par- 
ticularly analytical philosophers) generally felt that the imperfection of our philo- 
sophical speaking is mainly due to the lack ofan objective metalanguage, or at least 
to the fact that people do not use exactly the same metalanguage. Accordingly, striv- 
ing for an objective metalanguage was seen to be the good approach to finishing 
epistemology. It was a bitter experience when Godel (1931) showed that a defini- 
tive, objective metalanguage for mathematics in the form of objective axioms is 
impossible and that similar conclusions would apply to any descriptive tool, includ- 
ing language in general. I will derive here, from a constructivist evolutionary epis- 
temology (CEE, Diettrich, 1991), a conclusion that physics also cannot be based on 
a definitive set of objective laws of nature (the axioms ofphysics, so to speak). Then 
we will be able to say that neither is there an objective metalanguage from which 
we can derive all true statements, nor are there axioms from which we can derive 
everything in mathematics, nor are there objective laws of nature (and therefore, 
no theory of everything) from which we can derive everything that physically can 
happen in nature. Or, in other words: there is no definitive world view. Neither is 
there an absolute reference frame in space (as we know from Einstein), nor are there 
absolute notional reference frames whether in language, mathematics, or physics. 
I 
2.3.1 
Induction 
The most enigmatic element of metaphysics is that unexperienced experiences 
can be derived and predicted from experienced experiences by means of induction. 
Thinking in terms of induction is the most elementary and the most frequently 
used strategy for organizing our lives. Whether in day-to-day life where we have to 
make our usual decisions on the basis of incomplete data or unconfirmed hypoth- 
eses, in science where we have to conceive theories on how to extrapolate empiri- 

I 31 
2.3 Our lnborn World View 
cal data, or in philosophy of science where we try to find a basis for teleology or 
determinism - inductive thinking dominates all we do and is the most successful 
of all the mental concepts people apply. 
The obvious and uncontested success of induction is one of the greatest fascinosa 
that the philosophy of science was ever confronted with (Stegmuller, 1971). De- 
spite all philosophical efforts, we are more or less still in the same position as that 
described by Hume 250 years ago: universal laws can be justified only by induc- 
tion, which he understood to be unjustifiable, although natural. Chalmers said 
(1982, p. 19): 
Faced with the problem of induction and related problems, inductivists have 
run into one difficulty after another in their attempts to construe science as 
a set of statements that can be established as true or probably true in the 
light of given evidence. Each maneuver in their rearguard action has taken 
them further away from intuitive notions about that existing enterprise re- 
ferred to as science. Their technical program has led to interesting advances 
within probability theory, but it has not yielded new insights into the nature 
of science. Their program has degenerated. 
Nearly the only progress achieved until now is in clarifying and specifying the 
problem itself. 
The key notion in this context is what Wigner (1960) called “the unreasonable 
effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences”, meaning that it is difficult to 
understand why so much of the complexity of the world can be described by such 
relatively simple mathematical formulas. Davies (1990a) had a similar idea in mind 
when, following an idea of Solomonoff (1964), he said: 
All science is really an exercise in algorithmic compression. What one means 
by a successful scientific theory is a procedure for compressing a lot of 
empirical information about the world into a relatively compact algorithm, 
having a substantially smaller information content. The familiar practice of 
employing Occam’s razor to decide between competing theories is then seen 
as an example of choosing the most algorithmically compact encoding of 
the data. Using this language, we may ask: Why is the universe algo- 
rithmically compressible? and why are the relevant algorithms so simple 
for us to discover? 
Another version ofthe same question is “how can we know anything without know- 
ing everything?” and, more generally, “why is the universe knowable?” (Davies, 
1990a). The most typical examples are the correct prediction by means of linear 
extrapolation. Here, again, the development of certain systems can be compressed 
into the most simple (i.e., linear) relationship. 
However, Popper (1982, p. 4) goes further in criticizing the notion of induction: 
despite all the practical successes of inductive thinking, according to him natural 
science should dispense with induction completely, because it cannot be justified. 
His argument is that a general principle of induction can be neither analytic nor 
synthetic. Were it analytic it could not contribute to the growth of knowledge and 

32 2 Cognitive Evohtion 
therefore would not be inductive. Were it synthetic it would have to be justified by 
another inductive principle of a higher order which would lead to an endless re- 
gression. 
I 
2.3.2 
Reality 
The above and many other positions concerning induction have one thing in com- 
mon: they arise from our intuitive conviction that there is some reality that exists 
independently of us, which we have to recognize without having any a priori idea 
of what it may look like. In other words: all these positions arise from the claim to 
organize our lives according to an independent reality that is to be described in 
terms of its structure. With Popper (1973), our way of coping with reality is com- 
prised in the term ‘growth of knowledge’, to which induction must contribute, and 
which can be defined only in the context of some reality about which we may 
accumulate knowledge. 
Davies takes a more explicit stand (1990a): 
There exists a real external world which contains certain regularities. These 
regularities can be understood, at least in part, by a process of rational en- 
quiry called scientific method. Science is not merely a game or charade. Its 
results capture, however imperfectly, some aspect of reality. Thus these regu- 
larities are real properties of the physical universe and not just human in- 
ventions or delusions. ... Unless one accepts that the regularities are in 
some sense objectively real, one might as well stop doing science. 
The nearly generally agreed view that the problem of induction can and must be 
solved only within the framework of an ontological reality is the most influential 
metaphysical element in all sciences. Even more: induction would not be a prob- 
lem at all if it were not expected to expand our knowledge about a real world. This 
argument, however, becomes problematic when carried on within the so-called 
evolutionary epistemology (EE), even though EE was developed with the particular 
view of acquiring a better understanding of the human categories of perception 
and thinking, i.e., of our physical metatheory. The classical version (as I call it) of 
EE (Vollmer, 1975) declares that these categories, such as space, time, object, real- 
ity, causality, etc., result from evolution in the same way as organic elements and 
features do. This, in classical parlance, means that in the same way as organic 
evolution is guided by adaptive forces, cognitive evolution is the result of adapta- 
tion to the independent structures of an ontological reality. Campbell (1973) speaks 
in terms of a ‘natural-selection epistemology’. 
The general argument goes as follows: the theories we have designed to describe 
the structures of reality are surely incomplete or may have other strong deficien- 
cies - reality itself, however, has been developed as a category of human thinking 
just because of the ontological character of outside reality. The fact that we think 
and act in terms of reality is taken as a proof that a sort of reality must exist. What 
I try to do here is to explain the formation of the category of reality by means of 

2.3 Our lnborn World View 
33 I 
reference to its own content, i.e., to the existence of an ontological reality. In addi- 
tion to the fact that such reasoning would lead to circular inference is an even 
stronger objection: the existence of an ontological reality may, of course, have been 
a good reason for mental evolution to emulate it by creating a corresponding cat- 
egory of thinking. This argument, however, cannot be reversed. That is, we cannot 
say that human mental phylogeny never would have come up with the category of 
reality if there were no such thing as an ontological reality, so long as other reasons 
can be found that are functionally conceivable and phylogenetically plausible even 
though they do not refer to an ontological reality (see Section 2.4). 
Most people, upon hearing that reality may not be really real, would argue that 
ignoring the existence of tables, trees, traffic lights, or whatever we find in our 
environment is unacceptable. Of course - but these are objects or facts that we 
can, at least in principle, alter or displace according to what we intend. Let me call 
this ‘actuality’ (Wirklichkeit). In contrast, I speak of ‘reality’ (Realitat) as some- 
thing that can neither be ignored nor be modified by anything we do. According to 
classical thinking, this notion applies in a strict sense only to the laws of nature. 
Indeed, we are fully subject to the laws of nature: it is not advisable to ignore them, 
nor can we modify them. So, disputing the ontological character of reality is re- 
duced here to saying that there can be no definitive or objective laws of nature. (It 
is evident that this view has no solipsistic consequences, which people sometimes 
see when realism is disputed in general.) I discuss this in detail in Section 2.4 on 
the cognitive operator theory: what we call the laws (or the properties) of nature 
depends on our cognitive apparatus in the same way as in physics the properties of 
objects depend on how we measure them. 
2.3.3 
The Conservation of Identity 
Another a priori concept (also from classical physics) is that identity is conserved 
in time. That is, we do not consider the thought that something can loose its iden- 
tity and then be ‘reborn’ later. We rather say that an object was invisible for a while, 
or that two equal (but not identical) objects appeared. Identity cannot be inter- 
rupted without the object’s losing its character. 
2.3.4 
The 3D Structure of Visual Perception 
Seeing the world in 3D allows us to distinguish between a (visible) reduction in 
size due to physical compression and one due to distance. But we cannot say that 
our space for visual perception is 3D because the world itself is 3D in character, or 
that apes that could not see the world in 3D were unable to jump from tree to tree 
and therefore could not survive to become our ancestors (Lorenz, 1983). It is easy 
to show that appropriate, successful survival strategies could well be based on 2D 
or 4D perception spaces, independent of how many degrees of freedom are actu- 
ally available. 

34 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
With 2D perception, we would not know the phenomenon of perspective. Things 
are small or things are big, but they do not seem to be small because they are more 
distant and they do not seem to be big because they are nearer, because distance to 
the observer belongs to the third dimension that is excluded here. But objects. 
nevertheless, would shrink if we moved backwards and would enlarge if we went 
forward. So, with 2D perception we would develop a world view according to which, 
not only our hands and mechanical tools can modify objects, but also our move- 
ment. With such a perception, an ape may well be able to jump from branch to 
branch. The only thing he has to learn is that he has to grasp the branch seen just 
when its size and position meet certain typical values. If the perceived size of a 
branch doubles after three steps, the ape must know that he will arrive at it after 
another three steps and then has to grasp it. If he has learnt to do so, an external 
observer would find no difference between the movement strategies of such an 
ape and those based on 3D perception. (It is evident that physical theories based on 
an inborn world view according to which objects can be 'deformed not only by 
means of our hands but also by means of our walking or jumping would have no 
similarities with the theories we are used to apply.) 
We can explain this by another example: let us imagine locally fued plants that 
have eyes, can see, and may have acquired a 2D perception. They would tell you 
that they have smaller and larger companions. For us this would be due to differ- 
ent distances, but not for these plants. As soon, however, as they learn to commu- 
nicate and tell each other what they see, they would find out that what is small to 
one observer may well be large to another one. After some perplexity they may 
construct a theory of relativity of size, saying that size is not absolute but depends 
on the relative position of observers - something difficult to understand for some- 
one who is used to living in a 2D perceptional space. Exactly the same thing hap- 
pened to physicists when empirical evidence forced them to construct the theory 
of special relativity, which states that time intervals are not absolute but depend 
on the relative motion of the observer - difficult to understand for someone who 
is used to living in a Newtonian world. (This analogy can even be extended: the 
(relativistic) limit to speed in the 3D world (u 5 c) corresponds to the limit to length 
in the 2D world, because length can be defined only by means of an aperture 
a I 
180"). 
The question of whether modifications of visual perceptions should be inter- 
preted geometrically or physically is well known from another example in physics: 
the orbits of planets cam be considered as the effect of explicit gravitational forces 
(the physical interpretation) or as geodetic lines within a 4D space (the geometrical 
interpretation according to the theory of general relativity). Because these are merely 
different interpretations of the same observations we cannot decide between them 
on empirical grounds, nor was adaptation or selection relevant when the cognitive 
evolution of primates had to 'decide' whether to see the visual world in 2D or 3D. 
In other words: perceptional spaces and systems of categories are purely descrip- 
tive systems that may tell us something about how we see the world but nothing 
about the world itself. So they cannot be the outcome of adaptation to the world. 
From this it follows that our epistemology cannot be a natural selection epistemology, 
I 

I 35 
2.4 The Cognitive Operator Theoty 
because adaptation values cannot be attributed to single characters (Curio, 1973; 
Bock, 1980). Some obviously counterproductive characters can nevertheless sur- 
vive, so long as other characters compensate for its weakness. What counts is the 
fitness ofthe organism as a whole. So, the fact that we are surviving quite well with 
a 3D perception space cannot be taken as an argument that this is due to adapta- 
tion. 
2.4 
The Cognitive Operator Theory 
That our natural epistemology cannot be a natural selection epistemology in 
Campbell's sense does not dispense with the need for explaining why the evolu- 
tion of our natural epistemology went just this way and not another. In particular, 
it does not exclude the suggestive idea that organic and cognitive evolution must 
be linked to each other, or even more, that organic evolution has brought about 
cognitive evolution, i.e., that cognitive evolution may well be considered the con- 
tinuation of organic evolution by other means. From this one may suggest that a 
good theory of evolution is required to describe both organic and cognitive evolu- 
tion in a strictly coherent way. 
To understand cognitive evolution from an organic point of view, I start here 
from a constructivist extension (CEE, Diettrich, 1991) of classical evolutionary epis- 
temology (EE). The particularity of the CEE is based on a methodological element 
used mainly in physics, the so-called operational definition of physical terms. The 
usual dilemma regarding evolutionary and constructivist approaches to epistemol- 
ogy is that physicists in particular have difficulty in getting used to these ideas. The 
epistemological approach used here goes just the opposite way: physics transfers 
one of its most important modern elements (i.e., operational definition) to cogni- 
tive considerations rather than constructivism imposing its ideas on physics. 
What does an operational definition mean? As is well known, classical physics 
failed to accommodate the phenomena of quantum mechanics and special relativ- 
ity. 
In our everyday life this epistemological refinement is not necessary. We have a 
clear understanding of what the length or the weight of a body means, and we do 
not need confirmation by a tape measure or a scale to carry on with our lives. 
However, the situation is different with microscopic distances that are smaller than 
atoms. Here, first of all, we have to decide what kind of experimental facility we 
will use to define length or momentum. Physicists say that properties are defined 
as invariants of measurement devices. This even applies to the order in time of 
events which, under normal conditions, can easily be defined and detected. At very 
high speeds, however, the topology of events may depend on relative motions, as 
we know from the theory of relativity. 
Since this kind of experience can be repeated again and again, it suggests a gen- 
eralization that can be summarized as follows: properties of whatever kind and of 
whatever subject have no ontological quality. Instead they are defined by the fact 

36 2 Cognitive Evohtion 
that they are the invariants of certain measurement operators. This contrasts with 
classical thinking, in which properties are used for the objective characterization 
of objects. Usually, and most importantly, we assume that properties are inde- 
pendent entities in an antological sense. In everyday life this is incontestable. The 
length of a body and its color exist independent of each other and can be measured 
separately. This does not necessarily apply in subatomic regions, as we know. The 
position and momentum of submicroscopic particles cannot be measured inde- 
pendently of one another. Physicists learned from this that theoretical terms have 
to be defined operationally, i.e., they have to describe nature by means of theories 
in which terms are accepted only if they can be defined by certain experimental 
facilities, rather than by means of theories in which categories and notions are 
defined by protophysical common sense. 
The crucial step of CEE is to suggest that not only theoretical terms have to be 
defined operationally, but also observational terms, as well as mathematical and 
logical terms. 
Theoretical terms are defined as invariants of operations represented by physical 
measurement devices. 
Observational terms, comprising both visually perceived regularities (patterns) 
and those we condense into theories and into what we call laws of nature, are 
considered to be invariants of phylogenetically evolved mental cognitive operators. 
These operators are physiologically implemented somewhere in our brains and 
can be considered a kind of cognitive measurement device: measurement objects 
are the sensory inputs and measurement results are perceptions, i.e., views, and, 
within these views, certain regularities, structures, or patterns, rather than num- 
bers or pointer positions. Therefore, the entire system of laws of nature we have 
derived from these regularities cannot be objective entities but only mental con- 
structs. 
In this context, the often-discussed dichotomy of observational and theoretical 
terms is reduced to a rather secondary difference: observational terms have devel- 
oped phylogenetically in the unconscious parts of the human brain, whereas theo- 
retical terms are the outcome of conscious, rational efforts. Nevertheless, observa- 
tional terms remain privileged as the basic elements of any higher theories. We 
can modify theories according to observational data, but we cannot modify the 
genetically futed mental operators and their invariants according to the require- 
ments of special situations. 
It is useful to realize that organizing our perceiving and thinking in terms of 
invariants is not only a view suggested here by physics. As shown by Piaget (1967) 
it might well be an old inborn tendency in human cognition. According to him, 
cognitive functions construct invariants in all areas where this is necessary for 
their operating. Even when this is not directly suggested by actual experiences, 
invariants are attributed to objects and the outside world rather than seen as the 
outcome of cognitive functions. When dealing with the physical theory of Hamil- 
ton-Jacobi (see below), we will see that this is not the only instance in which some- 
thing invented by physicists acquires a deeper meaning when seen from the side 
of cognitive science. 
I 

I 37 
2.5 The Operational Definitions of Space, Time, and Causality 
2.5 
The Operational Definitions of Space, Time, and Causality 
2.5.1 
Space 
The most crucial consequence ofwhat has been said above is that space, time, and 
causality, which, according to Kant, are the necessary categories on which all exter- 
nal appearance is based, are not the only possible (and therefore necessary) catego- 
ries. They are rather the phylogenetically evolved features o f  human perception 
and interpretation, defined operationally as invariants of certain actions and trans- 
formations. Let us look at this in more detail. 
Following Piaget (1974), the spatial metric of our perceptional space (and there- 
fore its topology) is operationally defined by means of motion. The identity of ex- 
tended subjects, therefore, is defined as an invariant of locomotion (Uexkiill, 1921: 
‘A body is what moves together as a unit”). This definition is probably the main 
reason for the major difference between what we call space and what we call time. 
Time is said to flow in an irreversible way; no one can retrieve any part of the past. 
We cannot move back and forth between two points in time. But we can do so quite 
well between two points in space. If we say we travel from point A to point B and 
than back again to A, we mean that the A where we started before arriving at B, and 
the A to which we arrived after leaving B, are not only equal but identical. To say 
this is, however, possible only if we can distinguish between ‘equal’ and ‘identicar 
and if what we call identical is not influenced by our travel. This means that iden- 
tity is defined as the invariant of motion. And exactly this is the point. Only on 
grounds of such a definition can we call a change in spatial positions reversible, or 
more precisely: only on the basis o f  such a definition can we distinguish between 
the repeated return to the same A and travel along a sequence of equal A’s, i.e., 
between periodicity in time and space. 
In a similar way, locomotion can change the visually perceived environment. 
We can transform the perception we call ‘forest’ by walking into the perception 
we call ‘city’. But this is not what we are accustomed to saying. It is more com- 
mon to speak in terms of an environment which, a priori, is multidimensional in 
character, i.e., comprising at the same time several structures that differ, first of 
all, in what we call their spatial positions. What we achieve, then, by means of 
walking, is not a modification of our respective environment. We just ‘go’ to places 
consisting of different structures and therefore experience different perceptions. 
What we call the multiplicity of the world, thus, is defined as invariant to chang- 
ing our position in that world. From the functional (and CEE) point of view, men- 
tally generated spatial views belong to the most elementary theories we have at 
our disposal, by means of which we can forecast perceptions when walking - in 
the same way as the temporal structures stored in our memory inform us about 
what we can expect when repeating certain actions. So, both the formation of visual 
patterns and the formation of memory are first of all modes of extending life com- 
petence. 

38 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
2.5.2 
The Arrow of Time 
I 
Within the context of our day to day experiences we have a very clear understand- 
ing of what past and future are. Past is what embodies all the events we have expe- 
rienced; past is the source of all knowledge we have acquired. Future is the subject 
of our expectations; future embodies events that may happen and for which we 
have to wait to see if they really will happen. How can we express this by means of 
physical theories? Or, more precisely and according to the operationalization con- 
cept: are there devices or processes that can operationalize the terms ‘past’ and 
‘future’, i.e., the arrow of time? 
Many efforts have been made in this direction (Zeh, 1984). The result is short 
and disappointing: in all cases where it is said that the arrow of time has been 
operationalized it can be shown that the direction of time was already contained 
implicitly in the preconditions of the experiment. A typical example is the follow- 
ing: shaking a box containing black and white balls placed in order according to 
their color always leads to disorder and never again to order. In physical terms: 
entropy increases in time and never decreases. Entropy therefore seems to 
operationalize the arrow of time. But in this instance, the result depends on what 
we do first, separating the balls or shaking them. Shaking before separating leads 
to order. Shakmg after separating leads to disorder. So we already have to know 
what the terms ‘before’ and ‘after’ mean before we can do the experiment that is to 
tell us what ‘before’ and ‘after’ mean. Another example: a hot physical body left in 
a cooler environment always cools down. But this applies only if the collisions 
between the atoms involved are endothermic, i.e., if the kinetic energy of the col- 
liding partners is higher before the collision than after. However, if we have 
exothermal processes, which are characterized by the fact that the kinetic energy of 
the particles involved is higher after the collision, then the body heats up rather 
than cooling down. Here again we have to know what ‘before’ and ‘after’ mean in 
order to define the collision process that will define the result of the experiment 
that is to define the arrow of time. 
These are particular examples. Prigogine (1979, p. 220) has showed in a more 
general way that irreversible processes in thermodynamics cannot help us to 
operationalize the arrow of time: the existence of the so called Ljapunow function 
-which is closely related to macroscopic entropy - is a prerequisite for the distinc- 
tion between past and future also in microscopic systems. Unfortunately, the 
Ljapunow function is ambiguous with respect to the arrow of time. It can be con- 
structed in a way such that equilibrium is achieved in the future, in accord with 
classical thermodynamics, but it can also be constructed so that equilibrium is 
‘achieved’ in the past. 
From all this, one can make the hypothesis that, in principle, the arrow of time 
cannot be operationalized objectively, i.e., it cannot be derived from what we call 
nature. What ‘past’ and ‘future’ mean, then, can be described only by means of a 
sort of mental operationalization. The following definition, for example, may be 
suitable: from two perceived events A and B, A is said to be before B if we can 

I 39 
2.5 The Operational Definitions ofSpace, Time, and Causality 
remember A when B happens but not B when A happens. Of course, past is what 
we can remember but we cannot remember the future. This ‘mentalization’ of 
past, present, and future, I think, is very close to what Einstein (published 1972) 
may have had in mind when he wrote to his friend Bosso “that these categories are 
sheer illusions”. 
2.5.3 
Causality 
To define causality we must be able to identify patterns of events. If several events, 
say A, B, C, and D follow one another always at typical intervals independent of 
when the first event occurs (i.e., if the pattern is an invariant of translation in 
time), then we say that there must be a causal relationship between the events 
concerned (see Wuketits, 1981). Otherwise, the perceived regularity could not be 
explained. Causal relations, then, are defined as invariant patterns of time 
(Reichenbach, 1924). This, however, requires more than just having a topology of 
events as provided by our memory. We also must be able to distinguish between 
shorter and longer intervals of time, i.e., we need a time metric defined by a men- 
tal metric-generator implemented physiologically somewhere in our brain. For 
example, the fact that we say lightning is the cause of thunder but not the contrary 
is based on the fact that the time between lightning and the next thunderclap is 
usually much shorter and varies less than the time between thunder and the fol- 
lowing lightning strike. But the length of time intervals can be defined only by 
means of a time metric. If our time metric-generator were such that it would be 
accelerated after a flash oflight and retarded after an acoustic event, we might well 
come to the conclusion that thunder is the cause of lightning. The mental time 
metric-generator is therefore responsiblefor the causal order established andfor the prog- 
nostic capability derivedfiorn it. 
The specificity of the metric-generator has direct effects on the laws of conserva- 
tion that we record in physics (energy, momentum, etc.). These laws can be de- 
rived from the invariance properties of the equation of motion: invariance under a 
translation in time (i.e., physics is the same yesterday and today) implies conserva- 
tion of energy; invariance under a translation in space (i.e., physics is the same in 
America and Europe) implies conservation of momentum; invariance under spa- 
tial rotations implies conservation of angular momentum. In other words: the con- 
servation of momentum follows from the homogeneity of space, and the conserva- 
tion of energy follows from the homogeneity of time. What ‘homogeneity‘ means, 
however, is exclusively a matter of the mental metric-generator concerned. This 
applies also to the other conservation laws which, therefore, are human specifics 
rather than objective properties of nature. As seen below, the conservation laws 
constitute what one can call the cognitive reference frame we use to describe ac- 
tions and what those actions will bring about. Other conservation laws, based on 
other cognitive operators, would effect a different cognitive phenotype, but this 
would not mean that the methods and life strategies based on other operators 
would be less consistent or efficient. What is excluded, however, is communica- 

40 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
tion between representatives of different cognitive phenotypes such as (possibly) 
between terrestrial and extraterrestrial beings. 
I 
2.6 
Induction and the Compressibility of Observational and Theoretical Terms 
Perceptions (and observations) are related to each other according to what we call 
the regularities perceived. These regularities, as we have seen, are the outcome of 
special mental operators. A (scientific) theory on the relation between observa- 
tions, therefore, can be ‘true’ (i.e., it can extrapolate the data observed correctly) 
only if it would emulate the generating mechanisms. But how can we emulate 
these mechanisms if we do not have access to the brain where they are imple- 
mented and if we have no means of analyzing them otherwise? What we have is 
nothing but mathematical methods which - astonishingly enough as Wigner (1960) 
said - work very effectively in helping us to extrapolate observational data. Then, 
the conclusion is near at hand that there is a certain homology between the mecha- 
nisms generating mathematical, logical, and other theoretical terms and those gen- 
erating observational teams. This would explain, of course, why observational ex- 
trapolation (i.e., waiting for the observations expected or doing the experiments 
required) may lead to the same result as mathematical extrapolation from observed 
data does. A helpful contribution to solving the problem of induction, therefore, 
are plausible hypotheses on a common metatheory of mathematics and observa- 
tional terms. 
The stated equivalence of observational and theoretical terms requires that we 
approach mathematics and logic under the same constructivist aspect as we do 
the empirical world. There is already a certain tradition of constructivist approaches 
(Lorenzen, 1975) having in mind mainly a better foundation for mathematics: only 
if we know how things have developed can we understand why they are as they 
are. Unfortunately, it is not enough to find a ‘generative mathematics’ that gener- 
ates all the mathematical rules or regularities we know, because there is no guar- 
antee that it would also generate those we may yet find in the future. The only 
guarantee for generally succeeding is that we find a solution that emulates the 
actually implemented mental mechanisms. This generative mathematics, how- 
ever, as well as Chomsky’s generative grammar, is inaccessibly located in the sub- 
conscious parts of cognition. All we know and all we have access to are their re- 
sults. From them, unfortunately and as a matter of principle, we cannot conclude 
the generating mechanisms. This is why it is so difficult to concretize a genera- 
tive grammar producing more than just one or two grammatical regularities or 
rules. 
To deal with the compressibility of mathematical terms means to pose the ques- 
tions: Why can we describe the results of rather complex mathematical operations 
by relatively simple expressions? How can we extrapolate ordered sequences of 
mathematical operations by explicit formulas, i.e., why does the principle of math- 
ematical induction work? That this is a serious problem is known - at least in 

I 41 
2. G Induction and the Compressibility ofObservational and Theoretical Terms 
principle. Mathematicians generally acknowledge that Peano, by means of his five 
axioms has contributed considerably to understanding the world of natural num- 
bers - in particular, the fifth axiom (“If the natural number 0 has some property P, 
and if further, whenever n has P then so does n + 1, then all natural numbers have 
P”) is the basis of mathematical induction, which is one of the most important 
procedures in practical algebra. However, Hofstaedter (1979) has rightly remarked 
that this does not provide a criterion to distinguish true from false statements 
about natural numbers. He asked (ibid., p. 229): 
How do we know that this mental model we have of some abstract entities 
called ‘natural numbers’ is actually a coherent construct? Perhaps our own 
thought processes, those informal processes which we have tried to capture 
in the formal rules of the system, are themselves inconsistent! 
Well, at least in the constructivist context, they are not inconsistent. But the possi- 
bility remains that the formal rules we have established do not correctly or com- 
pletely emulate the informal thought processes (i.e., what we called mental opera- 
tors). The ongoing success of mathematical sciences, however, makes it rather 
probable that mathematics is a fairly good theory of what the mental operators can 
bring about. It may even be a correct or true theory if the mental operators, in the 
course of cognitive evolution, contributed implicitly to their own conscious for- 
malization, i.e., to the development of mathematical and logical thinking. In other 
words: mathematics succeeds by means of compressing theoretical terms (e.g., by 
means of mathematical induction) because the mechanisms of generating theo- 
retical terms and of compressing them are closely related to each other, due to a 
special cognitive coevolution having the effect that compressed and uncompressed 
terms behave alike and therefore are interchangeable. 
The fact that large amounts of empirical information can be described by a rela- 
tively simple mathematical formula, by a simple view or regularity, or by just a few 
words (i.e., by a theory in general), we explain by their compressibility. On the other 
hand, we can consider these formulas (etc.) to generate the data in question in the 
sense that we can derive the data from the generating theory. Within the frame- 
work of constructivism, however, there is nothing that is not generated, whether 
by a physical or biological process, by a theory in the proper sense, or by a mental 
operator generating what we perceive as regularities or laws. Compressibility, there- 
fore, is not a special feature of some data or entities we have to investigate or to 
wonder about. It is rather the central characteristic of constructivism. The generat- 
ing mechanisms (and only they) can tell us how we have to extrapolate given data 
or what we can conclude from certain observations, i.e., how we can apply math- 
ematical or empirical induction. Without generating mechanisms, both extrapola- 
tion and induction are merely arbitrary - and therefore useless and meaningless. 
The difficulty of classical approaches to the problem of induction follows from 
the idea that the operators generating the regularities of our perceptions are seen 
exclusively as nonmental external mechanisms. We say: regularities (such as 
symmetries) are in the outside nature and not in the way we see it. According to 
this, it is generally understood that we have to extrapolate data concerning celestial 

42 I 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
mechanics according to the effects of gravitational force as contained in Newton’s 
laws. But we find it strange to understand why we usually succeed in extrapolating 
much sensory data perceived according to a regularity identified by means of noth- 
ing but the data themselves - as if the regularity of the past and future data were 
caused by the same reason. But exactly this is true. There is of course a causal 
reason generating these regularities, but it is not an external reason, as gravitation 
is said to be. It is rather the internal mental operators that generate the regulari- 
ties. This is the very legitimization of empirical induction. Because this applies for 
any kind of regularity, so also the laws of classical mechanics as described by New- 
ton are nothing but emulations of mental operators by means of what we call 
explicit external forces. What still has to be explained, however, is how to deal with 
the regularities we find in areas such as elementary particle physics, etc., which 
can hardly be expected to be ‘inborn’, as are the regularities of classical mechanics. 
2.7 
Communication, Meaning, and the Compressibility of Semantic Terms 
If all structures we perceive are only human-specific artifacts that can be defined 
only as invariants of cognitive operators, then this concept must apply also to the 
perception (or interpretation) of language structures, i.e., as a physical object can- 
not have objective properties that can be used for an objective description, neither 
can verbal texts have an objective interpretation. Then the question arises as to 
whether a text can carry an autonomous message, and if not, what the notion of 
communication means. 
According to common understanding, ‘communication’ means that certain struc- 
tures, for example texts, are transferred from the sender to the recipient, where 
they actuate text-specific reactions. The text enables the recipient to draw conclu- 
sions insofar as he has understood (i.e., analyzed) what we call the meaning of the 
text. Meaning, then, is something encoded in the text. For the recipient, therefore, 
meaning is an externally defined structure. A similar view is held by Hofstadter 
(1979), who believes in the general possibility of deciphering context-free mes- 
sages. For him (Hofstadter, 1979, p. 165), “meaning is part of an object (or a text) 
to the extent that it acts upon intelligence in a predictable way”. 
This implies conceding to ‘meaning’ the status of an objective property in the 
sense of realism. Further to this, within the framework of the CEE, the notion of 
analyzing a structure to identify the structure’s inherent meaning is not explicable. 
Structures can be generated but not analyzed. What we usually call an analysis 
refers to other structures that are generated by the same operation and that we, 
just because of this, perceive as ‘similar’. 
Both theories and their meaning (in their quality as invariants of cognitive op- 
erators) are mental artifacts. Their effect is that they connect data or statements 
with each other - and here they have a monopoly: there is no other possibility of 
connecting data and statements except within the framework of a theory or a known 
meaning. From one sole observation we cannot derive a second observation except 

I 43 
2.7 Communication, Meaning, and the Compressibility ofsemantic Terms 
by means ofa theory that is able to do this. From the fact, for example, that one has 
seen until now only white swans says nothing about the existence of black swans, 
unless there were a theory saying something on this matter. (Diettrich, 1989, p. 78). 
Nor is it possible to derive from an isolated statement a second statement, without 
having knowledge of the context of meaning. If we nevertheless sometimes try to 
derive statements from each other, then this is only on the basis of tacit assump- 
tions concerning the context. 
Under these circumstances, to ‘perceive’ a text or any other structure can only 
mean to reproduce it through the recipient’s own generative means. Ifthese means 
are insufficient, they have to be modified accordingly by the recipient himself. 
This is what we call learning, and the text that has effected this is called a piece of 
information. Information is something the recipient did not know before, i.e., what 
he or she could not reproduce by their own means. To understand a text means 
that the recipient is not only able to reproduce the text but also to draw the same 
(or similar) conclusions from it or to infer the same texts as the sender. But what 
does it mean to make inferences, and especially inductive inferences, within the 
context of constructivism? In common thinking, all things that can be derived 
from one another by extrapolation or by inductive inference represent certain rela- 
tions. Under constructivist aspects, however, relations of any kind can be defined 
only through common generative mechanisms (operator, theory, etc.). 
We can now say that a recipient understands a text in the sense intended by the 
sender if he or she not only reproduces the text but does so by the same (or similar) 
mechanisms as used by the sender. Only under these circumstances does the re- 
cipient, further to the text in question, also have all the other texts at his disposal to 
which the sender could refer, i.e., they can both draw the same ‘conclusions’. Strictly 
speaking, this does not require that the generating mechanisms are structurally 
equal. But because they produce the same output, more or less, we can assume 
that this is due to their phylogenetically acquired common metatheory. In this case 
they, i.e. sender and recipient, would not only be functional but also structural 
homologs. 
Let us summarize: to say that the recipient has understood the meaning of a text 
means that the recipient has interpreted the text within the same theory that the 
sender has used to generate the text, or, in other words, that the recipient has 
decoded the text in the same way as it was encoded by the sender. 
A prerequisite for communication is that those concerned have the same (or at 
least a similar) cognitive phenotype. Only then could they think in terms ofthe same 
categories and deal with the same things and phenomena, about which they can 
inform and talk to each other by pointing to the object in question or by means of 
interpreters. In other words, the perceived worlds of those who want to communi- 
cate with each other must be largely isomorphic. This occurs when Chinese and 
Europeans speak with each other -however different their languages are in detail. 
If this condition is not met, no communication is possible. If one of them deals 
with objects having an identity defined as invariant of motion within a (3+1)-dimen- 
sional space-time continuum (as we do), but the other one describes objects as being 
the eigenvector of certain operators in Hilbert space (as may happen with certain 

44 2 Cognitive Evolution 
extraterrestrials), i.e., if the partners in communication use different defining op- 
erators, nothing could be compared. Here, the perceived worlds are not only fur- 
nished with different objects but also are syntactically structured in different ways. 
Some years ago, on a NASA rocket launched into space was mounted a copper 
plate engraved with some elementary information about humans and the terres- 
trial environment. This endeavor was based on the assumption that the same laws 
of physics would apply everywhere in the universe and that extraterrestrials, how- 
ever else they might be structured, had to adapt to these laws and, therefore must 
have developed equivalent cognitive structures in the course of their evolution. But 
since the laws of nature, as we have seen, characterize our cognitive and empirical 
phenotype rather than the world we live in, humans will identify the same laws of 
nature wherever they are in the universe. From the human point of view, the laws 
of nature are indeed universal because humans carry, so to speak, their own laws 
with them wherever they go. The same would apply to extraterrestrials. They as 
well would identify laws of nature which, from their point of view, would be as 
universal as ours but which would not necessarily be the same. Even when visiting 
the earth, there would be no reason for them to modify their world view and the 
laws included in it towards our laws of nature. By this reasoning, the prerequisite 
for the success of the NASA experiment is not met, because extraterrestrials, if 
any, cannot adapt themselves to laws which are not their own. 
This does not mean that we could not come to a kind of working arrangement 
with extraterrestrials ifwe met them. After a period of cohabitation we might learn 
how they behave in given situations. This might lead to a modus vivendi. But we 
cannot understand them, i.e., we cannot extrapolate their behavior to new and 
unknown situations. Understanding is possible only on the ground of similarity, 
but not necessarily cognitive similarities. If such beings were physically closed and 
of more or less fragile structure and not fixed in the ground like plants but rather 
could walk or fly around, they would have to avoid collisions with other objects, as 
we do. Then we could understand their habits ofmoving, at least to a certain extent. 
The question ofthe compressibility ofthe world (i.e., why observational data can 
be successfully extrapolated and, therefore, why induction works) can be trans- 
ferred to the linguistic area (Diettrich, 1997). We can speak of the compressibility 
of language and we can ask why we can extrapolate texts semantically, i.e., why we 
can draw correct conclusions from a text. The problem of induction, then (how can 
we successfully generalize physical data transmitted from nature?), corresponds 
to the problem of communication (how can we successfully generalize verbal data 
transmitted from other persons?). 
We see here a parallel between sensory and linguistic perception. Both result 
from mental operators acting on sensory or linguistic stimuli, respectively. The 
invariants of both operators present themselves as structures. In sensory percep- 
tion, we perceive this structure as regularities that allow us to complete observa- 
tions, or, as we would say in most instances, to extrapolate perceived data. In lin- 
guistic perception, we perceive the structure produced as meaning which allows 
us to draw the ‘correct’ conclusion from the text given or, as one could say, to 
extrapolate the text semantically. Regularities and meaning, or extrapolation and 
I 

2.8 Extensions I4 5  
logical inference, respectively, are analogous categories in the sensory and linguis- 
tic areas. 
2.8 
Extensions 
2.8.1 
Physical Extensions o f  Perceptions and the Notion of Reality 
Typical of most empirical sciences is the use of instruments and measurement 
devices (measurement operators) by means of which we extend the range of natu- 
ral perception in ways similar to those we use to extend our inborn physical capa- 
bilities by means of tools and engines. Here we have to distinguish between two 
important types of extensions (Diettrich, 1994a). 
We speak of quantitative extensions if the inborn perception operators and the 
measurement operators commute in the sense of operator algebra. Here, both 
operators have a spectrum of invariants (i.e., eigenvectors) that can represent each 
other. This means that the results of the measurement operations can be presented 
in terms of invariants of the inborn cognitive operators, i.e., in terms of our classi- 
cal world view. 
We speak of qualitative extensions if perception operators and measurement op- 
erators do not commute. Here, the results cannot be presented in a classical man- 
ner and require new, nonclassical theories. Because the set of possible measure- 
ment devices is, in principle, unlimited, it can never be excluded that qualitative 
extensions of previously established operators will bring about modifications of 
the previously established world view and of the theories associated with it. So 
there will never be a definitive world view and there will never be a definitive theory 
of everything. No objective laws of nature will ever be formulated. Those laws that 
we have, we have constructed in a human-specific way in the course of human 
evolution; they will never converge toward a definitive set oflaws except within the 
context of a limited set of operators, i.e., if we desist from further experimental 
research that would go beyond these limitations. What we actually do when we do 
science is construct a world that we believe we analyze by doing science. In other 
words, 'analytical', in the sense of deepening our knowledge, is characteristic of 
science only within quantitative extensions. 
The notion of a theory of everything is equivalent to the notion of reality. Reality, 
to our understanding, is independent of whatever we do or can do. So it must be 
characterized by objective laws of nature. We have seen that there are no objective 
laws of nature. But further to this, the notion of reality cannot even be defined 
operationally (and this is what we require of all meaningful scientific notions). To 
require of reality structures that are independent of all human action, i.e., struc- 
tures that are invariant under all possible operators, would deprive reality of just 
the specificity necessary for being a nontrivial notation. The operator that is to 
define reality must be resistant against anything humans can do, i.e., it must com- 

46 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
mute with all other operators. Unfortunately, only the trivial unity operator meets 
this requirement. A nontrivial reality can thus result only by being invariant under 
particular operations, such as all the operations applied until now (rather than all 
possible operations). In this situation, reality would reflect all the perceptions and 
experiences mankind has ever had or made. This is exactly what we have in mind 
when we speak in ontological terms about a reality that - according to our current 
knowledge - has this or that structure. Reality in this sense represents the sun1 
total of our actual knowledge. Therefore let us call it actual reality. That reality can 
be defined only as actual reality, i.e., with reference to what we experienced in the 
past, does not mean that there is a well defined remainder that we will come to 
know some time in the future. What we will experience in the future that we can 
use to bring reality up to date depends on what qualitative extensions we may 
bring about - and this is an entirely open set. There is not even a guarantee that 
our knowledge-based competence will increase on and on. Ifwe are forced to emi- 
grate into a new, unknown biotope, it may well happen that our acquired compe- 
tence is useless and that new tools and means have to be developed. 
If we base empirical theories on observations, as we actually do, and if observa- 
tions are theories as well, then the evolution of science is an entirely internal mat- 
ter between theories. Whatever we call the structures of reality, it must be com- 
prised in the more elementary theories upon which we base higher theories. Reality, 
so to say, is the outcome of its own history. This view will allow us to see the 
realist’s main argument in another light: the basic experience of all humans is that 
our perception contains regularities that we cannot influence. So, they must be 
objective, the realist infers, and hence it is legitimate to try to condense them into 
the laws of an objective world. Here, we concede that we have indeed no means of 
influencing the regularities perceived nor can we alter what we call the (classical) 
laws of nature - but only so far as the present is concerned. In the past, as we have 
seen, we intervened well through the phylogenetic decision on the development of 
the mental operators and by this on the regularities we perceive. The biological 
development of these operators can indeed be considered finished. What is not 
finished, however, is the development of possible physical extensions in the form 
of novel experimental facilities with novel invariants forming novel laws. 
Sometimes it is argued that the absence of objective laws of nature would open 
the door for sheer arbitrariness. This is not true. That a different time metric gen- 
erator in our brain might replace the 10 variables for which we identified conserva- 
tion laws (energy, momentum, angular momentum, etc.) with another set of con- 
servation variables does not mean that we would have fewer problems (such as 
with energy provision). We would just have different ones. The laws we actually 
find and the categories we actually apply constitute, so to speak, the categorical 
reference frame we use to describe and to master our real-life problems. The fact 
that the evolution of our cognitive phenotype might well have brought about an- 
other cognitive phenotype with another cognitive reference frame (i.e., the fact 
that our reference frame and the laws of nature concerned are not objective) does 
not allow the conclusion that cognitive reference frames are per se irrelevant and 
therefore can be ignored. Similar reasoning applies for our organic phenotype. 
I 

2.8 Extensions 
47 I 
That we have just two legs rather than one or three is not due to an objective law of 
nature. It rather is a specification of human evolution. But this does not mean that 
we can ignore the number of our legs when walking. 
From the functional point of view, realism implies the idea that theories and the 
instances of their evaluation can strictly be separated from each other so that inde- 
pendent evaluation criteria can be found. This view is also the basis for the logi- 
cians’ notion of truth. In the same way as proximity to reality is seen as the crite- 
rion for the success oftheories in natural sciences, truth is seen as the criterion for 
the success of linguistic behavior in its contribution to overall behavior. Accord- 
ingly, the aim of natural sciences is seen to be to identify the (independent) struc- 
tures of reality, and the aim of semantics, to identify universal conditions of truth. 
Yet this concept cannot be realized. We cannot even identify what we call current 
reality. The genetically and historically acquired knowledge that constitutes cur- 
rent reality has no doubt a crucial role in the evaluation of theories - but not an 
absolute role, because it may well happen that a theory may modify existing views 
and thus also the authority for its own evaluation. In other words: the genetic, 
cognitive, and historical burdens constitute severe constraints, particularly when 
implemented in phylogenetically older parts of our cognitive apparatus. However, 
more recently established constraints can sometimes be ignored, at least to a cer- 
tain degree. A typical example is the revision of previous interpretations of experi- 
mental facts and data in the light of new experiences and insights. So, even what 
we call current reality fails to meet the minimum demand of common language 
practice on reality. 
From this it becomes evident that what we call reality does not just mean adaption 
to an independently extant or ontological reality. Under these circumstances we 
may well ask why then did cognitive evolution bring about the category of reality? 
A possible answer to this question is that we have to immunize our perceptions 
against doubts and distrust, particularly in situations where quick reactions are 
required. This is exactly what the notion of reality does. Within our day-to-day 
realism we consider our perceptions as representations of what is real rather than 
as the outcome of deliberate cognitive interpretation. In this way, time-consuming 
(and therefore potentially dangerous) considerations as to whether these interpre- 
tations can be improved on do not arise. Careful reflections on how to interpret the 
results of physical measurements are no doubt useful. So, reality in its quality as 
the sum total of all we have derived from past experiences has to be taken seriously 
and objectively, and whenever it is required; this is a very meaningful outcome of 
cognitive evolution. Thinking in terms of reality can be regarded as a kind of cog- 
nitive burden incorporated during the course of cognitive evolution. That is, in 
whatever direction our cognitive evolution may proceed, reality remains an irre- 
versible category. 
Empirical evidence may suggest to changing a theory and, sometimes, even its 
metatheory. But this is not an exclusive effect of empirical findings. Sometimes a 
metatheoretical change can be caused by purely theoretical considerations. The 
evolution of theories and knowledge is generally not predictable, because new re- 
sults do not determine their theoretical interpretation, nor do open theoretical 

48 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
questions determine the experimental measures needed to answer them. New de- 
velopmental lines have been created very often in the history of physical theories. 
Fresnel’s interpretation of light refraction phenomena by means of a wave theory 
(1816) led to the idea ofthe ether and thence to the Michelson-Morley experiment, 
from there to the theory of general relativity, to the mass-energy equivalence, and 
finally directly to modern elementary particle physics and nuclear energy. Fresnel’s 
decision, however, was not a logical ‘must’. Quantum mechanics has shown that 
neither the corpuscular nor the wave aspect of light has an ontological quality. 
Rather, they are purely theoretical concepts. Refraction phenomena do not require 
a wave theory. They can be derived directly from the quantum mechanical uncer- 
tainty principle: an atom beam of given momentum passing through a slit dia- 
phragm does not follow the geometrical path, because this would mean that both 
momentum and future location are precisely defined - contradicting the uncer- 
tainty principle. Instead, the beam is refracted to an extent exactly predictable by 
both wave theory and quantum mechanics. This idea could have been derived in 
principle from the work of Hamilton who embedded classical mechanics formally 
into a kind ofwave mechanics. Nobody can say where we would be today if Fresnel 
had not embarked on wave theory. Perhaps we would have neither particle physics 
nor nuclear energy. 
I 
2.8.2 
Algorithmic Extensions of Mathematical Thinking 
As already mentioned, CEE requires that not only do the regularities we find in 
sensory perceptions have to be seen as invariants of certain mental operators, but 
also the regularities we find in logical and mathematical thinking. Indeed, the 
elementary logical structures and procedures that we find and apply in language 
are phylogenetically based human specifications, just like the perceptional struc- 
tures upon which we apply them to generate higher theories. In particular, the 
laws of logic cannot be explained as universals (in the sense of Leibniz) that, on 
grounds of their truthfulness, hold in any possible world. This view is implicitly 
held, for example, by Hosle (1988) when he writes “the statement S ‘there is no 
synthetic a priori’ is obviously itself an a priori statement. So S contradicts itself 
and its negation, therefore, must be true”. 
Of course, categories exist that, for phylogenetic reasons, are used by all hu- 
mans. Logic deals with the structures that can be constructed on this phylo- 
genetically established basis, which we later on furnished with empirical and other 
theories. Lorenz (1941) speaks of our ‘forms of intuition’ (Anschauungsformen), 
which cannot be derived from any individual experience and are therefore ontoge- 
netic a prioris, but which, however, are the outcome of evolution and so are also 
phylogenetic a posterioris. What we call a synthetic a priori reflects nothing but the 
inborn human-specific ways of thinking which, outside this framework, cannot 
even be articulated. What is more, no statement at all can be articulated independ- 
ent of and outside the framework of human categories. So it is impossible to find 
statements that can be accepted by any sufficiently complex intelligence, irrespec- 

2.8 Extensions 
49 
I 
tive of its phylogenetic background and which, therefore, can be called universal. 
Even the question of whether a certain statement expressed by an intelligence A 
would mean the same as what another intelligence B has formulated can be an- 
swered only if the categories of thinking of A and B can mapped onto each other, 
which is possible only on the ground of a transformation that necessarily is hu- 
man-specific as well. In other words, the notion of universal synthetic a prioris 
cannot be logically explained. Statements dealing with the existence of universal 
synthetic a prioris, as advocated by Hosle (1988), are neither false nor true. They 
are empty. This is in accordance with the views of Kant, insofar as there are forms 
of intuition prior to any experience - but only prior to any individual experience, 
not prior to any phylogenetic experience. The phylogenetically accumulated expe- 
rience, as represented in our picture of the world, and the categories of our think- 
ing and perceiving are the result of a permanent coevolution between inner im- 
ages and outer world. The idea that what is a priori for an individual is a posteriori 
for the species has been articulated by Lorenz (1941), Spencer (1872), and Haeckel 
(1902) and summarized by Oeser (1984) and Wuketits (1984, 1990). 
If the cognitive operators generating our perception are phylogenetically related 
to those generating mathematical thinking, then their respective results, i.e., per- 
ceived and mathematical structures, must show certain similarities. This would 
explain why we can simulate the extrapolation of perceptions (i.e., make predic- 
tions) by means of mathematical extrapolations and why the mathematics we use 
is so well suited to the description of what we call nature. In this context, Davies 
(1990a) speaks ofthe “algorithmical compressibility of the world and Wigner (1960) 
of the “the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences”. 
From the classical point of view (i.e., within the theory of reality), however, the 
algorithmic Compressibility of the world cannot be explained, and neither, on the 
same basis, can the success of induction. 
If there is really a relationship between mathematics and perception as postu- 
lated here, then the phenomenon of qualitative extensions must occur also in 
mathematics (Diettrich, 1994b). This sounds strange, but there is some plausibil- 
ity to this idea. Similar to the operators generating sensory perception, which can 
be extended by physical fac 
es, the mental operators generating our elementary 
mathematical conceptions can also be extended via higher and more complex 
mathematical calculi. This is what mathematics does as science. Insofar as higher 
mathematics is based on appropriate axioms, i.e. (in CEE parlance), on axioms 
that emulate correctly the relevant cognitive operators, there is no reason, from the 
classical point of view, to believe that this will lead to ‘nonclassical’ statements, i.e., 
to statements that cannot be formulated within the syntax constituted by the axi- 
oms concerned. This view substantiates the confidence in Hilbert’s program of 
the complete axiomatization of mathematics - or, in the terms used here, the con- 
fidence that mathematics can extend itself only quantitatively. 
From Godel (summarized by Nagel, 1958), however, we know that there are 
mathematical procedures that, although entirely constructed by means of well 
proven classical methods, lead to statements representing a truth that can no longer 
be derived from the axioms concerned. Mathematics has turned out to be as in- 

50 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
complete as classical physics. Nothing but the application of well-tested, sound 
methods and procedures can lead to results that cannot be extracted from the foun- 
dations of these methods and procedures. We must therefore conclude that we 
cannot be sure that there will be no surprises of a similar kind in the future. In- 
deed, just as experimental operators, although constructed entirely according to 
the rules of classical physics, may lead to results that cannot be described in classi- 
cal terms, there are also mathematical calculi which, as shown by Godel, although 
based entirely on well-tested axioms, can lead to statements that cannot be proven 
within the context of these axioms - and this can happen again and again. So we 
have qualitative extensions in physics as well as in mathematics and we can make 
some definitions accordingly: 
We speak of quantitative extensions if the truth value of the terms achieved can be 
derived from the axioms used. 
We speak of qualitative extensions if the truth value of the terms achieved cannot 
be derived from the axioms concerned even though the calculi used are completely 
based on these axioms. When this occurs, the axioms themselves have to be ex- 
tended to make the truth value in question derivable. 
Qualitative extensions, whether in physics or mathematics, are purely emergent 
phenomena that cannot be predicted, because, by definition, they cannot be de- 
rived from previous knowledge. The blueprints of quantum mechanical devices 
are entirely classical in character and nothing provoked the idea that the results 
they may bring about could no longer be interpreted within classical theories. The 
same applies to mathematics. There is no general criterion telling us if a given 
calculus will exceed its own axiomatic basis. 
With this, the existence of nonclassical theories in physics and the incomplete- 
ness theorem of Godel are homologous cognitive phenomena. Neither is there a 
definitive set of physical theories (i.e., a theory of everything) explaining and de- 
scribing all (also future) physical problems nor is there a definitive set of math- 
ematical axioms determining the truth value of all possible mathematical state- 
ments. 
As to qualitative extensions, the only difference between the physical and the 
mathematical situations is that we already have in physics two nonclassical theo- 
ries (quantum mechanics and special relativity) and that we can say precisely un- 
der what conditions we have to apply them, namely (simply spoken) in subatomic 
areas and at very high speeds. In mathematics we only know from Godel's theory 
that there must be nonclassical phenomena, but we do not know what they are, 
and, more specifically, we cannot say which operations will bring us out of the 
classical domain. Is it the notion of cardinal and ordinal numbers, or the notion of 
set or of infinity, or is it the combined application of these notions that will consti- 
tute the cause of nonclassical mathematical phenomena? Will logic turn out to be 
as incomplete as physics or mathematics? And what will happen if we deal with 
more and more powerful computers? Up to now, we do not know. But when we do, 
we will have modern, nonclassical mathematics as well as physics. 
The astonishment of mathematicians with respect to Godel's proof continues 
unbroken. The literature is full of responses to Godel. Among others, an explana- 
I 

2.8 Extensions I 5 1  
tion was proposed that the brain’s action cannot be entirely algorithmic (Lucas, 
19G1; Penrose, 1989). Besides the fact that it is not quite clear what in a neural 
network such as the brain could be nonalgorithmic, this kind of reasoning is not 
necessary. What follows from Godel’s proof is only that what certain mathematical 
calculi can bring about is not necessarily the same as what a combination of them 
could generate. Similar reasoning applies to physics: instruments, although con- 
structed entirely according to the laws of classical physics, would not necessarily 
reproduce the laws of classical physics, as seen in quantum mechanics (e.g., scat- 
tering experiments with atomic rays). But no physicist would draw from this the 
conclusion that something in our natural sciences is not natural. 
In contrast to the physicists, who suggested as an explanation for their respec- 
tive experiences that they had happened upon domains of nature where other and 
unpredictable laws rule, mathematicians hesitated to admit the idea that math- 
ematical research is empirical in the sense that it can lead to really new discoveries 
which could in no way have been expected, even not a posteriori. If mathematics 
had its own specificity, as included in the notion of Plato’s reality, then, according 
to general mathematical understanding, this must be something that is included 
in the very rudiments of mathematics and therefore determines all possible conse- 
quences. In other words, if there is such a thing as Plato’s reality it must reveal 
itself by the fact that a consistent mathematics can be based only on particular, well 
defined axioms (the analogy to the laws of physical reality, so to speak). Once these 
axioms have been found they would settle once and for all the ‘phenotype’ of all 
future mathematics. Mathematics, then, would be nothing but a kind of craft fill- 
ing up the possibilities opened by the axioms identified - similar to physics which, 
according to prevailing understanding, can do nothing but look for applications of 
the theory of everything once it has been found. 
In the beginning it was hoped that extending or modifying the axioms in view of 
the unprovable statements concerned could solve the problem. Unfortunately, the 
new axioms would be in no better a situation, because for any set of axioms, 
unprovable statements may be found. This applies also to physics. Of course, we 
can modify theories according to ‘unprovable’ phenomena, i.e., new phenomena 
that cannot be formulated within the existing theories or metatheories, and physi- 
cists did so when establishing quantum mechanics - but this provides no guaran- 
tee that similar things will not happen again. So, neither in physics nor in math- 
ematics can a tool for everything be found, by means of which all relevant problems, 
present and future, can be solved in a purely technical or formalistic manner. 
The relationship between physics and mathematics as suggested by CEE consti- 
tutes a certain heuristic balance. Experimental physics is no longer privileged in 
providing information from the outside world, while mathematics sets it into theo- 
ries. Instead, hopes are reasonable that a possibly successful study of nonclassical 
mathematical phenomena may be a key to better understanding nonclassical phe- 
nomena in physics also - and vice versa. In a way, physics and mathematics can 
see each other as very general theories. So, mathematics could outgrow its role as 
an auxiliary science, which it has held from the outset of empirical science, and 
come into the role of a heuristic partner of equal rights. Strictly speaking, this has 

52 2 Cognitive Evolution 
already happened. Of course, that we consider the world to be algorithmically com- 
pressible reflects nothing but the suitability of mathematics for prognostic pur- 
poses in physics. This is what physicists call the unreasonable effectiveness of 
mathematics in the natural sciences which, in the light of CEE, might well be 
reasonable. 
But what, then, are the specifics that mathematics and the world of our percep- 
tions have in common so that the two areas can consider each other to be their 
successful theories? This is difficult to say, because we have to abstract from just 
these specifics, which is possible only ifthey themselves do not belong to the most 
primitive elements of our thinking. The following might be a clue: the fact that we 
use the same kind of division to separate ourselves from the outside world as we 
use to divide the outside world itself into single subjects, to each of which we 
attribute an independent identity, belongs to the very beginning of our inborn ways 
of thinking. However, quantum mechanics shows how the entire (physical) uni- 
verse can be seen as a unity that can be described by a single wave function. Each 
division of the universe into subsystems is a matter of the categories applied and is 
therefore arbitrary, because phylogenetically acquired categories are not determined. 
Our inborn category of identity allows us to separate systems into discernible enti- 
ties. It is therefore constitutive for the notion of plural (and, therefore, for the 
notion of set), as well as for the notion of cardinal numbers. 
A second clue concerns the relationship between the metrics of space and num- 
bers. According to what Piaget (1970, p. 58) found with children, it is not the cat- 
egory of space that allows us to define motion as mapping a line in space to the 
scale of time. It is rather motion that generates the category of spatial structure. 
The most primitive intuition, as Piaget called it, is not space but motion. Just as it 
is impossible to come from one number to another without a counting (or equiva- 
lent) operator, we cannot distinguish points in space except by attributing to them 
a path of motion. Counting and moving are analogous terms within the genesis of 
homologous algebraic and geometric structures. This homology allows us to ex- 
trapolate the observations of motional phenomena in an empirically verifiable 
manner. The continuity of any physical motion, for example, is a cognitive phe- 
nomenon, i.e., it is part of our metaphysics, and is not the consequence of an 
independent law of nature. Formulating discontinuous motions would require a 
spatial metric which, on the other hand, is only defined by means of the category of 
motion itself. Discontinuous motions, therefore, cannot be realized within the 
human cognitive apparatus, i.e., within our metaphysics. This competition drasti- 
cally reduces the degrees of freedom of actual motions. The same applies to the 
compactness of numbers we use to establish metric spaces and (regular) analytical 
functions in metric spaces. Discontinuity of a set of numbers is defined only within 
the context of a previously defined metric. So, numbers generated by a metric 
defining (counting) operator are per se compact. Analytical functions in metric 
spaces are, therefore, natural candidates for describing the phenomena of mechan- 
ics. This strengthens the assumption that what Davies (1990 a, b) called the algo- 
rithmic compressibility of the world is essentially based on functional homologies 
between the mental roots of perceptual and mathematical procedures. 
I 

I 53 
2.9 Action, Perception, and the Role of'cyclic Variables' in Cognitive Evolution 
The close relationship between spatial perception and mathematics can also be 
seen from another example: spatial coding of mathematical notions from areas 
outside geometry is probably the very beginning of mathematical heuristics. This 
includes the visualization of sets as a closed figures with points inside represent- 
ing the set's elements, as well as seeing ordered sets as spatial chains. Similar 
reasoning applies to the basic notions of topology, such as exterior, boundary, inte- 
rior, isolated points, etc. Even the notion of cardinality of sets comprises a certain 
geometrical coding. The cardinality of sets cannot be defined operationally, be- 
cause the process of counting or mapping in pairs requires that the elements con- 
cerned differ in at least one property defining their identity (e.g., in their position 
with respect to the counting device). You cannot pick out an element that does not 
have a well defined geometrical position. Similar reasoning applies to the notion 
of plurality. That something exists in several separate but equal copies is plausible 
only if these copies differ in their spatial positions. But we cannot replace position 
as an element defining identity by, say, color; that is, we cannot say that several 
objects have all properties in common - including position - but not color. 
2.9 
Action, Perception, and the Role of 'Cyclic Variables' in Cognitive Evolution 
The task of perception is to allow the formation of theories by means of which we 
can predict the effects of action. Because the effects of action can be presented only 
in terms of perceptions, we can say: by means of perceptions we discover how 
perceptions can change under the influence of action. In other words, actions are 
operators that act on perceptions. 
Within classical realism, we say that the effects of our acting are determined by 
the laws of nature, and by means of our (natural and experimental) perceiving we 
acquire knowledge about these laws. Thus, scientific decoding of nature is seen as 
the crucial prerequisite for mastering nature. This is the legitimization for all natural 
sciences insofar as they aim at the exploration of natural laws. 
Searching for the laws of nature was useful when it was done for the purpose of 
mastering nature. Because there are, however, no objective laws (as we have seen), 
this way despite its success, is not heuristically legitimate. So there must be yet 
another link between perception and action that does not depend on the mediation 
of objective laws. If, nevertheless, we continue speaking about the laws of nature, 
we can expect that those laws will help us predict perceptions and the perceived 
effects of action but not that they will provide us with objective statements about 
the world. 
According to classical understanding, action and perception are two completely 
different categories: action refers to the individual's input to the world, and percep- 
tion refers to the worlds input to the individual. With CEE, however, both refer to 
the same mechanism, with the consequence that there is no essential difference 
between them. This sounds strange but is easy to illustrate. Visualize a hammer. It 
is an instrument designed primarily to alter certain objects. But a hammer, in its 

54 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
quality as an operator, also has invariants: objects and properties that would resist 
hammer strokes of a given strength. The hammer, then, can be used to measure 
mechanical properties such as the strength of materials. So, both perceiving and 
acting mean applying the same operator. The only difference is that, in perceiving, 
we seek the invariants of the operator in question, i.e., we look for what remains 
unchanged under the application ofthe operators, whereas in acting we seek what 
changes under the operator’s influence. Our inborn world view (i.e., the inborn 
interpretation of sensory input) therefore depends on the phylogenetic ‘decision’ 
about which operators we use to construct the cognitive reference frame and which 
operators we use to modify what is described within the reference frame. (We al- 
ready mentioned one of these phylogenetic decisions: using locomotion to give 
our perceptual space a third dimension rather than using it to modify the size of 
structures in a 2D world.) The decision made about our actual cognitive reference 
frame, however, was not an evolutionary accident. It rather was made according to 
a relatively simple scheme, as we will see. 
The result of performing a physical measurement (which is an action, of course) 
is, in physical parlance, the invariant of the measuring process. In other words, 
we use the invariants of a process to describe the effect of that process, ie., we 
describe the covariants of an operator by means of its invariants. This can be gen- 
eralized into the cognitive area. The actions by means of which we explore the 
world can be considered measurements (i.e., perceptions in the broadest sense). 
The results of measurements (or, as one could say, the results of our experiences) 
then are views of the world and theories representing what we call the unchange- 
able and, therefore, the objective world (i.e., what is invariant under all our doing 
and acting). If we instead look for the covariants of our action, i.e., what changes 
under the influence of our actions, we have to refer to what we said about the 
relationship between the covariants and invariants of measuring processes: the 
effect of action can be described only in terms of the invariants of action, i.e., in 
the terms of our world view. This is exactly the direct relationship between perception 
and action that we looked for and that does not rely on the concept of a world with 
objective laws. 
If this is true, then the elementary categories of our perception must be the 
invariants of our most elementary action operators. But what are the most elemen- 
tary action operators? They are not, as one might think, our hands and the tools 
guided by hands. They are, rather, our legs. By means of a few steps, we can change 
our environment from the room we are in into the environment of a blooming 
garden. Of course, we could achieve the same also by using our hands if we used 
them do the necessary reconstruction work. But this is troublesome and time con- 
suming. So, one of the most important specifically human operators is locomo- 
tion. Our world view, as a result, must be based on the invariants of this operator - 
and this is indeed true. The most elementary descriptive category of our world 
view is the identity of extended objects and spatial structures defined as an invari- 
ant of locomotion. This provokes the assumption that, from a phylogenetic point 
of view, the categories of description can be understood only through their capabil- 
ity to cope with the covariants of certain operators. From this it follows that the 
I 

I 55 
2.9 Action, Perception, and the Role of‘Cyclic Variables’ in Cognitive Evolution 
cognitive phenotype was fashioned by evolution not to explore the world but, in- 
stead, to extend the action possibilities of the organic phenotype. 
Spatiality and the spatial metric, as we have seen, are categories that are neces- 
sarily defined by the process of motion. On the other hand, motion cannot be 
explained without the notion of space in which motion takes place. From this, it 
follows that motion itself must have brought about the mental category of spatial 
structures necessary for dealing with motion. This is exactly what we maintain: 
what an operator is doing can be explained only in terms of its invariants. 
We encountered a similar problem when we dealt with the operational defini- 
tion of the arrow of time. An operational definition was impossible, because the 
notion of operators themselves would require a prior definition of the arrow of 
time. We therefore proposed referring to the memory and to events stored there. 
But, from the cognitive point of view, events themselves are already operators trans- 
ferring the status before the event into the status after the event. So events, just 
like any operator, require prior definition of the arrow of time. Without a definition 
of the arrow of time, events and all we store in our memory in order to write his- 
tory remain undefined. Thus, time turns out to be a mental modus that itself needs 
to have been brought about by operational means. In the same way as the spatial 
metric was generated by the process of motion (i.e., motion bringing about the 
category of space which is necessary for describing motion), the category of time 
must have been generated by operators (i.e., operators bringing about the category 
of time which is necessary for describing what operators are). 
The approach of describing the covariants of operators by means of their invari- 
ants is well known and often used in physics. Within the framework of Hamilton- 
Jacoby formalism, the variables of a mechanical system are chosen so that conser- 
vation laws (invariants) apply for them. With this prerequisite taken care of, the 
transformations describing the system’s development in time can be found easily 
and explicitly. On the other hand, the conservation laws themselves can be shown 
to be generated by the transformations considered. So the canonical total momen- 
tum (in this paper identified, in a more general way, as ‘motion’) brings about 
spatial translation, and the total energy (represented by the Hamiltonian) brings 
about translations in time. Something very similar applies for quantum mechan- 
ics. The system’s development in time is generated by the Hamiltonian, and the 
eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian constitute the reference frame by means ofwhich 
this is described. This means that our elementary cognitive coordinates are ‘cycli- 
cal variables’, by means of which the motion of force-free bodies can be described 
simply and linearly in time. 
Therefore, the existence of conservation laws and the closely related fact that the 
development in time of mechanical systems often seems rather simple (i.e., 
algorithmically compressed, as Davies (1990 a, b) would say) are not based on ob- 
jective laws of nature and their harmony and simplicity. They are instead related to 
the permanent coevolution of acting and cognitive instruments that is necessary 
for predicting the consequences of acting, i.e., for action management. The per- 
ceived simplicity of the world is based on the phylogenetic decision to apply those 
cognitive variables for the description of the effects of elementary acting (such as 

56 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
locomotion) that are cyclic in the sense of the Hamilton-Jacobi theory. Nature ap- 
pears complex only when we deal with situations in which additional forces with 
unusual properties depending on various variables constitute a system with re- 
spect to which the 3D Cartesian coordinates of our phylogenetically acquired world 
view are no longer cyclic. To predict how such a system will develop in time (i.e., to 
find the integration of the equation of motion) therefore depends on whether un- 
specific system variables can be transformed into system-specific cyclic variables. 
Such problems are often solved by means of the Hamilton-Jacobi theory. 
We can conclude that physical actions, and the cognitive operators we use to 
describe them, are brought about by the same organic operators (i.e., organic tools). 
Perceived patterns or regularities, and the instruments of mathematical thinking 
we use to describe them, are brought about by the same cognitive operators. So 
mathematical patterns, perceived patterns, and the results of our actions are liter- 
ally homologous in so far as they have a common ontogenetic root, and this is the 
very reason why they can ‘cooperate’ so well with one another - as well as being 
why the various physiological mechanisms brought about each other in the course 
of organic evolution. 
I 
2.10 
Adaptation and Assimilation vs. Action and Perception 
According to Piaget (1967, 1970), assimilation means modifying or using external 
data to meet internal needs. Accommodation means modifying these internal needs 
so they can be met more easily. Let us apply the terms assimilation and accommo- 
dation to general evolution. According to the synthetic theory, successful evolution 
means constructing or modifying an organism so that it can meet external require- 
ments. Evolution is thereby understood to precede primarily by means of accom- 
modation, from its early commencement through to human technical and scien- 
tific achievements for managing life. 
However, what evolves are not only internal needs for meeting external require- 
ments but also the competence for acting, i.e., the capacity for modifying external 
requirements according to previously defined internal needs. Seen in this way, 
evolution is both accommodation and assimilation - with an increasing tendency 
towards assimilation: the more complex and ‘higher’ organisms are, the more dif- 
ficult it becomes for them to modify the phylogenetically acquired physiological 
and other basic strategies, and the more likely is it, therefore, that evolution tends 
toward assimilating strategies, i.e., towards improving the methods for modifying 
the environment. Warm-blooded animals, for example, do not react to climatic 
changes by altering their physiologically defined body temperature. Instead, they 
conserve their internal climate by better isolation or higher (internal or external) 
energy investments. Humans, after all, do not react any longer by means of evolu- 
tionary accommodation. Especially with humans - whenever a conflict arises be- 
tween biologically defined human requirements and the environment, the conflict 
is solved at the environment’s expense (Diettrich, 1995). 

I 57 
2.10 Adaptation and Assimilation us. Action and Perception 
One of the most popular methods of all animals for changing the environment 
is locomotion. Paramecia use locomotion for escaping adverse local conditions. 
That the relevant environment and its selection pressure is an artifact of the vari- 
ous species occupying it, rather than an objective and external issue, was seen 
already by Waddington (1959, p. 1636): 
Animals are usually surrounded by a much wider range of environmental 
conditions than they are willing to inhabit. They live in a highly heterogene- 
ous ‘ambience’, from which they themselves select the particular habitat in 
which their life will be passed. Thus the animal by its behavior contributes 
in a most important way to determining the nature and intensity of selec- 
tive pressures which will be exerted on it. Natural selection is very far from 
being an external force, as the conventional view might lead us to believe. 
Regarded from this aspect, life is a mode of world construction in the sense of 
Goodmann (1984) rather than a process of exploring the world or of acquiring 
knowledge about the world as Lorenz (1983) said (“life is a cognition process”). In 
other words, evolution seems to aim at assimilation rather than accommodation. 
Actually, however, this view is as biased as the pure-accommodation view, be- 
cause the capacity for acting and reacting does not represent a successful assimila- 
tion strategy. Strategies, as well as organic features, must accommodate them- 
selves to given external conditions. This is what accommodation strategies aim at 
- not to explore the environment and modify one’s constitution accordingly, but to 
improve the capability of changing one’s environment so as to meet the require- 
ments of one’s constitution. These requirements, however, mean first of all mak- 
ing optimal use of existing assimilation techniques. So, accommodation must ori- 
ent itself to the techniques available rather than to the environment concerned. 
The most elementary example is the evolutionary extension of homeostasis for 
adapting to a larger variety of external data rather than finding special solutions for 
each special case. Accommodation, therefore, aims at extending the set of control- 
lable data independent of what is actually required. Whether a species can profit 
from this strategy depends on whether new conditions or a new environment can 
be found in which these new achievements will pay off. (A cultural example would 
be basic research that provides solutions for problems that do not yet exist and that 
will find successful application only if appropriate applications or problems can be 
identified.) So, the interplay characteristic of evolution is not only that between 
mutation and selection (supply strategy, defined by the supplies and constraints of 
the environment), but also that between extension of competence and applicability 
(demand strategy, defined by the requirements and the possibilities of the organ- 
ism). If we nevertheless want to continue using the notion of environment as the 
instance that articulates the boundary conditions for physical and evolutionary act- 
ing, we have to consider it as a construct in a double sense: (1) by acting in the 
proper sense we can modify the relevant boundary conditions - for example, by 
means of external heating we can reduce the demands on internal temperature 
management; (2) by changing the internal requirements the same environment 
can come to represent different boundary conditions - for example, by switching 

58 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
from anaerobic to aerobic respiration, the previously irrelevant oxygen content of 
the atmosphere became the key survival factor. More generally we can say that 
what counts is the ‘distance’ between organism and environment, and this can be 
reduced at both ‘ends’. 
Here we have an analogue in cognition. We said that the cognitive phenotype is 
entirely a construct of the organic phenotype, which was brought about to extend 
the functional possibilities of the phenotype rather than to ‘recognize’ the world or 
to explore what Vollmer (1975) called the cognitive niche. Nevertheless, here as 
well, we can continue using the notion of environment if we consider it (as we did 
in the organic case) as being constructed in a double sense. (1) We can displace 
objects, change our position, practice agriculture, or construct streets with traffic 
lights. By all this we change our environment and, if we do this in the interest of 
our needs, we practice assimilation. By this we construct what we call actuality 
(Wirklichkeit). (2) How we see the environment, what regularities we register, and 
to what ‘laws of nature’ we condense them is a matter of our cognitive phenotype. 
The development of the cognitive operators, up to the development of our world 
view (including the formation of scientific theories), is therefore an act of accom- 
modation to the conditions of actuality brought about by assimilation. Our cogni- 
tive environment, thus, is a human-specific construct characterized by the laws of 
nature as comprised in the notion of reality. Nature does not tell us how we have to 
see it (for example, as spatial objects moving in a 3D world). Nature is rather the 
phylogenetically developed mental operators and their invariants that define the 
regularities we perceive and the laws we derive from them. If we consider that the 
biological development of these operators is complete, but not the development of 
their possible physical extensions by means of novel experimental devices with 
novel invariants that require novel theories, then we can say that we continue more 
than ever to construct the object of scientific research, i.e., reality. Reality, in so far 
as it is articulated in terms of laws that physicists formulate and try to explore so as 
to make predictions possible, is a human-specific artifact. What we see depends 
both on what we do and on how we interpret the sensory reflection of our doing. 
In strict analogy to the organic situation, we can say that actuality and reality are 
the two ends that characterize the cognitive distance between individual and envi- 
ronment. Actuality is the result of our doing (including locomotion), i.e., of as- 
similation. Reality is the result of our phylogenetically acquired ways of interpret- 
ing of experiences with a view to making predictions. So reality is the result of 
accommodation. Because we cannot describe actuality without a previously de- 
fined interpretation of our sensory input, we cannot speak of assimilation without 
accommodation. Just as in the organic context, the results of accommodation (i.e., 
the actual phenotype) define what certain assimilating activities mean for the or- 
ganism concerned. This applies, as well, in the opposite direction: accommoda- 
tion is not possible without assimilation. We cannot speak of reality and its pur- 
pose for making predictions (accommodation) without reference to the object of 
those predictions, the actions (assimilation). The same argument holds in the or- 
ganic situation: action means the accommodation of assimilation strategies. Ac- 
tion and perception cannot be defined independently of one another. More par- 
I 

I 59 
2.7 7 Epistemological Autoreproduction 
ticularly, it does not make sense to speak in terms of perception or recognition of 
an independent, objective outside world. 
2.1 1 
Epistemological Autoreproduction 
The difficulty we have in accepting the notional character of our experiences as 
human-specific constructs differs with space and with time. Regarding the notion 
of space, it is not doubted (except perhaps by naive realists) that the spatial pat- 
terns we perceive are not objective in the sense of their being considered views of 
real structures, i.e., the world is not necessarily as what it appears to be. With 
space, we quite readily attribute a reduced objectivity to our world view. Not so with 
time: we consider the recorded time topology of events to be real. The past is as it 
was and not even God can change it a posteriori, we say. Weizsacker (1985) called 
this the ‘facticity of the past’. Actually, however, events can only be defined as the 
results of cognitive or scientific interpretations, just as visual patterns can only be 
defined as invariants of cognitive operators. Events, as such, have less clearly de- 
fined outlines than visual patterns have. A modification of the interpretations of 
events used (for example, in the presence of a novel theory) may well affect the 
past. But because this has not happened during historical times, the illusion arose 
of both the facticity of the past and the objectivity of the laws of nature. 
The allegation that the historicity of the world is a human-specific artifact is the 
more problematic because it is based (through CEE) on what is known about bio- 
logical evolution, which deals explicitly with the historical order of phylogenetic 
events. Said another way: on the one hand our world view is the construct of our 
cognitive and experimental apparatus; on the other hand, this world view is exactly 
what physics and biology refer to, particularly when describing the development of 
the human brain and the operators established there. So which is the hen and 
which is the egg? Is it the real world we live in and which developed in the course 
of organic evolution up to and including the brain’s functions, or is it just these 
brain functions that bring about the view of a real world as a tool for both articulat- 
ing and solving our problems? Formulated differently: are perceptions brought 
about by nature, or is nature a category brought about by our cognitive apparatus? 
This dichotomy is the reason for the frequent accusations that the EE is circular in 
so far as it interprets not only the categories of space, time, and causality in 
phylogenetic terms, but also the notion of reality and nature - the latter compris- 
ing phylogeny itself. So, phylogeny is interpreted by phylogeny, which is circular. 
Actually, however, no real dichotomy exists so long as there is certainty that per- 
ceptions and nature condition one another by generating one another. This cer- 
tainty is provided by the fact that our cognitive phenotype constructs a world pic- 
ture that permits an understanding of the genesis of this cognitive phenotype by 
means of evolution within the framework of this world picture. Thus, not only 
ontogenesis but also cognitive evolution have to be understood as circular, 
autoreproductive processes. 

60 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
In the biotic area the following holds: the epigenetic system of an organism is 
what determines how the genome’s structure is to be interpreted and expressed in 
the phenotype. Identical reproduction is possible, however, only if the epigenetic 
system brings about a phenotype comprising the epigenetic system itself. 
In the cognitive area the following holds: the cognitive apparatus (and all the 
science based on it) is what decides how the sensory input is to be interpreted and 
what world view is conveyed. The knowledge acquired in this manner is consistent 
and reproducible, however, only if the cognitive/scientific apparatus generates a 
world view that includes the cognitive/scientific apparatus itself. 
A genome on its own cannot determine the phenotype in the sense of providing 
a complete ‘blueprint’ - it rather represents one of several levels in the process of 
autoreproduction - nor can sensory input dictate its own interpretation, and, by 
this, the reactions it causes. This limitation does not contradict the fact that, within 
the context of a given organic or cognitive phenotype having a given interpretative 
machinery, a genetic mutation as well as a new perception may lead to reproduc- 
ible modifications of our physical constitution or of our theories. This means that, 
so long as the epigenetic system remains unmodified, a given genetic mutation 
always produces the same phenotypic change; and so long as our cognitive appara- 
tus and our scientific theories also remain unmodified, a given sensorial input 
always leads to the same reading. What we have to avoid, however, is concluding 
that what mutations and perceptions initiate is also what they determine. Deter- 
minism is possible only within a given scheme of interpretation, i.e., outside quali- 
tative extensions changing the interpretation concerned. The same limitations hold 
for adaptation. Adaptation makes sense only so long as there are no qualitative 
extensions, because these modify the requirements to be met, i.e., the selective 
pressure. The world, seen as the sum total of the boundary conditions of our act- 
ing, is subject to a permanent actualization, because acting aims at changing just 
these conditions that make further and more ample acting feasible. This begins 
with the organic phenotype, which defines the constraints for evolutionary ‘act- 
ing’, which in turn changes the constraints for further evolution (‘evolution’ mean- 
ing the evolution of its own boundary conditions). And it ends with the cognitive 
phenotype that defines, through our world view, what kind of scientific acting is 
possible by which the world view itself may be affected. The world as an object of 
adaptation can be defined only for the time between two paradigm shifts, i.e., be- 
tween two qualitative extensions. 
Circularity, a devastating objection to any theory within the context of classical 
realism, becomes (in the sense explained here) a necessary prerequisite for any 
complete constructivist approach. A world view brought about by a cognitive phe- 
notype is consistent if and only if the world concerned enables the genesis of the 
cognitive phenotype. The role of circularity constitutes the key difference between 
realism (ofwhatever kind) and constructivism as presented here. Realism requires 
life-mastering methods to be consistent with an independent outside world. A 
constructivist interpretation of the world as proposed here, however, needs only to 
reconstruct itself. To avoid conflict with what von Glasersfeld (1995) and others 
called radical constructivism, I would rather speak in terms of ‘complete con- 
I 

I 
2.7 7 Epistemological Autoreproduction 
structivism’ in characterizing CEE. The various epistemologies mentioned here 
can be explained more clearly when they are classified according to how they meet 
their functional requirements: 
1. The most elementary position taken is that cognitive constructs (perceptions) 
have to delineate correctly the structures of the environment, because the strat- 
egies devised to meet the requirements of the environment are believed to be 
derivable from those structures. This is the basis for most kinds of realism. 
Physical knowledge is reliable (i.e., it allows verifiable predictions) ifand only if 
it is ‘true’, i.e., if it is derived from perceptions and their ‘true’ theoretical inter- 
pretations. Both perceptions and true theories are seen to depend on the struc- 
ture of an external world. Knowledge, when true, is irreversible, additive, and 
converges towards a complete and definitive set oflaws of nature. The progress 
of knowledge is based on inductive inference. The success of induction cannot 
be derived rationally. If epistemology is seen as a matter of cognitive evolution 
it is understood as ‘natural selection epistemology’. This was the starting posi- 
tion of Evolutionary Epistemology (Lorenz, 1941; Campbell, 1974a; Vollmer, 1975; 
Riedl, 1980; Oeser, 1984; Wuketits, 1984, 1990). 
2. InfiLnctional realism (Wuketits, 1998), and in radical constructivism (Glaserfeld, 
1995) as well, cognitive constructs have to contribute to meeting the require- 
ments of the environment, not necessarily by means of delineating environ- 
mental structures, but rather functionally. The notion of ‘truth‘ is replaced with 
‘viability’ within the subjects’ experiential world. Physical knowledge is reliable 
(i.e., it allows verifiable predictions) if it is derived from perceptions (or phe- 
nomena) that depend on an external world and their interpretation by means of 
theories, which no longer must be true but viable. The progress of knowledge 
is based on inductive inference (i.e., what succeeded in the past will also suc- 
ceed in the future). The success of induction cannot be derived rationally. 
3. In complete constructivism physical knowledge is reliable (i.e., it allows verifiable 
predictions) if it is derived from perceptions and their appropriate interpreta- 
tion, but neither perceptions nor their (viable) interpretations need evaluation 
by an external world. The most elementary prediction, i.e., prediction by means 
of linear extrapolation, is possible only if the development in question is linear 
in time. For this, it is sufficient and necessary that the phylogenetically acquired 
observational terms are cyclic variables with respect to the elementary opera- 
tors of human action. This line of thought has resulted in the metatheory of 
classical physics, i.e., in the mental notions of time, space, spatial identity, loco- 
motion, momentum, etc., and in the 10 conservation laws of classical mechan- 
ics. More sophisticated actions (particularly qualitative extensions) require 
nonclassical views, i.e., a redefinition of our notional reference frame, i.e., of 
what we consider to be an observation or a phenomenon with a direct effect on 
what we call the laws of nature. The structure of our perceptional world there- 
fore depends on what humans can do by natural or technical means and it 
changes according to possible qualitative extensions brought about by novel 

62 
2 Cognitive Euo/ution 
I 
experimental developments. Knowledge is irreversible, additive, and conver- 
gent only within the times between qualitative extensions. Outside this range, 
knowledge depends on what nonclassical metatheory we use to respond to the 
qualitative extension concerned. The progress of knowledge within quantita- 
tive extensions is based on inductive inference. Induction succeeds because 
and as long as we describe the 'world' in terms of cyclical variables. An episte- 
mology comprising the notion of time and development in time is consistent if 
it can explain its own genesis. 
2.1 2 
Is Cultural/Scientific Evolution Really Lamarckian? 
There are not many theories that have been as successful as the idea that cultural 
evolution is Lamarckian in character and opposed to organic, Darwinian, evolu- 
tion: 
Cultural evolution has progressed at rates that Darwinian processes cannot 
begin to approach. Darwinian evolution continues in Homo sapiens, but at 
very slow rates. This crux in the Earth's history has been reached because 
Lamarckian processes have finally been unleashed upon it. Human cul- 
tural evolution, in strong opposition to our biological history, is Lamarck- 
ian in character. What we learn in one generation, we transmit directly by 
teaching and writing. Acquired characters are inherited in technology and 
culture. Lamarckian evolution is rapid and accumulative. It explains the 
cardinal difference between our past, purely biological mode of change, 
and our current, maddening acceleration towards something new and lib- 
erating - or towards the abyss (Gould, 1979). 
Cultural Lamarckism has a great inherent plausibility, because social evo- 
lution is so obviously Lamarckian in character - we learn generation by 
generation and can propagate our learning to the next generation (Medawar, 
1988). 
The development of culture is completely based on the transfer of acquired 
characters, which modern Darwinism has good reasons to reject for the 
developmental processes of organisms. If at all to draw a biological parallel, 
the theory of cultural development must be called Lamarckian (von Hayek 
1983). 
But what, exactly, does Lamarckian evolution mean? To speak in terms of inherit- 
ance of acquired characters is not very enlightening. All characters have once been 
acquired, either genetically, by genetic mutation, or culturally, by means of learn- 
ing: and all characters are inherited, either genetically or culturally. So, the inherit- 
ance of acquired characters can hardly specify a relevant difference between Lamarc- 
kian and Darwinian evolution. What we really have in mind when comparing 
cultural and organic evolution is something different: knowledge as a particular 

2. 72 Is Cu/tura//Scient$c Evolution Really Larnarckian? 
63 
I 
aspect of cultural evolution is seen as something that is brought about by means of 
procedures that usually guarantee a certain usefulness, whereas the value of ge- 
netic mutations is entirely a matter of chance. Let us try to transfer this into a 
definition that is general enough to be applicable to the organic/genetic context as 
well as the cultural: 
An evolution (of anything) is Darwinian if it follows the principle of trial and 
error, i.e., if it starts from accidental modifications that subsequently are selected 
(or more generally, evaluated or interpreted) according to independent criteria. 
An evolution is Lamarckian if a calculus is applied by means of which modifica- 
tions can be produced that will be considerably more successful than purely 
accidental modifications -a calculus that, for example, makes it possible to meet 
given (external) requirements in a target-oriented manner, such as a genetic re- 
production of ‘acquired characters’, i.e., of any proven phenotypic modification 
brought about in a living organism during its own lifetime; or a theory that will 
allow reasonable planning rather than Darwinian trial and error. 
According to these definitions, we have to distinguish clearly between the genesis 
of modifications, which can be Darwinian or Lamarckian, and their subsequent 
dissemination, which has nothing to do with Darwin or Lamarck. That “what we 
learn in one generation, we transmit directly by teaching and writing” as Gould 
said, does not qualify cultural evolution as Lamarckian. Genetic achievements (i.e., 
modifications that survived selection) also are transmitted directly to the next gen- 
eration. A difference, of course, is in speed and in the potential number of indi- 
viduals involved. In cultural evolution, particularly in the times of telecommunica- 
tion, it is possible to communicate within seconds with everyone, whereas genetic 
information can be exchanged only between mates (leaving horizontal gene trans- 
fer aside), and to ‘inform’ the entire population with individual genes takes many 
generations. So, cultural evolution indeed proceeds very much faster than genetic 
evolution, but this is because genetic and cultural knowledge use different ways of 
disseminating their modifications and has nothing to do with the way in which the 
modifications concerned were brought about. 
What then are the differences between the genetic and cultural techniques of 
generating innovations or changes, and how significant are they? The transforma- 
tion from the genome to the phenotype is done by what, since Waddington (1957) 
and Riedl(1975) has been called the epigenetic system, meaning, briefly, the total- 
ity of the developmental processes involved (Katz, 1982). The epigenetic system is 
highly specific. It rejects not only any alien genome but also inappropriate (i.e., 
lethal) mutations. So, the epigenetic system has two functions: on the one hand, it 
translates the genotype into the phenotype according to very specific rules, and on 
the other hand, it selects the purely accidental mutations according to their appro- 
priateness for the various levels of the developmental process - a Darwinian mecha- 
nism, as long as the mutations do not change the epigenetic system itself. 
Preselection of inappropriate input data is not reserved for organic evolution. In 
a ‘cultural’ situation that we cannot master with available tools, many ideas cross 

64 2 Cognitive Evolution 
our mind. We immediately identify some ofthem as unrealistic. Others turn out to 
be inappropriate only after careful comparison with the theories we know. Only a 
few pass all our checks (and, when relevant, also those ofother persons). So we use 
these to approach the problem. Simon (1983, p. 40) said: 
I 
According to the behavioral theory, rational choice may require a great deal 
of selective search in order to discover adaptive response. The simplest, 
most primitive search processes require that possible responses be first 
generated and then tested for appropriateness. The generator/test mecha- 
nism is the direct analogue, in the behavioral theory of rationality, of the 
variation/selection mechanism of the Darwinian theory. Just as in biologi- 
cal evolution we have variation to produce new organisms, so in the 
behavioral theory of human rationality we have some kind of generations 
of alternatives - some kind of combinatorial processes that can take simple 
ideas and put them together in new ways. And similarly, just as in the bio- 
logical theory of evolution the mechanism of natural selection weeds out 
poorly adapted variants, so in human thinking the testing process rejects 
ideas other than those which contribute to solving the problem that is be- 
ing addressed. 
There are further parallels between genetic and cultural evolution. New ideas or 
theories that are produced by our own imagination or reasoning correspond to 
mutated genes in biology. Critical evaluation of these ideas in the light of all we 
know (consistency test) corresponds to the selecting evaluation by the epigenetic 
system. Evaluation in the light of experiments made in the outside world corre- 
sponds to the usual Darwinian selection by the physical biotope. Evaluation in the 
light of what other people know or believe means natural selection by the social 
environment (i.e., competition). The result can be called individual (genetic or cul- 
tural) learning. If we adopt, however, foreign ideas, which usually have the advan- 
tage of having already been tested by other persons’ experiences, and combine 
them with our own concepts, then this corresponds to the adoption of proven genes 
within the framework of sexual reproduction, and their subsequent recombina- 
tion. This we call social (genetic or cultural) learning. So, the term individual or 
social refers to the source of data (Did I learn it myself, or did I let others learn for 
me?), whereas the term genetic or cultural refers to the type of data concerned (Is 
the result stored in my genes or in my ‘memes’?). In an exclusively cultural con- 
text, social contacts and social learning are always cultural, which has sometimes 
prompted people to replace the term ‘social’ by ‘cultural’ (Callebaut, 1987). If so, 
however, when drawing parallels to organic evolution, genetic ‘learning’ by sexual 
recombination and reproduction has to be called a cultural phenomenon, which 
would be against all scientific terminology. 
All theories, plans, and developmental processes have a certain range of compe- 
tence, inside which they act in a well planned, predictable, proven manner - Lamarc- 
kian processes according to the definition given. Outside this range, however, they 
can succeed only according the possibilities of Darwinian trial and error. For em- 
bryogenesis based on a specific genome, for example, the competence ends with 

I 65 
2.13 Physical Social Problem-Solving in Cognitive Evolution 
the production of a viable organism. Whether a certain organism, once it has been 
produced, survives in its physical and social environment is outside the competence 
of the epigenetic system. Here, the only method that organic evolution can apply is 
trial and error (whereas the Lamarckist believes that the developmental process can 
at least partially respond also to external requirements). Something similar applies 
to culturally acquired theories. Economic and social theories, for example, may tell 
us what particular budgetary or employment measure may increase inflation, but 
their competence is not sufficient to fully predict the outcome of more complex 
measures. The consequence is that policy, despite all scientific efforts, is largely a 
matter of trial and error. So, whether we have to call a modifying process Lamarc- 
kian or Darwinian does not depend so much on the process itself but rather on 
whether we look at the process from inside or outside its competence. The terms 
Darwinian and Lamarckian, therefore, describe aspects rather than qualities. 
If we look at two different processes, one from inside, the other from outside 
their competencies, then it is evident that we see different phenomena but these 
need not reflect possibly existing real differences. It is as if one would compare the 
physical hardness of two metals, one below and one above the melting point. We 
have to keep this precaution in mind when comparing genetic and cultural evolu- 
tion: if we speak in terms of theories and knowledge to be transmitted culturally to 
the next generation, we mean proven and tested theories, i.e., the results of cul- 
tural learning, and not the uncontrolled and unproven products of intuition. We 
have to compare these proven and tested theories with the results of genetic ‘learn- 
ing’, i.e., with the proven genetic modifications that have already shown their abil- 
ity by producing an organism that can survive and reproduce and which will there- 
fore be transmitted to the next generation. Gould (and others), however, look at 
cultural evolution from inside its competence and at genetic evolution from out- 
side, i.e., they compare culturally acquired theories that have already passed all 
checks with spontaneous genetic mutations that still have to pass all testing. If at 
all, the latter have to be compared with culture, policy, etc., by looking from outside 
the competence of the theories by means of which we try to guide social develop- 
ment. Then the evolution of culture would be Darwinian, driven by incompetent 
human action in the same way as organic evolution is driven by ‘incompetent’ 
mutations. So, to try to distinguish organic and cultural evolution by means of the 
terms Darwinian and Lamarckian is a kind of semantic confusion (Diettrich, 1992). 
2.1 3 
Physical and Social Problem-Solving in Cognitive Evolution 
To this point, I have dealt with cognitive evolution mainly from the point of view of 
how to manage sensory input or to identify laws of nature, i.e., how to solve the 
problems of our physical environment. Cognitive capabilities were presented mainly 
as tools to improve our physical fitness. The more time, however, we spend in 
social clusters, the more we have to cope with social problems and the more we 
have to improve our social fitness. 

66 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
‘Fitness’ is defined as the quality that contributes to the survival of a species - 
in the narrow sense if only genetically determined qualities are concerned and in 
the broad sense if culturally inheritable forms of behavior and capabilities are 
also considered, including the scientific and organizational skills of Homo sapi- 
ens. Although not customary, I will apply fitness also to theories or strategies if 
they succeed for a long time and under a variety of conditions. A sufficient con- 
dition for biological survival is a high reproduction rate, but it is not necessary: it 
is easy to show that under conditions of profitable social cooperation, maximal 
procreation might be counterproductive and that a restricted and modest repro- 
duction rate can be a better guarantee of long-term survival of the species con- 
cerned. Somatic cells in metazoa that would forget this and reproduce maximally 
like ‘free and independent’ cells will die as cancer cells. To a certain degree hu- 
mans (as well as some socially organized animals) have also acquired the status 
of somatic cells. They still propagate (and, of course, they must do so), but 
mainly according to certain social criteria and not so as to maximize their genetic 
output. Indeed, few of us would invest all our biological and social resources in 
bringing up as many children as possible. We are cultural individuals in so far as 
we strive for cultural and not only for genetic immortality. We strive for a lasting 
contribution to the ‘culture pool’ of our society. Some groups even explicitly re- 
sign (via celibacy) from genetic propagation, to be culturally or socially more effi- 
cient. They recruit their members by social integration instead of by biological 
replication. 
Yet, fitness is a theoretically fruitful notion only if it is more than just a synonym 
for the ability to survive, i.e., it must manifest itself also in other qualities from 
which one could then draw conclusions as to the species’ future position. Other- 
wise, one would run into the well known tautology of ‘survival of the fittest’. It 
would be sufficient, for example, if we could deduce from a species that has sur- 
vived until now that it must have developed so many survival skills that it will have 
a good chance of succeeding also in the future. But this is exactly what we cannot 
do. Special species have developed special skills tailored to the special difficulties 
of the past, but not necessarily those of the future - and particularly not for those 
they have brought about themselves by what they tried in the past. The more so- 
phisticated and comprehensive the problem-solving techniques a species has en- 
gineered are, the more sophisticated and comprehensive will the problems that 
will result as an unintended byproduct be, and the more expensive and trouble- 
some the efforts needed for mastering the new problems. Nearly all problems 
mankind has today result from the success our ancestors had in solving their prob- 
lems. Under these circumstances it is not at all evident that humans, despite all 
their problem-solving capab 
es, have less reason to worry about their future 
than many of the eukaryotes. What is more: because the risk of colliding with the 
boundary conditions of our existence grows with increasing effort and investment, 
we may become victims of irreversible life-threatening long-term consequences, 
and we may well find that progress undertaken for the conservation of the species 
will turn out to be counterproductive. What looked ingenious in its time may have 
been the first step into a dead-end street. 
I 

I 67 
2.13 Physical Social Problem-Solving in Cognitive Evolution 
This process can also be described in somewhat differently. There seems to be 
something that can be called risk-homeostasis (Wilde, 1982). All successful evolu- 
tionary solutions of problems diminish the extinction risk of endangered species. 
On the other hand, species are tempted to load new risks onto the strategic re- 
serves just acquired. The net security yield, therefore, may be zero, or even nega- 
tive when overcompensation occurs. Animals, for example, that cannot only walk 
but also fly should, under otherwise equal conditions, be better adapted then those 
that can only walk or only fly - but only so long as their greater competence will 
not entice them to occupy biotopes where both walking and are required for sur- 
vival, so that the loss of one of these abilities would be fatal. The driver who wastes 
the security benefits of the additional technical facilities of his automobile, such as 
ABS brakes, by driving at a correspondingly higher speed (a behavior that is unfor- 
tunately very common, as insurance companies confirm) is not much better off. 
This principle is very general: the number of potentially fatal problems humans 
have brought about by merely completely exploiting their various capabilities is 
not much less than the number of capabilities themselves, because solving any 
problem implicitly results in the generation of new problems, which are often 
more complex as they derive from a solution that must have overcome the previ- 
ous problem. In terms of ecology, the greatest problem of mankind is probably 
waste management. 
Although we saw that neither organic tools nor theories have a definitive or uni- 
versal value, I firmly believe that there are at least general strategies that are useful 
and therefore recommendable in any situation, even though their long-term profit 
may be reduced by the mechanisms of risk-homeostasis - functionally ‘true’ strat- 
egies so to say, similar to structurally true propositions in the real world. Improv- 
ing and strengthening the methods of rational thinking is of general utility not 
only in science but also in the world of day-to-day living. From what we understand 
as the success of rationality, we often conclude that it must be based on the consti- 
tution of the world we live in, and, consequently, that the worlds order can be 
decoded only by rational methods. From this notion, we conclude that, even in 
those cases in which consciously applied rationality seems to be excluded (as in 
the subconscious or in animal behavior), the success of strategies or the applicabil- 
ity of organs is guaranteed only insofar as they meet rational criteria, i.e., insofar as 
they are ‘ratiomorphic’ (Brunswik, 1955). This means that strategies and construc- 
tion principles (concerning both the physical and the cognitive context) have to 
consider all relevant facts in the same way as an accordingly informed analyst 
would. 
To derive the ‘rational structure’ of our world from the success of rationality and 
to conclude retrogressively that cognitive methods can survive only when being 
ratiomorph reflects the allegation that rationality results from cognitive adaptation 
to the real world (Campbell’s natural-selection epistemology). Because, however, 
the notion of an independent reality evaluating the efforts of those dealing with it 
cannot be explained, as we have seen, the success of rationality can hardly charac- 
terize the world as it is but only the class of rationally solvable problems. Thus, the 
ability of rational thinking cannot represent a value per se based on the particular 

68 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
constitution of the world. Its utility can be defined only in the context of the vari- 
ous applications concerned. Indeed, the high reputation rationality has enjoyed 
since the Enlightenment, particularly in the context of science and technology, is 
mainly based on mankind's decision to favor just those values (such as the physi- 
cal mastery of nature) that can be satisfied only by means of rational methods. The 
development of these methods, in turn, stimulated technology-based cultural 
achievements such as telecommunication, which in turn generated incentives for 
further research in this direction. This statement holds rather generally: there is 
an inherent coevolution between all means and their applications in general 
behavior, cognition, and culture, as well as in organic life. It refers to rationality 
and control of nature (or more particularly to basic research and technological 
applications), biological limbs and manual skills, visual sense organs and space- 
time perception, physical theories and experiments, or culinary tools and feeding 
habits, and so on. None of these tools would make any sense or could be evaluated 
except in the context of the applications that they had evolved with. In particular, 
we cannot say that species with rational capabilities would necessarily dominate 
all other species. With a view to the large number of unsolved human problems 
based primarily on a lack of social coherence rather than of scientific knowledge, 
we cannot exclude that societies specialized in intuitive (and therefore irrational) 
social problem management would, in the long run, be better off than societies 
with a high scientific standing but without the necessary feeling for what the social 
consequences of science can be. 
From another line of thinking we attain at the same conclusion. For a long time 
in human history, the world that humans had to cope with was the physical envi- 
ronment, and they had to master physical problems to survive. The fight against 
cold, hunger, and disease dominated human striving for ages, culminating even- 
tually in modern science and technology, solving nearly all of our classical prob- 
lems. With respect to the scientific possibilities available, mankind is largely satu- 
rated. With increasing social communication, however, the relevant environment 
is shifting more and more from the physical to the social environment, thus open- 
ing up an entirely new set of requirements. Looking at the course of a typical day, 
it is obvious that we spend the most effort in meeting social boundary conditions, 
such as in making money or finding acceptable balances with other peoples' inter- 
ests, rather than in grappling directly with physical needs. Even though scientists 
deal explicitly with the physical structure of the environment, they do so mainly to 
survive in the academic rather than in the physical world. In the long term, this 
may reduce the general curiosity about scientific- technological issues and the 
perception of the physical environment in favor of a sharper comprehension of 
societally relevant matters. Under these aspects, the high strategic importance we 
attribute to scientific and technological capabilities is a relic from times when the 
mastery of nature was the prevailing requisite for survival. Today, most ofthe prob- 
lems we have and even more of those we will have in the future are social in char- 
acter or can be solved only by social measures. So it may well be possible that the 
(Western) cultural dominance of the science of nature is a fading episode in man's 
history, to be replaced by what one could call the societal paradigm. 
I 

I 69 
2.74 Summary 
I would hesitate to see in the present widespread antiscience movement, as 
manifested particularly in the fields of nuclear energy and biotechnology, a first 
indication of a paradigm shift in the sense discussed above. On the one hand, 
these attitudes relate to fears and concerns about fatal applications or otherwise 
risky consequences due to mismanagement, lack of control, or neglecting the 
nonrenewable character of many resources, rather than to a general reevaluation 
of the goals to be achieved by science. On the other hand, however, the fact that 
science has become an issue on the public agenda makes it clear that science is 
going to shift from being a pure survival tool, such as agriculture was, toward one 
of the societal ‘enzymes’ that constitute the mechanism of social development as 
described by Luhmann (1990). 
For the time being, one of the most severe difficulties mankind has ever been 
confronted with is environmental pollution, which is no doubt physical in charac- 
ter. However, even pollution is first of all a social problem, because it requires 
socially reasonable responses to diminish the output rather than scientific effort. 
Scientific solutions, however ingenious and effective, cannot eliminate the mecha- 
nisms of risk-homeostasis, i.e., they cannot prevent a counterproductive increase 
in detrimental production so that, after a while and despite all the technical envi- 
ronmental protection skills we have, pollution will rise to historical levels again - 
or even higher. Unfortunately, there are many similar problems in which the often 
fascinating scientific success in fighting them prevents us from looking at the real, 
i.e., the societal, solution. 
2.14 
Summary 
I have dealt with two different kind of approaches to cognitive evolution and evo- 
lutionary epistemology, referred to as the classical and the nonclassical ap- 
proaches. 
The classical approach is based on the categories of our inborn world view, such 
as subject/object, space, time, causality, and even reality. That these categories are 
inborn imparts great inherent plausibility to this approach. Similarly, classical phys- 
ics is based on the same categories, which is exactly the reason why we can really 
‘understand it, whereas quantum mechanics -however well it may do - remains 
outside its mathematical framework a notionally inexplicable matter. Yet the point 
is that we do not really need to understand physics so long as it helps to master 
nature - whereas it is problematic to explain cognitive evolution by means of a 
notion of reality that has been brought about by cognitive evolution itself. Cogni- 
tive evolution may have had good reasons to ‘convince’ us that it is useful for de- 
scribing the sum total of past and present experience in terms of what we call the 
laws of nature. But evolution did not tell us that these laws would converge to- 
wards definitive, universal versions. This is an anthropomorphic allegation. Be- 
cause evolution at the same time ‘told us that everything has to have a cause, we 
invented ‘ontological reality’, to comprise among other things the universal laws of 

70 
2 Cognitive Evohtion 
nature. This invention (however heuristically dubious it might be) was a paying 
investment. To believe that what we see is real rather than the output of mental 
interpretations restrains us from time-consuming reflection on how appropriate 
our interpretations are, which accelerates many decision-making processes. Real- 
ism also legitimizes all scientific efforts to identify and analyze the structure of 
nature. Any empirical experience can be seen as a lasting contribution to the de- 
coding of nature. Because, from the realistic point of view, the structure of nature 
is definitive and of finite complexity, realism supports the idea that science is not a 
matter of endless striving but can be completed - at least in principle (theory of 
everything). Even epistemologists are made more comfortable by the thought that 
our inborn epistemology might have been evaluated by selection of a real nature 
and its laws. But realism is first of all a theory constructed to explain the definitive, 
objective character of the laws of nature. As a theory, however, realism cannot en- 
dow its subject, reality, with ontological authority. In particular, it cannot declare 
its own subject to be the reason or justification of why it itself came into being. 
Further to this, realism, defined by objective laws, became more problematic when 
it turned out that the laws of nature are neither objective nor definitive. 
The nonclassical approach tries to explain the well documented links between 
action and perception and the possibility of prediction without reference to an 
intermediate independent reality. If the independence of reality is based on the 
objectivity of laws of nature, we must first of all find a possibility to explain these 
laws as human-specific artifacts. 
Here we can profit from physics: after the experiments physicists made with 
quantum mechanics, they agreed that the properties of physical objects have no 
ontological character but are defined as invariants of measurement operators. This 
must apply also for physical laws, which can be seen as the properties of nature and 
which are thus defined as invariants ofthe cognitive apparatus as a whole. I showed 
this by referring to the cognitive operators contained somewhere in our cognitive 
apparatus, which transform the physical input of the sense organs into perceptions. 
The regularities that we perceive and condense into what we call the laws of nature 
can then be considered to be the invariants of cognitive operators. A typical exam- 
ple: the law of energy conservation can be derived from the homogeneity of time 
and thus depend on the time metric generator in our brain. Experimental physicists 
extend our cognitive operators by means of measurement operators. If both opera- 
tors commute in the sense of operator algebra, the measurement results can be 
described in terms ofthe inborn cognitive operators, i.e., in classical terms (quan- 
titative extensions). Otherwise (qualitative extensions), nonclassical theories have 
to be designed. Because qualitative extensions can never be excluded, physics can- 
not be completed. Similar reasoning applies in mathematics: because we (accord- 
ing to Godel, 1931) can never be rule out that the axiomatic system has to be changed, 
mathematics cannot be completed. The idea that the laws of nature are defined as 
invariants of the cognitive apparatus and that they cannot be seen as condensations 
of the experiences we have had with an external world, is very close to what Cruse 
(1999) had in mind when he wrote in a paper on the external and internal views in 
cognitive sciences: “We do not have the experience, we are the experience.” 
I 

I 71 
2.14 Summary 
As to the predictability of the results of our acting, we again can profit from 
physics. Whether a variable in a physical system evolves linearly in time (and can 
therefore easily be predicted) depends on the variables used. According to the theory 
of Hamilton-Jacobi, in many cases transformations can be found that make some 
of the variables ‘cyclic’, i.e., they change linearly in time. If cognitive evolution had 
managed to provide us with perceptional variables that are cyclic with respect to 
our elementary actions, then it is clear why we can extrapolate or predict the per- 
ceptions caused by our actions, such as locomotion. A generalization of this rela- 
tionship between action and perception leads to what Davies called the algebraic 
compressibility of the world. That so many and such complex features of our world 
can be described in rather simple mathematical formulas might well be based on 
functional homologies between the mental roots of perceptual and mathematical 
procedures. 
The most promising effort of the approach proposed here aims at a coherent 
description of organic, cognitive, and scientific evolution. However, the price to be 
paid is high. We have to accept that the laws of nature are phylogenetically ac- 
quired human-specific artifacts; that there is no ‘natural selection epistemology’ 
(in the sense of Campbell, 1974 a); that there will be no complete set of physical 
theories (theory of everything), and that there will be no meaningful context-free 
communication (such as with extraterrestrial beings). On the other hand, I have 
offered some explanations that could hardly have been expected from outside the 
cognitive operator approach: the incompleteness of physical theories and the in- 
completeness of mathematical axioms discerned by Godel (1931) have the same 
cognitive roots -the algorithmic compressibility of the world (which is equivalent 
to the success of induction) is due to the homology of cognitive mechanisms and 
the mechanisms of mathematical thinking. Of particular interest is the link be- 
tween organic and cognitive tools: if cognitive tools are to describe the covariants 
of an operator (i.e., what the operator effects), they have to be designed in terms of 
the operator’s invariants (a principle that has been reinvented by physicists within 
Hamilton-Jacoby and quantum mechanical formalism). Cognitive evolution (in- 
cluding the epistemology applied here) is therefore brought about by organic evo- 
lution (and by the evolution of experimental tools) rather than by trial and error 
and selection. And, vice versa, organic (and experimental) evolution is guided by 
the possibilities provided by cognitive tools. In addition to this I have shown that 
improving our scientific knowledge must not necessarily be the definitive goal of 
cognitive evolution. To the extent that our environment will be defined more and 
more by social boundary conditions rather than physical limitations, it may well be 
possible that in the long term, competence in social problem-solving will be more 
relevant than scientific skills. 
Let me summarize here in a synoptic view how the approach used enables us to 
describe the major elements of organic and cognitive evolution. 

72 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
Organic Evolution: 
Organic evolution has to meet the requirements of the environment (adapta- 
Only appropriate adaptation is retained by natural selection. 
Evolution brings about acting skills and tools to modify the (external) environ- 
ment according to the requirements of the organism (assimilation). 
Thus, discrepancies between the organism and its environment can be reduced 
from both ends, by adaptation, (internal solution) and by assimilation (external 
solution). 
The higher organisms have evolved, the more they use assimilation. (Humans, 
when confronted with physical problems, rely exclusively on external solutions, 
rather than waiting for evolution to provide better adaptation). 
As evolving species modify their environment, the selection power is not static. 
Evolution will therefore not converge towards a definite or optimum state - (no 
definitive species of universal competence) - the pride of creation so to say (or- 
ganic evolution will not reach completion). 
An organic phenotype (and the action tools comprised in it) cannot be ‘true’; to 
survive it must reproduce. 
The variety of organisms is subject to the boundary conditions of cells. The vari- 
ety of cells is subject to the boundary conditions of molecules, etc. 
The success of organs is specific to species. 
Organisms of different species usually cannot communicate genetically, i.e., in- 
terbreed. 
Genetic mutations, once they have passed all internal and external selection 
mechanisms, can be transferred directly to the next generation. Mutations are 
modifications of approved genotypes and are subject to genomic boundary con- 
ditions. So they are in many cases more promising than a stochastically rede- 
signed genome. Regarding Darwinism/Lamarckisrn, there is a strict balance 
between organic evolution and the evolution of science. 
Organisms with a novel phenotype are not necessarily obliged to meet the re- 
quirements of their actual niches. They can emigrate to more appropriate ones, 
i.e., they can find a better application for their phenotype. 
I 
tion). 
2.1 5 
References 
BARROW, J. D. (1990) Theories of Everything. Oxford University Press. 
BOCK, W. J. (1980) The definition and recognition of biological adaptation. 
BRADIE, M. (1986) Assessing evolutionary epistemology. Biology and Philosophy 
BRUNSWIK, E. (1955) ‘Ratiomorphic’ models of perception and thinking. 
Amer. Zool. 20, 217-227. 
1,401-459. 
Acta Ph~siol. 11, 108-109. 

I 73 
2.15 References 
CALLEBAUT, 
W. (1987) Why it makes sense to extend the genotypelphenotype 
distinction to culture. La Nuova Critica, Nuova Sene I-II, Problemi epistemo- 
logici della biologia 2, 65. 
CAMPBELL, 
D. T. (1974a) Evolutionary epistemology. In: The Philosophy of 
Karl Popper, Part I (Ed. P. SCHILPP). Open Court: La Salle, pp. 413463. 
CAMPBELL, 
D. T. (1974b) Unjustified variation and selection in scientific 
discovery. In: Studies in Philosophy of Biology (Eds. F. J. AYALA, 
T. DOBZHANSKY). 
Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 139-161. 
Open University Press. 
Cognition 5 (2), 162-173. 
CHALMERS, 
A. F. (1982) What is this Thing Called Science? Buckingham: 
CRUSE, 
H. (1999) Feeling our body - the basis of cognition? Evolution and 
CURIO, 
E. (1973) Towards a methodology of teleonomy. Experientia 29, 
DANCY, J., SOSA, E. (Eds.) (1992) A Companion to Epistemology. Oxford: Blackwell. 
DAVIES, P. C. W. (1990a) Why is the physical world so comprehensible? In: 
Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information, Santa Fe Institute Studies in 
the Sciences of Complexity, Vol. 8 (Ed. W. H. ZUREK). 
London: Addison Wesley, 
1045-1058. 
pp. 61-70. 
DAVIES, P. C. W. (1990b) Why is the universe knowable? In: Mathematics and 
Science (R. E. MICKENS, Ed.). New York: World Scientific Press, pp. 14-33. 
DAWKINS, 
R. (1982) The extended phenotype. Oxford and San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman. 
DIETTRICH, 0. (1989) Kognitive, organische und gesellschaftliche Evolution. 
Berlin and Hamburg: Parey. 
DIETTRICH, 
0. (1991) Induction and evolution o f  cognition and science. 
Philosophica 47/11. 
DIETTRICH, 0. (1992) Darwin, Lamarck and the evolution o f  life and culture. 
Evolution and Cognition 2 ( 3 ) ,  16-31. 
DIETTRICH, 0. (1994a) Heisenberg and Godel in the light of constructivist 
evolutionary epistemology. Ludus Vitalis 2 (2), 119-130. 
DIETTRICH, 0. (1994b) Is there a theory of everything? Bulletin of the Institute of 
Mathematics and Its Applications 80, 166-170. 
DIETTRICH, 0. (1995) Some relations between organic and cognitive evolution. 
In: Proceedings of International Seminar on Evolutionary Systems, Vienna, March 
1995. 
DIETTRICH, 
0. (1997) Sprache als Theorie. Papiere zur Linguistik 56, 77-106. 
DOBZHANSKY, 
T. (1973) Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light o f  
EINSTEIN, A., Bosso, M. (1972) Correspondence 1903-1955. Paris: Gallimard. 
FEYNMAN, 
R. P. (1965) The Character of Physical Law. London: BBC Publication. 
GIASEKSFELD, 
E. VON (1995) Radical Constructivism. London: Palmer. 
GODEL, 
K. (1931) Uber formal unentscheidbare Satze der Principia Mathematica 
und venvandter Systeme, Vol. 1. Monatshefte fur Mathematik und Physik 38, 
evolution. Amer. Biol. Teacher 35, 125-129. 
173-198. 

74 
2 Cognitive Evolution 
GOODMANN, 
N. (1984) Weisen der Welterzeugung. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 
GOULD, 
S. J. (1979) Another look at Lamarck. New Scientist 4 Oct., 38. 
G U ~ E N P L A N ,  
S. (1994) A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind. 
HAECKEL, 
E. (1902) Naturliche Schopjkgsgeschichte, 10th ed. Berlin: Georg 
HAWKING, 
S. W. (1979) Is the end in sight for theoretical physics? 
HAYEK, 
F. VON (1983) Sitte, Ordnung und Nahrung. Frankhrter Allgemeine 
HOFSTADTER, 
D. R. (1979) Godel, Escher, Bach. London: Harvester Press. 
HOSLE, 
V. (1988) Tragweite und Grenzen der evolutionaren Erkenntnistheorie. 
Zeitschrijfir Allgemeine Wissenschajstheorie 19, 343-377. 
KATZ, M. J. (1982) Ontogenetic mechanisms: the middle ground of evolution. In: 
Evolution and Development (Ed. J. T. BONNER). Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: 
Springer, pp. 207-217. 
LORENZ, K. (1941) Kant's Lehre vom Apriorischen im Lichte gegenwartiger 
Biologie. Blatterfir Deutsche Philosophie 15 S, 96125. 
LORENZ, K. (1966) Uber tierisches und menschliches Verhalten. Gesammelte 
Abhandlungen. Munich: Piper. 
LORENZ, K. (1971) Knowledge, beliefs and freedom. In: Hierarchically Organized 
Systems in Theory and Practice (Ed. P. WEISS). 
New York: Hafner, pp. 231-262. 
LORENZ, K. (1983) Kants Lehre vom Apriorischen im Lichte der gegenwartigen 
Biologie. In: Die Evolution des Denkens (Eds. K. LORENZ, F. M. WUKETITS). 
Munich: Piper, pp. 95-124. 
Wissenschajstheorie, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 
I 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Reimer. 
Inaugural Lecture for the Lucasian Chair. University of Cambridge. 
Zeitung, 30 July 1983. 
LORENZEN, P., SCHWEMMER, 
0. (1975) Konstruktive Logik, Ethik und 
LUCAS, J. R. (1961) Minds, Machines and Godel. Philosophy 36, 120-124. 
LUHMANN, N. (1990) Die Wissenschaj der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 
MEDAWAR, 
P. (1988) Lamarckism. In: The Fontana Dictionary ofModern Thought 
NAGEL, E., NEWMAN, J. (1958) Godel's ProoJ: London: Routledge. 
OESER, E. (1984) The evolution of scientific method. In: Concepts and Approaches 
in Evolutionary Epistemology (Ed. F. M. WUKETITS). 
Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 149- 
184. 
(Eds. A. BULLOCK, T. S. STALLYBRASS). 
London: Fontana/Collins. 
PENROSE, 
R. (1989) The Emperor's New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
PIAGET, 
J. (1967) Biologie et Connaissance. Paris: Gallimard. 
PIAGET, 
J. (1970) Genetic Epistemology. New York: Columbia University Press. 
PIAGET, J. (1974) Adaptation Vitale et Psychologie de l'lntelligence. Paris: Hermann. 
POPPER, 
R. K. (1973) Objektiue Erkenntnis. Hamburg: Hoffman and Campe. 
POPPER, 
R. K. (1982) Logik der Forschung. Tubingen: Mohr. 
PRIGOGINE, 
I. (1979) Vom Sein zum Werden. Munich, Zurich: Piper. 
REICHENBACH, H. (1924) Axiomatik der relatiuistischen Raum-Zeit-Lehre. 
RIEDL, R. (1975) Die Ordnung des Lebendigen. Berlin: Parey. 
Braunschweig: Vieweg. 

I 75 
2.75 References 
RIEDL, R. (1980) Biologic der Erkenntnis. Berlin, Hamburg: Parey. 
RUSE, M. (1986) Taking Dawin Seriously. Oxford: Blackwell. 
SIMON, H. A. (1983) Reason in Human Afairs. Stanford, CA.: Stanford 
SOLOMONOFF, 
R. (1964) A formal theory of inductive inference. Information and 
SPENCER, 
H. (1872) Principles ofPsychology, Vol. 2. London: William and Norgat. 
STEGMULLER, 
W. (1971) Das Problem der Induktion: Hume’s Herausforderung und 
UEXKULL, 
J. VON (1921) Umwelt und Innenleben der Tiere. Berlin: Springer. 
VOLLMER, 
G. (1975) Evolutioniire Erkenntnistheorie. Stuttgart: Hirzel. 
WADDINGTON, 
C. H. (1957) The Strategy ofthe Genes. London: Allen & Unwin. 
WADDINGTON, 
C. H. (1959) Evolutionary systems: animal and human. 
Nature 182, 1634-1638. 
WAGNER, 
G. P. (1984) The logical basis of evolutionary epistemology. In: Concepts 
and Approaches in Evolutionary Epistemology (Ed. F. M .  WUKETITS). 
Dordrecht: 
Reidel. 
University Press. 
Control, 7, 224-254. 
modeme Antworten. Braunschweig: Vieweg. 
WEIZSACKER, 
C. F. VON (1985) Aufbau der Physik. Miinchen: Hanser. 
WIGNER, 
E. (1960) The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural 
WILDE, 
G. J. S. (1982) The theory of risk homeostasis: implications for safety and 
WUKETITS, 
F. M. (1981) Biologie und Kausalitiit. Berlin: Parey. 
WUKETITS, 
F. M. (1984) Evolutionary epistemology. In: Concepts and Approaches 
WUKETITS, 
F. M. (1990) Evolutionary Epistmology and its Implications for Human 
WUKETITS, 
F. M. (1998) Functional realism. La Nuova Critica, Nuova Serie 1-11, 
ZEH, H. D. (1984) Die Physik der Zeitrichtung. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. 
sciences. Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 13, 1. 
health. Risk Analysis 2 (4), 209-225. 
in Evolutionary Epistemology (Ed. F. WUKETITS). 
Dordrecht: Reidel. 
Kind. Albany (NY): Suny. 
Quademo 31-32, pp. 5-21. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

I 77 
3 
Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
Harald Haarmann 
3.1 
Introduction 
The relationship between the basic concepts ‘evolution’ and ‘language’ is complex. 
We can understand it in a way that language is involved in evolution and has expe- 
rienced changes in the process. We can investigate the role that language has played 
as a means of communication in the communities of different hominid species. 
We can try to find out about the origins of speech sound production, about the 
mental preconditions of this “intricate set of structural and representational mecha- 
nisms’’ (Bickerton, 1994, p. 2881) that we call language, and about how language 
has functioned throughout the ages as a tool for constructing culture (Arutyunov, 
1989; Haarmann, 2000). 
This field of study is intriguing because, unlike other domains of language sci- 
ences, its pertinent issues have, for the longest time in the history of science, been 
tabooed or simply marginalized. In 1866, the Linguistic Society of Paris refused to 
accept any studies dealing with the origins of language. The main argument for 
barring such studies from the scientific record was that the nature of statements 
about the origins of language could only be speculative. 
For more than a hundred years, linguists remained impressed by the wisdom of 
the Linguistic Society and, even today, some experts entertain the same idea of the 
allegedly ‘unscientific’ nature of the subject. Astonishingly, an unprecedented ren- 
aissance of research on evolution and language occurred in the 1990s, and this 
domain has established itself as an arena of scholarly debate in which even re- 
nowned linguists and behavioral scientists do not hesitate to participate. Scholarly 
activities are accelerating, and more and more efforts are made to reconcile find- 
ings from various scientific fields that might enhance progress. This chapter pays 
special attention to interdisciplinary approaches to the problem area. 
Human beings are involved in processes of biological evolution as are other liv- 
ing creatures. A facet of evolution that is common to all primates, to ape species 
and to humans, is the working of cultural evolution. Research in animal commu- 
nication has highlighted the existence of networks of interaction in ape communi- 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 1: The Evolution ofHuman Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
- 
. , - . . . .- . 

78 
3 Evolution, language, and the Construction ofculture 
ties which deserve the label ‘culture’ (Bekoff and Jamieson, 1996). This insight 
might come as a surprise to traditionalists who consider culture to be a concept 
reserved for the realm of interaction among human beings. In fact, the evolution 
of language as a vehicle of human culture cannot be assigned its proper role when 
one leaves out the links of human culture in the wider panorama of cultural activi- 
ties in primate species. 
Modern humans (modern Homo supiens) share with other primates the use of 
nonverbal sign systems such as poses and gestures. Therefore, nonverbal commu- 
nication has a long tradition in primate evolution. Language, too, is not exclusive 
to modern humans. There are two other hominid species for which its use can be 
reasonably asserted, and these are archaic humans (archaic Homo sapiens or Homo 
neanderthulensis or Neanderthal man) and Homo erectus. These earlier hominid 
species were capable of producing speech sounds. Archaic man’s capability to dis- 
tinguish qualities of speech sounds was rather limited, as was his capacity to or- 
ganize meaningful elements in a linear sequence (Section 3.5). The stage of devel- 
opment of language in archaic man was that of a protolanguage that lacked the 
sophistication of modern human language. 
“Human language is an embarrassment for evolutionary theory because it is 
vastly more powerful than one can account for in terms of selective fitness” 
(Premack, 1985, p. 283). Indeed, it is an embarrassment when the evolution of 
language is viewed in the light of traditional ideas of adaptation. In the light of the 
capabilities of modern humans to devise grammatical structures and communica- 
tional strategies, we have to acknowledge the astonishing fact that the faculty of 
language as an elaborate means of information technology in modern humans 
cannot be explained by applying traditional categories of evolution theory associ- 
ated with models of refining skills in the process of adaptation. Modern man’s 
capabilities of verbal communication are due to a qualitative leap in evolution, not 
a gradual development reflecting the adaptation principle. 
Language is the major vehicle for organizing social relations among individuals 
as members of a group, and it functions in this role also to guarantee successful 
interaction in larger communities. The faculty of complex language gave modern 
humans the edge over the other hominid species living contemporaneously, ar- 
chaic or Neanderthal man. For at least 12 000 years, modern man and archaic man 
lived in the same areas in southwestern France and in the Iberian Peninsula. Set- 
tlements have been found with evidence of cohabitation of both species (Carbonell 
and Vaquero, 1996). In the process of contact, Neanderthal man’s lithic industry 
was ‘modernized, while modern humans, competing with archaic man, were chal- 
lenged to develop their organizational skills. Some have argued that the disappear- 
ance of archaic man might have been due to colonization and suppression by 
modern man as the superior species. Late remains of archaic man can be identi- 
fied in Andalucia, dating to about 29 000 BCE (before the common era). After that 
time there are no traces of that hominid species. 
The leap in evolution is also true for other domains of modern humans’ cultural 
activities. Palaeolithic rock art is one such domain. Already in the oldest pictures 
painted on the walls of caves that were found in Europe and Africa, a refined aes- 
I 

I 79 
3.2 Identification through language and its Impact on Culture Processes 
thetic sense is reflected. From the beginnings of documentation, modern man was 
capable of producing naturalistic pictures as well as using abstract symbols. This 
can be deduced from the presence, in earliest rock art, of paintings of animals and 
alignments of dots and strokes or of grid motifs. Although archaic humans had 
the capacity to produce abstract symbols (e.g., a cross sign scratched on a bone 
plaque), no specimens of figurative art have come down to us. It is noteworthy that 
the sense of symmetry is already at work in Homo erectus. This is evidenced by 
bifacial tools in the lithic production of that species (Foster, 1990). Neanderthal 
man obviously had the capacity to apply the organizing principle of symmetry more 
systematically. Modern man's sense of symmetry is thus the result of a long proc- 
ess of evolution. 
To sum up, the cultural capacities of modern humans reflect a set of skills that 
are partly the result of long-term evolution and partly the product of a leap: 
Capabilities with a longer tradition of evolution: 
- nonverbal communication (communication by symbolic manipulation of poses 
- a sense of symmetry 
- perception of abstract visual symbols as meaningful signs 
and gestures) 
Capabilities of modern humans with insignificant representation in other homi- 
nid species: 
- verbal communication (the production of a variety of speech sounds and the 
- an aesthetic sense (the creation of naturalistic pictures and sculptures, start- 
alignment of meaningful elements in the spoken code) 
ing in the Upper Palaeolithic period) 
3.2 
Identification through Language and its Impact on Culture Processes 
The evolutionary leap that occurred with the elaboration of language skills in mod- 
ern humans cannot be explained by the workings of the adaptation mechanism. 
And yet, there is a mental force in human beings that made such a leap possible, 
for the simple reason that this force required a sophisticated means in which it can 
crystallize. This driving force is identity or, to be more precise, the identification 
process. In the discussion of the grand theme of cultural evolution, identity has 
been widely neglected. In this chapter, I intend to highlight its significance. Hu- 
manity's striving for control of their environment was not based on a plan devised 
by some individuals in the remote past, which spread and inspired others to follow 
suit. Rather, it was connected to some inner force that is responsible for man's 
entire cultural enterprise. Identity is a complex mechanism providing an individual 
with the capacity of multiple choice in decision-making and role relations. Identity 
is not a phenomenon that - once achieved - continues unchanged. Rather, identity 
is a dynamic process that is renewed in everyday interactions and is subject to 
potential changes (Haarmann, 1996). 

80 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
A human being may play many social and cultural roles during his or her life- 
time, and the values as well as the priorities of cultural activities change from 
childhood to older ages. This dynamic property of identity - its involvement in the 
constant mental build-up responding to changing needs - is responsible for the 
manifold impulses which have led, throughout the cultural history of modern hu- 
mans, to the elaboration of ever-new sign systems, designed for a great variety of 
purposes. 
The process of identification in its broadest sense is equal to the mental con- 
struction of the Selfin contrast or relation to the Other(s). This is so elementary as 
to function as a motor for all kinds of interaction and cultural activities. Identity. 
that is, the awareness of one’s Self in distinction from Others, works in modern 
man in a way that it did not in other hominid species. Individuality and self-aware- 
ness were much less developed in Neanderthal man. Identity enhances intention- 
ality, and this in turn enhances the use of a sophisticated means to crystallize: 
language (Lyons, 1995). Intentionality is fairly week in primates, although it is 
present on a rudimentary level. An evolutionary reminiscence of this rudimentary 
stage of intentionality is still discernible in modern humans, namely in the some- 
how diffuse, prelinguistic intentionality of early childhood. 
Linguists have been impressed by the skills of chimpanzees in learning human 
language (Savage-Rumbaugh and Lewin 1994). Behavioral experiments with apes 
nourishes the idea that ‘nonhuman animals’ have their own representational pat- 
terns of cognitive categories of the world (Dupre, 1996). Such insights may be 
helpful for understanding brain capacities in different species on the evolutionary 
continuum. However, they provide little assistance for the study of communicational 
skills and their evolution in modern man. 
The crucial issue in cultural evolution is not the mental capacity to perform 
certain acts but rather the incentive that drives one species to elaborate and use a 
sophisticated technology such as language, and the others not to. Chimpanzees do 
not need language in their natural environment. Therefore, they have not activated 
their brain capacities to this end. On the other hand, modern humans would not 
be able to construct their cultural environment without verbal skills. Our need of 
language is intrinsically associated with the challenges of our identification proc- 
ess. The recent discovery of a so-called architect gene that is responsible for cer- 
ebral asymmetry and language (Crow, 1996) may contribute to the understanding 
of the driving force that is inherent in the identification process. 
I 
If identity is central to the culture process, then 
the theory of identity has to be regarded as the basic theory of all the hu- 
manities, on which the more specialized ethnological and other anthropo- 
logical disciplines ... would have to be based and elaborated (Muller, 1987, 
p. 391). 
Ifthe identification process and the driving force of intentionality are much stronger 
in modern humans than in archaic man or other hominid subspecies, then we 
must also expect that the most important vehicle for articulating intentionality, 
language, is much more elaborate in modern humans than in their predecessors. 

I 81 
3.2 Identijkation through Language and its Impact on Culture Processes 
Language -the most efficient natural sign system - has taken over a great deal 
of the functions that were necessary for the cultural construction of the world. 
‘Constructing’ culture means making the world understandable through symbols. 
in no other hominid species was symbol-making as essential as it was for modern 
man, who has been called Homo symbolicus for this reason (Deacon, 1997, p. 340 ff.). 
The cultures of modern humans are much more sophisticated than those of ar- 
chaic man, and this by all standards, because language is so effective. In the dy- 
namic process of identification, the relationship between the major factors can be 
specified as follows: 
identification process 3 intentionality ts language 
From the beginnings of social relations among modern humans, oral tradition 
was a prominent source for organizing the collective experience of the speech com- 
munity in the cultural process. Arguably, the oldest text genre to develop was the 
explanation of the world within the framework of mythical categories (Donald, 
1991, p. 267 ff.). In the mythical tradition, motivation for learning from experience 
and for making plans for the future may crystallize and produce an interpretation 
of one’s position in the world. In a comparative view of oral traditions, the modern 
observer is amazed at man’s imaginative skills to communicate with spirits and 
other divine beings for different purposes (see Novik, 1989, p. 137 ff. for examples 
of shamanistic rituals among Siberian peoples). 
The most elementary layer of mythical experience that we find in the worlds 
cultures are myths of origin, usually explaining, in ethnocentric terms, how a cer- 
tain group of people (a clan or kin group) was the focus of the creation process for 
which spirits or divine beings are held responsible. Spoken language served as a 
means for perpetuating mythical ideas, and its use was always associated with and 
related to the items in a given culture’s environment. Orality is more than what 
historians choose as their target when inspecting sources of oral history: verbal 
narratives. The experience with orality in traditional cultures teaches us that the 
memorized collective knowledge in a speech community is reiterated, renewed, 
and/or elaborated in ritualistic performances such as story-telling, ritual chanting 
and dancing, and competitions ofverbal and other performance skills (Hoem, 1995, 
pp. 31 ff., 104 ff.). Ritual chanting, for example, makes sense only under the con- 
dition that the verbal narrative is closely associated with local cultural symbolism. 
To exemplify this, I draw the readers’s attention to oral tradition among the Navajo 
Indians, which is closely associated with their sand pictures. When a Westerner 
lool<s at Navajo sand pictures in ethnographic studies or in popular publications 
on ethnic styles in art - that is, without their embedding in their original cultural 
context - he or she perceives them as items of ‘art’ (Westerners speak of ‘sand 
paintings’) or ‘design’. When viewing such ‘designs’ in their proper cultural con- 
text, one understands that sand pictures are a ritualistic tool, that their figural and 
abstract motifs are heavily imbued with mythical symbolism, that the selection of 
items in a picture is canonical, and that they always function in association with 
ritual performances, specifically ritual chanting (Griffin-Pierce, 1992, p. 98 ff.). Once 

82 
3 Evolution, language, and the Construction ofculture 
the verbal performance has come to an end, the sand pictures are destroyed, be- 
cause their visual retention beyond the ritual would be a sacrilege. Therefore, the 
simple fact of technically reproducing sand pictures in photographs is a violation 
of ritual constraints that are valid in traditional Navajo culture. 
Since ancient times, verbalized memories have been associated with visual items 
and/or auditory experiences (e.g., ritual chanting) of a given regional culture. It is 
from this crucial interplay of verbalized and audio-visualized elements - the bricks 
for the construction of culture - that the impulses sprang for devising notational 
systems. The term ‘notational system’ is subsumed, as a subcategory, under the 
overall category of ‘sign system’, which denotes an orderly organized set of sym- 
bols. The processes of developing notational systems follow two mainstreams, one 
is the visualization of language, the other is the visualization of ideas excluding 
language. Since language, humanity’s most effective sign system, is of ancient 
origin, one would be inclined to assume that the visualization of language-ori- 
ented information would have been the older of the two notational processes. How- 
ever, this is not so. Among the language-based notational technologies, writing is 
the most specialized and - at the same time - the most recent achievement in 
cultural history. The oldest known writing system that emerged from the milieu 
of the Danube civilization dates back to around 5500 BCE (Haarmann, 2002b, 
p. 19 ff.). 
Those notational systems that operate without the participation of language, such 
as numerical notation, have the longest record. Modern humans colonized Europe 
in the Upper Palaeolithic Age, and from that period stems the oldest documenta- 
tion of numerical notation. Among the items of mobile art in the caves that were 
frequented by humans are so-called ‘commando sticks’, deer antlers or mammoth 
ivory that often bear alignments ofabstract signs (i.e., strokes, lines, dots). Certain 
sign ensembles have been interpreted as an early approach to fixate information 
about phases of the moon. Such notational systems have been highlighted as “one 
of the most complex cultural developments of a hunter-gatherer society in the 
record of anatomically modern man” (Marshack, 1990, p. 481 f.). 
I 
3.3 
Variation and Variability: 
The Organizational Principle Par Excellence in Processes of Evolution 
In processes of evolution, there is a major arbitrator, and this is the working of the 
principle of variation. If variation works in the evolution of the living world, then 
variability is its intimate ingredient. From the very beginning of biological evolu- 
tion, life forms proliferate into ever-more-individual species. The reason for the 
proliferation of life forms is obvious. Every new species had the chance to better 
adapt to differing environmental conditions and to develop more sophisticated 
strategies of adaptation. The panorama of various life forms provided a solid guar- 
antee of the persistence of life on earth. The more variation between species, the 
greater the chance for life to persist. 

I 83 
3.3 The Organizational Principle Par Excellence in Processes of Evolution 
The validity of this life-assuring principle proved itself in several disasters that 
were caused by the impacts of meteorites into the earth crust at different times 
during earth‘s history. One of the most devastating collisions with a meteorite 
occurred about 60 million years ago. This catastrophe resulted in the loss of 
more than 80% of the then-living species, including most of the dinosaur spe- 
cies. The only dinosaurs to survive were those from which birds evolved. It has 
been estimated that only those animal species survived that weighed less than 
10 kg. 
The principle of variation is discernible in the evolution of primate species. 
Modern man is one among several variations of hominid species. With the excep- 
tion of Neanderthal man, who, in the late period of his existence, was contempo- 
rary with modern humans, other hominid species are predecessors whose links to 
us can be demonstrated in terms of genomic structures and biological descent. 
Although still a matter of dispute, the links to Neanderthal man seem to be the 
closest that can be identified for modern man. 
Variation is also the major arbitrator in the evolution of cultural patterns. Homo 
habilis deserves the name, judging from their capability to use certain objects in 
the environment, such as stones or sticks as tools, although they would have done 
this only occasionally. Homo habilis did not yet produce tools for specific functions. 
This organizational skill was developed in Homo erectus, the first of the hominid 
species to control fire, although its actual mastery may have taken a long time of 
experimenting. With Homo erectus we find the beginnings of symbolic ability, that 
is, an ability to use visual symbols. Evidence for this comes from a region that had 
been, since the earliest presence ofhominids, a contact area where influences from 
different directions were felt. 
In one ofthe caves in the mountainous region of Karabakh (western Aserbaijan), 
the Azykh cave, the skull of a bear with man-made notches was found. The cul- 
tural strata of this particular find dates back to the lower Acheulian period, to about 
430 000 BP (before present). ‘All the notches are made by dented tools with bifacial 
edges. The notches seem to be related to some religious ideas ofthe Azykh people” 
(Guseynov, 1985, p. (38). 
Obviously, the presence of abstract signs on the skull (whose lower jaw was de- 
liberately removed) near the hearth is noteworthy, as is the assembling oftwo lower 
jaws from bear skulls in the form of a cross. Judging from circumstantial evidence, 
one can assert some magical purpose in connection with the cult of the cave bear 
(Haarmann, 1992, p. 55 f.). 
The concept of evolution is intrinsically associated with time. Evolutionary stages 
of life forms can be pinpointed in relation to absolute chronology. This enables the 
observer to understand the processes of specialization and proliferation in the ho- 
rizon of time. Variation in cultural patterns evolves in a spatiotemporal continuum, 
which means that culture varies in space and time. The working of spatiotemporal 
variation leads us far back into the history of hominid species. The time depth is 
the greatest in Africa, where the early primates and all the hominid species are 
documented. Homo erectus spread into Asia and Europe, as did Neanderthal man. 
However, Australia and the Americas have no fossil remains of earlier hominid 

84 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
species. Australia was peopled by modern humans before GO 000 BP, but North 
America, no earlier than 15 000 BCE. 
At an early stage, spatial variation is observable in the evolution of cultural abili- 
ties. This is related to the cultural horizon of archaic man. Pilbeam (1988, p. 134) 
stated that “by 150-200 thousand years ago, European populations begin to di- 
verge from archaic sapiens populations elsewhere”. 
The anthropological properties of Neanderthal man are best evidenced from finds 
in Europe and west Asia. Most of the archaeological evidence for symbolic activity, 
that is, for the use of visual symbols, “comes from the Mousterian period and the 
Eurasian area of Neanderthal habitation” (Marshack, 1990, p. 459). 
This, however, cannot be interpreted as a lack of symbolic activity in archaic man 
outside Eurasia. Rather, it is indicative of a more flexible adaptation of archaic man 
in the Eurasian environment. 
Neanderthal man’s artistic skills are evidenced from early European sites, for 
instance, a carved mammoth tooth plaque (c. 100 000 years old at Tata, Hungary) 
or pendant beads with bored holes (c. 110 000 years old at Bocksteinschmiede, 
Germany). Although still a matter of scholarly dispute, evidence may exist of ar- 
chaic man’s shll in sculpture, for instance, bear figurines made of flint. Among 
the inventions of Neanderthal man in Europe are objects with various functions 
made of bone, such as needles, flutes, and drums. The use of red ochre is evident 
in Europe since the late Acheulian (c. 120 000 years BP) for archaic man (Marshack, 
1981); in other parts of the world, however, only for modern man (Boshier and 
Beaumont, 1972 for the Mesolithic in Swaziland). As an example of archaic man’s 
sense of abstraction and symmetry, I mention the fossil nummulite from Tata 
(Hungary), on which a cross sign is engraved. 
With the appearance of modern man, the impetus for symbol-making becomes 
more dynamic. Still in the Upper Palaeolithic, the evidence for symbolic produc- 
tion comes predominantly from Eurasia. Among the outstanding genres of artistic 
activities are sculpture and painting. From the very beginning, the tradition of 
sculpture in Europe shows variety in style and motif. Human figurines depicting 
males are rare compared with the abundance of female statuary. The female sculp- 
tures are of two different physical types. Generally speaking, the voluminous type 
of statuette with protruding breasts and buttocks is characteristic of European sites, 
whereas in Siberia, the female images are more slender and their attributes less 
prominent (Abramova, 1995). 
Cave painting is another well-documented domain in which modern man has 
demonstrated his skills. European cave painting especially shows great variety in 
motif, style, and complexity of pictorial composition. Early cave art is distinguished 
in two ways. One is the compositional technique of combining two categories of 
symbols, namely naturalistic or subnaturalistic motifs with abstract symbols, lin- 
ear and stylized. If humans’ general capacity of using symbols is the key to culture, 
then the capacity of distinguishing between iconicity and abstractness as two cog- 
nitive procedures is a practical approach to constructing culture. In the early cave 
paintings, the two techniques are applied in compositions from the beginning. 
The other outstanding characteristic is that this duality in visual techniques exhib- 
I 

3.4 Language and the Evolution of Communicational Skills 
85 
its a parallel manifestation in “the appearance of both representational and non- 
figurative mobile art” (Straus, 1990, p. 293). Evidence for this is found in the caves 
of Levantine and Vasco-Cantabrian Spain as well as in southwestern France (Anati, 
1995). 
I 
3.4 
Variation 1: Language and the Evolution of Communicational Skills 
In the horizon of time one can observe that the number of sign systems that hu- 
mans have devised multiplies with a stronger drive of intentionality and with an 
increase of communicational needs in higher stages of cultural development. Sign 
systems, of which language is but one, have served in constructing culture in all 
parts of the world, and their great variety can be categorized according to various 
parameters. 
Sign systems are distinguished according to their relatedness to the most basic 
cultural institution, language (i.e., nonverbal sign systems versus language-related 
systems), their relatedness to various stages of cultural evolution (i.e., traditional 
culture versus high culture), and their varying degrees of functional specialization 
(i.e., elementary versus specialized functions). In Figure 3.1, sign systems are po- 
sitioned according to their primary properties. Sign systems may be complex, that 
is, they may be characterized by primary as well as secondary properties. In a com- 
plex system, one can observe the working of symbolic techniques that are them- 
selves manifestations of differing principles. 
For example, the system of traffic signs and signals is categorized as a special- 
ized system in the section of nonverbal sign systems, because its basic signal func- 
tions rely on the forms and colors of mostly abstract symbols. The nonverbal com- 
ponent is the primary property of this system. As a secondary property, traffic signs 
may also be language-related, as in written signs such as ‘STOP’, ‘3 KM’, ‘ONE 
WAY’, ‘THRU TRAFFIC’, ‘ROAD UNDER CONSTRUCTION’, and the many place 
names that are written on plaques and boards. So, the system of traffic signs has a 
secondary property, for which it also ranges in the section of specialized language- 
related systems. 
In Figure 3.1, two sign systems are positioned at the very bottom stage of cul- 
tural evolution: mimicry in the section of nonverbal sign systems, and language in 
the other section. These sign systems differ from most others in that their functions 
are most elementary and in that the means for their use are provided by nature (i.e., 
the brain, the vocal cords, muscular activity for producing poses and postures, limbs 
such as arms and fingers for creating gestures). From the standpoint of cultural 
evolution, mimicry and language are closely interrelated. Judging from the impor- 
tance of gestural and tactile interaction among primates, human language “clearly 
evolved in a matrix of extensive non-verbal communication” (Tanner and Zihlman, 
1976, p. 474). As we all know from experience, interaction by means of language 
and mimicry still functions in modern society. In this synchrony of communica- 
tional means we find considerable cultural variation. People in Scandinavia are 

OJ 
QI 
L J  
Non-verbal sign systems 
Language and language-related sign systems 
- 
stages 
Elementary systems 
Specialid systems 
Elementary systems 
Specialized systems 
rn 
cultural 
0 
c q 
F E  
P E  
E 
Gestures and poses (mimicry) 
- 
Symbolism in ceremonial and 
ritual dances 
- Magic and religious symbolism 
- 
System of gesture signs and 
symbols (used as a means of 
interethnic communication among 
the North American Plains Indians) 
- 
Drum language 
- 
System of smoke signals 
- 
Whistle language (e.g., among 
Mexican Indians in Tlaxcala) 
- 
Symbolism of pictorial literacy 
- Symbolism in games (e.g.. board games) 
- Identification symbolism 
(e.g., marks of ownership, trade marks) 
-Heraldry (e.g., symbols of authority, seals) 
-Numeric notation 
-Weights, measures, and the 
monetary system 
-Pictographic writing 
- 
Notation of music 
- 
Sign systems in professional fields 
using logographic symbols (e.g., 
mathematics, astronomy) 
- 
T r a c  signs and signals 
- 
Sign language for deaf people 
- Digital processing of 
information 
(gestural code) 
- Language (signs of verbal 
behavior) 
Phonographic writing 
Systems related to 
systems (syllabic, alphabetic) alphabetic writing: 
- 
Flag signalling 
- 
Morse system 
- 
Sign systems in professional 
- 
Sign language for deaf people 
fields (e.g.. chemistry) 
(finger spelling) 
Figure 3.1 
Sign systems in a cultural framework (adapted from Haarmann, 1997). 

3.4 Language and the Evolution ofCornrnunicational Skills 
known for their ‘weak‘ body talk, but in Mediterranean and Arab countries gesticu- 
lating as a reinforcement of verbal messages is much more vivid. 
According to popular prejudice, mimic signs are universal means for expressing 
emotions and emotion-oriented attitudes. However, mimic signs function in cul- 
turally specific systems (Bremmer and Roodenburg, 1993). Even simple gestures 
may express very different things according to local cultural conventions. As an 
example of a multifunctional range of an elementary gesture, I mention the sud- 
den opening of the eye as a sign indicating attention, with the movement of the 
eyebrow as an epiphenomenon (Figure 3.2). Among the various functions of ex- 
pressing positive or negative attitudes in the cultures ofthe world are some special 
usages. As a sign of agreement this gesture expresses a substantial yes (e.g., in 
Samoan society), but as a sign ofrejection it expresses an arrogant attitude (e.g., in 
87 I 
Quick raising of the eye-brow 
(“eye greeting” as a sign of 
friendly surprise and friendly 
Greeting 
Flirt 
substantial 
Agreement -+ yes 
(e.g. Samoa) 
Thanking 
Affirmation of one’s own 
or a foreign statement 
Emphasizing of a 
statement (“yes, just like 
that”) 
Staring as a 
threatening reminder 
Indignation 
Rejection -+ 
Expression of 
arrogance (e.g. Greece) 
substantial 
no 
Raising of the 
eye-brow in 
surprise 
Opening of the eyes as a 
signal of attention, with 
the raising of the eye-brow 
as an epiphenomenon 
Raising of the eye- 
brow when asking 
Raising of the eye-brow 
when being curious 
h 
. .  
Raising of the eye-brou 
in scepticism 
Figure 3.2 The cultural overforming of a gesture (adapted from Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1972; 
with additions). 

88 3 Evolution, language, and the Construction of Culture 
Greek society). This element of ‘body language’ may be considered a universal 
symbol of nonverbal communication from the standpoint of biological anthropol- 
ogy. And yet, from the viewpoint of a cultural anthropologist, emphasis lies in the 
observation of the gesture’s cultural overforming. 
In Figure 3.1, two sign systems are positioned at the very top of all the stages of 
cultural evolution: the gestural code (nonverbal systems) and finger spelling (lan- 
guage-related systems). For these systems it is also true that the means of their use 
are provided by nature. In great contrast to elementary sign systems such as mim- 
icry and language, these two systems for communication among deaf people are 
among the most specialized of human sign systems. In addition, these insider 
systems are restricted in range to physically handicapped people and to those who 
have learned to communicate with them. 
Digital processing differs fundamentally from all other sign systems. According 
to its quantitative capacity of processing information it is the most effective of all 
sign systems, and according to the stage of its technological development it is the 
most complex. Although the principle of digital processing is simple (i.e., using 
combinations of 0 and 1 digits for individual data), the human brain cannot proc- 
ess longer sequences of digits without overstraining the memory. Humans need to 
translate digital processing into their most effective natural sign system, language. 
I 
3.5 
Variation 2: Language and the Evolution of Linguistic Structures 
The emergence of linguistic structures is a preferred field of study among lin- 
guists, anthropologists, and paleontologists. Here, variation is at work in the ways 
linguistic structures function in a synchronic perspective (Yartseva et al., 1990), 
and it is recognizable in how complex language evolves in the horizon of time. In 
particular, the evolutionary transition in communicational skills from the stage of 
Neanderthal man to that of modern humans has been investigated with great scru- 
tiny. Basically, there are two opposite approaches to how linguistic structures might 
have developed in the transition process. One is based on the assumption that the 
complex language of modern man evolved out of a pre-stage of a protolanguage 
with simple, if not simplistic structures. The other approach advocates a gradual 
evolvement of linguistic structures - resulting from “the co-evolution of language 
and the human brain” (Deacon, 1997) - without the intermediate stage of a 
protolanguage. The assumption of a step-by-step development stands against the 
concept of an evolutionary leap. 
The idea of a protolanguage emerged out of a milieu of the study of Pidgin and 
Creole languages. In processes of pidginization and creolization, an indigenous 
language fuses with a colonial language, and the structures of the involved lan- 
guages usually simplify to form a new set of phonetic sounds, new grammatical 
and syntactic rules, and a reduced vocabulary. Since the 1970s, the study of such 
processes has produced many insights into how languages function with simpli- 
fied linguistic structures. Such insights have inspired some scholars to assume 

I 89 
3.5 Language and the Evolution of Linguistic Structures 
the emergence of a protolanguage in earlier hominid species such as Neanderthal 
man and Homo erectus (Bickerton, 1995; Noble and Davidson, 1996; Mellars, 1998). 
The basic capacity of using language would have been present in early man, al- 
though its full-fledged evolution would be related exclusively to modern humans. 
Although the findings from studies on Creoles may help understand the construct 
of a simple language, there are, nevertheless, still quandaries with the qualitative 
progress of linguistic development in reaching the level of complex language. The 
structures of most Pidgins and Creole languages are much simpler than the struc- 
tures of those languages out of whose fusion a given Pidgin or Creole language 
emerged. And yet, the level of simplification in Creole languages is relative to the 
evolutionary stage of language in modern man and far above any capacity of commu- 
nicational skills that might be assumed for earlier hominid species. The constructs 
of a protolanguage that have been favored so far still lack the necessary explanatory 
potential to perceive the transition process to the stage of complex language. 
The approach of a gradual evolution of the structures of complex language sheds 
light on the evolutionary leap in a way as to break up the sudden process into 
discrete steps. What is tricky about the elaboration in a scaling scheme of internal 
linguistic changes that ultimately led to the emergence of complex language is the 
synchronicity of developments. In some simplistic attempts to grade evolutionary 
steps, the individual steps indicate developments in separate domains of linguistic 
structures, in phonetics, grammar, syntax, or the lexicon. However, the steps are 
not coordinated and their consequences for the clustering of linguistic abilities are 
not revealed. The most recent of such eclectic approaches has been put forward by 
Jackendoff (2002, p. 424) who claims: “Each of the major components of linguistic 
structure - phonology, syntax, and semantic/conceptual structure - is the product 
of an independent generative system, and each is further subdivided into inde- 
pendent tiers”. 
In all pertinent approaches to a gradation of the evolutionary process toward 
complex language, individual steps have been reconstructed on the basis of obser- 
vations of language acquisition in children (Burling, 2002). It is generally agreed 
among linguists that, in the development of language skills by a child, processes 
are repeated during individual socialization that originally took many thousands 
of years to evolve in different hominid species. 
In the following, a novel approach is presented, with evolutionary steps ranging 
from the most elementary to the most sophisticated linguistic structures. What is 
different here in comparison with other similar approaches is the attention paid to 
the dynamics of a synchronous evolution of phonetic, grammatical, syntactical, 
and lexical structures. Each step illustrates a certain stage in the evolutionary process. 
1. Communicating with signals and interjections: This activity culminates in a 
process of embedding certain sounds or sound groups that are produced by the 
vocal cords in an interactional network, that is, by assigning them pragmatic 
communicational quality. Elements of language of this early stage still function 
in complex language (e.g., ‘shh‘ as a signal to ‘be quiet!’, ‘hi’ as a greeting, or 
‘wow!’ for expressing astonishment). 

90 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
The amount of individual signals may have been small in the beginning (e.g., 
in the repertoire of Homo erectus), but their number gradually increased and 
the inventory of signals for more and more purposes was enlarged. 
I 
2. ‘Wording’ the environment: A precondition for this step is a representational 
capacity that enables the human being to distinguish individual objects in his 
perception and to assign them different ‘words’, that is, individual sound groups 
with a representational meaning. Even today, there is much uncertainty about 
how precisely the representational dimension of cognition relates to verbal ut- 
terances. Arguably, the following statement still holds true: 
Nobody really has the least idea what is physically going on in the head 
when we reason, but I agree that whatever goes on is likely to relate in a 
fairly abstract way to the words of spoken utterances, which are adapted to 
the necessary linearity of speech and to the fact that speaker and hearer are 
working with separate models of reality (Sampson, 1997, p. 100). 
The phonetic aspect: The simplest process of ‘wording’ the environment is 
the deliberate imitation of sounds or acoustic and visual effects typical of 
certain animals in order to individualize them as species, of the sounds and 
noises produced by natural forces such as the wind, the waves of the sea, the 
water running in a river, the noise of thunder, of a burning fire, etc. 
I must emphasize that archaic man, for whom this stage of protolanguage 
may be postulated, had a rather limited capability for producing speech sounds 
(Korhonen, 1993, p. 257 ff.). In all probability, archaic man could produce 
only two vowel qualities (like e and a) and perhaps eight consonants (i.e., p, b, 
t, d, s, h, m, n). In addition, archaic man was anatomically capable of produc- 
ing a glottal stop, a sound that is still present in languages such as German, 
Danish, and Finnish. 
This stage (2) of language evolution is still visible in complex language. This 
means that the linguistic technique of producing onomatopoeic words is still 
functioning today. Every historical and recent language includes onomatopoeic 
(sound-imitating) expressions. The amount of onomatopoeic elements in the 
lexicon of a complex language varies considerably. Some languages, such as 
Finnish and Japanese, have a high proportion of onomatopoeic elements. 
In complex languages, onomatopoeic expressions are embedded in the pho- 
netic, grammatical, and lexical system just like other words. Nevertheless, 
their structures may differ from other words in certain properties. For exam- 
ple, in Lithuanian, “most onomatopoeic words are monosyllabic (they may 
comprise only consonants) ...” (Ambrazas, 1997, p. 441). 
The grammatical aspect: At this stage of development one cannot yet expect a 
clear distinction of word classes or grammatical elements. 
The syntactic aspect: Individual words are used in the function of phrases. 
This stage, with no syntactic organization, has been termed ‘asyntactic’ 
(Carstairs-McCarthy, 1999, p. 15 f.). This stage is still observable in the proc- 

I 91 
3.5 Language and the Evolution of Linguistic Structures 
ess of language acquisition. A small child who knows the expression ‘cat’ 
might use this single word so that, in differing contexts, it assumes the mean- 
ing of whole sentences, such as ‘where is the cat?’, ‘look at the cat!’, or ’I 
would like to take the cat’. 
The lexical aspect: The vocabulary is gradually enlarged to contain signals 
and onomatopoeic expressions. 
3. Talking about things: Talking about things requires more than the capacity to 
represent objects by linguistic signs. It requires the capacity to reflect about 
things, to identify interrelations between things and living beings and to ver- 
balize such interrelations, and to speak about happenings and actions and about 
relationships among human beings. Thus, the preconditions include capaci- 
ties of cognitive representation on a broader scale than at stage 2 and the ability 
to process elementary linguistic techniques. 
The phonetic aspect: This stage produces systematic patterns of binary fea- 
tures in the system of sounds (i.e., voiced versus voiceless consonants, open 
versus closed vowels). Communication on this level requires a steady increase 
of new expressions. A precondition of this lexical process is the patterning of 
sound combinations. This stage of phonetic evolution enhances experiments 
with syllable combinations to create new expressions. Words now consist of 
more than one syllable, which in turn allows a wider range of combinations 
of different syllable types. 
In statistical terms, every complex language has its own proportions of sylla- 
ble types and combinations of vowels and consonants. In some languages, 
such as Finnish, consonant clusters are rare and usually found only in loan- 
words. In other languages such as Ubykh, a North Caucasian language, sin- 
gle consonants are rare and consonant clusters the rule. In retrospect, cer- 
tain syllable types were preferred in one local speech community, other types 
in other communities. 
The grammatical aspect: Basic word classes are distinguished, such as nomi- 
nal elements (nouns, adjectives), expressions for verbal action, and numbers 
(up to five; enhancing counting with fingers and hands). A rudimentary sys- 
tem of relational expressions is formed, by which relations such as horizon- 
tal and vertical distance and direction, as well as inside and outside locations, 
can be verbalized. One elementary technique for expressing these relations is 
the use of prepositions (in association with a noun), e.g., outside the house, 
from behind a rock, into the wood. 
At this stage of development, basic patterns of the deictic system (personal 
and possessive pronouns, demonstrative pronouns) emerge. A basic distinc- 
tion between present and past time relations, as reflected in the tense system 
of the verb, can be assumed. It is probable that this stage also sees the emer- 
gence of nominal classes (that is, the categorization of counted objects ac- 
cording to relevant properties). The distinction between tense and aspect re- 
lations is uncertain. 

92 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
The syntactic aspect: On a rudimentary level of syntactic structures, lexical 
elements are connected in protosentences. When using words according to 
stage 2, there is only one word in an utterance. The meaning of such an 
utterance is diffuse and attains some precision only in an unambiguous con- 
text. However, in situations where it was necessary to indicate the relation- 
ship between an agent and an object, more than a single word was needed to 
express the relationship. The combination of two words, for example, a per- 
son’s name (Suvi) and the denomination for a fruit (apple), makes it possible 
to establish different relationships such as ‘Suvi holds the apple’, ‘Suvi eats 
the apple’, or ‘Suvi goes into the garden to pick an apple from a tree’, accord- 
ing to differing contexts. 
The distinction of word classes is a precondition for the identification of 
the agent (nominal phrase) and the action (verbal phrase) in the sentence. 
Main arbitrators of syntactic structures are the subject (agent) and the ver- 
bal action. However, this stage of evolution does not yet produce distinctive 
patterns of word order. Syntactic structures lack complex patterns. This 
means that the types of main and dependent clauses are not yet distin- 
guished. 
I 
The lexical aspect: The vocabulary increases by adding expressions with two 
syllables to the basic stock of monosyllabic words. The number of combina- 
tions increases considerably so as to produce enough lexical material for this 
level of communicational needs. 
4. Interacting verbally in communities of modern humans: This stage is docu- 
mented in the recent languages of the world and in the stages that have been 
reconstructed for protolanguages (the Proto-Indoeuropean language, the Proto- 
Uralic language, etc.). No existing language represents stage 3 or the earlier 
stages described above. This means that, in the living languages of the world, 
there is no developmental stage that would be evidence of ‘primitive’ linguistic 
structures. 
The phonetic aspect: At this stage, the whole panorama of speech sounds 
that are found in the languages of the world, has evolved (Ladefoged and 
Maddieson, 1996). The living languages show a vast variety of sounds. For 
example, in Tahitian, a Polynesian language, only 9 consonantal sound quali- 
ties are distinguished (Peltzer, 1996). The language with the most consonants 
in the world is !X66 (/Hua-Owani), a Khoisan language, for which no fewer 
than 117 consonant phonemes have been identified (Traill, 1985). 
The grammatical aspect: All word classes are distinguished. This includes 
the class of conjunctions to link main clauses or main and subordinate clauses. 
Gender and number relations are fully developed in the system of grammati- 
cal categories. 
This stage sees the emergence of full-fledged case systems (with maximum 
distinctions of 15 cases in Finnish or 23 in Hungarian), of complex verbal 

I 93 
3.5 Language and the Evolution of Linguistic Structures 
systems (distinction between simple and complex tense categories, fully de- 
veloped aspect correlations as in Slavic or Semitic languages), and of com- 
plex pronominal systems. 
The syntactic aspect: Word order is fully developed, with the elements S (sub- 
ject), V (verb), and 0 (object) in different configurations. In the languages of 
the world, different patterns ofword order dominate. Most frequent are those 
orders with subject-initial position (i.e., SVO as in most European languages, 
SOV as in Altaic and most Semitic languages). Verb-initial word order is found 
in Celtic, Berber, and Polynesian languages. Object-initial word order is rare. 
Languages with an OVS order are Gupapuyngu (Arnhem Land, Australia) 
and Barasana (Columbia). One finds OSV order in Apos (Papua-New Guinea) 
(Haarmann, 2001b, p. 255 f.). 
All sentence types are developed, including complex sequences of main clauses 
or main and subordinate clauses. 
The lexical aspect: The lexicon in complex languages is multilayered. There 
is abundant lexical material to construct the cultural environment of human 
beings in their relationships to the natural surroundings. The lexical items in 
a given local language reflect the focus of socioeconomic and cultural activi- 
ties in a speech community. Thus, in Saamic or Evenki, we find a highly 
specialized terminology relating to reindeer breeding. The Somali vocabu- 
lary, for obvious reasons, has no terminology relating to reindeer breeding, 
but this language possesses a special lexicon abounding with terms for camel 
breeding. 
The processes of division of labor and of specialization of handicrafts in an- 
cient societies enhanced the elaboration of specialized sections of vocabulary. 
In the industrial era and with the emergence of modern science, the pressure 
to create new terminologies increased. The worlds cultures now face the tran- 
sition to a network society, which requires the elaboration of a sophisticated 
vocabulary to cope with modernization and to serve the manifold purposes of 
electronic communication. 
The evolutionary stage (l), representing a simple protolanguage, may be postu- 
lated for Homo erectus, who possessed capacities for this communicational system. 
This stage may also have dominated verbal communication of Neanderthal man 
who, in a later period of his existence, may well have reached stage 2, that of a 
more elaborate protolanguage. However, stages 3 and 4 are reserved for modern 
humans. Stage 3 can be assumed for the early phase of the existence of modern 
humans, that is for the period of about 100 000-70 000 BP. 
Stage 4 must have had emerged already before modern humans peopled Sahul 
(the land mass comprising Australia and New Guinea) ca. 60 000 BP and before they 
colonized Europe (ca. 55 000 BP). The identification ofthe period of ca. 60 000 BP 
as a terminus ante quem is crucial because the languages of Australia and the 
Papuan languages of New Guinea have no exceptional features that would point to 
a seclusive development of language skills there. It is clear from the time-horizon 

94 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
of mankind‘s inhabitation of the Americas that complex, stage-4 languages were 
introduced. Modern humans entered the North American plains no earlier than 
ca. 15 000 BCE. 
In southwestern Europe, modern humans encountered Neanderthal man. Dur- 
ing a time span of at least 12 000 years, moderns and Neanderthals lived in the 
same areas, either near one another or in cohabitats. Such settlements have been 
investigated, in which there is evidence for the contemporaneous presence of both 
archaic and modern humans. Modern humans who colonized Europe used a com- 
plex, stage4 language. Neanderthal man’s communicational skills had remained 
at stage 1. Perhaps their skills were in transition to stage 2. It seems likely that the 
transition to stage 2 in Neanderthals was enhanced by contact with modern hu- 
mans. This can be conjectured from the evidence of archaic man’s lithic industry, 
which became more refined in the cohabitats with modern humans. 
Even when the evolutionary steps from protolanguage to complex language are 
individualized, there still remains the clear impression of a qualitative leap that 
separates stages 1 and 2 from stages 3 and 4. The four-step scaling of the evolution 
of language that is presented here must be considered provisional. Most probably, 
future research will shed more light on the transitions from one stage to the next, 
which might lead to a refinement of the scaling. 
The emergence of language types is associated with stage 4. At stage 3 in the 
evolution, too many linguistic techniques that define a type were still missing. 
Language typology deals with issues of typological resemblances in languages, not 
with genealogical kinship, as does historical linguistics. The techniques of one 
and the same type may work in languages that are historically unrelated. For exam- 
ple, linguistic structures of Chinese are governed by techniques of the isolating 
type. The same techniques have shaped the structures of modern English, which 
has retained only a few morphological elements from its stage of development as 
an inflectional language (i.e., the grammar of Old English). 
Despite the fact that issues of typology have been on the agenda of language 
studies for more than 200 years, no inventory of language types has yet been elabo- 
rated that enjoys general consensus among scholars (see Song, 2001, p. 298 ff. for 
a historical outline). The concept of ‘type’ itself is much debated. Among the most 
successful approaches to distinguishing individual types of languages are those 
that conceive types as theoretical constructs, the features of which do not system- 
atically or totally govern the structure of a language (Haarmann, 2001b, p. 248 ff.). 
Empirical research has provided much insight into the cooperative working of 
typological techniques. This means that, as a rule, a given historical language oper- 
ates with techniques of different types. No language of the world operates with the 
techniques of only a single type. The languages of the world can be categorized 
according to the dominance of one of the following types: 
I 
a) The inflectional (flexive) type: The name indicates the significance of inflec- 
tion. Case relations as well as phases of verbal action are expressed with the 
help of grammatical morphemes. What distinguishes the inflectional type clearly 
from the agglutinative type (b) is the fact that also the word stems may change 

I 95 
3.5 Language and the Evolution of Linguistic Structures 
in the process of inflection; e.g., a change in vocalism as in German Baum 
‘tree, sg.’ versus Baume ‘trees, pl.’, a change in consonantism as in Russian 
drug ‘friend versus druzhba ‘friendship’. Most ofthe Indo-European languages 
are predominantly inflectional. 
b) The agglutinative type: Relations are expressed by means of fixing (agglutinat- 
ing) formative elements to the word stem. The phonetic structure of the stem 
does not change in this process. Predominantly agglutinative are Altaic and 
most of the Uralic languages (e.g., Turkic, Tatar, Mongolian, Komi, Mansi, 
Yurak) . 
c) The isolating type: The techniques ofthis type exclude grammatical morphemes. 
Relations in the nominal and verbal complex are expressed by syntactic means, 
that is, through the positioning of lexical items in the syntactic continuum. 
Chinese is a typical isolating language. Isolating techniques are best represented 
in ancient Chinese. There is no inflection of the monosyllabic word, in neither 
the noun nor the verb system. In modern Chinese, some agglutination is present 
(e.g., as reflected in the existence of two-syllable compound words). 
d) The incorporating type: Grammatical relations are expressed by a multitude of 
formative elements which are suffixed, prefixed, and/or infixed. The word stem 
can be enlarged by adding suffixes or prefixes, and objectival elements express- 
ing dative or accusative objects (pronominal and nominal) are usually incorpo- 
rated into the conglomerate of the stem and its extension. Generally, words in 
incorporating languages are longer than those in languages of other types, be- 
cause of the multitude of elements that are incorporated. 
The linguistic techniques of the incorporating type operate most extensively in 
the indigenous languages of North America (Mithun, 1999). A high degree of 
incorporation is categorized as polysynthetism. This is typical of the structures 
of languages such as Chipewyan, Seneca, and Oneida. In the Inuit languages 
of Canada and Greenland, polysynthetic constructions are most elaborate; e.g., 
Greenlandic aawlisa-ut-isshaR-siwu-nga ‘I try to get something which is suit- 
able for making a fishing tackle’ (lit. ‘fishing tool-suitable-obtaining-my’). 
The concept of types (a-d) is based on morphological categories. Although pho- 
netic and certain syntactic features also readily associate with one or the other of 
these types, priority is given to morphology. Typological research has also produced 
constructs of language types whose properties are more comprehensive. This is 
true for the construct that was called ‘active type’ by the scholar who first investi- 
gated it (Klimov, 1977). The constituent features ofthe active type are found in the 
lexicon, syntax, and morphology of certain languages. Among those features are: 
Lexical properties: The binary division of nouns into active (animate) versus in- 
active (inanimate); the binary division of verbs into active (verbs of action) ver- 
sus inactive (verbs of state); the inclusive/exclusive distinction of pronouns in 
the first person; the etymological identity of many body-part and plant-part terms 
(e.g., ‘ear’ = ‘leaf‘); etc. 

96 
3 Evolution, language, and the Construction of Culture 
Syntactic properties: Verb domination of the sentence: preferred word order SOV; 
I 
incorporation of the direct object into the verb; etc. 
Morphological properties: A richer inflection of the verb as compared to that of 
the noun; two series of personal affixes on the verb (active and inactive); the 
category of number is absent or weakly developed; postpositions are rarely used 
or altogether absent; etc. 
The languages that represent the active type are mostly found in North America 
(Na-Dene, Siouan, Muscogee, to a lesser degree also Iroquoian-Caddo) and in South 
America (Tupi-Guarani). Because some ancient languages (e.g., Elamite) also are 
characterized by features of the active type some have conjectured that this lan- 
guage type may represent an old layer in the evolution of the worlds languages. 
In most of the languages of the world, the operation of techniques typical of 
different types can be well observed. Modern English is a predominantly isolating 
language, with an additional inflectional component (e.g., the plural ‘s’ or the ‘s’ in 
the third person singular of the present tense in verb conjugation). Finnish gram- 
matical structures are dominated by techniques of the agglutinative type. Through 
prehistoric contacts with Germanic languages, Finnish has adopted inflectional 
techniques which form an additional component in its grammar. Hungarian is 
characterized by similar proportions of agglutinative and inflectional techniques 
as Finnish. Many of the languages that operate with techniques of the active type 
also show features of other types (see Nichols, 1992, p. 97 ff., for an assessment). 
3.6 
Variation 3: Language and the Evolution of Functional Variety 
The basic principle of variation is evident in the diversity of social functions that 
any language fulfils. Every complex language has some kind of internal variation. 
The most elementary variation is the distinction of dialects, which may diverge 
phonetically, lexically, or grammatically. 
According to a wide-spread stereotype, some totally homogeneous languages, 
with not even dialectal variation, do exist. Icelandic is mentioned in such contexts. 
And yet, although the degree of linguistic homogeneity is fairly high in Icelandic, 
dialectal and social variation exists. Some words for certain things differ between 
the north (e.g., in the town of Akureyri) and the south (e.g., in Reykjavik). In addi- 
tion, there is a social variety (sociolect) with a specialized vocabulary - the slang of 
schoolchildren. 
Language varieties belong to two categories (Figure 3.3): historical-natural and 
intentional-functional. Every language shows historical-natural variation, that is, 
variation in language use that stems from its natural development in the course of 
time; or variation of spoken language in space, that is, dialectal variation. Inten- 
tional varieties are those that have been created intentionally. The elaboration of a 
written standard for a given language is intentional. The written standard of any 
language diverges in some way from the spoken variety, simply because the func- 

I 97 
3.6 language and the Evolution of Functional Variety 
Written code 
Spokencode 
Figure 3.3 
(adapted from Haarmann, 1991). 
Notes: 
(1) Each variety (see circles as graphic representations o f  theoretical constructs) overlaps with 
one or several other varieties. Since the varieties o f  a historical language represent variations 
on a linguistic continuum, no individual variety remains separated from the entire string o f  
potential variations. 
variety (e.g. the technical variety o f  juridical sciences). The professional variety, is not written 
and overlaps with a local dialect (e.g. the language offishermen in a village on the seashore). 
A hypothetical construct of functional variation in a historical language 
(2) The professional variety, is one which is written and incorporates features ofthe standard 
tions of the written code require the refinement of vocabulary and style. Inten- 
tional variation occurs in only a certain number of the worlds languages. Written 
standards exist for some 1100 languages, although some may not regularly be 
written (Section 3.9). 
In many speech communities one finds distinct professional varieties. A profes- 
sional variety may be historical-natural, for example, the special language used by 
Portuguese fishermen in villages on the Atlantic coast. In modern society, lan- 
guage use proliferates so as to create a multitude of intentional professional varie- 
ties, for example, the specialized terminology in technology and science, which is 
under constant modernization pressure from English (Ammon, 2001). 

98 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
Variation has been a major arbitrator of language use since antiquity. The earli- 
est evidence for internal variation in a speech community comes from Mesopota- 
mia, in particular, from the Sumerian cultural milieu. The literary texts ofthe 20th 
century BCE distinguish between an ordinary variety of Sumerian, called Emegir, 
and a specific variety for recording female speech, called Emesal. There is ample 
evidence that the Emesal variety is derived from the Emegir, which was the normal 
language. The Emesal variety carried all the attributes of a prestigious variety, and 
its social connotations are clearly revealed in the Sumerian loanword in Akkadian, 
emesallu (‘fine taste, fine tongue, genteel speech’). 
Such an awareness of the finery associated with the Emesal variety matched its 
function well, since it was used in cult songs, laments, and love songs, in the so- 
called sacred marriage texts, to render the speech of female persons or goddesses. 
All literary texts in which Emesal is used alongside Emegir have religious content 
or are associated with a mythological context. Emesal is also associated with the 
speech of the kalu priests, who were not women. 
I 
The occurrence of Emesal in cult songs is thus explained as due to the fact 
that the kalu priests who recited these songs were eunuchs, and not being 
regarded as men, they had to use women’s language (Thomsen, 1984, p. 292). 
The Emesal variety can be recognized by its phonetic and lexical features, which 
distinguish it from Emegir. However, there are no grammatical differences between 
Emesal and Ernegir. With respect to the phonetic alterations, it is noteworthy that 
the sound differences in Emesal compared with the normal forms in Emegir are 
deliberately caused by a forward shift of the basis of articulation: e.g., Emegir ‘u’ 
(high back) is changed to Emesal ‘i’ (high front). Obviously, ‘forward-flanged pho- 
nemes, such as narrow vowels, and labial or dental consonants were considered 
‘finer’ than their ‘backward-flanged‘ counterparts. With respect to the lexicon, vari- 
ation in Emesal was partly due to the phonetic changes (e.g., Emegir munus: Emesal 
nunus, ‘woman’). In other cases, lexical differences are displayed in the parallel- 
ism of words of different origin in the two varieties (e.g., Emegir tum: Emesal ga, 
‘to bring’; Emegir a.na: Emesal ta, ‘what?’). Lexical variation due to phonetic altera- 
tion is ofmore frequent occurrence than the use of expressions with different roots. 
Sumerian, although the worlds oldest evidence for women’s language as a spe- 
cific variety, does not stand isolated. In particular, the characteristics of phonetic 
and lexical variation excluding grammatical differences is known from other lan- 
guages. “Tabus on the use of ‘men’s’ words and ‘men’s’ pronunciation is known 
the world over, particularly among peoples speaking structurally archaic, ‘ergative’ 
languages’ (Diakonoff, 1976, p. 113 E). Many communities with a traditional cul- 
ture have a specific female variety of speech, a so-called tabu language, that is 
distinguished from the normal language solely by its deviant vocabulary. For ex- 
ample, among the Dyirbal who live in Northeast Queensland (Australia), family 
members, when talking to a relative of the opposite sex, use a special variety of 
speech (e.g., a man communicatingwith his mother-in-law) (Dixon, 1972, p. 32 ff.). 
The distinction of a special language variety for women is not limited to the 
milieu of a traditional culture. In many modern societies, particularly in Asia, 

3.6 Language and the Evolution of Functional Variety 
99 I 
women use their own language variety. Japanese society is an illustrative example. 
Japanese is among those languages in which female speech is distinct on practi- 
cally all levels (Haarmann, 1991, p. 193 ff.): 
Phonetic and prosodic features: Female intonation is among the most promi- 
nent features by which women’s language is distinguished from men’s language. 
Women’s intonation is more ‘melodious’ than that of men, and this is closely 
related to the norms of polite speech. In a special subvariety, intonation is ex- 
tremely marked; this is okusan kotoba ‘the language of housewives’. 
Grammatical features: The most significant differentiation between female and 
male speech is in the pronominal system. Although forms such as atashi or 
atakushi (for the 1st pers. sg. of the personal pronoun) are used by women, the 
corresponding form in male speech is boku ‘1’. Japanese women’s language is 
characterized by a highly diversified set of pronominal elements to express vary- 
ing degrees of formality and politeness. 
Syntactic features: The strategy of paraphrasing by applying various techniques 
(e.g., inserting hedges, putting a directive into a negative question, using final 
particles to ‘soften’ sentences) is frequently used in women’s language to make 
expressions indirect, less straightforward, and/or less imposing. 
Lexical features: To a certain extent, one can distinguish between a specialized 
vocabulary of women‘s language and a general lexicon of men’s language. For 
example, when women refer to the stomach, they use the term onaka (e.g., in the 
expression onaka-ga suita ‘I am hungry’). Men use the expression hara, instead. 
Against the background of such a terminological difference, a term such as har- 
akiri ‘cutting one’s stomach‘ (suicide committed as a sign of social shame) makes 
reference to male social relations in Japanese society. Suicide committed out of 
social shame among women is done by cutting one’s throat with a dagger. 
Women’s language and polite speech are intrinsically interwoven, especially in view 
of the fact that Japanese women are more strongly subject to societal constraints 
than are men. One of the keys to understanding women’s social and verbal behavior 
in Japanese society is the concept wakimae, which may be paraphrased in English 
as ‘observing expected norms’ or ‘behaving in conformity with accepted stand- 
ards’. Interaction in Japanese society has maintained a high level of formalization 
in social relations, and a Japanese woman is essentially expected to closely observe 
the social distance between the speaker and the hearer, role relations that include 
different implements of power, and her own status in society which, as a rule, is 
considered inferior to that ofa man. Societal norms in Japan require that a woman 
not only behave socially like a female, but that she also talk like a woman. 
The distinction of social status in language as an arbitrator is found in many 
Asian languages, particularly in Southeast Asia. In those languages, deictic catego- 
ries reflect a marked degree of sophistication. The pronominal system is especially 
differentiated. In Khmer (Cambodian), for example, the following expressions for 
‘I’ are distinguished, each associated with a specific social context (Table 3.1). 

100 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
Table 3.1 
Expressions for 'I' in Khmer and their specific social contexts 
I 
khnom 
khnomkaruna: 
khnomba:t 
khnomcah 
I Pronoun in Khmer'' 
I Specification ofsocial status 
I 
Historical form for addressing a house slave: today used to 
address outsiders 
Very polite, used especially when addressing a Buddhist monk 
Used only by monks 
Used when addressing someone of superior social status; 
used especially by women 
kni:e 
je:n khnom 
kh1u:en khnom 
1 an 
Expresses membership in a social group 
Used in official language, when someone speaks as a representative 
Expression of individuality (without any association to a group) 
Used in familiar speech; used when an elder person addresses a 
younger person 
co 
chi 
Used to address a girl or an unmarried woman 
Used to address a woman aged 30 or older; 
The marking of social status in language and the use of polite speech forms 
intermingle strongly, as in Vietnamese, where the following forms of address are 
in daily use (Table 3.2). 
The marking of male and female social status is embedded in the general polar- 
ity of female and male speech. Even the most elementary deictic elements are 
distinguished according to gender. For examples, to say 'yes' Khmer men say ba:t 
and women say cah. 
Table 3.2 Forms of address in Vietnamese. 
Functional range in various social contexts 
expression'] 
F 
Used by parents and grandparents to address a child: 
the same form is used even after the child has grown up 
I 
also used among brothers and sisters 
Used to address a woman aged of 50 or older; also used as an 
honorific title for historical heroines, the Ba Trung who rebelled 
against Chinese colonial power in the 1st century AD 
Used to address a nian aged 50 or older: 
also usrd as an honorific title for men 
I em 
I Used by older sisters or brothers to address younger siblings 
1 
I anh 
I Used by younger sisters or brothers to address older siblings 
I 
'1 The Vietnamese expressions are presented here without the accents that mark tonemes. 

I lo’ 
3.7 Languages and their Genetic Affiliations 
Another variation in language that dates from antiquity is the distinction of a 
ritualistic language, “a special linguistic variety used in prescribed consecrated 
forms of behavior, governed by belief in mystical powers” (Du Bois, 1992, p. 335). 
Such variation can be readily assumed for the language of Palaeolithic man, be- 
cause shamanistic rituals in connection with the bear cult are evidenced from that 
time. In traditional cultures, ritualistic language is usually marked by its deviant 
lexicon. Expressions of ordinary language are either metaphorically paraphrased 
or are replaced by specific words that are formally unrelated. For example, in the 
healing chants that are performed by the priests among the Kuna Indians in 
Panama, the ritualistic expression for ‘woman’ is walepunkwa (instead of the usual 
ome), and for ‘eye’, tala (instead ofthe usual ipya) (Sherzer, 1983). 
3.7 
Variation 4 Languages and their Genetic Affiliations 
The identification process that forces modern humans to find their Self through 
self-awareness and to construct their cultural environment makes language a con- 
ditio sine qua non of all organizing forms of social relations. Because in modern 
humans the capacity to use language is spontaneous, it seems futile to search for 
one single source, that is, for the mother of all languages from which the lan- 
guages of our modern world have derived. Therefore, it is not reasonable to as- 
sume that the language that modern humans used about 90 000 BP - at the time 
they left Africa and wandered into Asia - is the origin of all recent languages. Even 
if there had been anything like a ‘primordial’ language of modern man (represent- 
ing stage 3), its traces have been lost in the horizon of time due to the dynamic 
power of variability. 
During their colonization of Asia and Europe, modern humans encountered 
other hominid species. The issues of whether there is any biological heritage of 
Homo erectus in the gene pool of people in East Asia and whether there was gene 
flow between archaic and modern humans in western Europe are still much de- 
bated. In any case, the possibility of influences from contacts between hominid 
species on the language use of modern humans has to be considered. This makes 
interspecies contacts a promising field of future anthropological study. 
Historical linguists have succeeded in establishing the genealogical affiliations 
of most languages of the world. But even today there are more than 100 languages 
for which no or no secure affiliation can be demonstrated. One of these language 
isolates is Basque. Basque is the oldest living language of Europe and has a re- 
markable history. This language is a remnant of a prehistoric linguistic layer that 
is remotely linked to the languages of those people who, in the Upper Palaeolithic 
Age, created the cave art of southwestern France and northern Spain (Haarmann, 
1998). Among the language isolates are also vehicles of ancient civilizations, such 
as Sumerian, Elamite, and Etruscan (Haarmann, 2002a, pp. 62 f., 65 E, 190 E). 
The formative periods of many language families are shrouded in prehistoric 
darkness. The time depth of the oldest phyla that are represented in modern lan- 

102 3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
Genetic Tree 
PoDUlations 
Lingpistic Families 
I 
Mbuti Pygmy - 
Original language unknown 
w' African '-b 
Niger-Kordofanian 
Nilo-Saharan 
San (Bushmen) - 
Khoisan 
II 
I1 
II 
I1 
11 
II 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Chukchi-Kamchatkan - 
I 
Amerind - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1  
N. W. Amerind - 
Na-Dene 
S. Ch' inese 
Sino-Tibetan 
Austroasiatic 
f::: 
Indonesian 
~ 
D
a
i
c
,
-
-
l
 
Austric 
Philippine 
Austronesian 
7 
Polynesian 
Micronesian 2 
Melanesian '
-
J
 
Indo-Pacific 
New Guinean 
Australian 
Austrahan 
Figure 3.4 
Correlation between genetic and linguistic trees (adapted from Cavalli-Sforza, 2000) 

I 103 
3.7 Languages and their Genetic Aflliations 
guages ranges between some 8000 and 12 000 years BP. What can be reconstructed 
with historical-linguistic methods are the assumed protolanguages, which origi- 
nated much earlier than their reconstructed full-fledged state of existence. Argu- 
ably, the oldest protolanguages that can be reconstructed with any accuracy are 
Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Uralic, both fully developed by about 8000 BP. 
Nobody knows with any certainty what happened before that time. 
Estimates of the chronological dispersion of languages into different parts of the 
world are closely associated with recent findings in human genetics. Geneticists 
have investigated the genomic profiles of various populations, modern and an- 
cient (Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994). Genetic structures are much more stable than 
linguistic structures, and therefore the migrations of early populations of modern 
humans can be traced by the genetic ‘fingerprints’ left in their genomes. When 
patterns of gene profiles are related to patterns of linguistic diversity in a tree model, 
details of areal configurations become evident (Figure 3.4). 
The languages of the world belong to some GO language families (phyla) (Table 
3.3). Many of these phyla are subdivided into several branches. The Indo-Euro- 
pean family includes the Germanic, Celtic, Romance, Slavic, Indo-Iranian, and 
other branches. Some phyla have many subdivisions, others not. A few phyla are 
distinguished by having a great number of individual languages: these are the 
Niger-Congo phylum (1436 languages), the Austronesian phylum (1236), the Trans- 
New Guinea phylum (539), the Indo-European phylum (418), the Afro-Asiatic phy- 
lum (371), and the Sino-Tibetan phylum (360). Except for Japanese, the big lan- 
guages of the world (those spoken by 100 million or more speakers) belong to one 
of these language families (Section 3.8). We also find small and very small (dwarf) 
languages, that is, languages spoken by only a few hundred people (e.g., Argobba 
in Ethiopia or Veddah in Sri Lanka). 
Upon inspection of individual language families and their internal subdivisions 
(branches), variations in space and time become evident. As an example I refer to 
the affiliation of languages in the Indo-European phylum (Figure 3.5). The devel- 
opment of branches such as Slavic or Baltic shows clearly how certain linguistic 
complexes may remain homogeneous for a long time before splitting into indi- 
vidual languages. In other branches the split occurred much earlier, as that be- 
tween Germanic and Celtic. We also find individual languages that did not split at 
all and have preserved their linguistic identity throughout history, for example, 
Armenian. The continuity of Illyrian is characterized by a process of transforma- 
tion of an older identity (Illyrian) into a modern one (Albanian). 
Certain languages that flourished in antiquity have lost most of their historical 
varieties, and their continuity is based on a single variety that persists. An illustra- 
tive example is Greek. Mycenaean Greek was the first variety to be written (in Lin- 
ear B from the 17th to the 12th centuries BCE). Mycenaean, like all other varieties 
of ancient Greek disappeared, except for koini. Greek (the common language), which 
evolved into Modern Greek. In one branch of Indo-European, i.e., the Indic sub- 
division of the Indo-Iranian branch, no modern language can be directly derived 
from any of the known written languages of the past. Neither Sanskrit nor the 
other historical languages (Prakrit, Pali) have direct descendants. Modern Indo- 

104 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
Table 3.3 
(Grimes and Grimes, 1996; Haarmann, 2001 b, p. 235 ff.; adapted from Haarmann, 2001 b). 
Language families (phyla) and language isolates 
I 
Number of 
languages 
> 1000 
100-1000 
10-100 
Language families 
(number of languages) 
Niger-Congo (1436) 
Austronesian (1236) 
Trans-New Guinea (539) 
Indo-European (418) 
Afro-Asiatic (371) 
Sino-Tibetan (360) 
Australian (257) 
Nilo-Saharan (194) 
Austro-Asiatic (180) 
Oto-Mangue (173) 
Sepik-Ramu (105) 
Dravidian (78) 
Arawakan (74) 
Tupi (70) 
Dai (68) 
Maya (68) 
Altaic (65) 
Uto-Aztec (60) 
Torricelli (48) 
Quechua (47) 
Athabascan (39) 
East Papuan (36) 
Khoisan (35) 
Uralic (34) 
North Caucasian (34) 
Geelvink Bay (34) 
Algic (33) 
Hmong-Mien (32) 
Macro-GC (32) 
Carib (29) 
Panoan (29) 
Main areas of spread 
western, central, and eastern Africa 
Madagascar, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, 
Pacific islands 
Papua-New Guinea 
originally Europe and southern Asia, today 
global 
Near and Middle East, northern Africa 
China, Tibet, Southeast Asia 
Australia 
central and eastern Africa 
Southeast Asia 
Central America (mainly Mexico) 
New Guinea 
India, Pakistan 
northern parts of South America, Caribbean 
Brazil, Paraguay, Peru, Bolivia 
China, Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Myanmar, 
India 
Mexico, Guatemala 
Eurasia (European part of Russia, Siberia, 
Turkey, central Asia, northern China) 
USA'), Mexico 
Papua-New Guinea 
Peru, Ecuador, Columbia, Bolivia, 
Argentina, Chile 
western Canada, northwestern parts of USA 
Papua-New Guinea, Solomon Islands 
South Africa, Botswana, Namibia, Angola, 
Tanzania 
Finland, Estonia, Hungary, central Russia, 
west and north Siberia 
southern Russia 
Indonesia (Irian Jaya) 
Canada, USA 
China 
Brazil 
Brazil, Columbia, Venezuela, Guyana 
Brazil, Peru, Bolivia 

I 105 
3.7 languages and their Genetic Afl/’liations 
Table 3.3 
(continued) 
Number of 
languages 
10-100 
Fewer than 
10 isolates 
Language families 
(number of languages) 
Salish (27) 
Hokan (27) 
Penutian (27) 
West Papuan (27) 
Tucano (26) 
Chibchan (22) 
Siouan (17) 
Mixe-Zoque (1G) 
Andamanese (13) 
Eskimo-Aleut (1 1) 
Palaeoasiatic (11) 
Totonacan (11) 
Mataco-Guaicuru (1 1) 
Choco (10) 
Main areas of spread 
Canada, USA 
USA, Mexico 
USA, Canada 
Indonesia (Irian Jaya) 
Columbia, Brazil 
Ecuador, Columbia, Panama, Costa Rica 
USA 
Mexico 
southern India 
eastern Siberia, Alaska, Canada, Greenland 
eastern Siberia, northern Pakistan 
Mexico 
Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay 
Columbia, Panama 
Several dozen smaller groupings (e.g., South Caucasian, Araucanian, 
Caddo) and numerous language isolates having no identifiable genea- 
logical affiliation with any other language (e.g., Basque, Japanese, Zufii) 
’’ USA means the 48 contiguous states (i.e., everything except Alaska and Hawaii). 
Aryan languages such as Gujerati, Hindi, and Singhalese evolved out of a com- 
mon Indic continuum during the early centuries of our era. 
Several old Indo-European languages persisted for a long time before they fell 
out of use, as can be seen by looking at the history of Thracian, Tocharian, and 
Venetic. And all the languages of the Anatolian branch of Indo-European have 
died out. Ofthese, Hittite and Luwian flourished as written languages (Haarmann, 
2002a, pp. 89 f., 126 f.). 
In the evolution within a given phylum such as Indo-European, we may find 
long-term continuity (e.g., Armenian), dynamic processes of proliferation at a slow 
pace (as in Baltic) or at a.more rapid pace (as in Celtic), or multiple splitting in the 
horizon of time. The Italic branch split early into various languages, including 
Oscan, Umbrian, Latin. In a secondary process, Latin then split into the range of 
Romance languages. 
Attempts have been made to reconstruct possible genealogical affiliations among 
the phyla. There is a special field of linguistics in which such issues are addressed, 
glottochronology or linguistic taxonomy (see Ruhlen 1994 for an outline). Although, 
for individual language families, the time depth of reconstruction may shed light 
on a stage of development of about 8000 BP, the identification of macrophyla (that 
is, inter-family relations) takes us into a much more remote past. However, the 
methods ofhistorical linguistics are not yet refined enough to achieve reliable results 

106 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofCulture 
-1500 
-1000 
-500 
I 
GREEK 
THRACIAN - 
PHRYGIAN - 
ARMENIAN - 
TOCHARIAN - 
r IRANIA? 
INDO- 
IRANIAN 
L INDIC 
SLAVIC 
BALTIC 
- 
GERMANIC - 
CELTIC 
- 
ITALIC 
__ 
ITALIC 
VENETIC 
MESSAPIC 
- 
ILLYRIAN 
__ 
lycenaean - 
__ Ar 
Spoken La 
(mid. Ind. 
1 
Vedic San. 
r Doric 
i! Gr 4 
eolic + 
imphylian 
yprian 
; ; ; d q  
- Phrygia 
. Avestan 
01 
Pel 
ges - 
-c 
S 
" 
ciin 
uan 
srilian 
>*an 
- Kid-Ira 
- Prakrit 
(mid. Ind 
ical -I 
pa' 
rrit 
cian 
iim 
E 
E 
__ 
l-Ls: 
Latin ~ 
- Veneric 
Mesnapic 
rim 
Figure 3.5 
Indo-European phylum (adapted from Mallory, 1989). 
The evolution of individual languages in the branches of the 

I 107 
3.7 languages and their Genetic Afiliations 
500 
1000 
1500 
Modern Languages 
I -  
(Kuchean) 
)Tocharisns 
,- 
- Khoranese 
-Persian 
hian 
Armenian - 
Modern Armenian 
I 
Ossetic 
Rshto 
Pamir 
Persian 
Kurdish 
Indo-Aryan 
(Modem Indian Languages: 
Gujerari, Mararhi, Panjabi, Hindi, 
Hindustani, Bengali, Singhalese etc.) 
j? 
or Mid. Pel 
Icelandic 
Norwegian 
G 
Old Norse 
Icelandic 
Norwegian 
Gaulish 
Hispmo-Celtii 
Leponric 
-
?
 
Welsh 
Italian 
French 
Spanish 
Portuguese 
Romanian 
A1,ani.m - 
Albanian 
Polish 
atvian - 
irhuanian- 
Ukrainian 
White Russian 
Russian 
Bulgarian 
Serbo-Croat 
Czecho-Slovak 
Polish 
Larvian 
Lithuanian 

108 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
of reconstruction. Therefore, much speculation is involved in the assemblage of 
macrophyla. One ofthe most popular concepts is that ofthe Nostratic (or Eurasiatic) 
macrophylum, which is comprised of Indo-European, Uralic, Altaic, South Cauca- 
sian (Kartvelian), Dravidian, and possibly Afro-Asiatic languages (see Figure 3.4). 
I 
3.8 
Variation 5: Language Evolution and Linguistic Diversity 
The linguistic diversity of the world is a vivid demonstration of how the evolution- 
ary principle of variation works. Individual languages have a life cycle, as have 
their users. Languages emerge, change, and die. In this process, manifold trans- 
formations may occur. In the final stage of a language, its structures may be trans- 
formed to develop into one or several new languages. This process can be observed 
for Latin. Spoken Latin diverged from the written, more conservative Latin already 
in the Classical period. Spoken Latin spread into the provinces of the Roman Em- 
pire and became the basis for local vernaculars. From the 6th to the 8th centuries 
AD, the local varieties of spoken Latin developed into early stages of the Romance 
languages. 
Since earliest times there have been contacts between local groups of people 
speaking different languages. In settings of language contact, influences may go 
either way, or one of the languages may dominate and have a unilateral effect on 
the other. Either way, the conditions of contact may change, even decisively, the 
direction of development of the languages involved. For example, the French lan- 
guage emerged out of a fusion process of spoken Latin and Gaulish, the language 
of the Celtic inhabitants of Gaul who assimilated. Romanian, has a Dacian ele- 
ment. The English language cannot be imagined without the strong Latin and 
French components of its vocabulary. Japanese would not operate as a linguistic 
system without the Chinese component with which indigenous structures are so 
intrinsically intertwined. 
Yiddish is an illustrative example of a language whose linguistic structures have 
been predominantly varied through language contacts. Indeed, “fusion processes 
can be found in literally every nook of the language” (Weinreich, 1980, p. 32 f.). 
This means that the profile ofYiddish as an individual language was shaped mostly 
by Hebrew, German, Polish, and Russian. 
The emergence of new languages is a process that can still be observed. During 
the political disintegration of the former Yugoslavia, the Slavic peoples in newly 
independent regions such as Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia-Hercegovina gained in 
national self-awareness, which has had long-term effects on their linguistic iden- 
tity. The former linguistic unit (i.e., Serbo-Croatian) split into three independent 
languages, namely Croatian, Serbian, and Bosnian. 
As ofthe beginning of the 21st century, 6417 languages exist, which are spread - 
highly unequally - among the fewer than 200 states and autonomous regions into 
which the world is divided. The largest concentration of languages is found in 
New Guinea, where 1073 languages are spoken. O f  these, 826 are distributed in 

I 109 
3.8 Language Evolution and Linguistic Diversity 
Europe 
Table 3.4 
Distribution of the world’s languages (adapted from Haarmann, 2001 c) 
143 
44 
G9 
15 
(30.7%) 
(48.3%) 
( 10.5%) 
’I Spoken by 1 million or more (e.g., English, Thai, Swahili). 
2, Spoken by more than 1000, but fewer than 1 million (e.g., Basque, Maasai, Tahitian). 
3, Spoken by fewer than 1000 (e.g., Ainu, Livonian, Sengseng). 
4’ Percentages are relative to the total number of languages in each area. 
5, English is a common language in Australia, spoken by about 18 million people. 
In this overview, however, it is not counted for Australia, because each language is counted 
only once, arid English is counted for Europe. Accordingly, Chinese is counted for Asia and 
not for other continents. 
the territory of Papua-New Guinea and 247 in that part of the island (the province 
of Irian Jaya) that belongs to Indonesia. In the entire Southeast-Asian archipelago 
(including Malaysia and Indonesia), about 1500 languages are spoken. These ac- 
count for almost 25% of the total number of languages in the world. 
When categorized according to the size of their speech communities the lan- 
guages of the world show the following geographical spread patterns (Table 3.4). 
The sizes of speech communities are extremely variable. Chinese in all its local 
varieties is spoken by 1210 million people. This is by far the largest speech com- 
munity in the world. Despite its significance for global intercommunication, Eng- 
lish comes in only a distant second, with 573 million speakers. Twelve languages 
in the world are each spoken by 100 million or more speakers (Table 3.5). These 
include all the languages that are called ‘world languages’ because of their interna- 
tional spread. 
Given their importance for international communication and their functional 
dominance in certain regions, the big languages are spoken as a second language 
by many people with other mother tongues. Each language has developed its own 
ratio of first-language and second-language speakers (Table 3.5). 

110 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
Table3.5 
second-language speakers (adapted from Haarmann, 2001 c). 
Languages with 100 million or more speakers, including the numbers offirst- and 
I 
language 
Total number of 
First-language 
Second-language 
speakers 
speakers 
speakers 
millions hercent oftotal) 
Chinese 
English 
Hindi 
Spanish 
1210 
573 
418 
352 
1139 (94.1%) 
337 (58.9%) 
182 (43.5%) 
266 (75.6%) 
Indonesian 
I 162 
I 21 (12.9%) 
I 141 (87.1%) 
I 
~- 
71 (5.9%) 
236 (41.1%) 
236 (56.5%) 
86 (24.4%) 
I French 
I 131 
I 76 (58.0%) 
I 55 (42.0%) 
I 
Russian 
Arabic 
Bengali 
Portuguese 
242 
170 (70.2%) 
72 (29.8%) 
209 
202 (96.6%) 
7 (3.4%) 
196 
189 (96.4%) 
7 (3.6%) 
182 
170 (93.4%) 
12 (6.6%) 
In the history of modern humans, many individual languages have emerged and 
died, leaving no observable traces. The state of linguistic diversity in the world to- 
day is the result of thousands of years of constant variation. Two thousand years ago, 
many ofthe present languages did not yet exist, e.g., the Romance, Germanic, Slavic, 
and Finno-Ugric and languages. On the other hand, many languages that existed 
then have died, and processes of language death will accompany us into the future. 
Japanese 
German 
3.9 
Variation 6 Globalization and the Future of Language Evolution 
126 
125 (99.2%) 
1(0.8%) 
101 
96.5 (95.6%) 
4.5 (4.4%) 
We live in an era of globalization. Our time is also called the information age, 
because its technologies provide means that enhance globalization. What does this 
widely-used expression ‘information age’ mean? The term itself is as odd as its 
use. It suggests that, today, the flow of information about the world is continu- 
ously growing, and our perspectives are constantly widening. In fact, we have lived 
in the information age for many centuries, ever since Marco Polo (1254-1324) told 
the Europeans about life in China (Shen, 1996, p. 169 ff.), ever since Columbus 
discovered America, ever since Europeans set out on their voyages for exploring 
Arctic waters (Lainema and Nurminen 2001), ever since Alexander von Humboldt 
(1769-1859) embarked upon his expeditions in the Americas and in Siberia, ever 
since the sciences experienced their breakthrough in the 19th century. 

I l l 1  
3.9 Globalization and the Future of Language Evolution 
What distinguishes our age from previous ones is a certain quality, and this is 
the electronic dimension of information transfer. We have long been living in the 
information age, but now we are constructing a network society. This term, popu- 
larized especially by Castells (1996-1998), was intended to remind us that, although 
the rate of accumulation of information about the world is accelerating, with the 
amount of information thus virtually exploding, the capacity of modern data banks 
to store this information seems unlimited. 
Among the top priorities of the network society is the construction of knowledge 
(see Asher and Simpson 1994 for accumulated knowledge on the study of the lan- 
guages of the world). Accumulating data is one thing, constructing knowledge is 
quite another. The computer facilitates the processing and storage of individual 
items of data, but - for the purpose of constructing knowledge -the human mind 
is needed to evaluate the electronic information and to select, categorize, and rank 
essential data. Knowledge is always a matter of how information is ‘anthropologi- 
cally’ exploited, of how the human mind constructs order, and of how a relational 
network emerges from masses of unsystematically amassed data. And for con- 
structing knowledge the human mind has to rely, now and in the future, on the 
oldest information technology that mankind possesses: language. 
The network society has produced a new pattern of communication, which I call 
national-English bilingualism (NEB) (Haarmann, 2001b, p. 303 ff.). Regarding the 
infrastructure of NEB, this configuration of language components highlights a cru- 
cial contact situation in which a given national (non-English) language serves com- 
municative purposes alongside English in the same domain and in similar func- 
tions, including digital literacy (Gilster, 1997). The information age has confronted 
us with a new dimension of sociocultural function of languages: using written code 
for the input and output of digitally processed data. ‘National’ is a generic term that 
refers to a given non-English language. The national component can be 
a language of broad distribution (e.g., Russian, German, French) 
a language with a local range but in regular use (e.g., Icelandic, Thai, Afrikaans) 
. 
a less-used language (e.g., Welsh, Kurdish, Tahitian) 
In Europe, we find a high density of local languages that participate in NEB. The 
smaller the national language and the less used, the greater the probability that a 
third language also participates, which extends the elementary pattern of bilin- 
gualism to one of local multilingualism. Examples of such an extension are Komi- 
Russian-English mdtilingiialism (in the Komi republic), Catalan-Spanish-English 
multilingualism (in Catalonia), and %mi-Nonvegian-English multilingualism in 
northern Norway. 
The English component in NEB may remain passive, and does not necessarily 
have to become active. This means that the reception of information in English (by 
reading and/or understanding) may suffice for participating in global intercom- 
munication. However, any successful exchange of information in many fields of 
science depends on the ability to use English actively. 
Given the functional implications of NEB, English as its component is repre- 
sented by formal varieties, varieties that are rightly understood as ‘bloodless inter- 

112 
3 Evolution, language, and the Construction of Culture 
national English'. This English is characterized by different sets of terminology: 
the vocabulary of internet jargon, the language used in the mass media, the vari- 
ous terminologies in the domains of science (natural sciences, information tech- 
nology, etc.). As a rule, this English is stylistically poor and lacks any refined flavor. 
NEB English is an asset for work in various professional fields, not a means of 
everyday life. Thus, there is hardly any danger that this English may eventually 
supersede the national component of bilingualism or even cause language shift. 
Where, outside English-speaking countries, less-used languages are under pres- 
sure, this is due to the impact of a local language of the state (e.g., Mordvin in 
relation to Russian, Hungarian in relation to Slovak, Quechua in relation to Span- 
ish), rather than to the influence of international English. 
When assessing the role of English as a component of NEB we have to bear in 
mind that we are dealing with a selection of formal varieties. There is much more 
to English than what we find in NEB. Recall that, in the historical process of spread- 
ing throughout the world, English also proliferated in terms of its internal varia- 
tion. Speaking about English means speaking about the Englishes of the world. 
Linguistic variation reaches far beyond the well-known distinction between British 
and American English (Crystal, 1997). 
There are many local and social varieties of English, including Hindish in India, 
the Australian outback English, ebonics in the USA (the language use of Afro- 
americans), and dozens of Pidgins and Creole languages that have emerged from 
the original source of European English. English deserves an entry in the Cuin- 
ness Book of Records as the one language that has produced the greatest numbei 
of historical derivations. So, the global role of English is relative and is focussed on 
certain specialized functions. 
In recent years, the problems of endangered languages have attracted the atten- 
tion of a broad public throughout the world, primarily because of alarming state- 
ments made by experts concerning the dangers of their extinction. The worldwide 
scenario of a hopeless struggle of small languages for survival fits into the apoca- 
lyptic vision of an irreversible loss of local cultures in the face of advancing globali- 
zation. Krauss (1992) estimates the rate ofloss ofthe worlds languages to be about 
90%, and the timeframe for their extinction to be about 100 years. Is the process of 
evolution unilaterally directed toward the extinction of languages? Will linguistic 
diversity ultimately dissolve? 
Assumptions about the future development of speech communities and, in par- 
ticular, predictions about the death of a language are often sentimental in nature 
and lack a substantial basis in empirical data. About 200 years ago, Wilhelm von 
Humboldt (1767-1835), who was the first to engage in a scientific study of Basque, 
predicted that this language would die out by about 1900. The death of Welsh, the 
Celtic language spoken in Wales, was predicted for the end of the 20th century. In 
fact, both languages are still spoken by more than half a million speakers. Similar 
statements have been made about numerous other languages that have survived 
predictions of their death. 
It has become customary to lay the blame for the annihilation of cultures and 
languages on globalization. This strategy ofblame has produced an atmosphere of 
I 

3.9 Globalization and the Future of Language Evolution 
conflict in which concepts such as ‘local culture’ and ‘small language’ collide with 
concepts such as ‘network society’ and ‘global communication’. As it seems, the 
magnitude of threat that is involved in many experts’ claims concerning the disso- 
lution of linguistic diversity in the near future and the associated loss of cultural 
heritages creates radical patterns of behavior among concerned observers. 
When linguists and anthropologists today ask “What can be done about the im- 
minent disaster of language loss in the world?” the best advice that can be given to 
them is: it is perhaps worthwhile finding out whether the rate of loss is truly as 
disastrous as is claimed. Few seem to be willing to question the apocalyptic claims 
of massive extinction of languages or to inspect in detail the relationship between 
globalization and the vanishing of local cultures. Anyone who engages in a careful 
analysis of the worlds small languages and of their ecological conditions will be 
surprised to find conflict settings less catastrophic than is generally assumed. 
It is hazardous to make generalizations about the worlds languages in crisis if 
one extrapolates from situations with specific local conditions (such as the USA). 
In a worldwide comparison of dwarf languages, that is, of extremely small lan- 
guages each spoken by only several hundred individuals, no general trend toward 
extinction is evident. Rather, varied patterns of ecological conditions become ap- 
parent (Haarmann, 2001a, p. 21 ff.). In some regions language death is the gen- 
eral theme, as among most Aboriginal languages in Australia. In other regions, 
however, even small communities have succeeded in maintaining their cultural 
and linguistic identity because there is little outside contact, as in Papua-New Guinea 
where government officials contact many ethnic groups only once or twice a year. 
The Etoro in the Strickland-Bosavi region ofthe New Guinea Highlands, an ethnic 
group of some 950 members, have maintained their local language and culture 
throughout the ages (Kelly, 1993). 
In regions with a multitude of languages, the local conditions of contact and the 
impact of conflict may vary considerably. Among Indian communities in Brazil, 
for example, continuity of their cultures and languages is guaranteed best where 
contact with white people is reduced to a minimum. It is obvious that, in the small- 
est communities of the world, it is not globalization or the impact of English that 
poses a threat to cultural continuity and language maintenance. Rather, it is the 
pressure of dominant languages (mostly other than English) on local non-domi- 
nant languages that provides the key to understanding why small languages van- 
ish. Such situational pressure, which today causes many small communities to 
assimilate, has much older roots than the modern process of globalization, which 
does not directly affect the functioning of small languages. Only in surroundings 
where English is the dominant language (e.g., in the USA or Australia) can its 
traditional pressure on local languages be confused with its role as a vehicle of 
globalization. 
In fact, most dwarf languages are found outside the English-speaking world, 
that is, outside countries where English is used as the first or second language. To 
this category belong almost 2000 languages, or about 30% ofthe worlds languages. 
Not all these languages are endangered by any means. If one extends the range of 
inspection of languages in crisis to larger speech communities where languages 

114 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
suffer from functional deficits, one might conclude that about 40% of the worlds 
languages are endangered. Although 2500 endangered languages pose an enor- 
mous challenge to those who engage in devising strategies for saving them, this 
portion ofthe world’s languages is far from the hysterical rate of 90% that has been 
publicized. 
The great majority of the languages in the world are ‘small non-elaborated lan- 
guages’, because they lack written standards. This deficit excludes them from par- 
ticipating in the digital processing of data. In this functional perspective, a lan- 
guage may be identified as a ‘small language’ if it is not present on the web or, in 
other words, if the potential of information in that language is not made available 
through the channel of digital literacy. Most languages of the world today are in 
this category, and they have no access to digital literacy. 
In the European context, there are few indigenous languages in this category. 
These are Livonian in Latvia, Izhorian west of St. Petersburg, Krimchak in south- 
ern Russia, Karaim in Ukraine, and some others. Although, in the linguistic pano- 
rama of Europe, languages of this category are the exception, they dominate the 
proportions in other parts of the world. Only about one sixth of the world’s lan- 
guages are written, and fewer than 800 are regularly used in written form. Ofthese, 
some 550 have crossed the threshold of Internet presence (Crystal, 2000, p. 142). 
The great majority of languages will remain excluded from the realm of digital 
literacy. Knowing that information technology has an enormous impact on the 
construction ofthe network society, one could argue that the small languages with- 
out literacy are the true losers in the competition for survival. Such a view is plau- 
sible from a standpoint that gives priority exclusively to the accumulation of digit- 
ally processed knowledge. How can we call such people ‘losers of the information 
age’ if we do not share the knowledge they have accumulated throughout many 
generations and lack their cultural memory? The picture that people in the net- 
work society carry in their minds is distorted, because the accumulation of essen- 
tial knowledge is not necessarily associated with the digital processing and storage 
of information, but may well be accumulated in cultural memory by means of oral 
tradition. 
We have to become aware that there is another world, a world in which an in- 
credible amount of knowledge about nature and culture is available, stored in the 
minds of individuals who speak small languages. This valuable knowledge about 
the world remains unexploited by the network society because no means exist for 
establishing a direct link between oral tradition and digital literacy. 
The small languages of our modern era may have a history of development reach- 
ing thousands of years into the past. The communities of their speakers have suc- 
ceeded in surviving throughout the ages with the help of an accumulated knowl- 
edge about lifestyles in surroundings determined by pertinent ecological conditions. 
Obviously, maintaining social order in a community and maintaining cultural iden- 
tity among its members does not ultimately depend on the functioning ofwhat we 
call ‘civilization’. 
If we are conscious of the values of small languages as vehicles of local culture 
and as means for making cultural knowledge operate, then we have to consider us 
I 

I 115 
3.10 References 
the losers of the information age if we allow those small languages to die. When 
we think of the manifold problems - environmental, economic, sociocultural - 
that people in the network society are facing today and of the problems we will be 
facing tomorrow, then we have to make efforts to safeguard all the knowledge that 
is available about this world, whether constructed by means of digital literacy or 
accumulated in oral cultural memory, as a potential source for survival strategies 
that we may need in the future. 
In view of this insight, any action that might be taken to facilitate the ecological 
conditions of small languages, to promote their maintenance, and to stimulate 
self-consciousness among their speakers is an ethical imperative. The issues of 
linguistic human rights, of moral status regarding the safeguarding of the func- 
tional range of languages, and of strategies in effective language engineering will 
remain on the agenda of activists in the years to come (Haarmann, 2001b, p. 142 ff.). 
On the other hand, we are confronted with the reality that NEB is needed for 
keeping us in the currents of global information exchange. English as the second- 
language component poses a challenge rather than a threat to our cultural and 
linguistic identity. Globalization through the medium of English is not a process 
of an irreversible eradication of local identities, but rather one in which local cul- 
tures are challenged to mobilize their inner forces and to activate various patterns 
of adaptation. 
In the era of an emerging network society, all cultures and languages that are 
involved experience change of some sort, locally differing in quality and magni- 
tude. In this process of change, the influence exerted by English is a major vari- 
able. How the influence of global English affects local speech communities and 
whether modernization is always successful depend on many factors of language 
ecology. Much depends on the flexibility of local cultures to adapt to the require- 
ments of modern communication. 
Regarding the maintenance of local languages, this is always a function of peo- 
ple’s consciousness and strength of mind. If Continental Europeans are determined 
to benefit from the network society, they will safeguard the advantage of being 
bicultural and bilingual. Biculturalism and bilingualism provide us with the op- 
portunity to look at the world from different angles, which is a kind of mental 
capital that monolingual English-speaking people painfully lack. 
3.10 
References 
ABRAMOVA, 
Z. A. (1995) Cart paliolithique d’Europe orientale et de Sibhie. 
AMBRAZAS, 
V. (Ed.) (1997) Lithuanian Grammar. Vilnius: Baltos lankos. 
AMMON, U. (Ed.) (2001) The Dominance ofEnglish as a Language ofScience. 
ANATI, E. (1995) Il muse0 immaginario dells preistoria. Milan: Editoriale Jaca Book. 
ARUTYUNOV, 
S. A. (1989) Narody i kul’tury. Razvitie i vzaimodeystvie. Moscow: Nauka. 
Grenoble: Jkrome Millon. 
Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 

116 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction ofculture 
ASHER, 
R. E., SIMPSON, 
J. M. (Eds.) (1994) The Encyclopedia of Language and 
Linguistics, 10 Vols. New York and London: Routledge. 
BEKOFF, M., JAMIESON, D. (Eds.) (1996) Readings in Animal Cognition. 
Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press. 
BICKERTON, D. (1994) Origin and evolution of language. In: The Encyclopedia of 
Language and Linguistics (Eds. ASHER 
and SIMPSON). New York and London: 
Routledge, pp. 2881-2883. 
BICKERTON, D. (1995) Language and Human Behavior. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 
BOSHIER, A., BEAUMONT, P. (1972) Mining in southern Africa and the emergence 
of modern man. Optima: Quarterly of the Anglo-American Corporation 22, 2-12. 
BREMMEQ J., ROODENBURG, H. (Eds.) (1993) A Cultural History ofGesture from 
Antiquity to the Present Day. Oxford: Polity Press. 
BRIGHT, W. (Ed.) (1992) International Encyclopedia oflinguistics, 4 Vols. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
BURLING, R. (2002) The slow growth of language in children. In: The Transition 
of Language (Ed. A. WRAY). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 297-310. 
CARBONELL, 
E., VAQUERO, M. (Eds.) (1996) The Last Neandertals - The First 
Anatomically Modern Humans. Cultural Change and Human Evolution: 
The Crisis at 40 KA BP. Tarragona: Universitat Rovira i Virgili. 
CARSTAIRS-MCCARTHY, 
A. (1999) The Origins of Complex Language. An Inquiry 
into the Evolutionary Beginnings of Sentences, Syllables, and Truth. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
3 Vols. Malden, MA, and Oxford: Blackwell. 
North Point Press. 
of Human Genes. Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press. 
language. In: WRAY 
2002,93-112. 
University Press. 
I 
CASTELLS, 
M. (1996-1998) The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture, 
CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
L. L. (2000) Genes, Peoples, and Languages. New York 
CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
L. L., MENOZZI, P., PIAZZA, A. (1994) The History and Geography 
CROW, 
T. J. (2002) Protocadherin XE A candidate gene for cerebral asymmetry and 
CRYSTAL, 
D. (1997) English as a Global Language. Cambridge: Cambridge 
CRYSTAL, 
D. (2000) Language Death. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
DEACON, 
T. (1997) The Symbolic Species. The Co-evolution of Language and the 
Human Brain. London and New York The Penguin Press. 
DIAKONOFF, 
I. M. (1976) Ancient writing and ancient written language: pitfalls 
and peculiarities in the study of Sumerian. In: LIEBERMAN (Ed.) Sumerological 
studies in honor of Thorkild]akobsen on his seventieth Birthday, June 7, 1974. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 99-121. 
DIXON, R. M. W. (1972) The Dyirbal Language of North Queensland. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
DONALD, M. (1991) Origins of the Modern Mind. Three Stages in the Evolution of 
Culture and Cognition. Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University 
Press. 

I 117 
3.10 References 
Du BOIS, J. W. (1992) Ritual language. In: BRIGHT (Ed.) International Encyclo- 
pedia of Linguistics. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
D U P R ~ ,  
J. (1996) The mental lives of nonhuman animals. In: BEKOFF and 
pp. 335-337. 
JAMIESON (Eds.) Readings in Animal Cognition. Cambridge, MA, and London: 
MIT Press, pp. 323-336. 
EIBL-EIBESFELDT, I. (1972) Stammesgeschichtliche Anpassungen im Verhalten 
des Menschen. In: GADAMER, 
H.-G., VOGLER, P. (Eds.) Neue Anthropologie, 
Vol. 2: Biologische Anthropologie. Stuttgart: Thieme, pp. 3-59. 
In: MELLARS 1990, 517-539. 
Anthropologie. Stuttgart: Thieme. 
FOSTER, M. L. (1990) Symbolic origins and transitions in the Palaeolithic. 
GADAMER, 
H.-G., VOGLER, P. (Eds.) (1972) Neue Anthropologie, Vol. 1: Biologische 
GILSTFR, 
P. (1997) Digital Literacy. New York and Weinheim: John Wiley & Sons. 
GOEBL, 
H. et al. (Eds.) (1996) Kontaktlinguistik - Contact Linguistics - Linguistique 
de Contact. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
GRIFFIN-PIERCE, 
T. (1992) Earth is My Mother, Sky is M y  Father. Space, Time, and 
Astronomy in Navajo Sandpainting. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 
Press. 
Dallas, Texas: The Summer Institute of Linguistics (13th ed.). 
etapy ego razvitiya). 1 500 000-70 tysyach let nazad. Baku: Elm. 
Kohlhammer. 
New York Mouton de Gruyter. 
Campus. 
Contact Linguistics - Linguistique de Contact. Berlin and New York Mouton de 
Gruyter, pp. 218-233. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (1997) The development of sign conceptions in the evolution of 
human cultures. In: POSNER 
et al. (Eds.) Semiotik - Ein Handbuch zu den 
zeichentheoretischen Grundlagen von Natur und Kultur. Berlin and New York: 
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 668-710. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (1998) Basque ethnogenesis, acculturation, and the role of 
language contacts. Fontes Linguae Vasconum - Studia et Documenta 77, 25-42. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (2000) Constructing culture: the realm of sign systems and 
beyond. Semiotica 132, 343-371. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (2001a) Die Kleinsprachen der Welt - Existenzbedrohung und 
Uberlebenschancen. Eine umfassende Dokumentation. Frankfurt, Berlin and 
Brussels: Peter Lang. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (2001b) Babylonische Welt. Geschichte und Zukunft der Sprachen. 
Frankfurt and New York: Campus. 
GRIMES, 
J. E., GRIMES, 
B. F. (1996) Ethnologue -Language Family Index. 
GUSEYNOV, 
M. M. (1985) Drevniy paleolit Azerbaydzhana (Kul'tura Kuruchay i 
HAARMANN, 
H. (1976) Grundziige der Sprachtypologie. Stuttgart and Berlin: 
HAARMANN, 
H. (1991) Basic Aspects OfLanguage in Human Relations. Berlin and 
HAARMANN, 
H. (1992) Die Gegenwart der Magie. Frankfurt and New York: 
HAARMANN, 
H. (1996) Identitat. In: GOEBL 
et al. (Eds.) Kontaktlinguistik - 

118 
3 Evolution, Language, and the Construction of Culture 
HAARMANN, 
H. (2001~) 
Kleines Lexikon der Sprachen. Von Albanisch bis Zulu. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (2002a) Lexikon der untergegangenen Sprachen. Munchen: C. H. Beck. 
HAARMANN, 
H. (2002b) Geschichte der SchriJ. Munchen: C. H. Beck. 
HARNAD, 
S. R. et al. (Eds.) (1976) Origins and Evolution of Language and Speech. 
New York New York Academy of Sciences. 
HARRISON, 
G. A. et al. (Eds.) (1988) Human Biology. An Introduction to Human 
Evolution, Variation, Growth, and Adaptability. Oxford and New York Oxford 
University Press. 
Oslo: White Orchid Press. 
Evolution. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 
Virtue among the Etoro. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. 
I 
Munchen: C. H. Beck. 
HOEM, 
I. (1995) A Way with Words. Language and Culture in Tokelau Society. 
JACKENDOFF, R. (2002) Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, 
KELLY, R. C. (1993) Constructing Inequality. The Fabrication ofa Hierarchy of 
KLIMOV, G. A. (1977) Tipologiya yazykov aktivnogo stroya. Moscow: Nauka. 
KORHONEN, M. (1993) Kielen synty. Porvoo, Helsinki and Juva: Werner 
KRAUSS, M. (1992) The worlds languages in crisis. Language 68, 4-10, 
LADEFOGED, 
P., MADDIESON, 
I. (1996) The Sounds of the World’s Languages. 
Oxford and Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
LINEMA, 
M., NURMINEN, 
J. (2001) Ultima Thule -Arctic Explorations. Helsinki: 
Werner Soderstrom. 
LIEBERMAN, 
S. J. (Ed.) (1976) Sumerological Studies in Honor of Thorkild Jacobsen 
on his Seventieth Birthday ]une 7, 2 974. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
Soderstrom. 
LYONS, W. (1995) Approaches to Intentionality. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
MALLORY, 
J. P. (1989) In Search of the Indo-Europeans. Language, Archaeology 
and Myth. London: Thames and Hudson. 
MARSHACK, 
A. (1981) On Palaeolithic ochre and the early uses of color and 
symbol. Current Anthropology 22, 188-191. 
MARSHACK, 
A. (1990) Early hominid symbol and evolution of the human capacity. 
In: MELLARS 
1990,457-498. 
MELLARS, 
P. (Ed.) (1990) The Emergence ofModern Humans. An Archaeological 
Perspective. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
MELLARS, 
P. (1998) Neanderthals, modern humans and the archaeological 
evidence for language. Memoirs of the Calgomia Academy of Sciences 24, 
MITHUN, M. (1999) The Languages ofNative North America. Cambridge and 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
MULLEQ K. E. (1987) Das magische Universum der Identitat. Elementarformen 
sozialen Verhaltens - Ein ethnologischer Grundriss. Frankfurt and New York: 
Campus. 
NETTLE, D. (1999) Linguistic Diversity. Oxford and New York Oxford University 
Press. 
89-115. 

I 119 
3.10 References 
NICHOLS, J. (1992) Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time. Chicago and London: 
The University of Chicago Press. 
NOBLE, W., DAVIDSON, 
I. (1996) Human Evolution, Language and Mind. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
NOVIK, E. S. (1989) Ritual und Folklore im sibirischen Schamanismus. 
Hamburg: Reinhold Schletzer. 
PELTZER, 
L. (1996) Grammaire descriptive du tahitien. Pape’ete, Tahiti: 
Editions Polycop. 
PILBEAM, 
D. R. (1988) Human evolution. In: Human Biology. An Introduction to 
Human Evolution, Variation, Growth, and Adaptibility (Eds. HAnRIsoN et al.). 
Oxford and New York Oxford University Press, pp. 3-143. 
POSNER, 
R., 
ROBERING, K., SEBEOK, 
T. A. (Eds.) (1997) Semiotik - Ein Handbuch 
z u  den zeichentheoretischen Grundlagen von Natur und Kultur/Semiotics - 
A Handbook on the Sign-Theoretic Foundations of Nature and Culture, Vol. 1. 
Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
PnEMAcK, D. (1985) ‘Gavagai‘ or the future history of the language controversy. 
Cognition 19, 207-296. 
RUHLEN, M. (1994) On the Origin of Languages. Studies in Linguistic Taxonomy. 
Stanford Stanford University Press. 
SAMPSON, 
G. (1997) Educating Eve: The ‘Language Instinct’ Debate. London: Cassell. 
SAVAGE-RUMBAUGH, 
E. S. LEWIN, R. (1994) Kanzi: The Ape at the Brink of the 
SHEN, F. (1996) Cultural Flow between China and Outside World throughout 
SHEnzER, J. (1983) Kuna ways of Speaking: An Ethnographic Perspective. 
SONG, J. J. (2001) Linguistic Typology. Morphology and Syntax. Harlow, London 
STRAUS, 
L. G. (1990) The early Upper Palaeolithic of southwest Europe: 
Human Mind. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
History. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. 
Austin: University of Texas Press. 
and New York. 
Cro-Magnon adaptations in the Iberian peripheries, 40 000-20 000 B. P. In: 
The Emergance of Modern Humans. An Archeological Perspective (Ed. MELuns). 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 276-302. 
TANNER, 
N., ZIHLMAN, 
A. (1976) The evolution ofhuman communication: What can 
primates tell us? In: Origin and Evolution of Language and Speech (Eds. S .  R. 
HARNAD 
et al.). New York New York Academy of Sciences, pp. 467-480. 
THOMSEN, 
M.-L. (1984) The Sumerian Language. An Introduction to its History and 
Grammatical Structure. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag. 
TWILL, A. (1985) Phonetic and Phonological Studies Of!X& Bushman. 
Hamburg: Buske. 
WEINREICH, 
M. (1980) History of the Yiddish Language. Chicago and London: 
The University of Chicago Press. 
WRAY, 
A. (Ed.) (2002) The Transition to Language. Oxford and New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
YAnTsEvA, V. N. et al. (1990) Yazyki mira: Problemy yazykovoy variativnosti. 
Moscow: Nauka. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

I 121 
4 
Social Evolution 
Peter Meyer 
4.1 
Introduction 
From sociology's beginning as an autonomous discipline, sociologists have been 
striving to understand the causes underlying social development. As they witnessed 
rapid changes in the political, economic, and demographic spheres in 19th-cen- 
tury Europe, as well as the expansion of colonial rule over hitherto unknown re- 
gions, their search for an embracing explanatory framework was both necessary 
and unavoidable. Even if many modern sociologists would rather refrain from uti- 
lizing evolutionary theory to explain social development, influential 19th-century 
sociologists made extensive use of that theory, being impressed by structural simi- 
larities between the natural process and the development of societies. It appeared 
that, similar to the evolution of more complex species from simple single-cell or- 
ganisms, human societies developed from small and simple to larger, more em- 
bracing types of association as well. There is, however, a major obstacle to insisting 
on the fruitfulness of the analogy, i.e., the problem of social regression: unlike in 
other species, complex human societies may fail and relapse into simple patterns. 
Other major problems in the theory of social evolution are notions of the basic 
directionality of the process, which are not compatible with the theory of evolution 
by natural selection, as well as evaluative labeling of progressions toward higher 
levels of adaptation. Although it cannot be denied that these and other problems 
impeded the theory of social evolution, attention should be given to the fact that 
social scientists are only partly responsible for the confusion over the theory of 
evolution. Recent advances in evolutionary biology, population ecology, and simi- 
lar approaches have made it clear that some of the premises of the theory of evolu- 
tion by natural selection need readjustment, due to findings about 'units of selec- 
tion', 'inclusive fitness', and similar concepts. This chapter argues that applying 
these concepts to the study of social evolution may greatly enhance our under- 
standing of this process. For instance, although it cannot be denied that competi- 
tion and various forms of force play a role in social evolution, recent findings by 
evolutionary biologists and evolutionary anthropologists indicate that force is not 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 1: The Evolution ofHuman Societies and Cultures 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
C*"..-;"L*m 
qnnr,ri: ,^__ 
x / r l l l r .  
1 - 
1 .." - 
' 
. 

122 
4 Social Evolution 
in itself a decisive factor in social evolution but must be combined with other fac- 
tors to cause development. Other findings relate to the fact that only a few areas of 
the world were conducive to the development of food production, the single most 
important cause of social evolution, and that people in those areas enjoyed selec- 
tive advantages over people in other areas. With the adoption of food production, 
people were able to pass the boundary between the primordial hunting and gather- 
ing society and more embracing patterns of association. This in turn brought many 
new cultural institutions in its wake, such as chiefdoms, kings, scribes, and sol- 
diers, to name but a few. Obviously, there were regularities at work in the evolution 
of the most dissimilar human societies, which throws the door open for an evolu- 
tionary understanding of societal development. 
When Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection was first published, the 
stage was already set for a new theory promising to account for the causes of devel- 
opment in a broad and embracing fashion. In those days, European societies were 
engaged in a thoroughgoing transformation of social and political institutions that 
was at least partly engendered by technological innovations. It is common knowl- 
edge that innovations such as Watt’s steam engine were preconditions for the 
modern industrialized world. Compared with previous systems of production, the 
19th century’s factories enabled entrepreneurs to produce larger quantities of goods 
at lower prices and thus to out-compete any producers relying on obsolete means 
of production. From the outset, the industrial system attracted large numbers of 
laborers who, fleeing the modest conditions of life in villages and small towns, 
hoped for a better living in the industrializing cities. In England and other parts of 
the United Kingdom, the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, these processes 
brought about major changes in society, namely urbanization with mass migra- 
tion of peasants into the cities, as well as novel patterns of political participation. 
By leaving their homes in the countryside, industrial workers also abandoned their 
role in the feudal system of agrarian production, which was, in the late 18th and 
early 19th century, still the dominant mode of production in most of Europe. I n  
the wake of these developments, new political structures evolved in 19th-century 
industrializing societies, namely trade unions, political parties, and new patterns 
of political participation in democratic processes. 
The French Revolution was the other major development in this era, leading to 
the abolition of absolute monarchy and, despite Napoleon’s resurrection of 
monarchic power, eventually resulting in the diffusion of the political ideals of 
republicanism and democracy. In fact, Napoleon became the executor of revolu- 
tionary ideas put forward by Rousseau, Montesquieu, and other social philoso- 
phers and ideologues of the time. As a consequence to these developments on a 
grand scale, large numbers of people, particularly the intellectuals, all over Europe 
came to accept ‘liberti., egalitb, fraternit? as a formulation of the inalienable rights 
of all mankind. In hindsight it seems obvious that these ideas should not only 
motivate men in other revolutionary movements, such as the Bolsheviks in Rus- 
sia, or Mads followers in China, but that their underlying ideals were to become 
foundation pillars for the developing social sciences as well. Although philoso- 
phers had been reflecting upon the human condition at least since Aristotle’s time, 
I 

I 123 
4. I Introduction 
the development of the social sciences was reserved for an era when traditional 
conditions of life, such as class structure, legitimacy of governance, and the pre- 
vailing mode of production were cast in doubt by economic, social, and political 
changes. Viewed against the background of the industrial and political revolutions 
in Europe, it seems unlikely that the relative temporal proximity of the publication 
of Smith‘s Enquiry into the Causes of the Wealth of Nations and Comte’s Cours de 
Philosophie Positive was merely fortuitous. However that may be, Smith, who con- 
sidered himself a moral philosopher, came to be the founder of modern econom- 
ics, and Comte, a philosopher, came to be the first sociologist. Despite many differ- 
ences in the perspectives of sociologists and economists, their primary concern in 
the early days of their respective sciences was the need for improved understand- 
ing of the workings of modern society, as it evolved in the wake of the social and 
political transformations outlined above. In the course of nearly 200 years of disci- 
plinary development, large numbers of competing theories and hypotheses evolved, 
but it may still be fair to say that economists specialize in studies of people’s ra- 
tional strategies in the pursuit of their economic goals, whereas sociologists seek 
some general cause underlying the ongoing evolution of society. In summary, Eu- 
ropean societies were in fact undergoing profound changes in social, political, and 
economic structures, and so there was a growing need for a comprehensive ac- 
count of the causes underlying these transformations. 
There was, however, yet another sphere of social life fostering the need for an 
understanding of social development, namely the Enlightenment. As indicated 
above, followers of this philosophy were united in their search for the inalienable 
rights of all mankind, rights of which many people still were deprived. In a pains- 
taking analysis of this philosophy, Mandelbaum (1971) draws special attention to 
the ideas of 19th century German philosophers such as Johann G. Herder and 
Georg W. F. Hegel. According to Mandelbaum, “at the heart of this new doctrine 
(enlightenment) was the conception of the organic nature of man’s social life”, as 
well as the idea 
that the various aspects of social life are to be conceived of as related to one 
another, and to the growth of the whole, as the component parts of a living 
thing are related to one another and to that thing as a whole (Mandelbaum, 
1971, p. 57). 
One of the first philosophers to use this view was Herder, who “used ‘blossoming’ 
as a root metaphor in his conception of history. Most important of all, he viewed 
nature as a single developing whole” (Mandelbaum, 1971, p. 58). With regard to 
the direct predecessors of sociology, it is interesting to note that Comte’s teacher, 
Claude-Henri de Saint-Simon “espoused materialism [instead of] his German con- 
temporaries’ . . . metaphysical idealism” (Mandelbaum, 1971, p. 63). Without going 
into further detail, I should emphasize that the idea of societies undergoing devel- 
opment by necessity, even the idea of social progress, were in no way alien to these 
philosophical traditions. In fact, as pointed out by Mandelbaum, Comte established 
his famous law of the three stages upon Saint-Simon’s views, although this step 
required a complete reversal of Saint-Simon’s notion of progression. 

124 
4 Social Evolution 
Turning to sociology, sociologists have always had a major goal of firmly estab- 
lishing their science as an empirically oriented and antimetaphysical discipline, 
clearly distinguishing it from some of the more outspoken normative disciplines 
such as ethics. However, contrary to these antimetaphysical pretensions, influen- 
tial sociologists have in fact pursued normative goals as well. According to 
Schimank, numerous social scientists adhere to the egalitarian ideals of the En- 
lightenment, proceeding from the assumption that social inequality is unjust 
(Schimank, 1996, p. 9) and considering one of the social sciences’ most important 
tasks to be the unveiling and even rejection of any form of social inequality. Al- 
though it may be a noble task to censure social inequality, social scientists tend to 
thereby endanger their primary role as empirical scientists because, from an epis- 
temological point of view, it is problematic if not strictly impossible to unite em- 
pirical statements and normative evaluations into one coherent theoretical approach. 
These reservations are also in place with respect to the theory of social evolution, 
when normative connotations are bound to carry evaluative categories such as 
‘progress’ or ‘degeneracy’ into the theory, thereby seriously jeopardizing the theo- 
ry’s explanatory goals. To be clear, whereas there can be no doubt about the legiti- 
macy of studies on the Enlightenment’s impact on the development of European 
societies or its intellectual influence on individual social scientists, the introduc- 
tion of Enlightenment norms and ideals into the context of general theories of 
social evolution poses serious dangers to the explanatory tasks of these theories. 
The first problem may be tackled by studies in the sociology of science, whereas 
the second problem, i.e., the causes of social evolution, calls for the identification 
of sets of causes, as well as of mechanisms underlying social evolution. What then 
are the general characteristics of a sociological approach to the study of social evo- 
lution? 
Unlike historians who specialize in studies of singular events, sociologists and 
other social scientists strive to reveal basic regularities in the course of events; they 
try to find general and repeatable patterns that can account for convergent evolu- 
tion (Sanderson, 1995, p. 3). The basic idea is that, despite obvious differences 
between societies, (1) there must be some general cause that sparked development 
in the first place, and (2) in spite of climatic and other environmental differences 
there are certain regularities in societal development all over the world. In this 
view, we can expect that a sociological study can, for instance, uncover similarities 
in the evolution of the state - in Ancient Egypt and Mexico -two areas geographi- 
cally so distant from each other that it seems utterly unlikely that cultural diffusion 
could be the cause for the resemblance of social patterns in these societies. This 
chapter will show that social scientists have put forward numerous theories de- 
signed to account for the causes that sparked development in the first place, as 
well as for the ensuing regularities in societal development. As indicated above, a 
first major problem with these theories is, however, the degree to which they entail 
notions of progress or degeneracy, which are normative connotations; a second 
problem is the nature of the mechanisms that are thought to induce societal devel- 
opment. Special attention will be given to the use of the concept of evolution, a 
concept that, according to Sanderson (1993, p. 735), was one of the most influen- 
I 

I 125 
4.7 Introduction 
tial in the history of the social sciences. However, before describing some of the 
classical theories of social evolution, some additional remarks on the historical 
conditions leading to the evolution of the social sciences are pertinent. 
It may appear from the above considerations that the evolution of the social 
sciences occurred in response to the shocks caused by the scientific and techno- 
logical advances that gave rise to the Industrial Revolution, the ideals and values of 
Enlightenment philosophy, as well as to the aftermath of the French Revolution. 
Because of these changes, everything that people felt to be obvious in society was 
suddenly cast into doubt, and they saw themselves exposed to a social situation of 
unprecedented complexity. In this situation, sociology emerged as a science “de- 
signed to observe society, and to provide means for an improved understanding of 
its operations” (Luhmann, 1990, p. 230). This happened when Comte, the found- 
ing father of sociology, published his Cows de Philosophie Positive in 1830, some 60 
years after Smith‘s publication of his Enquiry into the Causes ofthe Wealth of Nations 
in 1776, a book that was soon to become the basis for the evolution of modern 
economics. With respect to the theory of social evolution, there is yet another dis- 
cipline that has to be drawn into consideration, i.e., social and cultural anthropology. 
Leaving aside historical reasons for distinguishing social from cultural anthro- 
pology, it is interesting to note that cultural anthropology, according to a sort of 
tacit agreement, was assigned the task of studying premodern societies, particu- 
larly stateless clans and tribes which due to 19th-century colonialism, came within 
reach of the evolving social sciences. With the expansion of European states in the 
era of colonialism and imperialism, it seemed to be useful to acquire scientific 
knowledge about the stateless societies of Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australia, 
and Polynesia. In the present context it is particularly interesting to note a tacit 
consent among sociologists, according to which a clear distinction should be es- 
tablished between sociology, the science specializing in studies of modern society, 
and social and cultural anthropology, focussing on premodern societies. To be sure, 
this view cannot be upheld against recent criticisms, according to which this tradi- 
tional allocation of tasks must be regarded as arbitrary and superfluous. In con- 
trast to the consent still prevailing in some sociology quarters, it is suggested that 
the advent of modernity did in fact not establish entirely novel conditions for social 
living, entirely different from those in less advanced societies. From an evolution- 
ary point of view it seems utterly unlikely that social behavior should in fact be 
totally determined by the more-or-less arbitrary forces of modernity. Therefore, an 
evolutionary perspective proceeds from the assumption that, despite a variety of 
novel factors in modern society, there are certain general regularities in all types of 
society that can be accounted for by evolutionary theory. 
According to Antweiler, there are basically three different meanings of the con- 
cept of social evolution: (1) “long term change of an unspecified nature”, (2) direc- 
tional changes more-or-less synonymous with notions of increasing societal com- 
plexity, and ( 3 )  “processes of adapting diverse societies to their physical and social 
environments’’ (Antweiler, 1991, p. 272). As Antweiler pointed out, this classifica- 
tion allows for integrating Herbert Spencer (1857) as well as Carneiro, one of his 
influential followers, into a ‘directional change category’, whereas Habermas’ ap- 

126 
4 Social Evolution 
proach should be regarded as a peculiar brand of ‘developmental logic’ (Antweiler, 
1991, p. 493). Despite the merits of this classification, this chapter presents yet 
another view by, on the one hand, suggesting that modern Darwinism sheds some 
fresh light on many time-honored problems of social theory, and on the other hand, 
proposing in a somewhat Spencerian fashion that increases in social complexity 
actually are a major factor in social evolution. However, unlike the teleological 
notions inherent in Spencer’s theory, a truly Darwinian account has to take the 
role of physical and social environments, as well as the impact of unforeseeable 
events, such as warfare, into account. 
As pointed out in the chapter on Evolutionary Theory, Darwin’ s approach to 
explaining biological phenomena as products of natural selection is one of the 
most successful approaches in the history of science, and despite some reluctance, 
Darwin was also one of the first to apply his theory to the study of human behavior 
(Mandelbaum, 1971, p. 77). In his The Descent ofMan, and Selection in Relation to 
Sex of 1871, Darwin provided valuable insights into the biological underpinnings 
of human emotions, as well as of other regularities in human behavior. Since then, 
these studies have served as a point of departure for the development of ethology, 
sociobiology, evolutionary psychology, and evolutionary sociology, as well as for 
other studies of the natural bases of human behavior. These disciplines shed some 
fresh light on the evolutionary underpinnings of human social behavior and com- 
pete with many of the more traditional views in the social sciences. Because of 
these advances in evolutionary science, it seems implausible that the historicist 
notion of total determination of social behavior by modern society can be upheld 
against naturalistic and evolutionary criticism (Albert, 1999, p. 225). For this rea- 
son, I should emphasize that the majority of mainstream sociological theories of 
social development and evolution, which have relied on historicism or have leaned 
on other forms of progressivist thinking, are incompatible with Darwinian theory. 
As Schimank (1996) pointed out, the underlying preference for antiindividualistic 
approaches in historicism is due to a rift between the two dominant sociological 
paradigms, namely the sociology of action and the sociology of social system 
(Schimank, 1996, p. 205). 
Whereas the sociology of the social system specializes in studies of social insti- 
tutions and their development, the sociology of social action takes the human indi- 
vidual, his or her needs, interests, etc., as its focal point. Viewed over the entire 
history of sociology, the systems perspective and its antiindividualism was far more 
influential than the other. According to Dawe’s analysis (Dawe, 1978, p. 368), 
the contradiction between the two sociologies articulates the contradiction 
which is at the heart of the dominant modern experience and which perme- 
ates our life as a constant existential tension of our time and place (Dawe, 
1978, p. 368 after Schimank, 1996, p. 205). 
I 
Dawe specifies (1978, p. 365): 
While we never cease to experience ourselves as acting, choosing, purposeful, 
aspiring human beings, we also never cease to be aware of the factory gates 
closing behind us, the office days that are not our own, the sense of oppres- 

I 127 
4.7 Introduction 
sions by organizations nobody runs, the ‘not-enough world we are forced to 
inhabit most ofthe time (Dawe, 1978, p. 365 after Schimank, 1996, p. 205). 
Leaving details aside, I should emphasize that most of the advances in understand- 
ing the biological underpinnings of human behavior relate to the sociology of so- 
cial action, whereas most traditional studies of social evolution relate to the sociol- 
ogy of systems, mainly to the evolution of social institutions of various kinds. 
Turning to some classical sociological theories of social evolution, Comte is fa- 
mous for his law of the three stages, according to which civilization grows from an 
initial theological into a metaphysical stage, a process eventually leading to a posi- 
tive stage (Comte, 1972, p. 111). It is interesting that Comte uses mainly psycho- 
logical and epistemological categories in describing these stages, for instance, when 
he characterizes the first stage “by the search for essential causes . . . and absolute 
knowledge” (Comte, 1972, p.112). According to Comte, the initial state is soon 
followed by two substages, the fetishistic and then the monotheistic. In the latter 
era an inevitable decay (Comte, 1972, p. 113) of monotheism begins, and civiliza- 
tion enters the second, metaphysical stage. Eventually, the entire process results in 
the positive stage, which is dominated by the renunciation of ‘absolute knowl- 
edge’, and consequently the dominance of “observation as the only legitimate means 
of our striving for knowledge” (Comte, 1972, p. 117). Superficially, it seems obvi- 
ous from these citations that Comte viewed social development as a law-like pro- 
gression from one stage to the next and that this process was not based primarily 
on society but on individual cognitions. According to Mandelbaum, this would, 
however, be only part of the truth, because “it is society which determines the 
social characteristics ofthe individual” (Mandelbaum, 1971, p. 68) and not the other 
way around. From the Darwinian point of view, there is, however, yet another ma- 
jor problem in Comte’s theory, i.e., the analogy between human ontogeny and 
evolution in its entirety. The analogy is mistaken insofar as ontogeny is predomi- 
nantly under genetic control, whereas evolution, particularly social evolution, is 
not. However, despite the theory’s shortcomings, Comte was to become one of the 
19th century’s most influential sociologists. 
The first sociologist to address social evolution in the literal sense was Herbert 
Spencer, definitely one of the most influential sociologists in the discipline’s his- 
tory. According to him, the course of social evolution was predetermined to some 
extent because it was part of the more embracing process of organic evolution, 
proceeding “from incoherent homogeneity to coherent heterogeneity” (Schimank, 
1996). In a more comprehensive formulation Spencer suggests 
whether it be in the development of the earth, in the development of life 
upon its surface, in the development of society, of government, of manufac- 
tures, of commerce, of language, literature, science, art, this same evolu- 
tion of the simple into the complex, through successive differentiation, holds 
throughout. From the earliest traceable cosmic changes down to the latest 
results of civilization, we shall find that the transformation of the homoge- 
neous into the heterogeneous, is that in which progress essentially consists 
(Spencer, 1857, p. 40 after Schimank, 1996, p. 29). 

128 4 Social Evolution 
In a nutshell, this formulation contains one of the crucial concepts of most theo- 
ries of social evolution, i.e., the notion of social differentiation, which was used 
one way or another in most theories of social change. 
Similar to Comte, Spencer’s description of evolution views the process as a law- 
like progression from simple to more complex forms, or in Spencer’s words, a 
process analogous to the “development from a grain of seed to the tree” (Spencer, 
1972, p. 122). The problem with this view is that, unlike ontogenetic development, 
which is under genetic control, social processes are not solely determined by ge- 
netic information. In general, there are more differences than similarities between 
Comte and Spencer’s notions of the causes underlying social development. For 
instance, unlike Comte, Spencer pays much more attention to the empirical knowl- 
edge available in his day, for instance when he talks about the evolution of author- 
ity in stateless societies (Spencer, 1972, p. 124) or the impact of roads and other 
means of transportation on progress in social differentiation. Despite these advan- 
tages of Spencer’s ideas on social evolution, his theory needs to be classified as one 
of the theories of ‘directional change’ (Antweiler, 1991, p. 273). Moreover, accord- 
ing to Mandelbaum, Spencer insists on a concept of total evolution in accordance 
with one comprehensive law. Although Spencer “did not insist that every society 
had progressed, he claimed that “social evolution had proceeded in terms of the 
one general, overarching law of development” (Mandelbaum, 1971, pp. 105-106). 
From the viewpoint of modern evolutionary theory, any notion of directional or 
telic change must, however, be considered seriously flawed, because it is not very 
likely that the natural process pursues some goals that have been built into organic 
matter from the outset. Therefore, Spencer’s analogy between the emergence of 
the tree from the seed and social differentiation is most problematic, because these 
processes are located on different levels of evolution. As pointed out before, the 
change of a seed is under strict genetic control, whereas social differentiation is at 
least partly determined by novel causes arising from unprecedented conditions in 
the course of human history. 
One of the merits of Spencer’s theory of social evolution is his treatment of 
warfare as an important factor. According to him “warfare among men, like war- 
fare among animals, has had a large share in raising their organizations to a higher 
stage” (Spencer, 1873, p. 193). Obviously, Spencer felt that war “played a vital role 
in emancipating humans from an unruly, savage state” (van der Dennen, 1999, 
p. 166) and should therefore be considered a factor conducive to ‘progress’ and 
improvement of human affairs. With the wisdom of hindsight, this assessment is 
regarded as irritating or even disturbing; however, the fact remains that Spencer 
was the first sociologist to put forward a systematic study of this relationship 
(Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 131), and the importance of his insights is still 
cherished by many experts in the field, as pointed out in some detail below. Spen- 
cer also was perhaps the first social theorist to develop (Corning, 1983, p. 304) 
population-pressure theory, a theory that has more recently been taken up by 
Carneiro, Cohen, and Sanderson (Sanderson 1995, p. 37), to name but a few. An- 
other major advantage of Spencer’s work, although more on the psychological level, 
is his contribution to an evolutionary understanding of human emotions (Izard, 
I 

I 129 
4.1 introduction 
1981). Other implications of Spencer’s work have recently been regarded less 
favorably, particularly his role in the generation of Social Darwinism. Some critics 
have argued that Spencer was in fact the founding father of this doctrine, and that 
his theory should therefore be rejected. According to one ofthese critics, Lewontin 
(1968, p. 209), Spencer’s concept of the survival ofthe fittest played a major role in 
legitimizing laissez-faire capitalism, and Buchan (1966, p. 34) points to the undue 
identification of modern warfare with biological competition. 
There can be no doubt about Social Darwinism’s importance in the legitimiza- 
tion of power politics, and its undue reliance upon normative statements, but as 
Flohr (1987, p. 279) points out, the use of this doctrine was not restricted to any 
particular political movement; in fact it has been utilized by members of the politi- 
cal right, conservatives, and fascists, as well as by left-wing politicians. Despite its 
considerable influence in political life, Social Darwinism was, however, founded 
upon several misunderstandings; in particular, it invoked a vastly exaggerated role 
of violent conflict in social life. The first misunderstanding is, however, related to 
the use of Darwin’s name in the name of this doctrine. Darwin was in fact not an 
advocate of anything that is now identified with Social Darwinism, and his books 
contain numerous passages in which he emphasizes the role of sympathy in hu- 
man social life and argues in favor of supporting the poor (Winkler, 1994, p. 104). 
A second misunderstanding relates to the concept of the struggle for existence, as 
used by advocates of Social Darwinism in an attempt to raise the role of competi- 
tion and conflict to the single most important factor of social life. However, Dar- 
win was as clear as possible about the role of his concept of struggle for existence 
when he said that he wanted to use the concept “in a large and metaphorical sense, 
including dependence of one being on another, and including not only the life of 
the individual, but success in leaving progeny” (Darwin, 1968, p. 459). Whatever 
the impact of Social Darwinism on the history of society, it was based on misinter- 
pretations of the Darwinian theory of evolution by natural selection (Barash, 1980, 
p. 108; Corning, 1988, p. 148) from the outset, and therefore the political uses and 
misuses of this doctrine cannot be used to damage the theory of evolution. 
If Social Darwinism was a seriously flawed doctrine from the very beginning, 
many of the classical theories of social evolution also were established on misun- 
derstandings of evolutionary processes. From an epistemological point of view, 
Popper (1963) critiques any theory of social development “according to which this 
development obeys certain universal causal laws, so-called laws of history”. Unlike 
such philosophers of history as Hegel and Marx, as well as some of the most influ- 
ential early classics of sociology, mainly Comte and Spencer, we must “accept the 
obvious: there are not and cannot be any general theories of social change” (Boudon, 
1984, p. 189 after Schimank, 1996, p. 23). We might infer that assuming these 
laws introduces an over-deterministic notion of social development and, in conse- 
quence, precludes the rise of evolutionary novelties. For instance, as far as our 
knowledge of human history goes, ancestral human populations used to live in 
small-scale associations, without any institutions resembling modern political in- 
stitutions. However, at a certain point in human history, political institutions arose 
independently in many populations that were otherwise completely different. If 

130 
4 Social Evolution 
the evolution of novel types of social institutions were totally determined by some 
general law of history, it would have been necessary for similar institutions to arise 
in all human societies more or less at the same time. This is, however, not true. 
Quite the contrary, many populations have never evolved full-blown political insti- 
tutions, such as the aborigines ofAustralia and New Guinea. The story to be learned 
from this is that (1) similar institutions may arise in dissimilar societies; (2) such 
institutions do not, however, evolve in all human societies - in fact in some socie- 
ties political institutions have never evolved at all; and ( 3 )  there obviously is no 
universal law-like progression - rather, certain conditions evoke the evolution of 
similar institutions in some but not all human societies. Therefore, there are law- 
like phenomena in social development but they depend upon certain conditions, 
just like Boyle’s law on the boiling point of water presumes ‘at sea level’. At other 
levels, water boils at a different temperature, but Boyle’s law, is still a law. The 
evolution and diffusion of social institutions obviously did not comply with typical 
19th-century notions of the laws of history or with dualistic typologies such as 
Tonnies’ community vs. society, Durkheim’s mechanic vs. organic solidarity 
(Reimann, 1991, p. 125), or other such dichotomous constructions. These notions 
provided vague, over-simplified ideas of the real processes, which is why they were 
abandoned in the beginning of the new century (Tenbruck, 1989, p. 59) and were 
replaced by more embracing typologies. 
I 
4.2 
Typologies of Societies 
The following sections portray typologies of social evolution. Rather than trying to 
present a historical account of the evolution of typologies, I focus on some crucial 
concepts and their underlying assumptions. This descriptive part is followed by a 
critical assessment of some of the underlying theories and a closer look at the 
developments in some social institutions. For instance, several theories empha- 
size the role of warfare in social evolution, others point to the impact of population 
pressure on the course of events. It seems, however, that an understanding of 
warfare’s impact on social evolution presupposes a cautious analysis of this insti- 
tution’s development, and the same is also true for related institutions. 
There is nearly unanimous agreement among social scientists that the hunter- 
gatherer band was the first human society (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 69; 
Lenski, 1966, p. 95). This type of society was, however, not only the first but also 
the most stable type of human association, because it has prevailed from time 
immemorial to this very day in some remote areas of the globe, such as in parts of 
the Namib desert, in the rain forests of New Guinea and South America, and in 
other parts of the world. If one is looking for a general characteristic of this type of 
society, ‘simplicity’ seems to be all pervading, for instance membership is limited 
to 50-80 people (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. SG), a size that allows for periodic 
interactions among the bands members. Many authors agree that simplicity pre- 
vails throughout social institutions in this type of society, in fact, besides the sexual 

I 131 
4.2 Typologies of Societies 
division oflabor, age-group specific and the shaman’s activities (Lenski, 1966, p. loo), 
there are hardly any additional specialized social institutions. Due to the low level 
of division of labor, hunter-gatherer bands typically are highly egalitarian and lack 
political institutions. 
According to Lenski’s influential Power and Privilege (1966), simple horticultural 
societies are the next step in social evolution; Maryanski and Turner use the term 
‘horticulture’ to designate this type of society. According to these authors, prior to 
the evolution of this type of society, the invention of improved hunting technolo- 
gies may have caused the growth of populations, which in turn prepared people for 
accepting a new mode of living. The use of these weapons may have “led to a 
decrease in big game animals in a region, forcing hunters to become farmers; and 
as they did so, their numbers grew and forced them to remain horticulturalists” 
(Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 92). Leaving changes in other institutions aside, it 
is interesting to note that population density grew during the transition to horticul- 
turalism, and in consequence, people turned to semipermanent settlements. How- 
ever, this development brought in its wake certain structural problems, namely the 
constant problem of resource depletion, as well as incessant warfare (Maryanski 
and Turner, 1992, p. 96; Lenski, 1966, p. 129). These are just some examples of 
regularities arising in social evolution, more or less independent of other cultural 
factors. 
The advent of societies of the agrarian type tends to further intensify population 
growth and, according to Maryanski and Turner, population size now ranges from 
a few hundred thousand to several hundred million (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, 
p. 120). The basis for this population growth were further advances in technology, 
mainly the invention and diffusion of the plow. As Childe puts it (1936, p. 100, 
after Lenski, 1966, p. 190), 
The plow heralded an agricultural revolution. Plowing stirs up those fertile 
elements in the soil that in semiarid regions are liable to sink down beyond 
the reach of plant roots. with two oxen and a plow a man could cultivate in 
a day a far larger area than can a woman with a hoe. The plot (or garden) 
gives place to the field, and agriculture really begins. 
People now typically live in villages and towns, very much like those still existing 
in most parts of Europe and in other regions of the world. Furthermore, the agrar- 
ian system requires advances in the division of labor, because farmers depend on 
rapid sale of their excess products, and various classes of merchants specialize in 
marketing these goods. Industrial society, the most recent type of society, brings in 
its wake further population growth, continued urbanization and mass migration 
ofworkers into the core industrializing areas. According to Maryansh and Turner, 
division of labor is “becoming dramatically more differentiated and complex” 
(Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 149). As is well known, the industrial system evolves 
due to the invention and diffusion of various types of machinery, such as James 
Watt’s steam engine or the spinning mule (McNeill, 1970, p. 692), the combina- 
tion of which brought about a dramatic increase in the production of textiles. In 
short, industrialization was the single most influential economic factor since it 

132 
4 Social Evolution 
began in 18th-century England; it has, however, not only affected the means of 
production, but also exercised an influence on all aspects of social life. 
Obviously, the primary focus of this sketch is on population growth, and one of 
its major causes, i.e., technological innovation, which helped provide the means of 
subsistence for ever-growing numbers of people. There is, however, no clear causal 
relationship between these variables, so a typology relying solely on these variables 
is far from providing an account of the entire process. Despite its scanty informa- 
tion, there may, however, still be merit in this typology in drawing one’s attention 
to two crucial points, namely (1) the growth in size, social differentiation, or com- 
plexity, and (2) the similarity to the natural process. Turning to the growth in size 
and social differentiation, I should note that the majority of classical sociologists 
have emphasized this point, in fact some, like H. Spencer and T. Parsons, have 
seen increases in social differentiation as a sort of inbuilt goal of social evolution. 
Superficially, the increase in social differentiation seems to be analogous to the 
growth of differentiation in the natural process, as expressed in Spencer’s com- 
parison of processes in the seed with social differentiation. It seems to be in keep- 
ing with Spencer’s notions that in phylogeny, there is a growth ofinternal differen- 
tiation in living systems, with the older single-cell species, such as the amoebae, 
being established on comparatively less genetic information than mammalian spe- 
cies. Therefore, the extent of genetic information in a given species seems to be 
suitable as an indicator of its level of differentiation because, according to Riedl 
(1975, p. 219), providing the blueprint for a multicellular organism requires ge- 
netic information of considerably larger scope than doing so for a single-cell or- 
ganism. Although there may be considerable redundancy in the genetic blueprint 
of more advanced species, comparatively larger quantities of genetic information 
are required for storing all relevant traits of multicellular organisms than for sin- 
gle-cell organisms. The more recent and phylogenetically ‘higher’ species require 
more individual yes/no decisions, as well as genetic hierarchies, and are therefore 
more differentiated than the simpler and ‘lower’ species. We may infer that, by 
ascending the ladder of living beings from comparatively simple species to morr 
complex organisms, there is a concomitant increase in the total scope of genetic 
information, as well as of overall internal differentiation. 
Although these conclusions seem to make sense with regard to the evolution of 
organisms, there is, however, a major obstacle to analogizing it with social evolu- 
tion, namely the fact of social regression. It is well known that highly differenti- 
ated empires relapsed into evolutionarily antiquated social states, for instance, when 
comparatively backward tribal and feudal types of political organization succeeded 
the western Roman empire, which was the leading state in terms of social differ- 
entiation at the time. The same is true for the Mayan empire in Central America, 
which declined prior to the Spaniards’ arrival, most ethnic Maya returning to tribal 
ways. Some general causes for the decline of empires are presented in a later sec- 
tion; in the present context the fact of regression may serve as a reminder of major 
differences between organic and social evolution. In organic evolution, there is, 
however, nothing similar to social regression because, according to mainstream 
Darwinian theory, there is a biological relationship between living and extinct spe- 
I 

I 133 
4.2 Typologies of Societies 
cies. The point is not merely that currently existing species descended from those 
extinct; over and above it, living and already extinct species share large amounts of 
genetic information. For instance, although the mammoth's genetic information 
may no longer be viable, it is nevertheless, still present to some extent in their 
living successors, the elephants. In contrast, the social institutions underlying the 
Mayan empire, in particular its central political authority, did not survive the ex- 
haustion of natural resources, which probably was the cause of the breakdown of 
the empire, and the people returned to tribal ways, with comparatively simple so- 
cial institutions. 
It seems that a major difference between the two types of evolution is in the type 
of information carrier, DNA and individual genes organic evolution vs. cognitive 
and cultural information in social evolution. To be sure, genetic information plays 
a role in social evolution as well, as R. Boyd, P. Richerson, W. H. Durham (Boyd 
and Richerson, 1885, p. 38; Durham, 1990, p. 194), and others have demonstrated, 
but its primary purpose is to serve as the substratum for cognitive and cultural 
processes. The causal relationship between different types of information, namely 
between genetic, cognitive, and cultural information, is in itself a difficult and 
complex scientific problem; it will, therefore, suffice to say that genetic informa- 
tion is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the evolution of cognitive and 
cultural information. These latter types could not have evolved unless genetic in- 
formation had paved the way for them, but the mere existence of genetic informa- 
tion was not sufficient to bring about cultural information. An example may illus- 
trate the point. The evolution of water depended on the existence of both oxygen 
and hydrogen, but both substances did not possess the novel, unprecedented prop- 
erties of water. Similarly, the unprecedented characteristics of cognitive and cul- 
tural processes cannot be reduced to properties at the genetic level, although the 
existence of genetic information is a precondition for the evolution of these novel 
types of information. In this respect it is interesting to note that, according to 
recent findings, a total of 3659 genes have so far been identified (Wilson, 1998, 
p. 132) that function in the development of the individual human brain. Although 
these genes have been made by natural selection to control the development of the 
brain as an organ, their task definitely was not to impose total genetic control over 
the brain's processes, with some thirteen billion (Gazzaniga, 1992, p. 50) neurons, 
which in turn may have up to 50 000 synapses per neuron. From an evolutionary 
point of view it wouldn't make any sense to invest in the evolution of the brain, 
humans' costliest organ in terms of energy consumption, unless the benefits to be 
expected from its operation were likely to exceed the costs of the investments. To 
cut a long story short, it seems that the evolution of the human brain was favored 
by natural selection, because its unprecedented complexity vastly enhanced the 
chances of survival. Unlike with other animal species, the human species' develop- 
ment was not constrained by nature once for all: rather, our organic complexity 
threw the door open for a novel and much faster type of evolution, i.e., social evo- 
lution. 
In the present context, these considerations may help us understand that there 
are new and unprecedented phenomena in cognitive and cultural processes, which 

134 
4 Social Evo/ution 
cannot be understood by reducing the entire process to the genetic level. There- 
fore, Sanderson’s suggestion (1995, p. 7) makes sense, according to which random 
processes are typical of organic evolution, whereas deliberate and purposive ele- 
ments prevail in social evolution. It seems that human actors differ from most 
nonhuman organisms in their capacity for cognitive and rational planning of ac- 
tions, part ofwhich is further determined by cultural traditions. Although the im- 
pact of cognition and culture on human behavior cannot be denied, an overem- 
phasis on these phenomena seems, nevertheless, to be out of place for two main 
reasons. The first reason is that, according to recent findings, purposive action and 
culture are not as distinctly human as formerly thought, therefore they are not 
suited for marking a boundary between animals and humans (Bonner, 1980). Al- 
though we cannot deny that culture in the full-blown sense is a peculiarly human 
characteristic, some animal species have certain capacities for culture at their dis- 
posal too. There is, however, a second and more important reason for avoiding 
undue emphasis on ‘deliberate and purposive’ elements in human social action, 
namely the impact of the unintended consequences of human social behavior. 
Numerous social theorists have stressed that, despite intentional and rational 
elements in human social behavior, there is by necessity a large domain of unin- 
tended consequences in it. For instance, according to Elias (1988, p. 77), any indi- 
vidual action sparks a chain of subsequent behavioral reactions, the consequences 
ofwhich cannot be foreseen by the individual. Similarly, Weber’s work (1973, p. 76) 
on the origins of the “spirit of occidental capitalism” emphasizes the unintended, 
even involuntary consequences of the Protestant Reformation that brought about 
that ‘spirit’. As pointed out by Coleman (1995, p. ll), Weber’s approach is not 
entirely satisfying, because he fails to specify how individual religious beliefs can 
cause changes at the societal level. Although Weber is in fact rather vague on this 
particular point, it seems that his reasoning regarding the impact of unintended 
consequences on macroscopic change is nevertheless compelling. Similar to We- 
ber, an evolutionary approach puts emphasis on the impact of novelties and unpre- 
dictable elements in social behavior. In fact, this is in keeping with suggestions by 
Weber and other social scientists, according to which sociology should be under- 
stood as a science specializing in the study of the unintended consequences of 
social behavior. Even in economics, a science that in general highlights rational 
behavior, followers of A. Smith’s concept of the invisible hand point to the impact 
of unintended consequences for understanding economic processes. According to 
Radnitzky (1984), F. A. Hayeks concept of the emergence of spontaneous order 
seems to suggest that the emergence of order cannot be accounted for in terms of 
individual volitions and that economic theory must therefore take the role of ‘spon- 
taneous’ elements into consideration. 
Similar to social theorists, natural scientists have pointed to the roles of statisti- 
cal information systems and cybernetic control systems, which were designed by 
natural selection to warrant a certain degree of purposefulness. In Th. Dobzhansky’s 
words: “Purposefulness, or teleology does not exist in nonliving nature. It is uni- 
versal in the living world ...” (Corning and Kline, 1998). We may add that living 
systems will never succeed in totally controlling their environment’s complexity, 
I 

I 135 
4.2 Typologies ofSocieties 
because, as Luhmann (1985, p. 291) puts it, “the environment’s complexity is al- 
ways beyond the system’s complexity”. In summary, I should emphasize that, de- 
spite cognitive and cultural elements of foresight and planning, i.e., elements of 
teleology, it is utterly unlikely that human actors will ever succeed in keeping the 
social consequences of their individual acts under control or that they will restrain 
societies’ impact on other creatures and the physical environment. With regard to 
social behavior, this leads to a major problem, mainly the need for a certain degree 
of predictability. 
Any system of social behavior requires a certain degree of predictability because, 
in a broad sense, the term ‘social’ presupposes some sort of mutuality in interac- 
tions. Despite profound differences in the proximate causes underlying ants’, 
wolves’, or humans’ social behavior, a species-specific system of communication is 
common to all of them, by which individual organisms relate to each other and 
establish preconditions for social behavior. For instance, in some ant species, com- 
munication seems to be based mainly on the exchange of chemical substances, 
whereas wolves employ sounds, odors, and visual signals, as well as postures and 
gestures, in their system ofcommunication, and human organisms, in addition to 
these mechanisms, can use language. Whatever the differences between these 
mechanisms, they sufficed to spark the evolution of species-specific patterns of 
shared goal orientations, as well as of other elements of social behavior. In the 
human species, the comparatively high degree of unpredictability of social acts 
called for the evolution of a peculiarly human system of cultural institutions, as 
well as of social rules of various kinds, providing for at least a limited degree of 
mutual foresight. 
In this regard, there is considerable consensus among social scientists that it is 
in fact the major function of cultural institutions to provide just that minimum of 
predictability. It should, however, be emphasized once more that neither cultural 
institutions nor social rules in general are a warrant against deceit. In stark con- 
trast to notions of norm-obeying, ‘over-socialized (Wrong, 1961) individuals, which 
prevailed in mainstream sociology for some time, evolutionarily minded research- 
ers have pointed to the necessity of taking into consideration the importance of 
deceit for understanding social behavior. Some aspects of this discussion are dealt 
with below. The following section turns to a sketch of cultural institutions as they 
relate to the process of social evolution, the underlying idea being that, with regard 
to social evolution, changes in the nature and function of institutions seem to be a 
major proximate cause of this type of evolution. More specifically, we may assume 
that population growth, as well as increases in specialization, are major causes of 
social evolution. 
Turning to the concept of cultural institutions, it is interesting to note that, de- 
spite profound cultural differences between societies, there is a set of institutions 
that occurs in all human societies. In this regard, Murdock (1945, p. 124) lists 72 
universal cultural elements and institutions, including age-grading, bodily adorn- 
ment, incest taboos, and kinship terminology. In addition, Parsons (1964, p. 341) 
mentions religion, language, kinship, and stratification as well as a few other ‘evo- 
lutionary universals’, and Boehm (1986, p. 169) insists that social control and os- 

136 
4 Socia/ €uo/ut;on 
tracism are universal cultural institutions as well. Leaving aside some problems as 
to the precise definition of institutions, there seems to be considerable agreement 
that there are in fact some universal elements in human culture. I should empha- 
size that the very existence of universals poses a problem for any type of culturalism, 
insofar as this framework presupposes culture to be a nonreducible entity, an as- 
sessment that cannot be upheld from an evolutionary point of view. According to 
Durham (1990, p. 200), some confusion can be avoided by distinguishing primary 
from secondary cultural institutions and considering that the evolution of primary 
institutions was favored by natural selection, whereas secondary institutions are 
shared by social transmission (Durham, 1990, p. 200). Therefore, their evolution 
presupposes a secondary type of selection, i.e., social evolution. For instance, one 
may suggest that the primary mechanism underlying the evolution of the human 
family is the emotion of bonding (Brown, 1991, p. 47), emotions and human 
affectivity being products of natural selection, whereas the family is a secondary 
institution, its actual form being dependent on social evolution as well. Although 
emotions are not an example of primary institutions, they can, nevertheless, serve 
as foundations for the evolution of secondary institutions. So, what are institu- 
tions, and how can they be distinguished from other phenomena? 
Although there is not much consensus among social scientists as to a clear defi- 
nition of cultural institutions, there is, however, considerable agreement that insti- 
tutions should be regarded as some set of social rules (Giddens, 1988, p. 430) that 
are constantly being reproduced by societies. Unfortunately, Giddens, who sug- 
gests this view, does not address the problem of why some types of social rules 
evolved universally, nor does he offer a clear distinction from other types of social 
rules. In this regard, Melville’s suggestion seems more convincing, according to 
which a major characteristic of cultural institutions is their intimate relation to 
symbols, and, hence, this symbolism may be used to distinguish institutions from 
social rules. According to Melville (1997, p. 19), this symbolism suggests stability 
and constancy, characteristics that in turn provide individuals with a sense of cer- 
tainty and predictability. In view of the universality of some primary cultural insti- 
tutions, we may therefore assume that natural selection provided humans with a 
“biologically transmitted tendency to learn, recognize, or behave in one fashion 
rather than the other” (Somit, 1990, p. 562). Recently, the term ‘epigenetic rules’ 
has come to be used to denote causes underlying ‘softwired (Somit, 1990, p. 569) 
preferences for certain behaviors. According to Lumsden and Wilson (1983, p. 117), 
“the more successful epigenetic rules spread through the population . . . along with 
the genes that encode them”. 
In the present context, it may suffice to point to epigenetic rules, a concept that 
promises to open the door to a fresh understanding of the interface of ‘hardwired’ 
genetic determination on the one hand and ‘softwired processes on the other hand. 
Although for the time being geneticists have not succeeded in identifying any par- 
ticular gene that controls an individual epigenetic rule, the examples given in the 
literature (Wilson, 1998, pp. 172-201), as well as the concept itself, seem quite 
promising. with regard to social evolution, we may assume that natural selection 
provided the human species with a set of primary cultural institutions that, on the 
I 

I 13’ 
4.3 Cultural lnstitutions in Social Evolution 
one hand put all human societies into a single participatory universe (Prigogine 
and Stengers, 1991, p. 268) and on the other hand established a firm natural basis 
for social evolution. To be clear, social evolution is a process with new, unprec- 
edented characteristics, but, despite this fact, there is a feedback loop to natural 
selection underlying the entire process. At least this seems to be a legitimate infer- 
ence from the fact of social regression: after the collapse of the Mayan empire, not 
only did its cultural infrastructure vanish -there was a concomitant decrease in 
population size. 
4.3 
Cultural institutions in Social Evolution 
Despite major differences, animal and human behavioral systems have very much 
in common, in particular their dependence on physical environments. As is well 
known, evolutionary theory proceeds from the assumption that natural selection 
imposes developmental constraints on any living system, favoring those traits that 
tend to enhance survival in a given environment. In this view, there is ongoing 
competition between individual members of the same species, as to which of their 
traits are going to stand the test of selection. As a result, the winners are likely to 
pass their traits to sizeable numbers of offspring, others leave less progeny, and 
still others have no offspring at all. According to mainstream evolutionary theory, 
any trait of a living species emerges as a product of cumulative selection, a process 
that may have taken hundreds of thousands or even millions of years. Due to these 
processes, ‘ultimate causality’ evolved, i.e., a set of causes that, in a particular envi- 
ronment and situation, sparked proximate causes, which in turn preceded and 
caused the organism’s actual behaviors. As pointed out above, the universal sys- 
tem of human affectivity and emotions and the design of the human brain, as well 
as some universal cultural institutions, are part of ultimate causality. The major 
problem to be dealt with in this section is therefore that of why human societies, 
which started from more-or-less similar biological underpinnings, have evolved 
differently in the course of human evolution? What were the causes for the pro- 
gression of some primeval hunter-gatherers to horticulture and other advanced 
socioeconomic stages, while other hunter-gatherers never crossed the dividing 
line to more advanced types of economy and society? 
Before embarking on a discussion of these questions, I have to deal with the 
problem of what exactly should be regarded as the unit of social evolution. Is it the 
individual gene as in the natural process (Dawkins, 1978), or the human indi- 
vidual, the clan, the tribe, or what? In this regard, Sanderson (1995, p. 14) suggests 
a useful distinction, according to which “individuals are units of adaptation”, but 
in social evolution it is “necessarily social groups, structures” that evolve. In an- 
other passage he points out that “social groups and societies cannot be adaptational 
units because they are only abstractions. Only concrete, flesh-and-blood individu- 
als can be adaptational” (Sanderson, 1995, p. 10). In this view, natural selection 
provided human individuals with emotions, the capacity for language (Pinker, 1994), 

138 
4 Social Evolution 
and various epigenetic rules, the joint operation of which established a set of pri- 
mary cultural institutions. In other words, these features are the result of human 
adaptation, as well as the evolutionary basis of human social behavior. These pri- 
mary institutions are, however, comparatively vague, and therefore they are not 
suited to prepare people for any particular type of society, nor do they determine a 
general preference for any particular type of physical environment. Quite the con- 
trary, because human populations have succeeded in adjusting to the most varied 
ecological niches, the vagueness of underlying biological information must have 
been an advantage,because it allowed for adaptation to different environments 
without at the same time jeopardizing the evolutionary underpinnings of social 
behavior. 
Viewed against this background, adaptation to any particular environment pre- 
supposes secondary cultural institutions that, according to Durham (1990, p. 200), 
make use of social transmission rather than genetic transmission and are based 
on capacities for storing and processing learning inputs in the human mind. It is 
important to note that, whatever precise meaning may be assigned to the term 
‘culture’, its evolutionary basis is the human mind; in other words, culture would 
not exist without flesh-and-blood individuals. So, with respect to social evolution 
we may ask why some societies developed secondary or tertiary cultural institu- 
tions that enabled them to progress, whereas other societies remained more or 
less unchanged in the initial stage? Is progression started by some particular fea- 
ture in the environment or by certain ‘structural’ characteristics of human groups? 
From an epistemological point of view, it is clear that any kind of answer to these 
sweeping questions presupposes a theoretical framework. 
Although of course scientific statements don’t make sense unless their frame of 
reference is clear, for didactic reasons this chapter first describes the data. In the 
present context, this type seems justifiable for two main reasons, namely (1) be- 
cause I dealt with evolutionary theory in some detail in the above sections and (2) 
because an overemphasis on theoretical considerations is out of the place in an 
introduction to the field. With regard to the theory of evolution by natural selection 
it is, therefore, enough to say that it includes, in addition to a theory of descent, an 
emphasis on the scarcity of vital resources, as well as of concomitant intra- and 
inter-species competition. Keeping this in mind, in the following sections we turn 
to an analysis of various cultural institutions. 
Concerning the role of physical environments in social evolution, there is nearly 
unanimous agreement among specialists in the field that due consideration of 
environmental conditions is a prerequisite to any theory of social evolution. A well- 
known example is White’s reference (1975, p. 46) to the role of energy extraction in 
social evolution. Similarly, Adams (1975, p. 55) points to the importance ofenergy 
sources in the evolution of higher levels of social power, as well as in social evolu- 
tion in general. Even ancient philosophers pointed to the environment’s impact on 
the evolution of society, for example, Aristotle said that some types of country are 
more suitable for horse breeding and, therefore, for the evolution of a class of 
aristocratic horsemen and their peculiar social and political ways. The idea that 
some physical environments may be more conducive to the evolution of social 
I 

I 139 
4.3 Cultural lnstitutions in Social Evolution 
complexity has been elaborated by numerous social scientists and is in fact one of 
the major topics of the theory of social evolution. There are, however, different 
ways in which environments may influence the evolution of social patterns. One is 
the availability of vital resources such as food and water in any given environment; 
another is the suitability of a particular region for travel and transportation, as 
highlighted by Spencer. 
Human populations have settled in the most varied regions of the planet, some 
fertile, with an abundance of food and water supplies, others barren, lacking plants 
and game that were suited for foods. For example, the northwestern coastal re- 
gions of the USA provided an abundance of game and plants, as well as recurring 
salmon runs; therefore, the local Amerindian tribes were, on the whole, able to 
subsist without experiencing food scarcities. As portrayed by Bohannan (1963, 
p. 254), the Kwakiutl, one ofthe indigenous peoples, lived in a country where “there 
were forests of giant cedar and fir; animal life abounded. The sea teemed with fish, 
mammals, porpoises, and shellfish. Probably no other part of the world offered 
such riches for so little work. Not very surprisingly, “the Kwakiutl standard of 
living was among the highest the world has known” (Bohannan, 1963, p. 254). In 
contrast, the Kalahari Desert provides local !Kung San tribes with few resources: 
Drought makes many resources inaccessible for much ofthe year, and there 
are fluctuations in the seasonal and yearly productivity of wild vegetable 
foods (Wiessner, 1982, p. 64). 
According to Wiessner (1982, p. 62), the !Kung San people developed a social sys- 
tem for reducing risk, mainly the omnipresent risk of starvation, the mainstay of 
which is a special pattern of reciprocity. Although it is difficult if not impossible to 
compare the social systems of the !Kung San people, who are hunter-gatherers, 
with that of the Kwakiutl, whose technology, according to Bohannan, was com- 
paratively highly developed, these examples may give prominence to environmen- 
tal effects on the evolution of social patterns. 
Regarding the availability of natural resources, Bohannan points to yet another 
important aspect when he stresses that resources “do not exist except insofar as 
they can be exploited by the technology of the people who control the territory in 
which the raw materials exist” (Bohannan, 1963, p. 212). For instance, diamonds 
were of no interest to the indigenous people of the Kalahari, but European immi- 
grants brought an interest in these materials with them, as well as a technology for 
digging them from the earth. Similarly, the Bedouin of the Arab peninsula neither 
took an interest in oil nor could they employ a technology to drill it from the soil, 
but when the British Navy began to use oil instead of coal as fuel for its vessels, a 
rush for these resources began. We may infer from this that the mere existence of 
resources in any particular environment is not a sufficient condition for starting 
social evolution; rather, there must be a suitable technology available, as well as a 
decision to employ it. According to Spencer (1972, p. 127), the suitability of some 
environments for transportation of goods is another aspect worth mentioning. Some 
regions or waterways are better suited to these purposes than others and therefore 
tend to attract populations who specialize in these tasks. I should note, however, 

140 4 Social Evolution 
that this suitability for transportation is not a quality of the regions themselves; 
rather, it depends on the relative development of local populations. For instance, 
hunter-gatherer bands are not likely to take advantage of the potential benefits of 
these locations because they lack the technologies and even the need for these 
benefits. This brings me to a closer look at human populations, namely the causes 
of population growth as they relate to social evolution. 
According to Maryanski, ancestral human populations lived in small bands of 
fewer than 100 individuals (Maryanski, 1994, p. 381; Lenski, 1966, p. 100). Regard- 
ing the institutional structure of bands, Maryanski and Turner stress “a very low 
degree of differentiation among economy, religion, and kinship” (Maryanski and 
Turner, 1992, p. 79). Although there is ongoing discussion among specialists in 
the field for a definition ofthe term ‘band, there is considerable agreement that “a 
band is a network of kinsmen (blood) and affines (marriage) who live and work 
well together” (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 82). In the present context it suf- 
fices to note that hunter-gatherer bands come close to being a fully egalitarian 
system (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 85), that there is a clear distinction of male 
and female roles, and, most important for the present purposes, that stable num- 
bers are maintained through abortion, infanticide, and birth spacing (Maryanski 
and Turner, 1992, p. 86). with respect to the differentiation of cultural institutions 
such as stratification and political authority, Maryanski and Turner point to pres- 
tige differences between male and female roles, differences that serve as bases for 
the evolution of full-blown cultural institutions in more recent types of social or- 
ganization. Although prestige differences between the genders may partly derive 
from the males’ prestigious deeds in warfare, bravery in war was not to become the 
basis for a full-blown institution prior to the advent of chiefdoms and politically 
organized societies - when warrior societies were established, in many societies 
their members appropriated honor and prestige nearly exclusively for themselves. 
Unlike in these more advanced types of society, egalitarianism seemed to be the 
single most important imperative in hunter-gatherer societies, and reciprocity was 
the major foundation of this system. 
In Gouldner’s (1960) formulation, “the norm of reciprocity holds that people 
should help those who help them and, therefore, those whom you have helped 
have an obligation to help you”. As pointed out by Trivers (1971), reciprocity is, 
however, not a peculiarity of the human species; rather, it was a concomitant of 
social life even before the human species entered the scene. Thus, reciprocity may 
well be an example of a primary institution upon which human societies tend to 
impose secondary cultural institutions. From an evolutionary point of view, one 
may therefore assume that the primary institution evolved because it provided sur- 
vival benefits to members of animal species as well as to human populations. 
However, these benefits can be expected only if free riders and various kinds of 
defectors are likely to be detected and punished. 
“To play the reciprocity game, they need to recognize each other, remember who 
repaid a favor and who did not, and bear the debt or the grudge accordingly” (Ridley, 
1996, p. 69). Similarly, Alexander (1986, p. 107) pointed to the need for mutual 
recognition as a precondition for the operation of ‘indirect reciprocity’, which oc- 
I 

4.3 Cu/tura/ Institutions in Socia/ Euo/ution 
141 
I 
curs whenever rewards come from individuals other than those directly involved. 
Recently, Boyd and Richerson (1992) made it clear that, although reciprocity is 
definitely a primary institution, it is a dependable guarantee only in small-scale 
social patterns, particularly in dyadic relations, but it fails to operate in larger groups 
unless punishment is introduced. In larger social settings, in the absence of ab- 
sent ubiquitous social control, it is easier for defectors to make use oftheir ‘Machi- 
avellian intelligence’ (Gigerenzery 1997), trying to gain benefits without returning 
investments to those group members who were the original investors. According 
to Boyd and Richerson (1992), group members must therefore expect punishment 
upon detection, even if there is a long period of time between the treacherous act 
and detection. As Corning (1998) stresses, “reciprocity is likely to be more benefi- 
cial than kin selection, provided that cheaters can be detected and excluded from 
the system”. More important for the present argument, however, is reciprocity’s 
impact on the evolution of various cultural institutions, namely of feuding and 
warfare, as well as of moral systems. 
Many authors agree that feuding is in many respects a precursor to full-blown 
warfare. In a discussion of feuding’s evolutionary underpinnings, Daly and Wilson 
point to H. Kelsen’s statement, according to which “lethal retribution is an ancient 
and cross-culturally universal recourse of those subjected to abuse” (Daly and 
Wilson, 1988, p. 226). Kinsmen of a slain individual are likely to impose blood 
revenge upon the killer’s kinship group and, since there is no natural limit to the 
circle ofkilling, feuding more often than not turns into a virtually incessant violent 
relation between these groups. Although there is ongoing discussion as to the 
universality of feuding, Daly and Wilson’s conclusion (1988, p. 227) seems con- 
vincing: “the inclination to blood revenge is experienced by people in all cultures”. 
Returning to reciprocity’s impact on the development of other institutions, it is 
interesting to note that both institutions, i.e., blood revenge and feuding, are estab- 
lished upon reciprocity’s basic premise, according to which you have to help those 
who have helped you. In general, people tend to assume that it is their kinsmen - 
their parents, siblings, and other close relatives -to whom they are most obliged, 
and this is probably why revenge and feuding are by necessity offshoots of reci- 
procity. 1 point out below that the origins of the institution of warfare are inti- 
mately related to blood revenge and feuding. Since influential authors have attrib- 
uted to warfare a major impact on the course of social evolution, this point deserves 
closer analysis as well. 
With respect to the evolution of morality as an institution, Daly and Wilson (1988, 
p. 254) point to the universality of notions of right and wrong, which, in a social 
context, are indispensable for attributing beneficial or detrimental deeds to indi- 
vidual actors. Because individuals in ancestral environments were constantly ex- 
posed to threats by predators or inimical groups, they relied on the observance of 
rules of right and wrong in addition to those of reciprocity, and tended to punish 
violations at once. In this respect we should note Boyd and Richerson’s remark 
(1992, p. 185) that, once people realized that groups often persist much longer 
than individuals, observance of these rules must have been further endorsed. Based 
on the recognition that groups persist beyond individual lifetimes, blood revenge 

142 
4 Social Evolution 
and feuding may have evolved as fully developed cultural institutions, guarantee- 
ing revenge for kinsmen even beyond death and thereby contributing to the 
intergenerational stability of the group‘s moral basis. However that may be, nu- 
merous authors agree that blood revenge is a universal and ancient institution 
(Muhlmann, 1962, p. 220; van der Dennen, 1995, p. 317). In the present context it 
is particularly interesting to note that these institutions remind people of the com- 
parative longevity of social groups and hence cause them to bear in mind their 
moral obligations even beyond a kinsman’s violent death. Belated blood revenge 
may well lead to an increase in ambivalent feelings, as Boehm points out (1989, 
p. 928), but the ambivalence is still an indication of the persistence of the obliga- 
tion to moral retribution even beyond a considerable length of time. In view of 
this, it seems convincing that even though “sympathy, prescriptive social rules, 
reciprocity, and peacemaking” (Arnhart, 1996, p. 143) are practiced by some ani- 
mal species too, the observance of obligations towards deceased group members 
may well be a peculiarly human institution. In summary, we may suggest that 
morality as a cultural institution was based on a set of primary institutions, some 
ofwhich humans share with other animals. In the human context, the institution 
serves to control reciprocal interactions (Badcock, 1991, p. 116), reminding peo- 
ple of their obligations towards their kinsmen, those alive as well as those de- 
ceased. Although it may be interesting to note the evolutionary underpinnings of 
these cultural institutions, the problem arises as to what role these institutions 
may have played in social evolution. 
In a concise formulation ofthe causes underlying social evolution, Carneiro (1987, 
p. 11 1) suggests that, as a general rule, simplicity precedes complexity, and he goes 
on to say “the complexity that exists today does so because it conferred survival on 
those organisms which developed it” (Carneiro, 1987, p. 113). As an example, he 
points to the competition between the Kayapo and the Yanomamo, both tribal 
Amerindian societies in South America: “When pitted against each other.. . the 
simpler society almost invariably succumbs to the more complex one” (Carneiro, 
1987, p. 113), which in this case is the Yanomamo society. According to Carneiro, 
numerical superiority was a major advantage to Kayapo society, which in turn was 
based on its capacity for integrating comparatively large numbers of people into its 
social structure. However, the capacity for quantitative growth as such was not the 
real cause of the more complex society’s superiority over simpler social structures: 
rather, quantity was a mere precondition for the evolution of social complexity. 
According to Carneiro, village size is a distinct advantage in the violent competition 
between these people and, because Yanomamo villages, due to their structural sim- 
plicity, do not manage to grow beyond certain limits, they regularly succumb to the 
Kayap6. Therefore, although there can be no doubt as to the importance of quanti- 
tative parameters in competition between societies, it is nevertheless important to 
pay attention to Sanderson’s warning (1995, p. 99) that “qualitative transformation, 
the development of something new rather than simply something greater” is social 
evolution’s decisive feature. Therefore, the question arises as to which factors caused 
the transformation from simple types of social structure to more complex ones in 
the first place. More specifically, we must address the problem as to which causes 
l 

I 143 
4.3 Cultural lnstitutions in Social Evolution 
sparked the transition of some hunter-gatherer people to complexity, whereas sim- 
plicity prevailed in other hunter-gatherer societies. Is social structure in fact the 
single most important cause of social evolution, as Carneiro seems to suggest? 
Recently, J. Diamond made a major contribution to a new understanding of the 
main causes underlying these processes. Unlike most specialists in the field, he 
proceeds from the assumption that physical environments are not more-or-less 
alike, providing similar starting conditions for the transition from hunter-gath- 
erer types of society to horticultural and agrarian types of society. According to 
him, some environments provided wild plants and animals that lent themselves 
more easily to gathering and hunting or even to domestication than others did; 
therefore, people in these environments enjoyed various advantages over people in 
other regions, as the Kwakiutl example suggests. Regarding the transition from 
the hunter-gatherer stage to horticulture, it seems that the Fertile Crescent in the 
Near East offered the most advantageous conditions for the transition from simple 
to more complex types of society. As pointed out by Diamond (1998, p. 142), “as 
late as 9000 BC people still had no crops and domestic animals . . . but by 6000 BC 
some societies were almost completely dependent on crops and domestic animals”. 
So, within a comparatively short period of time the majority of local hunter-gath- 
erer bands must have passed the threshold between social simplicity and complex- 
ity. During these events, tribal organization began to emerge in the Fertile Cres- 
cent: ‘A tribe . . . differs in that it consists of more than one formally recognized 
kinship group, termed clans, which exchange marriage partners” (Diamond, 1998, 
p. 271). Regarding competition between societies, the tribes’ more elaborate social 
structure provided advantages over simpler band organization, as may be recalled 
from the Yanomamo-Kayap6 example. Typically, the more advanced groups had 
food production at their disposal and could therefore out-compete bands by their 
sheer numbers. According to Muhlmann (1962, p. 220), these advantages caused 
the displacement of bands into some of the planet’s most remote deserts and jun- 
gles, where some of them prevail to this very day. 
Turning to a closer look at some of the causes underlying this transition, Dia- 
mond (1998, p. 126) points to the domestication of wild plants in the Fertile Cres- 
cent, such as emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, barley, peas, lentils, and chickpeas - 
cereals and pulses that still belong to the modern worlds 12 leading crops (Dia- 
mond, 1998, p. 125). Food production provided enormous advantages because, 
by selecting and growing those few species of plants and animals that we 
can eat, so that they constitute 90 percent rather than 0.1 percent of the 
biomass on an acre of land, we obtain far more edible calories per acre. As 
a result, one acre can feed many more herders and farmers - typically, 10 to 
100 times more -than hunter-gatherers (Diamond, 1998, p. 88). 
Regarding the transition from the hunter-gatherer economy to food production, 
Diamond suggests that hunter-gatherers acquired food production as an unin- 
tended consequence of their long-standing familiarity with domestic plants’ wild 
ancestors. From an evolutionary point of view, it seems utterly unlikely that people 
pursued any rational planning of social consequences when turning to tillage; rather, 

141 4 Social Evolution 
some small groups may have realized the advantages of cultivation of certain areas, 
but other groups did not. Needless to say, cultivating fertile soil is likely to provide 
better harvests than barren areas do, and the availability of water is an additional 
precondition of successful farming. However, once people realized the benefits to 
be expected from cultivating fertile areas, fierce competition was sparked between 
adjacent populations over control of these areas, conferring evolutionary advantages 
on those social groups who had superior fighting techniques at their disposal. 
Phillips (1987, p. 235) describes similar processes in Mesoamerica, when, after 
experimenting with maize, genetic changes in that cereal were achieved, which 
vastly increased harvests. 
I 
Starting with what may have been (initially) accidental deviation in the sys- 
tem, a positive feedback network was established which eventually made 
maize cultivation the most profitable single activity in Mesoamerica 
(Flannery, 1968, p. 80). 
In the ensuing competition over fertile areas, Toltecs and Aztecs, both compara- 
tively backward tribes, succeeded in dominating populations in the fertile areas 
and in establishing empires. I should stress that, before the advent ofhorticulture 
there was no shortage of land, because hunter-gatherer groups were compara- 
tively small; hence, there was no need for competing over the control of land. In 
summary, 1 should stress that the social consequences of domestication could be 
predicted neither in the Fertile Crescent nor in Mesoamerica. As a consequence of 
the spread of domestication, population growth accelerated beyond limits previ- 
ously known, and cultural institutions such as writing and, most importantly, po- 
litical organizations came into existence. Furthermore, due to the scarcity of land 
suitable for tillage, as well as of water resources, competition between societies 
was elevated to a new and unprecedented level, and full-blown warfare evolved. I 
should emphasize that these new characteristics evolved as ‘regularities’ (Sanderson, 
1995) in the most diverse societies. Let us take a closer look at these developments. 
In a synopsis of relevant theories, Sanderson suggests that population-pressure 
theory is probably the most popular theory regarding the transition from hunter- 
gatherer to horticulture societies. According to M. Cohen, tillage requires more 
time and energy than hunting and gathering, therefore people would not have 
adopted the new technology unless increasing numbers (Sanderson, 1995, p. 37) 
of group members forced the shift upon them because the new technology pro- 
vided 10 to 100 times more calories per unit of land than foraging did. Sanderson 
considers Cohen’s population-pressure theory “the very best of all current theories 
of agricultural origins” (Sanderson, 1995, p. 42) and infers that population growth 
is “an inherent tendency of human population(s)” (Sanderson, 1995, p. 40), which 
can be accounted for by people’s wish to maximize ‘inclusive fitness’, as suggested 
by sociobiology. According to Sanderson, population growth theory may be com- 
bined with the ‘overkill hypothesis’, according to which hunters exterminated large- 
animal species in Australia, New Guinea, and North America: “Most large wild 
mammal species that might otherwise have later been domesticated by Native 
Americans were thereby removed (Diamond, 1998, p. 47), putting a strain on lo- 

I 145 
4.3 Cultural Institutions in Socia/ Evolution 
cal food supplies. The situation was further intensified by the fact that only a few 
animal species were suitable for domestication, and most of the ‘major five’ origi- 
nated from Eurasia. In particular, these are sheep, goats, cows, pigs, and horses 
(Diamond, 1998, p. 160). The so-called ‘minor nine’ (Diamond), including camels, 
llamas and alpacas, donkeys, etc., were ofmajor importance in some areas but, on 
the whole, raising cattle or breeding horses was likely to provide more benefits in 
terms of calories, because the animals’ manure could be used to increase soil fer- 
tility. In addition to these impacts on food production, horse breeding became the 
basis for the evolution of novel types of social life, namely of nomadic herders in 
the steppes and deserts ofAfrica and Asia, as well as the mounted bison hunters of 
North America. These were in fact some of the major causes of the evolution of 
social complexity, as is pointed out below. 
There can be no doubt about food production’s impact on the course of social 
evolution; in fact, it was the major source of surplus production, in terms of calo- 
ries that freed a sizeable numbers of individuals for specialized work, such as scribes, 
bureaucrats, and warriors, who, due to increased overall productivity, did not them- 
selves have to engage in hunting, gathering, or tillage. Due to the increase of pro- 
ductivity in horticultural societies, people could specialize in these activities, and, 
because the division of labor regularly brings higher yields in its wake (Ridley, 
1996, p. 42), more caloric intake per capita was possible. According to Sanderson, 
we should be aware of the “allegedly adaptive benefits of social complexity’’ (Sand- 
erson, 1995, p. 131; Tainter, 1988). Unlike functionalists, who proceed from the 
assumption that social evolution is a process producing increasingly well-adapted 
societies, Sanderson (1995, p. 131) points to the costs of Complexity as well: 
Growing complexity may be a good thing for elites, in whose interests it is 
generally carried out in the first place. But it is of dubious worth, or actually 
maladaptive, for the bulk of the population who must pay the costs of com- 
plexity. 
For example, the “Maya’s commitment to greater and greater complexity turned 
out to be inherently self-defeating” (Sanderson, 1995, p. 131). In fact, there are 
numerous examples of societies that collapsed due to various concomitants of so- 
cial complexity, such as “resource depletion, . . . natural catastrophes, competition 
with other societies”, to name but a few (Sanderson, 1995, p. 27). In summary, 
although increases in social complexity definitely provide benefits to parts of the 
group, it is not entirely clear if complexity increases the overall adaptation of any 
given society. 
Turning to some institutions that typically arise in the transition from hunting 
and gathering to food production, farming and cattle breeding are examples of 
specialized work that did not exist prior to the advent of these types of economic 
activities. Both farming and cattle breeding led to the evolution of distinct social 
rules, encompassing customs, mores, rituals, and religious beliefs that were in 
some way related to these peculiar economic activities. For instance, since water 
supplies or recurrent rainfall was a precondition for harvesting, farmers in many 
parts of the world developed amazingly similar religious beliefs. For instance, the 

146 
4 Social Euohtron 
Aztecs believed that Tlaloc, the god who directed rain, demanded recurring hu- 
man sacrifices (Hagen, 1974, p. 101). Similar notions can be found in other parts 
of the world as well, where irregular rainfall poses problems of the same kind to 
local people and, in general, one may hypothesize that religions are in fact part of 
peoples’ survival strategies (Reynolds and Tanner, 1983, p. 106). 
Other institutions that typically arise along with food production, and the ensu- 
ing availability of surplus, are bureaucracies specializing in collecting and distrib- 
uting parts of the surplus and military organizations designed to maintain control 
over the production of surplus (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 107; Lenski, 1966; 
Sanderson, 1993, p. 737) and to defend it against invaders. Turning to the evolu- 
tion of bureaucracies, it is interesting to note that the functions of land surveying, 
the imposition of taxes, and other types of bureaucratic work presupposed the 
existence of systems of writing and of numeral systems that were, however, not 
readily available in hunting and gathering societies. Recent findings indicate that 
the evolution of semiotic systems was in fact dependent on the previous establish- 
ment of food production. According to Meermann, the first system of writing to 
evolve in the Fertile Crescent was unfit for distinguishing quantities of certain 
goods, for instance of sheep vs. cereals, from the objects themselves. So, this origi- 
nal system did not in fact employ numbers in the full sense of the word, rather it 
designated the objects themselves (Meermann, 1991, p. 3), and considerable time 
elapsed before more abstract systems of numbers and characters evolved. It is 
noteworthy that these semiotic systems, as well as the social functions of the scribe 
or the accountant are in fact secondary cultural institutions that presuppose hu- 
man language. From an evolutionary point of view, it seems likely that these sec- 
ondary institutions evolved as unintended consequences of food production. Orice 
full-blown semiotic systems were available, however, they easily lent themselves to 
uses in religious matters, to the evolution of literature of various kinds, and to the 
establishment of central political control. 
It seems that religion, or a belief in supernatural powers, is a cultural universal 
too. Quoting Radcliffe-Brown, Lenski (1966, p. 105) notes that in most simple so- 
cieties, “honor and respect are accorded to three kinds of people: (1) older people, 
(2) people endowed with supernatural powers, and (3) [people having] valued per- 
sonal qualities, notably skill in hunting and warfare”. In another passage, Lenski 
(1966, p. 128) points out: “In many simple horticultural societies, magical skills or 
religious powers are the most valuable resource of all” and therefore “actual power 
was often in the hands of the shaman.” Typically, the shaman’s privileged position 
in society was, however, contingent upon successful performance. According to 
Wallace’s classification, 
I 
bands and tribal organizations have religions of an ‘individualistic’ or ‘sha- 
manistic’ nature, chiefdoms and kingdoms have what he refers to as ‘01- 
ympian‘ religions, religions that come from some larger, more distant, more 
encompassing wellspring (Adams, 1975, p. 237). 
It suffices to say that, due to the evolution of tribal and, later, even more encom- 
passing social structures, local cults were subdued and became dominated by the 

I 147 
4.3 Cultural Institutions in Social Evolution 
gods of victorious elites. As Adams (1975, p. 263) puts it, “religion lies at the bot- 
tom of political centralization”, that is to say, religion played a major role in the 
evolution of new social structures, particularly in providing legitimacy for new 
political authorities. In this regard, religion had to undergo changes, because tra- 
ditional clan and tribal mythologies had to be compatible with prevailing social 
structures. Therefore, it was unavoidable that cultural selection provided for mu- 
tually compatible social structures and belief systems. 
I should emphasize once more that the major cause underlying the evolution 
of societies was the transition to food production. A commonly used name for 
this transition is the Neolithic Revolution, during which populations grew and 
people turned to more-sedentary lives. In the present context it is particularly in- 
teresting to look at changing patterns of legitimacy. As indicated above, bands and 
tribes were strongly egalitarian societies, and leadership was mostly temporary, 
contingent upon the leader’s personal achievements, and legitimized by the kin- 
ship system. I should stress that, despite various types of relations between the 
tribe’s parts or segments, “there is no overarching political structure uniting the 
villages into a single functioning whole” (Sanderson, 1995, p. 54). However, with 
the evolution of the chiefdom, a new political system enters the scene, in which 
power and control were concentrated in the hands of a chief (Sanderson, 1995, 
p. 94). Unlike in bands and tribes, permanent control by a paramount chief 
(Carneiro, 1981, p. 45; Sanderson, 1995, p. 54) is being established. In fact, this 
marks a major step in the evolution of political systems, particularly with regard 
to patterns of legitimacy. Whereas there was no need for legitimizing temporary 
leadership in hunter-gatherer bands or simple tribal societies, the permanent con- 
centration of power in the chief‘s hands required extensive support by religious 
authorities. 
For instance, the political unification of Egypt was “probably based upon politi- 
cal units which antedated the unification ofthe Two Lands (Upper and Lower Egypt), 
but the authority exercised locally by priests, chieftains, or priest-kings” (McNeill, 
1970, p. 71) must have been comparatively undeveloped, compared with the situa- 
tion in Sumer where local rulers were much stronger. However that may be, ac- 
cording to McNeill (1970, p. 72), there is a striking similarity between Sumer and 
Egypt in that there was a “division of society . . . between a peasant mass and the 
household of a god. The Egyptian king, “being a god, was believed to enjoy im- 
mortality” (McNeill, 1970, p. 78) and with regard to legitimacy of rule, this quality 
may already have been more or less sufficient for impressing the people. There 
were, however, other developments in Egyptian religion as well, which additionally 
buttressed the legitimacy ofrule, namely the Pharaoh‘s identification with two gods 
with distinct local backgrounds: 
Horus and Osiris may originally have stemmed from different parts of Egypt. 
Certainly their characteristics suggest that the one harked back to a no- 
madic and comparatively warlike past, while the other embodied a distinctly 
agricultural concern with the seasons and the renewal of vegetable life 
(McNeill, 1970, p. 78). 

148 
4 S o c d  €vo/ution 
With regard to changing patterns oflegitimacy in the shift from one type of society 
to another, it is interesting to note that in Egyptian religion, the cultural back- 
ground of the various gods was obvious throughout the dynastic era. Given the 
structural similarity of social processes in the Neolithic Revolution, it seems justi- 
fiable to assume that religion, as well as other patterns of legitimacy, evolved more 
or less along similar lines in other regions as well. 
As mentioned above, the chiefdom was the first type of society with permanent 
control by a paramount chief (Carneiro, 1981, p. 45). In their discussion of eco- 
nomic and other causes underlying the evolution of chiefdoms, Maryanski and 
Turner (1992, p. 114) point to the impact of periodic resource scarcity, which in 
turn tends to intensify competition between adjacent societies for resources. Ac- 
cording to these authors, this situation leads to the evolution of a new institution, 
i.e., the ‘big man’, “who can coordinate economic activities, promote defense, ne- 
gotiate peace or wage war” (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 114). An important 
precondition for evolution of the ‘big man’ system is the production of economic 
surpluses that can be extracted by the leader. The availability of surplus was even 
more important for the evolution of full-blown chiefdoms because, according to 
Maryanski and Turner (1992, p. 114), 
I 
chiefdoms generally (1) organize larger territories, (2) create clear lines of 
authority and hierarchy among the paramount chief(s) . , . ( 3 )  undertake 
large economic tasks (capital improvements, exchange and trade, the coor- 
dination of labor, and the storage of surplus), (4) mediate internal disputes 
more closely, and (5) coordinate larger military operations. 
Obviously, the evolution of chiefdoms is another regularity in social evolution and, 
as pointed out by Flannery (1972, p. 403), it is intimately related to changes in 
religion: 
Often, chiefdoms have not only elaborate ritual but even full-time religious 
specialists; indeed, the chief himself may be a priest as well. Further, the 
office of ‘chief‘ exists apart from the man who occupies it, and on his death 
the office must be filled by one of equally noble descent. 
In summary, one may suggest that, whereas there is a remarkable degree of simi- 
larity among economic and technological causes that sparked social evolution, “they 
do not necessarily call forth similar social organizations or similar ideologies” 
(Corning, 1983, p. 224). Developments in economy or religion may lead to similar 
results but “may call forth alternatively an Athens or a Sparta” (Corning, 1983, 
p. 224); therefore, there must be additional factors that cause differences i n  this 
regard. Cultural traditions seem to be the main factor; these traditions have been 
selectively favored by their environments, mainly the dominant features of the 
physical and sociopolitical environments, and have had a decisive influence upon 
social evolution. With regard to the role of chiefdoms in social evolution, Sander- 
son’s suggestion (1995, p. 55) makes sense, according to which they are “a form of 
sociopolitical organization intermediate between tribes and states, and an organi- 
zational form that is an essential precursor of the state”. 

I 149 
4.3 Cultural lnstitutions in Social Evolution 
Sanderson (1995, p. 56) further suggested that 
the distinction between chiefdoms and states should be made on qualita- 
tive rather than quantitative grounds. I would define a state as a form of 
sociopolitical organization that has achieved a monopoly over the means of 
violence within a specified territory. 
Sanderson’s emphasis on a monopoly over the means ofviolence is reminiscent of 
Max Weber’s famous definition of authority, which gives the state‘s ‘legitimate’ 
control over the means of violence special importance too. Although there can be 
no doubt about the usefulness of paying attention to state control over the means 
of physical violence, it seems to be an erroneous assumption that violence was not 
a behavioral option in prestate societies. In his discussion of Carneiro’s and Giddens’ 
views on this point, Sanderson (1995, p. 56) stressed that, although he does not 
deny the role of violence in prestate societies, the monopoly on force does not have 
to be complete or total, but it should nevertheless be sufficient to crush rebellions 
against state power (Sanderson, 1995, p. 57). Such details may seem unnecessary 
in a chapter on social evolution, but it becomes clear below that they are in fact 
unavoidable in assessing the impact of various types of violence on social evolu- 
tion. 
In general, an acceleration in the specialization of institutions occurs concomi- 
tant with the rise of states. For instance, experts in land surveying are needed to lay 
the foundations for imposing the rule of law over a given territory; in addition, 
scribes and juridical specialists are needed to gain control over food production 
and tax collecting. With regard to the long-term stability of the state and its institu- 
tions, specialists in the use of physical violence must be permanently available and 
are therefore organized into police forces and armies. On the one hand, recruit- 
ment and training of these experts required considerable resources; on the other 
hand, even more surplus was needed to guarantee the permanent loyalty of these 
people to political authority. So, with regard to the structure of society, these devel- 
opments brought a dramatic increase in social inequality in their wake. The under- 
lying major causes of these developments were better harvests, a concomitant in- 
crease in surpluses, and the gradual separation of political authority from kinship. 
As compared to hunter-gatherer societies, food-producing societies enjoyed 10 to 
100 times more calories per acre, an obvious advantage in evolutionary perspec- 
tive; however, this advantage had to be compensated for by growing needs of labor, 
as well as by an increase in competition for fertile areas. In consequence, higher 
reproduction rates of farming people were selectively favored, and competition 
over fertile soil and water supplies led to a rise in the magnitude of warfare. Re- 
garding the progression from chiefdom to state, Lenski (19G6) pointed to the im- 
pact of technological innovations, mainly the invention and spread of the plow 
which increased the farmer’s productivity dramatically, an assessment that still 
seems to be valid. Despite long-term problems caused by population growth, larger 
populations enjoy various advantages over smaller populations, mainly in warfare 
- not however because of sheer size, rather because social structure can be much 
more elaborate in larger populations (Carneiro, 1987, p. 115). These are some of 

150 
4 Social Evolution 
the major causes underlying the evolution of states in the Fertile Crescent, as well 
as in other regions of the world. 
Turning to changing patterns oflegitimacy, Sanderson (1995, p. 57) stresses that 
“the specialized institutions of the state are at least partially independent of the 
kinship system, whereas the political institutions of the chiefdom are still strongly 
rooted in kinship connections”. Similarly, Diamond (1998, p. 280) suggests “that 
states are organized on political and territorial lines, not on the kinship lines that 
defined bands, tribes and simple chiefdoms”. According to Breuer (1989, p. 28), 
the king is now typically regarded as a god who, unlike in tribal times, now not 
only represents the community vis-a-vis the gods, but is a god himself. It is clear 
that the king‘s divine nature served as a firm buttress of the legitimacy of his rule 
and its supporting institutions. For instance, since the Egyptian pharaoh was con- 
sidered a god, he “was taboo, and it was he who guaranteed and maintained the 
cosmic order as well as its counterpart, law and order on earth” (Sanderson, 1995, 
p. 60). Due to his divine nature, the pharaoh could pass on these bases of legiti- 
macy to his children or to other members of his family. No wonder that these 
foundations served as a warrant for the stability of the dynastic system across many 
generations. Moreover, the stability of rule gave rise to a number of specialized 
institutions that had not existed previously. 
In view of the pharaoh’s godlike nature, there must have been a strong need for 
reverence among the people, which led to the construction of temples, palaces, 
and huge pyramids or magnificently decorated tombs for the pharaoh and for 
members of his family. Moreover, the institution of permanent rule brought about 
the establishment of a privileged stratum of officers, bureaucrats, and military 
officers who were in charge of palace guards and the empire’s borders. From a 
sociological point of view, it would be expected that these specialized institutions 
led to the evolution of aristocratic elites who enjoyed many privileges as compared 
to ordinary people. In fact, the ruins of Ancient Egypt have many illustrations of a 
highly stratified society, the tombs of the nobles being second in pomp only to the 
pharaoh‘s own funeral site, whereas there are hardly any traces of ordinary peo- 
ple’s remains. 
However, the worlds first states arose in the Fertile Crescent, more specifically 
in Mesopotamia. According to Sanderson (1995, p. 59), the “first Mesopotamian 
state was centered around the city of Uruk. Unlike in Egypt, where the unification 
of the Two Lands was attained in a comparatively early stage of development, the 
Mesopotamian, or rather, the Sumerian state consisted of some 13 politically au- 
tonomous city-states (ibid., p. 59). With respect to a general pattern of social evolu- 
tion, it is noteworthy that the worlds first full-blown system oflaw originated with 
Sargon of Akkad, one ofthe most important kings in the later period. According to 
Hoebel, “law is present when some kind of ‘court’ operates and when ‘legitimate 
use ofphysical coercion’ is present” (Hoebel, 1954, p. 470after Boehm, 1986, p. 196). 
Although systems of law existed in tribal societies as well, they were in general 
comparatively simple and unsuited for the needs of highly differentiated societies, 
which required much more elaborate systems of law. Therefore, the evolution of 
full-blown systems of law may be regarded as another example of a cultural insti- 
I 

I 151 
4.3 Cultural Institutions in Social Evolution 
tution that prevailed from times immemorial but, due to increases in social differ- 
entiation, had to acquire new characteristics, such as systematic training of juridi- 
cal experts, the establishment of authorities with clear-cut competencies, mainte- 
nance of written files and all the other characteristics of bureaucratic processes 
which Max Weber portrayed in detail. 
As already pointed out, reciprocity is one of the major foundations of systems of 
morality and law. More specifically, the function of law can be defined as a system 
of rules that “spell out the behaviors that are serious enough to cause harm that 
may be regarded as ‘societal’. The intent of the law is to deter such behaviors or to 
prevent their recurrence when they do happen” (Barner-Barry, 1986, p. 144). 
Typi- 
cally, tribal societies define some rather broad protected interests, mainly those 
concerning preservation of life, the right of taking revenge for a kinsman’s slaying, 
and preemptive ostracism of individuals who tend to endanger social order. Al- 
though protection of these interests may have sufficed to maintain social order in 
strictly egalitarian societies, additional principles of law were needed after the evo- 
lution of food production, which led to a considerable degree of social inequality. 
In addition to protecting the integrity of members’ lives, economically more ad- 
vanced societies had to keep individual’s property rights safe. Moreover, the evolu- 
tion of aristocratic elites brought a vast array of prerogatives in social life in its 
wake, which had to be guarded by law. In general, oral traditions of law, which 
prevailed in tribal societies, proved insufficient to provide for the juridical necessi- 
ties of stratified societies, so the evolution of written systems of law must have 
been favored in social evolution. The first systems ofwriting evolved in Mesopota- 
mia and lent themselves to use in juridical matters, as well as in other domains of 
life. To summarize, from an evolutionary point of view it seems utterly unlikely 
that the emergence ofthe world’s first systematic text on law, i.e., Sargon ofAkkads 
famous monument, was merely fortuitous; rather, this juridical text evolved as a 
concomitant to growing social complexity. 
At a certain point of social evolution, when innovations in technology had sparked 
food production, which in turn led to population growth and progressive social 
differentiation, the evolution of the state was an unavoidable necessity. According 
to Diamond (1998, p. 286), the major problem to be dealt with by the state is “con- 
flict between unrelated strangers. That problem grows astronomically as the number 
of people making up society increases”. Diamond goes on to point out that lethal 
conflicts in band and tribal societies usually lead to unending cycles of feuding; 
therefore, 
a large society that continues to leave conflict resolution to all of its mem- 
bers is guaranteed to blow up. That factor alone would explain why socie- 
ties of thousands could exist only if they develop(ed) centralized authority 
to monopolize force and resolve conflicts (Diamond, 1998, p. 286). 
Another important factor, furthering the evolution of the state, was the need for a 
redistributive economy (Diamond, 1998, p. 287), i.e., a market mechanism or some 
type of authority to make decisions about the distribution of surplus production. 
Since the majority of new institutions, such as scribes, bureaucrats in general, law 

152 
4 Socia/ Evo/utfon 
experts, priests, and last but not least members of the political and military elites, 
are usually exempt from producing food, allocation processes within the state pre- 
suppose the existence of such a center. From an evolutionary point ofview, it seems 
obvious then, that the state and its specialized institutions conferred survival value 
upon populations that had this type of organization at their disposal. Although it 
may be undeniable that the state was beneficial in functional terms, the question 
arises as to who was the main beneficiary of this development. In general, “very 
few of the spoils accrue to the mass of the population” (Sanderson, 1995, p. 85); 
most often, the experts in violence, as well as other members of the elite, gain 
most from the evolution of a state (Andreski, 1968; Meyer, 1977). 
The state, as the political organization of horticultural and particularly of agrar- 
ian societies, prevailed in many parts ofthe world since its establishment in antiq- 
uity. Superficially, it seems that the evolution of societies and their political organi- 
zation pursued a course of ever-increasing social complexity, because this was the 
best way to gain selective benefits. The well-known facts of evolutionary regres- 
sion, i.e., devolution, are however a most welcome reminder of the poverty of this 
notion. History holds many examples of empires that have collapsed, not only 
because they succumbed to foreign invaders, but also because they had been grow- 
ing to the point of exhaustion. The collapse of the Mayan Empire offers a telling 
illustration of some of the causes of exhaustion: 
I 
At its peak Mayan civilization was an extremely densely populated pre- 
industrial society.. . The Maya had been investing for hundreds of years in 
sociopolitical complexity, and the costs of this investment had to be borne 
entirely by the peasant agricultural population. With the buildup of severe 
population pressure over time, the bulk of the population had great diffi- 
culty meeting their own daily needs, let alone providing for the support of a 
large administrative superstructure (Sanderson, 1995, p. 131). 
According to Sanderson, growing differentiation and complexity, therefore, are no 
guarantees of enhanced adaptation, because the costs of complexity may exceed 
the benefits to be gained from it. Similar to the Mayan Empire, the causes of the 
breakdown of the Roman Empire were mainly the decline of population and “the 
increased military and administrative costs (that) had to be borne by fewer indi- 
viduals’’ (Sanderson, 1995, p. 129). So, their defeat by Teutonic invaders was not so 
much the result of the invaders’ military superiority, rather it was caused by the 
exhaustion of resources in the Roman Empire, which led to the weakening of its 
military defenses. 
After the fall of the Roman Empire, societies in western Europe resorted to tribal 
kingdoms for a considerable period of time, before states could be reestablished. 
Despite the existence of the medieval state, the general level of civilization was 
inferior in most western European societies to that of Roman times. Throughout 
this era, agriculture was the mainstay of most societies in western Europe, and the 
peasantry was the main basis for the production of surplus. These societies were at 
the same time highly stratified, the feudal aristocracy being able to extract a size- 
able part of the surplus. As pointed out by Wallerstein (1974, p. 18), 

I 153 
4.3 Cultural institutions in Social Evolution 
when we speak of western European feudalism, (it) is a series of tiny eco- 
nomic nodules whose population and productivity were slowly increasing, 
and in which the legal mechanisms ensured that the bulk ofthe surplus went 
to the landlords who had noble status and control of the juridical machinery. 
In general, feudalism is a system of private land ownership; “however, such land 
ownership is not unconditional or absolute, acquired once and for all and without 
strings. Rather, land is acquired in the form of a fief. A fief is a grant of land given 
by a superior lord to a lesser lord in return for the performance of certain obliga- 
tions, especially military service and personal protection” (Sanderson, 1999, p. 235). 
Therefore, the nature of the state was quite different than in the Roman era: in 
fact, the state was, according to Wallerstein (1974, p. 31), personified by 
the prince whose reputation was lauded, whose majesty was preserved, who 
little by little was removed from his subjects. And it was the bureaucracy 
which emerged now as a distinctive social grouping with special character- 
istics and interests, the principal ally of the prince. 
As described in detail by Wallerstein, in the European Middle Ages, there existed a 
Christian civilization, but neither an empire nor a world economy. Obviously, the 
evolution of a world economy, as well as of new empires, presupposed new meth- 
ods oflabor and relatively strong state machineries (Wallerstein, 1974, p. 38). Many 
of these causes are economic in nature, which is dealt with in more detail in the 
chapter on evolutionary economics#QS#. There are, however, important factors 
that are overlooked in many analyses, for instance, the role of force in this era and 
in other periods of social evolution, which deserve special attention and are looked 
at more closely below. 
Feudalism was a peculiarly European, or even western European, phenomenon, 
and Tokugawa Japan was probably the only region in the world with similar pat- 
terns of stratification. In other regions, for instance in Tsarist Russia, the peasant 
masses were kept in bondage until their formal liberation in the late 19th century. 
Other societies, such as China and Korea, were highly stratified according to the 
Confucian tradition and the hierarchical patterns of the Chinese empire. In short, 
there was no uniform social pattern that prevailed in all agrarian societies. In fact, 
S. N. Eisenstadt proposed 5 basic types of agrarian societies (Sanderson, 1995, 
p. 98), namely: 
Patrimonial empires, such as the Carolingian empire. 
Nomad or conquest empires, such as those of the Mongols. 
City-states, the most important example of which is probably ancient Athens. 
Feudal systems, such as existed in the European Middle Ages and Tokugawa 
Historical bureaucratic empires, such as various Chinese empires, the Roman 
Japan. 
Empire, and the Mogul Empire in India. 
Whatever differences existed between these types of society, there were common 
characteristics as well, such as high degrees of social inequality, as well as consid- 

154 
4 Social Evolution 
erable longevity ofthese social structures and their underlying causes. For instance, 
agrarian societies prevailed from the introduction of food production in the Fertile 
Crescent until the Industrial Revolution in the late 18th and the 19th centuries. 
and in many societies agriculture is still the dominant mode of production today. 
As pointed out in the Introduction, the advent of industrial production gave rise to 
sociology as well as other social sciences. The new mode of production and its 
effects on urbanization, on the evolution of class differences, and on the formation 
of novel patterns of political participation seemed to justify the occupation of these 
new academic disciplines, which were designed to study the ongoing process of 
revolutionary change in industrial societies. Meanwhile, the causes underlying the 
transition from agrarian to industrial society spread across the globe, at first in the 
course of European colonization, more recently by the determination of local gov- 
ernments or other political actors to introduce industrial production. This type of 
production may be hazardous, bringing depletion of resources, negative conse- 
quences to the environment, and other detrimental results in its wake; neverthe- 
less, influential actors seem to agree that industrialization is the only means avail- 
able to cope with overpopulation, power disequilibria among states, and some other 
aspects of uneven distribution of the instruments of power and influence. Many 
causes underlie the evolution of industrial society, even if one restricts one’s per- 
spective to economic factors. 
When the Industrial Revolution commenced in mid-18th-century England, there 
were three major competitors in Western Europe for leadership in economic and 
political affairs - France, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. From an eco- 
nomic point of view, it is noteworthy that “the English had an agricultural revolu- 
tion circa 1650 to 1750 and the French did not” (Wallerstein, 1980, p. 263). Accord- 
ing to Wallerstein, the military rivalry with France stimulated metallurgy, because 
metals were needed for the production of armaments; this in turn may have sparked 
inventions such as Watt’s steam engine. Another major factor was, according to 
Wallerstein (1980, p. 268), “the emphasis on foreign trade that led to Britain’s em- 
phasis on the navy and the colonies, which, in turn, permitted her the military 
triumphs of the long struggle with France”. In addition to these economic factors, 
there were, however, myriads of scientific, technological, and other factors, which 
were preconditions for evolution of the Industrial Age in the United Kingdom. 
According to Max Weber, one of the most influential sociologists of all time, the 
Protestant religion in general, and Calvinist and Puritan denominations in par- 
ticular, provided believers with the spirit of capitalism; however, Borltenau (1976), 
a sociologist who has fallen somewhat into oblivion, emphasized feudalism’s im- 
pact on the formation of Western individualism, which he regarded as the most 
important precondition for industrial capitalism. Last but not least, Parsons (19754, 
an eminent 20th-century sociologist, stressed the impact of antiquity’s ‘seedbed 
societies’, Greece and Israel, on the formation of the intellectual and social pre- 
conditions for the emergence of modern society. Some of these theories are corn- 
patible with an evolutionary perspective and are therefore dealt with below. How- 
ever, a general discussion of these theories goes well beyond the scope of this 
chapter. 
I 

I 155 
4.4 Causes ofSocial Evolution 
4.4 
Causes of Social Evolution 
In view of the immense amount of data collected by biologists, palaeontologists, 
and other specialists, it is difficult to deny that evolution is a fact. Although there is 
ongoing discussion as to which theory provides the best explanation for these data, 
there is considerable agreement on the reality of evolution, if creationist arguments 
may be left aside. At least, this may be concluded from Ridley’s reader on this topic 
(Ridley, 1997). Regarding the applicability of evolutionary theory to societal devel- 
opment, there are, however, many influential sociologists, for instance Giddens 
(1988, p. 42), who are extremely skeptical. Although we cannot deny that Giddens’ 
criticism is valid in some respects, his approach appears to fail to pay attention to 
many regularities in human behavior and in the evolution of human societies. 
Therefore, the following considerations proceed from the assumption that evolu- 
tionary theory, particularly Darwin’s theory, may still shed some fresh light on vari- 
ous problems of social evolution. I refrain from discussing theories that tend to 
deny the fruitfulness of evolutionary thinking entirely. Emphasis is instead placed 
on theories that have for whatever reasons gained prominence in debates about 
social evolution. It is important to note that no attempt is made here to fully cover 
these discussions, because this would definitely go beyond the scope of this chapter. 
According to one ofthe most influential traditions in the history of social theory, 
force was the prime mover in social evolution. As pointed out by Kammler (1966), 
this theory was endorsed in antiquity by Plato, as well as by Ibn Khaldun, and in 
more recent times by F. Oppenheimer and A. von Riistow, among many others. 
Definitely the most influential proponent ofthis theory was, however, H. Spencer, 
one of the founding fathers of modern sociology. In a relevant passage he suggests: 
Warfare among men, like warfare among animals, has had a large share in 
raising their organizations to a higher stage. The following are some of the 
various ways in which it has worked. In the first place, it has the effect of 
continually extirpating races which, for some reason or other, were least 
fitted to cope with the conditions of existence they were subject to. The 
killing off of relatively feeble tribes, or tribes relatively wanting in endur- 
ance, or courage, or sagacity, or power of cooperation, must have tended 
ever to maintain, and occasionally to increase, the amounts of life-preserv- 
ing powers possessed by men. Beyond this average advance caused by de- 
struction of the least-developed individuals, there has been an average ad- 
vance caused by inheritance of those further developments due to functional 
activity . . . A no less important benefit bequeathed by war has been the 
formation of large societies. By force alone were small nomadic hordes 
welded into large tribes; by force alone were large tribes welded into small 
nations; by force alone have small nations been welded into large nations 
(Spencer, 1873, pp. 193-194). 

156 
4 Social Euohtion 
In another passage, Spencer emphasizes that 
I 
we have ample proof that centralized control is the primary trait acquired 
by every body of fighting men, be it hordes of savages, groups of brigands, 
or masses of soldiers. And this centralized control, necessitated during war, 
characterizes the government during peace (Spencer, 1876, p. 576 after van 
der Dennen, 1999, pp. 165-166). 
According to Spencer, force is the single most important factor in social evolution 
because antagonism with other societies is more or less constant (van der Dennen, 
1995, p. 231), and violent conflict, therefore, is unavoidable. These passages are as 
clear as can be in demonstrating that Spencer assumed that force was a major 
cause, in fact a prime mover, of social evolution. 
With his emphasis on force, Spencer was undoubtedly one of the most influen- 
tial proponents of Social Darwinism (Service, 1977, p. 335), but in the present con- 
text, rather than attempting a general critique of this line of thought, it is more 
important to show that Spencer’s suggestions regarding the course of social evolu- 
tion are seriously flawed. To be clear, this criticism does not use moralistic under- 
tones against Spencer’s notions, but refers you to some recent findings regarding 
the evolution of complex types of society, what Spencer calls ‘nations’. In this re- 
gard, Spencer obviously assumes that such nations and their specialized institu- 
tions evolved because centralized control was an asset in warfare. Although there 
can be no doubt about the advantages of centralized control in warfare, there is 
ample evidence that warfare persisted for ages in many societies without bringing 
central control in its wake; therefore, we may hypothesize that the causal relation 
between the use of force and the evolution of differentiated societies is much more 
complex than Spencer assumed. Prior to a closer look at these causes, some meth- 
odological considerations are, however, advisable. 
A major problem regarding the origin of warfare as an institution is the scarcity 
of compelling evidence for war and other types of collective violence in prehistoric 
times. Due to the primitive nature of weaponry in those days, most of which were 
made of wood, stone, or similar materials, there is little reliable information re- 
garding armaments, levels of organization, and other factors, which would enable 
us to make an assessment of the type of warfare. In many cases, only one-sided 
data are available, for instance when cracked skulls are used as evidence of a battle. 
Therefore, many analyses of ancestral warfare resort to ethnographic reports from 
more recent times, mainly tribal societies of the 19th and 20th centuries. Making 
analogies between ‘modern‘ tribal societies and prehistoric groups does not, how- 
ever, provide direct proof for any particular hypothesis, so any theory on the role of 
warfare in those days must be met with caution. Needless to say, evidence for 
chiefdoms and full-blown states is much more reliable, not necessarily because 
written records of contemporary scribes are generally to be trusted, but because 
there is a multitude of other historical sources that allow the texts to be verified. 
Keeping these reservations in mind, it may be suggested that ‘primitive’ or ‘sub- 
military’ (Turney-High, 1971) war prevailed from time immemorial until this very 
day in some remote areas, whereas complex patterns of warfare evolved in other 

I 157 
4.4 Causes of Social Evolution 
regions, particularly in areas that easily lent themselves to food production. Ac- 
cording to Turney-High (1971, p. 8), a leading expert on primitive warfare, “war is 
primarily a sociological art, and the art of war improves so slowly that Alexander’s 
principles of combat are still standard. Regarding the distinction of sub-military 
from military war, Turney-High suggests the following criteria: (1) tactical opera- 
tions; (2) definite command and control; (3) ability to conduct a campaign to re- 
duce enemy resistance if the first battle fails; (4) some clarity of motive; and (5) 
adequate supplies. Regarding point 4, “the war must have a group motive rather 
than an individual one . . . True war is above the plane of feuds; it is a political 
device, properly so-called (Turney-High, 1971, p. 30; Keegan, 1995, p. 144). It is 
easy to realize why tribal warfare does not meet most of these standards: Usually, 
there is neither clear command and control of operations, nor are there strategic 
plans for operations beyond a first defeat. Due to the comparatively small size of 
tribal populations and their general primitivity, there are no specialized institu- 
tions available for warfare. In general, every adult male person is obliged to join 
war parties, assuming he does not want to be excluded from social intercourse, as 
well as from sexual privileges, which are often granted to victorious warriors. With 
regard to supplies, it is easy to see that tribal societies are typically unable to pro- 
vide for large-scale supplies of war parties. 
Most wars among tribal people were in fact feuds and, according to Turney- 
High‘s definition, should be classified as sub-military or primitive war; the term 
‘primitive’ denoting merely a lack of specialization and foresight in operations, 
definitely being devoid of any pejorative connotations. Recent analyses by Keeley 
and van der Dennen tend to cast the value of this simple classification in doubt. 
According to these authors, warfare in stateless societies comprises pitched-battle 
encounters, i.e., more or less ritualized fighting, as well as lethal raids (van der 
Dennen, 2000). However, in the present context it suffices to emphasize the gen- 
eral primitiveness of tribal warfare, as compared to the use of military force by 
chiefdoms and particularly by states. As somewhat of an oversimplification, it seems 
that typical motivations underlying primitive war are moralistic, e.g., in feuding, 
or are part of reproduction, when mating and marriage privileges are reseived for 
successful warriors. According to some anthropological studies of warfare among 
the Jivaro and Mundurucu tribes of South America, headhunting and similar indi- 
cations of bravery were related to notions of fertility, and marital status was re- 
served for successful warriors (Meyer, 1981, p. 68). In these tribes, the social status 
acquired by the successful warrior, i.e., the cultural evaluation of a certain type of 
behavior, was directly related to this person’s legitimate ability to reproduce, i.e., to 
differential reproduction in the strictly biological sense (Meyer, 1994). Last but not 
least, “a very profound motive for going to war is to resolve life’s tensions, to es- 
cape from unhappiness caused by frustration in other realms of existence” (Turney- 
High, 1971, p. 141). 
Returning to Spencer’s hypothesis on the role of force in social evolution, it is 
important to note that sub-military war had no sizeable impact on this process. If 
the basic characteristics of ‘modern’ forms of sub-military war may be attributed 
by way of analogy to this type of war in the past, it may be inferred that warfare did 

158 
4 Social Evohtion 
not exercise an influence on social evolution, as Spencer suggests. However, the 
invention of food production sparked new patterns of violent competition over 
scarce resources, and in the long run gave rise to full-blown military patterns of 
warfare. The cultural invention of novel types of resources, such as new varieties 
ofmaize (Phillips, 1987, p. 235), ofnew weapons, such as the longbow in medieval 
England (Montross, 1960, p. 158), or new tactics, such as the Macedonian phalanx, 
brought about new patterns ofwarfare (Meyer, 1981,1995). As presented in more 
detail in other publications, warfare developed into an independent variable through- 
out certain phases of social evolution (Keegan, 1995; Meyer, 1977,1981), although 
it was dependent on economic, religious, or other variables in most phases of hu- 
man history (Keegan, 1995, p. 314; Meyer, 1981). Summarizing Spencer’s general 
assessment of force, although he definitely overstates its impact in some respects, 
one cannot deny that full-blown warfare exercised a major influence on social evo- 
lution. 
It is important to note that this assessment ofthe role of force in social evolution 
is fully compatible with evolutionary theory, particularly with Darwinian theory. 
According to Darwin, competition over scarce resources is a problem that all living 
systems have to cope with in some way. However, unlike Spencer, Darwin (1968, 
p. 459) made it clear that the concept of the struggle for existence should be used 
“in a broad and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on an- 
other, and including not only the life ofthe individual, but success in leaving prog- 
eny”. From a Darwinian point of view, one would expect that, although conflict 
between individual actors may arise in some situations, cooperation among indi- 
viduals is a precondition for their survival in most environments. For instance, 
killing a person may force his kin to strive for legal retribution by blood revenge or 
other means; however, in most other situations these very same clans may depend 
upon cooperation to secure survival against predators or inimical groups. There- 
fore, people do in general try hard to return to internal peace after outbursts of 
violence or even actively avoid violent interactions with neighboring populations 
by ostracizing individuals who endanger peace (Boehm, 1986). To cut a long story 
short, conflict and cooperation are both necessities in a world of dangerous beasts 
and competitive groups; therefore, it does not come as a surprise that warfare and 
other forms of coordinated collective violence had their part in social evolution. 
However, unlike in Spencer’s, Bagehot’s and Sumner’s day (van der Dennen, 1999), 
when the impact of force on social evolution was vastly exaggerated, recent analy- 
ses of mainstream sociologists have more often than not ignored these factors 
altogether. In part, this may be an outcome of Social Darwinism’s overemphasis 
on force and violence; other factors may have been the enormous material and 
intellectual destruction caused by the World Wars, which induced sociologists to 
neglect the problem of force in social evolution. Only very recently are sociologists 
like R. Aron, R. Collins, M. Mann, S. K. Sanderson, and A. B. Schmookler begin- 
ning to reconsider the impact of force on social evolution. However, over the past 
decades, mainstream sociology was dominated by approaches that did not pay much 
attention to either the role of force in general or the impact of warfare in particular, 
but instead emphasized processes of social integration and social differentiation. 
I 

I 159 
4.4 Causes ofSocia/ Evolution 
A short look at some ofthese theories should begin by pointing to the two most 
influential sociological paradigms, namely the ‘sociology of action’ vs. the ‘sociol- 
ogy of social systems’ which, according to Schimank (1996, p. 205), dominated 
discussions within the discipline in recent decades. For several reasons, which 
cannot be dealt with in the present context, the systems perspective gained much 
greater influence in the discipline than the did the action perspective. Accordingly, 
sociologists were much more concerned with problems of how people are inte- 
grated into social systems, such as groups or societies, than in the causes of disa- 
greement, conflict, and other social problems. Somewhat oversimplifying, one may 
suggest that the systems view specializes in studies of the ways people adjust to a 
given normative infrastructure, for instance by looking at socializing processes, 
whereas conflict theorists delve into the causes of the divergence of individuals’ 
interests. In general, the first view is likely to stress functional requirements of 
social integration, whereas the second view lays stress upon conflicts of interest, 
the use of force, and similar behaviors. From a sociological perspective, both prob- 
lems are worth being dealt with, but from an evolutionary point of view, which is 
primarily interested in tackling the problem of how organisms manage to survive 
in a world of scarce resources, preference is given to conflict theory. 
According to Parsons (1975, p. 39), one ofthe most influential proponents ofthe 
functionalist-systemic tradition, social differentiation is likely to promote enhanced 
adaptation. Parsons explains that some societies in antiquity served as seedbeds 
for developments in other societies, for instance, ancient Israel and Greece con- 
tributed greatly to the system of modern society, although these ancient societies 
did not prevail as politically autonomous societies for long times. More specifi- 
cally, this contribution originated from cultural factors transcending their own 
politically organized community (Parsons, 1975, p. 161), such as the Greek idea of 
the polis or the Israelite notion of a universal god. With regard to the theory of 
social evolution, numerous critics have pointed to a hidden teleology underlying 
Parsons’ notion of ‘enhanced adaptation’ as an inbuilt developmental goal of social 
systems (Schmid, 1986, p. 7). According to Corning and Hines (1988, p. 156), Par- 
sons, although using a different terminology, did in fact subscribe to Spencer’s 
orthogenetic notion of evolution, i.e., similar to Spencer, he assumed a basic 
directionality of the evolutionary process. Yet another critic, Sanderson, censures 
Parsons’ notion that “social evolution [is] growing differentiation or complexity 
and that such a process produces increasingly well-adapted societies”. According 
to Sanderson (1995, p. 131), “growing complexity may be a good thing for elites, in 
whose interests it is generally carried out in the first place. But it is of dubious 
worth for the bulk of the population who must pay the costs of complexity”. To 
sum up, from an evolutionary point of view, Parsons’ functionalist theory of social 
evolution must be refuted as a seriously flawed account. 
More recently, Niklas Luhmann reestablished the functionalist-systemic approach 
in sociology, by combining it with the theory of autopoietic systems. As pointed 
out by Maturana and Varela, living systems operate in isolation from one another. 
Whereas von Bertalanf6, the founder of systems theory, assumed that living sys- 
tems must be open to the flow of matter and energy from the environment, 

160 
4 Social Evolution 
Maturana and his followers focus on nervous systems’ internal states. According 
to Maturana, that system is “an isolated network of interactions, in which each 
change of relations between its individual elements is likely to affect all other ele- 
ments as well”. In further following Maturana, we may infer that living systems 
‘make themselves’, i.e., they are ‘autopoietic’ because they are continuously repro- 
ducing the very elements that are prerequisites of their own existence (Maturana, 
1982, p. 141). According to Luhmann, any type of system, including social sys- 
tems, basically operates in a similar manner; therefore, systems, by utilizing their 
peculiar codes and programs, are isolated from each other, and hence, no direct 
interaction between them is feasible. Regarding social evolution, Luhmann starts 
from the assumption that differentiation is the single most important cause of 
social evolution, bringing the development of peculiar binary codes and programs 
in its wake. Due to social differentiation, modern societies are characterized by 
numerous specialized subsystems, such as the economic, the political, and the 
scientific, none ofwhich have direct access to each other. Although Luhmann puts 
considerable emphasis on the naturalistic and evolutionary underpinnings of his 
theory (Luhmann, 1985, p. 10; Luhmann 1997, p. 413), there is no clear concept of 
the causes underlying social differentiation. Instead of offering an explanation for 
that process, Luhmann presents a critique of Darwinian theory in general, and 
Neo-Danvinian accounts of social evolution in particular. In following S. J. Goulds 
considerations, Luhmann casts the concept of external selection in doubt and pleads 
for introducing internal selection, as well as the concept of the coevolution of struc- 
turally connected autopoietic systems (Luhmann, 1997, p. 427). Despite some ad- 
ditional conjectures about the persistent fruitfulness of Lamarck‘s evolutionary 
thinking (Luhmann, 1997, p. 504), as well as descriptions of various evolutionary 
achievements, Luhmann decides that “there are no unequivocal causes for evolu- 
tionary achievements, such as the development of agrarian production” (Luhmann, 
1997, p. 507). Not a very impressive result of his extensive deliberations! 
Unlike these functionalist-systemic approaches, theories of coevolution are more 
easily compatible with action-centric and conflict perspectives of social evolution. 
According to Lumsden and Wilson (1983, p. 19), coevolution of biological impera- 
tives and culture occurs, in fact, “culture is generated and shaped by biological 
imperatives while biological traits are simultaneously altered by genetic evolution 
in response to cultural evolution”. Unlike the systems approach, this theory pro- 
ceeds from the assumption that individuals, or rather, their inbuilt biological im- 
peratives, play a role in social evolution and spark the evolution of new cultural 
patterns. According to Lumsden and Wilson, the concept of epigenetic rules is suited 
for designating the interface between human biology and culture, a system that 
enables human individuals to establish cultural rules and institutions that are at 
least partly independent of biological determination. Regarding social evolution, 
this theory attaches great importance to epigenetic rules as biological underpinnings 
of mental and cultural factors, which seems to be in keeping with arguments pre- 
sented in this chapter. Unfortunately, however, Lumsden and Wilson’s concentra- 
tion on the biological foundations of mind and culture prevents them from giving 
due consideration to the impact of physical environments on the evolution of cul- 
I 

I 
4.4 Causes ofSocial Evolution 
ture. Undoubtedly, there are a variety of universal elements of human culture that 
can be accounted for by evolutionary biology, but a full understanding of culture 
presupposes attention to the role of environments and resource distribution. 
Other versions of coevolution theory have been presented by Durham, and by 
Boyd and Richerson. According to Durham (1990, p. 192), a major concern ofevo- 
lutionary culture theory is to demonstrate that cultural and social factors are inde- 
pendently variable yet mutually interdependent. In another passage he describes 
culture as a secondary “evolving system of information inheritance, separate from 
(though interacting with) the genetic inheritance system” (Durham, 1990, p. 194). 
Regarding social evolution, Durham suggests that, unlike strictly Darwinian views, 
which stress differential reproduction, evolutionary culture theory points to the 
impact of different teachings as a major factor of cultural transmission: “If natural 
selection increasingly turned control, so to speak, over to culture, it was because 
culture, as a general rule, did a better job” (Durham, 1990, p. 201). 
Similarly, Richerson (1997, p. 40) stresses that the “advantage of having a cul- 
tural nature is the flexibility and relatively rapid evolution of culture”. Cultural 
transmission is faster and, once it is established, it is likely “to reduce the cost of 
individual decision making still further” (Boyd and Richerson, 1985, p. 288). As 
pointed out by Degler, coevolution theory evolved in the course of discussions on 
kin-selection theory, one of the bulwarks of sociobiology. Boyd and Richerson, as 
well as Durham, “take a more positive position on defense of the use of kin selec- 
tion theory in explaining human behavior” (Degler, 1991, p. 281). 
According to Maynard Smith and Szathmiry (1995, p. 259), the basic idea of that 
theory is that “by helping a relative, an individual is propagating its own genes, or 
more precisely, copies of those genes”. The crucial point regarding the theory’s 
applicability to culture theory then is whether human adaptations evolve by “in- 
creasing the fitness of individuals relative to others within the same social group” 
or “by increasing the fitness of social groups as collectives, relative to other social 
groups” (Wilson and Sober, 1994, p. GOO). Obviously, there are opposing views re- 
garding the role of genes in social evolution, sociobiology advocating direct causal- 
ity, and coevolution theory being somewhat more cautious in this respect. 
In their discussion of coevolution theory, Maryanski and Turner (1992, p. 4) credit 
the theory as being “more viable and intriguing” than sociobiology, but they also 
note that “it is not clear that (it) can explain the complexities of sociocultural evo- 
lution’’. Yet another influential author in the field of social evolution, Sanderson 
(1999, p. 39), is even more positive about sociobiology’s explanatory potential but, 
similar to Maryanski and Turner, feels that it has to be combined with other theo- 
ries, to adequately cover social evolution. According to him (Sanderson, 2001), 
Darwinian conflict theory can fill the gap between sociobiology and the theory of 
social evolution, because this type of materialism provides a basis for taking hu- 
mans’ most important interests and concerns into account, mainly reproductive, 
economic, and political (Sanderson, 1998, p. 14). In fact, Sanderson’s view seems 
convincing that sociobiology, which focuses on reproduction, needs to be supple- 
mented by a theory promising to take economic and political interests into account 
as well. 

162 
4 Social Evohtion 
As pointed out by Sanderson, synthetic materialism is based on previous theo- 
ries, such as Marxian and Weberian conflict theory, Marvin Harris’ cultural materi- 
alism, Immanuel Wallerstein’s world system theory, as well as sociobiology. 
According to Sanderson, explanations of people’s economic and political interests 
and concerns provided by these theories can be connected to sociobiology, a theory 
which, unlike others, throws the door open to a new understanding of human 
preferences and needs. In fact, many sociological theories proceed from rather 
vague assumptions about the nature of human preferences, and so from an evolu- 
tionary point of view must be regarded as seriously flawed. This chapter argues in 
favor of sociobiological accounts, according to which human behavior and its un- 
derlying genetic, emotional, mental, and cultural structures evolved to enhance 
inclusive fitness. For instance, viewed against the background of evolution, mental 
and rational patterns have not evolved in their own right but because they contrib- 
uted to human survival. As pointed out by Sanderson (1998, p. 7), “as is well known, 
rational choice theory has great difficulty accounting for the origin of human pref- 
erences’’, because it dwells on traditional exchange theory’s assumptions on hu- 
man behavior and does not take the evolutionary background of these preferences 
into consideration (Somit and Peterson, 1999), as more recent evolutionary psy- 
chologists do (Barkow et al., 1992). 
To summarize, this chapter proceeds from the assumption that taking the bio- 
logical bases of cultural institutions into account may vastly enhance explanations 
of social evolution. In this view, mental and cultural processes, as well as human 
social behavior in general, far from being arbitrary, are firmly based on evolution- 
ary foundations. In addition to these universal conditions of social behavior, hu- 
man groups live in vastly different environments, which may or may not spark 
social evolution. At present, it is difficult to decide the extent to which social evolu- 
tion was synonymous with the rise of genetic differences between human popu- 
lations, as theories of coevolution suggest. There is, however, some evidence sug- 
gested by Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994, p. 380), according to which there are “important 
correlations between the genetic tree and what is understood of the linguistic evo- 
lutionary tree”. From an evolutionary point ofview, it therefore seems unlikely that 
genetic differences did not influence social evolution at all, as Diamond (Diamond, 
1998, p. 241), as well as mainstream social science, suggests. Fortunately, how- 
ever, there is no need for this chapter to present any solutions to this urgent prob- 
lem, because the main lines of social evolution can be analyzed without pretend- 
ing to have an answer to this complex question. 
In social evolution, many cultural institutions acquired new and unprecedented 
characteristics. For instance, force and collective violence have played important 
roles in human social behavior since time immemorial; or at least this may be 
inferred from historical and ethnographic data. However, feuding and other types 
of primitive warfare did not exert notable impulses on the evolution of social com- 
plexity, unless the instrumental (Meyer, 1981) returns ofwarfare had been discov- 
ered by people. Whereas chiefdoms and states fought wars over the control of 
territories and other scarce resources, i.e., they used armies as an instrument for 
conquering these resources; clans and tribes generally did not pursue material 
I 

I 163 
4.4 Causes ofsocial Evolution 
goals in war. According to Ferguson, conquering other groups’ land was not a 
typical goal of tribal warfare because it was ‘spirit infested (Ferguson, 1984, p. 30), 
hence, useless. 
However, once the instrumental utility of land, military organizations, and stra- 
tegic planning had been understood, full-blown warfare evolved and gained con- 
siderable influence on social evolution. With respect to institutions’ roles in social 
evolution, it is interesting to note that the psychological disposition toward blood 
revenge, which played an important role in primitive war, persist even in modern 
war. As pointed out by Smith (1991), modern states, in preparing their populations 
to war, resort to kinship terminology, just-unjust dichotomies, and similar prac- 
tices reminiscent of primitive war. We may infer that, despite novel characteristics 
of warfare, primitive psychological dispositions prevail to this day. 
I should emphasize once again that most progressions in social evolution 
evolved unintentionally, without deliberate planning. For instance, there is some 
evidence that, prior to the spread of horticulture, an improvement in hunting tech- 
nologies may have caused population growth, which in turn forced hunters to 
become farmers (Maryanski and Turner, 1992, p. 92). The diffusion of farming 
then sparked the evolution of centralized authority, bureaucracies, systems of writ- 
ing, and many other features of complex society. Furthermore, it is important to 
note that previously ‘primitive’ people in various parts of the world crossed over 
the boundary between tribal society and statehood without any discernible change 
in their genetic makeup. However, once the more complex society existed, there 
was in fact a feedback loop on natural selection because the emphasis on func- 
tions, such as scribes or accountants, favored the selection of certain talents from 
the gene pool. 
Similar to evolution by natural selection, social evolution is an open-ended proc- 
ess without inbuilt teleology. Despite many differences between people in various 
parts of the world, there are, nevertheless, remarkable regularities in social evolu- 
tion, To some extent, these similarities are caused by mankind‘s common biologi- 
cal heritage; others are products of environmental conditions. As pointed out by 
Dawkins (1986, p. 191), certain limits or constraints exist in nature: “Take running 
speed, for instance. There must be an ultimate limit to the speed at which a chee- 
tah or a gazelle can run, a limit imposed by the laws of physics.” Similarly, there 
were certain constraints in social evolution, bringing the evolution of remarkably 
similar social characteristics in the most dissimilar societies in its wake (Sander- 
son, 1995, p. 388). Understanding these constraints on social evolution tells us 
why the basic unity of mankind persisted, despite deep-seated cultural differences, 
which at first sight dominate our perception of social evolution. 

164 
4 Social Evolution 
4.5 
References 
I 
ADAMS, R. N. (1975) Energy and Structure. A Theory of Social Power. 
Austin, London: University of Texas Press. 
ALBERT, H. (1999) Die Soziologie und das Problem der Einheit der Wissen- 
schaften. Kolner Zeitschrijfitr Soziologie und Sozialpychologie 51 (2), 215-232. 
ALEXANDER, 
R. D. (1986) Ostracism and indirect reciprocity: the reproductive 
significance of humor. In: GRUTEQ 
M., MASTERS, 
R. D. (Eds.), Ostracism: 
A Social and Biological Phenomenon. Ethology and Sociobiology 7 (3-4), 105-123. 
ANDRESKI, 
S. (1968) Military Organization and Society, 2nd enlarged edition. 
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
ANTWEILER, 
C. (1990) Das Eine und die vielen Gesichter kultureller Evolution. 
Anthropos 85, 483-506. 
ANTWEI 
LER, C. (1991) Transgenerational cultural dynamics. from neo- 
evolutionism to a truly evolutionary theory. Cultural Dynamics 4 (3), 270-289. 
ARNHART, L. (1997) Good natured: the origins of right and wrong in humans 
and other animals. Politics and the Liji Sciences 16 (I), 143-144. 
BADCOCK, C. (1991) Evolution and Individual Behavior. An Introduction to Human 
Sociobiology. Oxford: Blackwell. 
BARKOW, J. L, COSMIDES, 
L., TOOBY, 
J. (Eds.) (1992) The Adapted Mind. 
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
In: GRUTER 
M., MASTERS, 
R. D. (Eds.) Ostracism: A Social and Biological 
Phenomenon. Ethology and Sociobiology 7 (3-4), 133-145. 
BOEHM, C. (1986) Capital punishment in tribal Montenegro. In: GRUTER, 
M.. 
MASTERS, R. D. (Eds.), Ostracism: A Social and Biological Phenomenon. Ethology 
and Sociobiology 7 (3-4), 157-173. 
American Anthropologist 91 (l), 921-939. 
BARNER-BARRY, 
C. (1986) Peer ostracism to control aggressive behavior. 
BOEHM, C. (1989) Ambivalence and compromise in human nature. 
BOHANNAN, P. (1963) Social Anthropology. New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston. 
BONNER, J. T. (1980) The Evolution of Culture in Animals. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
BORKENAU, F. (1976) Der ubergang vom Feudalen zum Burgerlichen Weltbild. 
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 
BOUDON, R. (1984) Theories of Social Change. A Critical Appraisal. Cambridge: 
Polity Press. 
BOYD, R., RICHERSON, P. (1985) Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago and 
London: University of Chicago Press. 
BOYD, R., RICHERSON, 
P. (1992) Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation 
(or anything else) in sizeable groups. Ethology and Sociobiology 13, 171-195. 
BREUER, S. (1989) Der archaische Staat als Form charismatischer Herrschaft 
(unpubl. manuscript). 
BROWN, D. E. (1991) Human Universals. New York: McGraw Hill. 

4.5 References I165 
BUCHAN, A. (1968) Der Krieg in unserer Zeit. Miinchen: C. H. Beck. 
CARNEIRO, 
R. L. (1981) The chiefdom: precursor ofthe state. In: JONES, G. D., 
KAUTZ, R. R. (Eds.) The Transition to Statehood in the New World. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
CARNEIRO, 
R. L. (1987) The evolution of complexity in human societies and its 
mathematical expression. International Journal of Comparative Sociology 28 
(3-4), 111-128. 
CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
L. L., MENOZZI, P., PIAZZA, A. (1994) The History and Geography 
CHILDE, V. G. (1936) Man Makes Himself: London: Watts. 
COLEMAN, 
J. S. (1995) Gvundlagen der Sozialtheorie. Handlungen und 
Handlungssysteme. Munich and Vienna: Oldenbourg. 
COMTE, A. (1972) Das Drei-Stadien-Gesetz. In: DREITZEL, H. P. (Ed.) 
Sozialer Wandel, 2nd printing. Neuwied and Berlin: Luchterhand, pp. 95-11 1. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1983) The Synergism Hypothesis. A Theory ofProgressive 
Evolution. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
CORNING, P. A. (1998) Holistic Darwinism. synergism and the new evolutionary 
paradigm. In: FALGER, V. S. E., MEYER, P., VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G. (Eds.), 
Sociobiology and Politics. Stamford and London: JAI Press, , pp. 17-43. 
CORNING, 
P. A,, HINES, 
S. M. (1988) Political development and political evolution. 
Politics and the L@ Sciences 6 (2), 141-155. 
CORNING, 
P. A., KLINE, S. J. (1998) Information and life, revisited. Part I: 
To be or entropy. Systems Research and Behavioral Sciences 15, 273-295. 
DALY, M., WILSON, 
M. (1988) Homicide. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. 
DARWIN C. (1968) O n  the Origin ofspecies by Means ofNatural Selection, or the 
Preservation of Favoured Races, in the Strugglefor Lije. London: Penguin. 
DAWE, A. (1978) Theories of social action. In: BOTTOMORE, T., NISBET, R. A. 
(Eds.) A History ofSociological Analysis. New York: Basic Books, pp. 363-417. 
DAWKINS, 
R. (1978) Das egoistische Gen. Berlin and Hamburg: Parey. 
DAWKINS, R. (1986) The Blind Watchmaker. Burnt Mill, Harlow: Longman House. 
DEGLER, 
C. N. (1991) In Search ofHuman Nature. The Decline and Revival of 
of Hurnan Genes. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Darwinism in Amencan Social Thought. New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
DIAMOND, 
J. (1998) Guns, Germs, and Steel. The Fates $Human Societies. 
New York and London: Norton. 
DURHAM, W. H. (1990) Advances in evolutionary culture theory. Annual Review 
of Anthropology 19, 187-210. 
ELIAS, N. (1988) Die Gesellschaft der Individuen. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. 
FERGUSON, 
B. R. (1984) Wafare, Culture And Environment. New York Academic 
FLANNERY, 
K. (1968) Archeological systems theory and early Mesoamerica. 
Press. 
In: MEGGERS, B. J. (Ed.), Anthropological Archeology in the Ameuicas. 
Washington: The Anthropological Society of Washington. 
Ecology and Systematics 3, 399-426. 
FLANNERY, 
K. (1972) The cultural evolution of civilizations: Annual Review of 

166 
4 Social Evolution 
FLOHR, H. (1987) Probleme biologischer Orientierung der deutschen Soziologie. 
In: KLINGEMANN, C. (Ed.) Rassenmythos und Sozialwissenschaftliches Wissen in 
Deutschland. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, pp. 277-31 3. 
I 
GAZZANIGA, 
M. S. (1992) Nature’s Mind. Penguin Books. 
GIDDENS, 
A. (1988) Die Konstitution der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main and 
GIGERENZER, 
G. (1997) The modularity of social intelligence. In: WHITEN, 
A,, 
New York Campus Verlag. 
BYRNE, R. W. (Eds.), Machiavellian Intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 264-288. 
American Sociological Review 25 (2), 161-178. 
Phenomenon. Ethology and Sociobiology 7 (3-4) 
GOULDNER, 
A. (1960) The norm of reciprocity. a preliminary statement. 
GRUTER, 
M., MASTERS, 
R. D. (Eds.) (1986) Ostracism: A Social and Biological 
HAGEN, 
V. W. VON (1974) Sonnenkonigreiche. Munchen and Zurich: Knauer. 
HOEBEL, 
E. A. (1954) The Law ofPrimitive Man: A Study in Comparative Legal 
KAMMLER, H. (1966) Der Ursprung des Staates: Eine Kritik der Uberlagerungslehre. 
KEEGAN, J. (1995) Die Kultur des Krieges. Berlin: Rowohlt. 
LENSKI, G. E. (1966) Power and Privilege. A Theory ofSocial StratiJcation. 
LEWONTIN, R. C. (1968) The concept of evolution. International Encyclopedia of 
LUHMANN, N. (1985) Soziale Systeme. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. 
LUHMANN, N. (1997) Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: 
LUMSDEN, C. J., WILSON, 
E. 0. (1983) Promethean Fire. Rejlections on the Origin of 
MANDELBAUM, 
M. (1971) History, Man, and Reason. A Study in Nineteenth- 
MARYANSKI, 
A. (1994) The pursuit of human nature in sociobiology and 
MARYANSKI, 
A,, TURNER, 
J. (1992) The Social Cage. Human Nature and the 
MATURANA, H. (1982) Erkennen: Die Organisation und Verkorperung von 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, 
J., SZATHMARY, 
E. (1995) The Major Transitions in Evolution. 
MCNEILL, W. (1970) The Rise ofthe West. A History ofthe Human Community. 
MEERMANN, 
H. (1991) Wie sich das Denken entwickelte. Ergebnisse von 
MELVILLE, 
G. (1997) Institutionalitut und Geschichte. Broschiire des SFB 537, 
MEYER, P. (1977) Kriegs- und Militiirsoziologie. Munchen: Goldmann. 
Dynamics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Koh and Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
New York McGraw-Hill. 
the Social Sciences 5, 202-209. 
Suhrkamp. 
Mind. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Century Thought. Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
evolutionary sociology. Sociological Perspectives 37 (3), 375-389. 
Evolution of Society. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Wirklichkeit. Braunschweig and Wiesbaden: Vieweg Sr Sohn. 
Oxford, New York, and Heidelberg: W. H. Freeman-Spektrum. 
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. 
Studien an Keilschrifttafeln. Siiddeutsche Zeitung, No. 32. 
TU Dresden. 

I 167 
4.5 References 
MEYER, P. (1981) Evolution und Gewalt. Ansatze zu einer bio-soziologischen 
Synthese. Hamburg and Berlin: Parey. 
MEYER, P. (1990) Human nature and the function ofwar in social evolution. 
In: VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G., FALGER, V. (Eds.), Sociobiology and Conflict. 
Evolutionary Perspectives on Competition, Cooperation, Violence and Wafare. 
London: Chapman & Hall, pp. 227-241. 
MEYER, P. (1994) On the origins of violent behavior. Darwinian contributions. 
In: CAUCHY, V. (Ed.), Violence and Human Coexistence, Vol. 11. Montreal: 
Editions Montmorency, pp. 16-23. 
In: CAUCHY, V. (Ed.), Violence and Human Coexistence, Vol. V. Montrkal: 
Editions Montmorency, pp. 259-266. 
New York, Evanston, and London: Harper & Row. 
MEYER, P. (1995) The evolution of warfare. origins of cultural variation. 
MONTROSS, 
L. (1960) War Through The Ages, 3rd revised and enlarged edition. 
MUHLMANN, W. E. (1962) Homo Creator. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 
MURDOCK, 
G. P. (1945) The common denominator of cultures. In: LINTON, R. 
(Ed.) The Science of Man in the World Crisis. New York and London: Columbia 
University Press, pp. 123-142. 
Review 29, 339-357. 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. 
Sciences 5 (2), 234-237. 
PARSONS, 
T. (1964) Evolutionary universals in society. American Sociological 
PARSONS, 
T. (1975) Gesellschaften. Evolutionare und komparative Perspektiven. 
PHILLIPS, 
C. (1987) Politics: an aspect of cultural evolution. Politics and the Lijk 
PINKER, S. (1994) The Language Instinct. New York Harper Perennial. 
POPPER, 
K. R. (1963) The Poverty of Historicism, 2nd ed. London: Routledge & 
PRIGOGINE, 
I., STENGERS, 
I. C. (1981) Dialog mit der Natur. Munchen: Piper. 
RADNITZKY, G. (1984) Friedrich von Hayeks Theorie der Evolution spontaner 
Ordnungen und selbstorganisierender Systeme. Humburger Jahrbuchfr 
Wirtschafts- und Gesellschuftspolitik 29, 9-33. 
Keegan Paul. 
REIMANN, H. et al. (1991) Basale Soziologie. 4th ed. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
RIDLEY, M. (1997) Evolution. Oxford: Oxford Reader. 
REYNOLDS, V., TANNER, 
R. S. (1983) The Biology of Religion. London: Longman. 
RICHERSON, P. (1997) Culture and human ‘nature’. Politics and the Lije Sciences 
RIDLEY, M. (1996) The Origins ofvirtue. Human Instincts and the Evolution of 
RIEDL, R. (1975) Die Ordnung des Lebendigen. Berlin and Hamburg: Parey. 
SANDERSON, 
S. K. (1993) Evoluzionismo. Enciclopedia delle Scienze Sociali 3, 
SANDERSON, 
S. K. (1994) Evolutionary materialism: a theoretical strategy for the 
SANDERSON, 
S. K. (1995) Social Transformations. A General Theory of Historical 
16 (l), 40-41. 
Cooperation. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
735-743. 
study of social evolution. Sociological Perspectives 37 (I), 47-73. 
Development. Oxford and Cambridge: Blackwell. 

168 
4 Social Evolution 
SANDERSON, 
S. K. (1998) Extending sociobiology’s explanatory power: synthetic 
materialism - an integrated theory of human society. Presented at the Annual 
Meeting of the European Sociobiological Society, Russian State University of the 
Humanities, Moscow, May 31 - June 4, 1998. 
4th ed. New York: Longman. 
Perspective. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield. 
Leske Sr Budrich. 
Unpubl. Paper, University of Augsburg, Germany. 
Main: Suhrkamp. 
Theory and Society 20, 103-138. 
war, and peacemaking. Journal of Conflict Resolution 34 (3), 553-582. 
tale of two theories. PS Online 39-44, http://www.apsanet.org/. 
Herbert Spencer and Social Evolution. Chicago IL: University of Chicago Press, 
I 
SANDERSON, 
S. K. (1999) Macrosociology. An Introduction to Human Societies, 
SANDERSON, 
S. K. (2001) The Evolution ofHuman Sociality. A Darwinian ConJict 
SCHIMANK, 
U. (1996) Theorien gesellschaftlicher Diflerenzierung. Opladen: 
SCHMID, 
M. (1986) Autopoiesis und soziales System: Eine Standortbestimmung. 
SERVICE, 
E. R. (1977) Urspriinge des Staates und der Zivilisation. Frankfurt am 
SMITH, P. (1991) Codes and conflict. toward a theory of war as ritual. 
SOMIT, A. (1990) Humans, chimps, and bonobos: the political bases of aggression, 
SOMIT, A., PETERSON, 
S. A. (1999) Rational choice and biopolitics: a (Darwinian) 
SPENCER, 
H. (1857) Progress: its law and cause. In: PEEL, 
J. D. Y. (Ed.) 
pp. 38-52. 
SPENCER, 
H. (1873) Descriptive Sociology. New York Appleton. 
SPENCER, H. (1876) Principles ofSociology, Vol. 1. London: Williams & Norgate. 
SPENCER, 
H. (1972) Die Evolutionstheorie. In: DREITZEL, 
H. P. (Ed.) Sozialer 
Wandel. Zivilisation und Fortschritt als Kategorien der soziologischen Theorie, 
2nd ed. Neuwied and Berlin: Luchterhand, pp. 121-133. 
TAINTEQ 
J. A. (1988) The Collapse ofComplex Societies. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
TENBRUCK, 
F. H. (1989) Die Kulturehn Gmndlagen Der Gesellscha. . 
Der Fall Der Moderne. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1971) The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of 
Biology 46, 35-57. 
TURNEY-HIGH, 
H. H. (1971) Primitive War. Its Practice and Concepts. Columbia, 
S. C.: University of South Carolina Press. 
VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G. (1995) The Origin ofwar. The Evolution ofa Male- 
Coalitional Reproductive Strategy, 2 Vols. Groningen: Origin Press. 
VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G. (1999) Human evolution and the origin ofwar: 
a Darwinian heritage. In: VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G., SMILLIE, 
D., WILSON 
D. R. (Eds.), The Darwinian Heritage and Sociobiology. Westport CT and 
London: Praeger, pp. 163-187. 
assessment. Unpubl. Paper, Center for Peace and Conflict Studies, University 
of Groningen, The Netherlands. 
VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G. (2000) Ritual combat, power parity, and the logic of 

4.5 References I 169 
WALLERSTEIN, 
I. (1974) The Modem World-System. Capitalist Agnculture and 
the Origins ofthe European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century, Vol. I. 
New York: Academic Press. 
Consolidation ofthe European World-Economy, 1600-1 750, Vol. 11. New York: 
Academic Press. 
WALLERSTEIN, 
I. (1980) The Modem World-System 11. Mercantilism and the 
WEBER, 
M. (1973) Die protestantische Ethik, 3rd. ed. Hamburg: Siebenstern. 
WHITE, L. A. (1975) The Concept ofcultural Systems: A Key to Understanding 
WIESSNER, 
P. (1982) Risk, reciprocity and social influences on !Kung San 
Tribes and Nations. New York: Columbia University Press. 
economics. In: PEACOCK, 
E., LEE, R. (Eds.), Politics and History in !Kung Sun 
Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 61-84. 
WILSON, 
D. S., SOBER E. (1994) Reintroducing group selection to the human 
behavioral sciences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17, 585-654. 
WILSON, 
E. 0. (1998) Die Einheit des Wissens. Berlin: Siedler. 
WIND, 
J., REYNOLDS, 
V. (Eds.) (1986) Essays in Human Sociobiology. Brussels: 
WINKLEQ 
P. (1994) Zwischen Kultur und Genen? Fremdenfeindlichkeit aus der 
WRONG, 
D. (19Gl) The oversocialized conception of man in modern sociology. 
WUKETITS, 
F. M. (1983) Herausforderungen durch die moderne Biologie. 
Vrije Universiteit Press. 
Sicht der Evolutionsbiologie. Analyse @ Kritik 16, 101-1 16. 
American Sociological Review 26 (2), 183-193. 
Philosophische Rundschau 30 (1-2), 1-23. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

5 
Evolution of Morality 
CarniloJ. Cela-Conde and FranciscoJ. Ayah 
5.1 
Explaining Moral Behavior 
Can human moral behavior be explained in terms of evolution by natural selec- 
tion? The question of whether moral behavior can be understood as a phenom- 
enon that appeared by means of natural selection was posed by Darwin, who pointed 
out, in favor of this idea, the existence of equivalents of human moral conduct in 
other animals. In Chapter IV ofthe Descent ofMan, Darwin (1871, p. 474) says: 
In Abyssinia, Brehm encountered a great troop of baboons who were cross- 
ing a valley: some had ascended the opposite mountain, and some were 
still on the valley; the latter were attacked by the dogs, but the old males 
immediately hurried down from the rocks, and with mouths widely opened, 
roared so fearfully, that the dogs quickly drew back. They were again en- 
couraged to the attack; but by this time all the baboons had reascended the 
heights, excepting a young one, about six months old, who, loudly calling 
for aid, climbed on a block of rock, and was surrounded. Now one of the 
largest males, a true hero, came down again from the mountain, slowly 
went to the young one, coaxed him, and triumphantly led him away - the 
dogs being too much astonished to make an attack. 
This is just one of the many examples given by Darwin of animals that help a 
distressed group member. However, in this particular case, Darwin uses a word 
that we would like to emphasize: the baboon that comes down from the mountain 
is called “a true hero”. ‘Hero’ is, beyond any reasonable doubt, an ethical concept. 
Is Darwin using it with a metaphorical or a technical import? 
Darwin belongs to an intellectual tradition originating in the Scottish Enlighten- 
ment that uses ‘moral sense’ as the element that, based on sympathy, leads human 
ethical choice. In his account ofthe evolution of cooperative behavior, Darwin states 
that any animal with well-defined social instincts - like parental and filial affec- 
tions - “would inevitably acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon as its intel- 
lectual powers had become as well, or nearly as well developed, as in man” (Descent 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 1: The Evolution of Human Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 

172 
5 Evolution ofMorahty 
ofMan, p. 472). However, this is a hypothetical issue -no animal has ever reached 
the level ofhuman mental faculties, language included. In fact, Darwin points out 
that even if some animal could achieve a human-equivalent degree of develop- 
ment of its intellectual faculties, we cannot conclude that it would also acquire 
exactly the same moral sense as ours (Descent ofMan, p. 473). Therefore, human 
moral behavior is a product of natural selection, but it is humankind’s exclusive 
attribute. No other primate displays ethical codes with such a huge quantity of 
discussions and arguments. No equivalent of the enormous variety of human moral 
options is within the reach of any other species. 
Two years after the end of the Beagle’s voyage, Darwin gathered the most mod- 
ern literature available on human moral behavior. He acquired the latest books by 
Martineau, Mackintosh, and Abercrombie, together with William Paley’s classic. 
Some of these authors (Martineau, Paley) defended ethic’s mere conventional char- 
acter, using an argument often exploited in our days: the diversity of moral codes. 
In those times, the proliferation of ethnographic voyages had brought to light the 
great variety of moral customs and rules. This is something Darwin had noticed in 
his profound observations on South American Indians. But this apparent disper- 
sion had not confused him. On the contrary, he saw the diversity as an adaptive 
response - as it would presently be called - to the environmental conditions unique 
to every different place. 
I 
5.2 
Deep Capacities 
Such an adaptive response could very well derive from some deeper capacities, a 
common substrate unique to the whole human race, and capable of orientating in 
multiple directions. This universality could certainly not be eternal: it would be 
subject, after all, to evolution by natural selection, and Darwin understood that 
different cultures manifested successive stages of a ‘positive’ moral evolution. Most 
important was the presence of this universal and common foundation, capable of 
turning humans into beings endowed with an ethical capacity. 
Darwin ended up turning to a special feature possessed only by the human spe- 
cies, moral sense. This attribute would turn a rescue carried out by a human, but 
not by a primate, into a heroic act, although both species may be acting altruisti- 
cally. Needless to say, however, unless we know what this ad hoc mechanism com- 
prises, the relations and differences existing between an altruistic baboon and a 
human altruist are not clear. 
Darwin does not leave many clues regarding this issue. He associates moral 
sense with the vague idea that human beings make an assessment in order to 
make decisions, an ability that does not exist in animals. The most important point 
of his analysis is the fact that moral altruism appears as a behavior similar to that 
of other beings, with certain added aspects. Ifwe adhere to this evolutionary line of 
thought, we cannot dismiss human altruism with a simple moral behavior model 
in the form ofautomatic responses to genetic determinations (otherwise we would 

I 173 
5.2 Deep Capacities 
not exclude the biological altruism as immediate as that of hymenopterans). But 
neither can we ignore the presence of a certain amount of fixed impulses during 
the phylogenetic process, when our ancestors exhibited an altruistic behavior shared 
with that of their close relatives. Hominids that developed sophisticated social habits, 
including a new moral behavior, had to do so in circumstances under which those 
shared biological altruistic traits were present. Thus, the final result of the process, 
that is to say, what we now refer to as ‘moral altruism’, must show some features 
close to biological altruism and others, exclusive to the human species, that deviate 
from it. 
In a certain way we could assert that Darwin is the last author in the stream of 
those that searched, since the times of the Enlightenment, for a justification of 
modern moral codes. And in that sense the model of The Descent ofMan is exem- 
plary. Human beings, by means of a nature that includes moral sense, and with 
the help of a sympathetic mechanism, construct societies in which ethical behaviors 
and approval codes for such behaviors appear. Initially the group benefiting from 
this set of actions and codes is small, but gradually, by means of intellectual, ma- 
terial, and moral progress, morality’s scope grows. Primitive beings respect and 
help their closest relatives; then they extend their sympathy to the tribe; later to a 
whole village. In time, Darwin concludes, the whole human race will form a sin- 
gle body of morality expressed in a universal code and a generalized sympathy. 
would this be accomplished by means of the progress of an instinct or of a per- 
fected rationalization? The key to Darwin’s naturalism is in the union of these 
two factors. 
Darwinian heredity theory comprises, as is known, the addition to the genetic 
pool of phenotypic transformations, or, in more usual terms, the heritability of 
acquired characteristics. The formula, proceeding from Lamarck, is a guarantee of 
the joint progress of sympathetic instincts and ethical codes, given that new gen- 
erations benefit from each new finding in a parallel and compatible way. Faithful 
to the thought in Descent OfMan, ethics shapes man, transforming the so-called 
primitive peoples into a modern citizen. The intersection of being and duty arrives 
at its most refined and complete formulation. 
With the definitive acceptance of August Weissman’s hereditary theory (in com- 
plete contrast to the acquired characteristics of Lamark‘s inheritance), Neo-Dar- 
winism had to forget the hope for progress and harmony. The concerns of Neo- 
Darwinism’s founders about human moral behavior were intense and, from a 
speculative standpoint, fruitful, but had to very carefully pull back from any ‘hard 
foundation of ethics such as that which Darwin had bound to hereditary mecha- 
nisms. Sociobiological models of altruism had to appear in order to recover the 
battle flag of contemporary naturalism. 
These models appear with an important novelty. The ethical naturalism inaugu- 
rated by Darwin had the virtue, or flaw, of turning morality into something de- 
pendant on human nature, but without saying how. Neither does Neo-Darwinism. 
The intended scientijc approach to moral phenomena does not often go beyond 
suggesting the existence of some bonds that are never detailed. We know that hu- 
man beings possess a ‘moral sense’ that makes them different from the rest of 

174 
5 Evolution ofMorality 
animals, and we deduce the great importance this sense has for the phylogeny of 
the human species. Nevertheless, when the time comes to explain what specific 
features of behavior are influenced by such biological structures, the naturalistic 
model abandons its scientific spirit and settles, at the most, for certain vague specu- 
lations about possible universals, such as the incest taboo. 
I 
5.3 
Sociobiological Models of Altruism 
In the last quarter of the 20th century a naturalist topic appeared that did justice to 
the pretensions of bringing ethics closer to biological laws and models. This was 
the explanation of the altruistic phenomenon as a function of certain combina- 
tions of genes. Without the problem that altruistic behavior represents for the evo- 
lutionary standpoint, it would have been difficult for anyone to pay such careful 
attention to the phenomena of group adaptation. A brief explanation of the prob- 
lem serves to show its importance. 
Natural selection improves the adaptation of the individuals to their environ- 
ment. Genetic variations arise by mutations and recombination. Individuals that 
possess variants that improve their adaptation to the environment (say, that im- 
prove vision or fleetness) are likely to survive better and produce more offspring 
than others. The adaptive variants will, therefore, increase in frequency over the 
generations: that is, they will be favored by natural selection. The rate of increase 
in frequency is measured by the parameter known as “Darwinian fitness” or sim- 
ply “fitness”. The term fitness is used by evolutionary geneticists in two senses: in 
the vernacular sense of being fit, well adapted to the environment; and as a meas- 
ure of the rate of frequency change of genetic variants. Variants that make indi- 
viduals better adapted to the environment (i.e., that are more fit in the vernacular 
sense) also have greater Darwinian fitness (i.e., will increase in frequency over the 
generations). The process of natural selection entails, therefore, an increase in 
adaptation to the environment. Thus, according to the model, we would expect to 
find individuals everywhere exhibiting adaptive behaviors, genetically inherited, 
and capable of promoting that aptitude. 
But altruistic behavior seems to escape the evolutionary model. Far from in- 
creasing individual fitness, it has the opposite effect: it decreases it. An altruist squan- 
ders nutritive resources it has obtained, shares its territory and may even put its 
life at risk, for example by warning the group of the arrival of a predator. It is 
difficult to understand how it is capable of transmitting its characteristics to the 
next generation with sufficient guarantees to insure that, in time, there will be 
altruists among the population. Regardless of the degree to which the group ben- 
efits in general terms from the presence of the altruist, this does not explain its 
adaptive success. Neo-Darwinist theory of evolution by natural selection demands 
that an individual behavior be able to assure the transmission of genetic charac- 
ters. Otherwise, the presence of a selfish mutant in a group of altruists would 
rapidly lead (in few generations) to the whole group being composed of selfish 

I 175 
5.3 Sociobiological Models ofAltruism 
individuals, because these would benefit from very superior possibilities of pro- 
ducing offspring. 
The first plausible explanation for the evolution of groups as the units for natu- 
ral selection had to wait more than a century after the publication of the Origin of 
Species. In the 1960’s Wynne-Edwards (1962, 1963), an author interested in eco- 
logical matters, posited the existence of certain effective mechanisms in some ani- 
mals allowing them to avoid overexploitation of their habitats. The way to achieve 
this consisted in self-limitation of their reproductive capacities. In other words, 
some animals seem to voluntarily accept having fewer offspring for the benefit of 
the population. Wynne-Edwards gave the example of the English tit, a species of 
bird in which the female lays an average of 13 eggs, but under adverse environ- 
mental conditions she limits the number to 9 or 10. Something like this comes 
into conflict with Darwin’s contrary idea of maximizing the total number of de- 
scendants. But the most interesting feature of Wynne-Edwards’ model is the pro- 
posal of social mechanisms as the means by which beings living in groups obtain 
information about the group’s size and its relation to the environment’s resources. 
This would explain the advantages of living in groups. A self-limited behavior like 
this, technically called altruism, undoubtedly benefits all the individuals that form 
part of the society. Wynne-Edwards’ idea, usually called group selection theory, 
could be faced with the same theoretical difficulties as Darwin’s intuition about the 
group being the selective unit. Williams (1966) pointed to an essential question: 
What advantage does a specific member of a group obtain by limiting its own 
progeny? The use of mathematical game theory in population genetics, mainly by 
Maynard Smith (1976) and Maynard Smith and Price (1973) introduced a very 
powerful concept against the idea of the group as the selective unit: the evolutionarily 
stable strategy (ESS). An evolutionarily stable strategy is one that cannot be sur- 
passed by a different and alternative strategy. The strategy of the altruistic mem- 
bers of the group is very efficient in keeping the collective healthy and, thus, of 
ensuring the biological efficiency of its members, but it is not evolutionarily stable. 
If an individual that refuses to cooperate appears in the group, its situation is un- 
beatable: it receives all the benefits of living in the group but, at the same time, 
does not waste any of its own resources. If the rest of the members of the group 
altruistically limit their progeny, it may opt for the opposite, for reproducing as 
much as it can, benefiting from the excellent opportunities for doing so. This self- 
ish strategy is clearly superior and, in the long run, the offspring of the selfish 
individual will predominate in the group, which means the end of the group as a 
collective of cooperating beings. 
There is only one exception to this situation: that in which the components ofan 
altruistic group organize themselves well enough to prevent this from happening. 
Detection and punishment of selfish individuals is a good means of defense. But if 
we are talking about birds, or even social insects, how can we think this to be 
possible? Leaving aside Walt Disney films in which ants have Woody Allen’s char- 
acter and initiative, there is no way of imagining how a beehive or a termite colony 
might detect and prevent selfish individuals. But in these societies neither dissi- 
dents nor cheaters exist. 

176 
5 Evolution ofMorality 
5.4 
Kin Selection: Genetic Altruism and Moral Altruism 
I 
About the same time that Wynne-Edwards hypothesized group selection, an alter- 
native and much more elegant, mathematically speaking, model finally resolved 
the problem of social insects and their peculiar way of reproducing and behaving. 
The answer was given by Hamilton (1963, 1964), using a similar resort to that of 
supporters of group selection, that is, changing the selective unit. If Wynne-Edwards 
had passed from the individual to the group, enlarging the unit, what Hamilton 
did was reduce it from the individual to the gene. It would be tedious to repeat his 
arguments here, but, in essence, he stated that biological efficiency must be meas- 
ured in terms of the presence of an allele in the population’s gene pool, dispersed 
in the cells of the individuals that constitute the population. The allele of a queen 
bee has biological success thanks first to the help given her by the workers, carriers 
of the same gene - after all, they are her sisters - and, second, to the mechanism of 
haplodiploidism, with a very high percentage of shared genes. 
Kin selection theory, the name of Hamilton’s model, was for the past several 
decades the preferred explanation for the existence of altruistic individuals. If we 
consider that it can explain the altruistic behavior of ants and rats reasonably well, 
is it also useful in explaining human altruism? In other words, are we referring to 
the same phenomenon when talking about altruism in both ants and human be- 
ings? 
Given the complex relations between human altruism and the biological or ge- 
netic altruism of other animals, finding a simple answer to this question seems 
unlikely. Authors the worth of Betram (1982), Voorzanger (1984, 1994), Wilson 
(1992), and Settle (1993), among many others, have treated the problem, showing, 
at least, the many difficulties found when transferring models and theories estab- 
lished for the interpretation of hymenopteran behavior to humans. Sober (1988) 
has indicated in a simple way the essential difference between what is commonly 
called ‘altruism’, that is, a way of behaving called vernacular altruism, and genetic 
altruism, or evolutionary altruism as Sober calls it. The first implies a mind, be- 
cause it refers to the psychological motives that a person may have for acting, which 
turn him or her into an altruist or a selfish person despite the results obtained. 
However, genetic altruism does not require a mind in the sense Sober understands 
it; instinctive behavior is enough to produce inversion of one’s own resources in 
favor of another individual. Thus, the real question, if we are talking about moral 
evolution in hominids, is double: (1) to what extent might certain inherited fea- 
tures be detected in the undoubtedly altruistic behavior, in the form of moral altru- 
ism, of most human beings, and (2) to what extent can the presence of altruistic 
behavior, beyond the imperatives of genetic altruism, be identified in our ances- 
tors. 
It is easier to distinguish the concepts of genetic altruism and moral altruism 
than to delineate the frontier between them when referring to human behavior. 
What is, for example, a mother’s loving care ofher children? Mere expression of an 
instinctive behavior? Altruism in the most magnificent sense of the word? To in- 

I 177 
5.5 An Evolutionary Model af Moral Behavior 
tend to clearly separate these two concepts, assigning some behaviors to one and 
other behaviors to the other, would require returning to pre-evolutionary times, 
when Kant understood human morality as having nothing to do with the world of 
nature, being an element pertaining to the domain of rationality and thus com- 
pletely excluded from the domain of the senses. Kant (1790), in the first Critic, 
argued that the world of moral values and the world of facts, be they biological, 
social, or even political, are irreversibly separated and not even a common frontier 
exists between them. But if we do find in moral altruism certain aspects shared 
with genetic altruism, naturalism will come through. 
Moral Naturalism, of course, is shared by Darwin, Neo-Darwinists, ethologists, 
and sociobiologists. But it would be convenient to insist on something that, being 
obvious, is often forgotten. Claiming that moral altruism is a form of biological 
altruism does not reduce ethics to biology. it merely states that there are connec- 
tions between moral and biological altruism that are impossible to overlook. If the 
concept of biological altruism being discussed is the one put forward here (that is, 
a behavior producing a decrease in biological fitness of the organism behaving in 
such a way), it is difficult to deny that moral altruism also leads to this kind of 
handicap. This fact is evident, despite any resistance one might have towards 
biologicisms. 
5.5 
An Evolutionary Model of Moral Behavior - Interpretation 
Although, generally speaking, the features defining moral altruism are usually 
related to rational aspects, the presence of emotional features arouses suspicions 
that biological altruism and moral altruism are not absolutely separate. Some 
phylogenetic motives point to that relative proximity: moral traits shared between 
great apes and human beings lead to positing the existence of a certain degree of 
continuity in their behaviors. As Darwin (1871, Chapter iV) pointed out, difficul- 
ties are met when one attempts to distinguish between two similar acts, carried 
out by a person or a baboon helping a wounded companion. 
What sociobiologists maintain is that sacrifice in favor of close individuals with 
whom we share many genes is encouraged by natural selection. We do not yet 
know how genes manage to control such behaviors (the model is still a black box), 
but undoubtedly, progress has been noteworthy. Ifwe apply kin-selection theory to 
the human species, we come up with a much more firmer bridge than we could 
find before between the world of what is (hereditary nature) and of what should be 
(moral codes) - an adaptive bond predicting that those behaviors capable of favoring 
kin will be established in the form of ethical rules. Hume’s intuition about how 
benevolence becomes progressively weaker as we move from relatives to friends to 
strangers is relevant here. 
Of course, such an extrapolation, from social insects to the human species, can 
give rise to many doubts about its legitimacy. Assuming that insects of the Hy- 
menoptera order do sacrifice themselves in favor of their close relatives, can this 

178 
5 Euo/ution ofMora/;ty 
be considered a moral behavior, in the sense used by philosophers? We could say 
that the question is absurd. After all, termites are too far from us in evolutionary 
terms for comparison or to look for saints and heroes among them. Unfortunately, 
this argument does not allow us to evade the problem, because it is easy to find 
phylogenetically closer examples. 
Is there much difference between the act of a baboon saving its young from 
harassment by wild dogs and the act of a man jumping into the water to rescue a 
drowning child? Darwin explicitly poses this question in his Descent of Man, con- 
cluding that both behaviors are similar, but that the ethical distinction of ‘hero’ 
makes sense only for human beings, because only we have that ‘moral sense’ we 
mentioned earlier. The argument is somewhat circular, of course. What is being 
discussed is, really, if an individual may be called ‘altruistic’ when it sacrifices itself 
because its genes order it to do so. Is a gene that impels these sacrifices for its own 
good ‘altruistic’ or instead selfish? Popular philosophical speculations about altru- 
ism and selfishness, with Dawkins’ famous The SeEfsh Gene (1976) in the fore, 
were the battle horse on the popular side of sociobiology. But when referring to 
genetic altruism, we must remember that ‘altruist’ is a technical concept. It is 
defined as the characteristic of an individual who invests his own resources in the 
survival of others. The definition goes neither into questions about intention nor 
into valuations of behaviors. Hamilton’s theory is safe from philosophical critiques. 
Nevertheless, it is not safe from other kinds of criticism. Visscher and Camazine 
(1999) verified that the type of cooperative behavior that occurs in bees depends on 
very simple cognitive tasks, although insects - fruit flies (Drosophila), at least, ac- 
cording to Liu et al. (1999) - can perform more complex tasks than were initially 
expected. Hamilton’s model explains social insects’ behavior perfectly, but what to 
say about other gregarious beings with much higher cognitive capacities? Highly 
social behavior, technically known as ‘eusocial’ behavior, has appeared at least four 
times in the history of life. It exists in social insects, in the parasitic shrimps of the 
coralline sea sponges (Synalpheus regalis) (Duffy, 1996), in the naked mole-rat 
(Heterocephalus glaber) (O’Riain et al., 1996), and of course in primates. We must 
admit there are no cheaters among termites, nor perhaps among S y n a l p h e ~  
shrimps. We know very little, by the way, about mole-rats. But it is known that both 
chimpanzees and human beings are capable of cheating, avoiding duties, and prof- 
iting from circumstances. To do this, they posses well-developed facial identifica- 
tion capacities, as documented by Parr and de Waal (1999), who used computer- 
ized manipulation of those species’ faces. But regarding human beings, there is no 
doubt about the abilities to detect facial features and to guess intentions. Then, in 
what manner does the behavior of humans relate to those other altruisms that are 
accounted for by theories such as kin selection? 
The relevance of a mutual relationship between genetic altruism and the emer- 
gence of a more complex moral behavior, at the time when the human species was 
developing its cognitive capacities and articulated language, seems to be beyond 
any doubt. Evolutionary transformations probably shaped primitive moral behavior, 
and those groups that depended on generalized altruistic behavior for survival ben- 
efited from it. The by-products of such adaptive strategies, based on the cognitive 
I 

I 179 
5.G Early Moral Behavior 
complexity of human beings, led, in the long run, to our enormous moral rich- 
ness. But the way in which evolution took place forces us to distinguish between 
two essential aspects of human moral behavior. It is important, when referring to 
moral values, to distinguish between the tendency to behave morally, following - 
to a certain extent - the prevailing values in our group, and the content of those 
values. The tendency to behave in a certain moral way is universal in practice and 
may be understood as a specific trait ofour species, with enormous adaptive value, 
that appeared by natural selection when the evolution of our cognitive capacities 
allowed it. Despite this fact, there is no proof of the existence of particular values 
that evolved in such a way. Some sociobiologists, such as Crook (1980), have sug- 
gested that the values of societies, such as the Greek in the aristocratic period and 
the traditional Chinese, are controlled by the genetic code and follow the so-called 
r and K strategies, respectively, established by analysis of their population curves. 
As we already mentioned elsewhere (Cela-Conde, 1986), the interpretation of Greek 
and Chinese values seems incorrect, and their identification as a genetically fixed 
behavior seems to go beyond empty speculation, into circular arguments. Faced 
with the universality of the tendency to behave morally, the historical and geo- 
graphical diversity of ethical codes is patent. But not all these codes are equally 
efficient in terms of adaptation. The group’s ‘tendency to act morally’ + ‘effective 
codes’ favor the group’s behavior, and the achieved result of that sum is what pro- 
vides the adaptive key. Beliefs leading to the destruction of the group (for example, 
those encouraging collective suicide) would obviously go extinct as soon as the 
group accepting them disappeared. Thus, it is not strange that cultural anthropol- 
ogy has tried to explain the presence of certain moral taboos, like those forbidding 
certain foods, as a function oftheir adaptive values. Nevertheless, at this point it is 
very difficult to escape circular arguments that consider very adaptive those moral 
patterns that survive, solely because they manage to do so. 
5.6 
Early Moral Behavior 
If we accept the idea of a moral behavior appearing by natural selection and adopt- 
ing very different values in different groups, it is worth asking when could the 
tendency to act in such a way have appeared. The answer is, necessarily, specula- 
tive, but since Konrad Lorenz (1963), the adaptive role of moral behavior has been 
contemplated as a key to the understanding ofthe adaptation ofthe first hominids. 
Our Pliocene ancestors had to face a rapidly deteriorating environment. The 
tropical forests of East Africa were giving way to great extents of open savanna, 
creating many frontier zones between thick forests and tall grasses. Hominids of 
the genus Austrdopithecus could not compete for the forest habitat, for which their 
close relatives, the great apes, were better prepared. Neither could they dispute for 
the savanna with the faster and stronger ungulates and predators. Their survival 
during several million of years is certainly a mystery, but it is assumed that the 
frontier zones between the forest and savanna acted as a precarious habitat. To 

180 
5 Evolution ofMorality 
profit from it, they had to resolve problems of environmental interpretation and 
anticipation of behaviors that generally required the production of very complex 
knowledge. Nevertheless, their brains were very small: approximately the size of a 
present-day chimpanzee’s brain. What was their advantageous ploy? 
It is probable that a combination of manual abilities suitable for the elaboration 
of simple tools and a very high degree of biological altruism, capable of founding 
family groups based on the division of labor and cooperative behavior, allowed the 
successful procreation of a relatively large number of descendants. What seems 
beyond any doubt is that such groups of Australopithecus existed, and that, as with 
the genus Homo, the construction of Oldowan tools and the problems of a coop- 
erative way of life implied an intense selective pressure for increased brain com- 
plexity. 
As that complexity grew, the organization of groups must have necessarily in- 
cluded the control of altruism by means of traditions, which would mean the tran- 
sition towards ethical behavior as it is presently understood. It is possible that, 
without the emergence of language, which took place in the last stages of human 
phylogeny, such traditions could maintain and transmit only very simple codes. 
But what is known about the origins oflanguage points to the fact that the impera- 
tive mode must have had a special importance at that time. It is unnecessary to 
insist that normative aspects of moral language are closely related to that mode. 
Can the process by which moral behaviors appeared be specified beyond this 
general sketch? Can we maintain that a specific hominid species made the jump 
forward to carry out and value altruistic actions? Some authors have done so, bnt 
by relating moral behavior to certain material indices. For example, Lorenz (1963) 
recognized the need for establishing emotional relationships linked to moral pat- 
terns in the first hominids that made stone tools, to resolve the survival problem 
posed by the existence of effective killing weapons, behavior at least as aggressive 
as that of other primates, and absence of the aggression-inhibiting signals found 
in predators. Lorenz (1963) felt that Australopithecines possessed that capacity. 
But it is evident that, if Homo habilis was the first toolmaker, then this species 
would be, in accord with Lorenz, the first hominid with a moral sense. 
It is impossible to show whether H. habilis or any other toolmaker behaved mor- 
ally; just as impossible as demonstrating it did not do so. But Neanderthal burials 
suggest certain keys recording pressure of morals. Burying a close relative indi- 
cates certain levels of thought that may be related to moral practices. But beside 
this circumstantial reasoning, given that the tombs preserve the skeletons very 
well, they constitute an important source of information about the state those be- 
ings were at the moment of death. Thus, we may ask how was it possible for such 
a Neanderthal as the ‘old man’ from La-Chapelle-aux-Saints to reach such an old 
age, lacking almost all his teeth. It seems reasonable to suppose he was looked 
after and fed by other members of his group. The same may be said about the 
Shanidar I specimen, an adult Neanderthal who died between 30 and 45 years old, 
and whose remains are very well preserved. Trinkaus (1983) notes that Shanidar I 
had so many atrophies, malformations, and fractures that it is impossible to think 
he could have survived so many years with these handicaps if he had not received 
I 

I 18’ 
5.7 Gene-Culture Coevolution 
care from his social group. Day (1986) warns against overestimating the sugges- 
tions of mutual help provided by burials. Maybe the few teeth of the old man from 
La-Chapelle-aux-Saints were enough for him to eat, albeit with difficulty. Perhaps 
some of the Shanidar deformities had some aesthetic intention (although that would 
be a different indication of a high cognitive level). But it cannot be denied, in the 
first place, that Neanderthals of advanced age are numerous in the record and that, 
also, most of them have important lesions or pathological deformities. The conclu- 
sion is that it is necessary to see in these beings an indication of a behavior that, 
among us, is considered moral. 
5.7 
Gene-Culture Coevolution 
How could such behavior become fixed, phylogenetically speaking? The weight of 
adaptation in the development of humans’ moral behavior has been treated, if not 
exhaustively, at least with a certain frequency by philosophers, psychologists and, 
of course, sociobiologists. Campbell (1975, 1983), Durham (1982), and Maxwell 
(1982), from different theoretical viewpoints, have argued that biological and cul- 
tural evolution must be understood in terms of the relations maintained between 
each other, that is to say, in terms of ‘coevolution’. They have all especially empha- 
sized the need to understand the phylogenetic mechanisms in order to better an- 
swer some of our current questions. But Lumsden and Wilson have made the 
most notable contributions to the existing model of coevolution between genes 
and culture. 
Lumsden and Wilson’s analysis of the mental process of phylogeny, which, by 
the way, brought into being the so-called ‘second sociobiology’, is found in Genes, 
Mind and Culture (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981). The main objective oftheir work is 
to establish a model for gene-culture interaction. In Promethean Fire, Lumsden 
and Wilson (1983) insist on these ideas, giving further attention to the species’ 
phylogeny. (We feel that Lumsden and Wilson’s model is too convoluted. And, 
even worse, all their mathematical apparatus may be insufficient for explaining 
something as complex as human social and mental behaviour. Lewontin, Rose 
and Kamin (1984) are right in pointing out that the worst feature of naturalist 
reductionism is its pretence of explaining things, however imprecisely. But in their 
critique of Lumsden and Wilson (1981) they go too far - it does not seem that 
Genes, Mind and Culture can be characterised as extremely deterministic.) 
Lumsden and Wilson present the influence of the genetic endowment on moral 
behavior (not directly, of course, but as a part of broad social behavior) as some- 
thing that cannot be expressed in all-or-nothing terms. There is a gradual influ- 
ence, changing as a function of specific social behavior, which can only be analyzed 
with probability curves. Confronted with a certain adaptive problem, such as hunt- 
ing to obtain food, some predator species use highly instinctive strategies, that is, 
strategies that are mainly genetically controlled. Other species can accumulate ‘tra- 
ditions’ that transmit the appropriate techniques from generation to generation. 

182 
5 Evolution ofMorality 
The biological resources necessary to genetically control very complex strategies 
are out of the question. Therefore, an elemental parsimonious principle leads us 
to understand that determination cannot get very far. But a totally free behavior 
would be surpassed by a kind of behavior for which certain genetic influences 
limit the necessity for very broad decision-making. Genes and behaviors are en- 
twined by tendencies guiding probable behaviors, following a model originated 
from Waddington’s ‘epigenetic valley’. 
Let’s return to the hunting example. A variety of possible cultural solutions can 
facilitate hunting antelopes. They range from simple harassment by an individual 
with empty hands to more complicated cooperative strategies of a whole group 
possessing sophisticated tools. Lumsden and Wilson (1981, 1983) suggest that, 
among all those possible and multiple solutions, exist some to which humans will 
mostly tend, accumulating traditions in that direction. The tendency is genetically 
controlled, but only in a probabilistic sense: the ‘chosen’ behavior occurs only if we 
abide by the laws of the greater number. It is very possible, even frequent, to find 
individuals who choose other solutions, with less adaptive efficiency, but with 
enough to maintain a balance between adaptation and genetic resources. As the 
complexity of cultural strategies increases, the necessary genetic resources to se- 
cure them tightly would be immense and utopian. Unfortunately, Lumsden and 
Wilson’s model, despite its formalization via differential equations, barely refers to 
how the cognitive mechanism that subjects use to analyze problems and apply 
their probabilistically-driven strategies can be understood. Only a reference to 
Quillian’s (1968) multi-storage memory model is found. However, given that moral 
behavior is a by-product of means that appeared evolutionarily and turned human 
knowledge into something very complex, some interesting keys should be found 
down that direction. Could they be further specified? 
The most promising pending task toward developing a coherent naturalism is 
an analysis of the cognitive mechanisms underlying general human actions (spe- 
cifically, the interiorization of society’s moral codes and the processing of this in- 
formation in ethical assessment and decision-making). (Krebs (1970) and, later, 
Trivers (1981) earlier proposed studying cognitive features as a basis for an accept- 
able model ofaltruism. Later, Krebs (1978,1982) developed those ideas, but follow- 
ing black box models like those proposed by Piaget and Kohlberg. We believe we 
can be more ambitious today, in light ofthe Churchlands work (Paul Churchland, 
1986; Patricia Churchland, 1986).) If we take into account the general features of 
the process by which specific individuals include themselves in a group, from the 
different viewpoints explained here, each individual embodies the unique and 
unrepeatable actualization of information from two different collective sources: 
on the one hand, the genetic pool in which all the possible combinations are found 
and in which the individual’s specific genetic endowment is a particular subgroup; 
on the other hand, an ethical pool accumulating as the universe of social values, 
interiorized as a body of personal values by learning and enculturation. 
Neither of these collective groups of information is permanent: both evolve by 
means of their actualization in different individuals. The process of evolution is 
complicated and difficult to analyze in detail, because, obviously, any new ethical 
I 

5.8 Group Selection Reborn 
value originates from an individual’s initiative, i.e., an individual‘s action, but it 
does not become part of society’s moral pool until it is shared by a reasonable 
number of actors. The relation between an individual and the social response rep- 
resents a problem similar to that of the incorporation of words and lexical concepts 
in a language: it has an individual feature and a collective one. Only the interaction 
between both of them can explain the phenomenon of moral evolution. 
Ifwe compare both pools, moral values and genetics, the rate of evolution is very 
different, of course, but in a structural sense, it is worth taking into account both 
domains as significant for understanding the way in which these collectives influ- 
ence the design of a particular individual. Biological naturalism explains how the 
genetic pool is capable of influencing an individual’s moral behavior. But cognitive 
naturalism, which starting to emerge through models of semantic representation 
(mainly schemes models), should have much to say on this subject. Given the 
connections found between the biological substrate and the activity of knowledge 
production, it seems that advances in ethical naturalism will depend upon advances 
in knowledge of the human mind. 
5.8 
Group Selection Reborn 
Accepting and following the group’s moral codes would be enough to ensure the 
way to Campbell’s ultrasociability. But the reason why humans do that is yet to be 
explained. If kin selection explains the social evolution of bees, ants, wasps and 
termites, how do we explain human groups? 
The best answer until recently was Trivers’ reciprocal altruism model (Trivers, 
1971; Trivers, 1983; Trivers, 1985), which follows from the enormous development 
of game theory. Very succinctly, Trivers claimed that group behavior is based on 
strategies about predictable behaviors of others: I scratch your back, and you scratch 
mine. Evidently such a model is effective only in species with a high cognitive 
development that allows them to elaborate plans for the future. Trivers gave, how- 
ever, many examples from ethological descriptions of gregarious species. It is also 
notable that reciprocal altruism is not mutually exclusive with kin selection theory. 
Among the primates, the way in which members of a horde behave towards a 
female and her young is very different from how they behave towards other mem- 
bers. Maternity does not seek reciprocities. 
With the more relaxed versions of the second sociobiology (like that of Lumsden 
and Wilson, 1981) and reciprocal altruism, we have moved far from the hard line 
of biological determination of moral behavior. In this case, a ‘universal ethical code’ 
is not appropriate, but a ‘universal tendency to accept ethical codes’ is. If we ac- 
cept this viewpoint, the relation between genetic control and moral behavior must 
be understood, at least in regard to human altruism, in a soft sense. Here we are 
very close to Neo-Darwinist proposals (Waddington, 1941, for example), suggest- 
ing that genes limit their control to establishing mere dispositions towards moral 
action. 

184 
5 Evolution ofMordity 
Going beyond these soft proposals is difficult - not because of a lack of specula- 
tive models about morality as a mechanism depending on natural selection, but 
because of the fact that giving valid empirical proof about the evolution of altruistic 
behavior and about the biological foundations of such a complex behavior is such 
a tremendous hurdle. In recent years, ethology, sociobiology, and ecology have 
generated many interpretations explaining social behavior by means of kin selec- 
tion and reciprocal altruism. Game theory’s mathematical support has allowed 
reaching such elegant and sophisticated models as that of Nowak and Sigmund 
(1998). Using computer simulations they explain the existence ofvery subtle social 
behaviors, based on the advantage brought about by displaying a cooperator ap- 
pearance to gain the group’s appreciation. 
In some cases, however, the elegance of models is imposed upon empirical evi- 
dence ofwhat is entailed in observed behaviors. Thus, referring to one of the favorite 
illustrations of altruistic behavior, that of sentinels warning of the presence of preda- 
tors, Bednekoff (1997) expressed some doubts, pointing out there was insufficient 
evidence that sentinels were victims of predators more often than the rest of the 
animals. Clutton-Brock and colleagues (1999), studying the African mongoose 
Suricata suricatta, have confirmed this impression. These animals live in highly 
social groups of between 3 and 30 members. Their cooperative behavior is efficient 
and depends on the number of group members: larger groups have fewer victims 
of predators than do smaller groups. The job ofthe sentinels is certainly responsi- 
ble for this adaptive success. However, looking out for predators is not a behavior 
that depends on either the number of close relatives in the group or on reciprocity. 
Immigrant members, with no close relatives in the group, do not show a higher or 
lower tendency to being a lookout, and taking turns in the labor of looking out 
does not happen, indicating no reciprocal behavior. The only pattern found by 
Clutton-Brock and colleagues is eating. Satiated animals tend to spend more time 
as sentries than those who have not eaten enough. None of the sentries observed 
by Clutton-Brocks team became victims of predators. To the contrary, they man- 
aged to escape and hide easily. Although these conclusions cannot be extended to 
other social species, African mongooses follow behavior patterns explainable by 
motives of convenience, that is to say, selfishness. If there is no other animal look- 
ing out, it is advantageous for a satiated mongoose to become a sentinel. 
Some social behaviors seem to be explainable without turning to highly complex 
models. Darwin’s revered idea of individual efficiency is enough. Other behaviors, 
in contrast, seem to be very complicated and out of reach of simple reciprocity or 
kinship, as with some primates’ ‘Machiavellian intelligence’ (Byrne and Whiten, 
1988). Macaques, chimpanzees, and, obviously, humans, establish highly complex 
alliances to attain advantages from life in groups. From the standpoint of evolu- 
tionary biology, which is the explanatory key to such a complex social behavior? In 
the first place, it would be difficult to sustain that it is superficial and has no sense 
in adaptive terms. At least regarding our species, socialization is indispensable for 
language and brain development. At the risk of falling into extreme adaptationist 
positions, such a phenomenon is usually considered to depend greatly on genetic 
information. In this sense, language-learning theories, such as Noam Chomsky’s, 
I 

I 185 
5.8 Group Selection Reborn 
appear. But if insects’ social behavior may be considered as genetically fixed, it is 
very difficult to determine precisely to what degree our behavior follows those pat- 
terns. As stated earlier, the determined genetic tendency to behave altruistically 
toward other members of our social group is one thing, but the development of 
ethical codes and laws that have nothing to do with the content of DNA is another, 
very different thing. But what is still lacking is an explanation of the biological key 
to the tendency to behave more or less according to a society’s moral norms. It 
could be true that the tendency to act in such a fashion was genetically determined 
and that it is impossible to explain it with the means we presently have. To better 
understand the difficulties of trying to reach such an explanation, it is worth dis- 
cussing a very recent model of human moral and social mechanisms proposed by 
Wilson and Sober (1994,1998), who, after examining different attempts to reintro- 
duce group-selection theory into the social sciences, maintain that the group may 
be considered an important selective unit. 
The reasons for rescuing group-selection theory originate from the need of envi- 
ronmental sciences, especially ecology, to explain the laws of evolution of units 
larger than the pool of genes considered by selfish gene theories. Such a short- 
sighted view cannot account for ecological phenomena occurring, for example, in 
a disappearing tropical forest. Here, the aim is not to explain the interactions among 
the members of an ant colony, but to explain interactions among different groups 
of animals and plants. Genetic replication laws do not say anything about the de- 
velopment of endangered ecosystems: we need a wider perspective. It is a problem 
that appears when talking about levels of emergence, that is to say, when it is 
necessary, in explanatory terms, to pass from physics to chemistry or from chem- 
istry to biology. The present example consists in passing from biology to ecology or 
even to psychology. In fact, cognitive questions are of great importance, as we shall 
soon see, in the reappearance of group selection theory. 
Wilson and Sober wrote a book, Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of 
Unselfish Behavior (1998), in which they try to offer a view of group-selection that is 
not naive, i.e., concerning individuals considered as subjects of game theory ap- 
plied to Darwinian evolution. That means that if individuals belonging to a gre- 
garious species that possesses high cognitive capacities, such as our own species, 
choose to continue in a group, it is because they find acting in such a way to be 
beneficial. Individuals are, after all, selfish - in the technical sense that they are 
willing to maximize their reproductive success - so they must consider that the 
group offers advantages for individual interests. For Wilson and Sober (1994), in- 
dividuals recognize adaptations at group level when they are exploited by one of 
these groups, but when they are protected or when exploitation is not possible due 
to a particular situation, group-level adaptations are seen as examples of individual 
interest. 
If an individual finds himself in a situation similar to the second or third exam- 
ples described by Wilson and Sober - being protected individuals or being in situ- 
ations in which exploitation is not possible -he believes his interests are favored. 
But now we have encountered a psychological problem. What does it mean that a 
certain individual A considers situation X to favor her interests? Subject A could 

186 
5 Evohtron ofMorahty 
make a mistake but in fact she would be acting as if situation Xwere favorable. The 
true question lies then in knowing how individuals belonging to a group under- 
stand what their interests are. This is a very usual perspective in neoclassical 
economy, which, let us not forget, supplied the mathematical apparatus used by 
game theory. 
According to the studies carried out in this field by Domenech (in press), neo- 
classical economy states that individuals have desires and beliefs and use available 
resources to satisfy their desires in accordance with their beliefs. Once we know 
individuals’ beliefs and desires, we can anticipate their actions. If their actions and 
desires are known, their beliefs can be imagined. If their actions and beliefs are 
known, we may deduce their desires. Basic knowledge is thus needed to apply the 
laws of behavior, be they economic, biological, or social. This is so only if we as- 
sume that humans act rationally, which is often difficult to argue convincingly. 
Many psychological studies carried out in the 1970s and 1980s (Cohen, 1972: 
Rosenhan, 1978; Batson et al., 1981; Hoffman, 1981; Rushton, 1982; Toi and Batson. 
1982) have shown that empathic mechanisms often intervene in cooperative 
behaviors. 
Wilson and Sober acknowledge that the psychological motivation of individuals 
belonging to a group has seldom been studied, but they predict that this will be a 
fertile research line in the future. In fact, this task has already begun, even though 
the theoreticians of sociobiology and ethology do not pay much attention to progress 
made in this field. To give an example, neural correlates of decision making in 
primates (rhesus monkeys) have already been detected in the posterior parietal 
cortex and possibly in the prefrontal cortex (Platt and Gimcher, 1999, for example). 
Even the basic mechanisms of brain functioning intervening in social judgments 
are beginning to come to light. The team led by Hanna and Antonio Damasio has 
indicated the role the amygdala plays: brain lesions affecting the amygdala prevent 
patients from making judgments about the trust they can have in other individuals 
(Adolphs et al., 1998). This may be due to an incapacity to interpret facially ex- 
pressed emotions when the amygdala is injured (Adolphs et al., 1994). But despite 
the promising studies, we must admit that, beyond this basic mechanism of sup- 
porting the social role of emotions, we know very little about them. It seems clear 
that psychological motivation can be very different among different members of 
the same group. Thus we now have no way out. How can we deduce general laws 
about altruistic behavior if individuals may be moved by very different motivations? 
The recovery of group selection made by Sober and Wilson places us before a 
true dilemma. It emphasizes the need to know the appropriate cognitive mecha- 
nisms required to act altruistically (that is, cooperatively) or selfishly (that is, 
uncooperatively). We cannot say that we ignore them from the collective viewpoint. 
Social norms, laws, punishment threats, and police forces are instruments forcing 
individuals to act in a civilized and cohesive fashion. Punishments are very fre- 
quent among social animals of high cognitive level and are used to prevent unco- 
operative behavior and to protect the reproductive interests of the dominant mem- 
bers of the group. But if we descend to the individual cognitive level, we are 
immersed in a slippery terrain in which ignorance thrives. 
I 

5.9 References I 187 
Some critics of Sober and Wilson’s work, such as Nunney (1998) have warned of 
the need to explain the motivation at the individual level if group selection is to be 
defended beyond speculative questions, given that it is based, ultimately, on indi- 
vidual choices. But motives to act may be so different that the actual feasibility of 
such a theory is low, unless we turn to alleged universals of a ‘human nature’. 
Thus, we are trapped in the same circle as is neoclassical economy. If we want to 
predict individual behavior, we must know their desires and beliefs, that is, their 
motives to act. But these motives can, for the moment, only be deduced from ob- 
served behavior. Either we eliminate the cognitive perspective, as with social in- 
sects, in which altruistic behavior is forced by the genetic code and follows kin- 
selection patterns, or we accept that the theory necessary to explain the motives 
leading to action is at present far from our reach. In the latter case, the only state- 
ment we can make regarding group selection is that societies must have mecha- 
nisms to identify selfish individuals and means to punish them. Such a general 
consideration, almost common sense, is admitted by classical group-selection theo- 
ries without the need for any revival whatsoever. 
Many years have passed since the appearance of the first hypotheses about altru- 
istic behavior, and we are still at the same level of explanation - or lack of it - as in 
the 1960s. Resorting to kin-selection theory, it seems possible to interpret the 
behavior of hypersocial societies, such as haplodiploid insects, but human behavior 
escapes those models. On the other hand, group selection is an interesting alterna- 
tive, but it cannot for the moment go beyond the limits of folk psychology. We need 
to devote a great deal of effort to research on the cognitive domain to establish a 
firm-enough foundation to explain individual behavior. 
5.9 
References 
ADOLPHS, R., TRANEL, 
D., DAMASIO, H., DAMASIO, A. (1994) Nature 372, 
ADOLPHS, R., TRANEL, 
D., DAMASIO, A. (1998) Nature 393,470-474. 
BATSON, C. D., DUNCAN, B. D., ACKERMAN, 
P., BUCKLEY, T., BIRCH, K. (1981) 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 40, 290-302. 
BEDNEKOFF, 
P. A. (1997) American Naturalist 150, 346-372. 
BEKTRAM, B. C. R., CLUTTON-BROCK, 
T. H., DUNBAR, R. I. M., RUBENSTEIN, D. I., 
WRANGHAM, 
R. W. (Eds.) (1982) Current Problems in Sociobiology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 251-267. 
BYRNE, R. W., WHITEN, 
A. (Eds.) (1988) Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise 
and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes and Humans. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
669-672. 
CAMPBELL, 
D. T. (1975) American Psychologist 30,1103-1126. 
CAMPBELL, 
D. T. (1983) In: The Nature of Prosocial Development. Interdisciplinary 
Theoriesand Strategies (Ed. D. BRIDGEMAN). New York: Academic Press, pp. 11-41. 
CELA-CONDE, 
C. J. (1986) On Genes, Gods and Tyrants. Dordrecht: Reidel. 

188 
5 Evolution ofMora/ity 
CHURCHLAND, 
P. M. (1986) Biology and Philosophy 1, 25-51. 
CHURCHLAND, 
P. S. (1986) Neurophilosophy. Toward a Unijied Science of the 
MindlBrain. Bradford Book: Cambridge, MA. 
CLUTTON-BROCK, 
T. H., O’RIAIN, M. J., BROTHERTON, P. N. M., GAYNOR, 
D., 
KANSKY, R., FRIFFIN, 
A. S., MANSER, M. (1999) Science 284,1640-1644. 
COHEN, 
R. (1972) Journal ofsocial Issues 28, 39-57. 
CROOK, 
J. H. (1980) The Evolution ofHuman Consciousness. Oxford: 
DARWIN, 
C. (1871) The Descent ofMan, and Selection in Relation to Sex. 
DAWKINS, 
R. (1976) The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
DAY, M. H. (1986) Guide to Fossil Man, 4th ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
DOMBNECH, 
A. (in press) In: Llenguatge, Cibncia i Societat, homenuje a Noam 
Chomsky (Ed. J. E. GARC~A-ALBEA). 
Tarragona: Universitat Rovira i Virgili. 
DUFFY, 
J. E. (1996) Nature 381, 512-514. 
DURHAM, 
W. H. (1982) Human Ecology 10,289-323. 
HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1963) American Naturalist 97, 356356. 
HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1964) Journal ofTheoretical Biology 7, 1-52. 
HOFFMAN, 
M. L. (1981) Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology 40, 121-137. 
KANT, I. (1790) Critik der Urtheilskra., [Critica deljuicio (19770 a cargo de 
KREBS, D. (1970) Psychological Bulletin 73, 258-302. 
LIU, L., WOLF, R., ERNST, R., HEISENBERG, 
M. (1999) Nature400, 753-756. 
LORENZ, K. (1963) Das sogenannte Bosse: Zur Naturgeschichte der Aggression. 
LUMSDEN, C. J., WILSON, 
E. 0. (1981) Genes, Mind and Culture: 
LUMSDEN, C. J., WILSON, 
E. 0. (1983) Promethean Fire. Rejlections on the Origin 
MARWELL, 
G. (1982) In: Cooperation and Helping Behavior (Eds. V. J. DERLEGA, 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, J. (1976) American Scientist 64,41-55. 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, J., PRICE, G. R. (1973) Nature 246, 15-18. 
NOWAK, M. A., SIGMUND, 
K. (1998) Nature 393, 573-577. 
NUNNEY, L. (1998) Science 281, 1619-1621. 
O’RIAIN, M. J., JARVIS, J. U. M., FAULKES, 
C. G. (1996) Nature 380, 619-621. 
PARR, 
L. A., DE WAAL, F. B. M. (1999) Nature 399,647. 
P L A ~ ,  
M. L., GIMCHER, 
P. W. (1999) Nature 400, 233-238. 
QUILLIAN, 
M. R. (1968) In: Semantic Infomation Processing (Ed. M. MINSKY) 
ROSENHAN, D. L. (1978) In: Altruism, Sympathy and Helping. Psychological and 
RUSHTON, J. P. (1982) Ethics 92,459-467. 
SETTLE, T. (1993) Biology and Philosophy 8, 61-83. 
SOBER, 
E. (1988) CanadianJournal of Philosophy Supp. 14, 75-99. 
I 
Clarendon Press. 
London: John Murray. 
MANUEL 
GARC~A 
MORENTE, 
Ed. castellana], Madrid: Austral. 
Viena: Borotha-Schoeler. 
The Coevolutionary Process. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
J. GRZELAK). 
New York: Academic, pp. 207-226. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Sociological Principles (Ed. L. WISPB). New York: Academic, pp. 101-113. 

I 189 
5.9 References 
SOBER, E., WILSON, 
D. S. (1998) Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of 
TOI, M., BATSON, D. C. (1982) Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology 43, 
TRINKAUS, 
E. (1983) The Shanidar Neandertals. New York: Academic. 
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1971) The Quarterly Review ofBiology 46, 35-57. 
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1981) In: Sociobiology and Human Politics (Ed. E. W H m )  
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1983) In: The Nature ofProsocial Development. Interdisciplinary Theories 
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1985) Social Evolution. Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings. 
VISSCHER, P. K., CAMAZINE, 
S. (1999) Nature 397, 400. 
VOORZANGER, 
B. (1984) Journal ofHuman Evolution 13, 33-39. 
VOORZANGER, 
B. (1994) Biology and Philosophy 9, 75-84. 
WADDINGTON, 
C. H. (1941) Nature 148,270-274. 
WILLIAMS, 
G. C. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection. A Critique ofsome 
Current Evolutionary Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1992) Biology and Philosophy 7, 61-68. 
WILSON, 
D. S., SOBER, E. (1994) Behavioral @Brain Sciences 17, 585-654. 
WYNNE-EDWARDS, 
V. C. (1962) Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour. 
WYNNE-EDWARDS, 
V. C. (1963) Nature 200, 623-626. 
Unselfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
281-292. 
Lexington Books: Lexington, MA, pp. 1-43. 
and Strategies (Ed. D. L. BRIDGEMAN). New York: Academic, pp. 43-69. 
Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

6 
The Evolution of Politics 
Peter A. Corning 
6.1 
Introduction 
Aristotle characterized humankind as the distinctively political animal (zoon 
politikon), and political theorists ever since have used Aristotle’s evocative term as 
a touchstone. But what does it mean? And, equally important, how did this trait - 
if indeed it is distinctive - originate and develop as the human species evolved over 
several million years, from an arboreal primate ancestor? 
Unfortunately, there has never been a consensus even on how to define politics, 
much less how to explain it. In fact, the cumulative index for the eight-volume 
Handbook of Political Science (Greenstein and Polsby, 1975), the most comprehen- 
sive synthesis of political science ever attempted, does not even include a reference 
for a definition of politics. 
Nor is the term ‘political evolution’ listed in the index.’ But this is not surprising. 
It is only within the past 35 years, dating back to the emergence of the so-called 
biopolitics movement, that a serious effort has been made to account for political 
behaviors from an evolutionary/biological perspective (see especially Somit, 1968, 
’ The more recent single-volume compendium, A New Handbook of Political Science (Goodin arid 
Klingemann, 1996), represents only a marginal improvement over the original. The editors define 
politics as the “constrained use of social power”, which they acknowledge follows in the tradition of 
Weber, Lasswell, Dahl, Duverger, and others (p. 7). However, they also concede that the concept is 
“well known to be a fraught conceptual field. Rather than getting bogged down in this controversy, 
they opt for the Weberian approach, which stresses the ‘nonviolent’ power of one person over another 
-whatever that may mean. (Falling in love may powerfully influence a person’s life, but is it politics?) 
On the other hand, the editors say, unconstrained power (or ‘force’) is “more the province of physics”, 
or maybe military science (Goodin and Klingemann, 1996, p. 7). Among other shortcomings, this is 
hardly consistent with the widely accepted claim that the state is defined by its monopoly over the 
‘legitimate’ use offorce. Later in the New Handbook, moreover, Young (Goodin and Klingemann, 1996, 
pp. 479-80) tacitly contradicts this definition by invoking Arendt’s vision of politics as activities relat- 
ing to the concerns of the political community - a throwback to Plato and Aristotle (see below). Thc 
New Handbook also conspicuously fails to mention the relationship between biology and politics or the 
contributions of the biopolitics movement, much less the concept of political evolution.] 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. I: The Evolution of Human Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
. 
~ 
~~~ 
~ 
. - ... ” - ..- . 
. . 

192 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
1976; Corning, 1971, 1974, 1983; Tiger and Fox, 1971; Alexander, 1974, 1979; 
Masters, 1975, 1983, 1989; Willhoite, 1976, 1981; Wiegele, 1979; Schubert, 1987; 
White, 1981; de Waal, 1982; and many others.) Traditionally, political theorists ei- 
ther have treated the subject in an ahistorical manner or have traced its roots back 
only to the classical Greeks (or to some hypothetical state of nature). 
Nevertheless, over the course of the past three decades much has been learned - 
in several different disciplines -that sheds new light on these issues. It may well 
be that an evolutionary perspective can serve as an arbiter - or, better, a bridge - that 
can reconcile and integrate the competing schools of political theory. In this chap- 
ter, I attempt to point the way toward such a reconciliation. But more important, I 
review the evidence that political behaviors (as defined here) exist in many other 
species, and I summarize a causal theory that seeks to explain the evolution of or- 
ganized political systems, in both nature and humankind. I conclude that the evo- 
lutionary roots of our politics and political systems date back several million years. 
I 
6.2 
Defining Politics 
6.2.1 
The Idealist Model 
We begin with the problem of how to define politics and with the writings of Plato 
and Aristotle (who in turn may have been inspired by the teachings of Socrates). In 
his classic dialogue, the Republic, Plato proceeded from the core premise that the 
polis (or polity) is fundamentally an economic association; it is very different in 
character from an amorphous aggregation of individuals who happen to share a 
common language, territory, or culture and may or may not engage in arms-length 
exchanges. A polity is characterized by a specialization of roles and a division of 
labor (or, more precisely, a combination of labor) and, equally important, interde- 
pendence with respect to the satisfaction of various needs and wants. As Plato 
observed: 
A city -- or a state - is a response to human needs. No human being is self- 
sufficient, and all of us have many wants ... Since each person has many 
wants, many partners and purveyors will be required to furnish them ... 
Owing to this interchange of services, a multitude of persons will gather and 
dwell together in what we have come to call the city or the state _.. [So] let us 
construct a city beginning with its origins, keeping in mind that the origin 
of every real city is human necessity ... [However], we are not all alike. There 
is a diversity of talents among men; consequently, one man is best suited to 
one particular occupation and another to another ... We can conclude, then, 
that production in our city will be more abundant and the products more 
easily produced and of better quality if each does the work nature [and soci- 
ety] has equipped him to do, at the appropriate time, and is not required to 
spend time on other occupations ... (Book 11, 369, 370b,c, 371c). 

I 193 
6.2 Defining Politics 
In other words, an organized polity, or state, produces mutually beneficial eco- 
nomic synergies; it is quintessentially a collective survival enterprise - a function- 
ally interdependent ‘superorganism’ (for more on superorganisms, see Corning, 
2002a). We will return to this key point later on. 
However, this is not the only purpose that the state may serve. Plato went on to 
argue that it should also strive to attain ‘the good life’ (in both a material and a moral 
sense), although he advanced this objective as a continuing quest, not a ready-made 
formula. Moreover, and this was one of Plato’s most profound insights, human na- 
ture is inherently at war with itself. There is a double edge to the human psyche. 
Our ‘lower-level’ appetites and urges manifestly serve our needs, but they can also 
become destructive, to both the community and ourselves. As Aristotle (Plato’s star 
student) observed in the Politics (1, 2: 1253a, 31 ff.): “Man, when perfected, is the 
best of animals, but, when separated from law and justice, is the worst of all.” 
Our prodigious appetites must therefore be constrained by the higher-level dic- 
tates of ‘reason’, along with our social and ethical impulses, and by the collective 
actions of the community to protect and preserve itself. To Plato, therefore, ethics 
and justice are not primarily derived from some higher metaphysics. Nor are they 
reducible to a tug-of-war over our ‘rights’ as individuals. Social justice is concerned 
with equitable rewards for the proper exercise of our ab 
es and our calling, and 
our conduct, in a network of interdependent economic relationships. 
Aristotle, in the Politics, supplemented his mentor’s views in some important 
ways. First, Aristotle emphasized that physical security - both external and inter- 
nal - is also a fundamental function of the state, one of its principle raisons d6tre 
(a point Plato also made later in the Laws). 
The collective survival enterprise is not, 
therefore, exclusively an economic association. Aristotle also stressed that human 
nature is not an autonomous agency. It entails a set of innate aptitudes that are 
uniquely fitted for society and that can only be developed in a network of social 
relationships. Thus, social life involves more than being simply a marketplace for 
economic transactions, It also involves a life in common; we are all enriched by it. 
Indeed, a hermit is not only economically deprived; he or she is not fully human 
and, equally important, has no evolutionary future. (We will also return to this 
important point.) 
Aristotle also devoted much attention to the fundamental political challenge, 
well appreciated by Plato, that a society is composed of many different, often com- 
peting, interests. Indeed, Aristotle seconded Plato’s conclusion that the basic, seem- 
ingly inescapable cleavage between the few who are rich and the many who are 
poor is potentially the most dangerous social division of all and the underlying 
cause of much civil unrest. The key to preserving any political community, there- 
fore, is to strike a balance between the members’ conflicting interests. To this end, 
the law must be sovereign and must serve as an impartial arbiter - “reason unaf- 
fected by desire”. Moreover, there must be moral equality before the law. The law 
cannot be used as a tool to favor the rich and powerful but must be an instrument 
for achieving social justice, which he defined as “giving every man his due”. 
Aristotle also discussed the role of government institutions. Recognizing that 
Plato’s proposal in the Republic for rule by specially trained, benevolent dictators 

194 
6 The Euo/lrtion ofPohtics 
(philosopher kings) was impracticable, if not dangerous, Aristotle proposed that 
the best alternative was a mixed state, with elements drawn from a cross section of 
the community. (Plato himself conceded the point in his later writings.) The state 
should strive to achieve social justice, not as an end in itself but as an instrument 
for preserving and even improving society as a stable, self-sufficing community. 
The objective of the state should be to achieve a balance among various interests 
and factions, and the ultimate measure of its success in doing so is the willing 
(uncoerced) consent of the citizenry. Another way of putting it is that politics is 
ultimately concerned with the overarching interests, problems, and needs of the 
collective survival enterprise - the public interest. 
This paradigm, which has often been termed the idealist view of politics. has 
many modern echoes. Wolin (1960, pp. 2-3, 10-11) speaks of activities related to 
or affecting the community as a whole. Deutch (1966, p. 124) calls politics “the 
dependable coordination of human efforts and expectations for the attainment of 
the goals of the society”. Easton’s (1965, p. 21) definition, though a bit ambigu- 
ous, is probably the most widely employed by contemporary political scientists. 
He termed politics the processes through which “values are authoritatively allo- 
cated for a society”. But perhaps the modern apotheosis of the idealist stance is 
Arnhart’s normatively laden definition in Dawinian Natural Right (1998, p. 1): “The 
ultimate aim of politics is to form the character of human beings to promote some 
conception of the best life.” This is so, Arnhart says, because “every political de- 
bate depends fundamentally on opinions about what is good and bad, just and 
unjust”. These moral opinions, Arnhart concludes, express “a universal human 
nature”. 
I 
6.2.2 
The Realist Model 
Unfortunately, many theorists over the years have disputed the claims of the ideal- 
ists (also referred to as holists). What has been called - at times with a supercilious 
tone - the realist (and sometimes materialist) view of politics traces its origins 
back at least to the classical Greeks, including the Sophists, Skeptics, Cynics, and 
Epicureans (their very names give the game away). These theorists advanced a 
radically different, individualist definition ofthe good life and of politics. For them, 
the claims of the Community, and the very concept of a public interest, were re- 
jected as a chimera; the primacy of individual self-interest was posited as the foun- 
dation of social life. Justice, according to the character Thrasymachus in Plato’s 
Republic, is nothing more than the interest of the stronger. 
Typical of this genre was the Epicurean school, which arose when the Greek city- 
states were in decline. The Epicureans advocated a thoroughgoing materialism 
and an individualistic pain-pleasure ethic that long predated the social contract 
theorists, utilitarians, and other conservative modern thinkers. To the Epicureans, 
individual self-interest is the driving force in humankind, and the ‘good life’ amounts 
to nothing more than the satisfaction of our personal appetites and material wants. 
States are formed primarily to provide security against the depredations of others, 

I 195 
6.2 Defining Politics 
and anything beyond this represents, in effect, a set of conditional, contractual 
arrangements to facilitate our personal self-interests. 
In the Epicurean paradigm, moreover, there is no instinctive preference for, or 
obligation to, society, and justice is solely a matter of expediency. According to the 
Golden Maxims of Epicurus, the school’s founder: 
There never was an absolute justice but only a convention made in mutual 
intercourse, in whatever region, from time to time ... Whatever in conven- 
tional law is attested to be expedient in the needs arising out of mutual 
intercourse is by nature just, whether the same for all or not, and in case 
any law is made and does not prove suitable to the expediency of mutual 
intercourse, then this is no longer just ... For the time being, it was just, so 
long as we do not trouble ourselves about empty terms but look broadly at 
facts (quoted in Hicks, 1910, p. 177 ff). 
The Cynic school was even more hostile to the community and the state. Rejecting 
all social life, all rules of social intercourse or conventions, or even the benefits of 
learning, the Cynics’ attitudes ranged from rugged individualism to utopian anar- 
chism and an idealized communism. The modern libertarian novelist Ayn Rand 
(much admired in conservative circles) provides us with a high-decibel echo of 
these ancient theorists. In her two best-selling novels, The Fountainhead and Atlas 
Shrugged, Rands protagonists were defiant individualists: 
Just as life is an end in itself, so every living human being is an end in 
himself, not the means to the ends or welfare of others - and, therefore, 
man must live for his own sake, neither sacrificing himself to others nor 
sacrificing others to himself (Rand, 1962, p 35). 
Rands political philosophy seems paradoxical: “Civilization is the process of set- 
ting man free from men” (Rand, 1943, p. 685). 
Needless to say, there have been many variations on the realist theme over the 
past 2000 years. For example, in Niccolo Machiavelli’s darkly cynical masterpiece, 
the Prince, politics is portrayed as the pursuit of self-interest clothed in altruistic 
rhetoric (“who gets what, when, how”, in the words of the modern political scien- 
tist Harold Lasswell), and political power is often an end in itself. In Machiavelli’s 
view, human nature is incurably selfish, aggressive, and acquisitive. Only the raw 
power of the state can prevent anarchy. (In the cutthroat political environment of 
16th century Italy, there was, unfortunately, much truth to this claim - a point that 
we will revisit later on.) Indeed, Machiavelli was the very father of the argument 
that Machiavellian machinations -the use of deception, chicanery and naked force 
- were necessary if a ruler hoped to obtain his ends (see Sabine, 1961). 
Thomas Hobbes, whose outlook was deeply affected by the turmoil of the Eng- 
lish civil wars, purveyed an equally dour vision of the political community. If eco- 
nomics is the ‘dismal science’ (in Carlyle’s epithet), Hobbes was the perpetrator of 
a dismal political science. In the state of nature, Hobbes claimed in the Leviathan 
(1962, p. 161), humans are totally, relentlessly egoistic. “I put for a general inclina- 
tion of all mankind, a perpetual and restless desire for power after power, that 

196 
G The Evolution ofPo/itics 
ceaseth only in death.” Since all men are more or less equal in strength and cun- 
ning, Hobbes asserted, the state of nature is a “war of every man against every 
man” (ibid., p. 189). Although peaceful cooperation may also be conducive to our 
self-preservation, fear of punishment is the only reliable way to curb our egoistic 
behavior. “Covenants without the sword are but words, and of no strength to se- 
cure a man at all” (ibid., p. 223). Therefore, the state is primarily an instrumental- 
ity for curbing our natural appetites and assuring mutual self-preservation; it 
amounts to nothing more than a contingent social contract. Furthermore, only an 
absolute monarchy (a ‘leviathan’) can be truly effective in preventing anarchy. 
Hobbes, like the Epicureans, also viewed ‘justice’ as a meaningless term. It amounts 
to whatever a person can get and keep, and the good life is merely the sum of our 
separate self-interests. 
The other great English social contract theorist, John Locke, lived in a very differ- 
ent, less turbulent period and pursued a different political agenda. As a self-ap- 
pointed spokesman for a rising middle class that wanted to curb the power of the 
monarchy, Locke adopted a sharply contrasting set of assumptions about the state 
of nature. Whereas Hobbes viewed his fellow men darkly as the slaves of restless, 
irrational passions, Locke, in his Two Treatises of Government (1970), portrayed hu- 
mankind as fundamentally rational; the state of nature was therefore a condition 
of peace and mutual aid. Humans are also endowed with certain inherent ‘natural 
rights’, especially property rights. Hence societies (and governments) exist to pre- 
serve and enhance these rights; in effect, a society is a voluntary association for 
mutual benefit. According to Locke, the state does not exist to serve some vision of 
what is good for the community as a whole or some disinterested concept of jus- 
tice. The state’s claims to power are circumscribed by its limited, contractual pur- 
pose. If this sounds familiar, it is because the writers of the American Constitution 
were greatly influenced by Locke’s thinking (see Sabine, 1961). As Grady and 
McGuire (1999) point out, modern constitutions are as much concerned with im- 
posing constraints on the exercise of sovereign power as with any conception of 
the general welfare. 
I 
6.2.3 
The Ethological Model 
A new chapter in this ancient debate opened with the emergence of the science of 
ethology in the 1960s. Although the systematic study of animal behavior dates 
back to Darwin‘s day - as evidenced in his landmark 1873 book on The Expression 
of the Emotions in Man and Animals, as well as in the pioneering work of the so- 
called comparative psychologists during the latter 19th and early 20th centuries - 
many social scientists of the 20th century rejected the evolutionary/biological para- 
digm as irrelevant to humankind. Human nature was widely assumed to be a tabula 
rasa that was shaped exclusively by cultural influences. In a famous, much-cited 
passage, the well-known anthropologist of that era, Ashley Montagu (1949, also 
1952, 1955), asserted that, except for a fear of falling and of sudden loud noises, 
human beings have no instincts. 

I 197 
G.2 Defining Politics 
However, support for this ideologically tainted model began to erode with the 
publication of various ethologically grounded books by Konrad Lorenz, Nicholas 
Tinbergen, Desmond Morris, Robert Ardrey, Irenaus Eibl-Eibesfeldt and others, 
along with the rise of the biopolitics movement in political science and, somewhat 
later, the founding of sociobiology and evolutionary psychology. (The origins of 
ethology predated World War 11, but only in the 1960s did its contributions become 
widely known - and debated.) The new debate over the nature of politics and its 
role in human evolution was initiated by Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox in their pro- 
vocative popularization, n e  Imperial Animal (1971). What they did, and with a 
certain relish, was to equate politics in human societies with dominance competi- 
tion in the natural world. Thus, politics is a world ofwinners and losers. The politi- 
cal system, they claimed, is synonymous with a ‘dominance hierarchy’. 
At first glance, it may seem that Tiger and Fox were promoting the Machiavel- 
lian vision (seconded by such modern-day theorists has Hans Morgenthau) that 
politics is essentially a struggle for power. As the character O’Brien put it in 
Orwell’s (1949) masterpiece, the novel 1984, “power is not a means; it is an end 
... the object of power is power”. Yet Tiger and Fox also recognized that domi- 
nance competition in nature also has a purpose. It is related to competition for 
scarce resources - nest sites, food, and especially, mates. Tiger and Fox concluded 
that “the political system is the breeding system”. Having thus flagrantly carica- 
tured this ancient term, Tiger and Fox were then forced to concede that politics 
in human societies serves very different purposes. It is more often associated with 
leadership, the division of labor and cooperative activities of various kinds. It has 
become dissociated for the most part from breeding functions (with some nota- 
ble exceptions, like Genghis Khan). Unfortunately, Tiger and Fox did not bring 
this crucial distinction into focus. In the end, they left us mainly with a loose 
analogy. 
A more coherent case for the proposition that human politics is related to domi- 
nance behaviors in other species was developed in a succession of works by the 
primatologist Frans de Waal, beginning with his Chimpanzee Politics: Power and 
Sex Among Apes (1982) (see also de Waal, 1989; Harcourt and de Waal, 1992; de 
Waal, 1996). Drawing on his own extensive research in captive chimpanzees, as 
well as the many long-term field studies of these animals, de Waal offered a deeper, 
richer perspective on the issue. The struggle for power and influence is ubiquitous 
among these animals, he acknowledged. From the animals’ motivational perspec- 
tive, this may well be an end in itself. And, yes, the dominant animals may gain 
advantages in terms of such things as nesting sites and breeding privileges. But 
there is much more to dominance behaviors than this. The competition for status 
very often involves coalitions and alliances; it is often a group process rather than 
an individualistic, Hobbesian ‘war’. Indeed, there is much evidence that social 
constraints on dominance behaviors are common, in both these and other social 
animals; coalitions sometimes form to thwart the actions of a dominant animal. 
And in bonobos (or pygmy chimpanzees), a loose female hierarchy seems to form 
the organizational backbone of the group; females often band together to con- 
strain an aggressive male (de Waal, 1997). Also relevant is the evidence for what 

198 
G The Evolution of Politics 
Boehm (1993, 1997, 1999) calls an egalitarian syndrome in small-scale human 
societies like hunter-gatherer bands (see also Knauft, 1991). 
More important, stable dominance hierarchies in chimpanzees and other so- 
cial animals also have functional importance for the group - maintaining peace, 
arbitrating disputes, limiting destructive competition, mobilizing collective action, 
even defending the group against outside threats. The intense interdependence 
of social animals like chimpanzees and bonobos also leads to a degree of reci- 
procity and generosity, such as food sharing. More recent work in chimpanzees, 
bonobos, orangutans, and other socially organized species also suggests that in- 
terpersonal social relationships and interactions can be very complex and that cul- 
tural influences may also play an important part (see especially de Waal, 1989, 
1996, 1999, 2001). In fact, there may even be a degree of ‘democratic’ participa- 
tion in various group decision-making processes (Conradt and Roper, 2003). Nor 
does one size fit all. The dynamics may differ from one group to the next or even 
within the same group over time. (In addition to the de Waal references, see also 
Kummer, 1968,1971; E. 0. Wilson, 1975; Lopez, 1978; Strum, 1987; Dunbar, 1988; 
Wrangham, 1994; Boesch and Tomasello, 1998; Whiten et al., 1999; van Schaik et 
al., 2003.) 
Frans de Waal (1982, p. 213), invoking Aristotle, concluded that chimpanzees 
are also political animals: “We should consider it an honour to be classed [along 
with chimpanzees] as political animals.” (For the record, this is also consistent 
with Aristotle’s usage, as Arnhart points out. Aristotle applied the term to any 
socially organized species that cooperates in jointly pursuing various aspects of 
the survival enterprise, from honeybees to wild dogs and killer whales. For obvious 
reasons, Aristotle placed humans at the pinnacle of this category.) 
In sum, the ethological model indicates that both the holistic (idealist) model of 
politics and the egoistic (realist) model have some validity; they are not mutually 
exclusive. As de Waal(l996, pp. 9,102) points out, we also need to ask “what’s in it 
for the subordinate?” His answer: 
I 
The advantages of group life can be manifold ... increased chances to find 
food, defense against predators, and strength in numbers against competi- 
tors ... Each member contributes to and benefits from the group, although 
not necessarily equally or at the same time ... Each society is more than the 
sum of its parts. 
In other words, cooperative social groups may produce mutually beneficial 
synergies. Again, we will return to this key point. 
Accordingly, in the modern version of the ethological model, dominance behaviors 
may take on the functional attributes of leadership, and a dominance hierarchy 
may provide a framework for organizing various cooperative activities, including a 
division (combination) of labor (see Corning, 1983; Masters, 1989; Grady and 
McGuire, 1999; Rubin, 2002). Such organized ‘political systems’ are characterized 
by overarching collective goals, decision making, interpersonal communications, 
social control processes, and feedback. In short, political systems are cybernetic 
systems. 

I 199 
6.2 Defining Politics 
6.2.4 
The Cybernetic Model 
Robert Dahl(l970, p. 8) has written that a definition is in effect “a proposed treaty 
governing the use of terms”. The treaty I have long promoted embraces both ideal- 
ist and realist models, and much more. It defines politics as being isomorphic 
with social cybernetics. To be specific: A political system is the cybernetic aspect, or 
subsystem of any socially organized, cooperating group or population. Politics in these 
terms rejers to social processes that involve e$orts to create or to acquire control over a 
cybernetic social system, as well as the process of exercising control. Power, in this defi- 
nition, is essentially a means, not an end. Moreover, political power can be at- 
tained in many different ways, including family inheritance, acquired wealth, sen- 
iority, expertise, merit, drawing straws, elections, lethal force, and, yes, the often 
potent influence of amorous love. Indeed, Gandhi - and many others since -have 
shown that political power can also be exerted by withholding cooperation or through 
the use of nonviolent “civil disobedience” (see Schell, 2003). 
This definition of politics is not original. The term ‘cybernetics’ can be traced 
back to the Greek word kybernetes, meaning steersman or helmsman, and it is also 
the root of such English words as ‘governor’ and ‘government’. In the 19th century, 
Andre Ampi.re took to using the term cybernetics as an equivalent for politics. 
More recently, the term has been employed by, among others, political scientists 
Deutsch (1966), Easton (1965), Steinbruner (1974), Corning (1974, 1983, 1987, 
1995,1996a, 2001a, 2002b), Corning and Hines (1988), Miller (1995), and Francois 
(1999). The cybernetic model is also widely employed by life scientists, engineers, 
and physicists, and numerous books and several scientific journals are devoted to 
this subject. 
The single most important property of a cybernetic system is that it is goal-ori- 
ented. Consider this problem: When a rat is taught to obtain a food reward by 
pressing a lever in response to a light signal, the animal learns both the instni- 
mental lever-pressing behavior and how to vary its behavior patterns in accordance 
with where it is in the cage when the light signal occurs, so that whatever the 
animal’s starting position, the outcome is always the same. 
How is the rat able to vary its behavior in precise, ‘purposeful’ ways so as to 
produce a constant result? Some behaviorist psychologists of the 20th century pro- 
moted a mechanistic model in which environmental cues were said to be modi- 
fying the properties of various stimuli that were acting on the animal, thus modi- 
fying the animal’s behavior in a deterministic way. But this model is implausible. 
It requires the modifying cues to work with quantitative precision on the animal’s 
nervous system; these cues are hypothetical and have never been elucidated; and 
most important, this model cannot deal with novel situations in which the ani- 
mal has had no opportunity to learn modifying cues. A far more economical 
explanation is that the animal’s behavior is ‘purposive’: the rat varies its behavior 
in response to immediate environmental feedback in order to achieve an endog- 
enous goal (food), which in this case also involves a learned subgoal (pressing 
the lever). 

200 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
The pioneer systems theorist William Powers (1973a) has shown that the behavior 
of a cybernetic system can be described mathematically in terms of its tendency to 
oppose an environmental disturbance of an internally controlled quantity. The sys- 
tem operates in such a way that some function of its output quantities is nearly 
equal and opposite to some function of a disturbance ofany of the environmental 
variables that affect the controlled quantity, with the result that the controlled quan- 
tity remains nearly at its zero point. The classic example is a household thermo- 
stat. In this model, feedback plays a key role in controlling the behavior of the 
system. In other words, cybernetic processes are always the result of a system- 
environment interaction (Figure 6.1). 
Needless to say, more complex cybernetic systems are not limited to maintain- 
ing any sort of simple, eternally fixed steady state. In a complex system, overarching 
goals may be maintained (or attained) by means of an array of hierarchically organ- 
ized subgoals that may be pursued contemporaneously, cyclically, or seriatim. Fur- 
thermore, homeostasis shares the stage with homeorhesis (developmental control 
processes) and even teleogenesis (goal-creating processes). But in all cases, cyber- 
netic systems are goal-oriented. 
What is the justification for ‘dehumanizing’ politics and converting the multi- 
farious real-world processes to an abstract analytical model? One advantage is that 
it reduces the many particular examples to an underlying set of generic properties 
that transcend any particular institutional arrangement, not to mention the 
motivations and perceptions of the actors who are involved. The cybernetic defini- 
tion is also functionally oriented: It is focused on the processes of goal setting, 
decision making, communications, and control (including the all-important con- 
I 
7 
Reference Signal 
= f(v,, 
v2, . . . V”) 
Effector 
Sensor 
Function 
System 
Function 
Environment 
---.-...-..-- 
_______..______._____________
...----..-. 
Environmental Feedback 
output 
Quantity 
Disturbance 
Quantity 
Figure 6.1 
A cybernetic control system (from Powers, 1973 b) 

I *01 
G.2 Defining Politics 
cept of feedback), which are in fact indispensable requisites for all purposeful so- 
cial organizations. Indeed, cybernetic regulatory processes exist in families, foot- 
ball teams, business firms, and at all levels of government. To quote Dahl again 
(1970, p. 1): 
Whether he likes it or not, virtually no one is completely beyond the reach 
of some kind of political system. A citizen encounters politics in the gov- 
ernment of a country, town, school, church, business firm, trade union, 
club, political party, civic association, and a host of other organizations ... 
Politics is one of the unavoidable facts of human existence. 
However, in the cybernetic model, relationships of “power, rule or authority” 
(Dahl’s definition of politics) are not ultimately ends in themselves but the means 
to various ends (goals). Moreover, these goals can range from very personal and 
self-interested - in conformity with the realist model - to public goals that are 
widely or even universally shared - in accordance with the idealist model. Or, very 
often, the system may reflect an admixture of personal and public goals. (The syn- 
thesis of realist and idealist models proposed here was implicit in my previous 
renderings of the cybernetic model, but not so clearly stated.) Needless to say, this 
model also accommodates a range of alternative decision-making processes, from 
autocratic fiats to head-to-head (zero-sum) competition among various contestants 
to negotiated decisions, democratic voting processes, or even entirely self-organ- 
ized voluntary processes (see below). 
The relevance of the cybernetic model can be illustrated with another diagram 
(Figure 6.2). It involves an adaptation of Powers’s original generic model to serve 
as a model specifically for the government of a modern nation-state. 
In the cybernetic paradigm, the struggle for power - or ‘dominance competition’ 
in the argot of ethology - is relevant and may (or may not) affect the Darwinian 
fitness of the participants, but this aspect is subsidiary to the role of politics qua 
cybernetics in the operation of any social system. Equally important, power strug- 
gles are a subsidiary aspect of the explanation for why such systems evolve in the 
first place. Social goals (goals that require the cooperation of two or more actors) 
and the anticipated or realized functional outcomes are the primary drivers. 
Another advantage of this definition is that it enables us to view human politics 
as one variant among the array of functionally analogous (and sometimes even 
homologous) cybernetic regulatory processes that are found in all other socially 
organized species - from bacterial colonies to army ants and wolf packs - and in 
all known human societies, including by inference our group-living protohominid 
ancestors of more than 5 million years ago (see below). Although there are great 
differences among these species, and among human societies, in how political/ 
cybernetic processes are organized and maintained, both the similarities and the 
differences are illuminating. They are variations on a common theme. 
Thus, a cybernetic definition of politics is grounded in a biological - and func- 
tional - perspective and is related, ultimately, to the biological problem of survival 
and reproduction in and for organized societies. Politics in these terms can be 
viewed as an evolved phenomenon that has played a significant functional role in 

202 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
I 
- 
input ,,Structures“ 
Elections 
Poiis 
Media 
Meetings 
Data 
’ court 
Decisions 
Goals/Polices/Actions 
Executive 
MinistrieslDepartrnents 
Regulatory Agencies 
Police 
Military 
* courts 
Boundary 
RuleslRegulations 
Executive Actions 
- Disbursements 
- Tax Collections 
- DatdSurveys 
lnput Sources 
(Individuals, organizations, etc.) 
Figure 6.2 
A cybernetic model of a modern political system. 
the evolutionary process; political evolution has been inextricably linked to thc 
synergies that have inspired the ‘progressive’ evolution of complex social systems 
-in nature and human societies alike. Not only is the cybernetic model compatible 
with both realist and idealist models (and the modern ethological model) but it 
fully conforms with Aristotle’s (and Plato’s) enduring vision. 
6.3 
Theories of Politics 
6.3.1 
Human (and Animal) Nature in Politics 
Many of the most famous theories of politics over the past 2000-plus years were 
derived from rather simplistic (and often one-sided) assumptions about the basic 
propensities ofhuman nature. We noted earlier how the realist model was/is based 

I 203 
6 3  Theon‘es ofPolitics 
on the claim that egoism and the pursuit of naked self-interest has energized and 
shaped the evolution of politics. The most extreme rendering of this viewpoint was 
encapsulated in Hobbes’s image of the state of nature (i.e., without the constrain- 
ing influence of ‘leviathan’) as a war of every man against every man. (In fact, 
recent research in behavioral economics, evolutionary psychology, and other fields 
has challenged this assumption. Human nature is far more complex. (More on 
this below.) 
We should note that, although Machiavelli is often lumped together with Hobbes, 
his views were actually more complex. As Sabine (1961) pointed out many years 
ago, there are really two Machiavellis, or rather two sides to his political theory. 
Most famous are his writings in the Prince, which were concerned with how a ruler 
must cope with a corrupt, anarchic, and perhaps revolutionary society. The other 
side, articulated in other writings, had to do with how to govern a stable society. 
Here Machiavelli borrowed ideas from Aristotle, Polybius, Cicero, and others. 
The other extreme view of human nature was perhaps most boldly articulated in 
the writings of one ofthe other great social contracttheorists, Jean Jacques Rousseau, 
whose 18th-century publications, especially the Discours sur l’inLgalitLand Du Contrat 
Social, were grounded in his deeply rooted conviction that man is innately good. In 
the state of nature, Rousseau claimed, humankind enjoyed a natural morality and 
lived the idyllic life of a ‘noble savage’. Humans are also innately social and are 
‘completed by their social relationships. Hence, society is fundamentally social 
rather than contractual in nature; it originated in the state of nature. 
Accordingly, society is prior to civil government, and the state should serve only 
to further what he called the general will (volontLgLnLrale) - the good of the com- 
munity. For Rousseau, it is the corrupting influence of civilization, and especially 
the unbridled pursuit of selfish material interests, that has turned us into the cal- 
culating, rapacious egoists described by Hobbes. The insatiable lust for property 
that civilization induces has perverted us and led to the enslavement of the masses 
of humankind. In sharp contrast with Locke, Rousseau concluded that all rights, 
including property rights, exist only within the community; they have no prior 
claim: “The right which each individual has to his own estate is always subordi- 
nate to the right which the community has over all.” Rousseau passionately be- 
lieved in human freedom, but the dark side of his vision, as many critics have 
pointed out, is that, in elevating the will of the community (the collective good) to 
a superordinate claim to power, it could be used as a justification for authoritarian 
or even totalitarian regimes. (Indeed, Robespierre, Lenin, Mao, and Hitler, among 
others, did just that.) 
By contrast, Plato and Aristotle - notwithstanding the ‘idealist’ label that some 
opponents have pinned on them - occupied a middle ground between the extreme 
individualist and radical collectivist visions of human nature and politics. As noted 
above, Plato and Aristotle recognized that an organized society is based on a divi- 
sion (combination) of labor and various forms of collective action to satisfy human 
needs and wants. It represents a network of cybernetic systems, from families to 
factories, markets, and perhaps multiple layers of government. Aristotle’s famous 
observation in the Metaphysics (Book, H., 1045: 8-10) says it all: “The whole is 

204 
G The Evolution ofPolrtics 
something over and above its parts, and not just the sum of them all.” To reiterate, 
a society can be characterized as a collective survival enterprise - an interdepend- 
ent ‘superorganism’ that produces mutually beneficial synergies; it is organized to 
provide for our basic survival and reproductive needs. (For an in-depth discussion 
of ‘basic needs’ as an empirically grounded concept, along with an explication of 
the Survival Indicators project, see Corning, 2000.) 
However, Plato and Aristotle were also well aware of the fact that there is an 
inherent tension between the public interest and the sometimes destructive self- 
interests of various individuals and factions. Societies are not, unfortunately, self- 
equilibrating. (This is precisely why the concept of social justice played such an 
important part in their political thought.) Accordingly, there is no standard model 
to which all governments conform. In practice, Plato and Aristotle argued, govern- 
ments can range from a highly exploitative tyranny to a top-heavy oligarchy, mixed 
democracy, or anarchic mob rule. Needless to say, this profoundly important dis- 
tinction between different types of government - and their political biases - has 
been overwhelmingly confirmed in the past 2000 years of political history. (The 
research on politics in primates, especially the great apes, documented by de Waal 
and many other primatologists, also provides supporting evidence.) 
I 
6.3.2 
Neo-Darwinism, Sociobiology, and Political Theory 
A word is also in order about the influence on political theory of Neo-Darwinism 
and sociobiology (and lately, evolutionary psychology). The Neo-Darwinian approach 
to social behavior is based on a radically individualist model - epitomized by 
Dawkins’s (1989) ‘selfish gene’ metaphor. The core assumptions are that the indi- 
vidual organism is the basic unit of survival and reproduction (genetic self-interest 
is the driver), and that cooperation and sociality are constrained to be consistent 
with the reproductive interests of the participants. Thus, Neo-Darwinism is a spir- 
itual cousin of Hobbes and Locke (and of the neoclassical economists). 
However, as originally formulated, Neo-Danvinism (and sociobiology) seemed 
to offer little in the way of a theoretical basis for social life. In his seminal papers 
on the genetic evolution of social behavior, William Hamilton (1964a, b), identified 
only three possible categories of social behavior: (1) altruism, (2) exploitative (zero- 
sum) selfishness, and ( 3 )  spite. Only later did he add reciprocity. Accordingly, Ham- 
ilton initially equated social cooperation with altruism, which made it appear to be 
a very problematic phenomenon. 
Hamilton’s truncated formulation was seconded by E. 0. Wilson in his disci- 
pline-defining volume Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (1975), where he identified 
altruism as the central theoretical problem of sociobiology (p. 3 ) .  The implication, 
which guided much ofthe early theory and research in sociobiology, was that coop- 
erative behaviors are a theoretical ‘problem’ that can be overcome only under ex- 
ceptional circumstances. Since the differential selection of altruistic groups was 
considered to be highly improbable - in the wake of Williams’s (1966) widely 
accepted critique of group-selection theory -this left mainly Hamilton’s model of 

I 205 
G.3 Theories of Politics 
‘inclusive fitness’ (or what John Maynard Smith called kin selection) to account for 
social behavior in the natural world. 
The basic idea, which actually traces back to Darwin’s concept of family selec- 
tion, is that altruism (sociality) might be a viable option if an individual’s genetic 
self-sacrifices were offset by gains to close kin that shared many or most of their 
genes in common. Early on, the only other theoretical ‘window’ for social behavior 
was Robert Trivers’s (1971) concept of reciprocal altruism -which, on close scru- 
tiny, was not really altruism but a mutually advantageous reciprocity with a de- 
layed repayment schedule. (For a more in-depth analysis of this issue, see Corning, 
1983, 1997, 2003.) 
Gary R. Johnson (1992) relied on this constricted theoretical framework in ad- 
vancing a sociobiological explanation for the origin of human polities. Politics, in 
Johnson’s view, is derived from reproductive competition (shades of Tiger and Fox). 
Moreover, its role in furthering cooperative efforts was seen by him as secondary, 
as a causal explanation for government, to the containment of individual conflicts 
(shades of Hobbes). Johnson also adopted the sociobiological assumption that there 
are only three grounds for social organization, all of them rooted in individual 
reproductive interests, namely, altruism (or nepotism toward closely related indi- 
viduals), reciprocity, and exploitation. Nepotistic kin selection, he concluded, was 
the primary force responsible for the emergence of societies and political systems 
among evolving humans. 
As we shall see, kin selection/inclusive fitness (that is, reproductive self-inter- 
est) may very well have facilitated some of the earliest steps in hominid social 
evolution (as Darwin himself supposed). However, kin selection is neither a su.- 
cient explanation nor is it even necessary as a precondition for cooperation, and it 
certainly cannot be called a force. Reproductive self-interest is universal in nature 
and always imposes a constraint on social behavior. So the question is, why have 
some species exploited various modes of cooperative behavior while others have 
not? In many species, in fact, close kin do not cooperate at all. Conversely, there 
are a great many examples of cooperation in nature that do not involve closely 
related individuals (see Corning, 1996b, 1997,2003, and references therein). Also, 
there are many species that engage in symbiotic partnerships with altogether dif- 
ferent species, in total disregard for their biological relatedness. For that matter, 
kinship is often irrelevant in human cooperation. Thus, something more than 
kinship is required to explain social life. 
Part of the answer to this paradox derives from the growing realization, backed 
by a large body of research, that cooperation is not equivalent to altruism (there 
can be egoistic cooperation as well as altruistic cooperation) and therefore does not 
depend on genetic relatedness. In fact, much of the cooperation in the natural 
world is based on reciprocities and win-win mutualism (see Corning, 199Gb, 1997, 
2003). Cooperation can more fruitfully be viewed in economic terms - in terms of 
costs and benefits - rather than in terms of genetic relationships (or lack thereof). 
One source of support for this proposition comes from the rapidly expanding 
literature in game theory. First introduced into evolutionary biology by Maynard 
Smith (1982a, 1984), game theory models of cooperation are distinctive in being 

206 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
totally indifferent to the genetic relationships among the ‘players’. The key to coop- 
eration in game theory models is, in fact, the synergy - the ‘economic’ gains that 
are assigned to the payoff matrices, though various steps may also be required to 
prevent defection, or cheating. Thus, in the famous tit-for-tat (or iterative) model of 
Axelrod and Hamilton (1981), only 1 point each was allowed for mutual defection, 
whereas asymmetrical cooperation yielded 5 points for the defector and none for 
the cooperator, and mutual cooperation yielded G points, evenly divided. Since de- 
fectors would be penalized by mutual defection in the next round, after two rounds 
the mutual cooperators would out-gain a defector. 
Likewise, in the model developed by Novak and Sigmund (1993), called ‘Pavlov’, 
the players could in effect punish cheaters by excluding them from future rounds 
in the game. As it turns out, Pavlov (and similar models developed since) conform 
well with the reality in nature. It is now recognized that ‘policing’ of cooperation 
and punishment of cheaters is common and that cooperation is not so constrained 
by the threat of cheating as early game theory models implied (see especially Boyd 
and Richerson, 1992; Clutton-Brock and Parker, 1995; Frank, 1995, 1996; Michod, 
1996, 1999). 
Another major source of support for the economic model of cooperation comes 
from the realization that some of the most important forms of collaboration in 
nature involve interactions that produce combined effects (synergies) that are self- 
policing because they are interdependent. This frequently occurs in symbiotic part- 
nerships, where each participant contributes different capabilities or resources, 
and in species like humans that depend on a division/combination of labor. 
Maynard Smith and Szathmiry (1995) suggested a useful metaphor to illustrate 
this distinction. Suppose that two oarsmen decide to cooperate in rowing a small 
boat across a river. In one alternative configuration, a sculling arrangement, the 
oarsmen each have two oars and row in tandem. In this situation, it is possible for 
one oarsman to slack off (to cheat) and let the other one do most of the work. This 
represents the classical game theory relationship. Now imagine instead a rowing 
arrangement. In this configuration, each oarsman has only one opposing oar, and 
their relationship to the performance of the boat is interdependent. If one of the 
oarsmen slacks off, the boat will go in circles and will not reach its goal. 
Thus, functional interdependence may have the effect of making a cooperative 
relationship self-policing. Maynard Smith and Szathmary (1995, p. 261) conclude 
that the rowing model is a better representation of how cooperation (and complex- 
ity) evolves in nature than are game theory models of arms-length exchanges. “Thc 
intellectual fascination of the Prisoner’s Dilemma game may have led us to overes- 
timate its evolutionary importance.” (We will return to this crucial point below.) 
Closely related to this is the fact that existing game theory models exclude one of 
the most common forms of cooperation in animal and human societies alike, 
namely, teamwork that produces what 1 call ‘corporate goods’. In the corporate 
goods model (which can include any number of players), the participants may 
contribute in many different ways to a joint product (say the capture of a large 
game animal or the manufacture and sale of an automobile). However, unlike 
‘collective goods’ that are indivisible and must be equally shared (possibly even 
I 

I 207 
6.3 Theories of Pohtics 
with nonparticipants and cheaters), corporate goods can be divided in accordance 
with various principles, or rules, or contracts. The division of the spoils is thus not 
preordained, as is true of the payoffs in game theory models; the payoff matrix can 
be manipulated. Indeed, the question of how the goods are divided up may be 
crucially important in determining if the game will be played at all. If this sounds 
familiar, even commonplace, it is because corporate goods games are, in fact, ubiq- 
uitous in human societies. Yet, surprisingly enough, this phenomenon has not 
been treated systematically in either sociobiology (evolutionary psychology) or game 
theory, to my knowledge. 
Some other problems with the conventional game theory paradigm - and with 
Neo-Danvinism - should also be noted. For instance, there are many examples in 
nature in which the alternative to a win-win cooperative effort is not zero (the 
lowest possible value in a game theory payoff matrix) but death. Ifyou were a small 
animal faced with the prospect of confronting a large predator, cooperative defense 
might be the only logical choice. Cheating would be self-defeating. Another prob- 
lem is that game theory models have not as a rule dealt with multiple interests, 
where cooperation in one area - say mutual grooming - may also affect coopera- 
tion in other areas, like hunting, meat sharing, coalition building, or mutual defense. 
Nor does game theory capture the sometimes complex interplay between the costs 
and benefits associated with various choices or strategies. 
A further problem, inherent in the game theory paradigm and in Neo-Darwin- 
ism generally, is that it is particularly insensitive to synergies of scale -the many 
examples in which collective action produces combined effects that would not oth- 
erwise be possible. Lee Dugatkin (1999) cites an example (based on research by 
Susan Foster) involving the collective behavior of the wrasse, a tropical reef fish 
that preys on the abundant supply of eggs produced by the much larger sergeant- 
major damselfish. Because female damselfish aggressively defend their nests, no 
single wrasse, or even a small group, can overwhelm the damselfish‘s defenses. 
However, very large groups can do so and are rewarded with a gourmet meal of 
damselfish caviar. Since success in raiding a damselfish‘s nest can only be achieved 
by a large group of wrasse acting in concert, it is an unambiguous example of a 
synergy of scale. Dugatkin calls this byproduct mutualism (an incidental byproduct 
of individual actions), but this is a misnomer. If an animal only engages in a dan- 
gerous activity (like mobbing a predator) in concert with other animals and reliably 
chooses flight when it is alone, such collective behaviors are not simply statistical 
artifacts. 
One other mode of cooperation in the natural world should also be mentioned, 
namely reciprocity. One well-studied form of this behavior is called indirect reci- 
procity. It involves a class of cooperative actions that do not seem to have any rela- 
tionship at all to reproductive fitness. For instance, helping behaviors among un- 
related individuals - say meerkat ‘babysitters’ or the ‘helpers at the nest’ in various 
bird species - appear to be an evolutionary puzzle. What do the helpers gain from 
this? Some years ago, Alexander (1987) developed the concept of indirect reciproc- 
ity as a possible explanation. Alexander’s argument was that, in a stable ongoing 
network of cooperators, a donor might ultimately receive a fair return indirectly for 

208 
G The Evolution of Politics 
a helping behavior if it later became the recipient of some other member’s gener- 
osity. It amounted to a formalization ofthe old expression “what goes around comes 
around. 
Much more thought and analysis has been devoted to this phenomenon in re- 
cent years, and the consensus seems to be that indirect reciprocity may well be a 
factor in sustaining socially organized species, independent of kinship (see espe- 
cially Boyd and Richerson, 1989; Mumme et al., 1989; Mesterton-Gibbons and 
Dugatkin, 1992; Nowak and Sigmund, 1998a, b; Gintis, 2000a, b; Clutton-Brock et 
al., 2001; Clutton-Brock, 2002). Significantly, this phenomenon seems to occur 
under the conditions that, most likely, also characterized the evolution of the hu- 
man species (see below). 
Also important is the work by Gintis (2000a, b), Fehr and Gachter (2000a, 11, 
2004, Sethi and Somanathan (2001), Fehr et al. (2002) and others on ‘strong reci- 
procity’ as a cooperation-enhancing mechanism. As the term implies, strong reci- 
procity is cooperation that is egoistic, not altruistic and is therefore dependent on 
an equitable distribution ofthe benefits (i.e. corporate goods), as well as on aggres- 
sive punishment to prevent cheating or defection. Closely related to this is the 
expanding body of work on ‘fairness’ as a facilitator of cooperation in humankind 
(see especially Corning, 2002c; also Rabin, 1993; Fehr and Schmidt, 1999; Fehr 
and Gachter, 2000a, b, 2002; Henrich and Boyd, 2001; Henrich et al., 2001; Price ct 
al., 2002). Also important is the work by Boyd and Richerson (2002) and others on 
the role of group-serving norms in securing cooperation.2 
Finally, the recent revival of group selection theory should be mentioned be- 
cause, among other things, this phenomenon is particularly relevant to the expla- 
nation of human evolution and the evolution of human political systems (see be- 
low). Very briefly, the widespread opposition to group selection theory was largely 
due to the theoretical misperception described above. If social cooperation is pre- 
sumed to require altruism, then it would seem improbable that cooperating (altru- 
istic) groups composed of non-kin could be favored by natural selection. However, 
if much (perhaps most) of the cooperation in nature involves reciprocity or mutu- 
alism -where all the participants are likely to benefit - the theoretical obstacle to 
group selection dissolves. David Sloan Wilson, who has been most closely associ- 
ated with the resurrection of group selection theory in recent years, likcs to call it 
‘trait group’ selection (see especially D. S. Wilson, 1975, 1980, 1999; Wilson and 
I 
The scientific evidence that a norm of fairness and reciprocity is a universal aspect of human naturc 
can fairly be called robust and continues to grow. Indeed, fairness is a day-in, day-out issue 111 an) 
society. (It is found in virtually every society and the few pathological exceptions seem to prove tlw 
rule.) There is also a large experimental literature on this phenomenon in psychology. game theory 
and experimental economics. Most noteworthy, perhaps, are the so-called “ultimatum gamrs”. a n  
experimental paradigm which has been used (repeatedly) to demonstrate that people are willing io 
share with others in ways that do not reflect their own “rationaP’ self-interest but reflect instead R sense 
of fairness. Equally important, it appears that people are far more willing to invest in policing falrness 
and punishing deviants than classical economic theory predicts. There are even son~e rudiirientar) 
examples of a sense of fairness in other species -the most conspicuous being sharing behaviors and 
reciprocity. To be sure, we also have a tendency to rationalize fairness away when it suits our intvrests. 
And, in the real world, power (and greed) often trumps fairness. 

I 209 
6.3 Theories ofPolitics 
Sober, 1989, 1994; Sober and Wilson, 1998). Maynard Smith (1982b) developed a 
similar model, which he called ‘synergistic selection’. I refer to it as Holistic Dar- 
winism (Corning, 1997,2003, in press), because it implies that selection can act on 
wholes that have irreducible functional properties. These wholes are not only greater 
than the sum of their parts but their ‘wholeness’ may be the difference that makes 
a difference (to use anthropologist Gregory Bateson’s mantra) to natural selection. 
We can illustrate the idea of group selection with a variation on the sculling and 
rowing models described earlier. Recall that in the sculling model, one of the two 
tandem oarsmen could defect (cheat) without undermining the attainment of their 
joint objective. Of course, this is a hypothetical situation. In the real world of small 
boating, a high wind, a strong current, or a distant goal might demand the com- 
bined efforts of both oarsmen. But now imagine a very different situation, where 
the boat is in a race against another boat. If the two oarsmen want to win the race 
they most likely have to make an all-out effort. It has become a group selection 
game, and the fate of the two oarsmen is totally interdependent, even if they are 
rowing in tandem. 
As an aside, I might point out that Dawkins himself acknowledged the role of 
group selection in one of the less-frequently quoted passages of The Selfish Gene 
(1989, p. 39). The genes are not really free and independent agents, he explained. 
“They collaborate and interact in inextricably complex ways ... Building a leg is a 
multi-gene, cooperative enterprise.” To underscore the point, Dawkins himself 
employed a metaphor from rowing: “One oarsman on his own cannot win the 
Oxford and Cambridge boat race. He needs eight colleagues ... Rowing the boat is 
a cooperative venture” (ibid., p. 40). Furthermore: “One of the qualities of a good 
oarsman is teamwork, the ability to fit in and cooperate with the rest of the crew” 
(ibid., p. 41). In other words, a group selection game creates a ‘public interest’. 
6.3.3 
The Synergism Hypothesis 
The liberation of sociobiology and evolutionary psychology - not to mention social 
theory in general - from the constraints of inclusive fitness theory have created a 
climate in which the synergism hypothesis - a causal theory of sociopolitical evo- 
lution that is focused on the ‘bioeconomics’ of the process (the phenotype) rather 
than on the genes - can now flourish. (Although this theory was first proposed in 
1983, the theoretical climate was not then propitious.) 
The synergism hypothesis is based on a fundamental characteristic of the mate- 
rial world, namely, that things in various combinations - sometimes with others of 
like kind and sometimes with very different kinds of things - have been a prodi- 
gious wellspring of evolutionary novelties. Moreover, these novel cooperative ef- 
fects have over the past 3.5 billion years or so produced at every level oflife distinct, 
irreducible ‘higher levels’ of causation and action whose constituent ‘parts’ have 
been extravagantly favored by natural selection. Indeed, in many instances these 
‘wholes’ have themselves become parts of yet another new level of combined ef- 
fects as synergy begat more synergy. 

210 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
The formal hypothesis is that synergistic effects of various kinds have been a 
major causal agency and a key source of creativity in biological evolution (see 
Corning 1983, 1998, 2003). The synergism hypothesis posits that the functional 
(selective) advantages associated with various forms of synergy have undergirded 
the evolution of complex, functionally organized biological and social systems. I n  
other words, underlying each of the many particular steps in the ‘complexificatioil’ 
process, a common functional principle has been at work. 
Evolutionists often speak metaphorically about natural selection (as did Darwin 
himself) as if it were an active selecting agency, or literally a mechanism. Thus, 
Edward 0. Wilson (1975, p. 67) assures us that “natural selection is the agent that 
molds virtually all of the characters of species”. Ernst Mayr (1976, p. 365) tells us 
that “natural selection does its best to favor the production of programs guarantee- 
ing behavior that increases fitness”. And George Gaylord Simpson (1967, p. 219) 
asserted that “the mechanism of adaptation is natural selection”. The problem is 
that natural selection does not do anything; nothing is ever actively selected (al- 
though sexual selection and predator-prey interactions are possible exceptions). 
Natural selection refers to whatever factors are responsible in a given context for 
causing the differential survival and reproduction of genes, or genic ‘interaction 
systems’ (in Sewall Wright’s term), or genomes, or phenotypes, or populations, or 
species. It is the functional effects produced by various units of selection that mat- 
ter. Indeed, evolutionary causation is actually iterative; it also runs backwards from 
our conventional notion of cause and effect. In evolution, functional effects are 
also causes. 
Evolutionists have traditionally tended to focus their research efforts on a par- 
ticular factor or selection pressure, or on the functional properties of a gene. This 
has proven to be a useful heuristic device, but in fact the dynamics of evolutionary 
causation are always interactional, relational, and iterative. To cite a textbook ex- 
ample, genetically based differences between the light, cryptic strain of the pep- 
pered moth (Biston betularia) and the darker, melanic strain (carbonaria) played a 
role in the documented change in their relative frequencies in the English country- 
side during the Industrial Revolution. But the color differences between these strains 
became significant only because industrial soot progressively blackened the lichen- 
encrusted tree trunks that were the moths’ favored resting places. Moreover, this 
change in background coloration was significant only because the moths were 
subject to avian predators that used a visual detection system - as opposed, say, to 
the sonar systems used by bats (Kettlewell, 1955,1973). In other words, the mecha- 
nism that was responsible for this microevolutionary change was the relationships 
among genetically determined traits, the background color of the trees, the behavior 
of the moths, and the nature of their predators. 
Accordingly, any factor that precipitates a change in functional relationships - 
that is, in the viability and reproductive potential of an organism or the pattern of- 
organism-environment interactions - represents a potential cause of evolutionary 
change. It could be a functionally significant gene mutation, a chromosome rear- 
rangement, a change in the physical environment, or, most significant for our 
purpose here, a change in behavior. In fact, a sequence of changes may ripple 
I 

I *” 
G. 3 Theories of Politics 
through an entire pattern of relationships: a climate change might alter the ecol- 
ogy, which might induce a behavioral shift to a new environment, which might 
lead to changes in nutritional habits, which might precipitate changes in the inter- 
actions among different species, resulting, ultimately, in the selection of morpho- 
logical changes. A well documented case in point is the long-term study in the 
Galapagos Islands of 13 different species ofbirds, known as Darwin’s finches, that 
recently diverged from a common mainland ancestor (Grant, 1986; Grant and Grant, 
1989, 2002). 
What, then, are the sources of creativity in evolution? There are many different 
kinds, but the role of behavioral changes as a ‘pacemaker’ of evolutionary change 
should be emphasized. To quote Mayr (1960, pp. 373, 377-378): 
A shift to a new niche or adaptive zone requires, almost without exception, 
a change in behavior ... It is very often the new habit which sets up the 
selection pressure that shifts the mean of the curve of structural [and he 
might have added functional] variation ... With habitat selection playing a 
major role in the shift into new adaptive zones and with habitat selection 
being a behavioral phenomenon, the importance of behavior in initiating 
new evolutionary events is self-evident ... Changes of evolutionary signifi- 
cance are rarely, except on the cellular level, the direct result of mutation 
pressure. 
However, this model also begs the question: What causes behavioral changes? 
Although this is obviously a very complicated subject, one important underlying 
principle can be identified. In fact, behavioral changes often involve a proximate 
causal mechanism - the immediate rewards and reinforcements that Thorndike 
(1965) associated with his famous Law of Effect, which forms the backbone of 
behaviorist psychology. At the behavioral level, in other words, there is a proximate 
selective process at work that is analogous to natural selection. I call it Neo- 
Lamarckian selection. Moreover, this mechanism is very frequently the initiating 
cause ofthe ultimate changes associated with natural selection (see Corning, 1983, 
2003; also Skinner, 1981; Bateson, 1988; Plotkin, 1988). 
One example of this mechanism is the evolution of giraffes, which is frequently 
cited in elementary biology textbooks as an illustration of the distinction between 
Lamarckian and Darwinian evolution. Evolutionists like to point out that the long 
necks of modern giraffes are not the product of stretching behaviors that were 
somehow incorporated into the genes of their short-necked ancestors (as Lamarck 
supposed). Instead, natural selection favored longer-necked giraffes once they had 
adopted the habit of eating tree leaves. And that is the point. A change in the or- 
ganism-environment relationship among ancestral giraffes, occasioned by the 
adoption of a novel behavior, precipitated a new selection pressure for morphologi- 
cal change. (So Lamarck was half right.) This example of adaptionist theorizing is 
also supported by the fact that there happens to be a short-necked species of 
Giraffidae called the okapi (Okapiajohlzstoni) in Africa that inhabits a very different 
environment from that of the prototypical giraffe (woodlands) and, as expected, 
employs a very different feeding strategy. 

212 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
This is where the phenomenon of functional synergy fits into the picture. It is 
the immediate functional payoffs from synergistic innovations in specific environ- 
mental contexts that are the causes of the biological/behavioral/cultural changes 
that, in turn, have led to synergistic longer-term evolutionary changes in the direc- 
tion of greater complexity, both biological and cultural/technological. 
Consider these two illustrations, one in bacteria and the other in a complex hu- 
man society. Among the many examples of a division (combination) of labor found 
in nature, one of the most remarkable involves Anabaena, a colonial cyanobacterium 
that engages in both nitrogen fixation and photosynthesis, a dual capability that 
gives it a significant functional advantage. However, these two processes happen 
to be chemically incompatible; the oxygen produced by photosynthesis inactivates 
the nitrogenase required for nitrogen fixation. Anabaena has solved this problem 
by complexifying. When nitrogen is abundant in the environment, the cells are all 
uniform in character. However, when ambient nitrogen levels are low, specialized 
cells called heterocysts are developed which lack chlorophyll but are able to synthe- 
size nitrogenase. The heterocysts are then connected to the primary photo- 
synthesizing cells by filaments. Thus, a compartmentalization and specialization 
of functions exists which benefits the whole (Shapiro, 1988). 
The second illustration involves a well-known example from Adam Smith's The 
Wealth ofNations (1964). Smith drew a comparison between the transport of goods 
overland from London to Edinburgh in broad-wheeled wagons and the use of sail- 
ing ships between London and Leith, the seaport that serves Edinburgh. In six 
weeks, two men and eight horses could haul about four tons of goods to Edin- 
burgh and back. In the same amount oftime, a merchant ship with a crew of six or 
eight men could carry 200 tons to Leith, an amount that, in overland transport, 
would require 50 wagons, 100 men, and 400 horses. 
The advantages of shipborne commerce in this situation are obvious. Indeed, 
shipment over water has almost always been an economically advantageous form 
of long-distance transport, as many different societies have discovered. But the 
causal explanation for Smith's paradigmatic example is not so straightforward as it 
might appear. In part, it entailed a division of labor and the merging of an array of' 
different human skills; in part it required the fairly sophisticated technology of late 
18th-century sailing vessels; it also required the capital needed to finance the con- 
struction of the ships; it required a government that permitted and encouraged 
private enterprise and shipborne commerce (including the protection afforded by 
the British navy); it also required a market economy and the medium of money; in 
addition, it required an unobtrusive environmental factor, namely, an ecological 
opportunity for waterborne commerce between two human settlements located 
(not coincidentally) near navigable waterways with suitable tidal currents and pre- 
vailing winds. 
In other words, the causal matrix involved a synergistic configuration of factors 
that worked together to produce a favorable result. And the result - which played 
an important role in the rise of the British Empire - represented a significant step 
in the ongoing process of societal evolution. However, I should also emphasize 
that, if any major ingredient were to be removed from the recipe, the result would 
I 

I 213 
6.3 Theories ofPolitics 
not have occurred. If you were to take away, say, the important component technol- 
ogy of iron smelting, there would have been no ocean-going merchant ships. Thus 
synergistic causation is always configural, relational, and interdependent; the out- 
comes are always codetermined. (The synergism hypothesis is discussed in much 
greater detail in Corning, 1983,2003.) 
6.3.4 
Explaining Political Evolution 
How, then, do we account for the evolution of political systems, both historically 
and in the often puzzling contemporary cases? In The Synergism Hypothesis 
(Corning, 1983), a chapter was devoted to what was called an 'interactional para- 
digm' (which was really a synthesis of various interdisciplinary paradigms that 
have been put forward over the past few decades). Here I can only provide a sketch 
of that causal framework. In brief, the pattern of causation in something as com- 
plex and variegated as the evolution of human societies requires a framework that 
is multidisciplinary, multileveled, 'configural' (or relational), functional, and cyber- 
netic. It involves geophysical factors, biological and ecological factors, an array of 
biologically based human needs, and many derivative psychological and cultural 
influences, as well as organized economic activities, technology (broadly defined) 
and, of course, political processes, all ofwhich interact with one another in a path- 
dependent, cumulative historical flux (Figure 6.3). 
This framework compels us to focus explicitly on the many codetemining factors 
that, in each example, interact synergistically, rather than singling out some mono- 
POLITICAL "ECOSYSTEM" 
4 
i 
I 
POLITICAL SYSTEM(S) 
I 
1 
ECONOMY: Organization, Technology, Training, Etc. I 
4 
i 
I 
CULTURE: Values, Traditions, Historical Experience, Etc. 
I 
~~ 
~~ 
"HXJMAN NATURE": Biological Needs, Psychobiological "Substrate" 
+ 
t 
t 
t 
POPULATION Ecological, Biological, Epidemiological Factors 
I 
"TERRITORY": Geophysical Environment (Resources, Climate, Etc.) 
Figure 6.3 The interactional paradigm. 
1 

214 
G The Evolution ofpolitics 
lithic causal variable that is ultimately destined to fall short. Also, it requires recog- 
nition that the process of political evolution is always situation-specific, even when 
there may be invariances and recurrent patterns of covariance within the total COII- 
figuration of factors. (The development of the new fields of evolutionary econom- 
ics and bioeconomics over the past decade or so have introduced a similar perspec- 
tive into economic theory.) 
Some of these variables are obvious to political scientists. They involve the sta- 
ples of conventional political analyses. But other variables are not always appreci- 
ated or may even be treated as a given. One case in point is fresh water resources, 
which have played a key role (necessary but not sufficient) in codetermining both 
the locations and the rise and decline of various civilizations - not to mention the 
conflicts between them. Thus, recent research has indicated that a major climate 
change most likely precipitated the sudden collapse of the Akkadian empire in 
ancient Mesopotamia about 2200 BC and possibly the disappearance of some other 
early civilizations as well (Weiss et al., 1993; Weiss, 1996,2000; Weiss and Bradley, 
2001). I refer to this phenomenon as ‘synergy minus one’. 
Two examples may suffice to illustrate the synergistic nature of such evolution- 
ary changes and the integral role of politics. The rise of the Zulu nation in the 19th 
century provides an instructive example of the interplay of among environmental, 
technological, and political factors (Gluckman, 1940, 1969; Morris, 1965). Until 
the early 18OOs, the people of mainly Bantu origin that inhabited what came to be 
known as Zululand (part of the modern South African province of Kwa-Zulu Na- 
tal), were a disorderly patchwork of cattle herding and minimally horticultural clans 
that frequently made war on one another. The most common cusus belli were dis- 
putes over cattle, grazing lands, and water rights, but the ensuing combat was 
usually brief. For the most part it entailed prearranged pitched battles at a respect- 
able distance between small groups of warriors armed with assegai (a lightweight, 
six-foot throwing spear) and oval cowhide shields. Injuries and fatalities were usu- 
ally few. 
However, the Bantu were hemmed in geographically, and, as the human and 
cattle populations increased over time, they began to experience increased crowd- 
ing. Robert Carneiro (1970) calls it environmental circumscription. This led to a 
corresponding increase in the frequency and intensity of warfare among the clans 
until a radical discontinuity occurred in 1816, when a 29-year-old warrior named 
Shaka took over leadership of the Zulu clan. Shaka immediately set about trans- 
forming the pattern of Bantu warfare by introducing a new military technology 
involving disciplined phalanxes of shield-bearing troops armed with short hook- 
ing and jabbing spears designed for combat at close quarters. 
Shaka’s innovation was as great a revolution in that environment, as was the 
introduction of the stirrup, gunpowder, or tanks into European warfare. After ruth- 
lessly training his ragtag army of some 350 men, Shaka set out on a pattern of 
conquests and forced alliances that quickly became a juggernaut. Within three 
years Shaka had forged a nation of more than a quarter of a million people, with a 
formidable and fanatically disciplined army of about 20 000 warriors who were 
motivated in part by Shaka’s decree that they were not allowed to marry until they 
I 

I 215 
6.3 Theon‘es of Politics 
were blooded in battle. Shaka’s domain had also increased from about 100 to 11 500 
square miles. There was not a tribe in all of black Africa that could oppose the new 
Zulu kingdom, and soon Shaka began to expand his nation beyond the Bantu 
peoples’ traditional boundaries. 
The further evolution and ultimate downfall of the Zulu nation at the hands of 
the Europeans in the latter part of the century is another chapter (but with a simi- 
lar theme). What is significant here is the profound structural and functional 
changes - changes involving the superposition of an integrated political system - 
that occurred among the Zulu by virtue of decisive political entrepreneurship stimu- 
lated by population pressures and coupled with synergistic changes in military 
techniques and organization. Again, the causal process was configural and 
interactional, with cybernetic control processes being an integral part of the 
synergies that resulted. 
The second example comes from some elegant fieldwork many years ago by 
Charles Drucker (1978) among an isolated Philippine population called the Igorot. 
The Igorot occupy a remote mountainous area of Luzon, where for centuries they 
have practiced irrigated rice cultivation with an awe-inspiring system of earthwork 
terraces, dams, and canals that were laboriously carved with simple tools out ofthe 
precipitous mountainsides. It was once thought that these massive structures, 
characterized by early explorers as the eighth wonder of the world, were thousands 
of years old and had taken thousands of years to build. But in fact they are much 
more recent - the product of a heroic response to the Spanish conquest and their 
seizure of the choicest lowland and coastal areas in the 16th century, which pro- 
duced a wave-like flight of the resident natives into the mountains. The Igorot 
people had traditionally practiced a low-intensity, seasonally shifting, slash-and- 
burn (or swiddening) form of cultivation, but the sudden increase in the popula- 
tion density and the demand for food in the more mountainous areas prompted a 
radical change in the Igorot’s food production technology. 
The introduction of a rice terrace farming system is only part of the story, how- 
ever. The remarkable sustained yields achieved by the Igorot’s rice paddies also 
depend on constant replenishment of soil nutrients, especially nitrogen. Yet the 
environmental sources of nitrogen in this area are totally inadequate. The solu- 
tion, and one key to the Igorot’s successful adaptation, is the presence in the ponds 
of a nitrogen-fixing bluegreen algae that lives in a symbiotic relationship with the 
rice plants. Respiration from the plant roots generates carbon dioxide that the al- 
gae need for photosynthesis and nitrogen fEing. At the same time, the plant leaves 
shade the rice terrace mud where the algae live, keeping the temperature cool enough 
for the algae to thrive. The supply of nitrogen in turn stimulates the growth of the 
rice plants. The result is extremely high productivity coupled with great ecological 
stability. For the past several centuries the Igorot have been able to grow almost 
enough staple food on a single hectare (2.47 acres) to feed a family of five. 
But there is one more critical element in the Igorot system. The ancestral Igorot 
lived in isolated family groups that were well-adapted to a shifting, small-scale 
plant cultivation strategy, but adoption of the rice terrace technology required these 
families to coalesce into a large, integrated organization. Sustained cooperative 

216 
G The Euo/ut;on ofPohics 
efforts were necessary, first to design and build this remarkable agricultural sys- 
tem and then to utilize, maintain, and expand it over the course of time. Indeed, 
without constant weeding and repairs the system would rapidly deteriorate. Ac- 
cordingly, the Igorot had to invent a social and political system to coordinate the 
activities of the many individual family groups in a disciplined manner. The result 
is that the Igorot today have a political system that would be unrecognizable to 
their pre-Hispanic ancestors. It represents an interwoven set of ecological, techno- 
logical, social, and political elements - a synergistic system. How do we know it’s 
synergistic? Just remove a single element - say the bluegreen algae - and observe 
the consequences. 
I 
6.3.5 
Explaining Political Devolution 
A major challenge for any theory of political evolution is that it must be able to 
account not only for ‘progressive’ complexification but also for ‘regressive’ changes, 
for the episodic decline (devolution) of political systems. Some climate-related ex- 
amples were noted above, and climate changes are also implicated in the dissolu- 
tion of the Mayan and Teotihuacin civilizations. Other examples of devolution 
include the Easter Islanders, where the decisive factors were (apparently) exhaus- 
tion of their wood supply and soil depletion. For the Ik in Africa, a drought appar- 
ently did them in. For the Moriori of the Chatham Islands (in the Pacific), it was a 
genocidal foreign invasion. For the Aboriginal Australians, the South African San 
people, the Mississippian chiefdoms, and many other Native American civiliza- 
tions, it was imported disease epidemics. 
In short, if synergy refers to the combined effects produced by wholes, the re- 
moval of even a single major part should (synergy minus one) should have a nega- 
tive effect on the performance of the whole and may even be fatal. And if political- 
cum-cybernetic control systems arise to facilitate the operation of complex 
synergistic systems at all levels of social organization, then the fate of the political 
system is necessarily tied to the functional viability - the economic well-being (in a 
broad sense) - of the system and its parts. 
To be sure, the term ‘devolution’ can be defined in several different ways. On the 
one hand, it can refer only to reduced economic Complexity. Or it can mean the 
complete collapse, dissolution, or physical extinction of a population. Similarly, it 
could refer either to a voluntary disaggregation or to an externally imposed or co- 
erced change. In light of the definition of politics proposed above, the focus here is 
limited to the cybernetic processes - the systems of communications and control 
among various individuals, groups, and populations. 
To be specific, if we associate the ‘progressive’ evolution of political complexity 
with the emergence of decision making, communications, and control processes 
designed to mobilize people and resources for one or more collective purposes, 
then the converse involves a decline or collapse of a cybernetic (political) system 
and its capabilities. In these terms, political devolution can be voluntary or co- 
erced. It can involve only a limited functional decline or it can be accompanied by 

I n7 
6.3 Theories of Politics 
the physical disappearance of a population. In any case, the hypothesis is that both 
the development and the dismemberment of any political (cybernetic) system is 
ultimately determined by the underlying economic situation - its integral (and 
necessary) relationship to the production of various functional synergies. 
Many forms of political devolution involve the termination of a system that was 
intended to be only temporary, narrowly focused, and ephemeral. The research 
literature on primates and social carnivores provides many examples: for instance, 
coalitions of lions, hyenas, or chimpanzees that coordinate individual efforts for 
the purpose of joint predation, for collective defense against another group, to 
compete with other males for mating privileges, or even to contain and resist a 
dominant animal. Here, devolution occurs when the job is done. 
Likewise, the ethnographic research literature concerning human societies pro- 
vides many examples of ephemeral political systems. One of the most famous in- 
volves the Great Basin Shoshone of the American Southwest. Until very recently, 
the native Americans who inhabited this dry, harsh environment survived mainly 
by foraging in small family groups for various plant foods - nuts, seeds, tubers, roots, 
berries, and the like. Occasionally, however, these families would gather into larger 
groups numbering 75 or more when there were opportunities for a large-scale rabbit 
(or antelope) hunt under the leadership of a ‘rabbit boss’. These joint ventures in- 
volved highly coordinated efforts with huge nets (rather like tennis nets, only hun- 
dreds of feet long) that were used to encircle and capture large concentrations of prey. 
Nevertheless, when the hunt was completed and the prey were consumed, the family 
groups dispersed once again (Steward, 1938, 1963; Johnson and Earle, 1987). 
In a similar vein, the native Americans of the northern Great Plains were legen- 
dary for their massive summer encampments. Dozens of small foraging bands, 
each with 50 members or fewer, would congregate into tribes numbering in the 
thousands once each year under a tribal council and a chief, who were responsible 
for organizing and directing various tribal activities, especially the annual buffalo 
hunt (Carneiro, 1967). 
There are also many examples of ephemeral political systems in contemporary 
human societies. When the basketball game is over, the team members go home 
for the night. When the play is over, the actors disperse. And when the collective 
response to a local disaster has achieved its immediate objectives, the ad hoc politi- 
cal system that arose to coordinate the efforts of various agencies (fire, police, re- 
pair services, housing, food distribution, volunteers, etc.) is disbanded. Such tem- 
porary systems have been studied in depth by Comfort (1994a,b, 1998). 
Similarly, in the business world there are innumerable joint ventures and part- 
nerships between different firms that are short-term and single-purpose and many 
others that are multifaceted and enduring. Some are highly successful, but others 
are abject failures that are quickly abandoned. In any case, devolution is a com- 
mon occurrence in the private sector as well. The downsizing of many 1960s con- 
glomerates during the 1980s provides one obvious example. By the same token, 
innumerable military alliances among bands, tribes, chiefdomships, and states (in 
the anthropologists’ terminology) over the past few millennia have lasted only so 
long as there was a common enemy to be resisted, or attacked. 

218 
G The Evolution ofpolitics 
However, the most significant examples of political devolution involve systems 
that are associated with the overarching ‘collective survival enterprise’ - i.e., a hu- 
man population that is more or less permanently engaged in the joint procure- 
ment or protection of the requisites for meeting their basic survival needs. For 
example, how can we account for the collapse of the Soviet empire, which, as 
Kenneth Jowitt points out, “was not supposed to happen”? Or, for that matter, how 
can we account for the recent ‘Balkanization’ of the Balkans? There is, needless to 
say, a long tradition of scholarship on the political devolution of human societies, 
from Gibbon’s Decline and Fall ofthe Roman Empire to the writings of Spengler, 
Toynbee, Simon, various systems theorists, catastrophe theorists, chaos theorists, 
and, of course, many modern-day environmentalists (the Club of Rome and the 
‘limits to growth’ theorists come to mind). 
Especially important, however, are the data and case studies on political devolu- 
tion in anthropology, archaeology, and ancient history. Over the past several mil- 
lennia, a great many societies have downsized, disaggregated, or disappeared. Some 
were defeated on the battlefield and put to the torch. Others disappeared mysteri- 
ously. Still others seem to have been burdened by a complicated nexus of destruc- 
tive factors - a negative synergy. By the same token, in some cases the society’s 
central places were completely depopulated but in others the population contin- 
ued to grow in succeeding centuries, albeit under new management. The list of 
relevant case studies includes, among many others, the Mayans, Incas, Aztecs, 
Olmec, Teotihuacin, Anastazi, Hohokam, Sumerians, Babylonians, Akkadians, 
Hittites, Minoans, Mohenjo-Daro, Easter Islanders, Moriori, Tasmanians, Maasai, 
the Hawiian and Zulu kingdoms, Han China, Carthage, and, of course, Rome. 
Indeed, Rome provides the classic example of an involuntary decline that was 
influenced by many complex, interacting factors. To modify the ancient saying, 
Rome was neither built nor destroyed in a day. The sack of Rome by Alaric in 410 
AD and its ignominious aftermath culminated several centuries of progressive 
decline involving a complex nexus of ecological, economic, social, and political 
factors. No doubt this is one reason why the fall of Rome is a source of endless 
fascination - and endless scholarship. Rome provides a relatively well-documented 
example of a multifactored, ‘dysergistic’ process, but it is not unique. (For a more 
detailed analysis of Rome’s rise and decline, incorporating recent scholarship and 
new insights, see Corning, 2003.) 
A more benign example of political devolution -theoretically significant because 
it exemplifies the many temporary systems that are created to meet a defined, short- 
term goal and then later dissolved - can be found in, of all places, the United States 
of America. Although the image of ‘big government’ and election campaign rheto- 
ric about the federal government as a ‘bloated bureaucracy’ have been a recurring 
theme in American politics over the past two decades, the reality is quite different 
if one contrasts the size and scope of the government and the level and intensity of 
cybernetic control over the population in 1944 (the height ofworld War 11) and in 
1994, 50 years later. 
The conversion of the United States from a depression-plagued peacetime 
economy with a very small military (350 000 in 1939) to a huge war machine (the 
I 

I 219 
6.3 Theories ofPolitics 
‘Arsenal of Democracy’), with 11.4 million uniformed military personnel and 
3.3 million civilian employees, is well documented. And this does not count the 
many millions ofAmericans who became involved in war production work (17 mil- 
lion new jobs were created during the war, a 34% increase in the labor force), or the 
10 million organized civilian volunteers of various kinds. In short, the war pro- 
duced a radical economic, political, and military transformation, a national mobi- 
lization (cybernation) at every level of society; and the degree of regimentation and 
control exerted over the population and the economy were totally unprecedented 
in the U.S. before or since. To be sure, this massive undertaking succeeded only 
because the population was united against two formidable enemies and (by and 
large) willingly accepted the sacrifices and constraints that were imposed. Never- 
theless, the changes were radical and convulsive. (For more details, see Corning, 
Even before the war was over, the U.S. government began planning for ‘recon- 
version’ to a peacetime economy. A special concern was how to meet the pent up 
demand for consumer goods, from automobiles to washing machines, without 
causing runaway inflation. (Despite the high level of wartime taxes, liquid assets 
waiting to be spent had increased from $ 50 billion in 1941 to $ 140 billion in 
1944.) So industries that were expected to experience a rapid surge in demand 
after the war were given priority in shifting out ofwar production work. In this and 
many other areas, the government deliberately planned for demobilization and 
downsizing (and a devolution of the federal government’s role) that was not only 
successful but, despite the Cold War that followed, never reverted to anything ap- 
proximating the broad scope and pervasive power that were exercised during World 
War 11. 
Fifty years after the war ended, the statistics tell the story. Federal employment 
in 1994, including the military, amounted to 1.53% of the total U.S. population, 
versus 10.7% during the war. In fact, the absolute number of civilian and military 
personnel combined in 1994 represented less than one-third the number in 1944. 
Despite the contrary perceptions of most Americans, federal employment as a share 
of the total population was only half a percentage point higher than in 1939. Like- 
wise, total federal government outlays as a percentage of GDP amounted to 21.1%, 
less than half the 1944 percentage (or 46.8%) and roughly equivalent to the per- 
centage in 1939 after subtracting transfer payments for Social Security, welfare, 
and the like, plus interest on the national debt (again, see Corning, 2002b). 
The conclusion seems well-justified. The ‘reconversion’ that occurred in the U.S. 
after World War 11 fulfilled the theoretical expectation that political devolution can 
result from either success or failure. By the same token, it can be either voluntary 
or coerced. From a functional, synergy perspective, this duality is not at all para- 
doxical. In this example, it was a direct consequence of the disappearance of the 
underlying functional need, which was clearly survival-related. No other theory 
that we are aware of can reconcile this seeming paradox. 
2002b.) 

220 
G The Evolution ofpolitics 
6.4 
The Evolution of Political Systems 
I 
6.4.1 
Animal Politics 
Much insight into the evolution of political systems in humankind can be gained 
from observing cybernetic social processes at work in other species. There are many 
illuminating examples. One of the most impressive involves the social insect Eciton 
burchelli, a species of army ant found in Central and South America (see E. 0. 
Wilson, 1975; Holldobler and Wilson, 1990, 1994). These creatures form highly 
organized colonies of about 500 000 members, with four distinct castes that divide 
up the responsibilities for colony defense, foraging, transport, and nest making 
and care of the brood. The big submajors (or porters), for instance, sometimes 
team up to carry very large prey which, if split into pieces, would be more than 
each individual submajor could carry alone. 
The army ants’ highly coordinated foraging system is also legendary. In a single 
day, a raiding party of up to 200 000 workers - armed with potent stingers and 
marching in a dense phalanx - might reap some 30 000 prey items, many of which 
are then split up and hauled back to the nest for all to share. Because they forage en 
masse, army ants can also collectively subdue much larger prey than would other- 
wise be possible - even lizards, snakes, and nestling birds. It’s an impressive ex- 
ample of synergy of scale. 
Perhaps the most remarkable form of synergy in army ants though, involves the 
way the colony builds its nests. The workers form the nest out of many thousands 
of their own interlinked bodies. Not only are these living nests quick and efficient 
to construct but, most impressive, they are able to maintain a constant internal nest 
temperature that varies by no more than *1 “C. (These nests are also ideally suited 
for a tropical species that must frequently relocate its home base when the local food 
supply is exhausted.) Although a full understanding of the decision making, com- 
munications, and control processes in army ants still eludes us, it appears to be a 
self-organized, even ‘democratic’ process based on distributed control rather than 
a centralized control process. Aggregations of chemical signals in threshold-break- 
ing concentrations seem to play an important role in mobilizing army ant behaviors. 
Another example of a superorganism in nature is found in naked mole rats 
(Heterocephalusglaber). The mole rat is an African rodent species that lives in large 
underground colonies (usually numbering 75-80 but sometimes over 200). They 
subsist by eating plant roots and succulent tubers. Affectionately dubbed ‘sabre- 
toothed sausages’ because they are hairless and have two outsize front teeth used 
for digging, the naked mole rats represent a particularly significant model of a 
division/combination of labor in mammals. In fact, these odd-looking animals 
utilize specialized worker castes and a pattern of breeding restrictions that is highly 
suggestive of social insects. 
Typically (but not always), breeding is done by a single queen, with other 
reproductively suppressed females waiting in the wings. The smallest of the 

I **’ 
6.4 The Evolution of Political Systems 
nonbreeders, both males and females, engage cooperatively in tunnel digging, tun- 
nel cleaning, nest mahng, transporting the colony’s pups, foraging for food, and 
hauling the booty back to strategic locations within the colony’s extensive tunnel 
system. (Robert A. Brett found a mole rat ‘city’ in Kenya that totaled about two 
miles of underground tunnels and occupied an area equivalent to 20 football fields.) 
Paul Sherman and his co-workers, who have studied these animals extensively, 
wrote the following description of the mole rats’ tunnel-building activities: 
The animals line up head-to-tail behind an individual who is gnawing [with 
its outsized, powerful front teeth] on the earth at the end of a developing 
tunnel. Once a pile of soil has accumulated behind the digger, the next 
mole-rat in line begins transporting it through the tunnel system, often by 
sweeping it backward with its hind feet. Colony mates stand on tiptoe and 
allow the earthmover to pass underneath them; then, in turn, they each 
take their place at the head of the line. When the earthmover finally arrives 
at a surface opening, it sweeps its load to a large colony mate that has sta- 
tioned itself there. This ‘volcanoer’ [so-named because its actions appear to 
an observer outside to produce miniature volcano eruptions] ejects the dirt 
in a fine spray with powerful kicks of its hind feet, while the smaller worker 
rejoins the living conveyor belt (Sherman et al., 1992, p.78). 
The vital and dangerous role of defense in a mole rat colony is also allocated to the 
largest colony members, who respond to intruders like predatory snakes by trying 
to kill or bury them and/or by sealing off the tunnel system to protect the colony. 
The mole rat ‘militia’ also mobilize for defense against intruders from other mole 
rat colonies. 
Students of animal behavior find many analogies between the naked mole rats 
and eusocial insects like army ants and honey bees. But in their politics and gov- 
ernment, the mole rats are more convergent with other social mammals, like chim- 
panzees or humans. As with many other socially organized species, naked mole 
rats exhibit a combination of self-organized cooperation (volunteerism) and social 
controls that are enforced by various coercive measures (policing). 
The cybernetic control role of the breeding queen is of central importance. The 
queen is usually the largest animal in the colony (size determines the dominance 
hierarchy), and she aggressively patrols, prods, shoves, and vocally harangues the 
other animals to perform their appointed tasks. Indeed, her aggressiveness varies 
with the relative urgency of the tasks at hand. In addition, the queen acts to sup- 
press breeding and reproduction by the other females, who are always ready to 
take over that role. (Occasionally other females are allowed to share the breeding 
function with the queen; why this happens is not known.) The mole rat queen also 
intervenes frequently in the low-level competition that goes on among colony mem- 
bers over such things as nesting sites and the exploitation of food sources. And 
when the reigning queen dies, there is a sometimes bloody contest among the 
remaining females to determine her successor. 
All of this control activity is facilitated by an elaborate communication system 
(and information sharing) that includes 17 distinct categories of vocalizations - 

222 
6 The Evolution ofPolitics 
alarms, recruitment calls, defensive alerts, aggressive threats, breeding signals, 
etc. In fact, the mole rats’ communication system rivals that of some primate spe- 
cies in its sophistication. 
A famous example of a self-organized, ephemeral political system in baboons is 
also noteworthy; it involved the development of cooperative hunting behavior in a 
troop of olive baboons (known as the Pumphouse Gang). While studying a group 
of 49 baboons on a huge ranch near Nairobi, Kenya, over a period of several years, 
Shirley Strum, Richard Harding and several coworkers observed the emergence 
and spread of a new ‘cultural’ pattern (Harding, 1973; Strum, 1975a, b; Harding 
and Strum, 1976). At first it was confined to a few adult males that opportunistically 
pursued and captured newborn antelopes or hares. It was a solitary activity and 
there was no food sharing. But over the course of time the pattern changed. The 
amount of predation increased, females and juveniles began to participate, food 
sharing became more commonplace, hunting skill and efficiency improved, and 
most important, the troop began to evolve systematic searches and coordinated 
attacks. In sum, it was the synergies (the proximate rewards) that drove the 
behavioral changes, not genetic mutations or natural selection, and it was not a 
hierarchically organized activity controlled by a single dominant animal. It was a 
voluntary coalition. Indeed, the new behavior was eventually abandoned - though 
it was not clear why. 
A final example involves a unique symbiotic partnership between two different 
species that entails systematic behavioral coordination. The African honey guide 
is an unusual bird with a peculiar taste for beeswax, a substance that is even more 
difficult to digest than cellulose. To obtain beeswax, however, the honey guide 
must first locate a hive and then attract the attention of a co-conspirator, such as 
the African badger (or ratel). The reason is that the ratel can attack and destroy 
the hive, after which it rewards itself by eating the honey while leaving the wax 
behind for the honey guides. However, this unusual example of cooperative pre- 
dation by two very different species depends on a third co-conspirator. It happens 
that the honey guides cannot digest beeswax. They are aided by a symbiotic gut 
bacterium that produces an enzyme that can break down wax molecules. So this 
improbable but synergistic feeding relationship is really triangular (Bonner, 
1988). 
What makes this example of a cross-species partnership particularly apropos is 
the fact that the honey guides also form symbiotic partnerships with humans, the 
nomadic Boran people of northern Kenya. Hussein Isack and Hans-Ulrich Reyer 
(1989) conducted a systematic study of this behavior pattern some years ago and 
found that Boran honey hunting groups were approximately three times as effi- 
cient at finding bees’ nests when they were guided by the birds. They required an 
average of 3.2 hours to locate the nest compared with 8.9 hours when they were 
unassisted. The benefit to the honey guides was even greater. An estimated 96% of 
the beehives that were discovered during the study would not have been accessible 
to the birds had the humans not used tools to pry them open. The honey guide- 
human partnership is also aided by two-way communications - vocalizations that 
serve as signals. 
I 

I 223 
6.4 The Evolution offolitical Systems 
6.4.2 
The Evolution of the ‘Political Animal’ - A Synopsis 
A major challenge for the synergism hypothesis as a theory of political evolution is 
the growing body of evidence regarding the evolution of humankind. Since this 
issue is addressed in some detail in Corning (1983, 2001b, 2003), here I will be 
brief. The underlying thesis, first articulated in The Synergism Hypothesis (1983), is 
that there was no prime mover in human evolution. Rather, the process was pro- 
pelled by proximate behavioral innovations and choices; the common thread was 
various forms of functional synergy with significant payoffs for the immediate 
problems of survival and reproduction, in accordance with the model described 
above. 
In the truest sense, the evolution of humankind involved an entrepreneurial 
process - a pattern of behavioral invention, trial-and-error learning, selective re- 
tention, and the subsequent natural selection of supportive anatomical changes. 
Humankind in effect invented itself. Moreover, much of our ancestors’ inventive- 
ness was focused on new forms of synergy; synergy played a key role in this evolu- 
tionary change. It generated potential bioeconomic benefits and payoffs of various 
kinds -new synergies of scale, combinations of labor, functional complementarities, 
sharing of costs and risks, tool and technology symbioses, and more. (My sources 
include full-length textbook treatments by Campbell, 1985; Klein, 1999; Wolpoff, 
1999a; and other sources cited below.) 
6.4.2.1 
Three distinct transitions can be seen in the 5-6 million-year process of human 
evolution. The first, and perhaps most momentous, involved the shift from an 
arboreal lifestyle to terrestrial living. Most likely this did not happen all at once. For 
one thing, it involved substantial costs and risks. As foraging ranges expanded, so 
did the time and energy required to exploit them, and the early Australopithecines 
were imperfect bipeds -competent but not as efficient as later Homo erectus/Homo 
ergaster. More important, the exploitation of a mosaic environment introduced se- 
rious new risks from predators and competitor species, not to mention rival 
protohominid groups. Some theories of human evolution have downplayed these 
threats, but it was in fact a major challenge, with life-and-death consequences (see 
especially Anderson, 1986; Cheney and Wrangham, 1987; Dunbar, 1988; van Schaik, 
1989; Cowlishaw, 1994; Iwamoto et al., 1996; Wrangham, 2001). There is substan- 
tial evidence for the proposition that our remote ancestors were subject to serious 
predation pressure (Brain, 1981, 1985; Foley, 1995; Isbell, 1995; Lee-Thorp et al., 
2000). 
Accordingly, the question is: How did a diminutive ape with constrained mobil- 
ity on the ground and no natural defensive weapons solve the problem of shifting 
to a terrestrial habitat, broadening its resource base, and, over time, greatly ex- 
panding its range? (By three million years ago, Australopithecines had spread 
through much of Africa.) Political organization -the creation of superorganisms - 
was very likely a key factor. In a patchy but abundant environment that was also 
The Rise o f  the Australopithecines 

224 
6 The Evolution ofPolitics 
replete with predators, competitor species, and sometimes-hostile groups of 
conspecifics, group foraging and collective defense/offense was the most cost-ef- 
fective strategy. There were immediate payoffs (synergies) for collective action that 
did not have to await the plodding pace of natural selection. Indeed, the odds of 
survival were greatly enhanced. It is also likely that the earliest of these protohominid 
pioneers stayed close to the safety of the trees. However, as they began to venture 
further from their safe havens, the risks increased commensurately. (Many other 
theorists over the years have endorsed the group-defense model, including George 
Schaller, Alexander Kortlandt, John Pfeiffer, Richard Alexander, Richard Wrangham, 
and others.) 
There may very well have been group selection involved in this process, but it 
was not based on altruism. It involved collective goods. Nor did it require a ‘coop- 
erative gene’. It required only a degree ofintelligence about means and ends, costs 
and benefits. Moreover, because these superorganisms were most likely formed 
around a nucleus of closely related males (an unusual pattern among the primates), 
individual selection, kin selection, and group selection would have been aligned 
and mutually reinforcing - just as Darwin originally proposed in The Descent of 
Man (1874). Indeed, only 6% ofthe 167 primate species studied to date have male- 
based groups, and this may have been one of the keys to the emergence of the 
hominid adaptive pattern (Wrangham, 1987; Lee, 1994). 
Why would the males defend the females and infants? For one thing, the males 
might not have known their paternity if the females followed a reproductive strat- 
egy of promiscuous mating and, perhaps, disguised ovulation (as bonobos evi- 
dently do). Another factor was that all of the infants would have been closely re- 
lated -nephews, cousins, or even younger siblings. A third point is that, in an 
extremely ‘K-selected species with a very long reproductive cycle and a short life 
span, each offspring was relatively more valuable. Finally, in a tightly organized, 
interdependent group it was not significantly more costly to defend the offspring 
of close kin than it was to defend one’s own progeny and oneself; it was not a 
matter of altruism or reciprocal altruism but of teamwork in a win-win (or lose- 
lose) situation - a synergy of scale. One appropriate analogue, as many other theo- 
rists have noted, is the organization of savanna baboon troops (see especially 
Cowlishaw, 1994, and references cited therein; for a general review of primate so- 
cial patterns, see Pusey, 2001). 
Was there also a division/combination of labor? Contemporary hunter-gatherer 
societies, not to mention most modern societies, typically have a division of labor 
along sexual lines, and it is possible that a rudimentary version of this pattern 
existed also among the early Australopithecines. It seems likely that the females 
would have been primarily responsible for carrying the infants and shepherding 
the juveniles, while the males served as the primary (though not necessarily exclu- 
sive) guardians for the group. We may never know for certain about this and many 
other details relating to human evolution, but group livinglgroup foraging and a 
cooperative division of labor allowing for increased access to a more dangerous but 
abundant terrestrial environment is likely to have been primordial in the hominid 
line. It would have involved the most-limited incremental behavioral changes with 
I 

I 225 
6.4 The Evolution ofPolitid Systems 
the most-cost-effective payoffs for the participants; it was highly synergistic. More- 
over, as time went on the group-living mode of adaptation led to other forms of 
social cooperation and more elaborate political organization. 
One other innovation may also have played a crucially important role in the 
transition of our ancestors from arboreal to terrestrial apes, namely a synergistic 
'soft technology' of wood and bone implements, and perhaps thrown objects as 
well. There have been many tool-use advocates over the years, from Darwin to 
Dart, Szalay, Washburn, Birdsell, Coursey, and Mann (Wolpoff, 1999a). Tool use 
can have a revolutionary effect. It can be the functional equivalent of opening a 
new ecological niche or a whole new adaptive mode. Sources of food that would 
otherwise be unattainable can suddenly become a reliable, even abundant, part of 
an animal's diet. Also, the payoffs are immediate; they need not await the workings 
of natural selection (see also discussions in Lewin, 1993 and Kingdon, 1993). 
It seems unlikely that the early Australopithecines could have adapted success- 
fully to a terrestrial lifestyle and survived, even prospered, for perhaps three mil- 
lion years without the acquisition and skilled use ofvarious natural objects such as 
digging sticks, hammers, carriers, and the like. Indeed, chimpanzees, elephants, 
capuchin monkeys, and many other species are frequent users of tools for procur- 
ing food and sometimes in conflict situations as well. 
By the same token, it seems likely that weapons also played an indispensable 
part in the successful transition to a terrestrial lifestyle. One can hardly exaggerate 
the value to a diminutive, relatively slow-moving biped, lacking the baboon's outsized 
canine teeth, of being able to use a short stick (similar to the modern billy club) or 
a large femur, or even a well-aimed rock, as a defensive weapon (as Darwin himself 
argued in The Descent of Man). A group of Australopithecines traveling together in 
dangerous or unfamiliar country with digging tools/weapons carried at the ready 
would have been far more likely to hold their own in any life-and-death situation. 
These creatures may not always have been subject to predation, but even one inci- 
dent in a lifetime would have been one too many. 
This is not to say that the influence of individual competition, status rivalries, 
internal social conflicts, etc., somehow magically disappeared. Then as now, it is 
likely that there was a sometimes precarious interplay between competition and 
cooperation, between various individual self-interests and the interests of the group. 
As noted earlier, a dynamic tension between individual and group interests is also 
a common phenomenon in other social mammals, just as it is in modern human- 
kind (see especially de Waal, 1996). 
The key to Australopithecine sociality lay in the relative costs and benefits to 
each individual of cooperation or noncooperation. Why should the males, even if 
they are closely related, cooperate with one another? And why should the females 
help one another if they are unrelated and perhaps rivals for social status and the 
attentions of the males? Reciprocity and reciprocal altruism may help to explain it. 
But the benefits associated with being included in the group - and the high cost of 
ostracism - may also have been a major factor. The social group was a vitally im- 
portant survival unit (it produced corporate goods that were measured in terms of 
life and death), which each individual had a stake in preserving and enhancing. 

226 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
In other words, the ‘public interest’ was rooted in the group’s potential for gener- 
ating collective synergies. For instance, a larger group was more likely - all other 
things being equal - to benefit from synergies of scale in confrontations with preda- 
tors or competitors (not to mention potential prey). These collective synergies pro- 
vided an overarching incentive for containing conflict and enhancing cooperation 
- and for punishing cheaters and free riders. 
I 
6.4.2.2 
Enter Homo Erectus 
The same principle of corporate synergy (and policing to maintain it) may well 
have contributed to the next major transition in human evolution. In the scenario 
described above, systematic group hunting was evidently not part of the picture. 
The current consensus seems to be that the Australopithecines may have opportu- 
nistically scavenged meat and hunted easily captured small prey as components of 
a diversified food quest (see especially Stanford, 1999). No doubt, seasonal fluctua- 
tions and the specific opportunities and constraints in different habitats played a 
role. However, there are also indications that major behavioral changes began to 
occur about 2.5 million years ago. A recently discovered 2.4-million-year-old spe- 
cies, Australopithecusgarhi (or an as-yet unidentified contemporary) at Gona, Ethio- 
pia, was already adept at transporting flaked stone tools over some distance and 
using them for chopping, cutting, smashing bones, and perhaps skinning both 
antelopes and wild horses (Asfaw et al., 1999). 
The importance of these ‘crude’ Oldowan tools (so-named because they were 
first discovered at the Olduvai Gorge by Louis Leakey) can hardy be overstated. 
It really amounted to a technological revolution, because it enabled our ances- 
tors to become systematic hunters and scavengers and to exploit the teeming 
herds of large animals that populated the open grassland areas in East Africa 
and beyond. Once stone tools were deployed, moreover, the carcasses of these 
animals provided raw materials - horns, bones, skin, and sinew - for many 
other uses as well. Just as digging sticks and handheld weapons may have 
played a key role in the success of the early Australopithecines, the invention of 
stone tools vaulted our ancestors into a new ecological niche. Equally signifi- 
cant, this adaptive revolution evidently predated the emergence of Homo erect us/ 
Homo ergaster by several hundred thousand years. In other words, synergistic 
behavioral changes - including technological innovations - preceded and sup- 
ported the major anatomical developments that are reflected in the fossil record 
much later on. 
The most plausible explanation for the transition from Australopithecines to 
Homo erectus/Homo ergaster, I (and others) believe, is that a major behavioral shift 
occurred and that this shift was the pacemaker for succeeding anatomical changes 
(see Wood and Collard, 1999; Wrangham, 2001). In the half million years after 
stone tools became a standard part of their tool kit, our hominid ancestors joined 
the ranks of top carnivores and learned how to hold their own in confrontations 
with other carnivore competitors - not to mention potential predators. This con- 
clusion is not original, of course (e.g., Washburn and Lancaster, 1968; Shipman 
and Walker, 1989; Wrangham and Peterson, 1996; Stanford, 1999; Wolpoff, 1999a). 

I 227 
6.4 The Evolution ofPolitical Systems 
But I would add that it is also the most parsimonious explanation for the anatomi- 
cal changes that occurred. 
Other scenarios are also possible, of course, but the group huntinglscavengingl 
foraging plus food sharingIprovisioning scenario seems most consistent with other 
evidence -tooth wear patterns, tool use patterns, and the anatomical changes that 
are found in H. erectus/H. ergaster. Over time, progressive improvements in tool- 
making skills (as reflected in the Developed Oldowan and Acheulean traditions) 
also occurred, as well as more selective use of raw materials, more complete process- 
ing of animal carcasses, and evidence of more specialized tools for different uses 
such as wood working, skinning, and plant food processing. 
The package of behavioral synergies that undergirded the anatomical develop- 
ment of Homo erectuslergaster in turn provided a foundation for many other im- 
provements that followed. Among other things, this pattern allowed for the elabo- 
ration of the group - the superorganism - as a unit of collective adaptation, with 
greater social and political organization, more coordination of activities, and espe- 
cially, a division (combination) of labor. One important example was the adoption 
of consistently occupied home bases, or encampments. This led to a significant 
improvement in economic efficiency for the group as a whole, because it allowed 
for a more elaborate combination oflabor. Resources as needed - meat, plant foods, 
stone tool cores, animal skins, water, firewood, etc. - could be carried to a safe 
haven and then shared and utilized through a network of reciprocities (for a pri- 
mate model, see Kortlandt, 1992). 
Another important technological innovation, often underrated these days per- 
haps because it is old news and a veritable cliche about human evolution, was the 
adoption and controlled use of fire. ‘Revolutionary’ is by no means too strong a 
word to use for the consequences of this multipurpose invention. Moreover, fire 
may have begun to play a major part in our evolution at a much earlier date than 
has traditionally been assumed. The so-called Karari sites analyzed by Bellomo 
(1994) suggest that hearths were used by hominids at least 1.6 million years ago 
(see also Campbell, 1985). However, Wrangham and colleagues (1999) (also 
Wrangham, 2001) believe there are fossil ‘signals’ that go back to 1.9 million years 
ago. 
Eventually, fire came to have many other valuable uses as well - defending against 
predators, chasing competitors away from carcasses, tenderizing meat, killing harm- 
ful bacteria, breaking down toxic chemicals in the many plant foods that could not 
be eaten raw, hardening wooden tools, drying skins, deterring insects, providing 
warmth (especially in colder, temperate climates), and even facilitating long-dis- 
tance signaling and communications. Indeed, Wrangham (2001) postulates that 
the adoption of cooking was a key to the emergence of Homo erectuslevgaster, be- 
cause it vastly expanded our ancestors’ nutritional repertoire and necessitated home 
bases. 
However, the invention of more efficient food-procurement technologies was 
only half the story. ‘Culture’ - the accumulated know-how and experience of the 
group - also became an increasingly important part of the hominid behavioral 
package. Larger cooperating superorganisms were able to exploit many new op- 

228 
G The Evolution ofPo/itics 
portunities for social synergy, including the sharing of costs and risks, pooling 
information, a more elaborate combination of labor and, not least, many synergies 
of scale against competitors, predators, and prey. Likewise, mutual aid, or ‘suc- 
corant behaviors’, could increase the odds of surviving an injury or illness, and the 
joint policing of free riders and cheats could reduce internal conflicts (see de Waal, 
1996). Boehm (1996, 1997) also stressed that political processes, such as group 
decision malung, can even become a factor in between-group selection. Recent 
research on culture in other primates, most notably chimpanzees (Whiten et al., 
1999) and orangutans (van Schaik et al., 2003) suggests that the roots of human 
culture may trace back 14 million years. 
The fossil record also suggests that, beginning with Homo erectuslergaster, cul- 
ture became cumulative and an increasingly potent adaptive tool; new ideas and 
inventions were not only preserved and communicated to subsequent generations, 
but were refined and improved upon over time. Boesch and Tomasello (1998) call 
it a ratchet effect. The group as a whole became a transgenerational repository of 
adaptive information and an engine for the invention of more synergies. Spears, 
for example, came to be made of better raw materials; they were more finely shaped 
and balanced; their tips were fire-hardened; barbed tips were added to increase 
their penetrating and holding power; and wooden spear throwers were invented as 
a way to increase their range, striking force and accuracy; finally, bows and arrows 
were invented as a lightweight alternative that could increase the hunter’s range 
and precision, and (not least) multiply the hunter’s supply of ammunition. Each of 
these inventions represented a major economic advance. More food could be ac- 
quired more dependably with less time, effort, and collective risk. However, effec- 
tive political organization was an essential concomitant. 
I 
6.4.2.3 
The last major transition in hominid evolution, the emergence of anatomically 
(and culturally) modern Homo sapiens, perhaps 100 000-150 000 years ago, is cur- 
rently a focal point of controversy. The self-flattering image of humankind as the 
product of a saltatory leap of some kind seems irresistible (e.g., Pfeiffer, 1977; 
Wills, 1993, 1998; Diamond, 1997; Tattersall, 1998, 2002; Klein, 1999, 2000). How- 
ever, the final ‘sprint’ to humankind was preceded by a long period of progressive 
cultural and anatomical changes throughout the Middle Pleistocene (from about 
750 000 to 250 000 years ago) and beyond (reviewed in Wolpoff, 1999a). The trend 
to modernity was already well along when the final Rubicon was crossed, and there 
are currently two major alternative theories regarding this transition. 
One is the so-called multiregional model (see Wolpoff, 1984, 1999a, b; Wolpoff 
et al., 2001), which postulates that the emergence of humankind was a worldwide 
process “with populations connected by gene flow and the exchange of ideas and 
technologies that spread across the inhabited world (Wolpoff et al., 2001, p. 293). 
The other model is based on the much-publicized ‘Out-of-Africa’ hypothesis. An 
increasingly compelling body of genetic evidence - mitochondria1 DNA and Y chro- 
mosome data in particular - suggest that all modern humans trace their lineages 
back to a very small population in East Africa about 100 000-150 000 years ago. 
The Emergence of Homo Sapiens 

I 229 
6 4  The Evolution ofPolitical Systems 
The data also suggest that this founding population grew larger over time and 
began to migrate out of Africa, starting about 50 000 years ago or perhaps earlier. 
In other words, various genetic markers indicate that there was an epicenter for 
the final leap to humanity and that modern humans effectively replaced all the 
other hominids in various parts of the world in short order, including (needless to 
say) the Neanderthals in Europe and the Middle East (see especially Cann et al., 
1987; Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1988, 1994; Stoneking, 1993; Hammer, 1995; Nei, 1995; 
Paabo, 1995; Relethford, 1995; Jin et al., 1999; Klein, 1999, 2000; Su et al., 1999; 
Ehrlich, 2000; Semino et al., 2000). 
There are problems with both scenarios, however. Briefly, the multiregional sce- 
nario requires an implausible flow of genes and cultural information over huge 
distances and diverse populations, while the Out-of-Africa scenario is based on 
genetic indicators that bear no direct relationship to any known anatomical differ- 
ences (more detailed critiques can be found in Ehrlich, 2000 and Corning, 2003). 
On the other hand, there are data that support both hypotheses. Accordingly, I 
propose a third alternative. It is possible that the migrants from Africa had some 
slight advantage (to use a Darwinian expression) which, nevertheless, made a great 
difference in terms of the balance of power between competing populations. In 
other words, the modern human ‘revolution’ -the explosive growth and worldwide 
spread of humankind - was a culturally driven process that utilized new forms of 
social synergy and political organization (a more potent superorganism). 
Many theorists - Cavalli-Sforza and Cavalli-Sforza (1995), Diamond (1997), 
Tattersall (1998), Wills (1998), Klein (1999,2000), Ehrlich (ZOOO), and others - hold 
that the perfection ofhuman language and the emergence ofa more advanced tech- 
nology were major factors in the modern human diaspora. It is significant that the 
timing of the African exodus - if true - coincided with the flowering and spread of 
the Aurignacian industry, which encompassed a range of technological improve- 
ments. Needless to say, a more advanced cultural ‘package’ would have provided 
an important economic advantage - namely, the means to support a rapidly grow- 
ing population in diverse habitats. However, the Aurignacian technology may also 
have given our East African ancestors a major military advantage. It seems likely 
that the great human diaspora of 50 000 years ago was not a peaceful trek into vir- 
gin territory but a more hostile invasion of already occupied lands; the human wave 
was often (perhaps not always) accompanied by coercion and warfare. This is not a 
new theory (see reviews by van der Dennen, 1995,1999), but it deserves a new look. 
I hasten to add that we are not talking here about wars of conquest or imperial- 
ism in the modern sense; the terminal Pleistocene humans were not necessarily 
warlike in temperament nor seeking dominion for its own sake. More likely, the 
process was driven by a pressing need for resources to support a growing, mobile 
population in a changing environment. (The last major ice age began about 75 000 
years ago, intensified about 33 000 years ago and peaked about 20 000 years ago.) 
Call it the ‘resource acquisition’ model of warfare - and of human evolution. This 
scenario is discussed in more detail in Corning (2001b, 2003). 
To summarize the argument, potent new forms of cultural (and political) synergy 
with immediate functional benefits may have been responsible for the spread of 

230 G The Evolution ofPolitics 
modern humankind out of Africa and around the world. Coercion is very likely to 
have played a major part in this dynamic, but it would be wrong to treat warfare as 
a prime mover. The ability to make war was itself the product of a synergistic pack- 
age of capabilities. More important, armed conflict is, after all, an instrumentality 
for attaining various ends; it is not an end in itself. The odds of violence are almost 
always influenced by a more-or-less explicit calculation of costs, benefits, and risks. 
A shorthand slogan for this calculus is, again, the balance of power (or more to the 
point, an imbalance of power). But this venerable concept implies a many-faceted 
analytical process, not a narrow statistical exercise. 
In sum, human evolution, a process that may have taken six million years and is 
still ongoing, included three distinct transitions -three ‘great leaps forward’ in the 
current formulation. The first, and in many ways the most important, transition 
involved our ancestors’ shift from an arboreal to a terrestrial mode of adaptation. 
This momentous change, I have argued, was accomplished by a synergistic 
behavioral package that included sociocultural and political synergies and a cru- 
cially important tool/weapon symbiosis. 
The second transition, which entailed a dramatic ‘hominization’ - a suite of major 
anatomical developments - was the result of synergistic new pattern of social 
behaviors, including potent new tools, systematic hunting, and, quite likely, the 
exploitation of fire, the adoption of home bases, the invention of a more elaborate 
division/combination of labor, and, not least, more elaborate political organiza- 
tion. 
Finally, the worldwide diaspora that resulted in the replacement of archaic Homo 
supiens and Neanderthals by modern humans about 50 000 years ago was also a 
synergistic cultural and political phenomenon, as larger groups with more advanced 
technology and organization overwhelmed other hominid populations, not to men- 
tion many other ‘megafauna’, in a worldwide spasm of extinctions. In each of these 
major transitions, moreover, functional synergy and political/cybernetic processes 
played an important part. 
I 
6.4.3 
The Evolution of Complex Societies 
6.4.3.1 
Prime Mover Theories 
The explosive rise of complex, technologically sophisticated human societies since 
the Paleolithic has inspired many prime mover theories (for more detailed reviews, 
see Corning 1983,2003). Herbert Spencer deserves credit for developing the first 
full-blown modern theory. In his monumental multivolume Synthetic Philosophy, 
an outpouring of works that spanned nearly 40 years and influenced many other 
theorists of his era, Spencer formulated a Universal Law of Evolution that encom- 
passed physics, biology, psychology, sociology, and ethics. In effect, Spencer de- 
duced society from energy by positing a sort of cosmic progression from energy 
(characterized as an external and universal ‘force’) to matter, life, mind, society, 
and, finally, complex civilizations. Spencer defined evolution as a process charac- 
terized by “a change from an indefinite, incoherent homogeneity to a definite, 

I 231 
6.4 The Evolution of Political Systems 
coherent heterogeneity through continuous differentiations [and integrations]” 
(1892, p. 10). 
With regard to the evolution of humankind, Spencer (1852) argued, increasing 
complexity provides functional advantages, but the proximate cause of progress in 
human societies has been the pressure of population growth - the Malthusian 
dynamic: 
It produced the original diffusion ofthe race. It compelled men to abandon 
predatory habits and take to agriculture. It led to the clearing of the earth‘s 
surface. It forced men into the social state; made social organization inevi- 
table and has developed the social sentiments. It has stimulated men to 
progressive improvements in production, and to increased skill and intelli- 
gence. It is daily pressing us into closer contact and more mutually depend- 
ent relationships. 
Although Spencer ultimately a became a pariah among many 20th century social 
scientists (an ideologically tainted episode), he nevertheless inspired many subse- 
quent prime mover theories. For instance, White (1949, 1959) adopted the 
Spencerian notion that progress is closely associated with the ability to harness 
and control energy and developed what he called the Basic Law of Evolution. In 
White’s words, “culture advances as the amount of energy harnessed per capita 
per year increases, or as the efficiency or economy of the means of controlling 
energy is increased, or both”(1959, p. 56). Calling himself a cultural determinist, 
White claimed that cultural evolution is independent of our will: “We cannot con- 
trol its course, but we can learn to predict it” (1949, pp. 39, 330, 335). 
Another modern-day prime mover theory invokes population growth, although 
Spencer’s prior claim to that idea is generally not acknowledged. In the 196Os, 
Boserup (1965) proposed that population growth might have played a key role in 
the development of agriculture. Dumond (1965) focused on the relationship be- 
tween population growth and cultural evolution in general. But Cohen (1977), in a 
closely reasoned book-length treatment, adopted the most Spencerian posture. 
Calling population growth the cause of human progress, he asserted that popula- 
tion pressure is an inherent and continuous causal agency in cultural evolution: 
“Rather than progressing, we have developed our technology as a means of ap- 
proximating as closely as possible the old status quo in the face of ever-increasing 
numbers” (p. 285). 
Unfortunately, this explanation is too simple. All species have the potential for 
exponential growth and all species ultimately have limits. Humans are not 
unique in this regard. Not only do human societies practice various means of 
birth control to limit population growth, but various external factors, from wars 
to diseases, droughts, and famines may impose severe population constraints (as 
Malthus pointed out). More important, human populations do not grow in a 
vacuum: they grow only in favored locations and at propitious times, when the 
wherewithal exists in the natural environment for their sustenance and growth. 
And this in turn has depended on a favorable environments and specific cultural 
adaptations. 

232 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
Social conflict - internal or external - is also frequently touted as the engine of 
cultural evolution, and there is certainly good reason to believe that violent con- 
frontations between human groups have ancient roots (as noted earlier). But many 
theorists have claimed that warfare also accounts for the evolution of ‘civilization’, 
from hunter-gatherers to advanced nation-states. Darwin, Spencer, and a host of 
Social Darwinists stressed social conflict to varying degrees, but some theorists 
have gone much further. They attribute cultural evolution to our supposed aggres- 
sive and acquisitive instincts. Sir Arthur Keith, who wrote A New Theory of Human 
Evolution (1949), was probably the first and least-known theorist of this genre, and 
the writings of Lorenz (1966), Ardrey (1966, 1976), and Bigelow (1969), among 
others, caused something of a furor in the latter 1960s and 1970s. (Some, like 
Bigelow, stressed the complementary role of cooperation as well.) 
Richard Alexander (1979) took perhaps the strongest position on this issue: in 
his so-called balance of power scenario, Alexander saw the process of cultural evo- 
lution as driven by competition between human groups, which in turn is an ex- 
pression of inclusive fitness maximizing behavior. In other words, it is a form of 
reproductive competition by other means (a more militant version of Tiger and 
Fox). Although various economic hypotheses are neither necessary nor sufficient 
explanations for large-scale societies, Alexander claimed, warfare is both necessary 
and sufficient. (Paul Rubin, in Darwinian Politics [2002], seems to be closely aligned 
with Alexander. He calls competition between groups the main force in human 
evolution. However, his views are not systematically developed. Indeed, Rubin also 
recognizes the important role of cooperation and economic development, albeit 
with a bias toward free market capitalism.) 
The theory of cultural/political evolution proposed by Robert Carneiro (1970) is 
more subtle (it relies on a functional argument rather than a presumed instinctual 
urge), but it too is monolithic: “Force, and not enlightened self-interest, is the mecha- 
nism by which political evolution has led, step by step, from autonomous villages 
to states.” Although state-level political systems were invented independently sev- 
eral times, warfare was in every case the prime mover, Carneiro claimed. However, 
Carneiro’s prime mover had a prime mover of its own. He argued that the mecha- 
nism of warfare is the result of an underlying dynamic that he called environmen- 
tal circumscription - a context in which a population is ecologically constrained by 
mountains, deserts, limited resources, or even by other human populations. Once 
a growing, circumscribed population reaches its Malthusian limit, Carneiro rea- 
soned, warfare and conquest become the only alternative to starvation. So Carneirds 
theory is really a theory about a predictable reaction of human groups to popula- 
tion pressures. 
It is clear that organized warfare has been a major source of synergy in the evo- 
lution ofhuman societies. There are, for instance, the synergies of scale and thresh- 
old synergies associated with the relative number of combatants on each side. There 
are the human-tool synergies produced by the appalling number of technologies 
that humans have invented for killing one another. And there are the synergies 
that arise when there is a division (or combination) of labor - e.g., the 5000-person 
crew of a modern aircraft carrier. The evidence is overwhelming that warfare has 
I 

I 233 
6.4 The Evolution ofPolitical Systems 
played a significant role in shaping the course of recorded human history. For 
instance, a major study ofthis issue some years ago examined 21 instances of state 
development, ranging from 3000 BC to the 19th century AD and found that coer- 
cive force was a factor in every instance and that outright conquest was involved in 
about half of them (Corning, 2001b). 
But is warfare the necessary and sufficient cause of complex societies? Ifwarfare 
involves grave and possibly fatal risks to the combatants, we need to probe more 
deeply into why wars occur. In fact, there is a vast research literature on this sub- 
ject, spanning several academic disciplines, which supports at least one unam- 
biguous conclusion: Warfare is itself a complex phenomenon with many potential 
causes and many different consequences. Wars cannot simply be treated as the 
expression of an instinctive urge or an uncontrollable external pressure. There are 
too many anomalies and too many exceptions for any monolithic theory to be 
acceptable. Why is it that some quite warlike societies - like the Yanomamo of 
Venezuela or the Dani of New Guinea - did not evolve into nation states? Why did 
some societies achieve statehood and then subsequently collapse or even disap- 
pear? And why did the first pristine states appear during a very small slice of time 
in the broader epic of evolution, within a few thousand years of one another at 
most? Finally, there are the examples in which population pressures were relieved 
by increased trade or an intensification of subsistence technologies (Corning, 
2OOlb). Indeed, there is evidence that in many cases political evolution preceded 
and perhaps precipitated warfare between societies, rather than the other way around 
(see especially Hackenberg, 1962; Brumfiel, 1976; R. Cohen, 1978a, b, c; also the 
discussion and references in Corning, 1983, p. 371). 
Technology has also been a popular candidate for the role of prime mover in 
cultural evolution. And nobody would dispute the fact that technology has played a 
major role, with synergies that are very often quantifiable. For instance, a !Kung 
San hunter-gatherer living in the African Kalihari desert in the 1960s extracted 
9.6 calories of energy from the environment for every calorie expended, according 
to the classic study by Lee (1968). In contrast, an American of the 1960s returned 
210 calories for every calorie invested. Since Americans worked twice as many hours 
as their Kalihari counterparts, they were able to secure 46 times as many calories 
per person. 
Many other technological synergies have been documented by human ecologists 
(see especially Salisbury, 1973). A native Amazonian using a steel axe can fell about 
five times as many trees in a given amount oftime as could his ancestors using stone 
axes, and a chain saw adds literally hundreds ofmultiples to a lumberjacks bottom 
line. Similarly, a shotgun is at least two to three times more efficient at bagging game 
on the hoof than is a bow and arrow. A farmer of the Middle Ages, with a horse and 
wooden moldboard plow, could turn over about one acre a day. His modern-day 
counterparts, with specially bred draft horses and steel plows, can cover at least two 
acres, and a farmer with a tractor and modern farm machinery can plow 20 acres 
per day and sometimes much more (see Corning, 2003 for more examples). 
However, there are problems associated with elevating technology to the status 
of the prime mover in cultural evolution. One is that technology is not a force or a 

234 
G The Evolution ofPo/itics 
mechanism. It is not even confined to tools or machines. It is really an umbrella 
concept - a broad label that we use to identify the immense number of cultural 
techniques that we have devised for earning a living and reproducing ourselves. At 
bottom, the term refers to human activities involving the use of various inventions 
- behaviors, tools, objects, or even other organisms that have been appropriated, 
developed, or fabricated to serve human purposes. Some technologies are mainly 
a matter of deploying knowledge and skills. Thus, many agricultural practices - 
the use of dung as a fertilizer, crop rotation, interplanting, controlled watering 
regimes, and much more -are very important technologies. Likewise, many of our 
common plant and animal food products are the result of countless generations of 
selective breeding (genetic engineering) for various desired properties - size, tex- 
ture, color, nutritional content, disease resistance, and the like. Similarly, domesti- 
cated animals are, in essence, some of humankind’s oldest and most important 
technologies. 
Many other human technologies involve the more or less skillful manipulation 
of objects in the environment. We have already noted the role of fire, one of our 
earliest and still most vital technologies. The techniques required to gather, proc- 
ess, and cook various plant foods played an important role in our evolution. The 
use of pits, dead falls, cul de sacs, and other stratagems for capturing game were 
also very likely among the early hominid food-getting technologies. The diversion 
of water for irrigation purposes was a critically important step in the development 
oflarge-scale agriculture. So were dams, walls, fences, weirs, and many other early 
cultural innovations. In other words, technology is not really some external agency; 
it is a synergistic relationship involving human knowledge, human skills, and the 
manipulation of various external objects. 
A second key point about technology is that it almost always requires organized 
cooperative (cybernetic) activities by humans - what Karl Marx called relations of 
production. The Boeing Aircraft Corporation, for instance, as of 2001 had 42 ma- 
jor facilities, 200 000 employees, and some 10 000 suppliers - many of them major 
corporations in their own right - that are scattered throughout North America 
and, indeed, the world. A Boeing 747 is the product of a vast cooperative effort. A 
third point is that every technology is embedded in a specific environment. It is 
enmeshed, so to speak, in the historical context; it is not a separate, autonomous 
agency but is always part of a larger economic and cultural system. More impor- 
tant, both the natural environment and the specific historical/cultural/political 
venue exert an important causal influence; they are codeterminants (recall the Igorot 
example cited above). 
Technological innovations have the following things in common: (1) they arise 
from human needs and human purposes in a specific historical context; (2) they 
utilize but also modify past cultural and technological attainments; (3) they are 
interdependent parts of a larger synergistic system; (4) they involve highly pur- 
poseful, goal-oriented development processes, as well as many progressive im- 
provements over time; and (5) they are subject to a Neo-Lamarckian selection proc- 
ess; that is, the outcomes are ultimately epiphenomena - the combined result of 
many individual user choices among the available options. There is at least a tacit 
I 

I 235 
6.4 The Evolution of Political Systems 
benefit-cost calculation associated with each individual decision, although many 
other cultural influences may also contribute. Yet in the final analysis it is the 
synergies that determine the emergence and diffusion of a new technology; it is 
the payoffs that induce the positive selection of each new innovation, in accord- 
ance with the backwards logic we talked about earlier. The wellspring of innova- 
tion in human societies is organized intelligence, but it is the functional effects - 
the synergies -that shape the selection process (pro or con). 
The main problem with prime mover theories is that they don’t work. They may 
highlight important influences but they are manifestly inadequate - perhaps nec- 
essary but certainly not sufficient - to explain cultural evolution. This is especially 
apparent when you begin to ask historical questions. Why did a particular break- 
through happen when and where it did? And why not at some other time or place? 
Nor can prime mover theories account for the manifest influence of other impor- 
tant movers. But more important, societies do not change in some automatic way 
or follow a unilinear path. Often the path leads downhill; prime mover theories are 
at a loss to explain political devolution. 
6.4.3.2 
Accordingly, I believe the synergism hypothesis is also applicable to the ongoing 
process of cultural evolution in complex societies. There is nothing predestined 
about this process, any more than there is a deterministic directionality in biologi- 
cal evolution. Moreover, each succeeding generation in effect reevaluates the tech- 
nologies and sociopolitical institutions and practices that it inherits. A given tech- 
nologylpractice is sustained over time by a cultural analogue of what is known in 
population genetics as stabilizing selection, just as various functional improve- 
ments over time are products of directional selection within and across each new 
generation of users. By the same token, the many examples of an older technol- 
ogy/practice being supplanted could be likened to adverse selection in nature. In 
any case, it is always a synergistic process. 
One example, among many, illustrates this point. Jared Diamond in his landmark 
study, Guns, Germs and Steel (1997), takes up the forbidding challenge of account- 
ing for the rise of large complex civilizations in humankind over the past 13 000 
years or so - not simply the reasons why this trend occurred but also why it hap- 
pened where and when it did, and why it did not happen elsewhere or at some other 
time. A key aspect of Diamonds approach, one that directly contradicts some of 
the deepest metatheoretical assumptions of the social sciences, is that it is not pos- 
sible to explain such fundamentally historical phenomena in terms of some deter- 
ministic (law-like) mechanism. Context-dependent factors have played a crucial role 
in the process. Each major breakthrough in the evolution of complex human soci- 
eties, as well as each replication of the process in some other geographic venue, 
was the result of a site-specific nexus - a convergence of many ‘ultimate’ and ‘proxi- 
mate’ factors (terms Diamond borrows from evolutionary biology but uses in a 
different sense). Diamond does not use the term synergy. He refers instead to a 
‘package’ of contributing factors. But the meaning is the same; each instantiation 
involved a combination of necessary and sufficient elements that worked together. 
The Case for the Synergism Hypothesis 

236 G The Evolution ofpolitics 
In the agricultural revolution, the development of food production and the crea- 
tion of food surpluses was a key factor, Diamond argues, but this in turn depended 
on many other factors. One important precursor was the prior emergence of ana- 
tomically modern humans, including our language skills and our sophisticated 
cultural resources, perhaps 100 000-150 000 years ago. Another factor was the 
decline and mass extinction of many of the large megafauna on which evolving 
humans had come to depend, coupled with an increase in human population lev- 
els. This demand-supply imbalance created a growing pressure to find suitable 
supplements to the standard hunter-gatherer diet. The fortuitous co-location only 
in the Fertile Crescent of key ‘founder crops’, especially emmer wheat (which could 
be domesticated with a single gene mutation), together with legumes and animal 
husbandry (which allowed for a balanced diet), meant that this was the most likely 
location for a technological breakthrough that could provide food for a large, sed- 
entary, concentrated population. Equally vital, however, were such cultural inven- 
tions as fire, tools, food storage, draft animals, record keeping, and, not least, com- 
plex political systems. 
As Peter Richerson and Robert Boyd (1999) have pointed out, synergy is not 
enough to account for our recent cultural evolution. Large-scale societies also re- 
quire workarounds to compensate for the lack of the face-to-face social influences 
that facilitate cooperation and constrain antisocial behaviors in small groups (see 
especially Boehm, 1993,1997,1999; de Waal, 1996). In comparison with army ants 
or small hunter-gatherer societies, Richerson and Boyd argue, a large, complex 
human society is at best a ‘crude superorganism’. 
The workarounds that Richerson and Boyd refer to have been many. They in- 
clude such things as ruling councils, law codes, legislatures and representative 
government, electoral systems, an independent judiciary, a free press, bureaucra- 
cies, police forces, and much more. (Political scientists lump many of these to- 
gether into three broad functional categories: legislative, executive, and judicial.) 
These and other political/cybernetic practices and institutions have evolved over 
the past 11 000 years (or more) through a process of trial-and-success (to borrow a 
term from paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson). Moreover, as human socie- 
ties have grown in size and Complexity, many new political (cybernetic) challenges 
have arisen. Thus, political evolution has closely tracked the larger process of societal 
evolution. 
The evidence on behalf of this theory was developed and presented in consider- 
able detail in Corning (1983), especially in chapter six. Updates can be found in 
Corning (1987, 1996a, 2002b) and in Corning and Hines (1988). Here I provide 
just a few data points. One of several propositions that were derived from this 
theory was the prediction that there is always a close relationship between popula- 
tion size, sociocultural complexity, and political complexity, and many studies over 
the years have confirmed these relationships. One confirming example is an analysis 
done by Carneiro (1967). Carneiro first developed a list of 354 societal traits (in- 
cluding political traits), ranging from craft specialization to markets, governing 
councils, and so on. This list was then winnowed to the 205 traits that he judged as 
best able to represent a society’s organizational complexity. Carneiro then assem- 
I 

I 237 
6 4  The Evolution of Political Systems 
bled a carefully screened list of 100 societies (using various criteria), from which 
he extracted a subset of 46 that consisted of a single community, Carneiro found 
that the number of societal traits in these societies approximated the square root of 
the size of the population. 
Elsewhere, Carneiro (1970) produced a more pointed analysis involving all 100 
of his selected societies, in which he attempted to correlate each of the categories 
in his list of 354 societal traits with 33 selected traits that he judged to be related to 
the degree of political organization. These traits ranged from the presence of a 
permanent headman (81 of the 100 societies had one) to the presence of a profes- 
sional civil service (only 4 had one). The results are summarized in Table 6.1. Each 
cell in the table shows the rank-order correlation coefficient for the two categories 
that intersect at that cell. The categories all correlate extraordinarily well (p < .001). 
To test whether similar correlations can also be found in contemporary societies, 
I undertook a study using demographic and economic data from the Inter-University 
Consortium for Political and Social Research for 145 societies covering the year 1967 
(Corning, 1983, pp. 358-359). Specifically, I examined the relationships between (1) 
population size, (2) GNP, (3) GNP/capita, (4) 
total land area, (5) urbanization, (6) 
government expenditures, (7) military expenditures, and (8) the number of govern- 
ment employees (Table 6.2). The results were less uniform (some correlations were 
not statistically significant), but the most important categories (theoretically) were 
highly correlated, especially the number of government employees in relation to 
population size, GNP, and land area, as well as government expenditures and GNP. 
To be sure, there may be some 'play' in the relationship between the political 
system and the economy. This is illustrated with data from the Ethnographic Atlas 
(Murdock, 1967) that was used (though recognizing the imperfect categories de- 
vised by anthropologists) to compare the levels of economic and political develop- 
Warfare 
Law and Judicial process 
,804 
Political Organization 
275 
.834 
303 
,826 
Social Organization 
,804 
and Stratification 
Economics 
,813 
.791 
315 
,751 
Subsistence 
.73 
.707 
.737 
.787 
,764 
.713 
.735 
,708 
.648" 
.721 
.673 

238 G The Evolution ofPolitics 
Table 6.2 
size (145 countries) (from Corning, 1983). 
Pairwise correlations between some sociopolitical categories and central government 
I 
Number of Government Employees 
Urba 
Land Area 
+: 
Cells with asterisks are not statistically significant. 
LEVEL OF 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
INDUSTRIAL 
LEVEL OF 
POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT 
AGRARIAN 
PASTORAL 
HORTICULTURAL 
HUNTE WGATH ER ER 
COMPLEX STATE 
STATE 
CHIEFDOM 
TRIBE 
BAND 
Figure 6.4 
The 'play' in political evolution - an illustration 

I 239 
6.4 The Evolution of Political Systems 
ment in various societies. As Figure 6.4 indicates, there are limits to the amount of 
‘play’ that is possible. No hunter-gatherer society has ever achieved statehood, nor 
has any pastoral society been able to support a complex nation-state. Indeed, 90% 
of the 147 hunter-gatherer societies listed in the Ethnographic Atlas were nomadic 
bands, whereas only 4% of the 377 horticultural societies were nomadic. 
In a major review of 150 cross-cultural studies, Naroll (1970) concluded that the 
following findings are historically valid in broad outline: (1) a strong allometric 
trend between population growth and occupational specialization (except for a spurt 
since the Industrial Revolution); (2) a corollary trend toward greater accumulation 
and dissemination of information; (3) a similar trend in the evolution of more 
diverse and complex organizational types; (4) 
and a clear-cut historical trend to- 
ward growth in political system complexity. In other words, ‘progressive’ evolution 
of political processes has been an integral part of the larger systemic process by 
which societies, cultures, and economies have evolved. Carneiro (1973, p. 108) lik- 
ened the process to the workings of a train of gear: 
A sociocultural system may be likened to a train of gears in which each gear 
represents a different sphere of culture. In the operation of this system the 
gears are generally in mesh. The gears differ, however. Some are larger 
than others, some have finer teeth, some turn faster, etc. Moreover, some 
are drive gears and engender motion to the others, while other gears are 
passive and do not impart motion of their own, but merely transmit the 
motion they receive. 
The gears also vary in the closeness with which they engage one another. If 
the mesh between any two were perfect and continuous, then the movement 
of one would automatically produce a corresponding and equivalent move- 
ment in the other. But in sociocultural systems, the gears never engage per- 
fectly or continuously. Now and then a gear slips out of mesh and may move 
forward half a turn without causing perceptible motion in the others. 
Yet by and large the gears move together. A certain position of one gear is 
not compatible with just any position of some other gear. Thus, leaving our 
metaphor aside and looking at sociocultural systems directly, we cannot 
imagine, for example, divine kingship fitting with cave dwelling, trial by 
jury with percussion flaking, parliamentary procedure with human sacri- 
fice, or cross-cousin marriage with nuclear reactors. When culture advances 
in one sphere, other spheres do no long remain unaffected. They tend to 
advance as a single coordinated system. 
The evidence briefly described here and reviewed in greater detail in Corning 
(1983) supports the contention that cybernetic social processes - political proc- 
esses - have been an integral and necessary element in the ongoing evolution of 
human superorganisms (see also Corning, 2002a). Politics is not simply an artifact 
of competing self-interests but a vitally important functional aspect of the ongoing 
collective survival enterprise that has sustained us and our ancestors literally for 
millions of years. 

240 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
6.5 
The Future of Politics 
I 
Cybernetic social processes are ubiquitous in nature - from the self-organized for- 
aging behavior of army ants to the authoritarian harangues of mole rat queens, the 
ad hoc hunting parties of baboons and woodland chimpanzees, and the highly 
orchestrated rice terrace system of the Igorot. Although politics as we have defined 
it here often entails the pursuit of narrow self-interests (in accordance with the 
realist model), it also takes place within a larger context - the purposes and inter- 
ests of the collective survival enterprise as an interdependent system (in accord- 
ance with the idealist model). Both of these classical renderings of politics have 
merit; they are not, in fact, mutually exclusive. Indeed, there is an inherent inter- 
play, and very often a tension, between them. 
The reality of the human condition is that the ‘superorganism’ is the key to our 
survival and reproduction, as it has been for millions ofyears. However, this vision 
of the ‘public interest’ does not negate or ignore our individual self-interests. Rather, 
it represents an aggregation of those interests into an immensely complex system 
of synergies based primarily on mutualism and reciprocity. The superorganism 
serves our self-interests in a multiplicity of ways; it provides both collective goods 
and corporate goods. And the public interest consists of preserving and enhancing 
these benefits. 
Accordingly, the state has evolved as an instrumentality for self-government and 
the pursuit of the public interest - although its overarching purpose is all too often 
subverted. Plato and Aristotle apprehended the overarching purpose of the collec- 
tive survival enterprise (and its inherent vulnerability) in their conception of the 
polis, and Aristotle prescribed a ‘mixed government under law as our best hope 
for ensuring that the public interest would be faithfully served. Plato and Aristotle 
also recognized that a fair-minded form of ‘justice’ is an essential element of the 
public interest; this is the only way to ensure the long-term stability and ‘legiti- 
macy’ (the willing consent) of the members of the community. Over the past 2000 
years we have added very little to this vision that is fundamentally new, although 
we have made many important improvements in the machinery of self govern- 
ment. 
What is sobering, even dismaying, is that we seem forever to be forgetting and 
then relearning this ancient lesson. Witness the former British Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher, who famously claimed that “there is no such thing as society”. 
The response to her contemptuous remark is that a society exists when people 
believe it does and act accordingly (or vice versa). Plato and Aristotle, and many 
others since, have stressed that the political order can be what we make of it. To a 
significant degree, our actions create self-fulfilling prophesies. If honesty, trust, 
mutual respect, courtesy, and a spirit of compromise are the prevailing norms, and 
deviants are ostracized and penalized, a society and its institutions likely reflect 
these values, by and large. Conversely, if the cultural climate encourages decep- 
tion, vicious partisanship, the demonizing of opponents, and an uncompromising 
no-holds-barred attitude toward opposing interests, the social and political envi- 

6.6 References 
ronment more closely fit the paradigms of Machiavelli and Hobbes. In the final 
analysis, our politics is a matter of choice, not a mindless reflection of human 
nature. Thus, if we choose to remain captives of destructive racial, religious, cul- 
tural, or economic class divisions, shame on us. 
In any case, the bottom-line conclusion of Plat0 and Aristotle remains valid to- 
day. For better or worse, our evolutionary future is dependent on the goods and 
services that are provided (or not) by the collective survival enterprise, along with 
the decisions and actions that we undertake collectively (or not) in the public inter- 
est. For this reason, the continuing quest for social justice and the good life re- 
mains the central challenge for every organized society, as well as for each one of 
us. It is a goal worth striving for, because our own survival, and certainly that of 
our descendants, may very well depend upon it. Nothing less than our evolution- 
ary future is at stake. To paraphrase the American founding father, Benjamin 
Franklin, in the long run either we will survive together or go extinct separately. 
6.6 
References 
ALEXANDER, 
R. D. (1974) The evolution of social behavior. Annual Review of 
ALEXANDER, 
R. D. (1979) Darwinism and Human AJairs. Seattle: University of 
ALEXANDER, 
R. D. (1987) The Biology ofMoral Systems. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. 
ANDERSON, 
C. M. (1986) Predation and primate evolution. Primates 27, 15-39. 
ARDREY, R. (1966) The Territorial Imperative. New York: Atheneum. 
ARDREY, R. (1976) The Hunting Hypothesis. New York: Atheneum. 
ARISTOTLE (1946) The Politics (BARKER, E., Translator). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
ARISTOTLE (1961) The Metaphysics (TREDENNICK, 
H., Translator). Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
ARNHART, L. (1998) Darwinian Natural Right: The Biological Ethics of Human 
Nature. Albany, NY: Suny Press. 
ASFAW, B., et al. (1999) Australopithecus garhi: a new species of early hominid 
from Ethiopia. Science 284,629-635. 
AXELROD, 
R., HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1981) The evolution of cooperation. Science 211, 
1390. 
BATESON, P. P. G. (1988) The active role of behavior in evolution. In: Evolutionary 
Processes and Metaphors (Eds. M. W. Ho, S. W. Fox). New York: John Wiley EL 
Sons, pp. 191-207. 
BELLOMO, R. (1994) Methods of determining early hominid behavioral activities 
associated with the controlled use of fire at FxJj 20 Main, Koobi Fora, Kenya. 
Journal of Human Evolution 27, 173-195. 
Boston: Little, Brown. 
Ecology and Systematics 5, 325-83. 
Washington Press. 
BIGELOW, R. (1969) The Dawn Warriors: Man’s Evolution Towards Peace. 

242 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
BOEHM, C. (1993) Egalitarian behavior and reverse dominance hierarchy. 
Current Anthropology 34, 227-254. 
BOEHM, C. (1996) Emergency decisions, cultural-selection mechanics, and group 
selection. Current Anthropology 37, 763-793. 
BOEHM, C. (1999) Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior. 
Cambridge, MA Harvard University Press. 
BOESCH, C.,TOMASELLO, 
M. (1998) Chimpanzee and human cultures. Current 
Anthropology 39, 591-614. 
BONNER, J. T. (1988) The Evolution ofcomplexity by Means ofNatural Selection. 
Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press. 
BOSERUP, E. (1965) The Conditions ofAgncultural Growth: The Economies of 
Agrarian Change Under Population Pressure. Chicago: Aldine Press. 
BOYD, R., RICHERSON, P. J. (1989) The evolution of indirect reciprocity. 
Social Networks 11, 213-236. 
BOYD, R., RICHERSON, P. J. (1992) Punishment allows the evolution of coopera- 
tion (or anything else) in sizable groups. Ethology and Sociobiology 13, 171-195. 
BOYD, R., RICHFRSON, P. J. (2002) Group beneficial norms can spread rapidly in 
a structured population. Ioumal of Theoretical Biology 210, 287-296. 
BRAIN, C. K. (1981) The Hunters or the Hunted? Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press. 
BRAIN, C. K. (1985) Interpreting early hominid death assemblies: the use of 
taphonomy since 1925. In: Hominid Evolution: Past, Present and Future. 
Proceedings of the Taung Diamondlubilee International Symposium 
(Ed. P. V. TOBIAS). 
New York: Alan R. Liss, pp. 41-46. 
‘population pressure’ hypothesis. In: The Early Mesoamerican Village 
(Ed. K. V. FLANNERY). 
New York: Academic Press, pp. 234-248. 
3rd ed. New York: Aldine Press. 
I 
BRUMFIEL, E. (1976) Regional growth in the eastern valley of Mexico: a test of the 
CAMPBELL, 
B. (1985) Human Evolution: An Introduction to Man’s Adaptations, 
CANN, 
R. L., et al. (1987) Mitochondria1 DNA and human evolution. Nature 325, 
CARNEIRO, 
R. L. (Ed.) (1967) The Evolution of Society. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
CARNEIRO, 
R. L. (1970) Scale analysis, evolutionary sequences and the rating of 
cultures. In: A Handbook ofMethod in Cultural Anthropology (NAROLL, R., 
COHEN, 
R. N., Eds.). Garden City, NY Natural History Press, pp. 834-871. 
CARNEIRO, 
R. L. (1973) The four faces of evolution. In: Handbook ofSocial and 
Cultural Anthropology (Ed. J. H. HONIGMANN). 
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally, 
31-36. 
pp. 89-110. 
CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
L., CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
F. (1995) The Great Human Diasporas: 
The History of Diversity and Evolution (THORNE, 
S., Translator). Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley. 
CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
L., et al. (1988) Reconstruction of human evolution: bringing 
together genetic, archaeological, and linguistic data. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences U S A  85,6002-6006. 

G.G References I 243 
CAVALLI-SFORZA, 
L., MENOZZI, P., PIAZZA, 
A. (1994) The History and Geography of 
CHENEY, 
D. L., WRANGHAM, 
R. W. (1987) Predation. In: Primate Societies 
Human Genes. Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press. 
(Eds. B. B. SMUTS et al.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 
pp. 227-239. 
CLU-ITON-BROCK, 
T. H. (2002) Breeding together: kin selection and mutualism in 
CLUTTON-BROCK, 
T. H., PARKER, G. A. (1995) Punishment in animal societies. 
CLUTTON-BROCK, 
T. H., et al. (2001) Contributions to cooperative rearing in 
COHEN, M. N. (1977) The Food Crisis in Prehistory: Overpopulation and the Origins 
COHEN, R. N. (1978a) Introduction. In: Origins of the State: The Anthropology of 
cooperative vertebrates. Science 296, 69-72. 
Nature 373, 209-216. 
meerkats. Animal Behaviour 61, 705-710. 
ofAgriculture. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Political Evolution (Eds. R. N .  COHEN, 
E. R. SERVICE). Philadelphia, PA: 
I.S.H.I., pp. 1-20. 
COHEN, R. N. (1978b) State foundations: a controlled comparison. In: Origins 
ofthe State: The Anthropology ofPolitical Evolution (Eds. R. N. COHEN, 
E. R. SERVICE). 
Philadelphia, PA: I.S.H.I., pp. 141-160. 
COHEN, R. N. (1978~) State origins: a reappraisal. In: The Early State 
(Eds. H. J. M. CLAESSEN, 
P. S. SKALN~K). 
The Hague: Mouton, pp. 31-75. 
COMFORT, 
L. K. (1994a) Self-organization in complex systems. Journal o f h b l i c  
Administration Research and Theory 4, 393-410. 
COMFORT, 
L. K. (199413) Risk and resilience: inter-organizational learning 
following the Northridge earthquake of 17 January 1994. Journal of 
Contingencies and Crisis Management 2, 157-170. 
and action. In: Handbook of Administrative Communication (Eds. J. L. G A R N E ~ ,  
A. KOUZMIN). New York Marcel Dekker, pp. 395-411. 
CONRADT, 
L., ROPER T. J. (2003) Group decision-making in animals. Nature 421, 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1971) The biological bases ofbehavior and some implications 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1974) Politics and the evolutionary process. In: Evolutionary 
COMFORT, 
L. K. (1998) Shared risk a dynamic model of organizational learning 
155-158. 
for political science. World Politics 23, 321-70. 
Biology, Vol. VIII (Eds. T. DOBZHANSKY 
et al.). New York: Plenum, 
CORNING, P. A. (1983) The Synergism Hypothesis: A Theory of Progressive 
Evolution. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1987) Evolution and political control: a synopsis of a general 
theory of politics. In: Evolutionary Theory in Social Science (Eds. M. SCHMID, 
F. M. WuKEmTs). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel, pp. 127-170. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1995) Synergy and self-organization in the evolution of complex 
systems. Systems Research 12, 89-121. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1996a) Synergy, cybernetics and the evolution of politics. 
International Political Science Review 17, 91-119. 
pp. 253-294. 

244 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
CORNING, 
P. A. (199Gb) The co-operative gene: on the role of synergy in 
evolution. Evolutionary Theory 11, 183-207. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1997) Holistic Darwinism: ‘synergistic selection’ and the 
evolutionary process. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems 20, 363-400. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (1998) The synergism hypothesis. Journal of Social Evolutionary 
Systems 21, 133-172. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (2000) Biological adaptation in human societies: a ‘basic needs’ 
approach. Journal of Bioeconomics 2,4146. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (2001a) Control information: the missing element in Norbert 
Wiener’s cybernetic paradigm? Kybernetes 30, 1272-1288. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (2001b) Synergy goes to war: an evolutionary theory of collective 
violence. Annual meeting, Association for Politics and the Life Sciences, 
Charleston, SC, October 18-21, 2001. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (2002a) Synergy and the evolution of ‘superorganisms’, past, 
present, and future. Annual meeting, Association for Politics and Life 
Sciences, Montreal, Canada, August 11-14, 2002. 
hypothesis’ and a cybernetic theory of political systems. Systems Research and 
Behavioral Science 19, 3-26 
(the biological basis of social justice). Annual meeting, Association for 
Politics and the Life Sciences, Montreal, Canada, August 11-14, 2002. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (2003) Nature’s Magic: Synergy in Evolution and the Fate of 
Humankind. Cambridge, U K  Cambridge University Press. 
CORNING, 
P. A. (in press) Holistic Darwinism: Synergy, Cybernetics and the 
Bioeconomics of Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
CORNING, 
P. A., HINES, 
S. M., JR. (1988) Political development and political 
evolution. Politics and the Life Sciences 6, 140-172. 
COWLISHAW, 
G. (1994) Vulnerability to predation in baboon populations. 
Behaviour 131,293-304. 
DAHL, R. A. (1970) Modern Political Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
DARWIN, 
C. R. (1874 [1871]) The Descent ofMan, and Selection in Relation to Sex. 
London: John Murray. 
DARWIN, 
C. R. (1965 [1873]) The Expression ofthe Emotions in Man and Animals. 
London: John Murray. 
DAWKINS, R. (1989 [1976]) The SeCfish Gene, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
DEUTSCH, K. W. (1966 [1963]) The Nerves ofGovernment: Models of Political 
Communication and Control. New York Free Press. 
DE WAAL, 
F. B. M. (1982) Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. 
New York: Harper & Row. 
D E  WAAL, 
F. B. M. (1989) Peacemaking Among Primates. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
DE WAAL, 
F. B. M. (1996) Good Natured: The Origins ofRight and Wrong in 
Humans and Other Animals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
I 
CORNING, P. A. (2002b) ‘Devolution’ as an opportunity to test the ‘synergism 
CORNING, P. A. (2002~) 
‘Fair shares’: beyond capitalism and socialism 

G.G References I245 
DE WAAL, F. B. M. (1997) Bonobo: The Forgotten Ape. Berkeley: University of 
DE WAAL, F. B. M. (1999) Cultural primatology comes of age. Nature 399,635-636. 
DE WAAL, F. B. M. (2001) The Ape and the Sushi Master: Cultural ReJlections by a 
DIAMOND, 
J. M. (1997) Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates ofHuman Societies. 
DRUCKEQ C. B. (1978) The price ofprogress in the Philippines. Sierra 63, 22-26. 
DUGATKIN, 
L. A. (1999) Cheating Monkeys and Citizen Bees. New York: The Free 
DUMOND, D. E. (1965) Population growth and cultural change. Southwestern 
DUNBAQ R. I. M. (1988) Primate Social Systems. London: Croom Helm. 
EASTON, D. (1965) A Systems Analysis ofPolitica1 Lfe. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
EHRLICH, P. R. (2000) Human Natures: Genes, Cultures, and the Human Prospect. 
Washington, DC: Island PresslSheanvater Books. 
FEHR, E., GACHTER, S. (2000a) Cooperation and punishment in public goods 
experiments. American Economic Review 90, 980-994. 
FEHQ E., GACHTER, 
S. (2000b) Fairness and retaliation: the economics of 
reciprocity. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 159-181. 
FEHR, E., GACHTER, 
S. (2002) Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415, 
137-140. 
FEHR, E., SCHMIDT, K. M. (1999) A theory of fairness, competition, and 
co-operation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 817-868. 
FEHR, E., et al. (2002) Strong reciprocity, human cooperation, and the 
enforcement of social norms. Human Evolution 13, 1-25. 
FOLEY, R. (1995) Humans Before Humanity: An Evolutionary Perspective. 
Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
FRANFOIS, 
C. (1999) Systemics and cybernetics in a historical perspective. 
Systems Research and Behavioral Science 16, 203-219. 
FRANK, S. A. (1995) Mutual policing and repression of competition in the 
evolution of cooperative groups. Nature 377, 520-522. 
FRANK, S. A. (1996) Policing and group cohesion when resources vary. 
Animal Behaviour 52,1163-1169. 
GINTIS, H. (2000a) Game Theory Evolving: A Problem-Centered Introduction to 
Modeling Strategic Behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
GINTIS, 
H. (2000b) Strong reciprocity and human sociality. Journal of Theoretical 
Biology 206, 169-179. 
GLUCKMAN, 
M. (1940) The kingdom ofthe Zulu of South Africa. In: Afican 
Political Systems (Eds. M. FORTES, E. E. EVANS-PRITCHARD). 
London: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 25-55. 
GLUCKMAN, 
M. (1969) The rise of the Zulu empire. ScientiJc American 202 (4), 
GOODIN, 
R. E., KLINGEMANN, H. D. (Eds.) (1996) A New Handbook ofPolitical 
California Press. 
Primatologist. New York: Basic Books. 
New York: Norton. 
Press. 
Journal ofAnthropology 21, 302-324. 
157-168. 
Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

246 
G The Evolution ofpolitics 
GRADY, M. F., MCGUIRE, 
M. T. (1999) The nature of constitutions. Journal of 
GRANT, 
B. R., GRANT, 
P. R. (1989) Natural selection in a population of Darwin’s 
GRANT, 
P. R. (1986) Ecology and Evolution of Darwin’s Finches. Princeton, NJ: 
GRANT, 
P. R., GRANT, 
B. R. (2002) Adaptive radiation of Darwin’s finches. 
GREENSTEIN, 
F., POLSBY, 
N. (Eds.) (1975) Handbook of Political Science (8 Vols.). 
HACKENBERG, 
R. A. (1962) Economic alternatives in arid lands: a case study of 
HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1964a) The genetical evolution of social behavior, I. 
HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1964b) The genetical evolution of social behavior, 11. 
HAMMER, 
M. F. (1995) A recent common ancestry for human Y chromosomes. 
HARCOURT, 
A. H., DE WML, F. B. M. (Eds.) (1992) Coalitions and Alliances in 
HARDING, 
R. S. 0. (1973) Predation by a troop of olive baboons (Papio anubis). 
HARDING, 
R. S. O., STRUM, S. C. (1976) Predatory baboons of Kepopey. 
HENRICH, 
J., BOYD, R. (2001) Why people punish defectors: weak conformist 
I 
Bioeconomics 1, 227-240. 
finches. American Naturalist 133, 377-393. 
Princeton University Press. 
American Scientist 90 (2), 130-139. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
the Pima and Papago indians. Ethnology 1, 186-195. 
journal offieoretical Biology 7, 1-16. 
Journal ofTheoretical Biology 7, 17-52. 
Nature 378, 376-378. 
Humans and Other Animals. Oxford Oxford University Press. 
Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 10, 49-56. 
Natural History 85, 46-53. 
transmission can stabilize costly enforcement of norms in cooperative 
dilemmas. Journal of Theoretical Biology 208, 79-89. 
in 15 small-scale societies. American Economic Review 91, 73-78. 
HENRICH, 
J., et al. (2001) In search of Homo economicus: behavioral experiments 
HICKS, R. D. (1910) Stoic and Epicurean. New York: Scribner. 
HOBBES, 
T. (1962 [1651]) Leviathan: O n  the Matter, Forme and Power ofa 
Commonwealth Ecclesiastical and Civil. New York: Collier. 
HOLLDOBLER, 
B., WILSON, 
E. 0. (1990) The Ants. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
HOLLDOBLER, 
B., WILSON, 
E. 0. (1994) journey to the Ants. Cambridge, MA: 
Belknap Press. 
ISACK, H. A., REYER, H. U. (1989) Honeyguides and honey gatherers: interspecific 
communication in a symbiotic relationship. Science 243, 1343-1 346. 
ISBELL, L. A. (1995) Predation on primates: ecological patterns and evolutionary 
consequences. Evolutionary Anthropology 3, 61-71. 
IWAMOTO, T., et al. (1996) Anti-predator behavior of Gelada baboons. Primates 37, 
J I N ,  L., et al. (1999) Distribution ofhaplotypes from a chromosome 21 region 
distinguishes multiple prehistoric human migrations. Proceedings ofthe 
National Academy of the Sciences U S A  96, 3796. 
389-397. 

G.G References I247 
JOHNSON, A. W., EARLE, T. (1987) The Evolution of Human Societies: From Foraging 
Group to Agrarian State. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
JOHNSON, G. R. (1992) The evolutionary origins of government and politics. In: 
Human Nature and Politics (Eds. J. Losco, A. SOMIT). 
Bronx, NY JAI Press, 
pp. 243-305. 
KEITH, A. (1949) A New Theory ofHuman Evolution. Gloucester, MA: Peter Smith. 
KETLEWELL, H. B. D. (1955) Selection experiments on industrial melanism in 
the Lepidoptera. Heredity 9, 323-342. 
KEITLEWELL, H. B. D. (1973) The Evolution ofMelanism: The Study ofa Recurring 
Necessity. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
KINGDON, J. (1993) SelfMade Man: Human Evolutionfi-om Eden to Extinction? 
New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
KLEIN, R. G. (1999) The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins, 
2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
KLEIN, R. G. (2000) Archeology and the evolution of human behavior. 
Evolutionary Anthropology 9, 17-36. 
KNAUFT, B. M. (1991) Violence and sociality in human evolution. Current 
Anthropology 32, 391409. 
KOKTLANDT, A. (1992) On chimpanzee dormitories and early hominid home 
sites. Current Anthropology 33, 399400. 
KUMMER, H. (1968) Social Organization of Hamadryas Baboons: A Field Study. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
KUMMER, H. (1971) Primate Societies: Group Techniques ofkological Adaptation. 
Chicago: Aldine-Atherton. 
LEE, P. C. (1994) The new evolutionary paradigm. In: Behaviour and Evolution 
(Eds. P. SLATER, T. HALLIDAY). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
LEE, R. B. (1968) What hunters do for a living, or, how to make out on scarce 
resource. In: Man the Hunter (Eds. R. B. LEE, I. DEVOKE). 
Chicago: Aldine, 
pp. 266-300. 
pp, 30-48. 
LEE-THORP, 
J., THACKERAY, 
J. F., VAN DER MEKWE, N. (2000) The hunters and the 
LEWIN, R. (1993) Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction, 3rd ed. 
LOCKE, J. L. (1970 [1690]) Two Treatises $Government (Ed. P. LASLETT). 
LOPEZ, B. (1978) OfWolves and Men. New York: Scribner. 
LOKENZ, K. (1966) O n  Aggression (WILSON, 
M. K., Translator). New York: 
MASTERS, R. D. (1975) Politics as a biological phenomenon. Social Science 
MASTERS, R. D. (1983) The biological nature ofthe state. World Politics 35,161-193. 
MASTERS, R. D. (1989) The Nature ofPolitics. New Haven, CT Yale University Press. 
MAYNARD SMITH, J. (1982a) Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge: 
hunted revisited. TheJournal ofHuman Evolution 39, 565-576. 
Boston: Blackwell Scientific. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Harcourt, Brace, World. 
Information 14, 7-63. 
Cambridge University Press. 

248 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, J. (1982b) The evolution of social behavior: a classification of 
I 
models. In: Current Problems in Sociobiology (Ed. KING’S COLLEGE 
SOCIO- 
BIOLOGY GROUP). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 2844. 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, J. (1984) Game theory and the evolution of behaviout 
The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7, 95-125. 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, J., SZATHMARY, 
E. (1995) The Major Transitions in Evolution. 
New York: Freeman Spektrum. 
MAYR, E. (1960) The emergence of evolutionary novelties. In: Evolution after 
Darwin, Vol. I. (Ed. S. TAX). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
pp. 349-380. 
MAYR, E. (1976) Evolution and the Diversity of L@: Selected Essays. Cambridge, 
MESTERTON-GIBBONS, 
M., DUGATKIN, 
L. A. (1992) Cooperation among unrelated 
MICHOD, R. E. (1996) Cooperation and conflict in the evolution of individuality. 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
individuals: evolutionary factors. Quarterly Review of Biology 67, 267-281. 
11. Conflict mediation. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London ( B )  263, 
813-822. 
MICHOD, R. E. (1999) Darwinian Dynamics: Evolutionary Transitions in Fitness and 
MILLER, J. G. (1995 [1978]) Living Systems. Niwot, CO: University Press of 
MONTAGU, 
M. F. A. (1949) The origin and nature of social life and the biological 
MONTAGU, 
M. F. A. (1952) Darwin, Competition and Cooperation. New York: 
MONTAGU, M. F. A. (1955) Direction of Human Development: Biological and Social 
MORRIS, D. R. (1965) The Washing of the Spears. New York: Simon Sr Schuster. 
MUMME, R. L., et al. (1989) Helping behaviour reproductive value, and the future 
component of indirect fitness. Animal Behaviour 38, 331-343. 
MURDOCK, 
G. P. (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. Pittsburgh, PA: University of 
Pittsburgh Press. 
NAROLL, R. (1970) What we have learned from cross-cultural surveys? 
American Anthropology 72, 1227-1288. 
NEI, M. (1995) Genetic support for the out-of-Africa theory ofhuman evolution. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 92, 6720-6722. 
NOWAK, M., SIGMUND, 
K. (1993) A strategy ofwin-stay, lose shift that 
outperforms tit-for-tat in the prisoner’s dilemma game. Nature 364, 56-58. 
NOWAK, M. A., SIGMUND, 
K. (1998a) Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image 
scoring. Nature 394, 573-578. 
NOWAK, M. A., SIGMUND, 
K. (1998b) The dynamics of indirect reciprocity. 
Journal of Theoretical Biology 194, 561-574. 
ORWELL, 
G. (1949) 1984. New York Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
PZBO, S. (1995) The Y chromosome and the origin of all of us (men). Science 
Individuality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Colorado. 
basis of cooperation. Journal of Social Psychology 29, 267-283. 
Henry Schuman. 
Basis. New York: Harper 8~ Row. 
268,1141-1142. 

6.6 References I 249 
PFEIFFER, J. E. (1977) The Emergence of Society: A Pre-history of the Establishment. 
PLATO 
(1946) The Republic (JOWETT, B., Translator). Cleveland, OH: World 
PLOTKIN, 
H. C. (Ed.) (1988) The Role of Behavior in Evolution. Cambridge, MA: 
POWERS, 
W. T. (1973a) Behavior: The Control of Perception. Chicago: Aldine Press. 
POWERS, W. T. (1973b) Feedback: beyond behaviorism. Science 179 351-356. 
PRICE, 
M. E., COSMIDES, 
L., TOOBY, 
J. (2002) Punitive sentiments as an anti-free 
rider psychological device. Evolution and Human Behavior 23, 203-23 1. 
PUSEY, A. E. (2001) Of genes and apes: chimpanzee social organization and 
reproduction. In: Tree of Origin: What Primate Behavior Can Tell Us about 
Human Social Evolution (Ed. F. B. M. DE WAAL). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, pp. 11-37. 
American Economic Review 83,1281-1302. 
New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Publishing Co. 
MIT Press. 
RABIN, M. (1993) Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. 
RAND, A. (1943) The Fountainhead. New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company. 
RAND, A. (1962) The Objectivist Newsletter, Vol. 1. New York: Times-Mirror. 
RELETHFORD, 
J. H. (1995) Genetics and modern human origins. Evolutionary 
RICHERSON, P. J., BOYD, R. (1999) Complex societies: the evolutionary origins of 
ROUSSEAU, J. J. (1915 [1754]) Discours sur l'inkgalitk. In: Vaughan's Political Writings 
ROUSSEAU, 
J. J. (1984 [1762]) Ofthe Social Contract (SHEROVER, 
C. M., Translator). 
RUBIN, P. H. (2002) Darwinian Politics: The Evolutionary Origins ofFreedorn. 
SABINE, 
G. H. (1961) A History ofpolitical Theory, 3rd ed. New York: 
SALISBURY, 
R. F. (1973) Economic anthropology. Annual Review of Anthropology 2, 
SCHELL, 
J. (2003) No more unto the breach, part I: why war is futile. 
SCHUBERT, 
G. (1981) The sociobiology of political behaviour. In: Human 
Anthropology 4, 53-63. 
a crude superorganism. Human Nature 10,253-289. 
ofJeanJacques Rousseau, 2 Vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
New York Harper and Row. 
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 
Holt, Rinehart &Winston. 
85-94. 
Harper's Magazine 306 (1834), 33-46 
Sociobiology and Politics (Ed. E. WHITE). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 
SEMINO, O., et al. (2000) The genetic legacy of Homo sapiens sapiens in extant 
SETHI, R., SOMANATHAN, 
E. (2001) Preference evolution and reciprocity. 
SHAPIRO, J. A. (1988) Bacteria as multicehdar organisms. Scientllfic American 
SHERMAN, 
P. W., et al. (Eds.) (1991) The Biology of the Naked Mole-Rat. Princeton, 
pp. 193-238. 
Europeans: a Y chromosome perspective. Science, 290,1155. 
Journal of Economic Theory 97,273-297. 
258 (6), 82-89. 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 

250 
G The Evolution ofPo/itics 
SHERMAN, 
P. W., et al. (1992) Naked mole rats. Scientijc American 267 (2), 72-78. 
SHIPMAN, P., WALKER, 
A. (1989) The costs of becoming a predator. 
SIMPSON, G. G. (1967) The Meaning ofEuolution. Rev. ed. New Haven, CT 
SKINNER, 
B. F. (1981) Selection by consequences. Science 213, 501-504. 
SMITH, A. (1964 [1776]) The Wealth ofNations, 2 Vols. London: J. M. Dent. 
SOBER, E., WILSON, 
D. S. (1998) Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of 
SOMIT, A. (1968) Toward a more biologically oriented political science. 
SOMIT, A. (Ed.) (1976) Biology and Politics: Recent Explorations. The Hague and 
SPENCER, 
H. (1852) A theory of population deduced from the general law of 
SPENCER, 
H. (1892 [1852-18571) Essays Scient$c, Political and Speculative. 
S~ANFORD, 
C. B. (1999) The Hunting Apes: Meat Eating and the Origins ofHurnan 
STEINBRUNER 
J. D. (1974) The Cybernetic Theory ofDecision: New Dimensions of 
STEWARD, 
J. H. (1938) Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups. 
STEWARD, 
J. H. (1963 [1955]) Theory ofCultural Change; the Methodology of 
STONEKING, 
M .  (1993) DNA and recent human evolution. Evolutionary 
STRUM, S. C. (1975a) Primate predation: interim report on the development of a 
STRUM, S. C. (1975b) Life with the pumphouse gang. National Geographic 
STRUM, S. C. (1987) Almost Human: Ajourney into the World ofBaboons. 
Su, B., et al. (1999) Y-chromosome evidence for a northward migration of 
I 
Journal ofHuman Evolution 18, 373-392. 
Yale University Press. 
UnseEfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Midwest Journal ofPolitica1 Science 12, 550-567. 
Paris: Mouton. 
animal fertility. The Westminster Review 57, 468-501. 
New York: Appleton. 
Behavior. Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press. 
Political Analysis. Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Multilinear Evolution. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
Anthropology B, 60-73. 
tradition in a troop of olive baboons. Science 187, 755-757. 
Magazine 147,687-691. 
New York: Random House. 
modern humans into eastern Asia during the last ice age. American]ournal of 
Human Genetics 65, 1718. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. 
TAITERSALL, 
I. (1998) Becoming Human: Evolution and Human Uniqueness. 
TATTERSALL, 
I. (2002) The Monkey in the Mirror. New York Harcourt Brace. 
THORNDIKE, 
E. L. (1965 [1911]) Animal Intelligence: Experimental Studies. 
TIGER L., Fox, R. (1971) The Imperial Animal. New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1971) The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of 
New York Hafner. 
Winston. 
Biology 46, 35-57. 

6. G References 1 251 
VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G. (1995) The Origin of War: The Evolution ofa Male- 
Coalitional Reproductive Strategy. Groningen, Netherlands: Origin Press. 
VAN DER DENNEN, 
J. M. G. (1999) Human evolution and the origin ofwar: a 
Darwinian heritage. In: The Darwinian Heritage and Sociobiology (Eds. J. M. G. 
VAN DER DENNEN 
et al.). Westport, CT Praeger, pp. 159-192. 
Comparative Socioecology (Eds. V. STANDEN, 
R. FOLEY). Oxford: Blackwell, 
VAN SCHAIK, C. P. (1989) The ecology of female social relationships. In: 
pp. 195-218. 
VAN SCHAIK, C. P., et al. (2003) Orangutan cultures and the evolution of material 
culture. Science 299,102-105. 
WASHBURN, 
S .  L., LANCASTER, 
C. S. (1968) The evolution of hunting. In: 
Man the Hunter (Eds. R. B. LEE, I. DEVORE). 
Chicago: Aldine, pp. 293-303. 
WEISS, H. (1996) Desert storm: weather brought destruction to the first ancient 
civilization. The Sciences 36 (3), 30-37. 
WEBS, H. (2000) Beyond the younger dryas: collapse as adaptation to abrupt 
climate change in ancient west Asia and the eastern Mediterranean. In: 
Environmental Disasters and the Archaeology of Human Response (Eds. 
G. BAWDEN, R., REYCRAFT). Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico 
Press, pp. 75-98. 
WEISS, H., BRADLEY, R. S. (2001) What drives societal collapse? Science 291, 
WEISS, H., et al. (1993) The genesis and collapse ofthird millennium north 
WHITE, E. (Ed.) (1981) Sociobiology and Human Politics. Lexington, MA: 
WHITE, L. A. (1949) The Science ofCultut-e: A Study of Man and Civilization. 
WHITE, L. A. (1959) The Evolution ofCulture. New York McGraw-Hill. 
WHITEN, 
A., et al. (1999) Cultures in chimpanzees. Nature 399,682485. 
WIEGELE, 
T. C. (1979) Biopolitics. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
WILLHOITE, 
F. H., JR (1976) Primates and political authority: a biobehavioral 
WILLHOITE, 
F. H., JR (1981) Rank and reciprocity: speculations in human 
609-610. 
Mesopotamian civilization. Science 261, 995-1004. 
D.C. Health. 
New York: Grove Press. 
perspective. The American Political Science Review 70, 11 10-1 126. 
emotions and political life. In: Human Sociobiology and Politics (WHITE, 
E., 
Ed.). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, pp. 239-58. 
WILLIAMS, 
G. C. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique ofsome 
Current Evolutionary Thought. Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press. 
WILLS, 
C. (1993) The Runaway Brain: The Evolution of Human Uniqueness. 
New York: Basic Books. 
WILLS, 
C. (1998) Children of Prometheus: The Accelerating Pace ofHuman 
Evolution. Reading, MA: Perseus Books (Helix). 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1975) A general theory of group selection. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences U S A  72, 143-146. 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1980) Trte Natural Selection of Populations and Communities. 
Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings. 

252 
G The Evolution ofPolitics 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1999) A critique of R. D. Alexander’s views on group selection. 
WILSON, 
D. S., SOBER, 
E. (1989) Reviving the superorganism. Journal of 
WILSON, 
D. S., SOBER, 
E. (1994) Reintroducing group selection to the human 
WILSON, 
E. 0. (1975) Sociobiology; The New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: 
WOLIN, S. S. (1960) Politics and Vision: Continuity and Innovation in Western 
WOLPOFE, 
M. H. (1984) Modern Homo sapiens origins: a general theory of 
I 
Biology and Philosophy 14, 431-449. 
Theoretical Biology 136, 337-356, 
behavioral sciences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17, 585-608. 
Harvard University Press. 
Political Thought. Boston: Little, Brown. 
hominid evolution involving the fossil evidence from east Asia. In: 
The Origins of Modem Humans: A World Survey of the Fossil Evidence 
(Eds. F. H. SMITH, F. SPENCER). 
New York: Liss, pp. 411-483. 
WOLPOFF, 
M. H. (1999a) Paleoanthropology, 2nd ed. New York McGraw-Hill. 
WOLPOFF, 
M. H. (1999b) The systematics of Homo. Science 248,1774-1775. 
WOLPOFF, 
M. H., et al. (2001) Modern human ancestry at the peripheries: 
WOOD, B., COLLARD, 
M. (1999) The human genus. Science 284,65-71. 
WRANGHAM, 
R. W. (1987) The significance of African apes for reconstructing 
a test of the replacement theory. Science 291, 293-297. 
human evolution. In: The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models 
(Ed. W. G. KINZEY). Albany, NY State University of New York Press, pp. 51-71. 
WRANGHAM, 
R. W. (2001) Out of the Pan, into the fire: how our ancestors’ 
evolution depended on what they ate. In: Tree of Origin; What Primate Behavior 
Can Tell Us about Human Social Evolution (Ed. F. B. M. DE WAAL). 
Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 121-143. 
WRANGHAM, 
R. W., PETERSON, 
D. (1996) Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of 
Human Violence. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
WRANGHAM, 
R. W., et al. (Eds.) (1994) Chimpanzee Cultures. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
WRANGHAM, 
R. W., et al. (1999) The raw and the stolen: cooking and the ecology 
of human origins. Current Anthropology 40, 567-594. 

I 253 
7 
Evolution of Economics 
John M. 
Cowdy 
7.1 
Introduction: Economics and Biology 
Like the living systems they describe, the connections between economics and 
evolution are complicated, convoluted, and characterized by mutually reinforcing 
hierarchical relationships. Not only has the evolution of the market economy had a 
profound effect on theories of biological evolution, these theories have in turn 
provided a rich source of inspiration to economists as well as an ideological justifi- 
cation for the sanctity of market outcomes. Controversies in evolutionary biology 
continue to have great relevance for the field of economics. In recent decades two 
trends have emerged from the field of biology to challenge the prevailing ortho- 
doxy in economic theory. One trend is the growing importance and even domi- 
nance of evolutionary biology and theoretical ecology in the philosophy of science. 
The other is the mounting evidence of the conflict between the growing economy 
and the earth's life-support systems. 
Since the early 1970s evolutionary biology has witnessed a revolution in think- 
ing about evolutionary change. For most of the 20th century the majority of biolo- 
gists saw evolution as taking place through small incremental adaptations within a 
fairly constant external environment (Gould and Lewontin, 1979). This view of the 
world had much in common with that of neoclassical economics, with its empha- 
sis on continuity, marginal change, and progress through increasing efficiency. 
This is not surprising, since both economics and biology matured in the common 
intellectual and social milieu of mid 19th century England. Today biologists recog- 
nize the importance of macroevolutionary processes in evolutionary outcomes. 
Accidents of history, coevolution, and hierarchical selection processes, as well as 
micro-level adaptation at the level of individual organisms, all influence the course 
of evolution. The debates in biology over the mode and pace of evolutionary change, 
the hierarchies of selection controversy, and the resurgence of theories of group 
selection have all had a profound effect on social science and especially on eco- 
nomics. Economists working in such diverse fields as industrial organization and 
innovation diffusion (Dopfer, 1994; Witt, 1997), technological change (Nelson, 1986), 
Handbook ofEvolution, Vol. I: The Evolution ofHuman Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
~ 
. 
~ 
~
~
1
1
,
 
.-,., 
T ,-... . - 
1 * . "  - 
. 
. . . 

254 
7 Evolution of Economics 
and the diversification of regional economies (Jacobs, 2000) increasingly draw on 
biological rather than mechanical analogies. Exclusive reliance on methodological 
individualism is falling into disfavor in the face of new evidence and concepts of 
group decision making, self organization, and higher-order selection processes. 
Recent decades have brought an increasing awareness of the relationship be- 
tween human activity, particularly economic activity, and the biophysical world. As 
we recognize the extent of the impact of human activity on global climate, 
biodiversity, and the course of biological evolution itself, longheld tenets of econo- 
mists, such as unlimited growth and the goal of Pareto optimality as the prime 
welfare objective, are being called into question. The attempt to reconcile econom- 
ics and biology by placing economic values on features of the natural world has 
exposed a number of fault lines in economic theory. It is becoming more and more 
difficult to reconcile the view of human nature embodied in ‘economic man’ with 
the empirically based models of human decision making being developed in the 
fields of psychology, physiology, and artificial intelligence. The demise of economic 
man will have profound consequences for the public policy recommendations of 
economists. 
The connections between biology and economics reach back well over a hun- 
dred years. Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace developed their theories of 
evolution through natural selection after reading the work of the philosopher and 
political economist Thomas Malthus describing the operation of competitive mar- 
kets. The ideas of gradualism, progressive change, and perfection through com- 
petitive selection provided a common framework for the natural as well as the 
economic world in Victorian England, where modem biology and modern eco- 
nomics began (Ruse, 1997). The idea of survival through competitive advantage 
and natural selection moved from economics to biology, and it came back to eco- 
nomics in the form of ‘survival of the fittest’, a term popularized by Herbert Spen- 
cer. Spencer was the most well known evolutionist of the 19th century, in fact 
better known than Darwin (Hodgson, 1993a). Spencer was a great influence on 
the development of economics in the late 1800s and early 1900s, particularly on 
Alfred Marshall, who is considered to be the first great synthesizer of neoclassical 
economics. Hodgson (1993a) quotes Marshall recounting the excitement that Spen- 
cer’s ideas held for him: ‘A saying of Spencer sent the blood rushing through the 
veins of those who a generation ago looked eagerly for each volume of his as it 
issued from the press.” It was the Spencerian version of evolution as gradual and 
progressive that was incorporated into the folklore of economics. 
just as the idea of evolutionary progress through natural selection played a ma- 
jor role in the history of economic thought, so too did ideas from economics find 
their way back to biology, particularly in the new science of ecology. According to 
Worster (1977), around 1900 ecologists began to view nature as an economic work- 
shop. In 1910 Hermann Reinheimer described organisms as ‘traders’ or ‘economic 
persons’. He wrote: 
I 

I 255 
7.2 The Evolution of the Human Economy 
Every day, from sunrise until sunset, myriads of (plant) laboratories, facto- 
ries, workshops and industries all the world over, on land and in the sea, in 
the earth and on the surface soil, are incessantly occupied adding each its 
little contribution to the general fund of organic wealth (quoted in Worster, 
1977, p. 291). 
August Thienemann moved ecology closer to economics when he introduced the 
terms producer, consumer, reducer, and decomposer to describe ecological rela- 
tionships. More recent biologists who have adopted the tools of economics to de- 
scribe ecosystems include Cody (1974), Rapport and Turner (1977), and Ghiselin 
(1978, 1992). 
Today a flurry of interdisciplinary work is being done at the intersections of biol- 
ogy, psychology, and economics. New scientific findings are telling us more and 
more about the evolution of human cognition, how individuals actually make deci- 
sions, and how genetic structure shapes human behavior (Wilson, 1998; Morrison, 
1999; Gintis, 2000). This new interdisciplinary work promises to move the social 
and natural sciences toward E. 0. Wilson's vision of consilience among the basic 
understandings of all fields of inquiry. Economics and biology are both concerned 
with the evolution of living systems. It is not surprising therefore that many of the 
theoretical controversies in the two disciplines mirror each other (Gowdy and Ferrer 
Carbonell, 1999). 
This chapter discusses several broad questions: How has the human economy 
changed through time? That is, how has the basic economic problem of making a 
living in a world with limited resources been met throughout human history? How 
have theories of economic evolution evolved over the years? What are the connec- 
tions among biological evolution, economic evolution, and evolutionary theory? 
What is the relationship between the biological and the economic world? Specifi- 
cally, how has the ideology of the market come to dominate human decisions about 
using the resources of the natural world, how has the natural world been affected 
by these decisions, and how will these effects feed back into the human economy? 
Understanding the connections between markets and ecosystems, and between 
evolutionary theories in economics and biology, is fundamental to understanding 
how we got where we are today and to assessing our prospects for the future 
(Wuketits, 1990, 1998). 
7.2 
The Evolution ofthe Human Economy 
For most of human history we had very simple economies with simple technolo- 
gies and, judging from accounts of recent hunting and gathering societies, com- 
plicated kinship, social, and religious systems. Today the situation is much the 
opposite, with very complicated technologies and economies and comparatively 
limited social relationships and kinship systems. For most of our existence as a 
species we lived within the confines of local ecosystems; today the entire planet is 

256 
7 Evolution ofEconornics 
dominated by one type of economic system, the market economy, and human ac- 
tivity now affects the entire planet. There is no corner of the earth that is not now 
under the influence of human activity. The expansion of material culture was ac- 
companied by important changes in how humans viewed the natural world and 
each other. 
I 
7.2.1 
Hunter-Gatherers: Humanity’s First Two Million Years 
A defining characteristic of our species is the extensive use of exosomatic (outside 
the body) instruments to enhance our chances for survival (Lotka, 1924; Georgescu- 
Roegen, 1977). Tool making was once defined as the characteristic that separated 
humans from other animals (Oakley, 1961). Recently, numerous studies have docu- 
mented the purposeful use of tools by nonhumans. Chimpanzees in the Ivory 
Coast not only use stone tools to crack nuts, but also store particularly good stones 
for future use. Chimpanzees also fashion twigs to gather termites, a skill that takes 
years to develop and one which humans find difficult to learn (De Waal, 1996). 
Green-backed herons in Japan use carefully selected twigs as bait to attract fish. 
(These and other examples are discussed in Griffin, 1992.) The tool-making behavior 
of birds, animals, and insects is much more complex than originally thought. Spi- 
ders learn how to hunt using their woven nets and modify their hunting tech- 
niques based on past experience. Even social insects, once thought to be pure au- 
tomatons, are capable of a wide variety of learned behavior. The distinction between 
‘instinct’ and ‘purpose’ that was thought to clearly separate humans and other 
animals is becoming increasingly blurred. 
Complex tool making by humans goes back several million years. Evidence indi- 
cates that tools were common in Africa by about 2.5 million years ago and were 
probably made by an early human ancestor known as Australopithecus. This genus 
probably evolved into Homo habilis and then to Homo erectus about 1.7 million 
years ago. Homo erectus was the first human ancestor to leave the African conti- 
nent and the first to have a sophisticated tool-making tradition. Although they 
differ somewhat in form from place to place and through time, the characteristic 
Homo erectus tool, the Achuelean hand axe, can be traced from 1.5-million-year-old 
sites at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania to the Isimila site dated about 260 000 years ago 
(Gamble, 1994, p. 125). Thus the Achuelean tradition of beautifully crafted hand 
axes lasted well over a million years and had a geographical distribution ranging 
from Africa to Europe to East Asia. Numerous other tool-making traditions have 
been identified by archeologists, each adapted to its own ecosystem and culture. 
Tool making, or more broadly the widespread use of flexible exosomatic instru- 
ments and the associated changes in cultural behavior, may in fact be the reasons 
humans survived an extremely unstable climatic period in eastern and southern 
Africa between 5 and 2 million years ago. Many mammalian species went extinct 
during this period and those that survived did so because they were better able to 
respond to changing climatic conditions than those who did not. Brain sizes became 
larger not only for humans but also in a variety of mammalian species. Humans, 

I 257 
7.2 The Evolution of the Human Economy 
by evolving flexible technology and cultures rather than endosomatic (phenotypic) 
adaptations, were able to quickly respond to changing environments by modifying 
their tools as the resource base changed. Flexibility and the ability to substitute one 
resource for another may be a genetically based characteristic of our species. 
By about 50 000 years ago there was a marked increase in the complexity and 
variety of human material culture. In Upper Paleolithic Europe, bone tools began 
to appear along with a variety of stone tools designed for very specific purposes 
such as scrapers, spear throwers, harpoons, and bow and arrows (Diamond, 1997, 
p. 39). About 38 000 years ago an explosion of creativity began in ice-age Europe. 
The best known manifestation of this increasing sophistication of Upper Paleolithic 
peoples is the magnificent paintings found in the caves of Southern Europe, espe- 
cially in France and Spain. Increasingly sophisticated art and personal ornaments 
have been found in Africa a few thousand years before the blossoming of art in 
Europe, leading to speculation that a worldwide diffusion of art began about 50 000 
years ago. The discovery of the dramatic increase in technological sophistication 
during the Upper Paleolithic has touched off a number of controversies relevant to 
current debates about technology, culture, and environmental sustainability. Some 
see this as the beginning of the human domination of the planet that we see today. 
Martin (1967), Diamond (1997), and others argue that the demise of big game 
animals in Europe and later in North America and Australia was directly due to 
human hunters with sophisticated technology. Others argue that the evidence for 
a major human role in Pleistocene extinctions is inconclusive since the disappear- 
ance of Pleistocene megafauna coincided with dramatic climate changes, in par- 
ticular the disappearance of the glaciers, whose trailing edges provided the lush 
vegetation upon which many ofthose animals fed (for rebuttals to Martin see Harris, 
1977, pp. 29-33; Kretch, 1999, Chapter 1). Cause and effect here is probably so 
entangled that a clear answer to the debate is impossible. The most reasonable 
explanation is ‘coevolutionary disequilibrium’ (Graham and Lundelius, 1984). The 
retreat of the glaciers set in motion a complex series of environmental changes 
which reduced the number of big game animals and, in that context, human hunt- 
ing could have played a role in their final demise. It may well be that humans were 
the direct cause of the extinction of big game animals in Europe and the New 
World, but one should remain skeptical because so far the evidence is sketchy. 
Also, the story fits too neatly with two pervasive cultural myths: (1) that humans 
are inherently destructive, and (2) that humans are outside and different from the 
rest of nature. In any case, even a limited role for humans in the extinction of 
Pleistocene megafauna shows that the impact of human technology on the natural 
world is not a new problem. 
Another Upper Pleistocene controversy is the relationship between Cro-Magnon 
and Neanderthal peoples. Diamond (1997, pp. 40-41) wrote: 
Some 40 000 years ago, into Europe came the Cro-Magnons, with their 
modern skeletons, superior weapons, and other advanced cultural traits. 
Within a few thousand years there were no more Neanderthals, who had 
been evolving as the sole occupants of Europe for hundreds of thousands of 

258 
7 Evolution of Economics 
I 
years. That sequence strongly suggests that the modern Cro-Magnons some- 
how used their far superior technology, and their language skills or brains, 
to infect, kill, or displace the Neanderthals, leaving behind little or no evi- 
dence of hybridization between Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons. 
Again, this story reflects the view that the end result of superior technology is 
domination and elimination. There is some evidence that the Neanderthal story 
may be more complex. First, Neanderthals and Cro-Magnons lived in the same 
parts of Europe and the Middle East for tens of thousands of years; second, there is 
evidence that they lived in very different habitats and may have only rarely come 
into close contact; and third, there is some, albeit scanty, evidence that when they 
did come into close contact they interbred. 
7.2.2 
The First Divide: The Rise o f  Agriculture 
Undoubtedly, the most dramatic change in the evolution of human technology was 
the widespread adoption of agriculture that began about 10 000 years ago. During 
the past three decades there has been a revolution in the interpretation of the tran- 
sition to agriculture. Until the 1970s it was generally accepted that the ‘discovery’ 
of agriculture was a great leap forward that freed humans from a life that was ‘nasty, 
brutish, and short’. Typical of the earlier, and erroneous, view of hunter-gatherers 
is that of the anthropologist Braidwood (1952, p. 122, quoted in Sahlins, 1972): 
‘A man who spends his whole life following animals just to kill them to eat, or mov- 
ing from one berry patch to another, is really just living like an animal himself.” 
It is now known that, although there is tremendous variety in hunter-gatherer life- 
styles (Kelly, 1995), most hunter-gatherer societies had much more leisure time 
than do people in agriculture or industrial societies and a rich and rewarding so- 
cial life (see articles in Gowdy, 1998). Furthermore, although hunter-gatherers 
certainly had an impact on the natural environment, they had an incentive to pre- 
serve environmental integrity since they depended directly on day-to-day flows from 
the natural world and lived off the land in an extensive fashion using a large variety 
of plants, animals, and raw materials. Ethnographic accounts of hunter-gatherers 
detail the human propensity to deal with an uncertain environment though knowl- 
edge, flexibility, and substitution. As illustrated in Figure 7.1, well-being in hunter- 
gatherer economies depended directly on environmental services unmediated by 
roundabout agricultural production or complex technology. 
food, shelter, spiritual well- 
flows from the environment 
*-b 
being based directly on 
Environmental 
services 
Figure 7.1 
Direct use of environmental flows by foraging societies. 

I 259 
7.2 The Evolution of the Human Economy 
With the adoption of agriculture, people made their living by intensively using a 
greatly reduced number of plants and animals. Indeed, a central problem in eco- 
nomic evolution is to understand the processes that drove the intensification of 
production in so many varied and seemingly unrelated instances, including tribal 
societies and early agricultural civilizations. Forces that today threaten the integ- 
rity ofthe planet's life support systems -overpopulation, runaway economic growth, 
and intensification ofthe use ofthe environment - began with the wide-scale adop- 
tion of agriculture. The phenomenon of economic growth in the modern indus- 
trial state may be orders of magnitude larger than anything that has happened in 
the past, but the forces driving it are not new. 
Although technology may be the defining characteristic of our species, it is clear 
that for most ofhuman history technological progress was neither the rule nor the 
measure of evolutionary change. Gamble (1994, Chapter 9) gives several examples 
of technological decline, including the loss of technological sophistication in Tas- 
mania after it was separated from the Australian mainland by sea level rise some 
12 000 years ago. Diamond (1993) contends that there was a marked deterioration 
in technology and in artistic style in Upper Paleolithic Europe at the close of the 
last ice age. Tainter (1988), Ponting (1991), Morrison (1999), and many others claim 
that overshoot and collapse is a recurring characteristic of complex societies. Just 
from past human cultures progress is not inevitable even with regard to technology. 
7.2.2.1 
Intensification of Production and Environmental Decline: The Tehuachn Valley 
Richard McNeish (1972; see also Harris, 1977, pp. 33-34) has reported in detail 
the process of intensification and resource depletion in the Tehuacan Valley of 
Mexico. The process began during the Ajuereado period 9000-7000 years ago. In 
the early part of that period horses and antelope were hunted to extinction, then 
jackrabbits and giant turtles. During the next period, the El Riego 7000 to 5400 
years ago, the percentage of meat in the diet fell sharply and continued to decline 
and, by the time of intensive agriculture about 2800 years ago, animal protein had 
apparently become a luxury. According to Harris (1977, p. 34): 
The implacable decline in the proportion of animal protein in the Tehuacan 
diet was the result of a continuous series of intensifications in the technol- 
ogy of hunting. As each species was depleted, the hunters attempted to com- 
pensate for the declining return in the effort they invested by using more 
efficient hunting weapons and techniques. Lances, spear throwers, darts, 
and finally the bow and arrow were pressed into service, all to no avail. 
McNeish (1972) documents the decline in labor efficiency (calories obtained divided 
by calories expended) as each new technology was introduced in an effort to main- 
tain meat in the diet. Although MacNeish's classification oftechnologies in Tehuacan 
has been criticized recently (Hardy, 1996,1999), his intensification hypothesis seems 
to have held up. Moreover, the same pattern of intensification and depletion was 
present after the adoption of agriculture and irrigation in the Tehuacan Valley. 
The adoption of agriculture had profound consequences for the organization of 
human society. In fact, some archaeologists argue that the transition to agriculture 

260 
7 Evolution ofEconornics 
was more of a cultural revolution than an economic one. For a variety of physi- 
ological, economic, and social reasons, including increased fertility, partly due to a 
greater percentage of body fat in females, and the need for a larger labor force, 
human populations grew rapidly with the expansion of the agricultural way of life, 
and human exploitation of the environment became more selective and more in- 
tensive (Baker, 1998). With agriculture came division of labor, hierarchical organi- 
zation of society, and an intensive exploitation of local environments. The striking 
feature of early agricultural societies is the almost universal pattern of coloniza- 
tion of a new area, gradual expansion, a rise in population and, eventually, social 
disintegration and collapse. This pattern was followed by an astonishing number 
of cultures occupying a variety of climate zones and ecosystems, including the 
Easter Islanders (Bahn and Flenley, 1992; Erickson and Gowdy, 2000), Sumeria 
(Ponting, 1991), the Mayans (Coe, 1993; Martin and Grube, 1995), Chaco Canyon 
(Tainter, 1988), the Akkadian empire in Mesopotamia (Weiss et al., 1993), and nu- 
merous others (Tainter, 1988). 
The agricultural way of life became dominant within a few millennia and with it 
came a profound shift in human social evolution. Societies became increasingly 
hierarchical and organized around new religious beliefs centered on the necessity 
of mobilizing a large workforce for the agriculture enterprise. The relationship 
between humans and the natural world also changed dramatically. The human 
economy no longer flowed in tandem with the ebb and flow of nature. The adop- 
tion of agriculture ushered in the age ofhuman-dominated ecosystems. This meant 
homogenization and control of nature on the one hand, and destruction of that 
part of nature not useful to humans on the other. According to Potts (1996, pp. 248- 
249), a key feature of the development of agriculture was the increasing capacity to 
buffer environmental disturbance. But this ability to anticipate and plan for envi- 
ronmental disturbance came at a price. As agriculture became more intensive, 
there was a loss of personal freedom compared to the hunting way of life, and 
many times, the cost of maintaining human-dominated parts of the environment 
was the destruction of other ecosystems. 
Two final points are worth making before we leave the topic of the adoption of 
agriculture. First, recent evidence suggests that crop cultivation was practiced for 
millennia before agriculture was widely adopted (Kelly, 1995). Hunter-gatherers 
cultivated rye in the Near East over 13 000 years ago, squash was being planted in 
the tropical forests of Ecuador, and wild rice was being cultivated by hunter-gath- 
erers on the banks ofthe Yangtze river by 10 000 years ago (Pringle, 1998, p. 1446). 
Why did agriculture become the dominant way of life within a few thousand years, 
after several million years of a successful hunter-gatherer lifestyle? The traditional 
answer that the invention agriculture was a great intellectual achievement that 
gave people more leisure time and a more rewarding lifestyle is no longer accepted. 
An intriguing answer to the question Why did agriculture arise? may lie in the fact 
that the last 10 000 years or so has been a period of remarkable climate stability. 
Compared to earlier periods, the Holocene has been remarkably warm, and fluc- 
tuations in temperature, rainfall, and the composition of the atmosphere have been 
smaller than at any time during the past several hundred thousand years (Taylor et 
I 

I 261 
7.2 The Evolution of the Human Economy 
al., 1997; Alley et al., 1999; Steig, 1999). Richerson et al. (1999) argue that it was 
this climate stability that made the growing of crops less risky and thus favored the 
gradual substitution of cultivated for wild food resources. Agriculture was prob- 
ably impossible in the Pleistocene because of extreme climate fluctuations (Bradley, 
1999). Richerson et al. (1999, p. 9) write: 
Holocene weather extremes have significantly affected agricultural produc- 
tion (Lamb, 1977). It is hard to imagine the impact ofthe qualitatively greater 
variation that characterized most if not all of the Pleistocene. Devastating 
floods, droughts, windstorms, and the like, which we experience once a 
century, might have occurred once a decade. 
Even as climate stabilized, the adoption of agriculture was relatively gradual, as 
borne out by recent discoveries that suggest that large settlements of humans are 
possible, perhaps as many as 10 000 people in the case of Catalhoyiik (Balter, 1998), 
with only rudimentary agriculture. The population of these settlements was sup- 
ported by domesticated cattle and sheep as well as hunting and gathering wild 
species. Over the more than 1000 year history of Catalhoyiik, domesticated plant 
species gradually became a larger and larger portion of the diet. 
The second point is that once reliance on cultivated crops reached a certain point, 
the agricultural way of life became locked in, for several reasons. An increasingly 
sedentary population meant higher rates of fertility and an increase in population 
size (Harris, 1977). Although several recent studies have shown that large settle- 
ments preceded widespread agriculture and that the switch from hunting and gath- 
ering to agriculture was a complicated process, in the context of the length of time 
our species has existed the rapidity of the change in the basic way humans lived 
should not be forgotten: 10 000 years ago most people on the planet lived in small 
bands of hunter-gatherers, and only 5000 years later most humans lived in settled 
communities. Over millennia the growing hierarchical organization of society and 
the emergence of religious and political elites favored the continuance of a way of 
life that benefited the dominant, and controlling, social group regardless of the 
consequences for the majority of the population. 
Agricultural output, 
Services of manufactured 
capital, tools, weapons 
and technology 
food, shelter and well- 
being based directly on 
only indirectly on services 
from the non-human world 
+ 
human-created systems, 
Natural capital and 
limited subsistence from 
foraging 
Figure 7.2 
Switch to dependence on manufactured capital in agricultural societies 

262 
7 Evolution of Economics 
As depicted in Figure 7.2, the adoption of agriculture led to an increasing de- 
pendence on manufactured capital and material technology. This meant that, al- 
though humans as biological organisms have always depended on the services of 
nature to survive, these services became more and more indirect and roundabout. 
Humans were increasingly able to live under the illusion that they were separate 
from the natural world. 
I 
7.2.2.2 
The human occupation of Easter Island, like the Tehuacin example above, also 
shows a pattern of temporary emancipation from resource constraints, rapid popu- 
lation growth, and eventual collapse as technology became increasingly special- 
ized and more and more vulnerable to exogenous disturbance (Erickson and Gowdy, 
2000). Research on Easter Island suggests that island forest resources began to 
decline shortly after human arrival around 400 AD. Soil erosion was also rapid, 
accelerated by the destruction of forest cover. Archeological evidence indicates that 
the human population continued to increase for several hundred years after near 
depletion of the forest and accompanying environmental degradation. The popu- 
lation peaked at perhaps 10 000 individuals in 1600 AD and had crashed to about 
3000 by the time Dutch explorers arrived in 1722. If the population continued to 
increase in spite of severe resource degradation, something must have substituted 
for the natural resources in order to maintain population growth following re- 
source degradation. It appears that the lag in population decline after land degra- 
dation was due to the ingenuity of Easter Islanders in finding substitutes for natu- 
ral resources, at least in the short run. For instance, as forest resources were 
converted to tools and boats, the islands ocean and wildlife resources were har- 
vested more intensively and replaced forest and soil resources. 
Limits existed, however, to this substitution of manufactured for natural capital, 
and Easter Islands population level could not be maintained and eventually crashed. 
Once the natural resource base had been irrevocably degraded beyond a certain 
point, the replenishment of manufactured capital depreciation was no longer pos- 
sible. Despite innovation and substitution, collapse was inevitable. The natural 
resource base need not be completely consumed in order to instigate its irrevers- 
ible decline. Moreover, marginal exploitation of ecological systems may lead to 
sudden, unexpected consequences where the next fish caught, the next species 
lost, the next acre developed could lead to a downward spiral of resource degrada- 
tion and social disintegration. The social institutions of Easter Islanders were un- 
able to change quickly enough to smoothly adjust to increasing natural resource 
scarcity. Instead, archaeological evidence shows severe societal collapse following 
resource degradation. Warfare, starvation, and cannibalism eventually followed 
widespread plant and animal extinction (Bahn and Flenley, 1992; van Tilberg, 1994; 
Diamond, 1995). 
Intensification of Production and Environmental Decline: Easter Island 

I 263 
7.2 The Evolution ofthe Human Economy 
7.2.3 
The Second Divide: The Rise of Industrial Society 
The transformation of the human economy from an agricultural society to an in- 
dustrial one began only about 250 years ago (Metcalfe, 1988; Mokyr, 1990). Several 
important technological breakthroughs in the Middle Ages (500-1500 AD), includ- 
ing the wheeled plow, the water wheel, and the horse collar (Mokyr, 1990, chap- 
ter 3) and improvements in the organization of agriculture during the Renaissance 
paved the way for the truly remarkable flowering of commerce and technology 
from 1750 to the present (Mokyr, 1990; Hohenberg and Lees, 1996). The conse- 
quences of the industrial revolution for the human condition and for the natural 
world have been at least as profound as those following the adoption of agricul- 
ture. During the past 2.5 centuries the human population has increased from 1 
billion to 6 billion. The growing domination of the market economy has created a 
civilization of haves and have-nots, with the bulk of an ever-increasing output of 
economic goods and services going to a smaller and smaller percentage of the 
worlds population. Increasing income stratification is apparently accelerating and 
occurring within almost every geographic, economic, and sociological category. 
According to World Bank estimates, the worlds poorest countries are getting abso- 
lutely poorer and the growth rate of per capita income in the richest countries is 
accelerating. 
The human impact on the natural world is also increasing. Two of the most 
important negative impacts are biodiversity loss and global climate change. Eco- 
nomic activity, particularly burning fossil fuels and deforestation, has pushed at- 
mospheric CO, to its highest level since a period of global warming some 125 000 
years ago. Manabe and Stouffer (1993) estimate that atmospheric CO, will increase 
from its preindustrial level of about 270 ppm to over GOO ppm within the next 100 
years. This could raise global temperatures by 3.5 to 7 "C and raise sea levels by 
several meters. The evidence is increasingly clear that the unprecedented change 
in global temperature is anthropogenic. Crowley (2000, p. 270) writes: 
The combination of a unique level of temperature increase in the late 20th 
century and improved constraints on the role of natural variability provides 
further evidence that the greenhouse effect has already established itself 
above the level of natural variability in the climate system. A 21st century 
global warming projection far exceeds the natural variability of the past 
1000 years and is greater than the best estimate of global temperature change 
for the last interglacial. 
Human activity is also directly and indirectly causing a massive loss of biodiversity, 
perhaps as great as the losses during the five major extinction episodes of the half- 
billion years of complex life on earth (E. 0. Wilson, 1992). According to calcula- 
tions by Vitousek et al. (1986), human activity, directly and indirectly, modifies 
about 40% of the potential terrestrial products of photosynthesis. Human activity 
now stretches around the globe and is having numerous unintended effects such 
as the introduction of alien species, disruption of water and nutrient cycles, and 

264 7 Evolution ofEconornics 
I 
Market economy, 
built environment 
technology, finance, + 
Economic well-being based 
entirely on flows from 
human-created economic 
system. Ability to temporarily 
increase growth of economic 
system by intensifying the 
exploitation of the 
environmental base 
Figure 7.3 
Economic use ofthe environment is indirect in industrial societies 
changes in the composition of atmospheric gases. The entire planet has now be- 
come a collection of human-dominated ecosystems. Our material culture has 
reached the point where nature’s contribution to the human economy is almost 
entirely indirect. As depicted in Figure 7.3, economic well-being for most of the 
worlds population is entirely separated from direct flows from the environment. 
The industrial revolution has not only drastically altered relationships between 
humans and between humans and nature, it also set in motion an ongoing proc- 
ess of economic change with an inner logic of its own (Metcalfe, 1988). It is impor- 
tant to keep in mind, however, that the pattern established since the invention of 
agriculture - input substitution and intensification of production through techno- 
logical advance in the face of diminishing resources - continues to be the path 
followed in the evolution of the industrial economy. The underlying belief system 
which supports the industrial revolution has its origins in the agricultural revolu- 
tion - beliefs still enshrined in the worlds major religions. These beliefs have in 
the last few hundred years been refined and honed into a cultural mythology unique 
in the history of our species. These core beliefs include the inevitability of progress, 
continual economic expansion, and salvation through technology. This belief sys- 
tem is supported by the discipline of contemporary economics whose theories of 
the dynamics of market exchange form an ideological core that embodies the most 
important cultural myths that arose with the adoption of agriculture and that gave 
birth to the industrial revolution. 
The consequences for human cultures of the communication revolution of the 
20th century have been so profound that it may be called a ‘third divide’ in human 
history. Within the lifetime of a person born early in the 20th century the world has 
been transformed from one in which each major geographical region had its own 
unique collection of cultural identities to one where the majority of humans on the 
planet buy the same commodities, listen to the same music, and through the urg- 
ing of advertising adopt the same cultural values. Because the globalization of the 
market culture has occurred so rapidly and so completely, there is a real danger 

I 265 
7.2 The Evolution ofthe Human Economy 
that we might see the triumph of the market as a natural occurrence; as the inevi- 
table victory of rationality over barbarism. This view is not only based on an ideol- 
ogy of efficiency (Bromley, 1990) but also on a belief that Western society is some- 
how devoid of the ‘exotic’ customs and beliefs that characterize less developed 
societies. Sahlins (1993, p. 12) writes: 
Western capitalism in its totality is a truly exotic cultural scheme, as bizarre 
as any other, marked by the subsumption of material rationality in a vast 
order of symbolic relationships. We are too much misled by the apparent 
pragmatism of production and commerce. The whole cultural organization 
of our economy remains invisible, mystified as the pecuniary rationality by 
which its arbitrary values are realized. All the idiocies of modern life from 
Walkmans and Reeboks to mink coats and seven-million-dollar-a-year base- 
ball players, and on to McDonald’s and Madonnas and other weapons of 
mass destruction - this whole curious scheme nonetheless appears to econo- 
mists as the transparent effects of a universal practical wisdom. 
In spite of the claim by many economists that market decisions are based on ‘posi- 
tive’ (objective and scientific) not ‘normative’ (value-laden) criteria, we should not 
be blind to the fact that the current market system that has evolved over the past 
few millennia is neither more nor less culturally specific than any other of the 
enormous variety of ways of making a living created by human societies. 
7.2.3.1 
The island of Nauru in the South Pacific illustrates the process of intensification of 
production and environmental degradation in a modern market economy (Gowdy 
and McDaniel, 1999; McDaniel and Gowdy, 2000). Little is known about Nauru’s 
prehistory, but the island was apparently settled by several groups of Melanesian 
and Polynesian peoples over a period of several thousand years. Traditionally the 
small island supported a population of about 1000 people living on fish and a large 
variety of native and domesticated plants and animals. Because of its geographical 
isolation, Nauru experienced little contact with Western cultures until the late 1800s. 
In 1900 it was discovered that the island was composed primarily of one of the 
highest grades of phosphate rock, an essential requirement for plant growth and 
an ingredient in fertilizer. Under various colonial administrations, including Ger- 
man, British, Japanese, and Australian, and under independent rule beginning in 
1968, most of the island of Nauru has been severely degraded by phosphate min- 
ing. Today, most of the island is uninhabitable except for a narrow strip of land 
around the coastal perimeter. 
As the natural resources of Nauru were degraded, the inhabitants came to rely 
more and more on trade with the outside world for necessities that were once 
plentiful locally. A diet of fresh fruit, coconuts, vegetables, and fish has been re- 
placed with imported canned goods. Even water now has to be imported from the 
mainland. The once vibrant and self-sufficient culture, living within the constraints 
of a local ecosystem, has been transformed into one totally dependent on imports 
Intensification of Production and Environmental Decline: Nauru 

266 
7 Evolution ofEconomics 
from the world market economy. Not only the cultural traditions of Nauru have 
suffered; the increased consumption of highly processed foods has given Nauruans 
one of the worst health profiles in the world. The rate of diabetes is the highest in 
the world, and very high rates of hypertension and heart disease are also present. 
In return for selling their island the people of Nauru, in spite of gross injustices 
perpetuated by colonial powers, received substantial monetary rewards. A trust 
fund was established to provide for the day the phosphate would be exhausted. In 
spite of some bad investments, the value of the trust fund was estimated to be over 
US $ 1  billion in the early 1990s. Unfortunately, most ofthe trust fund disappeared 
because of a combination of bad investments and the Asian financial meltdown of 
the mid 1990s. Today the people of Nauru are left with few environmental resources 
and a dwindling income flow from the remnants of the depleted phosphate re- 
serves to provide for their livelihoods. The Nauru experience can be interpreted as 
an isolated case or as another, modern, example of the pattern of intensification of 
production and overshoot and collapse that has prevailed in complex societies for 
the past several thousand years. 
I 
7.3 
Theories of the Evolution of the Industrial Economy 
Karl Marx was the first economist to develop a systematic theory of the evolution of 
the human economy. Marx’s theory of economic evolution is historical material- 
ism, the view that the bases for human social structure and social evolution are the 
relations of production, that is, the social relations established to reproduce peo- 
ple’s material lives. The social relations of production can change quantitatively 
without modifying the basic structure or can change qualitatively through social 
upheaval (Mandel, 1988). The goal of his monumental work Dus Kupital was to 
describe the inner workings and evolution of the capitalist system. To do this Marx 
first constructed, in a rigorous way, a model of a pure capitalist system which, in 
modern terminology, was characterized by competition with no market failures. 
The driving force in the system was production for profit which came from extract- 
ing surplus value from labor. Marx saw economic change as resulting from a struggle 
between labor, the creator of surplus value, and capitalists, who owned the farms 
and factories (the means of production). 
An important evolutionary law in Marx’s system is the falling rate of profit. Un- 
der perfect competition, the means of production sell at the value of what they can 
be expected to produce. If a new machine can be expected to produce $100 000 
worth of output (properly discounted) over its productive life, then it will sell at 
that price. Only living labor can be expected to be paid less than the value of its 
output, because of the unequal power relationship between workers and owners. 
The problem is that capitalists are under constant pressure to use better and better, 
and more expensive, machinery to keep pace with competitors. But in doing so, 
capitalists replace profit-creating labor with non-profit-creating machines. The re- 
sult is inevitable crisis. In Heilbroner’s words (1992, p. 161): 

I 267 
7.3 Theories ofthe Evolution ofthe Industrial Economy 
As his profits shrink, each capitalist will redouble his efforts to put new 
laborsaving, cost-cutting machinery in his factory. It is only by getting a 
step ahead of the parade that he can hope to make a profit. But since every- 
one is doing precisely the same thing, the ratio of living labor (and hence 
surplus value) to total output shrinks still further. The rate of profit falls 
and falls. And now doom lies ahead. Profits are cut to the point at which 
production is no longer profitable at all. Consumption dwindles as ma- 
chines replace men and the number of employed fails to keep pace with 
output. Bankruptcies ensue. There is a scramble to dump goods on the 
market, and in the process smaller firms go under. A capitalist crisis is at 
hand. 
The crisis is not the end of the process. As the economy turns down, unemploy- 
ment increases, wages fall, machinery is sold at bargain prices, and eventually 
surplus value returns, and the process repeats itself. Marx argued, however, that 
each successive crisis is worse than the preceding one, a prediction that held true 
until the Keynesian policies of the second half of the 20th century damped capital- 
ism’s boom and bust cycles. 
Marx was greatly influenced by theories of evolution, including Darwin’s, that 
were in the air in the middle of the 19th century. The rigor of his evolutionary 
approach is still unique in the history of economic science. Marx not only provided 
a stylized and systematic description of a modern capitalist economy, he stepped 
outside the arena of positive explanation and provided an evolutionary critique of 
that system. His work foreshadowed that of many of the ideas of the great econo- 
mists of the 20th century, including Keynes, Myrdal, and Schumpeter. 
In contrast to the great, broad insights into human activities and wide-ranging 
critiques of industrial society made by Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill, and Karl 
Marx, by the late 19th and early 20th century economics had become pedantic, 
cautious, and apologetic for the existing social order. The gilded age of the latter 
part of the 19th century is seen today as a period of gross excess. It was an age of 
robber barons and cycles of economic booms and depressions. Yet the works of the 
great economists of that period, Marshall, Taussig, and J. B. Clark, for example, 
give no hint of the real society behind their economic analyses. An exception was 
Thorstein Veblen, who was greatly influenced by the evolutionist Herbert Spencer 
and was a strong advocate of an evolutionary approach to economics, In his well 
known essay “Why is economics not an evolutionary science?” (Veblen, 1898) and 
other writings, he stressed that social institutions evolve and adapt to changing 
environments. He also believed that human habits were based on instincts that 
had evolved to take advantage of environmental conditions. But he parted com- 
pany with the social Darwinists like Spencer and argued that institutions could 
become lethargic and act as a drag on the progressive evolution of society. He was 
particularly critical of neoclassical economics (a term he coined to describe the 
economics ofAlfred Marshall), which he saw as narrow and confined to the most 
uninteresting questions about economic life. For Veblen, economic activity was 
shaped not by the logic of productive efficiency but rather by its social and institu- 

268 
7 Evolution of Economics 
tional context. Veblen drew heavily on the anthropological writings of his day to 
examine the place and the function of the leisure class in modern society. In con- 
trast to Marx, Veblen saw class distinctions as the glue that held society together. 
The lower classes did not want to overthrow their superiors, they wanted to emu- 
late them. 
Veblen was not only a precursor of contemporary evolutionary economics 
(Hodgson, 1992) he was a central figure in the emergence of the American School 
of Institutional Economics. Institutions for Veblen were not formal organizations, 
but ‘settled habits of thought’. Veblen’s influence can be seen in the work of C. E. 
Ayres, John Commons, and now Richard Nelson who follows Veblen’s lead in stress- 
ing the interplay between habits ofthought and technological progress. In a recent 
paper Nelson and Pack (1999) examined the positive (enhancing) and negative 
(restraining) roles of institutions in the development of the Korean automobile 
industry. Frank (1988, 1998) has also resurrected many of Veblen’s ideas in popu- 
lar books on the role of emotions in consumer behavior and conspicuous con- 
sumption. Unfortunately, much of the so-called new institutional economics is 
merely an elaboration of the ‘survival of the fittest’ metaphor of standard econom- 
ics so as to include institutions and cultural evolution. With some important ex- 
ceptions (Hodgson, Nelson, and Warren Samuels to name a few), institutional 
economics still follows the ultra-Darwinian path of marginalism, radical adaptatio- 
nism, and methodological individualism (see, for example, Vromen, 1995). 
In contrast to the evolutionary economics of Marx and Veblen, the use of biologi- 
cal metaphors by mainstream economists took a very different turn toward the 
end of the 19th century. The conception of evolution held by most economists 
since Alfred Marshall is analogous to the ultra-Darwinian position in evolutionary 
biology. In the standard view, economic change occurs through the accumulation 
of myriad successful innovations, driven by profit maximization through increased 
efficiency. Individual firms must adopt new, more efficient techniques or they will 
be replaced by firms that do so. Extensive use of the calculus of constrained 
maximization insures that this process is seen as gradual and continuous. It is 
well known that Marshall placed Darwin’s phrase ‘natura non facit saltum’ (nature 
does not make leaps) on the frontispiece of his Principles ofEconornics. In spite of 
repeated statements about the limitations of the methods of physical dynamics, 
Marshall stood by his principle of continuity and defended the view that economic 
evolution is gradual (Levine, 1983). 
The alternative to Marshall’s gradualism in the early 20th century was Schum- 
peter’s theory of creative destruction. Schumpeter followed Marx in viewing the 
economy as an evolving out-of-equilibrium system. Unlike Marx, he put a positive 
cast on the crisis phase of the economic cycle, with the Darwinian view that crises 
open up niches in the economic system that are quickly filled by the most innova- 
tive and vigorous new firms. ‘Destruction’ is a necessary ingredient to the ‘creative’ 
process of capitalism. In contrast to the gradual Darwinism of Marshall, Schumpeter 
was less interested in marginal change than in sweeping new innovations radi- 
cally different from any precursors. Schumpeter had little sympathy for biological 
analogies in economics because of the insistence in his day that biological evolu- 
I 

I 269 
7.4 Economic M a n  and Economic Change 
tion follows a uniform unilinear development (Schumpeter, 1934, pp. 57-58). It 
may be true that Schumpeter misunderstood Darwin (Hodgson, 1997, p. 135), but 
so did most biologists of his time (Mesner and Gowdy, 1999). Recently, interest in 
Schumpeter’s work has increased markedly. One group of neo-Schumpeterians 
focuses on the nature of innovation diffusion, and several elaborately modeled 
simulations have shed some light on this topic (see for example the articles in 
England, 1994; and Shionya and Perlman, 1994). Georgescu-Roegen (1989) saw a 
vindication of Schumpeter’s insistence on discontinuous change in the punctu- 
ated equilibrium revolution in evolutionary biology. 
For over 100 years a division has existed in economic theory between those who 
would limit the scope of economics to explanations of the behavior of consumers 
and firms in well organized markets and those who insist that economics is a 
social science, embedded within nature, human culture, and human psychology. 
Perhaps the key issue dividing neoclassical and heterodox explanations of economic 
evolution is the issue of methodological individualism and the degree of repre- 
sentativeness of economic man. Is economic man an accurate characterization of 
universal human nature or is there a need to supplement Homo economicus with 
other species describing other human types? 
7.4 
Economic Man and Economic Change 
Contemporary texts define the field of economics as the science of the allocation of 
scarce resources among alternative ends (R. L Miller, 1998, p. G-4). Individual con- 
sumers allocate limited budgets among the unlimited objects of desire in such a 
way as to maximize utility. Individual firms allocate limited budgets to acquire 
productive inputs so as to maximize output. The economic problem has been de- 
fined as one of constrained optimization, making the best of the generalized scar- 
city the world confronts us with - a world ofunlimited wants and limited means of 
satisfying those wants. The other important part of the story is that the most efi- 
cient way of solving the economic problem is through organized markets. Most 
economic theory today revolves around the study of how well organized markets 
operate to allocate resources most efficiently. In this framework, efficiency is the 
manifestation of progress and the driving force behind economic evolution. And 
the heart of this theory is economic man. Economic man is naturally acquisitive, 
with an insatiable appetite for economic goods, is rationally calculating, and is 
devoid of social and environmental context. Many economists would agree with 
Margaret Thatcher’s claim that there is no such thing as society, only individuals 
and families (D. S. Wilson, 1999). 
The cultural myth of economic man is characterized by a set of axioms based on 
both utilitarian philosophy and the need for mathematical tractability. The axioms 
of consumer choice include completeness (consumers can categorize any consump- 
tion bundle as more preferred, less preferred, or indifferent to any other bundle), 
transitivity (the consumer is consistent in ranking commodity bundles from most 

270 
7 Evolution of Economics 
to least preferred), and nonsatiation (the bundle with more of at least one good is 
preferred). For a more complete treatment of consumer choice, see any micro- 
economics textbook including Jehle (1991), Mas-Cole11 et al. (1995), and Varian 
(1992). The axioms of consumer choice are a stylized description of consumer 
behavior in organized markets and are based on a belief system compatible with 
the kind of impersonal market exchange practiced by western urban people 
(Georgescu- Roegen, 1960). 
Economic man is constructed to describe how individual consumers make choices 
in organized markets. Some basic beliefs underpinning the construction of eco- 
nomic man are (1) methodological individualism, that is, the belief that the start- 
ing point for economic analysis should be an isolated individual acting at a particu- 
lar point in time; (2) the commensurability of wants, that is, the belief that all 
things can be compared through a common metric of valuation; and (3) the mak- 
ing of choices on the basis of marginal valuation. As Winter (1988, p. 617) points 
out, economic man is a first approximation that sometimes works as a description 
of human behavior and sometimes does not. It is clear, however, that real-world 
human behavior is a complex combination of immediate self-interest, social coop- 
eration, and genetic predispositions (Gintis, 1998; Winter, 1988, p. 617). 
I 
7.4.1 
Methodological Individualism 
A characteristic of the evolution of the Western-style market economy is the in- 
creasing emphasis on the individual to the exclusion of social and ecological con- 
text. Over the centuries, markets have become increasingly impersonal, a charac- 
teristic seen as a virtue by standard economists. Market outcomes are driven by 
individual decisions made at a particular point in time. The radical individualism 
of the market economy is mirrored in economic theory. The neoclassical view is 
that individual preferences should be taken as the starting point for economic analy- 
sis and that these preferences can be accurately revealed in market outcomes. In 
this view, individuals are rational and are the best judge of what is good for them, 
the choices that give individuals the greatest amount of utility are those revealed in 
the market, and these market outcomes are sacrosanct. According to the standard 
approach, the principle of consumer sovereignty compels us to accept people’s 
tastes including their intertemporal preferences. Methodological individualism in 
economics is reductionism in the extreme. Its goal is to reduce explanation to the 
lowest level possible, to the exclusion of higher-order processes. In Shackle’s (1989, 
p. 51) words “economics is about choice as a first cause”. 
As Hodgson (1993b) argues, the problem with methodological individualism is 
not reductionism per se but rather the exclusion of other levels of explanation for 
economic behavior and economic change. Hodgson asserts that the micro- 
foundations project, that is, the attempt to explain all economic processes based 
on the behavior of individual firms and consumers, has foundered for a number of 
reasons. Among these are (1) work in theoretical game theory has undermined the 
economic notion of rationality (see below); (2) related work in the economics of 

I 271 
7.4 Economic Man and Economic Change 
imperfect information and bounded rationality (Tisdell, 1996) has undermined 
standard rational choice theory; (3) complex system analysis has revealed the sen- 
sitivity of realistic nonlinear economic models to initial conditions; and (4) the 
work of Arrow and Debreu has implied that the existence and uniqueness of equi- 
librium depends on very strong and extremely unrealistic assumptions. The theory 
of the firm requires such narrow and unrealistic conditions that its use in describ- 
ing individual consumer and firm behavior is problematic (Radner, 1968). Using 
the theory of the firm as a foundation for describing the macroeconomy is even 
more problematic (van den Bergh and Gowdy, 2003). 
Economic man and the approach of methodological individualism may be a rea- 
sonable description of impersonal market exchange. Furthermore, the behavior of 
many individuals, perhaps as many as 25% of the population, corresponds to the 
neoclassical characterization of human behavior (Gintis, 1998). Much human 
behavior, even economic behavior, however, falls outside the scope of the narrow 
focus of the basic neoclassical model. Perhaps the major problem with methodo- 
logical individualism is its policy implications. Neoclassical theory provides an elabo- 
rate justification for the superiority of market choices. Fundamental differences 
exist, however, between the choices individuals make in the context ofmarkets and 
the choices they make in a larger context as members of a community of other 
humans (Sagoff, 1988; Gowdy, 1997, 1999). The individual-at-a-point-in-time per- 
spective of neoclassical economics (and the market economies that that theory 
describes) is particularly problematic in decisions about the use of exhaustible 
natural resources and the generation of irreducible pollution (Georgescu-Roegen, 
1975; Daly, 1991; Bromley, 1998; Gowdy and Mayumi, 2001). 
The belief in the supremacy of markets to make decisions about resource alloca- 
tion is the one idea that unites most economists. Sometimes this idea is pushed to 
extremes, as in the claim by Friedman (1963) that the more decisions that can be 
handled by the market and taken away from the ‘irrational’ political process the 
better off (the more democratic) society will be. The argument is that markets are 
democratic because they are based on the ‘dollar votes’ of individuals whose collec- 
tive wishes determine that optimal mix of commodities. The methodological rea- 
soning behind this view has been undermined by advances in economic theory. 
Arrow’s (1963) impossibility theorem essentially states that it is impossible to con- 
struct a consistent aggregation rule (a social utility function) based on individual 
preferences. In other words, it is impossible that social preferences could be ra- 
tional in the sense that society behaves as a single individual would (Mas-Colellet 
al., 1995, p. 789). Yet market-based policies, including the ‘weak sustainability’ cri- 
terion for natural resource use (Solow, 1974; Hartwick, 1978), emissions trading to 
counter global warming (Smith, 1999), and cost-benefit analysis in general (Hanley, 
1999), depend on the strong rationality assumptions that are part of methodologi- 
cal individualism and the axioms of consumer choice. 

272 
7 Euo/ution of Economics 
7.4.2 
Commensurability of Wants 
I 
‘Commensurability ofwants’ is an awkward term referring to the fact that, in neo- 
classical analysis, all the attributes of a good are reduced to a single metric. The 
implicit assumption is that all things that humans value can be reduced to some 
common denominator - utility, or to take it a step further, money. Once the objects 
of utility are reduced to a common valuation metric, then substitution, marginal 
tradeoffs, and discounting seem logical and natural. Again, this may be reasonable 
for many market goods. The relative quality or desirability of clothing items at a 
department store, for example, may be accurately reflected in their relative prices. 
When applied to features of the natural world, however, the assumption of com- 
mensurability may not be justified. Can one imagine a single measure that could 
be used to make meaningful comparisons of the values of species or ecosystems 
anywhere on the planet at any time? 
Once the idea of a common denominator ofvalue is accepted, it is a small step to 
the standard economic notion of sustainability, called weak sustainability, which 
means sustaining the output of market goods and services. Weak sustainability 
assumes that manufactured capital and natural resources are substitutable. To 
ensure that economic growth is nondeclining in the future, society need only main- 
tain the total stock of ‘capital’, not the individual components. Suppose that the 
discounted present value of the stream of income from the sustainable use of a 
rainforest is $10 million. Suppose further that you can cut down the forest, sell 
the timber, invest the money (in anything) and obtain a properly discounted in- 
come stream of $ 11 million. From the point of view of traditional cost-benefit 
economics, the decision is clear: cut down the forest. 
7.4.3 
Marginal Valuation 
Central to economic theory is the concept of marginal value, that is, the change in 
value that results from a small increase or decrease in the item being valued. Mar- 
ginal valuation is a concept so ingrained in how economists think about markets 
and value that it is difficult for many to appreciate its limits. Many sources of 
human welfare, however, are not reducible to a market context and are not prop- 
erly subject to marginal valuation. For example, when we consider the value of a 
species or an ecosystem, the concept of marginal value is problematic. Removing 
or adding one species will affect all the others in the system in largely unpredict- 
able ways. Biodiversity is characterized by functional transparency (Vatn and 
Bromley, 1994), that is, the contribution of one feature of an ecosystem cannot be 
known until it is added to or subtracted from the system. Furthermore, the effect is 
likely to be different each time a change is made. Unresolved issues in neoclassical 
utility theory call into question the universal applicability of the notion of marginal 
value. Widely used tools of neoclassical analysis, such as the marginal rate of sub- 
stitution, are called into question by the fact that some goods and services are 

I 273 
7.4 Economic Man and Economic Change 
considered to be absolutely essential and not subject to trade (Georgescu-Roegen, 
1936, 1950). This is called lexicographic preference and has been empirically veri- 
fied in several studies ofconsumer attitudes (for example, Spash and Hanley, 1995). 
The question of marginal value is fraught with conceptual as well as informa- 
tional difficulties. Georgescu-Roegen (1968) pointed out that diminishing marginal 
utility has no meaning without some notion of cardinality. It is not enough to be 
able to merely rank goods according to their utility. To construct a complete prefer- 
ence ordering we need to be able to rank not only commodity bundles but also the 
differences between them. 
7.4.4 
Consumer Sovereignty and International Trade 
An interesting twist in the evolution of economic theory and policy is the emerg- 
ing conflict between the notion of ‘consumer sovereignty’ as the starting point for 
economic analysis and the goal of efficiency in production. Randall (1988, p. 217) 
gives a lucid statement of the neoclassical view of consumer sovereignty: “The 
mainstream economic approach is doggedly nonjudgmental about people’s pref- 
erences: what the individual wants is presumed to be good for that individual.” 
Traditionally economic man and his preferences, however they are formed, have 
been the starting point for economic analysis (Stigler and Becker, 1977). Recent 
occurrences have revealed inconsistencies and tensions within economic theory 
and policy. Concerning bovine growth hormone and genetically modified crops, 
economists are coming down on the side of efficiency, not consumer sovereignty 
(Bromley, 1998). Free market based trade agreements such as GATT (General Agree- 
ment on Tariffs and Trade) also reveal the conflict between economic man and 
social reality. GATT rulings, such as the decision not to permit ‘dolphin friendly’ 
labels on tuna cans, take the position that giving consumers information about 
how something is produced is somehow outside the bounds of what market choices 
should be about. What matters in the standard view are only the physical charac- 
teristics of the final product and its price. The driving ideology behind this view is, 
I believe, a notion of economic (and social) progress through survival of the fittest 
defined as survival of the most economically efficient. In the context of methodo- 
logical individualism, commensurability or wants, and marginal valuation, the only 
things that should matter to the survival ofa product through time are the demand 
for that product and the costs of its production. If one believes in the Spencer- 
Marshall interpretation of economic evolution through survival of the most effi- 
cient, any attempt to judge a product through any quality other than its own physi- 
cal characteristics and its price is bound to interfere with the ‘natural’ workings of 
the market economy. 
Barham (1997) discusses the distinction surfacing in trade disputes between 
labeling based on product-related qualities and those based on characteristics of 
the producer such as processing and production methods or location of the pro- 
ducer. Giving consumers more information about product-related qualities is con- 
sistent with neoliberal economic theory and free-trade ideology. Labels consider- 

274 
7 Evolution of Economics 
ing the characteristics of the production process, however, are based on very differ- 
ent and broader concepts of economy and society. Barham (1997, p. 2) argues that 
the ‘social value’ ecolabeling is indicative of a larger movement which aims to 
humanize the market mechanism and which can be seen as a microcosm of the 
future evolution of economic behavior. 
New economic theories are evolving based on increasingly realistic models of 
how social beings, human and otherwise, organize themselves and how they make 
decisions. Sah and Stiglitz (1986) have constructed a model of an economic sys- 
tem that incorporates hierarchical and polyarchical information and communica- 
tion systems. The economics of altruism has been explored from neoclassical 
(Becker, 1976,1981; Samuelson, 1993) and heterodox (Bergstrom and Stark, 1993; 
Simon, 1993; Bowles and Gintis, 1999b) perspectives. New work in anthropology 
and economics stresses the evolutionary importance of social constraints on indi- 
vidual behavior (McClennen, 1990; Hawkes, 1993; Boehm, 1997) and the evolu- 
tion of social cognition (Caporael, 1997; Richerson et al., 1999; Bowles and Gintis, 
1999a). It is only a matter of time until the field of economics is transformed by 
these scientific advances in other disciplines. Although economics has been influ- 
enced by other disciplines in the past, and it is true that neoclassical theory has 
shown an uncanny ability to absorb criticism, the current challenge is different 
because it calls into question the core of standard theory. The axioms of consumer 
choice, upon which welfare economics is based, lead to false predictions about 
human behavior. 
I 
7.4.5 
The Evolutionary Roots of Economic Man 
There is a growing concern about the increasing depersonalization of modern so- 
ciety and the increasing ‘rationalization’ of everyday life. Humans today seem to be 
being rapidly transformed into economic persons. We should not lose sight of the 
fact, however, that economic man has a long lineage in the cosmology of western 
civilization. Sahlins argues that the roots of economic man lie deep within Chris- 
tian cosmology. Man was put on earth destined to a life of misery trying to satisfy 
desires that even when fulfilled only led to further misery. But as Sahlins (1996, 
p. 397) points out: 
Still, God was merciful. He gave us Economics. By Adam Smith’s time, 
human misery had been transformed into the positive science of how we 
make the best of our eternal insufficiencies, the most possible satisfaction 
from means that are always less than our wants. It was the same miserable 
condition envisioned in Christian cosmology, only bourgeoisified, an eleva- 
tion of free will into rational choice, which afforded a more cheerful view of 
the material opportunities afforded by human suffering. The genesis of 
Economics was the economics of Genesis. 
The characteristics of the economic way of thinking listed above, including the 
commensurability of wants and methodological individualism, go back many cen- 

I 275 
7.5 Contemporary Evolutionary Economics 
turies before the commodification of everyday life. In 1440 Nicholas of Cusa ar- 
gued that it was Gods will for humans to place value on His creation: 
For although the human intellect does not give being to value (i.e., does not 
create the things valued), there would nevertheless be no distinctions in value 
without it ... Wherewith we see how precious is the mind, for without it, eve- 
rything in creation would be without value (Quoted in Sahlins, 1996, p. 399). 
Methodological individualism also has a history going back long before organized 
markets. Sahlins (1996, p. 398) writes: 
Again a long line of academic ancestors - stretching back to Vico and 
Machiavelli through the Enlightenment philosophes to the English utilitar- 
ians and their latest incarnations in the Chicago School of (the) Economics 
(of Everything) -have all argued that individual self-interest in the funda- 
mental bond of society ... Out of the Sin came Society. Men congregate in 
groups and develop social relations either because it is to their respective 
advantage to do so or because they discover that other men can serve as 
means to their own ends. 
The notion that suffering is necessary for salvation is another ancient idea solidly 
ensconced in economic theory. The idea defining contemporary economics is scar- 
city, unlimited wants confronting limited means of satisfying those wants. Suffer- 
ing is also necessary on the production side of the economy. Survival of the fittest 
means extinction of the weak. As John D. Rockefeller wrote with apparent relish: 
The growth of a large business is merely a survival of the fittest ... The 
American Beauty Rose can be produced in the splendor and fragrance which 
brings cheer to its beholder only by sacrificing the early buds which grow 
up around it (Quoted in Penrose, 1952, p. 809). 
Schumpeter’s ‘creative destruction’ interpretation of the business cycle is an idea 
whose origins lie in the beginnings of agricultural society. The seasonal death and 
resurrection of crops probably gave birth to the idea that we have to sacrifice and 
suffer to make ourselves better, an idea enshrined in world religions and in the 
institution of capitalism. 
7.5 
Contemporary Evolutionary Economics 
It is not much of an exaggeration to say that modern evolutionary economics be- 
gan with the publication in 1982 of Nelson and Winter’s book An Evolutionary 
Theory of Economic Change. The book is something of an enigma, in that is has 
been claimed both by essentially neoclassical economists and by those who argue 
for a nonequilibrium, nonmarginalist approach. Vromen (1995, Chapter 4), for 
example, argues that Nelson and Winter’s work represents “an extension of the 
basic beliefs of ‘orthodox’ theorists such as Alchian and Friedman”. If one believes 

276 
7 Evolution of Economics 
Nelson and Winter’s own words, however, their intellectual debt is to Schumpeter 
and Herbert Simon. Regarding Simon they write (Nelson and Winter, 1982, p. ix): 
“His work encouraged us in the view that there is much more to be said on the 
problem of rational behavior in the world of reality than can be adequately stated 
in the language of orthodox economic theory.” 
A deficiency in Friedman’s ‘survival ofthe fittest’ argument for the existing array 
of firms in a capitalist economy is the lack of a gene-equivalent in economic evolu- 
tion. Friedman’s position has been pointedly criticized on this point by Penrose 
(1952), Winter (1964,1971,1975), and Hodgson (1993a, 1994). Nelson and Winter 
(1982) argue that the carrier of economic information is production is the ‘rou- 
tine’. Routines range from well specified technical procedures to business strate- 
gies, and they play the role genes do in evolutionary biology. Nelson and Winter 
(1982) present a series of simulation models to examine a variety of assumptions 
about firm behavior. Although their simulations are limited to marginal changes, 
not Schumpeterian quantitative leaps, Nelson and Winter show clearly that in an 
evolutionary system, convergence to equilibrium is a special case requiring nu- 
merous restrictive assumptions. A good analysis of economic evolution should 
provide relevant and meaningful policy recommendations. And according to Nel- 
son and Winter (1982, p. 413): “Orthodox theory cannot adequately provide that 
analysis and understanding because, fundamentally, it is about an ahistorical world 
in which genuine novelties do not arise.” 
The lack of a specific unit of inheritance - a gene-equivalent - is a problem that 
has plagued theories of economic evolution for decades. In the early 1950s several 
economists applied the metaphor of natural selection to the theory of the firm. 
Alchian (1950) argued that, because of the natural selection operating on firms, 
they need not be conscious maximizers. Like Friedman (1953) he asserts that evo- 
lutionary processes, namely survival of the fittest (most efficient) firms, will insure 
that profit maximizers survive whether or not they overtly try to maximize profit. 
Alchian’s position was criticized by Penrose (1952) because of the lack of a gene- 
equivalent in the economic world. Interestingly, as Hodgson (1994) pointed out, in 
a later work Penrose (1959) at least implicitly proposed a theory of economic evolu- 
tion and transmission of knowledge through routines, foreshadowing the work of 
Nelson and Winter. Penrose parted company with neoclassical economists on sev- 
eral other points (Best and Garnsey, 1999). First she recognized the importance of 
contingency and moving equilibria (see her 1995 preface to the reissued The Theory 
of the Growth of the Fim). Second, she argued that firms are not passive agents 
responding like optimizing automatons to changing external conditions, but rather 
consciously shape their economic environments. Finally, she recognized the im- 
portance of increasing returns to the economic development of the 20th century. 
Enke (1951) also argued that, because of survival of the fittest, in the long run only 
optimizers survive. The article that has perhaps had a greater impact than any other 
on economics is Friedman’s 1953 paper “The methodology of positive economics”, 
an uncompromising defense of methodological individualism, the separation of 
‘positive’ from ‘normative’ economics, and a survival-of-the-fittest justification for 
market outcomes. In an oft-quoted paragraph Friedman (1953, p. 22) wrote: 
I 

I 277 
7.5 Contemporary Evolutionary Economics 
Let the apparent immediate determinant of business behavior be anything 
at all - habitual reaction, random chance, or whatnot. Whenever this deter- 
minant happens to lead to behavior consistent with rational and informed 
maximization of returns, the business will prosper and acquire resources 
with which to expand; whenever it does not, the business will tend to lose 
resources and can be kept in existence only by the addition of resources 
from the outside. The process of ‘natural selection’ thus helps to validate 
the hypothesis - or, rather, given natural selection, acceptance of the hy- 
pothesis can be based largely on the judgment that it summarizes appro- 
priately the conditions for survival. 
Winter (1964) made a telling criticism of Friedman’s maximization hypothesis. For 
selection to work there must be some superior quality or characteristic of a surviv- 
ing firm that is passed on from generation to generation. Unless there are charac- 
teristics that can be identified and traced through time, Friedman’s survival of the 
fittest argument is a mere tautology. Profit maximizers survive and if a firm sur- 
vives that means it is a profit maximizer. Although it is not necessary to have a firm 
‘gene’ that determines fitness, there must be some identifiable underlying charac- 
teristic that works on the firm ‘phenotype’ (Hodgson, 1994). According to Winter 
(1988, p. 616), 
Evolutionary economics thus attaches central importance to a question that 
is not merely unanswered, but unasked in the context of orthodox economic 
theory: what are the social processes by which productive knowledge is stored? 
Identifying such processes is critical in understanding economic evolution. Even 
if specific routines could be identified there are several objections to applying the 
survival of the fittest argument to firms: 
1. There must be some mechanism for radical innovations (mutations) to enter 
the existing mix of routines. Schumpeter’s cycle of creative destruction pro- 
vides the environment for innovation but not the mechanism through which 
mutations are created. 
2. The economic environment is not exogenous to the firm. Firm behavior ac- 
tively shapes its environment and its success or failure alters that environment 
(Penrose, 1959; Nelson and Winter, 1982; Hodgson, 1994). 
3. Accidents of history may favor less efficient firms or technology. Examples in- 
clude the adoption of the QWERTY typewriter keyboard and the survival of the 
VHS video recording system over the apparently superior Beta technology (Gould 
and Lewontin, 1979; David, 1985). 
4. Increasing returns to scale may favor first, but less efficient, entrants in the 
market over superior later entrants (Arthur, 1989). 

278 
7 Evohtion of Economics 
7.6 
Beyond Methodological Individualism in Biology and Economics 
I 
The philosophical debates in economics and evolutionary biology are remarkably 
similar. Furthermore, the resolution of these debates is heading toward similar 
outcomes in both fields of inquiry. We have seen that the cornerstone of orthodox 
economic theory is the notion of economic man, existing at an isolated point in 
space and time devoid of cultural and environmental context. For most of this 20th 
century orthodox evolutionary theory in biology also focused on individual units 
and generally eschewed a holistic approach. The ‘virtue of selfishness’ has been a 
major theme in biology as well as in economics. Ghiselin (1974, p. 247, quoted in 
Sober and Wilson, 1998) wrote: 
The economy of nature is competitive from beginning to end ... The im- 
pulses that lead one animal to sacrifice himself for another turn out to have 
their ultimate rationale in gaining advantage over a third ... Where it is in 
his own interest, every organism may reasonably be expected to aid his 
fellows ... Yet given a full chance to act in his own interest, nothing but 
expediency will restrain him from brutalizing, from maiming, from mur- 
dering - his brother, his mate, his parent, or his child. Scratch an ‘altruist’, 
and watch a ‘hypocrite’ bleed. 
Such sentiments would warm the cockles of many an economist’s heart. This view 
of the biological world mirrors the orthodox view of the economy. Nature and the 
market economy are both filled with utility-maximizing individuals with no room 
for cooperation except for one individual to gain an advantage over others. 
7.6.1 
Beyond the Selfish Gene 
The ‘economic man’ of biology is the ‘selfish gene’. And like its economic counter- 
part, it has also come under attack. For one thing, recent research indicates that 
the genotype/phenotype distinction is not as clear as it once seemed. Apparently, 
genetic information is contained in other than germ cells. For example, if 
Paramecium cilia are removed and put back in the reversed position, this induced 
cilia reversal is inherited by subsequent generations (Margulis, 1998). Experiments 
like this indicate that organisms are more than mere carriers of genes. There is 
apparently a lot of interplay upward and downward in the hierarchy of life proc- 
esses. It has also been discovered that simple organisms actually exchange genetic 
material with each other (R. V. Miller, 1998). More remarkably, although the idea is 
still controversial, it is increasingly accepted that a key process in the evolution of 
higher organisms is endosymbiosis, the creation of new tissues, organs, or species 
through the symbiotic joining of separate organisms. Mitochondria, for example, 
are respiratory organelles ubiquitous in cells, which apparently evolved separately 
then entered eukaryotic cells in a symbiotic relationship (Sapp, 1994). The sepa- 
rate evolutionary origin of mitochondria is confirmed by the fact that they contain 

I 279 
7.G Beyond Methodological Individualism in Biology and Economics 
bacteria-like DNA distinct from that found in the nuclei of the cells they inhabit. 
What we consider to be groups of ‘individuals’ are actually groups of organisms 
symbiotically cooperating. Margulis (1998, p. 11) gave this example: 
Ophrydium, a pond water scum that, upon close inspection, seems to be 
countable green ‘jelly ball’ bodies is an example of emergent individuality 
that we recently discovered in Massachusetts and redescribed. Our films 
show these water balls with exquisite clarity. The larger ‘individual’ green 
jelly ball is composed of smaller cone-shaped actively contractile ‘individu- 
als’. These in turn are composite: green Chlorella dwell inside ciliates, all 
packed into rows. Inside each upside-down cone are hundreds of spherical 
symbionts, cells of Chlorella. Chlorella is a common green alga; the algae of 
Ophrydium are trapped into service for the jelly ball community. Each ‘indi- 
vidual organism’ in this ‘species’ is really a group, a membrane-bounded 
packet of microbes that looks like and acts as a single individual. 
Organisms in mature ecosystems such as old-growth forests, undisturbed deserts, 
and coral reefs are bound together in a complex web of mutually beneficial rela- 
tionships. Fungi in old-growth forests act as conduits for nutrients that link di- 
verse species together in one huge symbiotic relationship. Trees routinely share 
water with neighboring plants during the night when transpiration is low (Yoon, 
1993b). This keeps nearby plants thriving and thus helps hold moisture and soil. 
When forests are attacked by insects, trees send out chemical warnings to 
neighboring tress, which then release other chemicals to protect themselves from 
the impending insect invasion. All these examples could probably be forced into 
the ‘pure selfishness’ model but at what intellectual cost? 
Corning (1997, p. 382) pointed out that E. 0. Wilson, considered to be one ofthe 
premier genetic determinists, wrote in the critical second chapter of Sociobiology, 
“The higher properties of life are emergent”. Wilson is even more emphatic in his 
recent work Consilience (Wilson, 1998, p. 137): “The accepted explanation of cau- 
sality from genes to culture, as from genes to any other product of life, is not 
heredity alone. It is not environment alone. It is interaction between the two.” 
Dawkins himself wrote in The Blind Watchmaker (Dawkins, 1986, pp. 170-171): 
In a sense, the whole process of embryonic development can be looked 
upon as a cooperative venture, jointly run by thousands of genes together. 
Embryos are put together by all the working genes in the developing organ- 
ism, in collaboration with one another ... We have a picture of teams of 
genes all evolving toward cooperative solutions to problems ... It is the ‘team’ 
that evolves. 
These and other examples from ecology do not deny that competition exists and do 
not imply that the world is one happy community joined together in an exclusively 
cooperative arrangement. competition exists, but it is of a much more compli- 
cated sort than that assumed by the selfish gene of biology or the economic man of 
the market. Competition is more complicated than isolated individuals transpar- 
ently competing for immediate gain. It takes place between groups as well as be- 

280 
7 Euohtion ofEconornics 
tween individuals. And cooperation is more complicated than a simple tit-for-tat 
strategy and goes beyond reciprocal altruism and kin selection. 
I 
7.6.2 
The Evolution of Cooperation and Multilevel Selection 
One of the most hotly debated topics in evolutionary biology is group selection, a 
concept whose definition has become increasingly slippery. As Corning (1 997) 
pointed out, natural selection above the level of the individual was a quite acccpt- 
able idea to Darwin, Wallace, and Spencer, who all believed in the differential sur- 
vival of groups. Even Sewall Wright, one ofthe key founders of the modern synthc- 
sis of genetic and morphological biology, used the term ‘interdemic selection’ to 
characterize selection among discrete breeding groups or ‘demes’ (Corning, 1997, 
p. 364). During the 20th century, however, explanations of evolutionary change 
became more and more reductionist, culminating in Richard Dawkins’ influential 
book The Se&h Gene (1976). This trend was to some extent a reaction to meta- 
physical theories of the evolution ofa higher consciousness, such as Theilhard de 
Chardin’s noosphere. Any attempt to stray beyond the straight and narrow path of- 
methodological individualism was met with skepticism, if not outright hostility. 
As recounted by Corning (1997), the first real skirmish between group selec- 
tionists and ultra-Darwinians occurred in the 1960s with the publication of Wynne- 
Edwards’ (1962) book Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behavior and the strong 
adverse reaction to it by Hamilton (1964a, b), Williams (1966), and to a lesser ex- 
tent, E. 0. Wilson (1975). Two theoretical extensions of Dawkin’s selfish gene theory 
were used to attack Wynne-Edwards formulation of group selection. One was kin 
selection (Alexander, 1987), which argued that apparently altruistic behavior is ge- 
netically based, because altruists are actually protecting their own genes by help- 
ing close relatives survive. The other was reciprocal altruism (Trivers, 1985), which 
argued that apparent altruism was based on the expectation that favors would be 
returned. 
For a few years after these exchanges, any notion of group selection as a factor in 
evolution was considered to be unscientific. G. C. William’s book Adaptation and 
Natural Selection was especially influential in debunking group selection. Sober 
and Wilson (1998, p. 5) wrote, “For the next decade [after the publication of William’s 
book,] group selection theory was widely regarded as not just false but as off-limits, 
as far as serious evolutionary thought was concerned.” In the 1980s and 1990s, for 
a number of reasons, there was a resurgence of interest in group or ‘multilevel’ 
selection (Boyd and Richerson, 1985; Wilson, 1997; White, 1998). Group selection 
means that the fitness of every member of the group depends on a group charac- 
teristic that is not isolated in an individual. There is mounting evidence that groups 
characterized by non-kin and nonreciprocal altruism may outcompete groups com- 
posed of selfish individuals or individuals showing only kin and reciprocal altru- 
ism. The existence of group selection has important implications for the neo-Dar- 
winian view (in biology and economics) that all evolutionary change is driven by 
individual characteristics alone (Depew and Weber, 1997; Wynne-Edwards, 1991). 

I 281 
7. G Beyond Methodological Individualism in Biology and Economics 
D. S. Wilson (1975, 1980) uses the phrase ‘trait group selection’ to refer to link- 
ages between two or more individuals which themselves become a mechanism of 
differential survival rates (Corning, 1996,1997,1998). Maynard Smith (1982) made 
a similar case for what he termed synergistic selection. Examples of non-kin-based 
cooperation include food sharing among vampire bats (Willunson, 1990), coopera- 
tive raising of young among unrelated Florida scrub jays, and group hunting among 
female African lions (Scheel and Packer, 1991). Cooperation may also take the 
form of ‘superorganisms’ (Corning, 1997), including social insects (Wilson, 1974) 
and social mammals such as the naked mole rat (Sherman et al., 1991). 
7.6.3 
Social Cognition and Economic Theory 
A large body of evidence suggests that human groups engage in a cognitive divi- 
sion of labor. When groups are assigned specific tasks in experimental studies, 
such as assembling radios, individual members specialized in remembering dif- 
ferent aspects of the assembly process, thus enhancing group performance (Liang 
et al., 1995). Caporael (1997) wrote: 
Group coordination implies that individuals may be ‘units’ of larger func- 
tional entities that cannot be reduced to mere aggregates of autonomously 
behaving individuals. Accordingly, human cognition could be viewed, at 
least under some circumstances, as truly social, interdependent with social 
context and not just ‘in the head of the individual organizer. To make tem- 
porary and limited use of the information-processing metaphor, humans 
would be part of a ‘network‘, participating in ‘truly social’ (i.e., irreducible 
to individual level) groups. This is not to say that there is a transcendental 
‘group mind. Rather, it identifies the problem of coordination as the ‘cen- 
tral problem’ for human evolutionary analysis. 
Human societies are characterized by top-down and bottom-up hierarchical con- 
trol. Individual behavior may be constrained by upper level rulers or by customs 
and mores imposed at the lower level by all members of the group. Humans are 
capable of a wide range of behavior, and any trait or combination of traits may be 
emphasized by particular cultures. Studies of nonmarket societies have provided a 
wealth of information about the incredible variety of human behaviors and about 
the peculiarity of the notion that greed and selfishness is always a dominant hu- 
man characteristic (Gowdy, 1999). During most of our existence as a species, we 
lived in small bands ofhunter-gatherers. Among these groups a highly stable egali- 
tarianism arose as a survival mechanism. Boehm (1997) argues that cooperative 
human institutions had a great impact on our physical evolution. Competition 
among males was reduced (see Lee, 1993; Gowdy, 1998), as was the intensity of 
selection within the group, thereby reducing variation among phenotypes (Boehm, 
1997, p. S100). 
In economics, the phenomenon of group selection has been recognized among 
product groups, industries, and even countries (Gowdy and Seidl, 2004). Tisdell 

282 
7 Evolution of Economics 
(1998) argues that there is a strong advantage for diversity and cooperation within 
industrial organizations and that this can make it inefficient to be on the neoclas- 
sical production frontier. To have a diverse array of firms within an industry can 
give a competitive advantage, in part due to that industry having more potential 
avenues to take advantage of new innovations. An entire industry can have an 
evolutionary advantage by keeping options open, especially in periods of rapid 
change. Tisdell gives the example of the very successful economic transition of 
China, which was driven by diverse village enterprises, as opposed to the unsuc- 
cessful transitions of Vietnam and the former Soviet Union, which lacked such 
diversity in their industrial structures. 
The work of Bowles and Gintis (1999a, b) also brings a modern evolutionary 
perspective to economics. In examinations of the economics of egalitarianism, 
they focus on the evolution of group selection and what they term ‘strong reciproc- 
ity’. Using data from a variety of human societies, they argue convincingly that 
Homo reciprocans is as distinctively human as Homo economicus. As D. S. Wilson 
(1999) points out, evolutionary models predict that a single population contains a 
variety of behavioral patterns. In a commentary on Bowles and Gintis’ (1999a) 
paper, Wilson writes: 
I 
Economic models also frequently predict mixed outcomes, but the irnagc 
of human populations as a community of interacting behavioral strategies 
has not emerged as strongly from economic theory as from evolutionary 
theory. It is therefore gratifying that Bowles and Gintis emphasize the pos- 
sibility of more than one human nature; human populations may consist 
of a spectrum from extreme altruists to extreme sociopaths. In addition to 
this theoretical plausibility, there is growing empirical evidence that a pro- 
pensity to cooperate or exploit forms an important axis of human behavioral 
variation. Seeing human groups as both communities of interacting strate- 
gies and (partially) adaptive units deserves to become a major theme in the 
future. 
Most of the literature on the altruism-cooperation-selfishness debate focuses on 
the consumer. Perhaps this is because the profit motive that drives production 
seems transparently individualistic. A closer look at the structure of production, 
however, shows a complex web of competition, cooperation, and mutualism. Most 
industries are examples of mutually reinforcing symbiotic relationships. The theory 
on regional economics in particular contains a variety of concepts recognizing in- 
terdependence and mutual advantage. ‘Agglomeration’, for example, refers to the 
mutual economic advantage of several firms being located together. Increasing 
returns to scale through economic growth is also a phenomenon through which 
all firms mutually benefit. Growth of several enterprises lets all of them increase 
the scale of operation and potentially produce goods more cheaply. Increasing re- 
turns may be the driving force behind the phenomenal rate of economic growth in 
the 20th century (Arthur, 1989). The basis of input-output analysis is the recogni- 
tion of mutual interdependence in a modern economy. In general, firms rise and 
fall together with the prevailing business climate. Division of risks is also present 

I 283 
7. G Beyond Methodological Individualism in Biology and Economics 
in a complex economy. Some parts of the economy are highly competitive, with 
high rates of return and a high rate of technological change. Other parts of the 
economy are less volatile, with lower but steady profits and less risk. 
7.6.4 
Evolutionary Game Theory 
Game theory was once a bastion of orthodoxy in economics and is still roundly 
criticized by many heterodox economists who see it as being just another variation 
in the selfishness-can-explain-all school of economics. Blaug (1998, p. 18) is par- 
ticularly harsh in his verdict on game theory: 
But game theory has turned out to be an even more seductive technique for 
economists than general equilibrium theory, encouraging once again the 
persistent tendency ofmodern economists to look away from the world and 
engage instead in armchair deductive theorizing. 
In contrast, Corning (1997, p. 370) argues that game theory, seen in its proper 
light, can provide great insights into a realistic, holistic view of economic evolu- 
tion. He also argues that traditional game theoretic models such as the Prisoner’s 
Dilemma are in effect rigged to favor selfish behavior that duplicates market out- 
comes. Players are not allowed to communicate, defectors are rewarded for cheat- 
ing, and cooperators have no power to punish cheating. In nature and in the 
economy, none of these assumptions typically hold. In recent applications of game 
theory, these restrictive assumptions are relaxed and, as in iterative games, coop- 
eration becomes the preferred strategy. A case in point are the ultimatum and 
dictator games which, in a variety of cultural settings, have shown a strong predi- 
lection for altruistic behavior among humans (Gowdy et al., 2004). 
Gintis (2000) makes a case for game theory as a universal language for the sci- 
ences of biology, anthropology, sociology, political science, psychology, and eco- 
nomics. Gintis (2000) says that games theory’s bad name comes from its whole- 
sale adoption of Homo economicus from traditional economic theory: 
Homo economicus is great when people are faced with anonymous market- 
like conditions, but not otherwise. Experimental techniques have a lot to 
teach us about choice and strategic interaction, and it’s up to us to develop 
rigorous, testable models of real human behavior. 
Bowles and Gintis (1999b) use a game theoretic approach to demonstrate the evo- 
lutionary feasibility of strong reciprocity, that is, cooperative behavior not based on 
reciprocal altruism (weak reciprocity). They use their experimental results, as well 
as case studies ofhunting and gathering societies, to argue that sharing is as much 
‘normal’ human behavior as is selfishness. 
Gintis (2000, Chapter 11) summarizes a number of findings by psychologists 
about how people make decisions (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974; Kahneman et 
al., 1982; Shafir and Tversky, 1992, 1995). For example, people are about twice as 
averse to losses as to accepting the same amount of gain. This is partly due to the 

284 
7 Evolution of Economics 
‘endowment effect’, by which people place higher values on things they already 
possess than on the same things they do not have. Bringing more realistic models 
of human behavior into economic theory has important policy implications, par- 
ticularly for the kinds of cost-benefit analysis widely used to value environmental 
goods. Findings from game theory and psychology help to explain the apparent 
anomaly from ‘contingent valuation’ surveys showing that people place much high 
values on environmental goods evaluated on willingness to accept a loss (WTA) as 
compared to willingness to pay for a gain (WTP). It also implies that policies for 
environmental protection should be based on higher WTA estimates even though 
lower WTP estimates are usually used. Of potentially immense importance to choice 
theory is the finding from neurological research that decisions are made in the 
human brain by reconciling various structurally distinct and spatially separated 
areas that probably evolved at different evolutionary stages (Gintis, 2000). Again, 
these findings question the validity ofthe model of human behavior that lies at the 
core of neoclassical theory. Models based on true altruism, social cognition, coop- 
eration, and learning by doing are proving to be better predictors of behavior than 
the selfish model of economic man. 
I 
7.6.5 
Cooperation as Evolutionary Progress 
Another contentious issue in evolutionary biology is the notion of progress. The 
general view is that progress can be equated with increasing complexity and that 
life has progressed from simple organisms to more complex ones, culminating in 
nature’s greatest achievement, the human species. Even if most biologists reject 
such an obviously culturally conditioned interpretation of evolution, the trend to- 
ward increasing complexity seems obvious. Or is it? Attempts to test specific ex- 
amples of the evolution of complexity are inconclusive. One study examining the 
evolution of mammalian backbones concluded that the overall course of evolution 
shows no trend toward complexity (Thomas and Reif, 1993). Neither does the evo- 
lution of shells of marine animals show a trend toward increasing complexity. 
Yoon (1993a) summaries these studies: 
The outer limit of complexity may increase over time, as an occasional lineage of 
organisms becomes more complex. But at the same time other species may be 
growing less complex. Thus over all, within a given assemblage of species, there is 
no evident evolutionary drive toward greater complexity. 
And of course, the ‘lower’ animals, bacteria, and other simple organisms, in- 
cluding forms of early life on earth, are still with us and have thus proven to be just 
as ‘successful’ and ‘modern’ as we are. These findings have prompted Gould (1988) 
to write: “Progress is a noxious, culturally embedded, untestable, nonoperational, 
intractable idea that must be replaced if we wished to understand the patterns of 
history. ” 
Notions of progress are deeply embodied in economic theory. In the standard 
view, market economies progress through the competition-induced drive toward 
efficiency. Economic growth itself is seen as a sign of progress. In a widely used 

I 285 
7. G Beyond Methodological individualism in Biology and Economics 
microeconomics text, Mansfield (1991, p. 9) wrote, “The goal of economic growth 
is a relatively new oe; most past societies have had economies that were un- 
progressive.” The neoclassical model of perfect competition invites a progressivist 
interpretation. Even some of the alternatives to the unlimited-growth assumptions 
of neoclassical economists still argue for continual progress, for example, the green 
alternative to the Gross Domestic Product, the ‘Genuine Progress Indicator’. 
Stewart (1997) resurrected the notion of progress by arguing that evolution is 
characterized by an increasing level of cooperation among living processes. He 
argues (Stewart 1997, p. 340) that life itself originated through the formation of 
cooperative hierarchical structures: 
A key step in the evolution oflife is the emergence of relatively large, stable 
molecules (or groups of molecules, as in an autocatalytic set) which use 
their capacity to control and manage the activities of smaller-scale atoms 
and molecules to maintain themselves and to produce replicas of them- 
selves. Again, the essence of this evolution is the discovery by managing 
entities of ways of controlling and coordinating other entities so as to en- 
hance the evolutionary interests of the managing entities and the assem- 
blage as a whole. The result is the formation of hierarchical organizations 
such as the autocatalytic sets which manage proto metabolisms, as described 
by Bagley and Farmer (1991). 
Stewart (1997, p. 342) sees three key steps in the history of life on earth, each of 
which involved the evolution of cooperative organizations. The first step was the 
formation of macromolecules to form a reproducing assemblage. The second was 
the management ofthese assemblages by RNA to form prokaryotic cells. The third 
was the management by DNA to form eukaryotic cells (Cavalier-Smith, 1981). Com- 
plex organisms can be seen as cooperative associations of different organ systems 
(Margulis, 1998). 
The traditional view of progress in economics is the continual improvement in 
efficiency in production, that is, a technological or managerial advance that allows 
the production of a given level of output with fewer inputs. For an individual firm, 
an increase in efficiency is an unambiguous improvement if something can be 
produced more cheaply. What meaning does this have, however, for the macro- 
economy? The standard argument is that increases in efficiency free up scarce 
resources that can then be used to produce more economic goods and that more 
economic goods increases the total welfare of human society. The view of effi- 
ciency as progress, then, hinges on one of the basic assumptions of economic 
man, more is always preferred to less. Likewise, the belief that the specific array of 
goods produced is ‘optimal’ depends on the rationality of each individual consum- 
er’s choices. 

286 
7 Evolution of Economics 
7.7 
Coevolution, Evolutionary Theory, and Economic Policy 
I 
Coevolution applied to human society refers to the fact that not only are humans 
shaped by their environment, they are in turn profoundly affected by that environ- 
ment. About SO million years ago the climate of the earth began to change dramati- 
cally as temperatures fell and climatic fluctuations increased. These changes af- 
fected mammalian evolution in still poorly understood but intriguing ways. For 
example, during this period of climatic instability the brain size increased in many 
species (Jerison, 1973), perhaps because intelligence became a new evolutionary 
advantage in dealing with rapidly changing conditions. The evolution of our spe- 
cies was shaped by changing environmental conditions in East Africa. Richerson 
and Boyd (2000) argue that a destabilized, unpredictable climate gave an evolu- 
tionary advantage to increased cognitive complexity that outweighed the costs of a 
greater metabolic requirement. Climate deterioration in the Pleistocene was par- 
ticularly rapid, and this is the period in which brain size increased most dramati- 
cally. According to Vrba‘s (1985) turnover pulse hypothesis, the major punctuations 
in human brain evolution that occurred about 1.8 millions years ago (Austrulopithecus 
to Homo erectus), and about 200 000 years ago (the appearance of Homo supiens) 
were driven by extreme climate events. As discussed above, perhaps the most pro- 
found cultural and technological shift in the history of our species, the adoption of 
agriculture, was likely spurred by the unprecedented climate stability of the 
Holocene. Potts (199G, p. 121) argues that lithic tool making gave humans the 
ability to switch from one type of prey to another as the others became scarce or 
extinct due to climate change. Humans gained an advantage over other species in 
terms of adaptability because of their reliance on exosomatic (outside the body) 
rather than endosomatic (part of the body) tools (Lotka, 1924; Georgescu-Roegen, 
1977). The invention of tools freed our ancestors from an exclusive reliance on 
evolved part-ofthe-body ‘tools’, such as sharper fangs or longer legs. The unique 
characteristics of our species were shaped by biological and cultural adaptations to 
climate changes. 
Not only has a changing environment driven human evolution, humans have 
also profoundly affected the ecosystems we live in. For about 99% of our existence, 
humans lived as hunter-gatherers within the limits of particular ecosystems. Even 
such technologically simple societies, however, had profound effects on the land- 
scape. Selective hunting and gathering patterns favor some species over others. In 
many parts of the world humans modified the land through the selective use of 
fire. Humans are not unique in this respect. The environment-modifying impacts 
of such animals as elephants and beavers are well known, but even small, less 
intrusive animals can have large effects. 
With the advent of agriculture, the human impact on the natural world increased 
by several orders of magnitude. No only were animals and plants selectively har- 
vested, but competitors for human food were systematically eliminated. As with 
the adoption of tool making by hunter-gatherers, so with the widespread use of 
agriculture humans substituted technology for environmental adaptation. As hu- 

7.7 Coevolution, Evolutionary Theory, and Economic Policy 
287 
man hunter-gatherers we did not evolve physical adaptations to exploit specific 
environmental resources but rather opted for a more generalized and flexible ap- 
proach using tools. As agriculturalists we gave up cultural adaptations to specific 
ecosystems in favor of a more general technique (agriculture) that could be applied 
to a wider variety of ecosystems. 
In the industrial age we have come to dominate the planet as never before. 
McKibbin (1989) argues that the late 20th century witnessed the ‘end of nature’. By 
this he means that no place on earth is unaffected by human presence. The mod- 
ern irony is that we have broken out of the limits imposed on us by local ecosys- 
tems only to enter once again an era of ecosystem limits; limits imposed by the 
finiteness of earth itself. Eldredge (1995) wrote: 
I 
For 10 000 years, all but a remnant handful of hunting-gathering societies 
have been living outside the normal, local-ecosystem confines of nature. 
That is why our cultural heritage proclaims us to be something apart from, 
even over and above, the beasts ofthe field ... We need an updated story, one 
that acknowledges that we did not so much leave the natural world as rede- 
fine our position in it. It is simply not true that our future is in any real 
sense independent of the future of the rest of the global system. 
The market economy is organized to use resources for economic growth and to 
substitute one resource for another as the first becomes relatively scarce. This strat- 
egy has been remarkably successful in producing a dizzying array of consumer 
goods for a sizable minority of the worlds population. As discussed above, this 
economic system originates with a set of ethical beliefs probably going back to the 
beginnings of agriculture. Numerous past societies have had similar beliefs, only 
to disintegrate when they came up against the limits imposed by local ecosystems. 
Our world market economy may, of course, really be different. Unlike earlier soci- 
eties that lacked our science and technology, we may be able to plan, substitute, 
and mitigate the negative impacts we are now having on the planet. 
On the other hand, it may already be too late. The warning signs are ominous. 
The loss of biological diversity is reaching the level of the great extinction episodes 
of the past 600 million years of complex life on earth. Climate change seems to be 
accelerating and may have already led to destabilizing the earth‘s climate. A recent 
study discovered that, in recent years, the Arctic ice mass has been thawing at a 
rate of about 15% per decade and that that rate is probably increasing. Since 1970 
the total volume of Arctic ice has decreased by about 40% (Kerr, 1999). When such 
rapid melting has occurred in the past, the ocean circulation system has been al- 
tered and this has led, paradoxically, to a period of rapid cooling. In the past, cool- 
ing of Europe and North America occurred abruptly during warming trends as the 
great North Atlantic current, which brings warm water from the tropics north- 
ward, slowed or even reversed. This reversal was caused by the inundation of fresh 
water from polar melting which prevented the heavier, saltier water from sinking 
and driving the climate conveyor belt. Should this current reversal happen again, it 
will have unknown but probably severe effects on world agriculture. Researchers 
predict that the rate of sea-ice melting will increase if emissions of heat-trapping 

288 
7 Evolution of Economics 
greenhouse gases continue at the present rate (Vinnikov et al., 1999). The damage 
we have done may have already sealed our fate ifthe world agricultural system that 
now feeds over 6 billion people is crippled by volatile and unpredictable weather. 
The economy is a complex hierarchical system that depends on social institu- 
tions, physical inputs from the natural world, and competing and cooperating col- 
lections of agents and ethical beliefs. Like past civilizations, ours has opportu- 
nistically exploited natural resources and overcome the resulting scarcity of 
particular resources with technological advances. Unlike past cultures that over- 
shot their environmental base, we do not have the option of moving to a new area 
and starting over. A defining feature of our species is flexibility. As hunter-gather- 
ers our larger brains gave us the ability to use tools to adapt to rapidly changing 
climates when other species were driven to extinction. Likewise, agriculture ena- 
bled humans to move beyond the limits of specific ecosystems and reshape and 
exploit a variety of environments. The latest human engine of adaptability, the 
market economy, has enabled us to take substitution to a new level. Markets have 
made it possible for humans to exhaust natural resources, eliminate species and 
entire ecosystems, and even change worldwide atmospheric conditions without 
affecting the expansion of our economies or our population. As outlined above, 
however, there are good reasons to believe that the process of intensified exploita- 
tion through substitution and adaptability will once again come to an end. And the 
collapse next time will be worldwide, not confined to a small region of the planet. 
It may well be that, paradoxically, our adaptability is itself an overspecialization 
which will lead to the extinction of our species. 
On the other hand, applying an evolutionary approach may help us to under- 
stand the power of the market to both allocate resources and to systematically de- 
stroy the social and biological basis for human existence. The field of economics is 
currently undergoing a radical change that is makmg it more dynamic, more inter- 
disciplinary, more scientific, and more relevant to the problems we face in this 
new century. The new evolutionary approach has the potential to move economic 
policy in a direction that will take into account the complexities ofhuman decision 
making and the complexities of the interactions between economy, society, and 
environment. Perhaps our flexibility and adaptability will allow us to make the 
drastic changes necessary to insure our survival. 
I 
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank Paul Christensen, Irmi Seidl, Marsha Walton, and Franz 
Wuketits for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this chapter. 

7.8 References I 289 
7.8 
References 
ALCHIAN, 
A. (1950) Uncertainty, evolution and economic theory. Journal of 
Political Economy 58, 211-222. 
ALEXANDER, 
R. (1987) The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY Aldine de 
Gruyter. 
ALLEY, 
R. B., LYNCH-STIEGLITZ, 
J., SEVERINGHAUS, 
J. (1999) Global climate 
change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U S A  96, 9987-9988. 
ARROW, K. (1963) Social Choices and Individual Values. New York Wiley. 
ARTHUR, B. (1989) Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-in by 
historical events. EconomicJournal99, 116-131. 
BAGLEY, R. J., FARMER, J. D. (1991) Spontaneous emergence of a metabolism. In: 
Art$cial Liji 11 (Eds. C. LANGTON, C. TAYLOR, 
J. D. FARMER, S. RASMUSSEN). 
Reading MA: Addison-Wesley, pp. 93-140. 
BAHN, P., FLENLEY, 
J. (1992) Easter Island, Earth Island. London and New York: 
Thames and Hudson. 
BALTER, M. (1998) Why settle down? the mystery of communities. Science 282, 
BARHAM, E. (1997) What’s in a name? eco-labeling in the global food system. 
1442-1445. 
Joint Meetings of the Agriculture, Food, and Human Values Society and the Asso- 
ciation for the Study of Food and Society, Madison, Wisconsin, June 5-8, 1997. 
sociobiology. Journal of Economic Literature 14, 817-826. 
Press. 
macroeconomics: an evolutionary perspective. Cambridge Journal of Economics 
BECKER, G. (1976) Altruism, egoism, and genetic fitness: economics and 
BECKER, G. 
(1981) A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
BERGH, C. J. M. VAN DEN, GOWDY, 
7. (2003) The microfoundations of 
27,65-84. 
BERGSTROM, T., STARK, 
0. (1993) How altruism can prevail in an evolutionary 
BEST, M., GARNSEY, 
E. (1999) Edith Penrose 19141999. Economic Journal 109, 
BLAUG, M. (1998) Disturbing currents in modern economics. Challenge, 
BOEHM, C. (1997) Impact of the human egalitarian syndrome on Darwinian 
environment. American Economic Review 83,149-155. 
F 187-F201. 
May/ June 1998. 
selection mechanisms. The American Naturalist, 150 (Supplement), 
pp. 100-121. 
BOWLES, S., GINTIS, H. (1999a) Is equality passe? Boston Review 23. 
BOWLES, S., GINTIS, H. (1999b) The evolution of strong reciprocity, mimeo, 
BOYD, R., RICHERSON, P. (1985) Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: 
BRADLEY, R. S. (1999) Paleoclimatology: Reconstructing Climates ofthe Quaternary, 
Department of Economics, University of Massachusetts. 
University of Chicago Press. 
2nd ed. San Diego: Academic. 

290 
7 Evolution ofEconomics 
BRAIDWOOD, R. (1952) The Near East and the Foundationsfor Civilization. Eugene 
OR: University of Oregon Press. 
BROMLEY, D. (1990) The ideology of efficiency: searching for a theory of policy 
analysis. Journal $Environmental Economics and Management 19, 86-107. 
BROMLEY, 
D. (1998) Searching for sustainability: the poverty of spontaneous 
order. Ecological Economics 24, 231-240. 
CAPORAEL, 
L. (1997) The evolution of truly social cognition: the core 
configurations model. Personality and Social Psychology Review 1, 276-298. 
CAVALIER-SMITH, 
T. (1981) The origin and early evolution of the early eukaryote 
cell. In: Molecular and CellularAspects ofMicrobial Evolution. (Eds. M. J. CARLISLE, 
J. COLLINS, 
B. MOSELEY). Society for General Microbiology Symposium 32. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
I 
CODY, M. L. (1974) Optimization in ecology. Science 183, 164. 
COE, M. (1993) The Maya. London and New York: Thames and Hudson. 
CORNING, 
P. (1996) Co-operative genes: bioeconomics, synergy, and evolution. 
71 st International Conference Western Economic Association International. 
San Francisco, CA, June 28-July 2. 
CORNING, 
P. (1997) Holistic Darwinism: ‘synergistic selection’ and the 
evolutionary process. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems 20, 363-400. 
CORNING, P. (1998) The synergism hypothesis: on the concept of synergy and its 
role in the evolution of complex systems. Journal of Social and Evolutionary 
Systems 21. 
CROWLEY, 
T. (2000) Causes of climate change over the past 1000 years. Science 289 
DALY, H. E. (1991) Steady State Economics, 2nd ed. Washington, DC: 
DAVID, P. (1985) Clio and the economics of QWERTY. American Economic Review 
DAWKINS, 
R. (1976) The SelJsh Gene. New York Oxford University Press. 
DAWKINS, 
R. (1986) The Blind Watchmaker. New York: Norton. 
DE WAAL, 
F. (1996) Good Natured. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
DEPEW, 
D., WEBER, 
B. (1997) Darwinism Evolving. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
DIAMOND, 
J. (1993) Drowning dogs and the dawn of art. Natural History 
DIAMOND, J. (1995) Easter’s end. Discover Magazine (August), 63-68. 
DIAMOND, 
J. (1997) Guns, Germs, and Steel. New York: Norton. 
DOPFER, K. (1994) The phenomenon of economic change: neoclassical vs. 
(14 July), 270-277. 
Island Press. 
Proceedings 75, 3 32-3 3 7. 
(March), 22-29. 
Schumpeterian perspectives. In: Evolutionary and Neoschumpterian Approaches, 
L. MAGNUSSON 
(Ed.) Dordrecht: Kluver, pp. 125-171. 
ELDREDGE, N. (1995) Dominion. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
ELDREDGE, N., GOULD, 
S. J. (1972) Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to 
phyletic gradualism. In: Models in Paleobiology (Ed. T. J. M. SCOPF). 
San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper, pp. 82-115. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
ENGLAND, R. (Ed.) (1994) Evolutionary Concepts in Contemporary Economics. 

7.8 References I 291 
ENKE, S. (1951) On maximizing profits: a distinction between Chamberlin and 
ERICKSON, J., GOWDY, 
J. (2000) Resource use, institutions and sustainability: 
FRANK, R. (1988) Passions within Reason: The Strategic Role $Emotions. New York: 
FRANK, R. (1998) Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to Satisfj, in an Era $Excess. Glencoe: 
FRIEDMAN, 
M. (1953) The methodology of positive economics. In: Essays in 
Robinson. American Economic Review 41, 566-578. 
a tale of two Pacific Island cultures. Land Economics 76, 345-354. 
Norton. 
Free Press. 
Positive Economics (Ed. M. FRIEDMAN). 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
pp. 3-43. 
FRIEDMAN, 
M. (1963) Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago 
GAMBLE, 
C. (1994) Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1936) The pure theory of consumer’s behavior. 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1950) The theory of choice and the constancy of 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1960) Economic theory and agrarian economics. 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1968) Utility. International Encyclopedia ofthe Social 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1975) Energy and economic myths. Southern Economic 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1977) Inequality, limits and growth from a 
GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, 
N. (1989) Quo vadis Homo sapiens sapiens? mimeo, 
GHISELIN, 
M. T. (1974) The Economy ofNature and the Evolution ofSex. 
GHISELIN, 
M. T. (1978) The economy of the body. American Economic Review 68, 
GHISELIN, 
M. T. (1992) Biology, economics, and bioeconomics. In: 
Press. 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 50, 545-593. 
economic laws. Quarterly Journal of Economics 64, 125-138. 
Oxford Economic Papers n.s. 12, 1-40. 
Sciences. London: MacMillan. 
Journal 41, 347-381. 
bioeconomic viewpoint. Review of Social Economy 35, 361-375. 
Duke University Georgescu- Roegen Collection. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
233-237. 
Universal Economics: Assessing the Achievements of the Economic Approach 
(Ed. G. RADNITZKY). New York Paragon, pp. 71-118. 
GINTIS, H. (1998) The individual in economic theory: A research agenda, mimeo, 
Department of Economics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA. 
GINTIS, 
H. (2000) Game Theory Evolving. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
GOULD, 
S. J. (1988) On replacing the idea of progress with an operational notion 
of directionality. In: Evolutionary Progress (Ed. M. NITECKI). 
Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-338. 
GOULD, 
S. J., LEWONTIN, 
R. (1979) The Spandrels of San Marco and the 
Panglossian paradigm. Proceedings ofthe Royal Society of London B 205, 
581-598. 

292 
7 Evolution of Economics 
GOWDY, 
J. (1994) Coevolutionary Economics: The Economy, Society and the 
GOWDY, 
J. (1997) The value of biodiversity: markets, society, and ecosystems, 
I 
Environment. Boston: Kluwer Academic Press. 
Land Economics 73, 25-41. Reprinted in 2000 in Ecosystems and Nature 
(Ed. R. K. TURNER), 
London: Edward Elgar. 
GOWDY, 
J. (Ed.) (1998) Limited Wants, Unlimited Means: A Reader on Hunter- 
Gatherer Economics and the Environment. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
GOWDY, 
J. (1999) Hunter-gatherers and the mythology of the market. In: 
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Hunter-Gatherers (Eds. R. B. LEE, R. DALY). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 391-398. 
GOWDY, 
J., FERRER CARBONELL, 
A. (1999) Toward consilience between biology 
and economics: the contribution of Ecological Economics. Ecological Economics 
GOWDY, 
J, IORGULESCU, 
R., ONYEIWU, 
S. (2004) Fairness and retaliation in a rural 
Nigerian village. Journal of Behavioral Economics and Organization, in press. 
GOWDY, 
J., MAYUMI, K. (2001) The foundations of consumer choice theory and 
environmental valuation. Ecological Economics 39, 223-237. 
GOWDY, 
J., MCDANIEL, 
C. (1999) The physical destruction of Nauru: An example 
of weak sustainability. Land Economics 75, 333-338. 
GOWDY, 
J., SEIDL, I. (2004) Economic man and selfish genes: the relevance of 
group selection to economic policy. Socio-Economics, in press. 
GRAHAM, 
R., LUNDELIUS 
E., JR (1984) Coevolutionary disequilibrium. In: 
Quarternary Extinctions (Eds. P. MARTIN, R. KLEIN). Tucson: University of 
Arizona Press. 
29, 337-348. 
GRIFFIN, 
D. R. (1992) Animal Minds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1964a) The genetical evolution of social behavior I. 
HAMILTON, 
W. D. (1964b) The genetical evolution of social behavior 11. 
HANLEY, 
N. (1999) Cost-benefit analysis of environmental policy and 
Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, 1-16. 
Journal of Theoretical Biology 7, 17-52. 
management. In: Handbook of Environmental and Resource Economics 
(Ed. J. C. J. M. VAN DEN BERGH). Aldershot: Edward Elgar, pp. 824-836. 
HARDY, 
K. (1996) The preceramic sequence from the Tehuac6n Valley: a 
reevaluation. Current Anthropology 37, 700-716. 
HARDY, 
K. (1999) On the Tehuacan project: reply to Flannery and MacNeish. 
Current Anthropology 40, 63-69. 
HARRIS, 
M. (1977) Cannibals and Kings. New York Random House. 
Hartwick, 1. M. (1978) Substitution among exhaustible resources and 
intergenerational equity. Review of Economic Studies 45, 347-354. 
HAWKES, 
K. (1993) Why hunter-gatherers work: an ancient version of the 
problem of public goods. Current Anthropology 34, 341-361. 
HEILBRONER, 
R. (1992) The Worldly Philosophers, 6th ed. New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 
HODGSON, 
G. (1992) Thorstein Veblen and post-Darwinian economics. 
CambridgeJournal of Economics 16, 285-301. 

7.8 References I 293 
HODGSON, 
G. (1993a) Economics and Evolution. Ann Arbor: University of 
HODGSON, 
G. (1993b) Why the problem of reductionism in biology has 
HODGSON, 
G. (1994) Optimization and evolution: Winter’s criticism of Friedman 
HODGSON, 
G. (1997) The ubiquity ofhabits and rules. CambridgeJournal of 
HOHENBERG, 
P., LEES, L. H. (1996) The Making of Urban Europe 1000-1994. 
JACOBS, J. (2000) The Nature ofEconomies. New York: Modern Library. 
JEHLE, G. (1991) Advanced Microeconomic Theory. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall. 
JERRISON, H. J. (1973) Evolution ofthe Brain and Intelligence. New York: Academic. 
KAHNEMAN, D., SLOVIC, 
P., TVERSKY, 
A. (1982) Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
KELLY, R. (Ed.) (1995) The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer 
KERQ R. (1999) Will the Arctic Ocean lose all its ice? Science 286, 1828. 
LAMB, H. H. (1977) Climatic History and the Future. Princeton: Princeton 
LEE, R. (1993) The DobeJu/’hoansi. Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace. 
LEVINE, A. J. (1983) Marshall’s principles and the ‘biological viewpoint’: 
LIANG, D. W., MORELAND, 
R., ARGOTE, L. (1995) Group versus individual 
Michigan Press. 
implications for economics. World Futures 37, 69-90. 
revisited. CambridgeJoumal of Economics 18,413-430. 
Economics 21, 663-684. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lijestyles. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. 
University Press. 
a reconsideration. The Manchester School 51, 276-293. 
training and group performance: the mediating role of transitive memory. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 21, 384-393. 
Wilkins. 
CO, on the ocean-atmospheric system. Nature 364,215-218. 
Dictionary of Economics. London: MacMillan, 367-383. 
LOTKA, A. (1924) The Elements of Physical Biology. Baltimore: Williams and 
MANABF, S., SroFFER, R. (1993) Century-scale effects of increased atmospheric 
MANDELL, 
E. (1988) Marx, Karl Heinrich (1818-1883). The New Palgrave 
MANSFIELD, 
E. (1991) Microeconomics, 7th ed. New York: Norton. 
MARGULIS, L. (1998) Symbiotic Planet. Amherst: Basic Books. 
MARTIN, P. (1967) Pleistocene overkill. Natural History 76, 32-38. 
MARTIN, S., GRUBE, 
N. (1995) Maya superstates. Archaeology 48, 41-46. 
MAS-COLELL, 
A., WHINSTON, 
J., GREEN, 
J. (1995) Microeconomic Theory. 
MAYNARD 
SMITH, J. (1982) Evolution and the Theory ofGames. Cambridge: 
MCCLENNEN, 
E. (1990) Rationality and Dynamic Choice: Foundational 
MCDANIEL, 
C., GOWDY, 
J. (2000) Paradisefor Sale: A Parable ofNature. 
MCKIBBEN, B. (1989) The End ofNature. New York: Random House. 
New York Oxford. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Explorations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

294 
7 Evolution ofEconornics 
MCNEISH, R. (1972) The Prehistory ofthe Tehuacan Valley, Vol. 4. Austin: University 
of Texas Press. 
MESNER, S., GOWDY, J. (1999) Georgescu-Roegerfs evolutionary economics. In: 
Bioeconomics and Sustainability: Essays in Honor of Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen 
(Eds. K. MAYUMI, J. GOWDY). 
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 51-GX. 
Economics. London: Macmillan, pp. 617-620. 
I 
METCALFE, 
S. (1988) Technological change. The New Palgrave Dictionary of 
MILLER, R. L. (1998) Economics Today. Reading (Massachusetts): Addison-Wesley. 
MILLER, 
R. V. (1998) Bacterial gene swapping in nature. Scientijc American 
MOKYR, J. (1990) The Lever ofRiches. New York: Oxford University Press. 
MORRISON, 
R. (1999) The Spirit in the Gene. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
NELSON, R. (1986) Evolutionary modeling of economic change. In: 
New Developments in the Analysis ofMarket Structure (Eds. J. E. SIGLITZ, 
G. F. MATHEWSON). 
Basingstoke UK: Macmillan Press, pp. 450-471. 
NELSON, R., PACK, S. (1999) The Asian miracle and modern growth theory. 
EconomicJoumal109,416-436. 
NELSON, 
R., WINTER, S. (1982) An Evolutionary Theory ofEconowlic Change. 
Cambridge, MA: Haward University Press. 
OAKLEY, 
K. (1961) Man the Tool Maker. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Penrose, E. (1952) Biological analogies in the theory of the firm. American 
PENROSE, 
E. (1959) The Theory ofthe Growth ofthe Firm. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
PONTING, C. (1991) A Green History ofthe World. New York: Penguin. 
Pons, R. (1996) Humanity’s Descent. New York: William Morrow. 
PRINGLE, 
H. (1998) The slow birth of agriculture. Science 282, 1446-1450. 
RADNER, R. (1968) Competitive equilibrium under uncertainty. Econornetrica 36, 
RANDALL, A. (1988) What mainstream economists have to say about the value of 
(January), 67-71. 
Economic Review 42, 804-819. 
31-58. 
biodiversity. In: Biodiversity (Ed. E. 0. WILSON). 
Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press, pp. 217-226. 
RAPPORT, D. J, TURNER, 
J. (1977) Economic models in ecology. Science, 367-373. 
RICHERSON, P., BOYD, R. (2000) Climate culture, and the evolution of cognition. 
In: The Evolution ofcognition (Eds. C. HEYES, 
L. HUBER). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, pp. 329-345. 
natural experiment in cultural evolution, mimeo. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Press. 
and polyarchies. American Economic Review 76, 716-727. 
RICHERSON, P., BOYD, R., BEITINGER, R. (1999) The origins ofagriculture as a 
RUSE, M. (1997) Monad to Man: 27te Concept ofprogress in Evolutionary Biology. 
RUSE, M. (1999) Mystery oflvlysteries: Is Evolution a Social Construction? 
SAGOFF, M. (1988) The Economy ofthe Earth. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
SAH, R., STIGLITZ, J. (1986) The architecture of economic systems: hierarchies 

7.8 References I295 
SAHLINS, 
M. (1972) The original affluent society. Reprinted in: Limited Wants, 
Unlimited Means: A Reader on Hunter-Gatherer Economics and the Environment 
(Ed. J. GOWDY). 
Washington DC: Island Press. 
SAHLINS, M. (1993) Goodbye to tristes tropes: ethnography in the context of 
modern world history. lournu1 of Modern History 65, 1-25. 
SAHLINS, 
M. (1996) The sadness of sweetness: the native anthropology of 
western cosmology. Current Anthropology 37, 395-428. 
SAMUELSON, 
P. (1993) Altruism as a problem involving group versus individual 
selection in economics and biology. American Economic Review 83, 143-148. 
SAPP, J. (1994) Evolution by Association: A History ofSymbiosis. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
SCHEEL, 
D., PACKER, 
C. (1991) Group hunting behavior of lions: a search for 
cooperation. Animal Behavior 41, 697-710. 
SCHUMPETER, 
J. (1934) The Theory ofEconomic Development. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
SHACKLE, 
G. (1989) What did the ‘general theory’ do? In: New Directions in 
Post-Keynesian Economics (Ed. J. PHEBY). 
Aldershot: Edward Elgar, pp. 48-58. 
SHAFIR, E., TVERSKY, 
A. (1992) Thinking through uncertainty: nonconsequential 
reasoning and choice. Cognitive Psychology 24, 449-474. 
SHAFIR, E., TVERSKY, 
A. (1995) Decision making. In: Trtinking: An Invitation to 
Cognitive Science, Vol. 3 (2nd ed.) (Eds. E. E. SMITH, D. N. OSHERSON), 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 70-100. 
Mole Rat. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
SHERMAN, 
P. W., JARVIS, J., ALEXANDER, 
R. (Eds.) (1991) The Biology ofthe Naked 
SIMON, H. (1993) Altruism and economics. American Economic Review 83,156-161. 
SMITH, S .  (1999) Tax instruments for curbing CO, emissions. In: Handbook of 
Environmental and Resource Economics (Ed. J. C. J. M. VAN DEN BERGH). Aldershot: 
Edward Elgar, pp. 505-524. 
Unselfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Review of Economic Studies 41 (Supplement), 29-45. 
preservation. Ecological Economics 12, 191-208. 
SOBER, E., WILSON, 
D. S. (1998) Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of 
SOLOW, R. (1974) Intergenerational equity and exhaustible resources. 
SPASH, C., HANLEY, 
N. (1995) Preferences, information, and biodiversity 
STEIG, E. (1999) Mid-Holocene climate change. Science 286, 1485-1486. 
STEWART, 
J. (1997) Evolutionary progress. Journal ofSocial and Evolutionary 
Systems 20, 335-362. 
STIGLER, 
G., BECKER, G. (1977) De gustibus non est disputantum. 
American Economic Review 67, 76-90. 
TAINTER, 
J. (1988) The Collapse of Complex Societies. New York Cambridge 
University Press. 
TAYLOR, 
K. C., MAYEWSKI, 
P. A., ALLEY, R. B., BROOK, E. J., Gow, A. J., GROOTES, 
P. M., MEESE, D. A., SALTZMAN, 
E. S., SEVERINGHAUS, 
J. P., TWICKLER, 
M. S., 
WHITE, 
J. W. C., WHITLOW, 
S., ZIELINSKI, 
G. A. (1997) The Holocene-Younger 
Dryas transition recorded at Summit, Greenland, Science 278, 825-827. 

296 
7 Evolution ofEconomics 
THOMAS, 
R., REIF, W. (1993) The skeleton space: a finite set of organic designs. 
VAN TILBERG, 
J. A. (1994) Easter Island: Archaeology, Ecology and Culture. 
TISDELL, 
C. (1996) Bounded Rationality and Economic Evolution. Cheltenham: 
TISDELL, 
C. (1998) Diversity and economic evolution:failures of competitive economic 
TRIVERS, 
R. L. (1985) Social Evolution. Menlo Park: Benjamin-Cummings. 
TVERSKY, 
A., KAHNEMAN, D. (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and 
VARIAN, H. (1992) Microeconomic Analysis. New York: Norton. 
VATN, A., BROMLEY, D. (1994) Choices without prices without apologies. 
Journal ofEnvironmenta1 Economics and Management 26, 129-148. 
VEBLEN, 
T. (1898) Why is economics not an evolutionary science? 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 12, 373-397. 
VINNIKOV, K., ROBOCK, A., STOUFFER, 
R. J., WALSH, 
J. E. (1999) Global warming 
and northern hemisphere sea ice extent. Science 286,1934-1937. 
VITOUSEK, 
P., EHRLICH, P., EHRLICH, A., MATSON, P. (1986) Human 
appropriation of the products of photosynthesis. BioScience 36, 368-373. 
VRBA, E. (1985) Ecological and adaptive changes associated with early hominid 
evolution. In: Ancestors: The Hard Evidence (Ed. E. DELSON). 
New York: Liss, 
I 
Evolution 47, 341-360. 
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute Press. 
Edward Elgar. 
systems. Working paper, University of Queensland. 
biases. Science 185, 11241131. 
pp. 63-71. 
VROMEN, 
J. (1995) Economic Evolution. London: Routledge. 
WEISS, H., COURTY, 
M., WETTERSTROM, 
W., GUICHARD, 
F., SENIOR, L., MEADOW, 
R., CURROW, 
A. (1993) The genesis and collapse of third millennium North 
Mesopotamian civilization. Science 261, 995-1004. 
WHITE, R. (1998) Toward the new synthesis: evolution, human nature, and the 
social sciences. Choice Magazine (September), 1-20. 
WILKINSON, 
G. S. (1990) Food sharing in vampire bats. Scientific American 262, 
WILLIAMS, 
G. C. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton: Princeton 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1975) A general theory of group selection. Proceedings ofthe 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1980) The Natural Selection of Populations and Communities. 
WILSON, 
D. S .  (1997) Human groups as units of selection. Science 276,1816-1817. 
WILSON, 
D. S. (1999) Evolutionary support. Boston Review 23. 
WILSON, 
E. 0. (1974) The Insect Societies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
WILSON, 
E. 0. (1975) Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
WILSON, 
E. 0. (1992) The Diversity ofL@. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
WILSON, 
E. 0. (1998) Consilience. New York: Alfred Knopf. 
76-82. 
University Press. 
National Academy of Sciences U S A  72, 143-146. 
Menlo Park CA: Benjamin Cummings. 
University Press. 
Press. 

7.8 References I297 
WINTER, 
S. (1964) Economic natural selection and the theory of the firm. 
WINTER 
S. (1971) Satisficing, selection, and the innovating remnant. 
WINTER, 
S. (1975) Optimization and evolution in the theory ofthe firm. In: 
Yale Economic Essays 4, 225-272. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 85, 237-261. 
Adaptive Economic Models (Eds. R. H. DAY, T. GROVES). 
New York: Academic, 
WINTER, 
S. (1988) Natural selection and evolution. The New Palgrave Dictionary 
WITT, U. (1997) Self-organization and economics: what is new? Structural 
WORSTER, 
D. (1977) Nature’s Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
WUKETITS, 
F. (1990) Evolutionary Epistemology and it Implicationsfor Humankind. 
WUKETITS, 
F. (1998) Naturkatastrophe Mensch. Dusseldorf: Patmos. 
WYNNE-EDWARDS, 
V. C. (1962) Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behavior. 
WYNNE-EDWARDS, 
V. C. (1991) Ecology denies neo-Darwinism. The Ecologist 21, 
YOON, C. K. (1993a) Biologists deny that life gets more complex. New York Times, 
YOON, C. K. (1993b) Plants found to share water with neighbors. New York Times, 
pp. 73-118. 
ofEconomics, Vol. 3. London: Macmillan Press, pp. 614-617. 
Change and Economic Dynamics 8,489-508. 
Albany: SUNY Press. 
Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd. 
May/ June. 
Science Times, March 30, p. C1. 
Science Times, October 26, p. C1. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

I 299 
8 
The Evolution of Scientific Method 
Erhard Oeser 
8.1 
introduction 
The term ‘evolutionary epistemology’ refers to the phenomenon of prescientific 
common-sense knowledge as well as to the phenomenon of science itself. Both 
evolutionary views emerged independently during the 20th century. Both had fore- 
runners in the 19th century, even before the time of Darwin. Moreover, both forms 
of evolutionary epistemology are closely related to other evolutionary views that 
deal not only with human knowledge but also with certain human activities as 
well, whether in an ethical-moralistic, social, or cultural sense. The framework for 
these evolutionary views is made up partly of general cosmological evolutionary 
philosophical systems, which from a historical point of view, although they ena- 
bled the theory of evolution to be formulated, have nevertheless been disproved by 
it (Oeser, 1974). At least this holds true for Darwin’s theory of evolution, which 
removed any kind of the teleology that dominated not only earlier evolutionary 
philosophical systems but also the theory of Lamarck. Nevertheless, even Darwin 
himself did not exclude the possibility of such a comprehensive and universal theory 
of evolution for the time to come; he hoped that “the principle of life will be recog 
nized as part or sequel of a universal law” (Bresch, 1977). In the course of the 20th 
century many biologists and philosophers have adopted this idea. This chapter 
does not deal with the various, frequently overlapping, at times even contradictory, 
universal evolutionary conceptions, but concentrates on the attempt to establish a 
relation between the two views of evolutionary epistemology, using an elementary 
terminology, that is, the theory of individual, subjective, common-sense reason, 
and the theory ofcollective, trans-subjective scientific reason. People in all fields of 
evolutionary research, such as molecular genetics, ethology, and evolutionary epis- 
temology, are well acquainted with this terminology. It rests on the term ‘informa- 
tion’. First, however, we have to consider the historical background to this question 
(because it has been a matter of controversy for some time), that is, whether the 
basic assumption of the human ability to know also applies to higher forms of 
reason, i.e., to ‘scientific knowledge’. 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. I: The Evolution of Human Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 

300 8 The Evolution ofScient$c Method 
8.2 
Historical Background 
I 
Darwin himself (1896) stated that man with his “god-like intellect which has pel1- 
etrated into the movements and constitution ofthe solar system ... still bears in his 
bodily frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin”. But, in what manner the 
mental powers were first developed in the lowest organisms, remained for him “as 
hopeless an enquiry as how life itself first originated. He considered both ques- 
tions as problems to be solved in the distant future. His contemporary, Herbert 
Spencer (1862), on the other hand, had postulated a general-development hypoth- 
esis even before Darwin’s main works were published. This stated that the entire 
perceptible reality constitutes a transition process that leads from an indefinite 
unconnected homology to a definite connected heterogeny. 
Thus, Darwin was able to refer, in his introductory historical outline of The Ori- 
gin $Species, to Spencer’s Development Hypothesis of 1852, as well as to the fact that 
Spencer in his Principles $Psychology had already extended this hypothesis to the 
gradual acquisition of all mental powers and abilities. The application of the gen- 
eral-development hypothesis to science itself was therefore taken for granted by 
Spencer. For scientific progress, too, gradually evolves from the simple and con- 
crete to the more complex and abstract relations: 
The law of the scales was known before the general law of the lever was 
known; the law of the lever was known before the laws of composition and 
resolution of forces were known; and these were known before the laws of 
motion under their universal forms were known. From the ancient doc- 
trine that the curve in which the sun, the moon, and each of the planets 
move is a circle (a perfectly simple and constant figure); to the doctrine 
taught by Kepler, that each member of the planetary system describes an 
ellipse (a much less simple and constant figure); and afterwards to the doc- 
trine taught by Newton, that the curve described by every heavenly body is 
some conic section (a still less simple and constant figure); the advance in 
generality, in complexity, in abstractness, is manifest. Numerous like illus- 
trations are furnished by physics, by chemistry, by physiology: all of them 
showing, in common with the foregoing ones, that the advance has been 
gradual, and that each more general relation has become known through 
the experience of relations a degree less general (Spencer, 1870). 
This conception was adopted by Mach. In his inaugural speech as chancellor of the 
University of Prague in 1883 he characterized the development of science as a 
special case of a common biological process, entirely corresponding with Darwin’s 
theory of evolution in both its basic factors of mutation and selection: 
We observe how scientific views are being transformed, how they are spread- 
ing to other areas, struggling with rival ideas and conquering those which 
are less efficient. Every person involved in the process of learning can ob- 
serve such processes in his own head (Mach, 1911). 

8.2 Histon'cal Background 
301 
I 
Similar ideas were advocated by Candolle. He too, referring to Spencer and Dar- 
win, saw the evolution of man in the age of science as a struggle for existence, that 
was currently proceeding favorably for the educated, whereas in former times it 
was decidedly in favor of the barbarous and most violent (Candolle, 1911). 
Since Darwin it was clear, also, that here a base can be found for establishing in 
a natural scientific way the evolutionary dynamics of scientific method. It was not 
the biologists, but physicists like Mach and Boltzmann, who consequently expanded 
the evolutionary approach to the epistemology of their own discipline. 
Boltzmann had an ambivalent relation towards philosophy. On one hand he was 
fascinated by this enormous area of knowledge, and the other hand he harbored a 
healthy mistrust of certain philosophers such as Hegel and Schopenhauer and 
even voiced explicit disgust for philosophy as such. It was a difficult decision for 
him, when in 1903 he was asked to replace Mach, who had become too sick to 
carry on his lectures on the philosophy of nature and the methodology of the natu- 
ral sciences. When he finally accepted, it was because he believed that real progress 
in the fundamentals ofboth natural sciences and philosophy could only be achieved 
when both disciplines cooperated. Boltzmann believed that the time was right for 
such cooperation between epistemology and physics, because he had witnessed 
the progress made in physical theory (mechanics), which to him was due to a 
parallel development in epistemology. Mach had been of the same opinion, when 
in his history of mechanics he aimed at demonstrating the progress made by hu- 
man cognition. But whereas Mach, in accordance with his principle of economy, 
viewed hypotheses and theories instrumentalistically, Boltzmann from the very 
beginning was convinced that our hypotheses and theories bear resemblance to 
reality. They are nor only instruments of thought, but possible expositions of reality. 
To justify this hypothetical realism, Boltzmann needed a theory of the perceiving 
apparatus that surpassed Mach's theory of sensations. Boltzmann looked towards 
brain physiology as an empirical support for his epistemological ideas and not as 
much towards sense physiology, as Mach had done. Both agreed that Darwin's 
theory of evolution laid the ground for all epistemology; yet, whereas Mach applied 
Darwin's theory to a theory of sense organs, Boltzmann (1905, p. 179) considered 
the brain to be the central computation unit and the bearer of human cognitive 
faculties - he wrote explicitly of a 'mechanism inside the human head', whose 
organ is the brain: 
We consider the brain as a world-perceiving apparatus, which, since it proved 
useful to the survival of the human species, has achieved near perfection. 
According to Darwin's theory this apparatus has developed an especial per- 
fection like the extremely long neck of the giraffe or the beak of the stork. 
This phylogenetically and ontogenetically extremely developed organ, the brain, 
manages to "accord even better to knowledge". His manuscript of 1903/1904 for 
his lectures clearly states this point. It was a new idea even for Mach, because it 
surpassed the concept of innate structures of thought, which Mach had evolved in 
his interpretation of Kant's a priori categories. Boltzmann emphasized that these 
innate structures can be modified. 

302 8 The Evolution ofScient$c Method 
If one compares Boltzmann’s statement with contemporary statements relating 
to brain physiology it becomes clear that Boltzmann was not only fully informed 
about the state of the art but even went further. The most prominent brain scien- 
tist in Vienna at that time was Meynert, whose popular lectures on the brain were 
certainly known to Boltzmann. Meynert believed that all scientific regularity of 
appearances stems from the atomistic world view. The atomistic world, however, 
consists merely of mathematical points, because atoms posses no qualities that 
can be sensed. Starting from these points, quantifiable forces trigger appearances 
in our conscience. Such atomistic universes consisting of mathematical points do 
not form a view of the world, which is integrated into our consciousness ready- 
made, but this world view is constructed with the help of the brain mechanism, 
which also accords with mechanical laws (Meynert, 1892, p. 20). 
The cerebrum can take in perceptions from the peripheral sense organs and 
stimulate the muscles. Sense receptors and motor effectors are projected on the 
cerebrum. Between these, associative fibers maintain a connection, and if amassed, 
form ‘fields of association’ in which thinking takes place. The anatomical structure 
and the function of the brain clearly correspond: “The organ’s structure contains 
the precondition of its function” (Meynert, 1892, p. 11). 
A comparison between these statements and Boltzmann‘s concept of a mecha- 
nism within the human head shows at once the fundamental agreement between 
Boltzmann’s epistemology and contemporary brain research even as regards ter- 
minology. Boltzmann’s realism rests on the insight that there are no psychic events 
that do not correspond with brain processes. This is shown empirically when dis- 
turbances of the mechanical processes in the brain cause corresponding distur- 
bances in performance. They are conditioned not only by phylogenesis but also by 
ontogenesis, as Boltzmann pointed out 1905 in accordance with neuronal theory. 
Anticipating Hebb‘s synapse theory, Boltzmann (1905) noted that different con- 
ceptions 
I 
at moments where different images correspond, the respective neurons build 
up fibers between each other. When a child starts connecting sight and 
sound sensations, fibers between the two corresponding centers in the brain 
are established, such as between the centers of sight and touch and the 
motor nerves, as soon as the child starts to grasp at things. 
Such modifications lead to necessary correctives, ameliorations, and expansions 
of our innate habits of thought. These modifications must be carried out actively 
and consciously. Our innate laws of thinking are prerequisites for our complex 
experiences; but this is not true oflower organisms, where these innate laws devel- 
oped slowly as a result of simple experiences and then were passed on to higher 
organisms, i.e., such laws of thinking were acquired by our ancestors, but they are 
innate to us, and that Boltzmann equates with a priori. 
Their being innate conditions their psychological rigour, but not their logical- 
epistemological infallibility. Boltzmann believed that Kant had been convinced of 
the infallibility of the laws of thinking and considered this conviction a logical 
mistake due to Kant’s ignorance ofthe identity of innate and a priori laws of thought, 

I 303 
8.2 Histon‘cal Background 
which Darwin discovered. How far Kant was really ignorant in this aspect is still 
discussed by his interpreters He himself criticized the use of categories in meta- 
physics. His a priori structures of cognition acquire content and truth only when 
applied in reality. Darwin’s theory explains why the laws of thinking appear to be 
infallible: only thoughts proved useful to survival are passed on. What proved wrong 
and did not serve the survival ofthe individual and the species was lost. This adap- 
tation of our laws of thinking to the important problems of everyday existence by 
far surpasses its air, but for the solution of abstract problems of cognition that do 
not affect survival, they are imperfect. 
This imperfection can be overcome step by step. Boltzmann prophetically de- 
fined the task of a philosophy of the future: to formulate fundamental concepts so 
as to enable their user to give precise directives for useful action. 
Boltzmann drew up three rules for this purpose: 
1. Laws of thinking have to be modified if they produce contradictions when 
2. Empirically, laws of thinking must lead us to actions that correspond to 
3. The urge to apply the laws of thinking to areas where they do not apply must 
applied. 
our aims. 
be resisted until it disappears. 
These three points together form a theory of scientific method, which as Boltzmann 
puts it, make up the skeleton that supports the progress of all science. 
In the 20th century the renewal of this evolutionary approach emerged from 
Popper’s fundamental objection that the really interesting dynamic aspects of evo- 
lution and variation in science escape the mere logical analysis of evidential sys- 
tems. For a long time Popper was reluctant to accept the theory of evolution as a 
natural scientific theory and accused it of having a circular character. He consid- 
ered Darwinism to be a medium of battle against Carnap’s inductivism, putting 
forward an analogy between Darwinism and Lamarckism, as well as selection and 
instruction (instruction through repetition), on the one hand, and deductivism 
and inductivism, as well as critical elimination of mistakes and positive justifica- 
tion, on the other. To characterize his own position, Popper added that his logic of 
research contains a theory of knowledge - growth through trial and error - that is, 
through the elimination of mistakes. This means selection instead of Lamarckian 
instruction. Popper (1994, p. 33) elaborated this analogy into a four-phase scheme 
of the dynamic of theories: 
1. Problem (not observation). 
2. Attempts at solution =hypotheses. 
3. Elimination = refutation of hypotheses or theories. 
4. New and more sharply defined problem that develops out of the critical 
discussion. 
As Popper noted himself, this scheme was supported by Lorenz at the deeper level 
of comparative behavioral research. Thus it can be said that the old ideas of the 
evolution of science (as anticipated by Mach and Boltzmann) were not only re- 

304 
8 The Evolution of Scientijk Method 
newed by Popper but that modern behavioral science, too, has delivered a natural 
scientific base which is far more than a mere analogy. The evolutionary philosophy 
of science as a second phase of evolutionary epistemology, however, is not merely 
a metaphorical view of the dynamics of theories in evolutionary disguise, but a 
further development of the basic trial-and-error mechanism related to scientific 
methods of cognition. Therefore its object is not the evolution of theories (as rec- 
ognized clearly by Boltzmann), but the evolution of the scientific method as a goal- 
oriented activity of cognition that hastens the scientific theories. 
The fundamental deficiency of the earlier conception of the evolution of science 
(Mach and Boltzmann), however, lies in the fact that all its references are only 
analogies, pointing out by the help of a vivid metaphorical language similarities to 
the process of the evolution of organisms, without being able to explain them. 
Moreover, Spencer, who regarded the evolution of science, within the framework 
of his general-development hypothesis, as a direct sequel of biological evolution, 
failed to observe differences between biological and socio-cultural evolution. Not 
only is scientific development much faster and more complex: it also shows defi- 
nite breaks with the past. 
I 
8.3 
Objective Scientific Knowledge as a Break with the Ratiomorphic Past 
Humanity’s common-sense knowledge can be understood as a continuation of the 
ratiomorphic ‘reasonable behavior’ of animals, as it serves the preservation of life. 
The scientific method, however, surpasses life- and species-preserving functions, 
by serving objective knowledge. This causes a great change in the phylogenetically 
developed perceiving apparatus. This apparatus is constructed in such a way that it 
functions reliably only in the field of life-preservation. It does not function reliably 
in other fields - it may even turn out to be an impediment to knowledge or a 
source of error. Scientific method, therefore, has to surpass this general aim of 
live-preservation by reversing the phylogenetically conditioned innate perceiving 
apparatus that developed in the biological evolution. 
This change in direction taking place within the evolution of human knowledge 
had been perceived already at the beginning of theoretically based science in ancient 
Greece. Thus the philosophers of the ancient world, especially Plato, described the 
permanently recurring process of reversal and transgression of one’s own perceiv- 
ing apparatus as a ‘second voyage’. Galileo transferred this distinction to the meth- 
ods of modern physics, separating the primo aspetto of common-sense knowledge 
from the secondo aspetto of scientific knowledge. That is, for the direct, theoreti- 
cally unconsidered perceiver, the sun still orbits the earth and determines the rhythm 
of day and night. The secondo aspetto of scientific reason, which constructs a theory 
of the solar system, shows, contrary to the immediate perception, that the sun’s 
apparent movement is a direct result of the rotation of the earth. This very process 
of a reversal of the direct sense-perception is increasingly noticeable in other scien- 
tific theories, too, including the relativity of space and time in modern physics. 

I 305 
8.3 Objective Scientfic Knowledge as a Break with the Ratiomorphic Past 
As a consequence of this change of direction to the emergence of science initi- 
ates a new stage of evolution. This stage transcends not only the biological evolu- 
tion of plants and animals but even the sociocultural evolution of man, with conse- 
quences that cannot be foretold as yet. 
The main characteristic of this last stage of evolution, which started only at the 
very last minute, so to speak, ofthis process, lasting billions ofyears, is manifest in 
the fact that the human perceiving apparatus does not follow a natural adaptation 
process but rather places itself outside this process. This leads to successfully passing 
beyond the originally life-preservation-oriented perceptive functions. This 'going 
beyond of the adaptation process manifests itself visibly in those drastic changes 
in human environment that result from the technical application of theoretical 
science, enabling man to adapt the world to his needs and conceptions. 
The decisive fact, however, is that this process of reversing and going beyond the 
innate perceiving apparatus is not a unique incident, but a process continually 
repeated during the development of every individual. Thus we can say, following 
Haeckel's biogenetic law, that the individual studying a science repeats, in a con- 
densed way, the entire history of the development of this science. The decisive 
factor is, not a repetition of the occurrence of various theories one succeeding 
another during the history of science, but the development of scientific method. 
The application of the scientific method constitutes in the life of a scientist, a per- 
manent process of going beyond the self, repeated for every act of knowledge. 
This results in an essential discrepancy that has not been given sufficient con- 
sideration by modem philosophers of science: the difference between the dynam- 
ics of theory and the dynamics of method. Insufficient consideration of this dis- 
crepancy had led the philosophy of science to a confrontation between two seemingly 
contradictory models: the revolutionary and evolutionary models of science. 
The revolutionary model, particularly advocated by Kuhn (1962), is based on a 
process that has been observed several times during the history of science: a fun- 
damental change occurs in scientific theories, that is, in their basic concept and 
axioms. But when the new theory is compared with the corresponding old theory, 
it turns out that the old theory (even if the new theory is drastically different) was, 
at least in certain respects, an approximation ofthe new theory. This becomes even 
more apparent when the various intermediate hypotheses that bridge the gap be- 
tween revolutionarily different theories are considered. The existence of interme- 
diate hypotheses, by which the overall understanding gradually proceeds through 
various stages, may better be compared to biological evolution. However, if we 
confine ourselves to a mere consideration of similarities, we may not be able to 
decide if a change in theory is evolutionary or revolutionary. According to one's 
intention to emphasize continuity or change, one gives priority to the evolutionary 
or revolutionary model. Ifthe theory change is regarded, from the viewpoint of the 
sociology of science, as a process that has actual effects on scientists, scientific 
communities, and institutions, every fundamental paradigm change can be called 
a revolution. From a methodological viewpoint, however, there are no changes or 
even crises or breakdowns in science. On the contrary, when a standstill occurs in 
scientific theory formation, during which none of the existing alternative theories 

306 8 The Evolution ofScient$c Method 
is accepted generally, the methodology of a discipline constitutes the stablest gen- 
erally accepted basis for that discipline. This means that the function of science 
itself is maintained, although certain structural breakdowns within science, con- 
cerning first of all theoretical concepts, may occur. This, however, is the exact char- 
acteristic of an evolutionary process (Eigen and Winkler, 1975). In Kuhn’s theory 
(Kuhn, 1962), too, we are able to discern, in certain processes during changes in 
theory, dynamics that certainly may be described as revolutionary from a sociologi- 
cal standpoint but are easily compatible with an evolutionary conception of the 
dynamics of method. Later (Kuhn, 1970), he even clearly emphasized the priority 
of the evolutionary approach, explicitly stating that his view of scientific develop- 
ment is evolutionary: “For me, therefore, scientific development is, like biological 
evolution, directional and irreversible.” 
The adequate continuation of evolutionary epistemology in the field of scientific 
knowledge may thus be called an ‘evolutionary methodology’. This evolution of 
scientific method is based, however, on a specific ability of consciousness, inher- 
ent only in humans, in whom, unlike in all other organisms, subjective knowledge 
as an adaptation process transforms itself into objective knowledge devoid of all 
life-preserving function. This means, however, that an evolutionary view of scien- 
tific methodology is based on an analysis of the human ability to perceive, to the 
extent that it has deviated from its phylogenetically conditioned foundations. In 
contradistinction to the empirico-biological approach, this#Q13# question has al- 
ways, from Plato and Aristotle through Kant’s Critique ofpure Reason, been posed 
in a meta-empirical fashion, which is characteristic of a pure epistemology. There- 
fore, the concept of a pure epistemology has to be considered before dealing with 
an evolutionary methodology of scientific knowledge. This concept should describe, 
in an elementary fashion, the structure of those cognitive processes that actually 
render it possible for human reason to detach itself from its phylogenetically ac- 
quired basis. Such a pure epistemology is not only the adequate equivalent of an 
evolutionary epistemology that deals with the phylogenetically acquired basis of 
human knowledge and constitutes a connection with the pre-human world; it is 
also its negation and deliberate reversal. 
This means that pure epistemology, in the sense of Kant, starts exactly at the 
point where evolutionary epistemology ends. Pure epistemology is a priori, be- 
cause it neither empirically describes the individual human cognitive activities, 
nor aims at theoretically explaining them in accordance with the theory of evolu- 
tion. Instead, pure epistemology prescribes how the acquisition of knowledge should 
proceed in order to arrive at objective truth. This prescriptive or normative func- 
tion of the a priori was Kant’s basic idea. In his doctrine of Reason as the legislator 
of nature, Kant did not want to propagate any kind of ‘idealism’, but to provide 
constructive criticism of the human capacity to know. 
I 

I 307 
8.4 The Systematic Relationship of Empirical-Evolutionary Epistemology 
8.4 
The Systematic Relationship of Empirical-Evolutionary Epistemology and 
Meta-Empirical or Pure ‘Transcendental’ Epistemology 
Supposing that evolutionary epistemology and philosophical epistemology do not 
constitute mutually exclusive alternatives, we basically have at our disposition two 
possibilities for describing the systematic relationship between these two theories. 
The first possibility may be characterized as follows: Evolutionary epistemology is 
a general biologically-based theory from which the phenomenon of human knowl- 
edge in all its forms can be deduced. Philosophical epistemology is then nothing 
but a system of deduced concepts and theorems, affirmable within the framework 
of evolutionary epistemology. The ancient mystery of knowledge, which Kant most 
radically formulated as the question of why subjective structures of knowledge can 
be applied to the real world a priori, would thus be resolved. As Popper pointed out 
in his preliminary studies on the logic of scientific discovery (1930-1933; Popper, 
1994), when the term ‘evolutionary epistemology’ was not yet used to denote a 
separate discipline, Kant’s attitude towards this solution was in no way entirely 
negative. He was only lacking a category of ‘necessity’, which a priori forms would 
consequently lack. An empirical theory may indeed explain the origin of a priori 
forms, but it cannot justify them as indispensable preconditions of the possibility 
of knowledge. This holds true even for Darwin’s theory of evolution, which in its 
explanatory scheme already blends chance (mutation) and necessity (selection). 
For Kant, however, a priori forms are in the category of pure necessity, because 
they simultaneously possess a normative or prescriptive nature. Hence, empirical 
evolutionary epistemology and pure (transcendental) epistemology are two theo- 
ries on different levels and cannot be deduced from one another. 
The second possibility is that the empirical evolutionary epistemology, just like 
other forms of empirical theories that deal with the phenomenon of knowledge, 
such as Piaget’s (1973) genetic epistemology, constitutes processes of argumenta- 
tion parallel to philosophical epistemology, which is located on a different level. 
Figure 8.1 shows what consequences can be drawn from this parallelism ofpure- 
philosophical and empirical-evolutionary epistemology regarding the function and 
position of formal logic in the analysis of scientific knowledge. Formal logic is 
reduced to a syntactic and/or semantic analysis of the products of human cogni- 
tion, whereas pure epistemology provides the gradual foundation (motivation) for 
the scientific method, endeavoring to define normative rules for the cognitive proc- 
ess. Evolutionary epistemology, as a primarily biological discipline, on the other 
hand provides an underlying basis for all empirical scientific research, dealing 
with scientists themselves and their individual psychological and social-institu- 
tional conditioning. Regarding the relation between empirical-evolutionary and 
pure-philosophical epistemology, it follows that, as parallel processes, they are by 
definition not competing programs, which mutually exclude each other or provide 
reduction. This parallelism, however, implies that evolutionary epistemology, against 
the background of classical philosophical epistemology, in no way represents a 
revolution, replacing or superseding classical epistemology as an obsolete theory. 

308 
8 The Evolution ofScient,fic Method 
Formal logic 
Philosophical epistemology 
Empirical 
I 
(analytic propositions 
as Critique of Pure Reason 
evolutionary 
a prior/) 
(synthetic propositions a prior/) 
epistemology 
(synthetic propositions 
~ 
a poster/or/) 
‘0 
p 
Logic of science 
Philosophy of science 
Empirical science of $ 
0 
.................................. 
3 
(semantics, syntax of 
(Methodology of science) 
science 
scientific language) 
(psychology and 
sociology and 
descriptive history 
of science) 
Figure 8.1: 
evolutionary epistemology 
Parallelism between formal logic, philosophical epistemology, and empirical 
Strings of argumentation can conform only when parallel. If so, they are able to 
support each other and advance heuristically in a catalytic process. These proc- 
esses may even diverge without causing a refutation, just as the conformity of a 
certain epistemological position, for example the so-called hypothetical realism, 
with evolutionary epistemology would not automatically imply any confirmation 
or corroboration of this position. The fact that internal or philosophical discussion 
among holders of the various epistemological positions has not brought about any 
variations since the appearance of evolutionary epistemology provides effective proof 
of this. 
There is, however, a direct possibility of verification and falsification of pure 
epistemology. Here, epistemology is considered not only as pure meta-empirical 
discipline but also as a normative prototheory for real scientific knowledge mani- 
festing itself in actual historical development. This means that all epistemological 
conjectures have to be transformed into methodological rules. Thus meta-science, 
the philosophy of science, provides direct, pragmatic, effective, control of pure epis- 
temology, which was absent in the context of philosophical systems. 
Simultaneously, another close relation of philosophy of science to evolutionary 
epistemology is established. Already in Darwin’s time, progress in science was 
regarded not only as a phenomenon of development but also as a phenomenon of 
evolution, with numerous analogies to biological evolution. Evolutionary episte- 
mology now offers the possibility of conceiving these analogies as structures of a 
manifest historical context. Thus the indispensability of classical epistemology 
becomes apparent to modern philosophy of science, which tended to restrict itself 
to the syntax and semantics of modern scientific language. For evolutionary epis- 
temology is nothing but the biological interpretation of Kant’s idea of the a priori 
(Lorenz, 1973; Campbell, 1974). Spencer called attention to this fact - he had by 
that time (Spencer, 1872) expressed the classical formula of evolutionary episte- 
mology by means of Kant’s terminology, namely, by regarding the data of intelli- 
gence as “a priori for the individual, but as a posteriori for that entire series of 
individuals of which he forms the last term”. The discrepancy between Spencer’s 

I 309 
8.5 Information and Knowledge 
reflections and current views in evolutionary epistemology lies in that fact that, as 
Lorenz (1973; put it, the continuum of evolution shows stages and levels, in which 
new system properties appear. Whereas Spencer (1872) considered “the ability of 
reasoning of children not better than that of a dog”, and the difference between the 
wjy of thinking of a Hottentot and Laplace equal to the difference between higher 
forms of animal intelligence and lower forms of human intelligence, Lorenz labeled 
the emergence of human consciousness with a much stronger term as a higher 
system-property: ‘fulguration’ (Lorenz, 1973). 
Lorenz’s view is not only adopted and rendered more precise by distinguishing 
between a genetically and physiologicaily determined concept of information and 
a concept of cognitive information, but it is also broadened by introducing the 
coxept of scientific information. The concept of scientific information defines 
within the so-called second evolution, that is, sociocultural evolution, a relatively 
autonomous field whose development can be considered analogous to Popper’s 
‘world 3 of objective knowledge’ - a third evolution. Whereas evolutionarv episte- 
iiioiogv in the sr7nse of Lorenz is concerned with the deveiopment of ratiomorphic 
structures inherent in living organisms and their historical phylogenetic relation 
to individual. creative, rational, human acquisition ofknowledge with all its advan- 
tapes and disadvantages, in this chapter I describe the evolution of scientific method. 
The evolution of method constitutes the transformation of individual subjective 
and intersubjective knowledge into the transsubjective objective knowledge of sci- 
ence. Thus a connection is established between both evolutionary views. largely 
independently developed. One view was concerned with the phenomenon of man 
(Lorenz, 1973), the other with the phenomenon of science (Popper). 
8.5 
Information and Knowledge 
There is only one way to find a common terminological basis for both evolutionary 
cpistemologv, which deals with the phylogenetic preconditions of the human abil- 
ity to perceive, and pure philosophical epistemology: the concept of ‘information’. 
A difficulty, however, arises from the fact that the concept of information is pres- 
ently dominated by the pragmatic-technical aspects of information, i.e., informa- 
tion processing, in a way that leads to near-complete disregard of its original mean- 
ing ;which is still present in everyday language, where the term ‘information’ always 
implies an increase in individual subjective knowledge, whether by communica- 
tion with others or directly by representation). But whereas information process- 
ing only permits transmission or transformation of information (or signals) ac- 
cording to algorithmic rules, human processes, as well as all other processes of 
information wi thin living systems, show processes of self-organization, which gen- 
erate something totally new. 
This change is brought about by processing already-existing information. Aris- 
totle recognized that the processing of information during cognition is different 
from the processing of matter and energy: “The stone is not within the mind.” ‘Ib 

310 
8 The Evolution ofScientific Method 
process information does not imply that something is ‘annihilated, but only that 
something is devalued. Information that is already known, already processed by 
the system, is no longer information to that system. It has fulfilled its function, in 
establishing a higher structural order. On the elementary level of self-organiza- 
tion, the concept of information permits equating the terms ‘life’ and ‘cognition’. 
Both are information-gaining processes according to structurally identical rules 
and laws, but on different levels. These levels can be distinguished by specifying 
information processing more accurately. 
The most elementary kind of information processing is found in the self-organi- 
zational stage of evolution, which already existed on the molecular level when life 
began. This is genetic information, which already exhibits the main characteristics 
of genuine information processing, i.e., processing and evaluation of information 
to achieve higher patterns of order. 
Between the living organism and its environment there exists a partial isomor- 
phism, for, by adapting to its environment, the organism becomes a representa- 
tion of it. The living organism extracts from its environment information about 
the external world, such as ‘the eye is attuned to the sun’, the motion of a fin is 
attuned to the undulation of the sea, as Lorenz (1973) has shown, and so on. This 
information is handed down as genetic information. This is true for every indi- 
vidual structure, from body shape and its structural parts to the positions of mol- 
ecules, and from the simplest to the most complex structures of behavior. Those 
principles of environment that are essential for life preservation are rebuilt by trial 
and error and coded into the hereditary material, so as to be reproducible later 
(pattern matching). Campbell wrote in his essay “Evolutionary epistemology” (1974) 
that this pattern-matching process “can be generalized to other epistemic activi- 
ties, as learning, thought and science”. This view of knowledge as an adaptation 
process was regarded as the basic model of evolutionary epistemology and submit- 
ted to a critique. The main counter-argument is that 
I 
man is distinguished from all animals by his faculty of developing new 
perceiving abilities, i.e., new methods of knowledge, without changing his 
physiological organization, and moreover, actually had done so (Frey, 1980). 
According to the basic model of evolutionary epistemology, our thinking should be 
determined by the evolutionarily developed organic perceiving apparatus in such a 
way as to constitute “a pair of spectacles that can never be taken off” (Frey, 1980). 
Moreover, the model of knowledge as an adaptation process would be valid only in 
a more-or-less unchanging environment. This critique of evolutionary epistemol- 
ogy, however, ignores one important fact (Vollmer, 1975). In addition to adapta- 
tion, Lorenz distinguishes another type of information processing, which is en- 
tirely different. This is not a process of adaptation, but rather a function of nervous 
sensory and bodily structures that are already adapted. These functions apply to 
short-term information processing, that is, to information that cannot be stored, 
as it refers to rapidly changing environmental circumstances. Such information is 
not permitted to leave any trace in the physiological apparatus, because the main 
function of this mechanism is to maintain the permanent ability to recall a newly- 

I 311 
8.5 information and Knowledge 
received signal and to replace it by another, frequently even the opposite one (Lorenz, 
1973). This functional structure of short-term information processing, which nec- 
essarily has to exist before any experience and also to be emptied of any experi- 
ence, is the only one actually equated by Lorenz with Kant’s a priori. The differ- 
ence between such short-term information processing and the process of human 
cognition lies in the fact that these responses, such as homeostasis, amoeboid 
reactions, etc., are restricted to the processing of a specific kind of information, 
especially in lower organisms. The result is a very narrow and strictly closed pro- 
gram. On the other hand, the a priori of the process of human cognition, especially 
when we look at the differentiation and graduation that was made by Kant, is basi- 
cally not specific to a certain kind of information, but has universal character. 
On the organogenic level this successive change in direction is characterized by 
an increasing encephalization of perception, and consequently of all other 
behaviorist components. That is, the original tendency of evolution was directed 
toward the multiplication and perfection of various sensory channels; with the 
emergence of the brain, however, especially in man, it was redirected towards im- 
proved processing and evaluation of sensory data (Seitelberger, 1980). From that 
moment on, organically considered, the fitness of perceiving structures is no longer 
decisive. What counts is the ability to design constructive models of reality that are 
later checked against the empirical data of perception. These empirical data go far 
beyond the natural range of our sense organs, because they are obtained by theo- 
retically constructed observation instruments. Kant’s epistemology, vis-a-vis these 
biological evolutionary empirical epistemologies, represents the transcendental 
meta-empirical path of self-awareness, which simultaneously implies the norma- 
tive function of transcendentalism. 
We may thus distinguish at least three levels of information: 
The first level is genetic information, which governs the development of organ- 
isms. Information processing from the genome is always valid for whole popu- 
lations, because this information can be transmitted to the next generation only 
genetically, by way of inheritance. We are concerned here with the adaptation proc- 
esses in species and populations, lasting over generations. 
The second level of information requires the existence of an information-process- 
ing system, i.e., a central nervous system. At first on this level does a kind of infor- 
mation processing occur that shows a certain similarity to the human cognition, 
because it constitutes a process that resembles individual learning. The neuro- 
dynamic information system is distinguished from the genetic information sys- 
tem by the fact that it enables the individual organism to acquire and to store 
information about certain individual situations in its environment. This acquisi- 
tion of new information, which depends on the existence of a central nervous sys- 
tem, must be distinguished from strictly genetic systems, which are ready-made 
adaptations to individual situations in plants and other ‘primitive’ organisms and 
are genetically fixed. It would be misleading to consider, as does Bresch (1977), 
that individually acquired neurodynamic information on the subhuman level is 
‘intellectual information’, because the term intellectual should be restricted to hu- 
man consciousness. 

312 
8 The Evolution ofscientific Method 
I 
The organic level of neuronal information processing deals, in contrast to 
the molecular-genetic level of information, with phenomena that form the 
basis of all conscious cognition. However, contrary to the conscious proc- 
esses of knowledge, this kind of information is not detached from its rnate- 
rial hasis. Being materially conditioned information, it remains dependent 
on specific material conditions of certain neurodynamic systems and GC- 
curs only in that form. Like genetic information, it has the character ot a 
‘signal’, represented by certain physicochemical manifestations. In this 
sense, a signal is the property of physicochemical states that occur in the 
brain as an information processing system. lnformation itself, however. IS 
the property of sets of signals; epistemologically seen it is the property or 
properties, or a meta-predicate. The meta-predicate ‘information’ must also 
be attributed to the subconscious brain states of subhuman organisms, 
because the behavioral patterns of animals have to be understood as infor- 
mational reactions to the environment. These cannot, however, be regarded 
as intellectual or rational information. 
Unconscious operations, functionally similar to reasonable caicuiamLl in3 
conclusions, may very well be labeled ‘ratiomorphic’, the term that 
coined by Brunswik (1955) and adopted by Lorenz (1977). Ratiomorphic 
information is located at the level of subconscious behavior that does iim>; 
constitute ‘rational knowledge’ or conscious acting: “It is undoubtedly nct 
only a prerequisite, ontogenetically and phylogenetically, for the devciop- 
ment of abstract thought, but also remains an indispensable part of it.’’ 
Only at the third level of information do we encounter human knowledge and 
conscious acting: here we may speak of ‘rational’ or ‘intellectual’ information. \JC7it?11n 
the actual subjective knowledge of an individual human, ‘rational’ or ‘int?llech~.a!’ 
information represents a certain state of consciousness that has its material equiva- 
lent in the neurodynamic system. Ifwe use the symbol 0 for the mental pheiiom 
enon of consciousness and the symbol Xfor its neurodynamic equivalent, VJC‘ 
im7;: 
say with Dubrovsky (1978) “that this 0-Xconnection is a special kind o f  fiiiicticliial 
connection, which characterizes the relationship between information and its 
bearer”. 0 is ‘contained’ in Xin the same sense that information is ‘contained’ in a 
signal. This conscious act of knowledge, however, is not the information coded as 
a signal in the neurodynamic system, but ‘pure information’, whose material 1 m i s  
was eliminated. For the subject of cognition has no direct or conscious experieiicc 
of the material bases of information, that is, the neurodynamic states of the l m i n  
while perceiving an object or thinking. 
In this sense Kant had stated, as a matter of principle, that the subject of 
consciousness may regard itself as only a ‘spectator’, who must leave it to 
nature to take action, as he does not know neurons or fibers or how to 
manage them for his intentions. Thus, information as knowledge is ‘pure 
information!, original information devoid of its material basis. It emerges 
as abstract information independent of any specific ‘bearer’. In the field of 

I 313 
8.5 Information and Knowledge 
epistemology, ever since Aristotle, only this ‘pure information‘ has been 
identified with the concept of human knowledge. In modern times this 
distinction has been clearly realized both in empiricism and rationalism. 
According to Locke’s essay concerning human understanding (1788), the 
process of knowledge is based on the senses that inform the mind. 
In the same way Descartes clearly distinguished between material informa- 
tion processing, in which the objects of the outer world leave their impres- 
sions mediated through the senses, and that process from which ideas of a 
purely spiritual nature arise as genuine and certain knowledge. Descartes 
regarded these ideas as forms of our thoughts when they inform our mind 
by turning it towards the brain, but not when they are impressed in a mate- 
rial organic sense in our brains. Kant himself, in fact, in accordance with 
contemporary terminology, no longer employed the concept of information 
in its original epistemological meaning. His differentiation, following the 
Aristotelian scholastic terminology of form and content (matter), between 
a priori and a posteriori has been, however, referred to the concept of infor- 
mation in the 19th century (Whewell, 1860) as well as in the 20th century. 
MacKay (1950) provided, by coordinating structural information content 
with Kant’s concept of a priori, a modern approach to an information-theory- 
based reconstruction of Kant’s transcendental philosophy. This informa- 
tional approach to human cognition (Oeser, 1976) helps explain the rela- 
tion as well as the difference between pure philosophical and empirical 
evolutionary epistemology. The a priori structural information content repre- 
sents the subjective function of consciousness in human knowledge. It con- 
stitutes the a priori disposition of that information process, which starts by 
illuminating some spots of the ‘infinite field of subconscious ‘obscure im- 
ages’ by way of reason. This process corresponds exactly to the above-men- 
tioned process of detaching ‘pure information’ from its material basis in 
chemophysicophysiological brain processes. 
Even though no further processing of free abstract information can occur without 
the underlying brain processes, we have now reached another level of representa- 
tion of information with a new process pattern. This sequel structure is directed by 
the logical laws of a priori forms of thinking. It represents, therefore, the purely 
logical level of information processing. 
Kant (1781) explicitly called his epistemology ‘transcendental logic’ and thus dis- 
tinguished it from all empirical-sensory, brain-physiological, and empirical-psy- 
chological investigations. Moreover, he defined transcendental logic against a for- 
mal propositional logic, or, as he called it, ‘general logic’, by distinguishing two 
basic principles: 
1. The law of prohibited contradiction is the basic law of formal logic. 
2. The law of sufficient reason is the basic law of epistemology. It must not be 
confused with the formal principle of knowledge, that every statement must 

314 
8 The Evolution of Scientific Method 
have a reason, which can be deduced from the law of contradiction. It is rather, 
as the first synthetic principle, a priori the material principle of knowledge. It 
states, according to Kant, that “every object must have its cause”. 
I 
The law of sufficient reason in this generalized formulation is not identical to the 
principle of causality in natural knowledge. It is rather to be placed above this 
special principle, because it refers to the causal structure of the real process of 
knowledge in its dynamic sequence. A process having neither material nor ener- 
getic character, but nevertheless showing a causal structure, is called, in accord- 
ance with current terminology, a ‘process of information’. Thus, Kant’s vaguely 
formulated law of sufficient reason can be defined more precisely as the principle 
of information. 
The principle of information states, in the classical terminology of the law of 
reason as formulated by Leibniz, that the process of proving the ‘truth’ of a state- 
ment must have the same causal structure as the process that establishes (causes) 
the ‘existence of a fact’. This structural identity of material causal processes and 
informational processes is, although implying a synthetic statement on the struc- 
ture of the world, a purely a priori axiom of epistemology, as it necessarily results 
from the definition of ‘knowledge’. The concept of knowledge, being a rational 
concept, always implies a connection between a knowing subject and a known 
object; the connection itselfis a process between those two components. No knowl- 
edge can occur if there is either no difference at all between those two components 
or a very significant difference, leaving them completely independent of each other. 
In both instances, every connection is eliminated. Complete identity or complete 
independence between the subject and the object of knowledge does not allow any 
processing of information to take place, and such states of ‘knowledge’ can be 
described only negatively: 
Complete identity means absolutely certain knowledge. Absolutely certain knowl- 
edge, however, can be achieved only in tautological analytical connections. Tau- 
tological insights, however, do not yield any evidence of the world. Such postu- 
lates are therefore trivial knowledge, because they do not contain any information. 
complete independence means absolutely uncertain knowledge. It implies the 
ultimate impossibility of perceiving the world by knowledge. Such a situation 
would occur only for a completely unstructured world. Such postulates are ab- 
surd knowledge, because they do not contain any information. 
Knowledge can occur only if both relation components, i.e., the subject and the 
object of knowledge, are simultaneously homogeneous and heterogeneous. Only 
thus are they able to constitute a system in which a process can occur. In tradi- 
tional epistemology this basic insight was made into a formula by Aristotle. He 
regarded knowledge as a process, through which something different in species, 
but identical in genus, affects something else in such a way that the ones different 
by species start to resemble each other. Aristotle distinguished this process from a 
material process that destroys the opposite, like incorporation of nourishment, 
which is a material causal process; Aristotle termed the former an informational 

I 315 
8.5 Information and Knowledge 
process, in which a transformation ofwhat had been existing potentially as a form 
occurs and results in its becoming real as an abstract form. 
In other words, in Aristotle’s theory ofknowledge the processing of information 
means an activation of the invariant substantial forms of real objects that have 
always been potentially present in the subject of knowledge. This process is ac- 
complished when the form of the subjective image corresponds to the substantial 
form of the real object. The concept of knowledge as a process of realizing forms 
that potentially already exist within the subject of knowledge is a basically static 
structural concept of a world with a constant amount of invariant forms. 
The contemporary concept of information, however, does not include this onto- 
logical precondition regarding the existence of invariant substantial forms. It re- 
fers only to the process of change itself, which is defined by the relation between 
‘condition’ and ‘effect’. For knowledge is not rendered possible by certain unchange- 
able forms of things-in-themselves, but by the causal structure or regularity of 
processes of change, determining the structures of being as well as the structures 
of knowledge. Here, knowledge no longer stands for an ideal correspondence be- 
tween invariable substantial forms of things and their mental images, but for the 
correspondence of two structurally homogeneous processes, caused by an attribu- 
tive relation between process elements. 
One process takes place within the subject of knowledge, requiring, however, 
another process to take place in the subject’s environment. The connection be- 
tween these two processes is established actively and spontaneously by the sub- 
ject. As a result, the ambiguity of the term ‘information’, unavoidable in any epis- 
temological subject-object relation, is rendered comprehensible: 
When referring to the subject, information has a structural a priori content. 
When referring to the object, information has an empirical a posteriori content. 
The structural information content is an achievement of the subject itself. There 
are stipulated conditions under which a thing may actually become an object of 
knowledge. Expressed in a realistic interpretation of Kantian terminology, this struc- 
tural a priori content constitutes a species-specific potential of brain performance. 
The most-elementary structural conditions, those of time and space, make up 
the basic pattern by which the world of objects is made accessible to the epistemo- 
logical subject, and by which categories are established that enable the epistemo- 
logical subject to structure the world relationally. 
The empirical information content refers to conditions and events that occur 
repeatedly, or not at all, independent of the subject, that is, of the subject’s percep- 
tion of them. The existence of such elementary effects, independent of conscious- 
ness, has throughout the history of epistemology, from Aristotle to Kant, been 
regarded as the only certain guarantee of reality. They not only constitute the point 
of departure, but if repeatedly occurring, continual verifications of the truth of 
knowledge. 
Knowledge is, therefore, a never-ending, irreversible processing of information, 
with a constantly changing ratio of empirical and structural information content. 
Even those conditions of the processing of information that seem not to change, 

316 
8 The Evolution ofScientific Method 
and which are consequently regarded as the end or the completion ofthe cognition 
process, are nothing other than stabilized (steady-state) phases in which the cogni- 
tion process has adapted itself to the processes occurring within the reality and the 
environment of the subject. Both processes have a certain discrete phase-structure 
that remains basically unchanged: 
Within the environment, a process starts from a state that constitutes the condi- 
tion for an event, which in turn creates a new state that constitutes the condition 
for another event. 
I 
Within the subject, a process starts with information about the environment, 
which creates a new state of knowledge, which is transformed via additional 
information into other states, and so on. 
Nevertheless, the attributive relation may vary - it can be practical or theoretical. 
Either way, it is actively established by the subject of knowledge and may take the 
following forms: 
A passive information-gaining relation that does not alter the environmental 
conditions, for example: 
- perception 
- observation 
- measurement (macrophysical) 
An active information-gaining relation that does change the state of the environ- 
ment, such as experimental preparation so as to create a certain state or an ac- 
tion that leads to a change in conditions by causing an event to occur. 
A theoretical relation, representing a certain state of knowledge or information, 
that permits prediction of an event or planning of an action that will cause an 
event. 
In each case, a phase shift between the two processes occurring within the subject 
and its environment takes place. On the one hand, information about a real event 
can be obtained only after the event has occurred. On the other hand, the subject is 
capable of receiving information only while it remains in existence: “Hence, the 
eye strides, but does not glide” (see Holst, 1969/70). 
The formal symbolic apparatus that represents this process structure may be 
very simple, but it has to always maintain the relation between the subject and 
object of knowledge, in order to serve as a ‘correspondence theory’ of truth within 
epistemology. Thus, we may distinguish two kinds of information distribution (Fig- 
ure 8.2): 
1. The information process within the subject, i.e., the transport or processing of 
information within the system. Symbolically represented by a horizontal arrow. 
2. The input from the environment of the subject, resulting in pure information 
as a change in the system. Although certainly no passive reception process, but 
an active encounter of the subject with the environment, this process can nev- 

I 317 
8.5 Information and Knowledge 
ertheless occur only because the environment actually exists. Symbolically it is 
represented by a vertical line. 
Even if these processes have an identical structure, two process elements must be 
distinguished: 
1. The states of the subject and the environment, being an informational state of 
knowledge on the one hand and a factual situation on the other hand. Symboli- 
cally this is represented by a circle. 
2. These states are conditions for changes to occur, either as structural changes in 
the informational state of knowledge by new information or as real events. Sym- 
bolically represented by a square. 
This representation by four symbols may be more complicated than the topologi- 
cal figures of ‘process logic’ or ‘temporal logic’, as conceived for example by Wright 
(1971), which consist only of ‘states’ (circles) and horizontal lines representing the 
‘history’ of the state. Yet they allow a more precise description of cognition proc- 
esses, decisions, and actions, without having to presume the logical-atomistic struc- 
ture of the world as a fundamental metaphysical conception. The structural theory 
of information processing that is presented here is not a logical but an epistemo- 
logical atomism. In contrast to those who hold ontological concepts, I make no 
statements on the logic setup of possible worlds. All I aim at is to analyze the 
informational processes within and above the real and factually knowable world, 
the only presupposition being that the world has process character, i.e., that it can 
exist only in space and time. This presupposition, however, is nothing but the 
condition of the possibility of its perception. The cognition process itself, as a proc- 
ess of information, is based on an underlying process in the real world in which 
the recognizable phase of this reality process has always already taken place. 
Thus, a graphical representation of the basic forms of information processes 
can be provided, allotting distinct places to information, observation, prediction, 
event, condition, etc. (Figure 8.2). This representation also clearly demonstrates 
the genetic priority of knowledge over action. Before a consciously planned inter- 
ference in the environment can be made, information-gathering and predictive 
perception 
observation 
meausrernent 
prognosis 
(prognosis- 
explanation of el 
control) 
or 
observation 
anticipation 
Envtron- 
1 
rnent 
State 1 
Event 1 
State 2 
Event 2 
Figure 8.2: 
Basic forms of information processing See the text for an explanation ofthe symbols 

318 8 The Evolution ofScientific Method 
anticipation of the subject’s environment are necessary. The immediate relation 
between knowledge and action is given systematically by the concept of ‘change’. 
When the process of gaining knowledge is merely contemplative or passive, the 
concept of change refers to the subject itself. Passive information-gathering does 
not and cannot change the observable environment at all; an example is non- 
experimental astronomical observations, because of the great distance to the ob- 
served object. There ‘change’ means an ‘adaptation’ or ‘assimilation’ of the sub- 
ject’s cognitive condition to the environment. In this sense the concept of 
information also refers to the subject. The concept of information is a systems- 
relative concept, expressing nothing but the change within the subject’s system 
caused by environmental influences. This, however, does not imply that the envi- 
ronment is an unchangeable part of the whole system. On the contrary, the change- 
ability of the objective world through activities on the part of the subject is an 
essential precondition of its recognition. All our knowledge is originally experi- 
mental knowledge, that is, it interferes with the environment, thereby launching 
real observable processes. 
Kant, in contrast to Aristotle and Leibniz, emphasized this component of spon- 
taneity in human cognition. He did not want to establish an idealistic epistemol- 
ogy, but an activist one. Thus, the law of reason, formulated more precisely as the 
principle of information, gains its fundamental meaning as the principle of causa- 
tion of knowledge. This means, in Kant’s words, “that within the occurrence there 
is always to be found the condition, from which this process (necessarily) follows 
at any time”. In other words, the a priori forms of consciousness form the struc- 
tural conditions of the process of knowledge in its causal temporal structure and 
are necessary because without them, no cognition - information processing - can 
occur. These a priori forms are also of general validity, representing not individual 
coincidental preconditions of an empirical subject, but the general homogeneous 
constitution of the human cognitive ability. From an evolutionary point of view, 
this universal constitution of the human cognitive ability equals a species-specific 
potential of brain activity, which Lorenz (1977) explicitly calls ‘fulguration’: “The 
evolution of man is a ‘creative flash‘ of accumulated tradition and the cerebrum is 
its organ.” 
Epistemologically speaking, the empirical fact of brain development has its equiva- 
lent in the hierarchical organization of the cognitive ability, as described by Kant. 
Hence it follows that it is not sensory experience, but scientific theory, that decides 
what is real. Thus the subjectivity of perception, conditioned by the brain, is tran- 
scended by an equally conditioned higher potential of human brain activity. So the 
brain is represented, very much in the sense of Kant, as a system of systems, con- 
tinually increasing its information content by systematically expending a certain 
amount of sensory energy or by suppressing it and ‘illuminating’ only those parts 
of the consciousness that have previously been decided on by the ‘obscure’ system 
of preconscious processing of sensory stimuli. The ‘chaos of sensory perceptions’ 
mentioned by Kant (1781), receives, in exact accordance with his doctrine of cat- 
egories, a preconscious but nevertheless a priori formation. A modern probabilistic 
interpretation of signal processing by nerve cells, by von Neumann (1956), allows 
I 

I 319 
8.5 Information and Knowledge 
the Kantian conception of chaos, from which order arises by spontaneous cogni- 
tive ability, to be formulated more precisely. Von Neumann demonstrated how to 
build reliable systems from unreliable elements. Such possibilities are realized 
within certain neural networks, counterbalancing the statistical uncertainties of 
changeable chemical processes. Thus, the material presented to conscious cogni- 
tion is already processed and arranged according to certain structures. However, 
even this material of conscious sensory knowledge is further processed according 
to higher selective principles, in a process repeating itself from a structural point 
of view. Consequently, also in this sense, the rational supersystem supersedes 
understanding, which is a subsystem. This complies with the following fact of 
brain physiology: that as sense-organ signals undergo more and more neural rep- 
resentational processes, the greater the degree of independence of the neural stimu- 
lation pattern from the environmental trigger (Griisser and Henn, 1970). 
On this logical level of information processing, it is essential that the empirico- 
causal material processes within the sense organs and the brain, that is, within the 
peripheral and central nervous system, are rearranged and directed by a second 
process. Although these forms of consciousness have their phylogenetic roots in 
preconscious or ratiomorphic structures of subhuman organisms, they possess a 
different character on this level. They are determining components of a process, 
which consciousness identifies in all its parts as its own acts. Using an image 
William James borrowed from Kant, conscious human knowledge resembles, in 
contrast to causal-energetic processes on a material-empirical level, a game of 
billiards in which the elastic balls are not only able to move, but are also conscious 
of it. The first ball would thus transmit not only its motion but also its conscious- 
ness to a second ball, which after receiving it would transmit motion and con- 
sciousness to a third ball, and on and on until the last ball would contain every- 
thing. In this way a vivid description ofthe fundamental structure of every conscious 
process of knowledge, from the most primitive formation of concepts to the high- 
est form of constructing scientific hypotheses and theories is presented, all ofwhich 
are processes of information condensation. 
From this perspective, the process of acquiring knowledge consists of a chain of 
mental states, having their material equivalents in the dynamic organization of the 
brain. Nevertheless, only achieved states of consciousness are perceivable, not the 
transitions and transient parts of the stream of consciousness, which are always 
completely obscured by the achieved goal of the movement. To record these transi- 
tory motions is impossible, as it would mean their destruction. It resembles, as 
William James puts it, the futile effort to switch on the light to see what the dark- 
ness looks like. 
Nevertheless, the continuity of consciousness, the ‘I think, accompanying my 
imaginations’, is maintained; because every state of consciousness, every substan- 
tial point of rest, contains the previous one. Moreover, this does not take place in a 
random way, but according to certain unchangeable structural synthetic a priori laws 
that provide the ultimate guarantee for the unity of consciousness. From this it 
becomes obvious that information within the human cognitive process is not de- 
veloped by mere addition, but aims towards an increasingly constructive rational- 

320 
8 The Evolution of Scientific Method 
Reason 
I 
Sensibility 
Figure 8.3: 
Kant’s relationships between powers of the mind. 
ity. This rationality is constructed by a certain mechanism, which Kant already pre- 
cisely described in his transcendental epistemology (Oeser, 1982) (Figure 8.3). 
Figure 8.3 shows that the well-known circular arrangement of sensory input, 
understanding, and reason, each containing certain levels of a priori form (space 
and time, categories, and ideas), does not make up a static structure, but has a 
dynamic functional relation. This functional relation is set up by knowledge 
potentials, precisely determined in the sense of logical operation, that are closely 
linked with each other, forming a topological system having a quasicircular charac- 
ter. 
Differing from the conventional interpretation of Kant, but in accordance with 
evolutionary epistemology, I can demonstrate, by reconstructing Kant’s prag- 
matic anthropological ideas, that his system of synthetic a priori forms provided 
not only a topology of human perceptive ability, but also a topology of error. The 
basic idea behind this negative topology of human cognition is that even error 
can be explained epistemologically. Or, as Shakespeare put it: “Though this be 
madness; yet there’s method in it.” Figure 8.4 shows the methodical structure of 
error as a pathological exaggeration of cognitive abilities and forces on the pro- 
ductive heuristic side, whereas on the reproductive stabilizing side, deficiencies 
and attenuations are seen. This topology of error, which is of course totally real- 
ized within a real individual, constitutes the foundation of individual-private, as 
well as of collective-systematic disinformation, which occurs even within sci- 
ence. 
The functional unity of all perceiving abilities and their connecting cognitive 
forces are exactly what Kant calls the epistemological subject, or self-conscious- 
ness. This unity is the a priori precondition for the possibility of knowledge, which 
itself appears only during the process of experience. Thus, the reality of conscious- 
ness may be comprehended as an informational reality that exists only within this 
constantly repeated functional relation. Moreover, this functional relation is the 
key to an evolutionary methodology of science that is capable of explaining the 
development of those mechanisms of knowledge that serve to transcend the 
phylogenetically conditioned foundations of human cognitive ability. 

I 321 
8. G Science as an Evolutionary Information System 
Systematic madness 
Simple Mindeness 
Absurdity 
Stupidity 
Simple Mindeness 
Insanity 
Figure 8.4 Kant’s topology of error. 
8.6 
Science as an Evolutionary Information System 
Scientific knowledge can be regarded as a reversal of common-sense knowledge, 
because it does not primarily serve to preserve life, but to acquire ‘objective knowl- 
edge’. All the same, our innate cognitive apparatus can be transcended only by aid 
of the apparatus itself, by a repetition of the original procedure. This means that 
scientific method has the same circular structure as the elementary mechanism of 
trial and error-elimination that is observable also in the lower animals. Scientific 
method, however, is distinguished by being a consciously developed supra-indi- 
vidual mechanism for self-correction, that not only eliminates incorrect informa- 
tion but also stores correct information, or more precisely, condenses it in an ab- 
stract manner. This process can be illustrated by the epistemological model in 
Figure 8.5. 
Although this model resembles the three-worlds model of Popper and Eccles, it 
is different in that it is a purely epistemological model (not an ontological model, 
which distinguishes diverse levels of being or different relatively independent 
worlds). In contrast, in an epistemological model, stratification of being or separa- 
tion of worlds occurs as abstract differentiation of the object area of scientific knowl- 
Science 
1 
Scientific 
Scientific 
information 
Representation 
Representation 
r 
Objects 
Figure 8.5: 
Diagram of the process of scientific method. 

322 8 The Evolution ofScientific Method 
edge. The model demonstrates cognitive processes and the conditions by which 
the subjects of cognition represent the central active parts or bearers of the scien- 
tific process. Representation is the most elementary form of an information proc- 
ess that, on the cognitive human level, may be termed ‘knowledge’. My model 
shows representation as a direct connection between an epistemological subject 
and an object area. The adequacy of this representation corresponds to what has, 
in classical correspondence theory, been called the ‘correspondence’ of subject and 
object. This correspondence can now be identified as the result of an information 
process, by transforming the Kantian principle of the possibility of experience, 
that is, the law of sufficient reason, into the information principle. In this process, 
information is not transmitted, but is produced by the human consciousness. 
Human consciousness (or, as Kant put it, the originally synthetic unity of tran- 
scendental apperception) separates itself, as well as its material bearer (the organ- 
ism), from the external world by setting up a subjective model of this external 
world as a phenomenological world within itself. Here, the Kantian a priori forms 
of sensibility (Anschauung) and Reason result in a model of knowledge opera- 
tions, which, as a general principle, can no longer be questioned. They are, how- 
ever, in no way an absolute guarantee of the truth of knowledge. Not even Kant 
ever claimed this. They are merely a guarantee of the ‘impossibility of absolute 
error’. In every individual cognitive process, knowledge and error are inseparably 
blended, because the subjective model of the external world does not consist only 
of information, but also of disinformation. 
Disinformation can be identified as such only after a corrective process is ap- 
plied. It is, so to speak, a topological distortion ofthe external world integrated into 
this model along with undistorted information. Hence, the model of the external 
world, set up by a cognition process, resembles a map on which the various places 
actually exist, but their relative positions are shifted. This displacement does not 
make the map completely incorrect, as we can still reach these places by following 
the paths on the map. 
But the subjective model of the external world can also be lifted to the higher 
level of intersubjectivity by the individual concrete subject’s communication with 
other subjects, which results in a specific social construct of reality. The perceiving 
individual may thus escape from the prison of his own brain-conditioned subjec- 
tivity. 
Hence, communication is the second process of human knowledge processing, 
which is permanently superimposed on the information process of representa- 
tion, and which, at least as far as intersubjectivity is concerned, provides an additio- 
nal guarantee of reality. The original medium of direct personal communication is 
natural language, which originated under selective pressure for communication 
among subjects. As Berger and Luckmann (19GG) told it so vividly, the everyday life 
of man resembles the rattling of a conversational apparatus, which constantly guar- 
antees, modifies, and reconstructs his reality. We have, however, to distinguish 
between direct interpersonal communication and indirect communication, which 
arose with the invention of writing. A written document not only creates the op- 
portunity for a new kind of indirect communication, independent of time and 
I 

I 323 
8.6 Science as an Evolutionary Information System 
place, but simultaneously provides a novel source of information. A written docu- 
ment not only serves, at least in the area of science, to spread knowledge, but, 
moreover, contains the demand for further information processing within the frame- 
work of a comprehensive transsubjective process, in which each document repre- 
sents but a minute part. 
Scientific knowledge is indeed based on processes of information and represen- 
tation, which are also well known in common-sense knowledge. But, as a matter of 
principle, scientific knowledge must be distinguished from common sense by the 
fact that - from the beginning - ‘scientific knowledge’ refers to the transsubjective 
system of science, which is endowed with relative independence. This abstract 
system of science, however, cannot be directly identified with the whole of papers, 
books, and documents (including electronic documentation), because for the most 
part, these documents contain devalued information that is no longer used. The 
state of science is in fact represented only by those documents actually used by 
scientists. This conception of science as a system of information can, with refer- 
ence to Bolzano, be labeled an ‘actualistic’ conception. It contends that only what 
corresponds to the current state of scientific communication can be regarded as 
‘science’. Everything that is not part of the current information process of the widely 
branched interpersonal communication system of science, either no longer be- 
longs or does not yet belong to science. Without adding criteria for this ‘actuality’, 
however, this theory would indeed be trivial. Statistics on author citations or key- 
words may provide an outward reference, but by no means an undisputed founda- 
tion. The logical epistemological criterion determined by the concept of ‘truth‘ is 
no better qualified for this purpose, because current science includes current truth 
as well as current error, which is constantly present in the system of science, as a 
collective disinformation. As a basic criterion, as well as a real entrance condition 
and selection mechanism, we should therefore regard only the scientific method 
of a discipline, because it decides the foundation and justification of new knowl- 
edge, just as it decides the processing and devaluation of former knowledge. The 
totality of all methods of a discipline represents the mechanism of knowledge ac- 
cepted by the scientists in that field. It functions even when alternative theories 
within a discipline conflict, because such disputes are decided in accordance with 
methodological principles. Controversies between various methods do not arise 
solely within the overall system of all sciences, but also within the limits of specific 
sciences. However, this controversy between methods refers after all only to a shift 
of emphasis within the system of methods used by a discipline. It does not con- 
cern the functional relation itself, which basically connects all possible methods of 
knowledge, including reduction, induction, construction, and deduction. This func- 
tional relation is established within the human cognitive faculty as an a priori ba- 
sic structure. At the level of scientific knowledge this cyclic or quasi-circular struc- 
ture proves to be a methodologically regulated corrective process. The basic pattern 
of this constantly ascending self-corrective process can be described most adequately 
as a spiral iteration that gradually approaches an unknown aim without ever actu- 
ally reaching it. This corrective procedure is, like common-sense knowledge, a 
product of evolution - of an evolution, however, that has already changed its direc- 

324 
8 The Evolution ofScientijc Method 
tion from subjective knowledge, which aims at the preservation of life, to objective 
knowledge. 
I 
8.7 
The ‘Law of Three Stages’ of the Evolution of Method 
A functional relation between methods, serving the purpose of acquisition, sys- 
tematization, and justification of scientific knowledge, is established today within 
many empirical sciences. Actually it is nothing but an iteration of the subjective 
individual mechanism of common-sense knowledge, originally serving the main- 
tenance of life. We could say that this elementary mechanism, epistemologically 
proven even in the behavioral patterns of lower organisms, forms a kind of proto- 
type of the mechanism of scientific knowledge, in which every methodologically 
regulated step has to be retraceable. This is demonstrated in Figure 8.6 (Oeser, 
1976) which completely corresponds with Kant’s model of the functional relation 
between cognitive faculty and cognitive forces. The reconstruction of the historical 
development of this model depicts the evolution of scientific method. 
This evolution constitutes a process, which, as Spencer already assumed, is de- 
termined by an evolutionary law. Even before Spencer and Darwin, Comte had 
demonstrated the development of simple, concrete relations into complicated, ab- 
stract relations, by positing a law of three stages. This law maintains that different 
sciences, depending on whether their field of study is simple or complex, attain 
different stages of development at different times. Although Comte considered 
these stages of development - in tune with his positivist ideal - as a process liber- 
ating science from theological and metaphysical influences, the history of science 
assumes a vastly different character when seen against the background of the evo- 
lution of methods. It then no longer represents a process, leading phylogenetically 
as well as ontogenetically from a theological through a metaphysical to a positive 
scientific stage, but rather a process, developing in its first stage an empirical in- 
ductive method, in its second stage a constructive systematic method, and in its 
third stage a deductive formal method. These methods do not supersede or replace 
Theory 
Information 
Figure 8.6 The functional relation between scientific methods. 

8.7 The ‘law of Three Stages’ of the Evolution of Method 
one another, but unite into an increasingly compact functional relation. This ap- 
proach corresponds to Spencer’s amendment of the Comtian law of three stages. 
Contrary to Comte, Spencer points out that there are not three antagonistic meth- 
ods of knowledge acquisition, but a single method that basically remains the same. 
Unlike Spencer, we are not compelled to abandon the law of three stages in our 
model, because the various stages of science can be regarded as periods in the 
development of a single increasingly complex method relation. Thus, Comte’s idea 
of different sciences attaining these stages at different times or remaining in these 
stages for different periods of time is retained. It may even occur that certain sci- 
ences, having a complex content, never reach the axiomatic deductive phase. In 
the model this means that the separate sectors of the quasicircular process form 
not only a logical systematical sequence, but also a historical genetic one. Thus the 
evolution of method may be demonstrated as follows. 
The first phase in the development of science is characterized methodologically 
as a pretheoretical phase. During this phase the inductive method is developed in 
its simplest enumerative form. At this stage of scientific progress, science is merely 
descriptive, for example the classical natural history. Yet, even on this level of 
pretheoretical science, it is possible to make predictions about future effects. A 
prerequisite for such a prediction (i.e., a prognosis without theory) is the uniform- 
ity or permanent repetition of effects. A general principle of induction is thus jus- 
tified by the uniformity of the world, and a prediction is just the extrapolation of a 
uniformity series of observations into the future. An example (Figure 8.7) is pro- 
vided by Babylonian astronomy. 
The second stage of scientific knowledge is marked by a period of theory con- 
struction. During this period a jump from inductively enumeratively obtained state- 
ments to general statements (laws) occurs. This typological jump is not justifiable 
by pure logic and consequently requires a new kind of induction, going beyond 
mere enumeration. Whewell(1860) called it a ‘superinduction’, always containing 
a mysterious, creative element that cannot be rationalized by formal logic. Histori- 
cally, this leap in the field of empirical science was made possible by the develop- 
ment of Euclidean geometry. It created a scope of empirically independent regu- 
larities that could, however, be transferred to the area of experience. A brilliant 
example for such a general analogy, in which mathematical laws were translated 
into reality, is the Ptolemaic astronomy of ancient Greece. 
Thus the Comtian classification of science, which represents a series of develop- 
ments from a historical genetic point of view starting with mathematics and lead- 
325 
I 
duction 
Information 
Figure 8.7: 
The pretheoretical phase of scientific method. 

326 8 The Evolution of Scientific Method 
ing via astronomy to physics, chemistry, biology, and finally to sociology is con- 
firmed. In observing the actual evolutionary history of science, we realize that, 
indeed, physics was the next science to reach the constructive theoretical stage. 
Although, within the dynamics of astronomical theory, a change from the geocen- 
tric to the heliocentric system was effected by Kepler and Copernicus, the develop- 
ment of method in this field remained perfectly continuous. A decisive change 
occurred however when, along with Galileo's nuova scienza, physics as terrestrial 
mechanics passed into its second methodological phase. Galileo, and later Newton 
and Huygens, explicitly named the basic structure of this methodological step the 
method of opposed operations - metodo risolutivo and metodo compositivo - the 
method of analysis and the method of synthesis. This means that, when analyzing 
a homogeneous phenomenon of motion, for example, in the motion of a free- 
falling sphere, the primitive enumerative induction is retained. It serves, however, 
a higher purpose, namely the deduction of general laws, which succeeds only by 
way of superinduction, provided by geometry. The discovery of these laws exactly 
illustrates the process of development from simple concrete laws to complicated 
higher laws; e.g., from the primitive law of scales and levers to the complex laws of 
free fall. 
The constructive synthetic setup of a theory thus follows a law of development, 
in which, by varying the experimental conditions, increasingly complex relations 
can be realized. This process can be considered a constructive one, because previ- 
ous steps can be employed for further procedure. The more abstract and compre- 
hensive a law, the more complex and broad its context, because it integrates previ- 
ous regularities as structural conditions. The classical example of such integrative 
growth is Newton's theory of gravitation, which contains the laws of terrestrial 
as well as of celestial mechanics. Classical (inductive synthetic) theories meet 
their limits in the unwieldy mathematical apparatus of Euclidean geometry, which 
sets bounds to any further development towards more comprehensive principles, 
no longer graphically presentable. In the model, this means that emphasis on 
the inductive constructive part coincides with deficiency on the deductive part 
(Figure 8.8). 
Being axiomatic deductive theories, classical synthetic theories are logically in- 
complete. No concept is ultimately defined, in the sense of mathematical logical 
exactitude so as to exclude emendation. No axiom is formulated so as to exclude 
correction; no theorem is self-evident to such an extent that it would not require 
additional proof for its deductibility from axioms. 
Only in the third stage, methodologically characterized by the development of a 
formal analytic method of deduction, does science attain the degree of systematical 
perfection that permits prediction and explanation of individual phenomena within 
a certain area and in a constant manner, in the sense of an algorithmic method. 
Thus, a major shift in emphasis from observing, measuring, and experimental 
procedure to theoretical calculation occurs. This holds true at least for 'normal' 
problems, for which algorithms are available in the form of algebraic equations. 
The prime example of this, unmatched to this day, is the analytical mechanics of 
Langrange and Laplace. It is, as Mach (1921) stated, a purely formal development 
I 

8.7 The ‘Law of Three Stages’ ofthe Evolution of Method 
327 
I 
Theory 
Information 
Figure 8.8: 
The constructive synthetic phase of scientific method. 
of Newton’s original constructive synthetic theory into a formal axiomatic deduc- 
tive system. In terms of the model, this means that emphasis on the deductive part 
coincides with abandonment of the inductive constructive method (Figure 8.9). 
Not even heuristic developments or fundamental changes in the axiomatic de- 
ductive theory in its basic concepts and axioms, such as, for example, Einstein’s 
theory of relativity in relation to classical mechanics, has had such an effect on the 
basic structure of previously valid scientific method. The inductive constructive 
procedure of heuristic logic, which is closely tied to sensory experience, is sup- 
planted by a speculative constructive procedure, which is far from realistic experi- 
ence and creates concepts that, as Einstein (1956) said, are free inventions of the 
human mind. 
For this reason, Einstein (1956) characterizes the movement from axioms to a 
highly developed theory of principles as a ‘jump’, no longer justifiable by the tradi- 
tional procedure of gradual induction (Oeser, 1979). This view, however, should 
not be identified with anti-inductivism, as advocated by Popper in his radicalization 
of Einstein’s reflections on method. As a matter of fact, this discontinuous proce- 
dure was characteristic also of classical induction. There, the jumps had of course 
been shorter and fewer, because they usually occurred in the same way as those in 
Theory 
Information 
Figure 8.9: 
The axiomatic-deductive phase of scientific method. 

328 8 The Evolution of Scient$c Method 
Euclidean geometry, that is, within a defined area. Deductive systematization was 
therefore considered merely an additional effect that often manifested itself only 
generations later. 
A somewhat different situation is encountered in the abstract theories of princi- 
ples of modern physics. Precisely because their basic concepts are inaccessible to 
experience, deductive systematization has to be performed directly and with ulti- 
mate consistency, to make the free play of thought a scientifically relevant, i.e., 
systems-relative, process of knowledge. How strictly even Einstein followed this 
‘logical path‘ of deductive systematization is evident from his scientific papers, in 
which he employs the purely logical aspect of thought economy to an extent that 
highlights the limitations of creative intuition in scientific procedure more clearly 
than ever. The distinction between hypothesis and theory is visible on this level of 
deductive systematization. Isolated hypotheses are unimportant at this stage. Only 
within a system of axioms do they gain a certain significance. Subsequent inductive 
support of such abstract hypotheses before the establishment of a theory is there- 
fore superfluous, regardless of the fact that, in general, there are no such possibili- 
ties. Hypotheses, forming the top of a highly abstract system of axioms, mutually 
support each other. Einstein (1956) endeavoured to substantiate this ‘criterion of 
inner perfection’ that “is not concerned with the relation to the observed material” 
not only from a logical, but also from a pragmatic and aesthetic point of view. 
According to the comprehensive formula of Comte, not only mathematics, as- 
tronomy, and physics have attained the stage of positive science, but in succession 
also chemistry, biology, and sociology. This development has its equivalent in the 
model of the evolution of method. For example, chemistry reached, at the latest 
when Dalton’s theory of atoms became known, the last stage of axiomatic theory 
formation. At this stage it is possible to predict, within the framework of Mendeleev’s 
periodic table of the elements, the discovery of new elements. Here, however, chem- 
istry, in the sense ofhomogenous reduction, overlaps physics, since the basic theory 
of both disciplines has become identical. In the field of biology we encounter a 
slightly different situation: already Darwin pointed out that, compared to physical 
laws, the relations between biological phenomena are far more complicated. An 
even higher level of intricacy occurs in the laws in the field of human society. Here 
an entirely new factor is added, namely the fact that theoretical concepts cause 
some changes in the field of study 
Being phylogenetically firmly established in the human perceiving apparatus, 
the quasicircular fundamental structure of functional relations among methods in 
retained throughout. An example in the field of humanities is the so-called 
hermeneutic circle, which, in applied sciences is the action-circle or applicative 
circle. As Schleiermacher and Dilthey stated, this circle of human knowledge is 
based on the functional relation between induction and deduction. Therefore, it 
does not in general display any structural difference from the feedback loop of 
inductive experience and deductive theory customary in natural sciences. The dif- 
ference lies not in the structure of the cognitive mechanism, but in the peculiarity 
of the object area which contains different kinds of order. For example, in the field 
of biology, contrary to physicochemical laws of repetitive and universal character, a 
I 

8.7 The ‘Law ofThree Stages’ of the Evolution of Method 
329 
new kind of order appears, which only distantly originates in thermodynamic 
equilibria (Prigogine and Stengers, 1981). 
Of this kind of order of living systems, new structures of order appear in the 
human sphere which will probably never be understood by means of axiomatic 
deductive theories. These new open structures correspond to another type of theory 
that, although not having fixed determinations or axioms, is no less scientific. It is 
based on a methodologically justifiable fundamental structure of a self-controlling 
process of knowledge. 
This methodological fundamental structure, although formed in the course of 
the history of science, is merely an idealized abstraction, not pertaining to any 
individual scientist but only to the system of science. This means that the indi- 
vidual scientist is free to choose his or her method and even to come up with 
absurdities. The constitution of human cognitive ability, however, proves Kant’s 
statement of the impossibility of total error. A positive formulation of this idea, 
corroborated by evolutionary epistemology, appeared in “Allgemeine Natur- 
geschichte und Theorie des Himmels” (Kant, 1755) and could be made the guid- 
ing principle of the entire history of human knowledge and science: “Even in the 
most absurd views that have found approbation by man, there will always be found 
a grain of truth.” Methodologically, this means that scientific research cannot be 
mastered in an ideal way, i.e., completely harmonized in its functional elements. 
The functional connection, phylogenetically developed in the course of the history 
of science, has its ontological equivalent within the human individual. Here, too, 
shifts in emphasis are observable. It may develop into stationary conditions that 
cannot be escaped individually. In the history of science, there will always be radi- 
cal inductivists or deductivists contributing their share to the general development 
of science. 
The actual selective mechanism, however, is not affected (in the sense ofa primi- 
tive social Darwinism) by disputes and discussions among scientists, but by the 
system of science itself. This selective mechanism treats the individual mercilessly 
but with absolute justice. In science, no structure of order is ever lost. Discoveries 
made too early, like the Mendelian laws of heredity, are rediscovered later. For the 
individual, however, this justice is usually administered too late, because the selec- 
tive forces are not attuned to the individual person. To the contrary, they cut right 
through personal ideas and scientific efforts, where truth and error, sense and 
nonsense, constitute a uniform system. 
This selective agency, for example, separates the Galileo who founded physics 
from the Galileo who established abstruse theories on high and low tides: it sepa- 
rates the Newton who founded a fundamental uniform astronomical/physical theory 
from the Newton who dabbled in pyramids, theology, and alchemy; it separates the 
Cuvier who founded comparative anatomy and paleontology from the Cuvier who 
was an irrational and furious opponent of the theory of evolution. 
The advantage of such an impersonal justice, which does not have to be invoked 
by the individual, because it will be provided anyway, is contrasted with its disad- 
vantage, that science indeed no longer needs the creative human individual and 
thus acquires an inhuman dimension that has already begun to frighten us. 
I 

330 
8 The Evolution ofscientific Method 
8.8 
References 
I 
BERGER, P., LUCKMANN, T. (1966) The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in 
BOLTZMANN, 
L. (1905) Populure Schrijien. Leipzig: Joh. Ambrosius Barth. 
BOLTZMANN-FASOL, 
I. M. (Ed.) (1990) Ludwig Boltzrnann Principien der 
BRESCH, C. (1977) Zwischenstuji Leben: Evolution ohne Ziel? Munich and Zurich: 
BRUNSWIK, E. (1955) Ratiomorphic models of perception and thinking. 
CAMPBELL, 
D. T. (1974) Evolutionary epistemology. In: The Philosophy of Karl 
Popper, Part I (Ed. P. SCHILPP). 
Open Court, La Salle, pp. 413-463. 
CANDOLLE, 
A. DE (1991) Zur Geschichte der Wissenschaften und der Gelehrten. 
Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft. 
DARWIN, 
C. (1859) On the Origin of Species by Means ofNatural Selection. London: 
Murray. 
DARWIN, 
C. (1896) The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, 2nd ed. 
London: Murray. 
DUBROVSKY, 
D. I. (1978) Informational approach to the mind-brain problem. 
In: Proc. lGth World Congress of Philosophy. Dusseldorf, pp. 205-208. 
EIGEN, M., WINKLER, 
R. (1975) Das Spiel: Naturgesetze steuern den Zufall. 
Munich and Zurich: Piper. 
EINSTEIN, A. (1956) Lettres a Maurice Solovine. Paris. 
FREY, G. (1980) Moglichkeit und Bedeutung einer evolutionaren Erkenntnis- 
GRUSSER, 
0.-J., 
HENN, 
V. (1970) Erkenntnistheoretische und anthropologische 
the Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Doubleday & Co. 
NaturJlosofi. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer. 
Piper. 
Acts Psychol. 11,108-109. 
theorie. Zeitschr.f. Phil. Forschung 34, 1-17. 
Aspekte der modernen Hirnforschung. In: Wohin fahrt die Biologie? 
(LOHMANN, M., Ed.). Munich: Hanser, pp. 111-146. 
New York Wiley. 
(Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Band I u. 11) Miinchen: Piper, 
London: Macmillan, 1929.) 
Chicago Press. 
Knowledge (I. JAKATOS, 
A. MUSGRAVE, Eds.). London and New York: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 231-278. 
LOCKE, J. (1788) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. London: Rivington. 
Lorenz, K. (1973) Die Ruckseite des Spiegels: Versuch einer Naturgeschichte 
rnenschlichen Erkennens. Munich-Zurich: Piper. (English translation, New York 
and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977.) 
HEBB, D. 0. (1949) The Organization of Behavior. A Neuropsychological Theory. 
HOLST, 
E. v. (1969/70) Zur Verhaltensphysiologie bei Tieren und Menschen. 
KANT, I. (1781) Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Riga: Hartknoch. (English translation, 
KUHN, T. S. (1962) The Structure of Scientijc Revolutions. Chicago: University of 
KUHN, T. S. (1970) Reflections on my critics. In: Criticism and the Growth of 

I 331 
8.8 References 
MACH, E. (1885) Die Analyse der EmpJndungen und das Verhaltnis des Physischen 
MACH, E. (1905) Erkenntnis und Irrtum. Leipzig: Barth. 
MACH, E. (1919) Prinzipien der Wannelehre. Leipzig: Barth. 
MACH, E. (1921) Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung. Leipzig: Brockhaus. 
MACH, E. (1910) Populanvissenschajliche Vorlesungen. Leipzig: Barth. 
MACKAY, D. M. (1950) Quanta1 Aspects of Scientific Information. Philosophical 
MAYQ E. (1976) Evolution and the Diversity of Lfe. Cambridge, MA and London: 
MEYNERT, 
T. (1892) Sammlung von populanvissenschajlichen Vortragen iiber den 
NEUMANN, J. VON (1956) The General and Logical Theory of Automata. In: 
OESER, 
E. (1974) System, Klassijkation, Evolution. Vienna and Stuttgart: Braumuller. 
OESER, 
E. (1976) Wissenschaj und Information, 3 Vols. Vienna and Munich: 
OESER, 
E. (1979) Wissenschajstheorie als Rekonstruktion der Wissenschajs- 
OESER, 
E. (1982) Kants Beitrag zur progressiven Begrundung der komparativen 
OESER, 
E. (1987) Psychozoikum. Evolution und Mechanismus der menschlichen 
OESER, E. (1988) Das Abenteuer der kollektiven Vemunj. Evolution und Involution 
POPPER, 
K. R. (1972) Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford: 
POPPER, 
K. (1984) Auf der Suche nach einer besseren Welt. Munich and Zurich: Piper. 
POPPER, K. (1994) Die beiden Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie, 2nd ed. 
PRIGOGINE, 
I., STENGERS, 
I. (1981) Dialog rnit der Natur. Neue Wege natunvissen- 
RIEDL, R. (1980) Biologie der Erkenntnis: Die stammesgeschichtlichen Grundlagen 
SFITELBERGER 
F. (1980) Die Raum-Zeit-Struktur der menschlichen Erlebniswelt 
zum Psychischen (3rd ed. 1902). Jena: Fischer. 
Magazine 46, 296. 
Harvard University Press. 
Bau und die Leistungen des Gehims. Wien: Braurnidler. 
The World ofMathematics, Vol. 4. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
Oldenbourg. 
geschichte, 2 Vols. Vienna and Munich: Oldenbourg. 
Wissenschaftstheorie. Philosophia Naturalis 19, 201-250. 
Erkenntnisfdhigkeit. Berlin and Hamburg: Parey. 
der Wissenschaj. Wien and Hamburg: Parey. 
Clarendon Press. 
Tiibingen: Mohr. 
schajlichen Denkens. Munich and Zurich: Piper. 
der Vemunf. Berlin and Hamburg: Parey. 
als Problem der Hirnforschung. Studien zur Klassijkation, Vol. 9. 
Frankfurt/M.: Index. 
Norgate. 
Erkenntnisstrukturen im Kontext von Biologie, Psychologie, Linguistik, Philosophie 
und Wissenschajstheorie. Stuttgart: Hirzel. 
SPENCER, 
H. (1870) The Principles ofPsychology, Vol. I. London: Williams and 
VOLLMER, 
G. (1975) Evolutionare Erkenntnistheorie. Angeborene 
WHEWELL, 
W. (1860 [1972]) On the Philosophy ofDiscovery. New York: Franklin. 
WRIGHT, 
G. H. V. (1971) Explanation and Understanding. Ithaca, NY Cornell 
University Press. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

Index 
A 
a posteriori 
308 
a priori 302, 308, 311, 318, 320 
- forms of consciousness 318 
aborigines 
130 
abstract visual symbols 79 
accommodation 
56 
Achuelean 256 
action 53 
adaptation 
African honey guide 222 
agglomeration 282 
aggression 
13 
agricultural revolution 154, 236 
agriculture 
131, 258 
algorithmic compressibility 52 
altruism 274 
altruistic behavior 174, 176, 178, 
184, 186 
anthropology 
- cultural 125 
- social 125 
apparatus, innate cognitive 321 
apperception, transcendental 
322 
applicative circle 328 
Ardrey, R. 
197 
Aristotle 122, 138, 191-193, 198, 
army ants 220, 240 
Aron 158 
arrow of time 38 
assimilation 
56, 318 
Australia 130, 144 
Australopithecine 2, 223, 256 
1, 34, 121, 305, 310, 318 
202-204,240 
autism 5 
autopoiesis 
160 
axiomatization 49 
Ayres, C. E. 
268 
Aztecs 144 
B 
baboons 222,240 
Bagehot 158 
balance of power 229,230,232 
Bertalanffy, L. v. 
159 
bilingualism 
11 1 
biodiversity loss 263 
bioeconomic 209,214,223 
biogenetic, law 305 
biological altruism 
173, 176, 177 
biopolitics 191 
blood revenge 141,142,158,163 
Bolsheviks 122 
Borkenau, F. 
154 
bounded rationality 271 
brain 
301, 302, 312, 313 
brain development 318 
British Navy 139 
bureaucracy 146 
C 
Carneiro, R. L. 
128 
case systems 92 
catalhoyuk 261 
category 32,318 
- Kant’s a priori 301 
causality 37,39 
central nervous system 31 1 
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. I: The Evolution of Human Societies and Cultures. 
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Christoph Antweiler 
- 
. , - 
_-_. 
1 
- . .. - - ~~- 
~~ 
- 

334 
index 
I 
cerebrum 302 
chiefdom 
148 
chimpanzee culture 17 
chimpanzees 
12 
clan 
125, 137, 143 
Clark, J. B. 
267 
classification of science 325 
climate 260 
-change 
263 
- deterioration 286 
coevolution 49, 160, 253 
coevolutionary disequilibrium 257 
cognitive 
- adaptation 
67 
- apparatus 29 
- evolution 25 
- niche 58 
- operator theory 33, 35 
- representation 8 
Cohen, J. 
128 
collective survival enterprise 
193, 
Collins, P. 158 
colonialism 125 
combination of labor 227, 228 
commensurability of wants 270, 
Commons, J. 
268 
communication 42, 322 
communicational skills 85 
competition 
121, 129, 137, 138, 
complete constructivism 61 
complex language 78 
complexity 142 
compressibility 41 
Comte, A. 123 
conflict 
- theory 159,161 
- violent 129 
consciousness 312, 319, 322 
consilience 255 
constrained optimization 
269 
constraints 47 
constructivism 41 
204,218,240, 241 
272 
143,279 
constructivist evolutionary 
consumer sovereignty 270,273 
content 
- empirical a posteriori 315 
- structural a priori 315 
contingent valuation 284 
cooperation 280 
corporate good 240 
corporate goods 206-208 
correlation study 237 
cost-benefit analysis 271 
creative destruction 275 
creolization 88 
Cro-Magnon 257,258 
cultural 
- construction of the world 
- evolution 268 
- - created artifacts 19 
- - social practices 19 
- information 133 
- institutions 
135, 162 
- - secondary 138 
- -tertiary 
138 
- - universal cultural elements 
- Lamarckism 62 
- learning 5 
- memory 114 
- organization 
2 
- transmission 
12 
culture 1, 160, 227, 231 
cumulative cultural evolution 4 
Cusa, Nicholas of 275 
cybernetic 220, 236, 239 
- control 216,221 
- model 202 
- system 199, 200, 203 
cybernetics 199, 201, 213 
cyclic variables 
Cynics 194, 195 
epistemology 30 
81 
136 
5 3, 5 5 
D 
Darwin, Charles 126, 155, 254 
Darwinian evolution 62 
Darwinism 
126, 303 

Index I 335 
Darwin's finches 211 
Dawkins, R. 
280 
deduction 326, 328 
deductivism 303 
determinism 
31 
digital literacy 114 
disinformation 
322, 323 
division oflabor 
131, 145, 197, 199, 
203, 212, 232 
- sexual 130 
- shamanism 
131 
division/combination of labor 220, 
domestication 143, 145 
- horse breeding 145 
dominance 221 
- competition 197 
- hierarchy 199 
- rank 
3 
Dong, Maoze 122 
Durkheim, E. 
130 
dynamic of theories 303, 304 
224,230 
E 
Easter Island 262 
economic 269 
- growth 285 
- man 254 
- surplus 148 
economics 125, 134 
elite, aristocratic 150 
empire 
- Chinese 153 
- Mayan 
132,152 
- Roman 132,152,153 
- Tokugawa 153 
empirical theory 46 
empiricism 313 
emulation learning 
12 
enculturated apes 16 
endowment effect 284 
enlightenment 
123 
environment 126, 143, 148, 160, 
-Mogul 
153 
310,318 
- physical 137 
Epicurean 194, 195 
epigenetic system 
GO 
epistemological autoreproduction 59 
epistemology 27, 313 
- evolutionary 299,301,304,306,308 
- transcendental 
307, 320 
equivalence postulate 27 
error, impossibility of total 329 
ethology 126, 196, 197 
evolution 
- biological 308 
- concept 124 
- of complexity 284 
- of human technology 258 
- ofman 301 
- of scientific method 306 
- organic 127 
- sociocultural 309 
- theory 299 
evolutionary 
- anthropology 121 
- biology 121 
- culture theory 161 
- economics 268 
- epistemology 26 
- sociology 126 
- stable strategy 175 
exhaustible natural resources 271 
exosomatic 256 
exosomatic instruments 
256 
extensions 
- qualitative 46, 50 
- quantitative 45, 50 
extinction episodes 287 
- psychology 126, 197,207,209 
F 
fairness 208 
female speech 98 
Fertile Crescent 143, 154 
feud 141,162 
feudalism 152, 153 
- European 153 
- Japanese 153 

336 Index 
I 
fief 153 
first-language speakers 
110 
food production 
122, 143, 146 
force 
121, 155 
forms, invariant substantial 315 
French Revolution 122 
friendship 3 
fulguration 309, 318 
functional 
- realism 61 
- variety 96 
C 
game theory 205,207,208,270 
gene 137 
geneculture coevolution 181 
genetic 
- affiliations 101 
- altruism 
176, 178 
gestural communication 
12,13 
Gould, S. J. 
160 
grammatical combinations 8 
Great Basin Shoshone 217 
group selection 176, 183, 185-187, 
208,224, 228,253,280 
group selection theory 175, 208 
growth of knowledge 32 
H 
Habermas, J. 
125 
Harris, M. 
162 
Hayek, F. A. von 
134 
Hegel, G. W. F. 
123 
Herder, J. G. 123 
hierarchical selection 253 
historicism 126 
history, accumulated wisdom 
19 
Hobbes, T. 
195,196,203,205,241 
Holocene 260, 286 
homo 2 
- erectus 223, 226, 256 
- ergaster 223 
- habilis 256 
- reciprocans 282 
- sapiens, evolution 228 
horticulture 131 
huge 279 
human 
- cognition 
2, 3, 19 
- individual 137 
- nature 193,194,196,241 
hunter-gatherer 
122, 130, 140, 143, 
hypothesis 
2 13 
- general-development 300 
258 
I 
identification through language 79 
identity 33 
Igorot 215,240 
imitation 11 
imitative learning 4, 6 
inborn world view 29 
inclusive fitness 
indirect reciprocity 208 
induction 26, 30, 325, 328 
inductive inference 61 
inductivism 303 
Industrial Revolution 
122, 154, 263 
industrialization 13 1 
information 299, 309, 310 
- concept 318 
- cultural 
133 
- genetic 132, 310 
- intellectual 311 
- neurodynamic 311 
-pure 
312 
- ratiomorphic 312 
- short-term 311 
- structural 313 
-types 
133 
information principle 322 
input substitution 264 
input-output analysis 282 
Institutional Economics 268 
institutional economics 268 
institutions 
2 
instruments 256 
intensification of production 
264 
121, 144, 162, 205, 
209,232 

Index I 337 
intentionality 80 
interactional paradigm 
213 
interests 
126 
internalization process 10 
J 
Japanese macaque 17 
Jivaro 157 
joint attention 
5 
K 
Kalahari 139 
Kammler 155 
Kayapo 142,143 
Kelsen 
141 
kin selection 
-theory 
161 
kinship 
3 
knowledge 62,314 
- certain 314 
- common-sense 323 
- scientific 323 
- uncertain 
314 
!KungSan 139 
Kwakiutl 139,143 
176, 178, 187, 224, 280 
L 
labor 
- combination 
192 
- division 192 
Lamarck, J. B. 
160 
Lamarckian evolution 62 
Lamarckism 303 
language 
3 
- acquisition 8 
- families 101 
-types 
94 
law 
151 
- evolutionary 324 
- of contradiction 314 
- of Effect 
211 
- of epistemology, basic 313 
- of prohibited contradiction 313 
- ofSargon 
150 
- of sufficient reason 313,322 
- ofthinking 303 
- ofthree stages 324, 325 
legitimacy 
- bigman 148 
- chiefdom 147 
- pattern 
147, 150 
lexicographic preference 273 
linguistic 
- diversity 108 
- structure 88 
- symbol 1, 8,9, 19 
Locke, J. 
196, 203 
logic, formal 3 13 
Luhmann, N. 
159 
M 
Machiavelli, N. 
195, 203, 241 
Machiavellian intelligence 184 
main clauses 93 
Malthus, Thomas 254 
Mandelbaum, M. 
123 
Mann 158 
marginal 
- change 268 
- valuation 270, 272 
market economy 263 
Marshall, Alfred 254 
Marx, Karl 
129, 266, 267 
mathematical thinking 48 
mathematics 
40 
Maturana, H. 159 
Maya 
145 
measurement 
316 
memory 55 
mental artifacts 42 
metatheory 27 
method, scientific 304 
methodological individualism 254, 
methodology 301 
- evolutionary 306, 320 
metodo 
- compositivo 326 
- risolutivo 326 
military organizations 146, 163 
2 70 

338 
Index 
I 
Mill, John S. 267 
mimicry 87 
mitochondria 278 
models of science 305 
modernity 
125 
mole rat 240 
monopoly on force 149 
Montesquieu, Ch. de 122 
moral 
- altruism 
177 
- behavior 171,172,178-180 
- sense 171-173,178,180 
morality 141, 151 
motion 55 
Mundurucu 
157 
mutation 
307 
mutualism 207, 208, 240, 282 
myths of origin 81 
N 
naked mole rats 220 
Namib 130 
Napoleon 122 
national language 11 1 
natural 
- epistemology 27, 35 
- selection 
121 
Nauru 265 
Neanderthal 
257, 258 
Nelson, Richard 268 
Neo-Darwinism 204, 207 
Neo-Lamarckian selection 21 1 
neoclassical economics 253, 254 
neoliberal 273 
Neolithic Revolution 147, 148 
network society 11 1 
New Guinea 
130, 144 
nonhuman primate 
- culture 11 
- social cognition 11 
- social learning 11 
nonverbal communication 78 
North America 144 
notational systems 82 
novelty 
134 
0 
objective knowledge 321 
observation 46, 316 
observational terms 36 
ocean circulation system 287 
Olympian 146 
ontogenetic 
- a prioris 48 
- niche 
5 
- ritualization 
14 
ontogeny 
127 
operator 45 
Oppenheimer, F. 
155 
oral history 81 
origins of language 77 
P 
Pan paniscus 2 
Pan troglodytes 2 
Pareto optimality 254 
Parsons, T. 
132, 154, 159 
perception 
53, 316 
philosophy 301 
- evolutionary 304 
- of science 308 
- transcendental 
3 13 
phylogenetic a posterioris 48 
phylogeny 132 
pidginization 88 
Plato 
Pleistocene extinctions 257 
plow 
131 
political devolution 216-219 
political evolution 191, 202, 214, 
- correlation study 237 
- population growth 230 
- social conflict 232 
- technology 233 
political system 
political/cybernetic processes 230 
politics 
205 
- definition 
191, 199, 216 
155, 192, 193, 202-204, 240 
223,232,233,236 
197, 199, 202, 208, 
213,216, 217,220,222,232 
194, 197, 199, 201, 202, 204, 

index I 339 
- political systems 192 
- political theory 192 
- prime mover theories 230 
pollution 271 
population growth 
131, 144 
population-pressure theory 128, 144 
positive from normative economics 
potato washing 11 
predictability 135 
preferences, human 162 
preselection 63 
priest-kings 
147 
primate culture 10 
primates 1 
Prime Mover Theory 
- political devolution 235 
- technological innovations 
234 
principle 
- economy 301 
- of information 
314, 318 
- of the possibility of experience 
- of variation 83 
problem-solving 
- physical 65 
- social 65 
process logic 317 
progress 
128, 253, 254 
pronominal system 99 
protolanguage 
78 
public interest 
punctuated equilibrium 
269 
276 
322 
194, 204, 209, 226, 
240,241 
Q 
quantum mechanics 35 
R 
Radcliffe-Brown 146 
radical constructivism 
61 
ratiomorphic structures 319 
rational 
- choice theory 162 
- thinking 
27 
rationalism 
313 
realism, hypothetical 301 
reality 28, 32 
reciprocal altruism 
183, 205, 224, 
reciprocity 140, 151, 208,240 
- indirect 
140, 207 
regularity 122, 124, 125, 148 
religion 146 
- evolution 146 
- pharaoh 
147 
representational mechanisms 
77 
resource 
- depletion 
131 
- natural 
139 
resources 
- noveltypes 
158 
- scarcity 158 
ritual chanting 81 
Rockefeller, John D. 275 
Rousseau, J.-J. 
122, 203 
routine 
276 
Riistow, von 
155 
rules, epigenetic 160 
225,280 
S 
Saint-Simon 123 
Sanderson, S. K. 
128, 158 
Schumpeter, J. A. 268 
science 
- as a special case of a common 
- evolution 304 
- history 324 
- pretheoretical 325 
second-language speakers 
110 
selection 307 
self organization 254 
selfish gene 278 
semantic terms 42 
sensory-motor world 9 
shamanism 146 
sign systems 85 
small languages 11 2 
Smith, Adam 123,267 
biological process 300 

340 
Index 
I 
social 
- cognition 
2, 15, 274, 281 
- complexity 126 
- Darwinism 
129,156,267 
- development 
121 
- - developmental logic 126 
- - laws of history 
- differentiation 
128, 132 
- evolution 121, 159, 260 
- -law of the three stages 
- groups 137 
- inequality 124,149 
- institutions 
127, 130 
- -political 
131 
- learning 2, 15 
- -bottomup 
15 
- -topdown 
15 
- regression 
121, 132 
- rules 136 
- - epigenetic 136 
- sciences 122 
social-cognitive revolution 6 
sociobiology 126, 161, 197, 204, 
sociology 124-126, 154 
- action 126, 159 
- social systems 126, 159 
South America 130 
space 37 
spatiality 55 
spatiotemporal continuum 83 
special relativity 35 
specialized terminology 93 
speech communities 
115 
Spencer, Herbert 125, 127, 132, 
- survival of the fittest 
spirit of occidental capitalism 134 
state 149, 151 
- taxcollecting 
149 
strong reciprocity 208, 282 
struggle for existence 301 
subordinate clauses 93 
Sumer 147 
Sumerian state 150 
129 
123, 127 
207, 209 
155,254 
129 
Sumner, W. G. 158 
superinduction 325 
superorganism 
193,204,223,227, 
surplus 
- production 
145 
-value 
266 
survival 133, 142 
- of the fittest 254,275, 276 
sustainability 272 
symbiotic relationships 
282 
symbolic artifacts 8 
symbols 1 
synapse theory 302 
synergism 213 
- hypothesis 209,213,223,235 
synergistic 214, 222, 225 
synergy 199,202,204,206,207,212, 
220, 223, 224, 226, 228, 229, 232, 
235,240 
236, 240 
system 
- axiomatic deductive 327 
- neurodynamic 312 
- philosophical 299 
system of sounds 91 
systematization, deductive 328 
J 
teaching 4 
technological progress 259 
technology 131 
Tehuacin 259,262 
teleology 134, 159 
temporal 
- logic 317 
- proximity 123 
tense system 91 
Theilhard de Chardin, P. 280 
theoretical terms 36 
theory 28 
- of descent 138 
- ofidentity 80 
thermodynamics 38 
Thienemann, August 255 
three-worlds model 321 

index I 341 
time 
37 
tit-for-tat strategy 280 
Toltecs 144 
Tonnies, F. 
130 
tool use 
12, 13 
tools 1 
topology of error 320, 321 
transcendentalism 
311 
trial-and-error 304 
tribe 
125, 137, 143 
U 
ultimate causality 137 
ultimatum and dictator games 283 
ultra-Danvinian 268 
uncertainty principle 48 
unintended consequences 134 
units of selection 
121 
Upper Paleolithic 257 
Upper Pleistocene 257 
Uruk 
150 
V 
Varela, F. 
159 
Veblen, Thorstein 267 
verbal communication 78 
visual perception 
33 
Vrba 
286 
W 
Wallace, Alfred R. 
254 
Wallerstein, I. 
162 
warfare 
- feuding 157 
- primitive war 157, 163 
- resource of acquisition 229 
Watt 
122,131 
wave mechanics 48 
Weber, M. 
151,154 
welfare economics 274 
win-win mutualism 
205 
word classes 90 
wordorder 92 
Wright, Sewall 280 
128, 149, 156, 157, 229, 232 
Y 
Yanomamo 142, 143 
Z 
Zulu 214. 215 

