
Handbook of Evolution
Edited by
Franz M. Wuketits
Francisco J. Ayala

Related Titles
Journal
Evolutionary Anthropology
2005, 6 Issues
ISSN 1060-1538
S. Stinson, B. Bogin, R. Huss-Ashmore, D. O’Rourke (Eds.)
Human Biology: An Evolutionary and Biocultural Perspective
2000
ISBN 0-471-13746-4
K. M. Weiss, A. V. Buchanan
Genetics and the Logic of Evolution
2004
ISBN 0-471-23805-8
I. K. Bradbury
The Biosphere, Second Edition
1999
ISBN 0-471-98549-X
K. J. McNamara, J. Long
The Evolution Revolution
1998
ISBN 0-471-97407-2

Handbook of Evolution
Volume 2:
The Evolution of Living Systems
(Including Hominids)
Edited by
Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala

Editors
Prof. Dr. Franz M. Wuketits
Institut für Wissenschaftstheorie
Universität Wien
Sensengasse 8
1090 Wien
Austria
Prof. Dr. Francisco J. Ayala
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
University of California, Irvine
321 Steinhaus Hall
Irvine, CA 92697
USA
All books published by Wiley-VCH are
carefully produced. Nevertheless, editors,
authors, and publisher do not warrant the
information contained in these books,
including this book, to be free of errors.
Readers are advised to keep in mind that
statements, data, illustrations, procedural
details or other items may inadvertently be
inaccurate.
Library of Congress Card No.: applied for
A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library.
Bibliographic information published by
Die Deutsche Bibliothek
Die Deutsche Bibliothek lists this publication
in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data is available in the
internet at http://dnb.ddb.de.
© 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA, Weinheim
All rights reserved (including those of
translation in other languages). No part of
this book may be reproduced in any form –
nor transmitted or translated into a machine
language without written permission from
the publishers. Registered names, trade-
marks, etc. used in this book, even when not
specifically marked as such, are not to be
considered unprotected by law.
Printed in the Federal Republic of Germany
Printed on acid-free paper
Cover Design    SCHULZ Grafik-Design,
Fußgönheim
Composition    Manuela Treindl, Laaber
Printing    Strauss GmbH, Mörlenbach
Bookbinding    Litges & Dopf Buchbinderei
GmbH, Heppenheim
ISBN-13  978-3-527-30838-5
ISBN-10  3-527-30838-5

VII
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5
Contents
Preface    V
List of Contributors    XI
1
The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis    1
Francisco J. Ayala    
1.1
Biological Diversity and Evolution    1
1.2
Evolutionary Theory    4
1.3
The Evidence for Evolution: Paleontology    4
1.3.1
Comparative Anatomy, Biogeography, Embryology    6
1.3.2
Molecular Biology    9
1.4
Genetics of Evolution    11
1.4.1
Variation and Mutation    12
1.4.2
Genetic Equilibrium and Genetic Change    13
1.5
Natural Selection    15
1.6
Sexual Selection and Kin Selection    17
1.7
The Origin of Species    18
1.7.1
Adaptive Radiation    20
1.7.2
Rapid or Quantum Speciation    21
1.8
Evolutionary History    21
1.9
Punctuational Evolution    23
1.10
Molecular Evolution    24
2
The Evolution Controversies: An Overview    27
Michael Ruse    
2.1
Introduction    27
2.2
The History of Evolutionism    28
2.3
Origin of Life    31
2.4
Natural Selection    34
2.5
Human Sociobiology    37
2.6
The Creationist Controversy    40

VIII
Contents
2.7
Conclusions    43
2.8
References    43
3
The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity    47
Edward O. Wilson    
3.1
Introduction    48
3.2
Sociality and Rate of Evolution    48
3.3
Sociality, Success, and Dominance    51
3.4
References    55
4
The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects    57
Franz M. Wuketits    
4.1
Introduction    57
4.2
“Forerunners” of Darwin    58
4.3
What is an Evolutionary Theory and Who was the First Evolutionary
Theorist?    63
4.4
Obstacles to Evolutionary Thinking    67
4.5
Charles Darwin (1809–1882): The Theory of Natural Selection    73
4.6
Darwin and After Darwin    78
4.7
References    81
5
Evolutionary Developmental Biology    87
Gerd B. Müller    
5.1
Introduction    87
5.2
Historical Roots    89
5.3
Agenda and Concepts    92
5.3.1
The Origin of Developmental Systems    93
5.3.2
Evolution of the Developmental Repertoire    93
5.3.3
The Evolutionary Modification of Developmental Processes    94
5.3.4
The Patterns of Phenotypic Variation    95
5.3.5
The Origin of Phenotypic Novelty    95
5.3.6
The Organization of the Phenotype    96
5.3.7
The Environment–Development–Evolution Interaction    97
5.4
Research Programs and Methods    97
5.4.1
The Comparative Morphology Program    98
5.4.2
The Epigenetic and Experimental Program    98
5.4.3
The Evolutionary Developmental Genetics Program    99
5.4.4
The Theoretical Biology Program    101
5.5
Practical and Theoretical Integration    103
5.6
Prospects    105
5.7
References    106

IX
Contents
6
Human Biological Evolution    117
Winfried Henke    
6.1
Summary    117
6.2
Introduction to the Issue    118
6.3
Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review    131
6.3.1
Emergence of Primates    131
6.3.2
The First Hominins: Ardipithecus, Australopithecus, Paranthropus    142
6.3.2.1 Historical Outlines of Discovery and Fossil Evidence    142
6.3.2.2 Chronological and Geographical Distribution    148
6.3.2.3 Morphological Patterns, Phylogenetic Relationship, and Paleoecology    150
6.3.3
The Earliest Evidence of the Genus Homo    160
6.3.3.1 Homo rudolfensis and Homo habilis (s. str.)    161
6.3.3.2 Chronological and Geographical Distribution    162
6.3.3.3 Morphological Patterns, Phylogenetic Relationships, and Paleoecology    165
6.3.4
Lower and Middle Pleistocene Homo    168
6.3.4.1 Homo erectus (incl. Homo ergaster)    168
6.3.4.2 Geographical and Chronological Distribution    170
6.3.4.3 Morphological Patterns, Phylogenetic Relationships, and Paleoecology    174
6.3.5
Upper Pleistocene Human Evolution    181
6.3.5.1 How Many Species?    181
6.3.5.2 Geographical and Chronological Distribution    181
6.3.5.3 Multiregional Model versus Recent African Origin    184
6.3.6
Morphological Patterns and Paleoecology    188
6.3.7
The Role of the Neanderthals    192
6.3.7.1 Geographical and Chronological Distribution    192
6.3.7.2 Characteristic ‘Neanderthal’ Morphology    193
6.3.7.3 Paleoecological Remarks on the Neanderthals    197
6.3.7.4 Neanderthal aDNA Sequences and the Origin of Modern Humans    199
6.3.8
Molecules and the Origin of Recent Humankind    201
6.4
Concluding Remarks    207
6.5
References    207
7
Evolution on a Restless Planet: Were Environmental Variability and
Environmental Change Major Drivers of Human Evolution?    223
Peter J. Richerson, Robert L. Bettinger, and Robert Boyd    
7.1
Introduction    223
7.2
The Evolution of Cenozoic Environments    225
7.3
Climate and the Evolution of Large Brains and Cultural Artifacts    227
7.4
Learning and Social Learning as Responses to Variability Selection    230
7.5
Internal Constraints on the Evolution of Human Culture    232
7.5.1
Time    232
7.5.2
Preadaptations    232
7.5.3
Functional Constraints    233
7.5.4
Cultural Diversification    233

X
Contents
7.6
Cultural Evolution in the Late Pleistocene and Holocene    234
7.6.1
Holocene Climates and the Origins of Agriculture    234
7.6.2
Geographic Regulation of Rates of Holocene Progress    234
7.6.3
Collapses of Civilizations and Other Holocene Events    235
7.7
Anthropogenic Effects on Climate Evolution    236
7.8
Conclusions    237
7.9
References    238
8
The Human Impact    243
Bernhard Verbeek    
8.1
Introduction    243
8.2
How an Extraterrestrial Would Perceive Modern Humans    244
8.3
Pre-established Harmony    246
8.4
The Progress of Civilization    248
8.5
Ecology and the Human Being    249
8.6
Evolution of Sustainability    252
8.7
Back to the Past    253
8.8
Culture: Evolution at a Meta Level    255
8.9
Genome and Culture    256
8.10
How Do We Learn Culture?    260
8.11
Evolutionarily Formed Learning Dispositions    262
8.12
The Ecological–Social Dilemma    264
8.13
Sustainability Through Faka-Tonga    265
8.14
Cultural Comparison    266
8.15
The Power of Constraints    268
8.16
Critical Phase of Evolution    269
8.17
References    270
Index    273

V
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5
Preface
The present volume of the Handbook is devoted to biological evolution, i.e., the
evolution of living systems, including hominids. This is an enormous topic. The
evolution of organisms has been studied by means of various concepts and
methods applied in different fields of scientific research, virtually comprising all
biological disciplines, from comparative anatomy to genetics, from biogeography
to molecular biology. In addition, evolutionists make use of results in disciplines
like biophysics, biochemistry, geology, climatology, etc. Thus, evolutionary biology
relies on a vast amount of data and can be regarded as an extensive interdisciplinary
approach. However, it should not be misunderstood as a mere accumulation of
“facts”. First and foremost, it is a comprehensive theory of life’s history on the
Earth and the overwhelming diversity of organisms, both extant and extinct.
The editors and authors of this volume aim to give a synopsis of the most
important data, concepts and theoretical reflections in evolutionary biology. The
intention is not to give a full account of our present knowledge of biological evolution
in all its details. This would not be possible, anyway, in one volume. What is probably
more interesting to the reader is a presentation of some basic ideas and “facts”,
and, even more, of the implications of evolutionary thinking for a comprehensive
modern world view. In this sense, the eight chapters of the volume are to be
understood as parts of a mosaic. Their authors present and discuss different aspects
of the biological theory of evolution, tackle problems and controversial issues, and
point to “open questions”. As the reader will notice, the theory of biological evolution
consists of many “subtheories” and is not yet a finished case (as science never is).
While nobody can seriously doubt that evolution occurs, the questions “Why?” and
“How?” still require some deeper analyses and leave room for speculation. The
conceptual framework for evolutionary biology is Charles Darwin’s theory of natural
selection. However, as the altmeister himself was well aware, the theory needed
some improvement. In the meantime, much work has indeed been done and the
results of evolutionary research are astounding. However, we cannot yet rest our
case.
Chapter 1 presents a synopsis of biological evolution. It summarizes the empirical
evidence for evolution, the genetic basis of evolutionary change, the meaning of
selection (in its different expressions), ideas of mode and tempo in evolution, and
molecular evolution. In Chapter 2, Michael Ruse critically reviews some evolution
controversies (including the sociobiology debate and the controversy surrounding

VI
Preface
evolutionism versus creationism). Edward O. Wilson’s contribution (Chapter 3) is
a discussion of the evolutionary meaning of complex social systems. Although not
an original paper (it was first published in 1991), it is still fresh and lucid, and
helps our understanding of some important aspects of biological evolution.
Chapter 4 is a brief presentation of the history and philosophy of evolutionary
thinking in biology. It reconstructs the very idea of evolution, the main (philo-
sophical) obstacles to evolutionism, and Darwin’s theory and its ramifications in
the 20th century. In Chapter 5, Gerd B. Müller gives an account of the comparatively
new discipline of evolutionary developmental biology, its empirical background,
agenda and concepts, research programs, and its meaning for a deeper under-
standing of evolutionary change. Chapter 6, by Winfried Henke, provides a
comprehensive compilation and discussion of current ideas of human evolution.
This chapter can also serve as an introduction to biological systematics and
taxonomy, and its relevance in the context of evolutionary theory. In Chapter 7,
Peter J. Richerson and his co-authors pose the question whether environmental
variability and environmental change were major motors of human evolution, and
reach some interesting conclusions. The human impact on evolutionary change is
the topic of Chapter 8. Bernhard Verbeek discusses the question to what extent the
emergence and evolutionary development of humans has changed the face of our
planet.
Clearly, evolutionary biology includes many other aspects that are of some interest.
However, we hope that the selection of topics presented and discussed in these
chapters will serve as a guide to one of the most fascinating adventures of our
intellectual history, and will invite readers to further reflection and discussion.
Moreover, we hope that this volume will give the impression of evolutionary biology
as a discipline “in flux”. It is not by chance that human evolution is given so much
space in the present volume. The future of our own and many other species will
depend, to a considerable extent, on our understanding of – and attitude towards –
evolutionary history and the meaning of biodiversity. We want to encourage readers
to think about the importance of evolution and evolutionary biology in our
institutions of higher education.
Our thanks go to the contributors of this volume who, despite their many other
obligations, found time and energy to write and – in some cases – even to rewrite
“their chapters”. Also, we want to express our thanks to the staff of Wiley-VCH
(Weinheim), particularly to Dr. Waltraut Wüst for her characteristic patience and
constant encouragement.
May 2005
Franz M. Wuketits, Vienna (Austria)
Francisco J. Ayala, Irvine, CA (USA)

XI
Prof. Dr. Francisco J. Ayala
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
University of California, Irvine
321 Steinhaus Hall
Irvine, CA 92697
USA
Prof. Dr. Robert L. Bettinger
Department of Anthropology
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
USA
Prof. Dr. Robert Boyd
Department of Anthropology
University of California, Los Angeles
375 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
USA
Prof. Dr. Winfried Henke
Institute of Anthropology
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
55099 Mainz
Germany
Prof. Dr. Dr. Gerd B. Müller
Universität Wien
Biozentrum
Althanstrasse 14
1090 Wien
Austria
List of Contributors
Prof. Dr. Peter Richerson
Department of Environmental
Science and Policy
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8573
USA
Prof. Dr. Michael Ruse
Department of Philosophy
Florida State University
156B Dodd Hall
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1500
USA
Prof. Dr. Bernhard Verbeek
University of Dortmund, FB 3, Biology
Otto-Hahn-Strasse 6
44227 Dortmund
Germany
Prof. Edward O. Wilson
Museum of Comparative Zoology
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
USA
Prof. Dr. Franz M. Wuketits
Institut für Wissenschaftstheorie
Universität Wien
Sensengasse 8
1090 Wien
Austria
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

1
1
The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
Francisco J. Ayala
1.1
Biological Diversity and Evolution
The diversity of life is staggering. More than two million existing species of plants
and animals have been named and described: many more remain to be discovered,
at least ten million according to most estimates. What is impressive is not just the
numbers but also the incredible heterogeneity in size, shape, and ways of life: from
lowly bacteria, less than one thousandth of a millimeter in diameter, to the stately
sequoias of California, rising 100 meters above the ground and weighing several
thousand tons; from microorganisms living in the hot springs of Yellowstone Natio-
nal Park at temperatures near the boiling point of water, some like Pyrolobus fumarii
able to grow at more than 100 °C, to fungi and algae thriving on the ice masses of
Antarctica and in saline pools at –23 °C; from the strange wormlike creatures
discovered in dark ocean depths thousands of meters below the surface, to spiders
and larkspur existing on Mt. Everest more than 6600 meters above sea level.
These variations on life are the outcome of the evolutionary process. All organisms
are related by descent from common ancestors. Humans and other mammals are
descended from shrew-like creatures that lived more than 150 million years ago;
mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fishes share as ancestors small worm-
like creatures that lived in the world’s oceans 600 million years ago; plants and
animals are derived from bacteria-like microorganisms that originated more than
three billion years ago. Because of biological evolution, lineages of organisms change
through time; diversity arises because lineages that descend from common ancestors
diverge through the generations as they become adapted to different ways of life.
Charles Darwin argued that organisms come about by evolution, and he provided
a scientific explanation, essentially correct but incomplete, of how evolution occurs
and why it is that organisms have features – such as wings, eyes, and kidneys –
clearly structured to serve specific functions. Natural selection was the fundamental
concept in his explanation. Genetics, a science born in the 20th century, revealed
in detail how natural selection works and led to the development of the modern
theory of evolution. Since the 1960s a related scientific discipline, molecular biology,
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

2
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
has enormously advanced knowledge of biological evolution and has made it possible
to investigate detailed problems that seemed completely out of reach a few years
earlier – for example, how similar the genes of humans, chimpanzees, and gorillas
are (they differ in about 2% of their DNA).
The evolution of organisms, i.e., their common descent with modification from
simple ancestors that lived many million years ago, is at the core of genetics,
biochemistry, neurobiology, physiology, ecology, and other biological disciplines
and makes sense of the emergence of new infectious diseases and other matters of
public health. The evolution of organisms is universally accepted by biological
scientists. “Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution”
(Dobzhansky 1973).
I present a summary of some central tenets of the theory of biological evolution.
The processes by which planets, stars, galaxies, and the universe form and change
over time are a type of ‘evolution’, but in a different sense. In both instances there
is change over time, but the processes are quite different, and I do not discuss the
evolution of the universe. The evolution of the hominids, the lineage that leads to
our own species is treated separately in this volume.
A distinction must be drawn at the outset between the questions (1) whether and
(2) how biological evolution happened. The first refers to the finding, now supported
by an overwhelming body of evidence, that descent with modification has occurred
during some 3.5 billion years of earth’s history. The second refers to the theory
explaining how those changes came about. The mechanisms accounting for these
changes are still undergoing investigation; the currently favored theory is an
extensively modified version of Darwinian natural selection.
Natural selection was proposed by Darwin primarily to account for the adaptive
organization of living beings: it is a process that promotes or maintains adaptation
and thus gives the appearance of purpose or design. Evolutionary change through
time and evolutionary diversification (multiplication of species) are not directly
promoted by natural selection, but they often ensue as byproducts of natural
selection as it fosters adaptation to different environments. Darwin’s theory of
natural selection is summarized in the Origin of Species as follows:
As many more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must
in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with another
of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or with the
physical conditions of life. … Can it, then, be thought improbable, seeing that
variations useful to man have undoubtedly occurred, that other variations
useful in some way to each being in the great and complex battle of life,
should sometimes occur in the course of thousands of generations? If such
do occur, can we doubt (remembering that many more individuals are born
than can possibly survive) that individuals having any advantage, however
slight, over others, would have the best chance of surviving and of procreating
their kind? On the other hand, we may feel sure that any variation in the least
degree injurious would be rigidly destroyed. This preservation of favorable
variations and the rejection of injurious variations, I call Natural Selection.

3
1.1  Biological Diversity and Evolution
The most serious difficulty facing Darwin’s evolutionary theory was the lack of an
adequate theory of inheritance that would account for the preservation through the
generations of the variations on which natural selection was supposed to act.
Contemporary theories of ‘blending inheritance’ proposed that the characteristics
of parents became averaged in the offspring. As Darwin became aware, blending
inheritance could not account for the conservation of variations, because halving
the differences among variant offspring would rapidly reduce the original variation
to the average of the already existing characteristics.
Mendelian genetics provided the missing link in Darwin’s argument. About the
time the Origin of Species was published, the Augustinian monk Gregor Mendel
was performing a long series of experiments with peas in the garden of his
monastery in Brünn (now Brno, Czech Republic). These experiments and the
analysis of their results are an example of masterly scientific method. Mendel’s
theory accounts for biological inheritance through particulate factors (genes)
inherited one from each parent, which do not mix or blend but segregate in the
formation of the sex cells, or gametes. Mendel’s discoveries, however, remained
unknown to Darwin and, indeed, did not become generally known until 1900, when
they were simultaneously rediscovered by three scientists.
The rediscovery in 1900 of Mendel’s theory of heredity ushered in an emphasis
on the role of heredity in evolution. In the 1920s and 1930s the theoretical work of
geneticists demonstrated, first, that continuous variation (in such characteristics
as size, number of eggs laid, and the like) could be explained by Mendel’s laws; and
second, that natural selection acting cumulatively on small variations could yield
major evolutionary changes in form and function. Distinguished members of this
group of theoretical geneticists were R. A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane in Britain
and Sewall Wright in the United States. Their work had a limited impact on
contemporary biologists because it was almost exclusively theoretical, formulated
in mathematical language, and with little empirical corroboration. A major
breakthrough came in 1937 with the publication of Genetics and the Origin of Species
by Theodosius Dobzhansky, who advanced a reasonably comprehensive account
of the evolutionary process in genetic terms, laced with experimental evidence
supporting the theoretical argument. Other writers who importantly contributed
to the formulation of the synthetic theory were the zoologists Ernst Mayr and Sir
Julian Huxley, the paleontologist George G. Simpson, and the botanist George
Ledyard Stebbins. By 1950, acceptance of Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural
selection was universal among biologists, and the synthetic theory had become
widely adopted.
Since 1950, the most important line of investigation has been the application of
molecular biology to evolutionary studies. In 1953 James Watson and Francis Crick
discovered the structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), the hereditary material
contained in the chromosomes of every cell’s nucleus. The genetic information is
contained within the sequence of components (nucleotides) that make up the long
chain-like DNA molecules, very much in the same manner as semantic information
is contained in the sequence of letters in an English text. This information
determines the sequence of amino acids in the proteins, including the enzymes

4
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
that carry out the organism’s life processes. Comparisons of the amino acid
sequences of proteins in different species provides quantitatively precise measures
of species divergence, a considerable improvement over the typically qualitative
evaluations obtained by comparative anatomy and other evolutionary subdisciplines.
1.2
Evolutionary Theory
Three different, though related, issues have been the main subjects of evolutionary
investigations: (1) the fact of evolution; that is, that organisms are related by common
descent with modification; (2) evolutionary history; that is, the details of when
lineages split from one another and of the changes that occurred in each lineage;
and (3) the mechanisms or processes by which evolutionary change occurs.
The fact of evolution is the most fundamental issue and the one established with
utmost certainty. Darwin gathered much evidence in its support, but evidence has
accumulated continuously ever since, derived from all biological disciplines. The
second and third issues go much beyond the general affirmation that organisms
evolve. The theory of evolution seeks to ascertain the evolutionary relationships
between particular organisms and the events of evolutionary history, as well as to
explain how and why evolution takes place. These are matters of active scientific
investigation. Many conclusions are well established; for example, that the
chimpanzee and gorilla are more closely related to humans than any of these three
species is to the baboon or other monkeys; and that natural selection explains the
adaptive configuration of such features as the human eye and the wings of birds.
Some other matters are less certain, others are conjectural, and still others – such
as precisely when life originated on earth and the characteristics of the first living
things – remain largely unresolved.
1.3
The Evidence for Evolution: Paleontology
That organisms are related by common descent with modification has been
demonstrated by evidence from paleontology, comparative anatomy, biogeography,
embryology, biochemistry, molecular genetics, and other biological disciplines. The
idea first emerged from observations of systematic changes in the succession of
fossil remains found in a sequence of layered rocks. Such layers are now known to
have a cumulative thickness of many scores of kilometers and to represent at least
3.5 billion years of geological time. The general sequence of fossils from bottom
upward in layered rocks had been recognized before Darwin perceived that the
observed progression of biological forms strongly implied common descent. The
farther back into the past one looked, the less the fossils resembled recent forms,
the more the various lineages merged, and the broader the implications of a common
ancestry appeared.

5
Paleontology, however, was still a rudimentary science in Darwin’s time, and
large parts of the geological succession of stratified rocks were unknown or
inadequately studied. Darwin, therefore, worried about the rarity of truly inter-
mediate forms. Although gaps in the paleontological record remain even now, many
have been filled by the researches of paleontologists since Darwin’s time. Hundreds
of thousands of fossil organisms found in well dated rock sequences represent a
succession of forms through time and manifest many evolutionary transitions.
Microbial life of the simplest type (i.e., prokaryotes, which are cells whose nuclear
matter is not bounded by a nuclear membrane) was already in existence more than
three billion years ago. The oldest evidence suggesting the existence of more complex
organisms (i.e., eukaryotic cells with a true nucleus) has been discovered in fossils
that had been sealed in flinty rocks approximately 1.4 billion years old. More
advanced forms like true algae, fungi, higher plants, and animals have been found
only in younger geological strata. Table 1.1 presents the order in which progressively
complex forms of life appeared.
The sequence of observed forms and the fact that all except the first are constructed
from the same basic cellular type strongly imply that all the major categories of life
(including plants, algae, and fungi) have a common ancestry in the first eukaryotic
cell. Moreover, there have been so many discoveries of intermediate forms between
fish and amphibians, between amphibians and reptiles, between reptiles and
mammals, and even along the primate line of descent from apes to humans, that it
is often difficult to identify categorically along the line when the transition occurs
from one to another particular genus or from one to another particular species.
Nearly all fossils can be regarded as intermediates in some sense; they are life forms
that come between ancestral forms that preceded them and those that followed.
The fossil record thus provides compelling evidence of systematic change through
time – of descent with modification. From this consistent body of evidence it can
be predicted that no reversals will be found in future paleontological studies. That
is, amphibians will not appear before fishes nor mammals before reptiles, and no
complex life will occur in the geological record before the oldest eukaryotic cells.
Table 1.1  Order in which progressively complex forms of animal life appeared.
1.3  The Evidence for Evolution: Paleontology
Life form 
Millions of years since first known appearance (approximate) 
Microbial (prokaryotic cells) 
Complex (eukaryotic cells) 
First multicellular animals 
Shell-bearing animals 
Vertebrates (simple fishes) 
Amphibians 
Reptiles 
Mammals 
Nonhuman primates 
Earliest apes 
Earliest hominids 
Homo sapiens (modern humans) 
3500 
1400 
  670 
  540 
  490 
  350 
  310 
  200 
    60 
    25 
      6 
      0.15 (150 000 years) 
 

6
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
That prediction has been upheld by the evidence that has accumulated thus far: no
reversals have been found.
1.3.1
Comparative Anatomy, Biogeography, Embryology
Inferences about common descent derived from paleontology have been reinforced
by comparative anatomy. The skeletons of humans, dogs, whales, and bats are
strikingly similar, despite the different ways of life led by these animals and the
diversity of environments in which they have flourished. The correspondence, bone
by bone, can be observed in every part of the body, including the limbs: a person
writes, a dog runs, a whale swims, and a bird flies with structures built of the same
bones (Figure 1.1). Scientists call such structures homologous and have concurred
that they are best explained by common descent. Comparative anatomists investigate
such homologies, not only in bone structure but also in other parts of the body as
well, working out relationships from degrees of similarity. Their conclusions provide
important inferences about the details of evolutionary history that can be tested by
comparisons with the sequence of ancestral forms in the paleontological record.
The mammalian ear and jaw offer an example in which paleontology and
comparative anatomy combine to show common ancestry through transitional
stages. The lower jaws of mammals contain only one bone, whereas those of reptiles
have several. The other bones in the reptile jaw are homologous with bones now
found in the mammalian ear. What function could these bones have had during
intermediate stages? Paleontologists have now discovered intermediate forms of
mammal-like reptiles (Therapsida) with a double jaw joint – one composed of the
bones that persist in mammalian jaws, the other consisting of bones that eventually
became the hammer and anvil of the mammalian ear. Similar examples are
numerous.
Biogeography also has contributed evidence for common descent. The diversity
of life is stupendous. Approximately 250 thousand species of living plants, 100
thousand species of fungi, and 1.5 million species of animals and microorganisms
have been described and named, each occupying its own peculiar ecological setting
or niche, and the census is far from complete. Some species, such as human beings
and our companion the dog, can live under a wide range of environmental
conditions. Others are amazingly specialized. One species of the fungus Laboulbenia
grows exclusively on the rear portion of the covering wings of a single species of
beetle (Aphaenops cronei) found only in some caves of southern France. The larvae
of the fly Drosophila carcinophila can develop only in specialized grooves beneath
the flaps of the third pair of oral appendages of the land crab Gecarcinus ruricola,
which is found only on certain Caribbean islands.
How can we make intelligible the colossal diversity of living beings and the
existence of such extraordinary, seemingly whimsical creatures as Laboulbenia,
Drosophila carcinophila, and others? Why are island groups like the Galapagos
inhabited by forms similar to those on the nearest mainland but belonging to
different species? Why is the indigenous life so different on different continents?

7
Figure 1.1  The forelimbs of four species of vertebrate animals. Although the limbs
are used for different functions (writing, running, swimming, flying), the bones and
their organization are similar, reflecting their derivation from a common ancestor.
1.3  The Evidence for Evolution: Paleontology

8
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
Creationists contend that the curious facts of biogeography result from the
occurrence of special creation events. A scientific hypothesis proposes that biological
diversity results from an evolutionary process whereby the descendants of local or
migrant predecessors became adapted to their diverse environments. A testable
corollary of this hypothesis is that present forms and local fossils should show
homologous attributes indicating how one is derived from the other. Also, there
should be evidence that forms without an established local ancestry had migrated
into the locality. Wherever such tests have been carried out, these conditions have
been confirmed. A good example is provided by the mammalian populations of
North and South America, where strikingly different endemic forms evolved in
isolation until the emergence of the isthmus of Panama approximately three million
years ago. Thereafter, the armadillo, porcupine, and opossum – mammals of South
American origin – were able to migrate to North America along with many other
species of plants and animals, while the placental mountain lion and other North
American species made their way across the isthmus to the south.
The evidence that Darwin found for the influence of geographical distribution
on the evolution of organisms has become stronger with advancing knowledge.
For example, approximately 2000 species of flies belonging to the genus Drosophila
are now found throughout the world. About one-quarter of them live only in Hawaii.
More than a thousand species of snails and other land mollusks are also only found
in Hawaii. The natural explanation for the occurrence of such great diversity among
closely similar forms is that the differences resulted from adaptive colonization of
isolated environments by animals with a common ancestry. The Hawaiian islands
are far from and were never attached to any mainland or other islands, and they
have had few colonizers. Organisms that reached these islands found many
unoccupied ecological niches where they could then undergo separate evolutionary
diversifications. No mammals other than one bat species lived on the Hawaiian
islands when the first human settlers arrived; very many other kinds of plants and
animals were also absent. The scientific explanation is that these kinds of organisms
never reached the islands because of their great geographic isolation, while those
that reached there multiplied in kind, because of the absence of related organisms
that would compete for resources.
The vagaries of biogeography cannot be attributed to environmental peculiarities
alone. The Hawaiian islands are no better than other Pacific islands for the survival
of Drosophila, nor are they less hospitable than other parts of the world for many
organisms not indigenous to them. For example, pigs and goats multiplied in Hawaii
after their introduction by humans. The general observation is that all sorts of
organisms are absent from places well suited to their occupancy. The animals and
plants vary from continent to continent and from island to island in a distribution
pattern consistent with colonization and evolutionary change, rather than being
simply responsive to the conditions of place.
Embryology, the study of biological development from the time of conception, is
another source of independent evidence for common descent. Barnacles, for
instance, are sedentary crustaceans with little apparent similarity to such other
crustaceans as lobsters, shrimps, or copepods. Yet barnacles pass through a free-

9
swimming larval stage, in which they look unmistakably like other crustacean larvae.
The similarity of larval stages supports the conclusion that all crustaceans have
homologous parts and a common ancestry. Human and other mammalian embryos
pass through a stage during which they have unmistakable but useless grooves
similar to gill slits found in fishes – evidence that they and the other vertebrates
shared remote ancestors that respired with the aid of gills.
1.3.2
Molecular Biology
The substantiation of common descent that emerges from all the foregoing lines
of evidence has been validated and reinforced by the discoveries of molecular biology,
a biological discipline that emerged in the mid-20th century. This new discipline
has unveiled the nature of the hereditary material and the workings of organisms
at the level of enzymes and other molecules. Molecular biology provides very detailed
and convincing evidence for biological evolution.
The hereditary material, DNA, and the enzymes that govern all life processes
hold information about an organism’s ancestry. This information has made it
possible to reconstruct evolutionary events that were previously unknown and to
confirm and adjust the view of events that already were known. The precision with
which events of evolution can be reconstructed is one reason the evidence from
molecular biology is so compelling. Another reason is that molecular evolution
has shown all living organisms, from bacteria to humans, to be related by descent
from common ancestors.
The molecular components of organisms exhibit a remarkable uniformity in the
nature of the components as well as in the ways in which they are assembled and
used. In all bacteria, plants, animals, and humans, the DNA is made up of the
same four component nucleotides, although many other nucleotides exist, and all
of the various proteins are synthesized from different combinations and sequences
of the same 20 amino acids, although several hundred other amino acids do exist.
The genetic code by which the information contained in the nuclear DNA is trans-
lated into proteins is everywhere the same. Similar metabolic pathways are used by
the most diverse organisms to produce energy and to construct the cell components.
This unity reveals the genetic continuity and common ancestry of all organisms.
There is no other rational way to account for their molecular uniformity when
numerous alternative structures are equally likely. The genetic code may serve as
an example. Each particular sequence of three nucleotides in the nuclear DNA acts
as a pattern, or code, for the production of exactly the same amino acid in all
organisms. This is no more necessary than it is for a language to use a particular
combination of letters to represent a particular reality. If it is found that many
different combinations of letters, such as ‘planet’, ‘tree’, ‘woman’, are used with
identical meanings in a number of different books, one can be sure that the
languages used in those books are of common origin.
Genes and proteins are long molecules that contain information in the sequence
of their components in much the same way as sentences of the English language
1.3  The Evidence for Evolution: Paleontology

10
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
contain information in the sequence of their letters and words. The sequences that
make up the genes are passed on from parents to offspring, identical except for
occasional changes introduced by mutations. The similarity between the sequences
is evidence that they derive from a common ancestral sequence; the differences
reflect the time elapsed since they started to diverge and thus make it possible to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of the organisms that carry the sequences. To
illustrate, assume that two books are being compared; both books are 200 pages
long and contain the same number of chapters. Closer examination reveals that
the two books are identical page for page and word for word, except that an occasional
word – say one in 100 – is different. The two books cannot have been written
independently; either one has been copied from the other or both have been copied,
directly or indirectly, from the same original book. Similarly, if each nucleotide is
represented by one letter, the complete sequence of nucleotides in the DNA of a
higher organism would require several hundred books of hundreds of pages, with
several thousand letters on each page. When the ‘pages’ (or sequence of nucleotides)
in these ‘books’ (organisms) are examined one by one, the correspondence in the
‘letters’ (nucleotides) gives unmistakable evidence of common origin.
Two arguments attest to evolution. Using the alphabet analogy, the first argument
says that languages that use the same dictionary – the same genetic code and the
same 20 amino acids – cannot be of independent origin. The second argument,
concerning similarity in the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA or the sequence
of amino acids in the proteins, says that books with very similar texts cannot be of
independent origin.
The evidence of evolution revealed by molecular biology goes one step further.
The degree of similarity in the sequence of nucleotides or of amino acids can be
precisely quantified. For example, cytochrome c (a protein) of humans and
chimpanzees consists of the same 104 amino acids in exactly the same order; but
differs from that of rhesus monkeys by one amino acid, from that of horses by 11
amino acids, and from that of tuna by 21 amino acids. The degree of similarity
reflects the recentness of common ancestry. Thus, the inferences from comparative
anatomy and other disciplines concerning evolutionary history can be tested in
molecular studies of DNA and proteins by examining their sequences of nucleotides
and amino acids.
The authority of this kind of test is overwhelming; each of the thousands of
genes and thousands of proteins contained in an organism provides an independent
test of that organism’s evolutionary history. Not all possible tests have been
performed, but many hundreds have been done, and not one has given evidence
contrary to evolution. There is probably no other notion in any field of science that
has been as extensively tested and as thoroughly corroborated as the evolutionary
origin of living organisms. There is no reason to doubt the evolutionary theory of
the origin of organisms any more than to doubt the heliocentric theory of the
rotations of the planets around the sun.

11
1.4
Genetics of Evolution
The central argument of Darwin’s theory of evolution starts from the existence of
hereditary variation. Experience with animal and plant breeding demonstrates that
variations can be developed that are useful to humans. So, reasoned Darwin,
variations must occur in nature that are favorable or useful in some way to the
organism itself in the struggle for existence. Favorable variations are ones that
increase chances for survival and procreation. These advantageous variations are
preserved and multiplied from generation to generation at the expense of less
advantageous ones in the process known as natural selection. The outcome of the
process is an organism that is well adapted to its environment, and evolution often
occurs as a consequence.
Biological evolution is the process of change and diversification of living things
over time, and it affects all aspects of their lives – morphology, physiology, behavior,
and ecology. Underlying these changes are changes in the hereditary materials.
Hence, in genetic terms, evolution consists of changes in the organism’s hereditary
makeup.
Natural selection, then, can be defined as the differential reproduction of
alternative hereditary variants, determined by the fact that some variants increase
the likelihood that the organisms having them will survive and reproduce more
successfully than will organisms carrying alternative variants. Selection may be
due to differences in survival, in fertility, in rate of development, in mating success,
or in any other aspect of the life cycle. All of these differences can be incorporated
under the term ‘differential reproduction’, because all result in natural selection to
the extent that they affect the number of progeny an organism leaves.
Darwin explained that competition for limited resources results in the survival
of the most effective competitors. But natural selection may occur not only as a
result of competition but also as an effect of some aspect of the physical environ-
ment, such as inclement weather. Moreover, natural selection would occur even if
all the members of a population died at the same age, if some of them produced
more offspring than others. Natural selection is quantified by a measure called
Darwinian fitness, or relative fitness. Fitness in this sense is the relative probability
that a hereditary characteristic will be reproduced; that is, the degree of fitness is a
measure of the reproductive efficiency of the characteristic.
Evolution can be seen as a two-step process. First, hereditary variation takes place;
second, selection occurs of those genetic variants that will be passed on most
effectively to the following generations. Hereditary variation also entails two
mechanisms: the spontaneous mutation of one variant to another, and the sexual
process that recombines those variants to form a multitude of variations.
The gene pool of a species is the sum total of all of the genes and combinations
of genes that occur in all organisms of the same species. The necessity of hereditary
variation for evolutionary change to occur can be understood in terms of the gene
pool. Assume, for instance, that at the gene locus that codes for the human MN
blood groups, there is no variation; only the M form exists in all individuals.
1.4  Genetics of Evolution

12
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
Evolution of the MN blood groups cannot take place in such a population, since
the allelic frequencies have no opportunity to change from generation to generation.
On the other hand, in populations in which both forms M and N are present,
evolutionary change is possible.
The more genetic variation that exists in a population, the greater the opportunity
for evolution to occur. As the number of genes that are variable increases and as
the number of forms of each gene becomes greater, the likelihood that some forms
will change in frequency at the expense of their alternates grows. The British
geneticist R. A. Fisher mathematically demonstrated a direct correlation between
the amount of genetic variation in a population and the rate of evolutionary change
by natural selection. This demonstration is embodied in his fundamental theorem
of natural selection: “The rate of increase in fitness of any organism at any time is
equal to its genetic variance in fitness at that time.” This theorem has been confirmed
experimentally. Because a population’s potential for evolving is determined by its
genetic variation, evolutionists are interested in discovering the extent of such
variation in natural populations. Techniques for determining genetic variation have
been used to investigate numerous species of plants and animals. Typically, insects
and other invertebrates are more varied genetically than mammals and other
vertebrates; and plants bred by outcrossing exhibit more variation than those bred
by self-pollination. But the amount of genetic variation is in any case astounding.
Every individual represents a unique genetic configuration that will never be
repeated again. The enormous reservoir of genetic variation in natural populations
provides virtually unlimited opportunities for evolutionary change in response to
environmental constraints and the needs of the organisms, beyond the new
variations that arise every generation by the process of mutation, which I discuss
next.
1.4.1
Variation and Mutation
There are more than two million known species, which are widely diverse in size,
shape, and ways of life, as well as in the DNA sequences that contain their genetic
information. What has produced the pervasive genetic variation within natural
populations and the genetic differences among species?
The information encoded in the nucleotide sequence of DNA is, as a rule, faithfully
reproduced during replication, so that each replication results in two DNA molecules
that are identical to each other and to the parent molecule. But, occasionally
‘mistakes’, or mutations, occur in the DNA molecule during replication, so that
daughter cells differ from the parent cells in at least one of the letters in the DNA
sequence. A mutation first appears on a single cell of an organism, but it is passed
on to all cells descended from the first. Mutations can be classified into two
categories: gene, or point, mutations, which affect only a few letters (nucleotides)
within a gene; and chromosomal mutations, which either change the number of
chromosomes or change the number or arrangement of genes on a chromosome.
(Chromosomes are the elongated structures that store the DNA of each cell.)

13
Gene mutations can occur spontaneously; that is, without being intentionally
caused by humans. They can also be artificially induced by ultraviolet light,
X irradiation, and other high-frequency types of radiation, as well as by exposure to
certain mutagenic chemicals, such as mustard gas. The consequences of gene
mutations may range from negligible to lethal. Some have a small or undetectable
effect on the organism’s ability to survive and reproduce, because no essential
biological functions are altered. But when the active site of an enzyme or some
other essential function is affected, the impact may be severe.
Newly arisen mutations are more likely to be harmful than beneficial to their
carriers, because mutations are random events with respect to adaptation; that is,
their occurrence is independent of any possible consequences. Harmful mutations
are eliminated or kept in check by natural selection. Occasionally, however, a new
mutation may increase the organism’s adaptation. The probability of such an event’s
happening is greater when organisms colonize a new territory or when environ-
mental changes confront a population with new challenges. In these situations,
the established adaptation of a population is less than optimal, and there is greater
opportunity for new mutations to be better adaptive. This is so because the
consequences of mutations depend on the environment. Increased melanin
pigmentation may be advantageous to inhabitants of tropical Africa, where dark
skin protects them from the sun’s ultraviolet radiation; but it is not beneficial in
Scandinavia, where the intensity of sunlight is low and light skin facilitates the
synthesis of vitamin D.
Mutation rates are low, but new mutants appear continuously in nature, because
there are many individuals in every species and many genes in every individual.
The process of mutation provides each generation with many new genetic variations.
More important yet is the storage of variation, the results of past mutations, in
each organism. Thus, it is not surprising to see that when new environmental
challenges arise, species are able to adapt to them. More than 200 insect and rodent
species, for example, have developed resistance to the pesticide DDT in different
parts of the world where spraying has been intense. Although the insects had never
before encountered this synthetic compound, they adapted to it rapidly by means
of mutations that allowed them to survive in its presence. Similarly, many species
of moths and butterflies in industrialized regions have shown an increase in the
frequency of individuals with dark wings in response to environmental pollution,
an adaptation known as industrial melanism. The examples can be multiplied at
will.
1.4.2
Genetic Equilibrium and Genetic Change
The genetic variation present in natural populations of organisms is sorted out in
new ways in each generation by the process of sexual reproduction. But heredity by
itself does not change gene frequencies. This principle is formally stated by the
Hardy–Weinberg law, an algebraic equation that describes the genetic equilibrium
in a population. In the simplest instance, there are two alleles, A and a, at a gene
1.4  Genetics of Evolution

14
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
locus, so that three genotypes are possible, AA, Aa, and aa. If the frequencies of
the two alleles in the population are p and q, respectively, the equilibrium frequencies
of the three genotypes are given by (p + q)2 = p2 + 2 p q + q2 for AA, Aa, and aa,
respectively. The genotype equilibrium frequencies for any number of alleles are
derived in the same way.
The Hardy–Weinberg law assumes that gene frequencies remain constant from
generation to generation – that there is no gene mutation or natural selection and
that populations are very large. But these assumptions are not correct; indeed, if
they were, evolution could not occur. Why, then, is the Hardy–Weinberg law
significant if its assumptions do not hold true in nature? The answer is that the
Hardy–Weinberg law plays in evolutionary studies a role similar to that of Newton’s
first law of motion in mechanics. Newton’s first law says that a body not acted upon
by a net external force remains at rest or maintains a constant velocity. In fact,
there are always external forces acting upon physical objects (gravity, for example),
but the first law provides the starting point for the application of other laws. Similarly,
organisms are subject to mutation, selection, and other processes that change gene
frequencies, and the effects of these processes are calculated by using the Hardy–
Weinberg law as the starting point. There are four processes of gene frequency
change: mutation, migration, drift, and natural selection.
The allelic variations that make evolution possible are generated by the process
of mutation; but new mutations change gene frequencies very slowly, since mutation
rates are low. Moreover, gene mutations are reversible. Changes in gene frequencies
due to mutation occur, therefore, very slowly. In any case, allelic frequencies usually
are not in mutational equilibrium, because some alleles are favored over others by
natural selection. The equilibrium frequencies are then decided by the interaction
between mutation and selection, with selection usually having the greater con-
sequence.
I have already discussed the process of mutation. Migration, or gene flow, takes
place when individuals migrate from one population to another and interbreed
with its members. The genetic makeup of populations changes locally whenever
different populations intermingle. In general, the greater the difference in allele
frequencies between the resident and the migrant individuals and the larger the
number of migrants, the greater effect the migrants have in changing the genetic
constitution of the resident population.
Moreover, gene frequencies can change from one generation to another by a
process of pure chance known as genetic drift. This occurs because populations
are finite in numbers, and thus the frequency of a gene may change in the following
generation by accidents of sampling, just as it is possible to get more or fewer than
50 heads in 100 throws of a coin simply by chance. The magnitude of the gene
frequency changes due to genetic drift is inversely related to the size of the
population: the larger the number of reproducing individuals, the smaller the effects
of genetic drift. The effects of genetic drift in changing gene frequencies from one
generation to the next are small in most natural populations, which generally consist
of thousands of reproducing individuals. The effects over many generations are
more important. Genetic drift can have important evolutionary consequences when

15
a new population becomes established by only a few individuals, as in the
colonization of islands and lakes. This is one reason why species in neighboring
islands, such as those in the Hawaiian archipelago, are often more heterogeneous
than species in comparable continental areas adjacent to one another.
1.5
Natural Selection
The phrase ‘natural selection’ was used by Darwin to refer to any reproductive bias
favoring some hereditary variants over others. He proposed that natural selection
promotes the adaptation of organisms to the environments in which they live
because the organisms carrying such useful variants would leave more descendants
than those lacking them. The modern concept of natural selection derives directly
from Darwin’s but is defined precisely in mathematical terms as a statistical bias
favoring some genetic variants over their alternates (the measure to quantify natural
selection is called fitness). Hereditary variants, favorable or not to the organisms,
arise by mutation. Unfavorable ones are eventually eliminated by natural selection;
their carriers leave no descendants or leave fewer than those carrying alternative
variants. Favorable mutations accumulate over the generations. The process
continues indefinitely because the environments that organisms live in are forever
changing. Environments change physically – in their climate, physical configuration,
and so on – but also biologically, because the predators, parasites, and competitors
with which an organism interacts are themselves evolving.
If mutation, migration, and drift were the only processes of evolutionary change,
the organization of living things would gradually disintegrate, because they are
random processes with respect to adaptation. These three processes change gene
frequencies without regard for the consequences that such changes may have on
the ability of the organisms to survive and reproduce. The effects of such processes
alone would be analogous to those of a mechanic who changed parts in an
automobile engine at random, with no regard for the role of the parts in the engine.
Natural selection keeps the disorganizing effects of mutation and other processes
in check, because it multiplies beneficial mutations and eliminates harmful ones.
But natural selection accounts not only for the preservation and improvement of
the organization of living beings but also for their diversity. In different localities
or in different circumstances, natural selection favors different traits, precisely those
that make the organisms well adapted to their particular circumstances and ways
of life.
The effects of natural selection can be studied by measuring the ensuing changes
in gene frequencies; but they can also be explored by examining changes on the
observable characteristics – or phenotypes – of individuals in a population.
Distribution scales of phenotypic traits such as height, weight, number of progeny,
or longevity typically show greater numbers of individuals with intermediate values
and fewer and fewer toward the extremes (the so-called normal distribution). When
individuals with intermediate phenotypes are favored and extreme phenotypes are
1.5  Natural Selection

16
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
selected against, the selection is said to be stabilizing. The range and distribution
of phenotypes then remains approximately the same from one generation to another.
Stabilizing selection is very common. The individuals that survive and reproduce
more successfully are those that have intermediate phenotypic values. Mortality
among newborn infants, for example, is highest when they are either very small or
very large; infants of intermediate size have a greater chance of surviving.
But the distribution of phenotypes in a population sometimes changes systema-
tically in a particular direction. The physical and biological aspects of the environ-
ment are continuously changing, and over long periods of time the changes may
be substantial. The climate and even the configuration of the land or water vary
incessantly. Changes also take place in the biotic conditions; that is, in the other
organisms present, whether predators, prey, parasites, or competitors. Genetic
changes occur as a consequence, because the genotypic fitnesses may be shifted so
that different sets of variants are favored. The opportunity for directional selection
also arises when organisms colonize new environments where the conditions are
different from those of their original habitat. The process of directional selection
often takes place in spurts. The replacement of one genetic constitution for another
changes the genotypic fitnesses of genes for other traits, which in turn stimulates
additional changes, and so on in a cascade of consequences.
The nearly universal success of artificial selection and the rapid response of natural
populations to new environmental challenges are evidence that existing variation
provides the necessary materials for directional selection, as Darwin already
explained. More generally, human actions have been an important stimulus to this
type of selection. Mankind transforms the environments of many organisms, which
rapidly respond to the new environmental challenges through directional selection.
Well known instances are the many cases of insect resistance to pesticides, synthetic
substances not present in the natural environment. Whenever a new insecticide is
first applied to control a pest, the results are encouraging, because a small amount
of the insecticide is sufficient to bring the pest organism under control. As time
passes, however, the amount required to achieve a certain level of control must be
increased again and again, until finally it becomes ineffective or economically
impractical. This occurs because organisms become resistant to the pesticide
through directional selection. Resistance of the housefly, Musca domestica, to DDT
was first reported in 1947. Resistance to one or more pesticides has now been
recorded in more than 100 species of insects.
Sustained directional selection leads to major changes in morphology and ways
of life over geologic time. Evolutionary changes that persist in a more-or-less
continuous fashion over long periods of time are known as evolutionary trends.
Directional evolutionary changes increased the cranial capacity of the human lineage
from Australopithecus afarensis, human ancestors who lived four million years ago,
with a small brain weighing somewhat less than one pound, to Homo sapiens,
modern humans with a brain three and a half times as large. The more-or-less
gradual increase in size during the evolution of the horse family from 50 million
years ago to modern times is another of the many well studied examples of
directional selection.

17
Two or more divergent traits in an environment may be favored simultaneously,
which is called diversifying selection. No natural environment is homogeneous;
rather, the environment of any plant or animal population is a mosaic consisting of
more-or-less dissimilar subenvironments. There is heterogeneity with respect to
climate, food resources, and living space. Also, the heterogeneity may be temporal,
with change occurring over time, as well as spatial, with dissimilarity found in
different areas. Species cope with environmental heterogeneity in diverse ways.
One strategy is the selection of a generalist genotype that is well adapted to all of
the subenvironments encountered by the species. Another strategy is genetic
polymorphism, the selection of a diversified gene pool that yields different genetic
makeups, each adapted to a specific subenvironment.
1.6
Sexual Selection and Kin Selection
One important factor in reproduction is mutual attraction between the sexes. The
males and females of many animal species are fairly similar in size and shape
except for the sexual organs and secondary sexual characteristics such as the
mammary glands of female mammals. There are, however, species in which the
sexes exhibit striking dimorphism. Particularly in birds and mammals, the males
are often larger and stronger, more brightly colored, or endowed with conspicuous
adornments. But bright colors make animals more visible to predators; for example,
the long plumage of peacocks and birds of paradise and the enormous antlers of
aged male deer are cumbersome loads at best. Darwin knew that natural selection
could not be expected to favor the evolution of disadvantageous traits, and he was
able to offer a solution to this problem. He proposed that such traits arise by ‘sexual
selection’, which “depends not on a struggle for existence in relation to other organic
beings or to external conditions, but on a struggle between the individuals of one
sex, generally the males, for the possession of the other sex.” Thus, the colored
plumage of the males in some bird species makes them more attractive to their
females, which more than compensates for their increased visibility to potential
predators. Sexual selection is a topic of intensive research at present.
The apparent altruistic behavior of many animals is, like some manifestations of
sexual selection, a trait that at first seems incompatible with the theory of natural
selection. Altruism is a form of behavior that benefits other individuals at the expense
of the one that performs the action; the fitness of the altruist is diminished by its
behavior, whereas individuals that act selfishly benefit from it at no cost to
themselves. Accordingly, it might be expected that natural selection would foster
the development of selfish behavior and eliminate altruism. This conclusion is not
so compelling when it is noticed that the beneficiaries of altruistic behavior are
usually relatives. They all carry the same genes, including the genes that promote
altruistic behavior. Altruism may evolve by kin selection, which is simply a type of
natural selection in which relatives are taken into consideration when evaluating
an individual’s fitness.
1.6  Sexual Selection and Kin Selection

18
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
Kin selection is explained as follows. Natural selection favors genes that increase
the reproductive success of their carriers, but it is not necessary that all individuals
with a given genetic makeup have higher reproductive success. It suffices that
carriers of the genotype reproduce more successfully on average than those
possessing alternative genotypes. A parent shares half its genes with each progeny,
so a gene that promotes parental altruism is favored by selection if the behavior’s
cost to the parent is less than half its average benefits to the progeny. Such a gene
will be more likely to increase in frequency through the generations than an
alternative gene that does not promote parental care. The parent spends some energy
caring for the progeny because it increases the reproductive success of the parent’s
genes. But kin selection extends beyond the relationship between parents and their
offspring. It facilitates the development of altruistic behavior when the energy
invested, or the risk incurred, by an individual is compensated in excess by the
benefits ensuing to relatives.
In many species of primates (as well as in other animals), altruism also occurs
among unrelated individuals when the behavior is reciprocal and the altruist’s costs
are smaller than the benefits to the recipient. This reciprocal altruism is found, for
example, in the mutual grooming of chimpanzees as they clean each other of lice
and other pests. Another example appears in flocks of birds that post sentinels to
warn of danger. One crow sitting in a tree watching for predators, while the rest of
the flock forages, incurs a small loss by not feeding, but this is well compensated
by the protection it receives when it itself forages and others of the flock stand
guard.
1.7
The Origin of Species
Darwin sought to explain the splendid diversity of the living world: thousands of
organisms of the most diverse kinds, from lowly worms to spectacular birds of
paradise, from yeasts and molds to oaks and orchids. His Origin of Species is a
sustained argument showing that the diversity of organisms and their characteristics
can be explained as the result of natural processes. As Darwin noted, different
species may come about as the result of gradual adaptation to environments that
are continuously changing in time and differ from place to place. Natural selection
favors different characteristics in different situations.
In everyday experience we identify different kinds of organisms by their
appearance. Everyone knows that people belong to the human species and are
different from cats and dogs, which in turn are different from each other. There
are differences among people, as well as among cats and dogs; but individuals of
the same species are considerably more similar among themselves than they are to
individuals of other species. But there is more to it than that: a bulldog, a terrier,
and a golden retriever are very different in appearance, but they are all dogs because
they can interbreed. People can also interbreed with one another, and so can cats,
but people cannot interbreed with dogs or cats, nor these with each other. It is,

19
then, clear that although species are usually identified by appearance, there is
something basic, of great biological significance, behind similarity of appearance;
namely, that individuals of a species are able to interbreed with one another but
not with members of other species. This is expressed in the following definition:
species are groups of interbreeding natural populations that are reproductively
isolated from other such groups.
The ability to interbreed is of great evolutionary importance, because it determines
that species are independent evolutionary units. Genetic changes originate in single
individuals; they can spread by natural selection to all members of the species but
not to individuals of other species. Thus, individuals of a species share a common
gene pool that is not shared by individuals of other species, because they are
reproductively isolated.
Although the criterion for deciding whether individuals belong to the same species
is clear, there may be ambiguity in practice for two reasons. One is lack of knowledge:
it may not be known for certain whether individuals living in different sites below
to the same species, because it is not known whether they can naturally interbreed.
The other reason for ambiguity is rooted in the nature of evolution as a gradual
process. Two geographically separate populations that at one time were members
of the same species later may have diverged into two different species. Since the
process is gradual, there is no particular point at which it is possible to say that the
two populations have become two different species. It is an interesting curiosity
that some antievolutionists have referred to the existence of species intermediates
as evidence against evolution; quite the contrary, such intermediates are precisely
expected.
A similar kind of ambiguity arises with respect to organisms living at different
times. There is no way to test whether or not today’s humans could interbreed with
those who lived thousands of years ago. It seems reasonable that living people, or
living cats, would be able to interbreed with people, or cats, exactly like those that
lived a few generations earlier. But what about the ancestors removed by one
thousand or one million generations? The ancestors of modern humans that lived
one million years ago (about 50 thousand generations) are classified in the species
Homo erectus, whereas present-day humans are classified in a different species,
Homo sapiens, because those ancestors were quite different from us in appearance
and thus it seems reasonable to conclude that interbreeding could not have occurred
with modern-like humans. But there is no exact time at which Homo erectus became
Homo sapiens. It would not be appropriate to classify remote human ancestors and
modern humans in the same species just because the changes from one generation
to the next are small. It is useful to distinguish between the two groups by means
of different species names, just as it is useful to give different names to childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood, even though there is no one moment at which an
individual passes from one to the next. Biologists distinguish species in organisms
that lived at different times by means of a commonsense rule: if two organisms
differ from each other about as much as two living individuals belonging to two
different species differ today, they are classified into separate species and given
different names.
1.7  The Origin of Species

20
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
Bacteria and blue-green algae do not reproduce sexually, but by fission. Organisms
that lack sexual reproduction are classified into different species according to criteria
such as external morphology, chemical and physiological properties, and genetic
constitution. The definition of species given above applies only to organisms able
to interbreed.
Since species are groups of populations reproductively isolated form one another,
asking about the origin of a species is equivalent to asking how reproductive isolation
arises between populations. Two theories have been advanced to answer this
question. One theory considers isolation as an accidental byproduct of genetic
divergence. Populations that become genetically less and less alike (as a con-
sequence, for example, of adaptation to different environments) may eventually be
unable to interbreed because their gene pools are disharmonious. The other theory
regards isolation as a product of natural selection. Whenever hybrid individuals
are less fit than nonhybrids, natural selection directly promotes the development
of reproductive isolation. This occurs because genetic variants interfering with
hybridization have greater fitness than those favoring hybridization, given that the
latter are often present in poorly fit hybrids. Scientists have shown that these two
theories of the origin of reproductive isolation are not mutually exclusive.
1.7.1
Adaptive Radiation
The geographic separation of populations derived from common ancestors may
continue long enough that the populations become completely differentiated species
before coming together again. As the separated populations continue evolving
independently, morphological differences may arise. Examples of adaptive radiation
are common in archipelagos far removed from the mainland. The Galapagos Islands
are about 600 miles off the west coast of South America. When Darwin arrived
there in 1835, he discovered many species not found anywhere else in the world –
for example, 14 species of finch (known as Darwin’s finches). These passerine birds
have adapted to a diversity of habitats and diets, some feeding mostly on plants,
others exclusively on insects. The various shapes of their bills are clearly adapted to
probing, grasping, biting, or crushing – the diverse ways in which these different
Galapagos species obtain their food. The explanation for such diversity (which is
not found in finches from the continental mainland) is that the ancestor of
Galapagos finches arrived in the islands before other kinds of birds and encountered
an abundance of unoccupied ecological opportunities. The finches underwent
adaptive radiation, evolving a variety of species with ways of life capable of exploiting
niches that in continental faunas are exploited by different kinds of birds.
Striking examples of adaptive radiation occur in the Hawaiian Islands. The
archipelago consists of several volcanic islands, ranging from less than one million
to more than ten million years in age, far away from any continent or other large is-
lands. An astounding number of plant and animal species of certain kinds exist in
the islands while many other kinds are lacking. Among the species that have evolved
in the islands, there are about two dozen (about one-third of them now extinct) of

21
honeycreepers, birds of the family Drepanididae, all derived from a single immigrant
form. In fact, all but one of Hawaii’s 71 native bird species are endemic; that is, they
have evolved there and are found nowhere else. More than 90% of the native species
of the hundreds of flowering plants, land mollusks, and insects in Hawaii are also
endemic, as are two-thirds of the 168 species of ferns. About one-fourth of the world’s
total number of known species of Drosophila flies (more than 500) are native Hawai-
ian species. The species of Drosophila in Hawaii have diverged by adaptive radiation
from one or a few colonizers, which encountered an assortment of ecological
opportunities that in other lands are occupied by different groups of flies or insects.
1.7.2
Rapid or Quantum Speciation
Examples of rapid speciation are also known in many organisms. Instances of
rapid speciation are sometimes called quantum or saltational speciation. An
important form of quantum speciation occurs as a result of polyploidy, which is
the multiplication of entire sets of chromosomes. This can happen in a single
generation, for example, if meiosis fails so that an individual’s gametes have two
sets of chromosomes, rather than only one. If a male and a female gamete, each
with two sets of chromosomes, combine, the resulting individual will have four
sets, rather than two sets, of chromosomes. A typical (diploid) organism carries in
the nucleus of each cell two sets of chromosomes, one inherited from each parent;
a polyploid organism has several sets of chromosomes. Many cultivated plants are
polyploid: bananas have three sets of chromosomes, potatoes have four, bread wheat
has six, some strawberries have eight. All major groups of plants have natural
polyploid species, but they are most common among flowering plants (angio-
sperms), of which about 47% are polyploids.
In animals, polyploidy is relatively rare because it disrupts the balance between
chromosomes involved in the determination of sex. But polyploid species are found
in hermaphroditic animals (individuals having both male and female organs), which
include snails and earthworms, as well as in forms with parthenogenetic females
(which produce viable progeny without fertilization), such as some beetles, sow
bugs, goldfish, and salamanders.
1.8
Evolutionary History
It is possible to look at two sides of evolution: one, called anagenesis, refers to
changes that occur within a lineage; the other, called cladogenesis, refers to the
split of a lineage into two or more separate lineages. Anagenetic evolution has,
over the last four million years more than tripled the size of the human brain; in
the lineage of the horse, it has reduced the number of toes from four to one.
Cladogenetic evolution has produced the extraordinary diversity of the living world,
with more than two million species of animals, plants, fungi, and microorganisms.
1.8  Evolutionary History

22
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
The evolution of all living organisms, or of a subset of them, can be represented
as a tree, with branches that divide into two or more as time progresses. Such trees
are called phylogenies. Their branches represent evolving lineages, some of which
eventually die out while others have persisted to the present time. Evolutionists are
interested in the history of life and hence in the topology, or configuration, of
evolution’s trees. They also want to know the anagenetic changes along lineages
and the timing of important events.
Tree relationships are ascertained by means of several complementary sources
of evidence. First, there is the fossil record, which provides definitive evidence of
relationships among some groups of organisms, but is far from complete and often
seriously deficient. Second, there is comparative anatomy, the comparative study
of living forms; and the related disciplines of comparative embryology, cytology,
ethology, biogeography, and others. In recent years the comparative study of
informational macromolecules – proteins and nucleic acids – has become a powerful
tool for the study of evolution’s history. We saw earlier how the results from these
disciplines demonstrate that evolution has occurred. Advanced methods have now
been developed to reconstruct evolution’s history.
These methods make it possible to identify whether the correspondence of
features in different organisms is due to inheritance from a common ancestor,
which is called homology. The forelimbs of humans, whales, dogs, and bats are
homologous. The skeletons of these limbs are all constructed of bones arranged
according to the same pattern because they derive from an ancestor with similarly
arranged forelimbs (Figure 1.1). Correspondence of features due to similarity of
function but not related to common descent is termed analogy. The wings of birds
and of flies are analogous. Their wings are not modified versions of a structure
present in a common ancestor but rather have developed independently as
adaptations enabling them to fly.
Homology can be recognized not only between different organisms but also
between repetitive structures of the same organism. This has been called serial
homology. There is serial homology, for example, between the arms and legs of
humans, among the seven cervical vertebrae of mammals, and among the branches
or leaves of a tree. The jointed appendages of arthropods are elaborate examples of
serial homology. Crayfish have 19 pairs of appendages, all built according to the
same basic pattern but serving diverse functions – sensing, chewing, food handling,
walking, mating, egg carrying, and swimming. Serial homologies are not useful in
reconstructing the phylogenetic relationships of organisms, but they are an
important dimension of the evolutionary process.
Relationships in some sense akin to those between serial homologs exist at the
molecular level between genes and proteins derived from ancestral gene duplica-
tions. The genes coding the various hemoglobin chains are an example. About 500
million years ago a chromosome segment carrying the gene encoding hemoglobin
became duplicated, so that the genes in the different segments thereafter evolved
in somewhat different ways, one eventually giving rise to the modern gene coding
for α hemoglobin, the other for β hemoglobin. The β hemoglobin gene became
duplicated again about 200 million years ago, giving rise to the γ (fetal) hemoglobin

23
gene. The α, β, and γ hemoglobin genes are homologous: similarities in their DNA
sequences occur because they are modified descendants of a single ancestral
sequence.
1.9
Punctuational Evolution
Morphological evolution is a more-or-less gradual process, as shown by the fossil
record. Major evolutionary changes are usually due to a building up over the ages
of relatively small changes. But the fossil record is often discontinuous, so that it
fails to manifest the gradual transition from one form to another. Fossil strata are
separated by sharp boundaries; accumulation of fossils within a geologic deposit
(stratum) is fairly constant over time, but the transition from one stratum to another
may involve gaps of tens of thousands of years. Different species, characterized by
small but discontinuous morphological changes, typically appear at the boundaries
between strata, whereas the fossils within a stratum exhibit little morphological
variation. This is not to say that the transition from one stratum to another always
involves sudden changes in morphology; on the contrary, fossil forms often persist
virtually unchanged through several geologic strata, each representing millions of
years.
Paleontologists attributed the apparent morphological discontinuities in the fossil
record to the discontinuity of the sediments; that is, to substantial time gaps
encompassed in the boundaries between strata. The assumption was that, if the
fossil deposits were more continuous, they would show a more gradual transition
of forms. Even so, morphological evolution would not always keep progressing
gradually, because some forms, at least, remain unchanged for extremely long times.
Examples are the lineages known as living fossils: the lamp shell Lingula, a genus
of brachiopod that appears to have remained essentially unchanged since the
Ordovician Period, some 450 million years ago; or the tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus),
a reptile that has shown little morphological evolution for nearly 200 million years
since the early Mesozoic.
According to some paleontologists, however, the frequent discontinuities in the
fossil record are not artifacts created by gaps in the record, but rather reflect the
true nature of morphological evolution, which happens in sudden bursts associated
with the formation of new species. The lack of morphological evolution, or stasis,
of lineages such as Lingula and Sphenodon is in turn due to lack of speciation within
those lineages. The proposition that morphological evolution is jerky, with most
morphological change occurring during the brief speciation events and virtually
no change during the subsequent existence of the species, is known as the
punctuated equilibrium model of morphological evolution. Most evolutionists,
however, agree that evolution is on the whole gradual, rather than discontinuous.
1.9  Punctuational Evolution

24
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
1.10
Molecular Evolution
Molecular biology has made possible the comparative study of proteins and nucleic
acid, DNA, which is the repository of hereditary (and therefore, evolutionary)
information. The relationship of proteins to DNA is so immediate that they closely
reflect the hereditary information. This reflection is not perfect, because the genetic
code is redundant and, consequently, some differences in DNA do not yield
differences in the synthesized proteins. Moreover, it is not complete, because a
large fraction of the DNA (about 90% in many organisms) does not code for
proteins. Nevertheless, proteins are so closely related to the information contained
in the DNA that they, as well as the nucleic acids, are called informational
macromolecules.
Nucleic acids and proteins are linear molecules made up of sequences of units –
nucleotides in nucleic acids, amino acids in proteins – which retain considerable
amounts of evolutionary information. Comparing two macromolecules establishes
the number of their units that are different. Because evolution usually occurs by
changing one unit at a time, the number of differences is an indication of the
recentness of common ancestry. Changes in evolutionary rates may create difficul-
ties, but macromolecular studies have two notable advantages over comparative
anatomy and other classical disciplines. One is that the information is more readily
quantifiable. The number of units that are different is precisely established when
the sequence of units is known for a given macromolecule in different organisms.
The other advantage is that comparisons can be made even between very different
sorts of organisms. There is very little that comparative anatomy can say when
organisms as diverse as yeasts, pine trees, and human beings are compared; but
there are homologous DNA and protein molecules that can be compared among
all three (Figure 1.2).
Informational macromolecules provide information not only about the topology
of evolutionary history (that is, the configuration of evolutionary trees), but also
about the amount of genetic change that has occurred in any given branch. It might
seem at first that determining the number of changes in a branch would be
impossible for proteins and nucleic acids, because it would require comparison of
molecules from organisms that lived in the past with those from living organisms.
But this determination can actually be made using elaborate methods developed
by scientists who investigate the evolution of DNA and proteins.
One conspicuous attribute of molecular evolution is that differences between
homologous molecules can readily be quantified and expressed as, for example,
proportions of nucleotides or amino acids that have changed. Rates of evolutionary
change can therefore be more precisely established with respect to DNA or proteins
than with respect to morphological traits. Studies of molecular evolution rates have
led to the proposition that macromolecules evolve as fairly accurate ‘clocks’. If the
rate of evolution of a protein or gene were approximately the same in the evolutionary
lineages leading to different species, proteins and DNA sequences would provide a
molecular clock of evolution. The sequences could then be used to reconstruct not

25
only the topology of the evolutionary tree but also the time when the various
branching events occurred.
The molecular evolutionary clock is not a metronomic clock, like a watch or
other timepiece that measures time exactly, but a stochastic clock like that of
radioactive decay. In a stochastic clock, the probability of a certain amount of change
is constant, although some variation occurs in the actual amount of change.
Figure 1.2  Evolutionary tree of 20 diverse organisms, ranging from the human,
through the horse, chicken, and snake, to moth and yeast. This tree is based
on the amino acid sequences of a small protein, cytochrome c. Although the
evolutionary relationships are not all accurate, it is remarkable that they can be
determined by examining a single protein. A more nearly correct evolutionary
tree can be constructed by combining data for several proteins.
1.10  Molecular Evolution

26
1  The Evolution of Organisms: A Synopsis
Over fairly long periods of time, a stochastic clock is quite accurate. The enormous
potential of the molecular evolutionary clock lies in the fact that each gene or protein
is a separate clock. Each clock ‘ticks’ at a different rate – the rate of evolution
characteristic of a particular gene or protein, but each of the thousands and
thousands of genes or proteins provides an independent measure of the same
evolutionary events.
Evolutionists have found that the amount of variation observed in the evolution
of DNA and proteins is greater than is expected from a stochastic clock; in other
words, the clock is inaccurate. The discrepancies in evolutionary rates along different
lineages are not excessively large, however. It turns out that it is possible to time
phylogenetic events with as much accuracy as may be desired; but more genes or
proteins (about two to four times as many) must be examined than would be required
if the clock were stochastically accurate. The average rates obtained for several DNA
sequences or proteins taken together become a fairly precise clock, particularly
when many species are investigated (Figure 1.3).
Figure 1.3  Differences in DNA composition vs. paleontological time. The total
number of differences for seven proteins (cytochrome c, fibrinopeptides A and
B, hemoglobins α and β, myoglobin, and insulin C-peptide) were calculated
for comparisons between pairs of species whose ancestors diverged at the
time indicated. The solid line was drawn from the origin to the outermost
point. The fit between the observed number of differences and the expected
number (as determined by the solid line) is fairly good in general. However, in
the primates (points below the diagonal at lower left) protein evolution seems
to have occurred at a slower rate than in most other organisms.

27
2
The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
Michael Ruse
2.1
Introduction
Evolutionary theorizing has been controversial from its birth in the eighteenth
century. No sooner had people like the Englishman Erasmus Darwin (1794–1796)
and the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck (1809) started putting forwards ideas
of upward organic development, than the critics started to launch their counter-
attacks. The greatest biologist of the age, George Cuvier (1813), was a leader of the
critique, arguing that evolution is a false, pernicious doctrine, religiously un-
acceptable, politically dangerous, and ideologically suspect. Things did not change
during the nineteenth century. Charles Darwin, the grandson of Erasmus, rightly
known as the father of evolution, published his great work On the Origin of Species,
in which he argued for the mechanism of natural selection, in 1859. Only a year
later, Darwin’s great supporter Thomas Henry Huxley found himself debating the
forces of reaction and status quo: first the comparative anatomist and paleontologist
Richard Owen, and then publicly the Bishop of Oxford, Samuel Wilberforce (Ruse
2000b). In the twentieth century, evolution continued to be controversial. Notoriously
in 1929 in the state of Tennessee a school teacher, John Thomas Scopes, was
prosecuted for teaching evolution, and although his conviction was overturned on
appeal, it had a chilling effect on evolutionary ideas, particularly in schools (Larson
1997). It was not indeed until the 1960s and 1970s that evolution started to find its
way back into textbooks in the United States. In the last part of the twentieth century,
evolution certainly throve in universities and museums, but still it continued a
source of much controversy. There was a court case in the state of Arkansas in
1981, and then as the millennium drew to an end, more and more voices were
raised against evolution. Noteworthy were such people as the Berkeley lawyer Phillip
Johnson and the Notre Dame philosopher Alvin Plantinga (Ruse 2000a). But even
within the halls of evolutionism itself there was much controversy, with people like
the Harvard entomologist and sociobiologist Edward O. Wilson (1975) on the one
side arguing for an extension of evolutionary ideas to our own species, and his
colleagues at Harvard the geneticist Richard Lewontin (1977) and the paleontologist
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

28
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
Stephen Jay Gould (1980) on the other side arguing that such extensions are
scientifically unwarranted and morally dubious.
In this brief overview I cannot hope to cover all the controversies that follow
evolutionists at the beginning of a new century. I therefore confine my discussion
to some five controversies, hoping thereby to give the reader a good sense not only
of the debates, but also of the excitement that surrounds one of the most important,
if controversial, ideas of our time. I start with a vigorous debate about the history of
Darwinism itself. This is revealing not just for the past but also for our understanding
of the present. Next, I move to some of the debate and discussions about origin-of-
life studies. I then move to central issues to do with natural selection. This is followed
by extensions to humankind. I conclude with the attacks from without, particularly
by today’s enthusiasts for so-called Intelligent Design.
2.2
The History of Evolutionism
I begin with discussion of a controversy that is not so much about or within
evolutionary theory itself, but rather about the history of evolutionism. As was said
at the beginning, evolutionary theory is a child of the eighteenth century (Ruse
1999a). It was then that discoveries of the fossil record and of strange organisms
and the like started to persuade people to think that the Genesis-based account of
origins is not correct (Rudwick 1972). Rather, we must suppose that organisms
came by a natural process of development from primitive forms. However, from
the beginning, all would agree evolutionary theory was very much more than just a
straight scientific theory. The early evolutionists, Erasmus Darwin in Britain and
Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck in France, had strong ideological axes to grind (Ruse
1996, 1999b). They were enthusiasts of the chief secular philosophy or ideology of
the age: progress. They believed that humans, unaided, can improve their know-
ledge, and through this their social conditions. Darwin and Lamarck and other
early evolutionists took this ideology and read it into the biological world. Meta-
phorically, they saw evolutionary development as a progressive rise from the
primitive to the complex, from the monad to the man, as they used to say. Then
generally, in good circular fashion, they read their biological progressivism back
into culture, thinking that they had justified their overall ideology!
Expectedly, the great critics of evolution – notably Georges Cuvier (1813) in France
and Adam Sedgwick (1833) in England – opposed not only the factual basis of
evolution, which to be frank was not very great, but also the ideological under-
pinnings. Cuvier and Sedgwick and others were keen Protestants, and as such
they saw progressivism striking directly at their central theological commitment to
a Providential God: to a world where we humans can effect no lasting changes on
our own but can seek salvation only by appealing to God for His mercy and his
grace.
Evolutionary theory in those early days was therefore less a genuine scientific
theory and more a kind of pseudoscience or secular religion. And this is the way

29
2.2  The History of Evolutionism
that it persisted at least until the time of Charles Darwin. In the Origin of Species,
published in 1859, Darwin put forward a much firmer (than hitherto understood)
empirical base for evolutionary change, appealing right across the spectrum of the
biological world: instinct, paleontology, biogeography, anatomy, embryology,
systematics, and more. Thus he supported his belief in a gradual process of descent.
Conversely, he used this belief in a gradual process of descent to illuminate problems
in the various subdisciplines of the biological sciences. In short, it was Darwin’s
hope that the Origin of Species would provide a new paradigm of research – biology
under the umbrella of evolution (Ruse 1999a).
However, this was not to be. Darwin’s great supporters (notably Thomas Henry
Huxley) had little interest in making a functioning professional science out of
Darwinism. They were not interested in evolutionary problems at an experimental
level, being much more concerned with broad-scale issues to do with morphology
and paleontology (Desmond 1994, 1997). And as all agree, for a long while after the
Origin was published, evolutionary biology became not very Darwinian at all. Indeed,
it owed far more to the transcendental idealistic morphology coming out of Germany,
reaching back ultimately to the Naturphilosophen, than to anything to be found in
the Origin of Species (Richards 1992; Nyhart 1995). It is at this point that we start to
enter into controversy. I argue that what happened after the Origin was little more
than a disaster from the point of view of science. Evolutionary biology was hijacked
by others, notably Ernst Haeckel in Germany and Herbert Spencer and his followers
in England (and then in America). It remained as it has long been: a kind secular
religion, an alternative to Christianity. As a science, it became (or rather stayed)
thoroughly second-rate.
All agree that now there was a science of evolutionary biology, but it was a kind of
evolutionary morphology, which was increasingly pushed out of the universities, if
indeed it ever got in them, and became a museum subject. Evolution was much
more a kind of popular science than anything else, and because it turned out that
trying to trace phylogenies using evolutionary morphology and embryology ended
in paradox more often than not, the best young biologists of the age turned
increasingly away from evolutionary problems. They took up other issues like
cytology, embryology, and ultimately in the twentieth century, genetics. People like
William Bateson, the English Mendelian, and Thomas Hunt Morgan, the great
American fruit fly geneticist, started life as evolutionary biologists but found that
the subject was getting them nowhere. So they turned to richer and more fertile
fields.
I argue that this situation continued until the 1920s and even into the 1930s.
Evolutionary biology was a second-rate subject, not one for a top-quality university
mind. Students were steered away from it. It was only after the population
geneticists, notably R. A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane in England and Sewall Wright
in America, had put genetics on a firm evolutionary basis from a theoretical point
of view that it was possible to develop evolutionary theory as a university-based,
mature, professional science (Provine 1971). This finally occurred in the 1930s and
1940s, thanks particularly to the labors of such people as Theodosius Dobzhansky
and his followers in America and to E. B. Ford and others in Britain. By the 1950s,

30
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
one did at last have the kind of selection-based, mature theory that Charles Darwin
had hoped for.
The question now is one of interpretation. Am I correct in my claims that what
happened after Darwin until the 1930s was indeed a disaster for evolutionary theory?
(The case is made fully in Ruse 1996.) The eminent British historian of evolutionary
biology, Peter Bowler, disagrees strongly. He has detailed very carefully the work of
the evolutionary morphologists in the latter decades of the nineteenth century and
the first decades of the twentieth century (Bowler 1984, 1996). He shows rightly
that there was a great deal of work that went on, and he argues that this was
interesting and significant. More importantly, he argues that it was because of this
work that evolutionary biology was able to take off and professionalize in the way
that it did in the late 1920s and 1930s. He believes that there is indeed a continuity,
even though he himself has stressed that much of the work that was done around
the turn of the century was not very Darwinian. He feels that whatever the regard
for Darwin’s work, a basis was provided for the advances that were to come.
I am obviously not the person to make a disinterested evaluation of this debate.
I would simply say from my corner that I see no evidence to back Bowler’s claim.
I believe that the evolutionists of the 1930s had themselves to break with what had
gone before, and that they themselves set out deliberately to make a theory, not
only at the conceptual level, but also at the social level. One finds that few if any of
them had any interest in morphology. Even the paleontologist of the group, G. G.
Simpson (1944), succeeded as a modern evolutionist because he was breaking away
from the old fashions of searching desperately for phylogenies. He was developing
and embracing a much newer, dynamic, causal picture of evolutionary change.
Simpson in his way was just as much a revolutionary as the others.
Probably the time is not yet fully ripe to decide if the truth lies with me or with
Bowler. Although much work has been done on the history of evolutionary theory,
very little has been done at the meta-level on this grand a range. Most studies on
evolutionary history are micro-studies on particular events or particular people.
Few other than Bowler or myself – who are now both long past the years of PhD
thesis writing, an exercise that encourages micro-studies – have attempted to look
at the broader picture and to offer overall interpretations. No doubt more work will
be done on this, and nothing stimulates inquiry more than dispute. Quite probably,
both Bowler and I will come through with our positions modified. However, at the
moment we have an ongoing and as-yet-unresolved controversy about the nature
of evolutionary theory. All agree that Darwin was crucially important in providing
a theory of evolution through natural selection. All agree that, although Darwin
was crucially important, his ideas were not picked up after the publication of the
Origin in the 1860s. It was indeed not until the 1920s and 1930s that people became
truly Darwinian and the modern theory of evolution was developed. All agree that
between Darwin and the 1930s a great deal of non-Darwinian biology was done,
which drew heavily on German morphology and other roots. The question is Where
does one go from here? Does one want to argue as does Bowler that this intermediary
science was good quality science albeit non-Darwinian, and that it led in an
important way to the modern theory of evolution? Or does one argue as I do that

31
this non-Darwinian science was an absolute disaster for the history of evolutionary
theory? That it was second-rate, if science at all, and often was used simply as a
vehicle for quasi-religious ideas, and that the development to the modern theory in
the 1920s and 1930s took place only because the new practitioners turned their
backs on or were ignorant of what had gone before? That they have reached back
rather across the years to Darwin himself?
Here we have two very different pictures of evolutionary theory. In its history,
time and more research will tell which is correct.
2.3
Origin of Life
If you are an evolutionist, that is to say, if you believe that all organisms came
gradually by natural processes from one or a few forms (as Darwin said), then it is
almost inevitable that you will start to think about ultimate origins. You will start to
ask questions about how life itself came into being. Was it something that was
seeded from elsewhere, or was it something that developed naturally in some fashion
here on earth? Certainly the early evolutionists, Erasmus Darwin and Jean-Baptiste
de Lamarck, thought long and hard about ultimate origins, both of them subscribing
to some form of the venerable doctrine of ‘spontaneous generation’ (Farley 1977).
Lamarck, for instance, believed that in pools of warm mud, lightening and heat
and so forth would stir things up. Worms and the like would come about in-
stantaneously, and thus life would be on its path upward. This was a belief shared
by other early evolutionists through to the first part of the nineteenth century. You
find, for instance, that Robert Chambers (the author of Vestiges of the Natural History
of Creation) thought that somehow life comes about instantaneously, and he was
forever looking for lifelike forms in the inorganic world that he believed might be
generated into living beings.
At the time that Darwin wrote the Origin, however, the whole notion of spon-
taneous generation was coming under very heavy criticism, and as is well known
the French biologist Louis Pasteur in the 1860s was to drive the final nail into its
coffin. Darwin, a very skilled scientist, knew that he could only get into trouble if
he subscribed to anything like spontaneous generation, and yet he knew he had no
alternative. Wisely therefore, he realized that the best course of action was to say
nothing at all, and so in the Origin the vital question of the origin of life is significant
mainly by its total absence. Darwin said nothing because he had nothing to say,
and in many respects his strategy was very successful, because any question of
life’s origin never became one of the focal points of debate after the Origin (Ruse
1982).
It was, however, a problem that would not go away, especially if spontaneous
generation no longer seemed to be a viable option. It is generally agreed that the
major breakthroughs on this topic came about in the 1920s, when independently
the English biochemist and geneticist J. B. S. Haldane (1929) and the Russian
biochemist A. I. Oparin (1924) put forward ideas about life’s origins. They suggested
2.3  Origin of Life

32
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
that it would be something that came about naturally but in a sequential form –
not an instantaneous appearance of fully functioning life as was supposed by
supporters of spontaneous generation. But there would have been a kind of organic
evolution leading up to functioning primitive life forms. These ideas of Haldane
and Oparin received considerable support in the 1950s, when researchers at the
University of Chicago, Harold Urey and Stanley Miller (1953), showed how it would
be possible to make some of life’s basic building blocks (amino acids) naturally
from inorganic compounds – naturally, under experimental condition similar to
what might have been expected back when life was supposedly formed.
Much work has gone on since then, although no one could say that the questions
have been answered with unambiguous success. Indeed, the whole matter of the
origin of life is today one of some considerable controversy (Ruse 2000b). On the
one hand, we have some of the leading researchers admitting that we really do not
yet know how life could come about. One prominent researcher, using the metaphor
of a detective story, writes “We must conclude that we have identified some important
suspects and, in each case, we have some ideas about the method they might have
used. However, we are very far from knowing whodunit” (Orgel 1998, p. 495). On
the other hand, we find critics who are contemptuous of supposed claims about
the supposed origins of life. For instance, the eminent philosopher of religion Alvin
Plantinga states that, in his opinion, we are, if anything, further away from solutions
now than we were in the past. He speaks of hypotheses about the origin of life as
for “the most part mere arrogant bluster”, adding that “given our present state of
knowledge, I believe it is vastly less probable, on our present evidence, than is its
denial” (Plantinga 1991, p. 20). Is this really so?
It is useful to break the Oparin–Haldane hypothesis into a number of steps
(Freeman and Herron 1998). We begin first with the question of the conditions
required for the natural creation of organic molecules, those that constitute the
ultimate building blocks of life. If conditions back when life is supposed to have
begun – some 3.5 billion years ago, if we read the fossil record right – are like
conditions today, it simply would not be possible for primitive building blocks of
life to be created and persist. The oxygen atmosphere that we have today would
preclude that. However, it is thought that, around the time that life is supposed to
have started, in fact the atmosphere on the earth was oxygen-free, somewhat laden
with other gases such as methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide.
These are just the ingredients that we need for making elementary molecules.
Then, second, there is the production of complex molecules from inorganic
substances. Mention has already been made of the work of Miller and Urey, and it
is still thought that their work holds up well. There would have been precisely the
kinds of radiation, electrical storms, etc. that would have given rise to primitive
building blocks, particularly amino acids.
Next in the Oparin–Haldane sequence you have the question of linking these
primitive molecules into long macromolecules, to make the substances we find in
cells today: proteins and nucleic acids. The problem is not so much the joining of
the molecules – this happens quite easily – but keeping them joined long enough
for them to start functioning. Quite possibly what happened was that the molecules

33
adhered to clays and built up long chains. This has been simulated. But how then
do we move on the fourth step, to get the chain molecules to replicate themselves?
Some suggest that the clays continue to play an important role. Crystals repeat
themselves, building copies on templates although sometimes with mistakes built
in. These mistakes then get repeated. Perhaps the organic molecules piggybacking
on the crystals got repeated; then mistakes got built in, and eventually the molecules
could themselves take over reproduction, dropping their supports. Possibly, however,
the molecules themselves could move directly to making proteins. It is thought
that the key molecule here would be RNA, because in some organisms it is the
only nucleic acid. It is capable of replicating itself and also of acting as a model for
other cellular building blocks.
There are going to be more steps after this. For instance, one has to make a
globular cell. It was here that Oparin (1968) spent most of his life’s work, as did a
number of Americans, notably Sidney Fox (1988). They were showing how one
could make self-contained spheres that can maintain and reproduce themselves.
Possibly the organic molecules would work within these spheres. Later it is thought
that other events had to occur. Most researchers today subscribe to the ideas of the
American researcher Lynn Margulis (1970, 1993), who has argued that, to make
more complex cells, one needed a kind of symbiotic relationship between more
primitive cells. The cell parts today, like mitochondria, perhaps once had an
independent existence. Then they were incorporated within other cells and now
remain there as part of a united whole.
There is more after this. For instance, one needs the development of sexuality
and things of this nature. I really do not think that even the greatest optimist could
say that we are anywhere close to having a full and adequate picture of life’s origins.
There are far too many gaps waiting to be filled in and unknowns that have not
been properly addressed and answered. On the other hand, this said, huge advances
have been made in the past half century on this problem of life’s origin. Moreover,
this is an area that is not stagnating, but rather where a great deal of effort is being
put into exploring the various links. It is not a topic that scientists avoid because
they have no ideas at all about how to tackle the problems. If anything, it is a more
vigorous area than it has ever been before.
It seems therefore that it would be foolish indeed to conclude with the critics
that this is an area of great weakness for the evolutionist. It is simply not true, as
Plantinga claims, that we are further back now than we were before. Indeed, to the
contrary, thanks to the coming of molecular biology we now are starting to have a
full appreciation of the great problems that are involved in coming to an adequate
theory of life’s origins. Recognizing the magnitude of problems is the first step
toward solving them. Philosophers are notoriously unreliable when making forecasts
about the future of science. But my suspicion is that in the next half century we
will see even greater advances than before, and without confidently predicting that
it will be possible to create life anew in the test tube in the laboratory, my suspicion
is that we will at some point in the foreseeable future start to get really solid answers
to the origin of life. It is no longer the black hole for evolution that it was at the time
for Charles Darwin. when he wrote the Origin of Species.
2.3  Origin of Life

34
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
2.4
Natural Selection
Let me move now to the central issue of modern evolutionary theory, namely the
Darwinian mechanism of natural selection. Charles Darwin argued that more
organisms are born than can possibly survive and reproduce. There is consequently
a struggle for existence. Then following this, given the naturally occurring variation
in populations, there will be something analogous to the breeders’ form of artificial
selection. This Darwin called natural selection: more organisms are born than can
survive and reproduce, and those that are successful or ‘fitter’ succeed because of
variations they have that the losers do not have. Overall, given enough time, this
leads to evolutionary change. But it is important to note that for the Darwinian,
this change is of a particular kind; namely, it is change in the direction of adaptation.
Organisms have characteristics that enable them to survive and reproduce –
characteristics like the eye or hand. It is the essence of Darwinism that evolution
produces organisms that are not simply thrown together, but which are tightly
integrated or functioning thanks to their adaptive nature (Ruse 1999a).
There have always been critics of natural selection, and these critics continue
vocal today. Particularly strident have been Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould,
who in a famous, or notorious, paper “The Spandrels of San Marco” argued that
Darwinian evolutionists much over-emphasize the extent to which the world is
tightly adapted (Gould and Lewontin 1979). These critics argued to the contrary
that, just as in medieval cathedrals one found areas at the tops of pillars – so-called
spandrels – that have no direct function, so also in looking at organisms one should
recognize that much of their nature is not particularly adaptive. Therefore, although
natural selection undoubtedly occurs and is an important evolutionary mechanism,
it is nothing like as important or significant as Darwinians claim.
What would the critics put in the place of natural selection? There is no one
answer, and to a certain extent what they imply is that really things happen more or
less randomly or by happenstance. Perhaps the process of genetic drift, in which
the population frequencies of genes just float up or down by chance, is an important
mechanism. Also, frequently suggested are so-called developmental constraints. It
is argued that simply as part of the development and architecture of organisms
many characteristics happen, not for any good reason but just because they do
(Gould 1984). Often highlighted by the critics of natural selection is the four-
limbedness of vertebrates. Why, ask people like Gould and Lewontin, should there
be four limbs for vertebrates rather than six as for insects or even eight as for
arachnids; or perhaps five as for starfish?
Darwinians have been combating these arguments with some vigor. John
Maynard Smith (1981), the doyen of English evolutionists, argues that the four-
limbedness of vertebrates may not have any direct adaptive function at the moment,
but certainly was rooted in adaptive advantage in the past. The earliest vertebrates
were aquatic and needed two limbs in front and two limbs in back to move up and
down in the water just as planes today move up and down in the air. In fact, argues
Maynard Smith, the earliest vertebrates were not necessarily four-limbed, and the

35
number four was something that came about precisely because it proved to be of
adaptive advantage to the possessors. Likewise, argue the Darwinians, other
mechanisms seem not to have been greatly significant. Genetic drift recently has
been much criticized by a number of theoreticians who suggest that it is highly
improbable that it was ever very significant – certainly not in any major way in the
course of evolution (Coyne et al. 1997).
In a sense, the jury is still out on the issue of the power and ubiquity of selection,
although it is fair to say that most practicing evolutionists rely very heavily on natural
selection. Indeed, they would argue that, unless they did, they simply could not do
their science. If one wants to put things down to other random factors, then this is
a kind of negative argument that leads to no new research hypotheses. Talking of
constraints or drift is simply not very helpful. There is an asymmetry here between
selection and its rivals. However, this is not to deny that – taken over long periods
of time, when one starts to look at macro events rather than micro events – one
might see certain patterns emerging that were not directly fueled by natural
selection, patterns that reflect other factors or constraints on the course of evolution.
This particularly was the hypothesis of the late Jack Sepkoski, a paleontologist who
argued that, if one looks at the course of evolutionary change over millions of years,
one starts to see certain patterns emerging – patterns that, although not negating
natural selection, do not depend on it directly.
In particular, Sepkoski was initially interested in the rise of organisms during
the Cambrian period, some five or six hundred million years ago. What Sepkoski
(1976, 1978, 1979, 1984) argued was that, with the coming of sexuality, perhaps
one got a kind of exponential growth as organisms were able to move into new
empty ecological niches. And then, as these niches got filled up, the growth slowed.
So one gets the kind of sigmoid pattern one associates with such growth. In fact,
Sepkoski was able to map the numbers of families of marine organisms extant at
that time, and he showed that, roughly speaking, one does get such a growth as
one expects. More than this: Sepkoski was then able to add other more subtle factors
to his analysis, showing in particular that once the Cambrian explosion was over,
then the Cambrian organisms, if anything, started to decline somewhat. But now
new forms took over and one got a kind of sigmoid growth on the back of the
earlier ones. Indeed, this has happened even a third time among animals. Thus,
Sepkoski felt able to model (using computers and vast databases of extinct taxa) the
history of life in the past six or seven hundred million years.
I stress that Sepkoski certainly did not look upon his work as being in any sense
anti- Darwinian. It was rather neutrally non-Darwinian, because he was doing was
trying to show broad patterns that would not be captured directly by natural selection.
However, even here, in a sense, Sepkoski went on to appeal to Darwinism. He
certainly thought that the new waves of organisms, building on the earlier growth
patterns, came about because the organisms developed new adaptations of an
altogether innovative kind. One has here an example of what the British ultra-
Darwinian Richard Dawkins refers to as the evolution of evolvability. Organisms
grew in great numbers during the Cambrian and then tailed off, but then new
forms and new adaptations were developed so life could take off again. Moreover,
2.4  Natural Selection

36
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
this has happened no less than three times in all, giving the kind of picture that we
find in the fossil record. (When it came to plants, Sepkoski believed that perhaps
one even had a fourth wave. This might have been a function of the evolution of
the angiosperms, a new kind of life form that was able to build on previous patterns.)
We have here therefore a case of an extension of Darwinism, but by no means a
refutation of Darwinism. (I see analogies between what Sepkoski attempted in
evolutionary history and what Bowler and I attempt in the history of evolutionary
theory. Like Sepkoski, Bowler and I both think that when you look at the broader
picture, new patterns emerge – patterns that could not be deduced from the micro-
studies on their own. That Bowler and I differ in our findings and interpretations
is another matter. Sepkoski and his colleague David Raup also thought that
extinction is periodic (Sepkoski and Raup 1986a, b). Some agreed, some did not.
We all concur that it is only by looking at the big picture that these issues arise.)
What about Stephen Jay Gould’s supposed new theory of punctuated equilibria?
Gould has argued that he has found aspects of the fossil record, which are not only
beyond Darwinism but which are in some sense anti-Darwinian (Eldredge and
Gould 1972; Gould and Eldredge 1977; Ruse 1989). It is an essential tenet of
Darwinian theory that evolutionary change must be gradual, yet Gould argues that
in the fossil record one finds long periods of inaction, or what he refers to as stasis,
followed by sharp changes in form from one kind to another. This apparently
supports a whole new vision or theory of evolution – non-adaptive, jerky, em-
phasizing constraints. And this theory of punctuated equilibria, as Gould calls it, is
in some important sense not just non-Darwinian but anti-Darwinian. It cannot be
incorporated within the Darwinian picture.
However, conventional Darwinians are not certain that any of this is very
significant:
Gould occupies a rather curious position, particularly on his side of the
Atlantic. Because of the excellence of his essays, he has come to be seen by
non-biologists as the preeminent evolutionary theorist. In contrast, the
evolutionary biologists with whom I have discussed his work tend to see
him as a man whose ideas are so confused as to be hardly worth bothering
with, but as one who should not be publically criticised because he is at
least on our side against the creationists. All this would not matter, were it
not that he is giving non-biologists a largely false picture of the state of
evolutionary biology. (Maynard Smith 1995, p. 46)
Darwinians point out that what may be a sharp change in the fossil record could
take many hundred of generations in real life, and this could be quite time enough
for natural selection to work on the random variation produced by genetics (Ruse
1982). Orthodox Darwinians have never claimed that change, although gradual, is
always at a steady rate. Rather, it has always been thought, from Darwin on, that
sometimes one will have times of rapid change and sometimes periods when
nothing much happens. After all, selection is going to change things only if there
is a good reason for this to happen. Hence, although conventional Darwinians

37
allow that Gould has done service in pointing to the uneven patterns in the fossil
record, inasmuch as punctuated equilibria is taken to be a whole new theory of
evolutionary change or to demand new mechanisms, Gould is stepping way beyond
his competence and the evidence given to us by nature. There is no need for a
theory beyond Darwinism.
I would not want to say that all of these controversies around selection are
completely concluded. Amongst nonbiologists (philosophers, for example) there
is much sympathy for a critique of adaptationism. However, in the working
community of evolutionary biologists, it seems fair to say that almost all who are
actually doing ongoing research feel that Darwinism functions as a viable paradigm.
It provides new problems and sets new standards. At this time, there is little need
to look elsewhere. (Although I shall suggest that there was more to the story than
this, I would entertain seriously the suggestion that Lewontin and Gould show the
dreadful effects of the turn-of-the-century rejection of Darwinism. They have not
fully internalized the revolution of the 1920s and 1930s. If this is so, then relating
back to the dispute between Bowler and myself, you might say that he is certainly
correct in saying that the non-Darwinism did have a lasting effect. But I am correct
in saying that the non-Darwinism did not feed into the new Darwinism. Moreover,
I am correct in seeing the turn-of-the-century non-Darwinism as an absolute disaster.
It was a disaster at the turn of one century and it is a disaster at the turn of another
century.)
2.5
Human Sociobiology
It has always been the claim of the traditional Darwinian that his or her theory
applies to humankind. Erasmus Darwin and Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck both thought
that evolution applies to humans, and the same was true of Charles Darwin. In
fact, the very first records we have of Darwin speculating about natural selection
are about human brains and human intelligence. In the Descent of Man written
some 12 years after the Origin of Species, Darwin argued strongly not only that
humans have evolved from other organisms, but that human nature is in many
respects something molded by natural selection
For many years however, people held back from exploring these ideas. There was
the growth of the social sciences that naturally did not want to be swallowed by the
biological sciences. Then also there were the terrible events in the first part of the
twentieth century, particularly as occurred in Nazi Germany in the 1930s. People
grew even less willing to see human nature as in some sense a function of or
dictated by biology. But times do change, and by the 1960s and 1970s an increasing
number of evolutionary biologists (and others) were wondering whether the time
had come to look in some detail at the state of human nature from a biological
perspective (Degler 1991). They were encouraged in doing this by the fact that the
1960s saw a great development of our evolutionary understanding of social behavior.
It was realized that organisms not only fight and compete against each other, but
2.5  Human Sociobiology

38
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
that very widely they cooperate. The reasons for this are fairly simple: enlightened
self-interest dictates that one is better off if one works together with one’s group
than if one is constantly competing. Although there are costs to cooperation, or as
biologists call it, altruism, the costs are well out-paid by the benefits from such
cooperation or altruism (Ruse 1985).
In 1975 the Harvard entomologist Edward O. Wilson brought together these
new ideas about social behavior – what he called sociobiology – and incorporated
them into a magnificent overview of the whole subject: Sociobiology: The New
Synthesis. What made Wilson’s work controversial, however, was the fact that he
applied the ideas of animal sociobiology to human nature. He argued that just as
ants and lions and chimpanzees are animals that function the way they do because
of their biology, so also in many major respects we should see that humans are
products of evolution through natural selection. Much that we do in culture is
dictated by or determined by our evolutionary past.
The sorts of things that Wilson talked about in Sociobiology: The New Synthesis
and in a later more popular exposition of the human case (On Human Nature),
included family structures, parent–child relationships, and sexual encounters.
Wilson argued that the fact that males so often are dominant in societies, whereas
women are more subservient and tend to be the gatherers as opposed as to the
hunters, is not simply a function of male oppression, but also in many major respects
a function of our biology. There are good reasons why males should be aggressive
and compete for females, whereas females should be somewhat more choosey – to
use a word of Wilson’s which gave great offence – to be much more ‘coy’. Females
are the ones left holding babies, whereas males can impregnate a great many
partners. In other words, sexual relationships are asymmetrical, an imbalance that
follows directly from our biology. Wilson offered similar arguments for such things
as aggression, social status, politics, and life (including ethics) generally. Noteworthy
was Wilson’s belief that religion is something that has no basis in reality but is an
adaptation put in place by our biology to make us good social animals.
These ideas were attacked, viciously at times, by a whole range of people (Kitcher
1985). Naturally enough, feminists and others did not like Wilson’s claims about
the supposedly natural relationship between the sexes. Social scientists were made
very uncomfortable by what they saw as the territorial ambitions of evolutionary
biologists. If sociobiology worked, then what place would there be in the curriculum
for psychology and sociology? And above all, the radical biologists disliked Wilson’s
ideas. These critics felt that his views were just a prescription for racism and worse.
They saw human sociobiology as being little more than an echo of the vile doctrines
of Germany of the 1930s. Prominent amongst these critics were Lewontin and
Gould (Lewontin 1977, 1991; Gould 1980, 1981; Lewontin et al. 1984).
Much of the critical objection was directed less at Wilson’s Darwinian extensions
to humankind and more at the very core of Darwinism. I have already looked in
the last section at some of the objections made against natural selection, and it is
right and proper to see these objections in the context of an overall critique of
Darwinism – a critique intending to forestall its application to humankind. However,
the critics also had specific objections to the human sociobiological program. They

39
argued that there is simply no evidence for the genetic basis of such things as
sexual differences, that these can be explained simply in terms of culture and politics.
Likewise, they argued that things like aggression have no ultimate basis in biology,
nor does ethics. At best, something like moral behavior is a cultural phenomenon,
if not indeed a reflection of certain material or otherwise objective entities.
There is no doubt that the critics made some telling points. The work of Wilson
and his like is frequently speculative, even verging into sloppy. Moreover, the motives
of the human sociobiologist are often based more in ideology than in anything to
be found in the empirical world. However, there does seem to be an area where
(over the last 25 years) there have been significant scientific advances. Now, even if
the battle is not finished, it is at least dying out. During the past quarter century,
fundamental advances have been made by molecular biologists and others in
understanding the nature of the human genetic blueprint (the genome). We now
do know beyond reasonable doubt that much of our behavior is rooted in our biology.
This does not in itself mean that it is adaptive, but this a first step toward such a
conclusion.
Take sexual orientation, the putative causes of which were very speculative at the
time that Wilson wrote (something that led to much scorn and criticism). It used
to be thought that sexual orientation is all a question of the environment (Ruse
1988b). Classically, Freud (1905) argued that homosexual men are produced by a
combination of dominant mothers and weak or distant fathers. Now however, we
are starting to get really solid evidence suggesting that (at least some) homosexuality
is directly under the control of the genes. The way that you think about sex, and the
objects toward whom you are attracted, are indeed a matter of one’s DNA rather
anything in one’s upbringing. The nature of sexual encounters is no less a function
of our evolutionary heritage than are the tools of such encounters (LeVay 1993;
Hamer and Copeland 1994).
What about the question of adaptive advantage? Here also one finds that major
advances have been made. One of the most stunning successes of human socio-
biology stems from the work of the Canadian evolutionary psychologists Martin
Daly and Margo Wilson (1988) at McMaster University. They took as their subject
their problem of homicide. Why is it that people kill other people, and who does
what to whom? They were particularly interested in the issue of parents killing
children. This would seem to be blatantly nonadaptive and to go against the
Darwinian paradigm. Excluding infanticide, which raises issues of its own, Daly
and Wilson hypothesized that the parents who kill children are almost always social
parents and but rarely biological parents. In other words, Daly and Wilson suggested
that it is step-parents who do the killing of children rather than so-called natural
parents. I should say that in making this hypothesis they were not sailing in entirely
untested waters. It is a very well documented fact in the animal world that males
moving in on pregnant females or on females with litters will first and foremost
bring on an abortion or kill all the offspring. The female is thus brought into heat,
and the new male can impregnate her. And there will be no rivals making demands
on her when the next batch of children is born. Daly and Wilson suggested that
perhaps humans are similar.
2.5  Human Sociobiology

40
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
They tested this hypothesis and found that it was stunningly confirmed. A child
is more than 100 times more likely to be killed by a step-father than by a biological
father. (This does not mean that most step-fathers kill their step-children. This
does not follow. The point is that one is looking at comparative figures.) What
made the Daly–Wilson finding even more stunning was that the relative differential
held both in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, and in Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A. The
murder rate in the United States is at least five times higher than it is in Canada,
and Detroit even more so. But although the absolute numbers are much increased
in Detroit, proportionately the same ratio of step-parents (as opposed to biological
parents) kill children. What made the work of Daly and Wilson truly convincing
was that this was hardly a conclusion built in before they set out in their research.
They found when they went to the authorities for figures to check their hypothesis
there were no such figures. When it came to family violence, agencies had been
reluctant or indifferent to distinguishing between step-parents and natural parents.
They thought it was either irrelevant or would be prejudicial to reconstituted families.
However, once the statistics were kept in a proper manner, the differences emerged
dramatically.
As Aristotle said, one swallow does not make a summer. But this is far from the
only swallow. There is now a really large and ever-growing body of evidence
suggesting that human sociobiology is something with a strong grounding in
empirical reality. Here therefore is a place where an evolutionary controversy is,
perhaps is not yet concluded, but well on the way to closure. The interest now is in
developing human sociobiology in broader and more subtle ways, so that we can
further tease out the effects of genes as opposed to the environment. (Although I
have been talking about biology, let me stress that no one wants to argue that the
environment or culture is a matter of causal indifference. The reason why I speak
English rather than German is because I was brought up in England rather than in
Germany. This is a cultural phenomenon. The reason why I speak at all, rather
than just grunt, is because I am a human being. This is a biological phenomenon.
The task now for sociobiologists is that of teasing apart the relative causal factors
in human nature and seeing which are really significant and which are not.)
2.6
The Creationist Controversy
In 1981 in the State of Arkansas the American fundamentalists, better known today
as Creationists, masterminded the passing of a law that insisted on the teaching of
the Bible taken literally in biology classes in the state. This law was soon overturned
and ruled unconstitutional, but the Creationism controversy has continued since
then (Ruse 1988a; Hull and Ruse 1998). Indeed, as we start the twenty-first century,
it thrives as never before. A wide range of thinkers – some biologists but many
from medicine, philosophy, law, and elsewhere – argue that evolutionary theory,
Darwinism in particular, is on very shaky grounds indeed (Johnson 1991). They
believe that one ought rather subscribe to an alternative position. These days,

41
Creationists are cautious about parading the early chapters of Genesis taken
absolutely literally, although one suspects that most of them do in fact subscribe to
literal interpretations. However, what is often said now is that one ought to prefer
something called Intelligent Design over Darwinism. That is to say, one should
accept that at some point or points, some being – which may or may not have been
the Christian God (one knows the Creationists think it was) – intervened in creation.
Organisms were produced miraculously, in one step, with the full glory that one
finds about them today.
On what basis do the Intelligent Design theorists make their case? Probably the
most sophisticated argument has come from the Lehigh biochemist Michael Behe,
in his Darwin’s Black Box. He argues that, at the biochemical level particularly, one
finds examples of what he refers to as ‘irreducible complexity’: organism parts are
so complex that there is simply no way that they could have been put together by
natural selection. Behe argues that many organic systems are rather like mouse
traps, which need five parts all functioning together to work. Take away one part,
for instance the spring, and the mouse trap simply does not work. Behe argues
that this means that it could never have been produced by selective processes,
because the essence of selection is gradualness. Likewise, at the biochemical level,
Behe argues that one finds that parts have to be put together at one instant, to get
them to work. Behe cites the example of blood clotting, for which we have a kind of
cascade process with one part of the process kicking in and then another, and then
a third until the whole thing is over. Take away one part of the process, argues
Behe, and nothing works. Analogous to the mouse trap example, he suggests that
natural selection could not possibly have assembled all the constituent parts and
then put them together in one spot at the same time. Here then we have irreducible
complexity, which cannot be explained by natural selection. The only other
reasonable hypothesis is one of intervention of some kind, or what Behe and his
like call Intelligent Design.
This argument has been much criticized by scientists and others. The blood
clotting example is thought by experts in the field to be a paradigm of how something
was in fact manufactured sequentially (Doolittle 1997). The various parts of the
cascade are all similar, and apparently not all are truly necessary. It is thought
therefore that one started with very primitive forms and then things got more
sophisticated by duplicating various parts and modifying them slowly. In other
words, Darwinians argue that selection could indeed produce something like blood
clotting or other sophisticated processes at the biochemical level. (The Krebs cycle
– a process necessary for producing available energy for the functioning body – has
been a recent counterexample of the evolutionists (Miller 1999).)
More fundamentally, critics argue that Behe misunderstands the way in which
evolution works (Ruse 2000a). Perhaps all the parts are put together now, and to
move one part would cease to make for functioning. It does not follow that all parts
were assembled at one fell swoop. Suppose, to counter the mousetrap example,
one looked at a stone bridge with no mortar. If one just saw it as it stands at the
moment, one could not understand how the keystone in the centre was inserted. If
one built up the walls of the bridge and sides, and tried then to move towards the
2.6  The Creationist Controversy

42
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
middle everything would just keep falling down. However, we know that first the
bridge maker makes a structure underneath the arch – perhaps scaffolding or a
mound of earth. The stones are laid on this, and the bridge completed. Then, once
everything is in place and the stones pushing against each other, one can remove
the scaffolding underneath and the bridge remains standing. So likewise this is a
common practice in evolution. We have already seen it suggested that clays might
have worked this way for the earliest functioning molecules. There is therefore no
need to invoke an alternative non-Darwinian mechanism.
In any case, argue the Darwinians, someone like Behe is even in worse trouble
theologically than he is scientifically. Suppose one does in fact conclude that a
Being – a Designer – was necessary for making the functioning, complex parts of
the body. How then can one deny that this Being was responsible for the not-very-
complex, indeed very-simple-but-absolutely-horrendous mistakes that sometimes
occur in the functioning body. Why, for instance, is the Designer not responsible
for sickle-cell anemia, which is brought about by the change of just one base in a
DNA molecule? Here, the philosopher–mathematician William Dembski has
intervened, arguing that through a filter process one can get the designer off the
hook. Dembski (1988a, b) argues that, when an event occurs in biology, one has
three choices. First, one might put it down to the working of law. So, if a blue-eyed
child is born to blue-eyed parents, one simply explains this as the workings of
Mendel’s laws. But if one cannot put something down to law, for instance one has
random mutation, then one puts this down to chance. Sickle-cell anemia is to be
put down to chance and is to be blamed on no one. If neither law nor chance
explain things, then it is appropriate to invoke Intelligent Design. Hence, argues
Dembski, one can give the Designer the credit for something like the blood-clotting
cascade but can exonerate the Designer from the problems of the sickle-cell anemia
malfunctioning gene.
Critics do not find this response convincing. Are law, chance, and design quite
as logically distinct as Dembski thinks? Why should one not say that, even though
the malmutation came about by what we would regard as chance, in some sense it
could still be a function of a Designer. Why should the Designer’s responsibility be
evaded at this point? After all, even though one might want to say that the
malmutation came about in a random way, one could still insist that ultimately the
malmutation was caused by law. It was certainly not an event outside law. In fact,
we now know a great deal about the causes behind mutations, including bad
mutations. So the critics of Intelligent Design argue that, even though one might
speak of a malmutation as being a function of chance, at the same time it is probably
something that is covered by law. And, if indeed one is prepared to invoke an
Intelligent Designer for one set of events, then why should one not be forced to
invoke an Intelligent Designer for all other sets of events?
Despite these strong criticisms, I doubt very much that Intelligent Design or
Creationism generally is going to go away in a hurry. It seems to be thriving more
at the moment than ever before. However popular though it may be, and socially
and pedagogically threatening as it truly is, it does not seem to be a matter of great
intellectual import or concern to the orthodox Darwinian.

43
2.7
Conclusions
I have run through a number of controversies. I suggest that Darwinism emerges
looking stronger than ever. This is not to say that all problems are resolved. They
never are when one has interesting, forward-looking science. No doubt new
advances, both in theory and in empirical finding, will throw up new challenges.
For instance, now molecular biologists are suggesting that maybe the history of
life is less that of a tree and more that of a lattice. Perhaps through viruses genes
can be transferred from one branch of the living world to another. If true, surely
this will be significant in the course of evolution and possibly also for the
mechanisms. But these are matters for the future. As things stand at the moment,
controversial though evolutionary theory in general and Darwinian theory in
particular may be, I would argue that it is a mature, thriving, and very successful
branch of modern science.
2.8
References
Behe, M. (1996) Darwin’s Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution.
New York: Free Press.
Bowler, P. (1984) Evolution: The History of an Idea. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Bowler, P. (1996) Life’s Splendid Drama. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Chambers, R. (1844) Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. London: Churchill.
Coyne, J. A., Barton, N. H., Turelli, M. (1997) Perspective: a critique of Sewall
Wright’s shifting balance theory of evolution. Evolution 51, 643–671.
Cuvier, G. (1813) (trans. Kerr, R.) Essay on the Theory of the Earth. Edinburgh:
W. Blackwood.
Daly, M., Wilson, M. (1988) Homicide. New York: De Gruyter.
Darwin, C. (1859) On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray.
Darwin, C. (1871) The Descent of Man. London: John Murray.
Darwin, E. (1794–1796) Zoonomia; or, The Laws of Organic Life. London:
J. Johnson.
Dawkins, R. (1988) The evolution of evolvability. In: Langton, C. G. (Ed.),
Artificial Life. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Degler, C. N. (1991) In: Search of Human Nature: The Decline and Revival of
Darwinism in American Social Thought. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dembski, W. (1998a) The Design Inference: Eliminating Chance through Small
Probabilities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dembski, W. (Ed.) (1998b) Mere Creation: Science, Faith and Intelligent Design.
Downers Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press.
Desmond, A. (1994) Huxley, the Devil’s Disciple. London: Michael Joseph.
2.8  References

44
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
Desmond, A. (1997) Huxley, Evolution’s High Priest. London: Michael Joseph.
Doolittle, R. F. (1997) A delicate balance. Boston Review 22, 28–29.
Eldredge, N., Gould, S. J. (1972) Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to
phyletic gradualism. In: Schopf, T. J. M. (Ed.), Models in Paleobiology.
San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper, 82–115.
Farley, J. (1977) The Spontaneous Generation Controversy from Descartes to Oparin.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Fox, S. W. (1988) The Emergence of Life: Darwinian Evolution from the Inside.
New York: Basic Books.
Freeman, S., Herron, J. C. (1998) Evolutionary Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Freud, S. ([1905] 1955) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality. In: Strachey, J.
(Ed.), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud
7. London: Hogarth, 125–243.
Gould, S. J. (1980) Sociobiology and the theory of natural selection. In: Barlow,
G., Silverberg, J. (Eds.), Sociobiology: Beyond Nature/Nurture? Boulder, CO:
Westview, 257–269.
Gould, S. J. (1981) The Mismeasure of Man. New York: Norton.
Gould, S. J. (1984) Morphological channeling by structural constraint:
convergence in styles of dwarfing and giantism in Cerion, with a description of
two new fossil species and a report on the discovery of the largest Cerion.
Paleobiology 10, 172–194.
Gould, S. J., Eldredge, N. (1977) Punctuated equilibria: the tempo and mode of
evolution reconsidered. Paleobiology 3, 115–151.
Gould, S. J., Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist program. Proc. Roy. Soc.
London, Series B: Biol. Sci. 205, 581–598.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1929) The origin of life. Rationalist Annual, 1–10.
Hamer, D., Copeland, P. (1994) The Science of Desire: The Search for the Gay
Gene and the Biology of Behavior. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Hull, D. L., Ruse, M. (Eds.) (1998) Readings in the Philosophy of Biology: Oxford
Readings in Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, P. E. (1991) Darwin on Trial. Washington, DC: Regnery Gateway.
Kitcher, P. (1985) Vaulting Ambition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lamarck, J.-B. ([1809] 1963) (trans. Elliot, H.) Zoological Philosophy. New York:
Hafner.
Larson, E. J. (1997) Summer for the Gods: The Scopes Trial and America’s
Continuing Debate over Science and Religion. New York: Basic Books.
LeVay, S. (1993) The Sexual Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lewontin, R. C. (1977) Sociobiology: a caricature of Darwinism. In: Suppe, F.,
Asquith, P. (Eds.), PSA 1976. East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science
Association.
Lewontin, R. C. (1991) Biology as Ideology: The Doctrine of DNA. Toronto: Anansi.
Lewontin, R. C., Rose, S., Kamin, L. J. (1984) Not in Our Genes: Biology, Ideology
and Human Nature. New York: Pantheon.

45
Margulis, L. (1970) Origin of Eukaryotic Cells. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Margulis, L. (1993) Symbiosis in Cell Evolution. New York: Freeman.
Maynard Smith, J. (1981) Did Darwin get it right? London Review of Books
3 (11), 10–11.
Maynard Smith, J. (1995) Genes, memes, and minds. New York Review of Books
42 (19), 46–48.
Miller, K. (1999) Finding Darwin’s God. New York: Harper and Row.
Miller, S. L. (1953) A production of amino acids under possible primitive earth
conditions. Science 117, 528–529.
Nyhart, L. K. (1995) Biology Takes Form: Animal Morphology and the German
Universities. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Oparin, A. ([1924] 1967) (trans. Synge, A.) The origin of life (Originally
published as Proishkhozhdenie zhizni [1928]). In: Bernal, J. D. (Ed.),
The Origin of Life. Cleveland, OH: World, 199–234.
Oparin, A. (1968) The Origin and Initial Development of Life (NASA TTF-488).
Washington, DC: GPO.
Pennock, R. (1998) Tower of Babel: Scientific Evidence and the New Creationism.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Plantinga, A. (1991) Evolution, neutrality, and antecedent probability: a reply to
Van Till and McMullin. Christian Scholar’s Review 21, 80–109.
Provine, W. B. (1971) The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Richards, R. J. (1992) The Meaning of Evolution: The Morphological Construction
and Ideological Reconstruction of Darwin’s Theory. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Rudwick, M. J. S. (1972) The Meaning of Fossils. New York: Science History
Publications.
Ruse, M. (1982) Darwinism Defended: A Guide to the Evolution Controversies.
Reading, MA: Benjamin/Cummings.
Ruse, M. (1985) Sociobiology: Sense or Nonsense? 2nd ed. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Ruse, M. (Ed.) (1988a) But is it Science? The Philosophical Question in the
Creation/Evolution Controversy. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus.
Ruse, M. (1988b) Homosexuality: A Philosophical Inquiry. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ruse, M. (1989) The Darwinian Paradigm: Essays on its History, Philosophy and
Religious Implications. London: Routledge.
Ruse, M. (1996) Monad to Man: The Concept of Progress in Evolutionary Biology.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ruse, M. (1999a) The Darwinian Revolution: Science Red in Tooth and Claw,
2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ruse, M. (1999b) Mystery of Mysteries: Is Evolution a Social Construction?
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ruse, M. (2000a) Can a Darwinian be a Christian? The Relationship between
Science and Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ruse, M. (2000b) The Evolution Wars. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
2.8  References

46
2  The Evolution Controversies: An Overview
Sedgwick, A. (1833) A Discourse on the Studies of the University. London: Parker.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. (1976) Species diversity in the Phanerozoic: species-area
effects. Paleobiology 2, 298–303.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. (1978) A kinetic model of Phanerozoic taxonomic diversity.
I. Analysis of marine orders. Paleobiology 4, 223–251.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. (1979) A kinetic model of Phanerozoic taxonomic diversity.
II. Early Paleozoic families and multiple equilibria. Paleobiology 5, 222–252.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr. (1984) A kinetic model of Phanerozoic taxonomic diversity.
III. Post-Paleozoic families and mass extinctions. Paleobiology 10, 246–267.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr., Raup, D. M. (1986a) Periodicity in marine extinction events.
In: Elliott, D. (Ed.), Dynamics of Extinction. New York: Wiley, 3–36.
Sepkoski, J. J. Jr., Raup, D. M. (1986b) Was there 26-Myr periodicity of extinctions?
Nature 321, 533.
Simpson, G. G. (1944) Tempo and Mode in Evolution. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1975) Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1978) On Human Nature. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press.

47
3
The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity*
Edward O. Wilson
Abstract
Social vertebrates display faster chromosomal evolution, faster species turnover,
and higher levels of allelic heterozygosity than nonsocial vertebrates. At least some
species also display substantially more genetic differentiation among geographically
spaced social groups. The explanation for this pattern may be that matrilines stay
together over multiple generations to compose such groups, and a relatively small
number of males inseminate them. In contrast, higher social insects, comprising
the termites, ants, eusocial bees, and eusocial wasps, have slower rates of evolution,
similar to that of other, related groups of insects. The explanation appears to be
that their population structure is very different from that of vertebrates: from the
view-point of genetics their colonies are actually individuals (superorganisms), and
the population equivalent to the local vertebrate society (= population) is the
population of colonies. Moreover, outbreeding is extensive. The four major
assemblages of highly social organisms – the colonial invertebrates, eusocial insects,
nonhuman social mammals, and man – are characterized for the most part by
great biomass, interspecific competitive superiority, and low species diversity.
Competitive superiority in colonial invertebrates and eusocial insects over nonsocial
animals is achieved substantially by social means. Lower species diversity on the
other hand is due substantially to large organism size, where invertebrate clones
and insect colonies are the equivalent of the organisms composing nonsocial
species.
* This contribution is a re-release. First published in Oikos 61, 13–18, Copenhagen 1991.
Wiley-VCH thanks the author for his permission.
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

48
3  The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity
3.1
Introduction
The usual form of sociobiological analysis addresses the prerequisites in heredity
and the environment for the origin and evolution of sociality. In this article I will
reverse the procedure and pose the question of how sociality affects evolution,
biological diversity, and certain aspects of the environment.
3.2
Sociality and Rate of Evolution
Bush et al. (1977) found that among 225 genera of vertebrates, speciation and
chromosomal evolution have proceeded faster in genera whose species are organized
into troops or harems, such as those of horses and many primates. They found the
same trend in genera with limited vagility, patchy distribution, and strong individual
territoriality, a category which includes (for example) many rodents. The criteria
used by these authors were: (1) rate of chromosome change inferred from phylo-
genies of living species; (2) rate of appearance of new species, inferred from
phylogenies of living species and fossils; and (3) rate of generic extinctions, hence
turnover, in monophyletic clades (species and their descendants).
Marzluff and Dial (1990) obtained what might seem at first a result contrary to
that of Bush et al.: hyperdiverse living groups of vertebrates, that is, families with
many genera and genera with many species, are not significantly more social than
less diverse groups. However, the two sets of results do not conflict. The data
reviewed by Marzluff and Dial represent the standing crops of genera and species,
while those reviewed by Bush et al. refer to turnover rates. It is possible to have
very high turnover – new taxa replacing old ones – and hence rapid evolution overall,
but achieve only a small standing crop base. The turnover is due to the dynamism
of the evolutionary process, while the standing diversity is constrained by population
size at equilibrium (K) and hence the number of species that can be packed together
in the same community.
This brings us to the question of the causes of rapid evolution in social vertebrates.
Bush et al. suggested that social groups, by staying clear of one another through
behavioral repulsion, separately constitute demes with low effective breeding size.
The groups are more prone to allele and chromosome type fixation by genetic drift.
Thus, in accordance with Sewall Wright’s shifting balance hypothesis, these socially
demarcated populations might “experiment” with temporarily less adaptive
combinations. If a new, favorable combination were to be struck (in Wright’s
metaphor, the population crosses the adaptive valley to a new adaptive peak),
divergent evolution among the populations would be accelerated. And if the
populations were further isolated by a geographic barrier, such as a deep valley or
riverine corridor forest, the divergence might lead to full species formation, with
intrinsic isolating mechanisms thereafter preventing free genetic exchange with
other, sister populations. Finally, in taxonomic groups where only a few species

49
3.2  Sociality and Rate of Evolution
can coexist, sympatry of the newly formed species would tend to result in the
extinction of those less well adapted – in other words increase the rate of turnover.
Unfortunately for this neat explanation, Melnick (1987, 1988) noted from his
research on rhesus macaques and that of earlier investigators on mammals generally
that mammalian societies apparently exchange too many individuals to allow
protracted evolution based on sustained genetic drift. For at least the rhesus
macaques of Dunga Gali, Pakistan, Melnick also excluded the possibility that
divergence among local troops is due to fission and formation of new troops along
matrilines, in other words, females and their descendents.
Nonetheless, the data on social vertebrates confirm a high degree of differentiation
among social groupings of mammals, just as Bush et al. stressed. Melnick offers
the following alternative explanation to inbreeding and genetic drift. Matrilines
stay together to compose each troop over multiple generations. Only a small number
of males inseminate the females, as a result of dominance interactions, and they
soon leave, as do their sons, without inbreeding. The total result is a strong genetic
divergence among the troops, even when these groups are stationed only a short
distance apart. If geographical isolation occurred, speciation might soon follow.
One can imagine that intergroup selection is also an accelerating force, with certain
genetic combinations prevailing over others in territorial disputes and takeovers.
In a parallel study, Nevo et al. (1984) found that among 127 vertebrate species
surveyed with isozyme electrophoresis, social species possessed higher levels of
genic heterozygosity than nonsocial species. Nevo’s own work on Spalax mole rats
of the Middle East indicates that heterozygosity in local populations increases with
the level of environmental stress, in particular physical stress associated with arid
environments. Nevo has suggested (pers. comm.) that social organization is a form
of stress that could promote higher degrees of behavioral polymorphism and hence
allelic heterozygosity. But it also seems likely that chance variation arising among
geographically proximate groups, as postulated by Bush et al. and Melnick, would
result in elevated genic diversity within groups through gene flow, even when gene
flow between groups is moderately restricted across a few generations at a time.
When we turn to the second great pinnacle of social evolution, the eusocial insects
(Wilson 1975), we encounter a radically different situation from that of the
vertebrates. The rate of evolution at the level of the species and above is slower by
as much as an order of magnitude. Slow evolution, at least slow macroevolution, is
a trait held in common with most other insects. All of the 28 orders of insects alive
in the Cretaceous Period are still alive today, with several extending all the way back
to the late Paleozoic, whereas only one Cretaceous mammalian order, the Marsu-
pialia, still persists. Within the single insect order Hymenoptera, 25 of the 36 families
present in the Cretaceous are alive, whereas this is true for only one mammalian
family, the Didelphidae or opossums. In contrast to the fast-evolving mammals,
the early Tertiary faunas of social insects have a decidedly modern cast, down to the
level of the genus and even the species group. A species of the contemporary
stingless bee genus Trigona has been found in Late Cretaceous amber (Michener
and Grimaldi 1988). No fewer than 56% of the ant genera of the early Oligocene
Baltic amber still survive. A modern facies is even more evident in the Dominican

50
3  The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity
amber, which is apparently early Miocene in age. here 34 genera or 92% of the total
37 are extant. Furthermore, the majority of species belong to living species groups,
and a few are difficult to separate from living ants at the species level (Wilson
1985). The eusocial insects (ants, bees, wasps, and termites, characterized by a
nonreproductive worker caste) appear to be about as conservative in evolution as
their closest relatives among the solitary insects (Wilson 1990).
If the rapid evolution and high levels of heterozygosity of social mammals are to
be explained as the impact of social organization on population structure, as the
evidence seems to indicate, how are we to account for the complete lack of such
correspondence in the social insects? The answer is that a colony of social insects,
unlike a troop of macaques or herd of elephants, is not ordinarily a population, at
least not in the ordinary sense applied in population genetics. Rather, it is the
counterpart of a vertebrate organism, with the queen as the reproductive system
and the workers as the rest of the body. The queen is inseminated by one to several
males at the start of the life on the colony, or in the case of termites, is accompanied
by a long-lived consort male. The offspring workers rarely reproduce on their own
while the queen still lives, and in the vast majority of species, virgin primary
reproductives leave the nest to start their own colonies alone and elsewhere. Soon
after departure they mate with individuals from other nests, often in the midst of
large panmictic swarms drawn from many other nests. In short, gene flow appears
to be as free and random as it is in solitary insects. The equivalent in the social
insects of a conventional local breeding population of vertebrates or solitary insects
is the population of colonies.
There are exceptions to the population structure of the social insects just
characterized. Some ant species in the genera Formica, Linepithema (formerly part
of Iridomyrmex), Myrmica, Pheidole, and Pristomyrmex are organized into super-
colonies or unicolonial populations, in which there are no colonial boundaries and
the local population is just one great sprawling colony serviced by large numbers
of queens (Hölldobler and Wilson 1990). Much of the mating occurs locally, within
the territories of the supercolonies. These aggregations are thus structured
somewhat like vertebrate society-populations, and have a similar potential for rapid
evolution. Yet they do not present the appearance of much cumulative change.
They are typically closely related to species that form ordinary colonies, and in fact
may represent evolutionary dead ends that do not evolve much further on their
own. The supercolony species are also poor in standing diversity compared with
their ordinary relatives. Here the reason seems clear. Supercolony species typically
dominate the local environment, aggressively excluding colonies of many of the
related species. They are also broad generalists, preying on arthropods, scavenging
corpses, and collecting honeydew excreta from aphids and other homopterous
insects. It is hard to imagine two recently evolved sister species with supercolonies
that overlap in the same habitat.

51
3.3
Sociality, Success, and Dominance
In considering the status of any group of organisms, biologists intuitively use the
concepts of success, dominance, and diversity – and just as often conflate them.
For the purposes of evaluating sociality in insects with greater precision, I recently
proposed the following definitions (Wilson 1990):
Success
Longevity of the entire clade (a species and all its descendents) through geological
time. Paleontologists often use the average duration of genera or families as a
measure of a still higher taxon, such as the class Anthozoa or phylum Porifera.
What they mean is the clade that starts with the ancestral species first displaying
the diagnostic traits of the genus or family, plus all of the species descended from
that species. What they exclude is pseudoextinction, the “termination” of a line by
evolution of new diagnostic traits without extinction of the populations bearing the
ancestral traits. A species evolving radically different traits may be said to give rise
to a second species. Thus there are two chronospecies, the ancestor and the
descendent, but the line has not gone extinct; the two forms are counted together
as part of the same clade. Clade longevity is intuitively the best criterion of success,
because it represents the simplest and most direct measure of species-level selection
over long periods of time. It is a pure Darwinian criterion of the evolutionary process.
Dominance
Relative abundance, especially as it effects the appropriation of biomass and energy
and impacts the populations and evolution of the rest of the biota. Dominance, as
I have used the word (Wilson, 1990), is thus not merely population density but the
degree to which the species influence the remainder of the community. The
influence in general will certainly be correlated with density, and all other things
being equal it must be identical to density. But other things are very seldom equal.
Influence will rise as organism size increases, hence more biomass is appropriated.
It will rise as basal metabolism increases, resulting in the appropriation of more
free energy. It will rise with the number of links in the food webs, hence the number
of species affected. For parasites it will rise with the degree of virulence. For free-
living organisms generally it will rise as more of the physical environment id
disturbed, by soil excavation during nest-building, by adventitious destruction of
vegetation during trail construction and feeding, and so on. How these varied
concomitants of population density and their impact are to be generally measured
is a problem not easily resolved, but the usefulness of refining the concept of
dominance in particular cases is clear enough.
Speciosity
The number of species, which in turn can be usefully separated into the geo-
graphically expanding components of diversity (Magurran 1988): alpha (the number
of species occurring together within a given habitat), beta (the rate of turnover in
3.3  Sociality, Success, and Dominance

52
3  The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity
species along a transect in passing from one habitat to another), and gamma (the
number for all of the sampled localities taken together). The greater the alpha and
beta diversity, the greater the adaptive radiation.
Adaptive radiation
The array of niches occupied by the various species of a clade, especially those that
coexist in the same area simultaneously.
Geographic range
The entire area occupied by a clade at a particular time.
Success, which is an evolutionary quality, and dominance, which is an ecological
trait, are correlated. All mathematical models to date have confirmed the strong
intuitive impression that the risk of extinction decreases with maximum population
size (K) and increases with the temporal coefficient of variation in population size
(CV). Pimm et al. (1988) confirmed this result in an analysis of census data of 100
species of British land birds living in small to moderate sized populations on 16
islands. Stanley (1987) found that among marine bivalve mollusks living along the
Pacific rim during Pleistocene times, abundant clades survived the longest. Yet
success (longevity) and dominance (abundance and impact on biota) are qualitatively
different phenomena and can be uncoupled and opposed in particular cases. A clade
can enjoy enormous success by virtue of chronological persistence, but also be so
rare as to have negligible influence on the ecosystem in which it lives. Examples
include many “living fossils”, such as onychophorans and coelacanths, which tend
to be local and rare. At the opposite extreme, a clade can be so abundant for a while
as to exert a profound and lasting impact on the rest of life, yet be short-lived. The
most striking examples of all time may include the extinct clades of social mammals.
(We hope and trust that this assemblage will not soon include man.)
A clade is likely to increase its longevity not only if its populations are larger but
also if it contains many species, representing an array of adaptive types, and occupies
a broad geographical range; because the clade then has “spread its bets” across
many independent gene pools, among which one or more may possess traits that
insure survival when the remainder of the clade succumbs. This relation is likely
to exist as a broad correlation, yet it too can be uncoupled in particular cases.
A tardigrade genus such as Echiniscoides, for example, might be worldwide and
ancient yet monotypic and scarce; a species swarm of cichlid fishes can be middle-
aged and extremely diverse, yet limited to a single African lake; and so on through
all of the combinations of the population-level traits pertaining to abundance and
diversity.
In Table 3.1 I have used the population-level traits to categorize the four animal
(and human) assemblages possessing the most complex social organizations. With
the exception of Homo, none of these assemblages is monophyletic, which is good
for purposes of analysis, since each thus embraces multiple evolutionary experi-
ments. The higher social insects include at least twelve independent lines, and the
nonhuman social mammals are at least that polyphyletic. The colonial invertebrates

53
are distributed as independent clades across two phyla, the Cnidaria and Ectoprocta
(Bryozoa).
What emerges clearly from this subjective comparison is that highly social
organisms tend to be ecologically dominant and geographically widespread, but
not speciose. Their record of longevity is decidedly mixed, with eusocial insects
showing remarkable persistence since their origins, and colonial invertebrates and
nonhuman social mammals less so.
The ecological dominance of social animals is striking. In terra firma rainforest
near Manaus, eusocial insects make up about 80% of the insect biomass and a
third of the entire animal biomass (Fittkau and Klinge 1973). In some samples
from the Peruvian rainforest canopy, ants compose 70% or more of the individual
insects (T. L. Erwin and J. E. Tobin, pers. comm.). The prevalence of ants in particular
holds equally well in arid habitats. It also extends into the cold temperate zones,
where for example ants remain the dominant insects in southern Finland. Wood
and Sands (1978), Brian (1983), Hölldobler and Wilson (1990), Wilson (1990) and
others have reviewed evidence documenting the impact of ants and termites on
soil structure and composition, seed dispersal, plant distribution, and the biology
of myriads of species of insects and other animals.
There can be little doubt that this overwhelming presence is due to social
organization. The following traits arising from social life have been identified by
experiments and field observations as conveying competitive superiority over
otherwise similar nonsocial insects (Wilson 1990): (1) series-parallel operations,
by which workers change occupations from moment to moment in a way that
keeps larval care, nest construction, and other sequential tasks continuously well
Traits 
Group 
Success 
(clade 
longevity) 
Dominance 
(abundance, 
impact) 
Speciosity 
(species 
numbers) 
Adaptive 
radiation 
Breadth of 
geographic 
range 
Colonial 
invertebrates 
± 
+ 
– 
– 
+ 
Eusocial insects 
(terminates, ants, 
eusocial bees, 
eusocial wasps) 
+ 
+ 
– 
± 
+ 
Nonhuman social 
mammals 
– 
± 
– 
– 
+ 
Man (Homo) 
? 
+ 
– 
+ 
+ 
 
Table 3.1  Evolutionary and ecological traits of the four major groups
of organisms with the most complex modes of social organization.
+ traits strongly developed; – weakly developed; ± with many clades
in both categories; ? intermediate. Human beings are judged to have
undergone adaptive radiation, but by culture rather than speciation.
3.3  Sociality, Success, and Dominance

54
3  The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity
attended; (2) high levels of altruism, conferring combat advantage over enemies
with a reduced cost of inclusive fitness in case of injury or death; (3) ability of the
colony as a whole to control nest sites and food sources and bequeath them to later
generations; and (4) use of social homeostatic devices, such as nest design, water
cooling, and heating from massed bodies, to control microclimate and permit longer
occupancy of nest sites near stable resources. With these advantages ants and
termites occupy center stage in the terrestrial environment. They have pushed out
solitary insects from the generally most favorable nest sites. The solitary forms
occupy the most distant twigs, the very moist or dry or excessively crumbling pieces
of wood, the surface of leaves, in other words, the more remote and transient
microniches. They are also either very small, or fast moving, or cleverly camouflaged,
or heavily armored. At the risk of oversimplification, the picture I see is one of
social insects at the ecological center, solitary insects at the periphery.
Marine zoologists have independently forged a similar conception of the
dominance of colonial invertebrates (Jackson 1985, Vermeij 1987). By Early
Cambrian times sponge-like colonial Archaeocyatha formed reefs, to be succeeded
in this role by bryozoans, sponges and corals, and then noncolonial worms,
foraminiferans, and brachiopods during the Paleozoic; next sponges and algae and
then rudist pelecypods in the Mesozoic; and finally corals, sponges, and coralline
algae during the Cenozoic. A gradual increase in differentiation of zooids and in
integration of the colonies occurred during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic in the corals
and cheilostome bryozoans, possibly enhancing the competitive ability of these
prominent colonial forms.
Colonial invertebrates displace solitary invertebrates in stable hard-bottom
communities around the world. Being larger than solitary animals, they can
overgrow them and are less likely to be pulled up the turbulence or eaten by
predators. In contrast, solitary immobile animals tend to prevail in less stable
environments, including the rocky intertidal zone, unconsolidated bottoms, and
small or transient substrata such as shells and seaweeds. Like solitary insects, solitary
benthic invertebrates fill in the smaller and more ephemeral niches where their
competitively superior social counterparts cannot take hold.
That Homo sapiens has also achieved great biomass and competitive superiority
by means of social organization is too clear to warrant further discussion.
Remarkably, sociality promotes dominance but not diversity. The numbers of
species of the most highly social forms is very small compared to related solitary
forms in the current world biota. The number of described species of eusocial
insects is as follows: termites, 2200; ants, 8800; eusocial bees, roughly 1000; eusocial
wasps, 800. The total number of described insect species, social and solitary
combined, is about 750 000. In other words, 2% of the known insect species of the
world have appropriated more than half of the biomass. The story is similar for the
colonial invertebrates: among 240 000 multicellular invertebrates outside the insects,
fewer than 5000 are sponges, 6000 are corals, and 4000 are bryozoans. The highly
social nonhuman mammals are even less speciose, comprising the lion, 3 species
of canids, 2 elephants, and only about 35 bandforming primates. Being close to the
top of the food chain, most of the mammals are also less than dominant. An

55
exception is formed by the elephants, which are capable of building dense
populations that destroy extensive areas of woodland and alter the soil through
physical disturbance and the deposit of large amounts of excrement.
The apparent reason for lessened biodiversity of the most social animals in size.
For the most part these animals are very large. A coral head is essentially one
organism, a superorganism. The same is true of an ant or termite colony. Both are
orders of magnitude larger than single organisms belonging to solitary species. It
is a well-established principle that within a monophyletic assemblage, such as the
beetles, birds, and mammals, the numbers of species belonging to different body
sizes are highest near (but not precisely at) the lower extreme and taper off gradually
toward the upper extreme (Dial and Marzluff 1988, May 1988). The generally
accepted explanation, which is also plausible for animal societies (in other words,
superorganisms) is the larger the organism the larger the spatial niche and the
fewer the species that can coexist stably.
3.4
References
Brian, M. V. (1983) Social insects: ecology and behavioural biology. New York:
Chapman and Hall.
Bush, G. L., Case, S. M., Wilson, A. C., Patton, J. L. (1977) Rapid speciation and
chromosomal evolution in mammals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 3942–3946.
Dial, K. P., Marzluff, J. M. (1988) Are the smallest organisms the most diverse?
Ecology 69, 1620–1624.
Fittkau, E. J., Klinge, H. (1973) On the biomass and trophic structure of the
central Amazonian rain forest. Biotropica 5, 2–15.
Hölldobler, B., Wilson, E. O. (1990) The ants. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press
of Harvard Univ. Press.
Jackson, J. B. C. (1985) Distribution and ecology of clonal and aclonal benthic
invertebrates. In: Jackson, J. B. C., Buss, L. W., Cook, R. E. (Eds.), Population
biology and evolution of clonal organisms. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
297–355.
Magurran, A. E. (1988). Ecological diversity and its measurement. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton Univ. Press.
Marzluff, J. M., Dial, K. P. (1990) Does social organization influence
diversification? Am. Midl. Nat., in press (cited with permission of authors).
May, R. M. (1988) How many species are there on Earth? Science 241, 1441–1449.
Melnick, D. J. (1987) The genetic consequences of primate social organization:
a review of macaques, baboons, and vervet monkeys. Genetica 73, 117–135.
Melnick, D. J. (1988) Why are we social? – Ann. Rep. Stanford, CA: Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
Michener, C. D., Grimaldi, D. A. (1988). A Trigona from Late Cretaceous
amber of New Jersey (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponinae). Am. Mus. Nov.
2917, 1–10.
3.4  References

56
3  The Effects of Complex Social Life on Evolution and Biodiversity
Nevo, E., Beiles, A., Ben-Shlomo, R. (1984) The evolutionary significance of
genetic diversity: ecological, demographic and life history correlates. In:
Mani, G. S. (Ed.), Evolutionary dynamics of genetics diversity. Lecture Notes
in Biomathematics 53, 13–213.
Pimm, S. L., Jones, H. L., Diamond, J. (1988). On the risk of extinction.
Am. Nat. 132, 757–785.
Stanley, S. M. (1987). Periodic mass extinctions of the Earth’s species. Bull. Am.
Acad. Arts Sci. 40, 29–48.
Vermeij, G. J. (1987). Evolution and escalation: an ecological history of life.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1975) Sociobiology: the new synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press of Harvard Univ. Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1985) Invasion and extinction in the West Indian ant fauna:
evidence from the Dominican amber. Science 229, 265–267.
Wilson, E. O. (1990) Success and dominance in ecosystems: the case of the social
insects. Oldendorf-Luhe, Germany: Ecology Institute.
Wood, T. G., Sands, W. A. (1978). The role of termites in ecosystems. In:
Brian, W. V. (Ed.), Production ecology of ants and termites. New York: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 245–292.

57
4
The Theory of Biological Evolution:
Historical and Philosophical Aspects
Franz M. Wuketits
There is grandeur in this view of life …
Charles Darwin
4.1
Introduction
Evolution, “the most exciting and the most portentous natural truth that science
has ever discovered” (Gould 1997, p. X), has fascinated many naturalists and some
philosophers for more than 200 years. While nowadays nobody should seriously
deny that evolution, i.e., the transformation of species through the ages, is a plain
fact heavily documented by data from practically all fields of biological research,
there is – as the creationist movement shows – still resistance against evolutionary
theory and many people feel taken aback when confronted with the ancestry of
their own species. Indeed, we humans came up from the ape, and reconstructing
the paths of our evolutionary history is one of the most fascinating and challenging
adventures of modern science (see Chapter 6). It is true that biological concepts
and theories differ from that of other natural sciences in a particular sense. As
Mayr (2000, p. 80) writes: “Many biological ideas proposed during the past 150
years stood in stark conflict with what everybody assumed to be true. The acceptance
of these ideas required an ideological revolution”. However, it seems that this
“ideological revolution” is still an unfinished task.
This contribution is a brief review of historical and philosophical aspects of
evolutionary thinking in biology. It outlines the major steps in the history of an idea
that has changed our worldview more dramatically than any other idea in the natural
sciences (including Einstein’s theories and quantum physics). In a way, evolutionary
thinking requires its own philosophy and stands in contrast to any idealistic
conceptions that have predominated Western tradition many centuries. Darwin’s
theory – which is of course one of the focuses in the present article – meant no less
than a shift from static (essentialist) to dynamic thinking. This might be regarded as
the very meaning of what has been frequently called “Darwinian Revolution”, for
Darwin showed that what is real in nature is not the “type”, but “variation”. The
implications of this conception have been serious and far reaching, going beyond
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

58
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
the narrower domain of biological science. Besides, and philosophically no less
notable, Darwin’s theory – evolutionary theory in general – expresses a materialist
view based on the (philosophical) assumption that the world is composed only of
material things and not influenced by any supranatural principles (Bunge 1981).
This chapter aims at giving a brief presentation of the philosophical pre-
suppositions of evolutionary theory as seen in its historical development. I argue
that the history of evolutionary thinking can be understood as a “battle” against
some old and venerable philosophical conceptions. I of course do not intend to
give a complete history of evolutionary theory. This would require another Handbook
volume. Anyway, there exist many comprehensive, full-length expositions of this
topic (some of them I have used here for reference). I just want to highlight the
most remarkable ideas and figures of this adventurous intellectual journey.
However, there are certainly more historically and philosophically relevant aspects
that are not treated in this chapter; the reader will find them discussed in other
contributions to this Handbook. Thus, for instance, the epistemological and ethical
implications of evolutionary thinking are presented in the first volume.
4.2
“Forerunners” of Darwin
Darwin was not the founder of evolutionary thinking. He rather established a par-
ticular evolutionary theory that could – and, basically, still can – explain the diversity
of life on Earth and its history (see Section 4.5). The idea that “natural things” are
changeable in one way or another goes back to ancient times, finding its expression
in many concepts; some of them – from our today’s point of view – quite amusing.
Let us just think of the idea of generatio spontanea (“spontaneous generation”)
according to which many plants and animals can emerge and develop spontaneously
from some nonliving material or from other organisms. Thus, for instance, Aristotle
(384–322 BC) believed that many insects come from putrefying earth or vegetable
matter – a belief that was widespread among naturalists and philosophers also in
later centuries (e.g., see Mayr 1982) and, of course, must not be confused with
evolutionary thinking in a strict sense, for evolution always implies the change of
species over comparatively long periods of time. However, many naturalists and
philosophers before Darwin speculated about this change and attained at what
can be called “evolutionary thinking” in a broader sense. But for methodological
reasons, we have to be cautious in this context. [One should keep in mind that up
to the 19th century there was no clear distinction between “naturalists” and
“philosophers”. The term philosophy was frequently used in the sense of methodology
or denoted a comprehensive view, a synthesis of facts and ideas in science. A good
example is Lamarck’s Philosophie zoologique (see Section 4.3)].
Let us consider, for example, the speculations of Benoit de Maillet (1656–1738),
also known as Telliamed (de Maillet spelled backwards) (see Zimmermann 1953;
Haber 1959; Junker and Hoßfeld 2001). The French Consul-General in Egypt
traveled widely in the Mediterranean regions, had good knowledge of history and

59
4.2  “Forerunners” of Darwin
natural history, and did some original research work in geology. He believed that the
antecedents of humans were marine organisms (hommes marins) and that dogs de-
scended from seals. According to de Maillet, actually all terrestrial animals descended
from marine creatures. This sounds as if he had anticipated a “modern truth”.
However, all things considered, de Maillet’s views were rather fantastic and inspired
by the idea of spontaneous generation. He did believe in transformation, but his
“transformationism” does not resemble evolutionary thinking in a strict sense.
We should not “hunt” for precursors of Darwin. Indeed, many researchers in
pre-Darwinian days assumed – sometimes very cleverly – that we live in a changeable
universe. But this does not at all mean that they anticipated Darwin’s theory or that
they were already concerned with Darwin’s problems. “The efforts of pre-Darwinian
naturalists”, says Bowler (1984, p. 21), “are interesting not because they tried to
solve Darwin’s own problems and failed but because they found so many different
ways to explore the implications of a changing universe”. Anyway, what cannot be
neglected is that many researchers before Darwin speculated about the variability
of species and their common descent.
A good example is the philosopher Denis Diderot (1713–1784), one of the leading
figures of the French Enlightenment, editor of the famous Encyclopédie, and author
of numerous philosophical essays, novels, and dramas. He wrote:
Imagine … that the order which strikes you has always subsisted; but allow
me to believe that it is not at all so; and that, if we went back to the birth of
time and of things, and if we perceived matter stirring and chaos dis-
entangling itself, we should encounter a multitude of shapeless beings for
a few well-organized … I may ask you, for instance, who has told you … that
in the very beginning of animal formation, some were not without a head
and others without feet? I can assure you that some had no stomach, and
others no intestines … that all the monsters were successively annihilated;
all the imperfect combinations of matter have disappeared; only those
remained in whose mechanism there was no imperfect contradiction and
which could exist by themselves and perpetuate themselves (Quoted after
Crocker 1959, p. 120).
Diderot was also very impressed by the facts of comparative anatomy and pondered
that this discipline could, maybe, help us to understand the origin of animals.
However, he hesitated to go further in his speculations and at the end even resigned
because there was, as he said, God who created all living beings and the idea that
species are changeable was contradicted by the observations. Thus, Diderot after
all did not transgress, so to speak, from pre-evolutionary conceptions.
His contemporary, Georges L. L. Buffon (1707–1788), one of the most eminent
naturalists of the 18th century and author of the monumental Histoire Naturelle,
took a more decisive step towards evolutionary thinking. Although not truly an
evolutionist, he might be called the “father of evolutionism” (Mayr 1982) for his
ideas were more explicit and better grounded on biological facts. He considered
data from comparative anatomy, biogeography, and the variation of plants and

60
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
animals under domestication. A donkey, he argued, is nothing but a “degenerated”
horse and, more generally, he concluded:
If one species had been produced by another, if, for example, the ass species
came from the horse, the result could have been brought about only slowly
and by gradations. There would therefore be between the horse and the ass
a large number of intermediate animals. Why, then, do we not today see the
representatives, the descendants, of these intermediate species? Why is it
that only the two extremes remain? (Quoted after Lovejoy 1959, p. 99)
Taking this passage seriously, we have to admit that Buffon has already argued in
terms of evolution. However, we read other passages in his heavy volumes, we must
recognize his objections against evolutionary changes. Like Diderot, he did not see
empirical evidence for such changes and stated that since Aristotle, nobody had
observed the emergence of a new species. Also, he missed the “intermediate
animals” between extant species like the horse and the donkey. Why, then, should
Buffon be called the “father of evolutionism”? Because he posed questions and raised
ideas that marked, historically and philosophically, the outset of modern evolutionary
thinking. [The terms “evolutionism” and “evolutionary thinking” are used in a
general way and indicate the belief in a change of organisms (and other natural
objects as well as human social and cultural systems). However, they do not
necessarily imply any statement concerning the mode and causes of such a change,
and are therefore not to be confused with evolutionary theory (see Section 4.3).]
Several other naturalists and philosophers of the 18th and 19th century are also
to be regarded as advocates of a kind of evolutionary thinking, although only very
few of them reached Buffon’s scrutiny and the rigor of his arguments. They were
usually guided by typological thinking, which was one of the most serious obstacles
to evolutionary theory (see Section 4.4). Thus, the zoologist Charles Bonnet (1720–
1793) insinuated that “perhaps there will be a continued progress … of all species
towards a higher perfection, such as all degrees of the scale will be continually
changing in a constant and determined order” [quoted after (Glass 1959, p. 168)].
Bonnet strongly supported the idea of the scala naturae or the chain of being which
had predominated views of nature since ancient Greek philosophy (see Lovejoy
1936). The “chain” reflected the assumption that all natural objects are arranged in
a linear way – from inorganic compounds to objects of ever-higher complexity (plants
and animals) and, finally, to human beings – and that this arrangement represents
the divine plan of creation (Figure 4.1). It was, of course, a static model of nature;
however, Bonnet’s achievement was to think that the chain of being “had unfolded
step by step through time to give a progression of life from the simplest forms at
the bottom of the chain to the most complex at the top” (Bowler 1984, p. 62). Hence,
in a way, Bonnet anticipated the idea of evolution for he contributed to the
temporalization of the chain of being (Lovejoy 1936), but he remained an advocate
of idealistic philosophy and cannot be regarded a “true evolutionist”. Evolution in
a strict sense does not simply mean a step-by-step progression of living forms; the
core of evolutionary theory is common descent.

61
Figure 4.1  Bonnet’s scala naturae (chain of being) from inorganic compounds to human beings.
4.2  “Forerunners” of Darwin

62
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
Typically, naturalists and philosophers in the 18th century searched for the
“prototype” of organisms and, actually, of everything. (See also the notion of
archetype to be briefly discussed below.) In this sense, most of them were “idealists”.
The French philosopher Jean B. Robinet (1735–1820) is another example. He
claimed that nature has varied a single prototype, “a germ which tends naturally to
develop itself” [quoted after Crocker (1959, p. 134)]. Such statements did imply a
kind of evolutionary thinking, but they did not really anticipate Darwin’s views and
their originators should not a posteriori be classified as Darwin’s forerunners in a
narrower sense.
Things are different in the case of Charles Lyell (1797–1875), whose work inspired
Darwin in a very direct manner and who urged Darwin to publish his theory. He
contributed much to the expansion of the time scale (see Section 4.4) and was one
of the founders of historical geology, a “codifier of modernity” (Gould 1988, p. 4), for
he strongly influenced Darwin’s thinking and reasoning. Darwin took the first
volume of Lyell’s Principles of Geology (1830) with him when he embarked on the
expedition on the Beagle and read it quite enthusiastically (Manier 1978). [His teacher,
the theologian and botanist John Steven Henslow (1796–1861) had advised him to
read the book but not to believe it!] Lyell’s central idea was that the Earth’s surface is
produced by physical, chemical, and biological processes through long periods of
time. His uniformitarianism implied that (1) everything on our planet (mountains,
lakes, oceans, land masses) changes over time and (2) past events can be explained
by the same causes we observe around us today. This principle of actual causes was
a remarkable methodological achievement in the earth sciences and important for
the foundation of evolutionary theory.
To summarize briefly at this point, we can state that, when Darwin entered the
scene, the idea that species are variable was not new. Darwin does not stand at the
beginning of evolutionism, but he did take the last and most decisive step in a
150-year-old tradition. He was quite aware of this. It is interesting to see whom he
regarded as his “forerunners”. In a historical sketch “of the progress of opinion on
the origin of species” (Darwin 1859 [1958, pp. 17–25]) he mentioned about two
dozen researchers – naturalists and philosophers – “who believed that species
undergo modification and that the existing forms of life are the descendants by
true generation of pre-existing forms” (Darwin 1859 [1958, p. 17]). In the first place
he mentioned – not surprisingly – Buffon; in the second – more explicitly – Lamarck
(see Section 4.3). Among the other names we find, to give just a few examples,
Thomas H. Huxley (see Section 4.4), Herbert Spencer (see Section 4.5), the
Prussian-Estonian anatomist and embryologist Karl E. von Baer (1792–1876), the
German geologist Leopold von Buch (1774–1853), the British zoologist Robert E.
Grant (1793–1874), and the British anatomist and paleontologist Richard Owen
(1804–1892).
Owen deserves particular attention. He coined the word “dinosaur” (Desmond
1979), described Archaeopteryx, the first known fossil bird, and published a
considerable number of anatomical and paleontological books. Darwin was
astonished to learn from correspondence between Owen and the editor of the London
Review “that Professor Owen claimed to have promulgated the theory of natural

63
selection before I had done so; and I expressed my surprise and satisfaction at this
announcement” (Darwin 1859 [1958, p. 22]). Owen had studied and worked at the
zoological material from Darwin’s voyage, but finally became Darwin’s opponent.
The issue that divided the two eminent naturalists was the place of humans in
nature – Owen claimed that the human brain is essentially different from that of
the apes and that humans are to be regarded as superior beings. He simply disliked
human ape ancestry. Owen also formulated the important notion of homology as
contrasted to mere analogy. He noticed that, while analogies are just cases of
similarities between unrelated organs (like the “wings” of birds and insects),
“homologies … are cases in which the same basic structure is used by various
species for quite different purposes” (Bowler 1984, p. 132). (Well-known examples
are the limbs of vertebrates.) However, Owen was driven by an idealistic notion of
archetype (see Desmond 1982) and gave an ahistorical, a comparative definition of
homology as sameness, whereas Darwin later conceived of homology – in a historical
sense – as an indicator of common descent (see Müller 2003). Owen searched for a
“ground plan” on which the diversity of living forms is modeled and thus retreated
to a kind of romanticism. In his studies on the vertebrate skeleton he looked for an
“idealized vision of the simplest vertebrate form, an imaginary creature that had
the essence of the type without any of the specialized modifications required by
every real animal” (Bowler 1984, p. 132).
In other words, Owen was a “victim” of typological thinking, convinced that all
living animal species are varieties of an “ideal form” (archetype) designed by the
Creator. This belief appeared to be one of the obstacles to modern evolutionism
(see Section 4.4.). However, we must always keep in mind that scientific ideas do
not develop in a vacuum, but that they, some way or other, reflect the zeitgeist, and
are not independent of cultural and social constraints. Human intellectual history
in general and the history of scientific ideas in particular is not a linear process, but
rather resembles a “zigzag” pattern. “Romanticism was a reaction to the 18th century
clockwork cosmos, and, in early 19th century England, to the horrors of industria-
lization and its utilitarian supporters” (Desmond 1982). Owen and many other
naturalists of the 18th and 19th century came very close to the idea of evolution,
but their conceptions still remained embedded in idealism.
It is certainly true that historical contingencies influence the development of
science and that our understanding of science closely interacts with our under-
standing of nature (Hull 1988), and vice versa.
4.3
What is an Evolutionary Theory and Who was the First Evolutionary Theorist?
Speculating about the possibility of changes in nature, about the possible changes
of plant and animal species through longer periods of time, does not necessarily
imply – or lead to – an evolutionary theory. Any evolutionary theory in a strict sense
has to pose and to answer at least three sets of questions (see Wuketits 1988, 1989,
2000a, 2003):
4.3  What is an Evolutionary Theory and Who was the First Evolutionary Theorist?

64
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
(1) Are species changeable? Are the extant species descendants of other, earlier
species?
(2) What are the modes of evolution? How does evolution occur?
(3) What are the mechanisms, the “motors” of evolutionary change?
The first question marked the very beginning of evolutionary thinking and is no
longer relevant. The statement that species are changeable does not yet imply a
theory of evolutionary change. Such a theory has to answer the second and third
question, and has always to include at least two sets of statements (see Ayala
1985):
(1) Statements concerning the degree of relationship and evolutionary history of
particular species or “classes” of species.
(2) Statements concerning the mechanisms by which evolutionary changes occur.
The first set of statements also includes propositions about the tempo and modes
of evolutionary changes (see Chapter 1).
In this sense the French naturalist Jean-B. de Lamarck (1744–1829), who also
coined the word “biology”, was the first evolutionary theorist (e.g., see Chapman
1873, Dobzhansky et al. 1977; Mayr 1982; Wuketits 1988; Young 1992; Oeser 1996;
Junker and Hoßfeld 2001).
Lamarck was a very productive researcher, and contributed data and ideas to
different scientific disciplines. He published a three-volume flora of France,
a comprehensive system of invertebrate animals, a two-volume treatment on matter
and energy, and many other book-length works and articles concerning important
scientific questions of his time. He was appointed, at the age of 50, to a professorship
of zoology devoted to invertebrates, the “inferior animals” including insects, spiders,
snails, worms, and all the other innumerable creatures that most people usually do
not tend to esteem. We have to keep in mind here the zeitgeist of the 18th century,
the spirit of the Enlightenment, ideas and ideals regarding progress and improve-
ment of the conditio humana – the role of invertebrates was, to say the least, an
insignificant one. Yet Lamarck’s accomplishments in evolutionary thinking were
mainly due to his intensive study of these animals and to the application of the
analytical method. It was therefore completely wrong to say that Lamarck’s theory
is lacking empirical evidence (Dürken 1924) and to think that Lamarck was just a
“speculating forerunner” of Darwin.
Lamarck was the first naturalist who not only speculated about the possibility of
evolution, but explicitly stated that complex organisms have evolved from simpler
ones (Figures 4.2 and 4.3). Also, most importantly, he tried to explain evolution,
i.e., to find a mechanism for evolutionary change. He argued that there is an inherent
tendency towards greater complexity and that a major “driving force” of evolution
is the inheritance of acquired characteristics. This is what is usually understood by
Lamarckian evolution or Lamarckism – a term which was not coined by Lamarck –
and that could never be seriously tested. It was therefore unwarranted to claim, as
some authors at the beginning of the 20th century did, that the empirical evidence

65
4.3  What is an Evolutionary Theory and Who was the First Evolutionary Theorist?
Figure 4.2  Lamarckian scheme of animal evolution.
in favor of Lamarckism is enormous (see Wagner 1908). In fact, the idea that
(individually) acquired characteristics are inherited in a strict sense and that they,
in the long run, cause evolutionary change has after all proved invalid (e.g., also
see Zimmermann 1969), and the attempt to reanimate Lamarckism – neo-
Lamarckism (see Table 4.4) – failed.

66
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
Nevertheless, Lamarck’s theory remains the first complete evolutionary theory.
It is, by the way, a remarkable historical coincidence that his main methodological
work containing the theory, his Philosophie zoologique (Zoological Philosophy), was
published exactly 50 years before Darwin’s Origin of Species which was – and remains
to be – the book by which evolutionary thinking was finally established in science.
Why had 50 years to pass? Why did the scientific community – except for a few
“adventurers” and “radicals” – ignore Lamarck’s theory or not give it credit as an
evolutionary theory?
Figure 4.3  Lamarck’s branching of animal groups.

67
4.4
Obstacles to Evolutionary Thinking
The more general question to be posed is: “Why, after all, did it take so long in the
history of Western thinking to establish evolutionism, not to speak of an evolutionary
theory?”. As I have already mentioned, the emergence of evolutionary thinking
can be regarded as an intellectual battle against philosophical conceptions, some
of them strongly inspired by theology. Evolutionists had to fight against different
dogmas and firmly established belief systems. (Considering the creationists
movement these days, we must recognize that the battle is even now not yet won;
see also Chapter 2).
Maybe the main obstacle to evolutionary thinking was – and sometimes still is –
the plain fact that evolution does not fit our common sense (Mayr 1982). In our
everyday life we do not observe the transmutation of species, but see instead that,
for example, the progeny of horses is again horses, the elephants again procreate
elephants, and so on and so forth. And it is, at first glance, indeed difficult to believe
that dragonflies, woodpeckers, and elephants may have anything in common.
Evolution connects all animal and plant species; however, it is usually a rather slow
process – the development of new species, genera, families, etc., takes time. This is
the point: time had to be discovered and, despite some earlier speculations – here
again Buffon is to be mentioned – was not discovered before the 19th century (e.g.,
see Gould 1988). What is meant is the expansion of the time scale. The Earth was,
as some naturalists (including Buffon) were tempted to think, rather old, thousands
or even millions of years old (see also Taylor 1963). On the other hand, there were
attempts to calculate the date of Creation and in the 17th century archbishop James
Ussher, for instance, came to the conclusion that the world was created in the year
4004 BC. From today’s point of view, this seems ridiculous, but one has to keep in
mind that for many centuries the only accepted source for such calculations and con-
clusions was the Old Testament, and is was taken for granted that the Creation story
of Genesis reveals the ultimate truth about the origin of the Earth and its inhabitants.
This story was the second obstacle to evolutionary thinking. Its influence was so
pervasive that, as Mayr (2000, p. 81) reminds us, in the middle of the 19th century
still “virtually all leading scientists and philosophers were Christian men”. Thus,
Lamarck’s views were almost totally neglected or regarded as religiously offensive
(see also Ruse 1982). Natural theologians, above all the English clergyman William
Paley (1743–1805), had argued that the organization of living beings offered evidence
for an omnipotent and omniscient designer, and the “intelligent-design argument”
became, after all, a challenge to Charles Darwin (see Greene 1963; Ayala 2004). It
is interesting to note that a philosopher in the second half of the 19th century who
even claimed to establish a “cosmic philosophy” based on the theory of evolution
could still declare that:
… it becomes desirable … to inquire whether on the new [evolutionary] view
there is any ground for assuming, as was necessarily assumed on the old
view, that the divine Power works by methods analogous to human methods.
4.4  Obstacles to Evolutionary Thinking

68
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
The question we have to answer is not whether there exists a God. … [O]ur
Cosmic Philosophy is based upon the affirmation of God’s existence, and
not upon the denial of it, like irreligious Atheism or upon the ignoring of it,
like non-religious Positivism. The question which we have now to answer
concerns the existence of a limited personal God, who is possessed of a
quasi-human consciousness, from which quasi-human volitions have
originated the laws of nature, and to whose quasi-human contrivance are
due the manifold harmonies observed in the universe (Fiske 1875, p. 377).
As can be seen, the author does see some particular problems with God in the light
of evolutionary thinking, but finds no reason to doubt the existence of the Creator.
In fact, Fiske’s intention was to spiritualize evolutionary theory and to give evolution
a transcendental direction. [Although nowadays almost unknown, John Fiske (1842–
1901), historian and philosopher, was at his time an important popularizer of
evolutionary thinking in the United States. His work Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy
was well received in the United States and elsewhere.]
Generally, many scholars in the 19th century tried to connect evolutionism with
theological ideas or at least to leave room for God in evolutionary thinking.
The third obstacle to the very idea of evolution was typological thinking or
essentialism which is deeply rooted in Western philosophy and still quite influential
– in philosophy and elsewhere. It is mainly a heritage of Plato’s conceptions
according to which, to put it briefly, only the “ideas” or “essences” are real, while
the observed objects are just their representations; ideas or essences are un-
changeable and give the observable natural kinds their “fixed” character. This point
of view is the opposite to evolutionary thinking. It emphasizes the world’s stability
and invariance. For Plato and his successors the variety of natural objects is
constrained, so to speak, by a limited number of types, each one forming a class
separated from other such classes. Actually, variety is an illusion, only the types are
real. Thus, evolution is not possible at all.
The eminent French educator, zoologist and founder of paleontology, George
Cuvier (1769–1832), argued that animals possess so many diverse characters that
they cannot be arranged in a single linear system. Thus, he was on the right track
– the track towards evolution, that is – but since he was a “typologist”, he could not
embrace the idea of evolution. Just the opposite, he used his position and influence
in science to defeat Lamarck (see Section 4.3), in particular, and evolutionism, in
general. He arranged animals into four large groups (types) (Table 4.1), each of
them representing one of the basic patterns of animal organization and subdivided
into classes, orders, etc. These groups (types) he considered unchangeable and
also “argued against the possibility of one species transforming itself into another”
(Bowler 1984, p. 114). One might wonder how a paleontologist, aware of fossils,
could reach such a conclusion. While (correctly) recognizing fossils as remnants
of extinct animals, Cuvier (falsely) assumed that fossil species did not change and
evolve into recent ones. Sure, as we know today, many species simply died out and
did not become ancestors of any other kind of organisms. However, for Cuvier,
extinction meant a proof for the stability of species and he believed “that each

69
species is a functional whole that cannot be disturbed by significant variation”
(Bowler, 1984, p. 116), but only definitely destroyed by catastrophes. Therefore, his
views have been characterized as catastrophism and were contrasted by Lyell’s
uniformitarianism (see Section 4.2).
Late in his career Cuvier was involved in a debate with his compatriot Etienne
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (1772–1844), a brilliant and well-known naturalist, whom
we have also to consider as a forerunner of Darwin. Geoffroy postulated the “unity
of composition”, i.e., a single consistent structural plan underlying the anatomy of
all animals, but he conceded that one animal form might derive from another
within its type and in a way he even anticipated the idea that evolutionary change
could occur through sudden “mutations”. Cuvier opposed this and his debate with
Geoffroy is among the best known academic controversies. As he did with Lamarck’s
ideas, he demolished Geoffroy’s theory – and the struggle for evolutionism was
lost once again.
One more word on the meaning of fossils. From a philosophical or methodological
point of view it is interesting to note that fossils initially did not serve as a proof for
evolutionary change. Fossils had been known already in ancient times, but were
continuously interpreted as ludus naturae (“plays of nature”), results of the Creator’s
mood or products of the Deluge (e.g., see Hölder 1960). That means that within
the old paradigms (typological, statical thinking, belief in creation) they could not
be properly understood. Only the paradigm of evolution made a correct inter-
pretation of fossils possible. Hence, it is wrong to assume that – as is still often
implied in textbooks – fossils offered evidence for evolution. Of course, the fossil
record demonstrates the variation of species and helps us to reconstruct the modes
of evolution. But, first of all, evolution is to be accepted because, as we can learn
from Cuvier’s arguments, fossils alone do not impose the idea of the transformation
of species. Cuvier, in fact, uncovered the fossil record, but since he was an
antievolutionist, an advocate of the old paradigm, he thought that fossils – especially
the gap one sees in the record – speak against evolution (Ruse 1982).
The fourth obstacle to evolutionary thinking was teleology, the belief that there is
universal purpose in nature, that there are final goals and a kind of “conscious
actor”. The problem of purpose plays still an important role in biology and the
question “What for?” is a typically biological question. Whether one takes, for
4.4  Obstacles to Evolutionary Thinking
Table 4.1  Cuvier’s four types of animal organization.
Vertebrata (vertebrates) 
Creatures possessing a backbone: mammals, birds, reptiles, and 
fish (in the 19th century the amphibians were usually included 
with the reptiles) 
Mollusca (mollusks) 
Creatures with no backbone but sometimes an external shell 
(oysters, clams, etc.) 
Articulata (articulates) 
Creatures with articulated or segmented bodies, like insects, 
spiders, worms, etc. 
Radiata (radiates) 
Creatures with a radial or circular body plan, e.g., sea urchin 
 

70
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
example, the neck of a giraffe, the eye of an octopus, the wings of birds, or the
hands of humans – they all serve particular purposes. This is also true to physio-
logical processes such as, e.g., respiration or digestion, and behavioral traits, and
teleological explanations have been postulated as a special type of explanations in
biology.
When biologists nowadays refer to purpose, they do not have in mind a universal
or cosmic teleology. They do not believe in any “higher purpose”, but argue that
teleologically organized systems are based on programs that are result of evolution
by natural selection. When, for example, a biologist states that the large ears of the
African elephant serve the purpose of cooling, then he or she is not implying any
kind of conscious goal-intended processes or a Creator designing ears and other
structures for particular purposes. Rather, the biologist would argue that, under
particular constraints, this type of ears has been favored by natural selection. In
order to avoid a confusion with the old belief in teleology, the term teleonomy is
now frequently used (e.g., see Mayr 1988, 1997). It refers to the fact that natural
selection “breeds”, as it were, structures, functions, and behavioral traits which aid
the survival of an organism. Hence, the problem of purpose is no longer obscured
by metaphysical speculations. It is fully compatible with the theory of evolution by
natural selection and teleological (teleonomic) explanations do not contradict causal
accounts (e.g., see also Ayala 1999).
However, up to the 19th century the interpretation of purpose hampered
evolutionary considerations or even made them impossible. Darwin shocked (in
the literal sense of the word) many of his contemporaries mostly because he
explained the diversity of life without any reference to cosmic teleology and instead
introduced a rather gloomy mechanism, i.e., natural selection. “Thus”, he concluded,
“from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object we are
capable of conceiving, … the production of the higher animals, directly follows”
(Darwin 1859 [1958, p. 450]). Nevertheless, in some aspects Darwin was still
influenced by teleological thinking and was tempted to use teleological phrases, so
that he is regarded as a teleologist by some historians of science (Himmelfarb
1968; Lennox 1993) (see Section 4.5).
Closely related to the belief in a universal or cosmic teleology is the fifth obstacle
to evolutionism, i.e., the belief in a special status of human beings in nature. Thomas
H. Huxley (1825–1895), “Darwin”s bulldog” and “devil’s disciple”, as he was called,
and one of the chief spokesmen for evolution in the 19th century, relentlessly
defended the view that humans are closely related to other living beings, and offered
ample anatomical and paleontological evidence for the common ancestry of humans
and apes. An engaged science educator, he popularized this view quite successfully
(see also Weiss 2004). Yet, in his classical Man’s Place in Nature, he concluded:
Our reverence for the nobility of manhood will not be lessened by the
knowledge, that Man is, in substance and in structure, one with the brutes;
for, he alone possesses the marvelous endowment of intelligible and rational
speech, whereby, in the secular period of his existence, he has slowly
accumulated and organized the experience which is almost wholly lost with

71
the cessation of every individual life in other animals; so he now stands
raised upon it as on a mountain top, far above the level of his humble fellows,
and transfigured from his grosser nature by reflecting, here and there, a ray
from the infinite source of truth (Huxley 1863 [2001, p. 114]).
Thus, Huxley did justice to the belief that several aspects of human activities are
not strictly zoological (see di Gregorio 1984). Anyway, his (evolutionary) view of
humans was a heresy. We have to keep in mind the long-standing (religiously
informed) conviction that humans are in the center of the world and that they are
essentially separated from all other creatures living on the Earth. Up to now
philosophers have frequently characterized humans as fundamentally different from
other living beings and until recently some biologists have also acknowledged the
human species as something special. However, as Ruse (1986, p. 104) puts it: “If
you take Darwin seriously … then the special status of Homo sapiens has gone for
ever. Any powers we have are no more than those brought through the crucible of
the evolutionary struggle and consequent reproductive success”. Having in mind
that such statements still meet with fierce resistance in philosophy and the human
sciences, it should not be difficult to imagine that scholars in the 19th century
protested against those who were trying to place humans in the animal kingdom.
Paradoxically, nobody seemed to protest, when – a century before Darwin and
Huxley – the Swedish naturalist and father of biological systematics and taxonomy,
Carl von Linné (Linnaeus) (1707–1778), put humans together with chimpanzees
and gorillas, and portrayed the apes as very humanlike creatures (Figure 4.4).
4.4  Obstacles to Evolutionary Thinking
Figure 4.4  von Linné put humans together with chimpanzees and
gorillas, and portrayed the apes as very humanlike creatures
(reproduced from Zimmermann 1953).

72
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
However, Linné was not an evolutionist and therefore obviously not considered a
dangerous person. He just tried to reveal the Divine order of nature and, modest as
he was, “believed that he was privileged to see the outline of the Creator’s plan and
his efforts to represent it would become the basis of a new biology” (Bowler 1984,
p. 64). [In a way, he even did not underestimate himself for he worked out some
fundamental principles of biological classification that proofed to be very useful
and are still valid. He introduced binominal nomenclature, a method of naming
organisms based on Aristotelian logic. According to this method the scientific name
of any plant or animal consists of two (Latin) words, the first designating the genus,
the second emphasizing the species and its uniqueness, e.g., Canis lupus (wolf) or
Homo sapiens (modern humans). Also, compared to earlier attempts to systematize
living beings, Linné’s systematics was, because of its coherence, a remarkable
advance (see also Oeser, 1996).] Thus, Linné advocated a typological species concept
and regarded each species as a fixed, discrete entity different from other species
(e.g., see also Price 1996).
Finally, a general methodological aspect should be mentioned in this context.
Evolutionary theory is a historical theory and it seems that for this reason it still
causes some confusion even among scientists, at least among those who believe
that anything and everything has to be experimentally tested. Indeed, evolutionists
do rely on some experiments, e.g., the mutation experiments in Drosophila (e.g., see
Ayala and Valentine 1979), but the major paths of evolution are not amenable to
experiments. It is for this reason that Mayr (1997, 2002, 2004) uses the structure of
evolutionary theory – and of evolutionary biology as the empirical study of evolution
– to demonstrate the autonomy of biology among the natural sciences (e.g., see also
Vollmer 1995, Wuketits 2004). Neither in physics (except for disciplines like
cosmology) nor in chemistry does the historical aspect plays such an important
role as it does in biology. Evolutionary theory (biology) has a special status among
the natural sciences because:
(1) It deals, to a large extent, with (historically) unique phenomena, such as the
emergence of vertebrates, the extinction of the dinosaurs, the origin of birds, or
the evolutionary history of humans.
(2) The events to be studied cannot be experimentally tested (we cannot experiment
on the emergence of vertebrates or the extinction of dinosaurs).
(3) The evolutionist tries to answer the question why? (see also Simpson 1980) or
what happened? (e.g., to the dinosaurs).
Evolutionary theory (biology) relies on the method of historical narrative: “Just as in
much of theory formation, the scientist starts with a conjecture and thoroughly
tests it for its validity, so in evolutionary biology the scientist constructs a historical
narrative, which is then to be tested for its explanatory value” (Mayr 2004, p. 22).
What, from this point of view, can be said with regard to most pre-Darwinian
thinkers is that they made a lot of interesting observations and quite often even
posed the right questions, but that they were unable to construct the proper historical
narratives. This brings us conveniently to Darwin.

73
4.5
Charles Darwin (1809–1882): The Theory of Natural Selection
In her introductory remarks to Darwin’s Autobiography, Noral Barlow, his grand-
daughter, states that:
Darwin’s whole trend of thought was against facile speculation, yet theories
flowed freely through his mind ready for the essential tests of observation
and experiment. He took twenty years of combined theorizing and fact-
finding to prepare his case for evolution in the face of a predominantly
antagonistic world. He had to convince himself by accumulated evidence
before he could convince others, and his doubts are as freely expressed as
his convictions. His books lie like stepping-stones to future knowledge.
Dogmatic fixity was wholly alien to his central idea (Darwin 1958, p. 13).
This is a very sympathetic characterization of Darwin’s attitude to his own work. In
fact, Darwin had first to convince himself – of the variability of species for initially
he, like most of his contemporaries, believed that the Earth and its inhabitants
were created by God. One has always to keep in mind that he studied theology and
was prepared for Holy Orders in the Church of England. He was strongly influenced
by natural theology and Paley’s interpretation of design (see Section 4.4), which he
later dismissed. However, he never studied natural sciences at a professional level.
In a way, Darwin represented the typical amateur naturalist in 19th century England
(Finkelstein 2000).
So much has been written about Charles Darwin and his theory that it seems
rather superfluous to comment on the man and his ideas once again. On the other
side, how could Darwin’s theory be omitted in a Handbook of Evolution! Besides,
some aspects of Darwin’s work are still often misunderstood, and the general reader
might wish for some information concerning Darwin’s very achievements in science
and the historical and philosophical background of his theory.
Theory? Indeed, Darwin established five theories (Mayr 1991; see also Table 4.2),
and again (see Section 4.3) a distinction must be made between (1) the fact that
Table 4.2  Darwin’s five theories.
Evolution 
Species are not constant but variable 
Common descent 
All species are genealogically related and are to be traced back to 
a single unique origin in the history of the earth 
Multiplication of species 
One species splits into two or more new species 
Gradualism 
Evolution occurs gradually, with no major breaks or 
discontinuities 
Natural selection 
The very mechanism of evolution is natural selection; evolution 
occurs on the basis of the abundance of genetic variation in 
each generation 
 
4.5  Charles Darwin (1809–1882): The Theory of Natural Selection

74
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
evolution has occurred, (2) the pathways of evolution, and (3) the theory of
mechanisms that explain evolutionary change (Oldroyd 1986). Darwin’s genuine
theory was that of natural selection, while for the other four theories we can find
several other advocates and authors. Lamarck, for one, was convinced that species
are variable (see Section 4.3) and also espoused gradualism which expressed the
old and venerable philosophical doctrine that nature does not produce any saltations
(natura non facit saltus). From the point of view of many naturalists of the 19th
century “the two great merits of [Darwin’s] work are its bringing together in a
condensed form the evidences in favor of the Evolution of Life, and its offering
Natural Selection as a cause of Evolution” (Chapman 1873, pp. 16–17). These two
“merits”, however, can also be seen from our today’s point of view.
At the beginning of his scientific career, Darwin believed in creation and was not
aware that the transmutation of species had been discovered by Lamarck (see
Section 4.3). When he eventually took notice of Lamarck’s work, he was obviously
not impressed. The same is true to his grandfather’s work. Erasmus Darwin (1731–
1802) was a colorful person, a universal genius, physician, naturalist, engineer,
and poet – at one and the same time. He developed a kind of Lamarckian theory of
evolution and was, in a way, a forerunner of his grandson who, when reading his
Zoonomia, was first quite enthusiastic about it, “but on reading it a second time
after an interval of ten or fifteen years … [was] much disappointed, the proportion
of speculation being so large to the facts given” (Darwin 1958, p. 49). No doubt,
Charles and his grandfather were scientists of a completely different mentality.
Most important in Darwin’s life was the Beagle voyage (1831–1836), which gave
him many opportunities to study biological and geological phenomena. When he
returned to England, not only his thoughts of a clerical life had vanished, but his
belief in the transmutation of species had developed. For the next two decades he
was busy studying the collected material and formulating his theory of natural
selection. He proceeded very cautiously with this theory, hesitating to write it down
and publish it. “In June 1842”, he remembered in his Autobiography, “I allowed
myself the satisfaction of writing a very brief abstract of my theory in pencil in 35
pages” (Darwin 1958, p. 120). However, only 17 years later he published the results
of his research. Probably, it would have taken him even longer to come to a
reasonable – satisfactory for him – end, but then what Ruse (1982, p. 3) describes
as follows happened:
On June 18 1858, Charles Darwin sat down after breakfast in his study to go
through his mail. One package came from the Far East; it was sent by a
young naturalist and collector, Alfred Russell Wallace. Wallace and Darwin
had never met but for a year or two now they had been corresponding,
exchanging views and queries about the biological world. Wallace had written
a short paper, mailing it to Darwin and hoping that the older man might
think it worthy of publication. As Darwin had started to read, his heart started
to sink. For twenty years, he, Darwin, had been sitting on a secret: a theory
and a mechanism that would explain in a scientific way the organisms we
find around us and in the fossil record: a theory of evolution. His friends

75
had long argued that he publish, lest someone else forestall him. Now the
worst happened, for Wallace had hit on the same ideas, and the paper he
had just sent to Darwin was as if Darwin himself had written it. Even the
language was the same!”
In the next meeting of the Linnean Society (in July 1858) Wallace’s paper and extracts
from Darwin’s unpublished writings were read, and then Darwin rushed to finish
and publish his On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. This impressive
work is perhaps not the best example for literary quality in the Victorian age, although
some are inclined to characterize Darwin as “a superb writer, in the great Victorian
tradition” (Gribbin and White 1995, p. vii). However that might be, the book contains
a vast number of facts from different disciplines including geology, biogeography,
anatomy, and embryology, and is probably best labeled as One Long Argument (Mayr
1991). That is what Darwin intended: to give, based on a body of evidence, convincing
arguments for evolution by natural selection.
The importance of Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913) in the history of evolutionary
thinking is undisputed. He developed a theory of evolution through natural selection
independently of Darwin. (By the way, he also coined the term Darwinism.) Why,
then, has he never been such a celebrity like his compatriot? I do think that Wallace
has been underestimated, but this is not the place to go into biographical and
historical detail. What seems to be true is that evolutionary thinking, in general,
and the theory of natural selection, in particular, have been mainly promoted through
Darwin’s work. In addition, Darwin was more consequent than Wallace. He applied
the theory of natural selection also to the evolution of human psychic and mental
capacities. Wallace, however, influenced by spiritualism, believed that some
supranatural or, at least, non-biological agency must be responsible for the
emergence of “higher” phenomena such as the human mind.
How did Darwin arrive at his theory of natural selection? Table 4.3 presents his
most important observations and his major conclusions.
While reflecting about a possible mechanism of evolutionary change, Darwin
read – “for amusement”, as he remembers in his Autobiography (1958, p. 120) – the
Essay on the Principle of Population (1798) by the sociologist Thomas R. Malthus
4.5  Charles Darwin (1809–1882): The Theory of Natural Selection
Table 4.3  Central elements of Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
Observations 
Potentially unlimited reproduction 
 
Limited resources 
 
Uniqueness of the individual 
 
Differential reproduction 
Conclusions 
Competition among the individuals of one and the same species 
(struggle for existence) 
 
Natural selection and survival of the fittest 
 
Variation of species over many generations (evolution) 
 

76
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
(1766–1834). Malthus argued that the resources are limited, but that human
populations can increase exponentially; thus, the consequences would be hunger
and disease. Darwin applied this argument to nature, he “saw that the potentiality
for exponential population growth is quite universal in the living world … [so that]
it follows that only a part of the progeny survive, and the rest are eliminated by
death” (Dobzhansky et al. 1977, p. 97). Thus, he produced the theory of natural
selection which replaced the “intelligent-design argument” (see Section 4.4). Using
his own words, we can state that “there seems to be no more design in the variability
of organic beings and in the action of natural selection, than in the course which
the wind blows” (Darwin 1958, p. 87). [In the Origin of Species Darwin definitely
dispensed with religious arguments, and thus irritated theologians and theologically
oriented philosophers. Only a few of them did not really feel threatened by him
(see Gregory 1991).] What counts in the living world is reproductive success and
those individuals that are most successful in this aspect will be favored by natural
selection. This is the very meaning of Darwin’s formula survival of the fittest which
he adopted from the philosopher Herbert Spencer (1820–1903). [Spencer was also
the first who used the term “evolution” in a modern sense. Although in many aspects
he was a Lamarckian, he shared important evolutionary ideas with Darwin and
was also inspired by Malthus’ Essay. He expanded evolutionary thinking to all natural
phenomena, and to human social and political systems, and thus tried to establish
a kind of “universal evolutionism” (for a review, see Gay 1999).]
In this context we should also remember Darwin’s reference to domestic breeding
which helped him to understand the meaning of variation. Darwin himself bred
and raised pigeons, and was well acquainted with the literature on domestication.
Fifteen years before the publication of the Origin he already drew the analogy
between natural selection and an omniscient “super breeder” who selects not for
the benefit of the human breeders, but only for the benefit of the organism itself.
However, he did not simply apply artificial selection to nature. Rather, as Richards
(1998) explains, he treated domestic breeding as an “experiment”, from which he
could establish the law of natural selection.
From a philosophical/methodological point of view, three aspects of Darwin’s
theory are of particular interest: gradualism, the theory of adaptation and the general
meaning of theory.
Regarding gradualism, Darwin followed, as already stated, the old philosophical
assumption natura non factit saltus[m] and concluded: “As natural selection acts
solely by accumulating slight, successive, favorable variations, it can produce no
great or sudden modifications; it can act only by short and slow steps … ‘Natura
non facit saltum’” (Darwin 1859 [1958, p. 435]). He was, of course, influenced by
the zeitgeist and the idea of slow, but constant, progress at different levels. This
idea fits pretty well the notion of adaptation – the assumption that, through natural
selection, organisms get better and better adapted to their respective environment(s).
Concerning his views of adaptation, Darwin has been frequently misunderstood
– as adaptationist, that is. Adaptationism (e.g., as criticized by Gould and Lewontin
1984) is the conviction that any – anatomical, physiological, or behavioral trait – of
an organism is adapted to a given environment and that selection works exclusively,

77
as it were, from outside (environmental selection). Darwin, however, did not believe
that living beings are simply “molded” by their environment(s) and was prepared
to acknowledge the organism’s role in evolution (see Wuketits 2000b). Thus, he
critically stated:
Naturalists continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food,
etc., as the only possible source of variation. In one limited sense … this
may be true; but it is preposterous to attribute to mere external conditions,
the structure, for instance, of the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and
tongue, so admirably adapted to catch insects under the bark of trees (Darwin
1859 [1958, p. 28]).
Organisms are active, dynamical systems and Darwin himself anticipated what
more than hundred years later the philosopher Popper (1984) claimed: that living
beings are actively searching for a “better world”.
With respect to the meaning of theory in Darwin’s work, we have to abandon the
view that Darwin worked on the basis of induction, that he accumulated “facts” in
order to, finally, – establish a theory. As Ghiselin (1969, p. 4) has already pointed
out, Darwin’s “entire scientific accomplishment must be attributed not to the
collection of facts, but to the development of theory”. This is not to say that Darwin
disregarded empirical evidence – just the opposite is true as one can learn from his
expositions in the Origin and his zoological writings, like the work on barnacles
(see Stott 2003). “From my early youth”, Darwin (1958, p. 141) stated, “I have the
strongest desire to understand or explain whatever I observed, – that is, to group all
facts under some general laws”. Mere “facts” are not enough. What counts is, as we
have seen in the case of fossils, a proper explanation, a useful theory. Erroneously,
attempts to corroborate evolutionary theory were based, for some time, mainly on
empirical arguments and not on the theory itself (Gutmann 1979). Empirical
arguments do matter in science, but the sophistication of theories is no less
important – I would say even more important than the “facts”.
Finally, it is to be emphasized that, if we take Darwin and his theory of natural
selection really seriously, we can recognize some most fundamental philosophical
implications and, besides, we have take into account that his theory is meaningful
in the context of a new humanism. As Mayr (2000, p. 83) says:
He [Darwin] developed a set of new principles that influence the thinking
of every person: the living world, through evolution, can be explained without
recourse to supernaturalism; essentialism or typology is invalid, and we must
adopt population thinking, in which all individuals are unique (vital for
education and the refutation of racism); natural selection, applied in social
groups, is indeed sufficient to account for the origin and maintenance of
altruistic ethical systems; cosmic teleology, an intrinsic process leading life
automatically to ever greater perfection, is fallacious, with all seemingly teleo-
logical phenomena explicable by purely material processes; and determinism
is thus repudiated, which places our fate squarely in our own evolved hands.
4.5  Charles Darwin (1809–1882): The Theory of Natural Selection

78
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
These statements also assert the meaning of Darwinian evolutionary thinking for
education and general culture. A similar point has been recently made by Kutschera
and Niklas (2004) in a paper published on the occasion of Mayr’s 100th birthday.
Evolutionary thinking is one of the most important enterprises of human intellectual
development, and must be part and parcel of higher education. It is indispensable
for a modern, secular world view for it helps us to develop a deep understanding of
our own nature, our origins, and our possible future. As Simpson (1963, p. 25)
accurately states: “It is a characteristic of [the] world to which Darwin opened the
door that unless most of us do enter it and live maturely and rationally in it, the
future of mankind is dim, indeed – if there is any future”.
4.6
Darwin and After Darwin
Like any other scientific theory, Darwin’s theory of natural selection is not – and
has never been – a body of dogmas. Therefore, it has undergone several ex-
pansions and changes (e.g., see Stebbins and Ayala 1985; Beurton 1994; Wieser
1994; Wuketits 2003; Kutschera and Niklas 2004). At the same time, there have
always been some alternative theories, some of them contrasting, others more or
less compatible with Darwin’s views. It has to be stressed – again and again – that
controversies within evolutionary thinking, particularly different views of modes
and mechanisms of evolutionary change, do not impinge on the fact of evolution.
Evolution is a very complex process and it is understandable that it requires a
broad view of the phenomena in question. As in other fields of scientific research,
controversies have proved quite fruitful in evolutionary biology for they urge the
involved “combatants” to reassess – and critically reflect upon – their own
arguments.
Table 4.4 gives a synopsis of evolutionary theories after Darwin. Darwin’s own
views were expanded in the light of new biological findings. Neo-Darwinism
included classical genetics (Weismann 1904), the synthetic theory, or, according to
Huxley (1942), Modern Synthesis included population genetics. The meaning of the
study of populations increased in the 20th century and today evolutionary thinking
without population biology is unimaginable. However, other biological disciplines
have also gained growing importance in evolutionary studies, e.g., developmental
biology (see Chapter 5). Darwin’s theory of natural selection has remained basically
undisputed, but – in his own spirit – it has been frequently (and successfully)
argued that selective forces have to be conceptualized at different levels of organismic
organization (e.g., see Gould 1982). The synthetic theory was a kind of long-term
project carried out in the 1930s and 1940s by many biologists in several countries
(see, for a review, Reif et al. 2000). It brought together results from various fields of
research and can be regarded as an integrative view of biological evolution. Some
of its tenets, e.g., gradualism, have been challenged by more recent findings and
theoretical considerations, but basically it proved to be very solid and heuristically
extremely useful.

79
4.6  Darwin and After Darwin
Table 4.4  Evolutionary theories after Darwin and their main elements.
Neo-Lamarckism 
Inheritance of acquired characteristics; “will” in organisms to 
change their own structures and functions (“psycho-Lamarckism”) 
Neo-Darwinism 
Expansion of Darwin’s theory; the cell as a level of selection; 
classical Darwinism plus (Mendelian) genetics 
Mutation theory 
Evolution occurs mainly through mutations 
Synthetic theory 
Expansion of Darwin’s theory and neo-Darwinism; genetic 
recombination and mutations are the material basis, natural 
selection is the “driving force” of evolution; neo-Darwinism plus 
population genetics 
Saltationism 
Drastic, sudden changes (“saltations”) happen in evolution, 
for example through “macromutations” 
Punctuated equilibria 
There are long periods without significant evolutionary changes 
interrupted by short episodes of rapid change 
Neutrality theory 
Molecules evolve under the influence of mutation (by chance) and 
are neutral to selective forces 
Systems theory 
Expansion of the synthetic theory; inner constraints (“internal 
selection”) and environmental selection are mutually related 
 
From the point of view of the philosophy of science, it is remarkable that the
history of evolutionary theory in the 20th century was a process of integrating
scientific, biological, disciplines. The synthetic theory mirrors, so to speak, the
attempt to unify biological sciences (Smocovitis 1992). At the same time, its
arguments are based on practically all fields of biological research – from com-
parative anatomy to population genetics, from paleontology to cell biology, from
physiology to biogeography. Only in this way was it possible to establish a really
synthetic theory. Mayr (1963) distinguishes between two classes of evolutionary
theories: monistic and pluralistic theories. The former are based on the conviction
that there is one particular mechanism responsible for evolutionary change (e.g.,
mutations, according to the mutation theory); the latter operate with several
mechanisms and their interplay. Today there is agreement that evolution can be
properly explained only if we consider the combination of some mechanisms or
factors (mainly natural selection, genetic recombination, and mutations).
Finally, I should like to give some remarks on the philosophically relevant idea of
progress in evolution or progressive evolution. As can be observed, many evo-
lutionary theorists have recently abandoned the idea of progress (e.g., see Gould
1996; Wuketits 1997, 1998; Nitecki 1988), but it seems that it is not so easy to
dismiss this idea completely from evolutionary thinking. Maybe, “it is”, as Simpson
(1951, p. 107) states, “impossible to think in terms of history without thinking of
progress”. This, then, would be a psychological problem and the idea of progress
would reflect what Gould (1989) characterized as “the iconography of an expecta-
tion”. Many people still tend to believe that evolution has a direction, i.e., it is “going
somewhere”, and that the appearance of humans was the inevitable result of all

80
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
Figure 4.5  Ideas of progress – yesterday and today (reproduced from Gould 1989, Wuketits 1998).

81
previous evolutionary processes. Even some biologists (e.g., Bresch 1977) claim
that evolution is goal-directed and in all its paths inevitable, that selection forces a
particular direction, with Homo sapiens as the – preliminary – climax (Figure 4.5).
Science is a process of changing ideas, but some ideas seem to persist, like “living
fossils”; among them is the idea of evolutionary progress.
Earlier in this chapter (see Section 4.4) it was stated that teleological thinking
and the belief in human superiority were obstacles to evolutionism. However, it
seems that, after evolutionism was established, both ideas found new grounds. For
all those who have been willing to accept evolution, but at the same time unwilling
to renounce the conception of cosmic teleology – with humans still in the center of
nature – evolution has become a new religion (see Midgley 1985). Now, more than
120 years after Darwin, it is time to disclaim this conception and to purge
evolutionary thinking from metaphysical belief. A distinction must be made between
evolutionary theory and metaphysical interpretations of evolution. The idea of progress
is a metaphysical notion reflecting the hope of humans, but a mischievous
understanding of biological evolution. What counts, is survival, and hence evolution
is not going towards “perfection” – it is going nowhere (Ruse 1986).
What can be said in conclusion is that the world into which Darwin led us is far
from being totally explored. Still, evolutionists have to fight against preconceptions
and are at the same time constantly challenged by new findings (“facts”) in different
fields of research. It would be arrogant to maintain that all problems of evolution
are already solved. However, it would be arrogant as well to assume that any of the
“open problems” can find a satisfactory solution within the frame of some
metaphysical belief systems disregarding Darwin’s theory of natural selection and
its more recent expansions.
4.7
References
Ayala, F. J. (1985) The theory of evolution. Recent successes and challenges.
In: McMullin, E. (Ed.), Evolution and Creation. Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame Press, 59–90.
Ayala, F. J. (1999) Adaptation and novelty: teleological explanations in
evolutionary biology. Hist. Philos. Life Sci. 21, 3–33.
Ayala, F. J. (2004) In Willam Paley’s shadow: Darwin’s explanation of design.
Ludus Vitalis 12 (1), 53–66.
Ayala, F. J., Valentine, J. (1979) Evolving: The Theory and Processes of Organic
Evolution. Menlo Park: Benjamin/Cummings.
Beurton, P. (1994) Historische und systematische Probleme der Entwicklung
des Darwinismus. Jahrb. Geschichte Theor. Biol. 1, 93–211.
Bowler, P. J. (1984) Evolution. The History of an Idea. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Bresch, C. (1977) Zwischenstufe Leben: Evolution ohne Ziel? Munich: Piper.
Bunge, M. (1981) Scientific Materialism. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
4.7  References

82
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
Chapman, H. C. (1873) Evolution of Life. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Crocker, L. G. (1959) Diderot and Eighteenth century French transformism. In:
Glass, B., Temkin, O., Straus, W. L. (Eds.), Forerunners of Darwin 1745–1859.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 114–143.
Darwin, Ch. (1859 [1958]) On the Origin of Species. New York: New American Library.
Darwin, Ch. (1958) The Autobiography of Charles Darwin 1809–1882
(Ed.: Barlow, N.). New York: Norton Library.
Desmond, A. (1979) Designing the dinosaur: Richard Owen’s Response to
Robert Edmont Grant. ISIS 70, 224–234.
Desmond, A. (1982) Archetypes and Ancestors: Palaeontology in Victorian London
1850–1875. London: Blond & Briggs.
Di Gregorio, M. A. (1984) T. H. Huxley’s Place in Natural Science. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Dobzhansky, T., Ayala, F. J., Stebbins, G. L., Valentine, J. (1977) Evolution.
San Francisco: Freeman.
Dürken, B. (1924) Allgemeine Abstammungslehre. Zugleich eine gemeinverständliche
Kritik des Darwinismus und des Lamarckismus. Berlin: Borntraeger.
Finkelstein, G. (2000) Why Darwin was English. Endeavour 24 (2), 76–78.
Fiske, J. (1875) Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy, Based on the Doctrine of Evolution.
Vol. II. Boston: Osgood.
Gay, H. (1999) Explaining the universe: Herbert Spencer’s attempt to synthesize
political and evolutionary ideas. Endeavour 23 (2), 56–59.
Ghiselin, M. T. (1969) The Triumph of the Darwinian Method. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Glass, B. (1959) Heredity and variation in the eighteenth century concept of the
species. In: Glass, B., Temkin, O., Straus, W. L. (Eds.), Forerunners of Darwin
1745–1859). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 144–172.
Gould, S. J. (1982) Darwinism and the expansion of evolutionary theory.
Science 216, 380–387.
Gould, S. J. (1988) Time’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle: Myth and Metaphor in the Discovery
of Geological Time. London: Penguin Books.
Gould, S. J. (1989) Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History.
New York: Norton.
Gould, S. J. (1996) Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin.
New York: Three Rivers Press.
Gould, S. J. (1997) Dinosaur in a Haystack: Reflections in Natural History.
London: Penguin.
Gould, S. J., Lewontin, R. C. (1984) The spandrels of San Marco and the pan-
glossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist programme. In: Sober, E. (Ed.),
Conceptual Issues in Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge: MIT Press, 252–270.
Gregory, F. (1991) Darwin and the German theologians. In: Woodward, W.,
Cohen, R. S. (Eds.), World Views and Scientific Discipline Formation. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 269–278.
Greene, J. C. (1963) Darwin and the Modern World View. New York: New American
Library.

83
Gribbin, J., White, M. (1995) Darwin: A Life in Science. London: Simon & Schuster.
Gutmann, W. F. (1979) Entwickelt sich ein neues Evolutionsverständnis?
Das Analogie-Denken Darwins und die physikalistische Evolutionstheorie.
Biol. Rdsch. 17, 84–99.
Haber, F. C. (1959) Fossils and the idea of a process of time in natural history. In:
Glass, B., Temkin, O., Straus, W. L. (Eds.), Forerunners of Darwin 1745–1859.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 222–261.
Himmelfarb, G. (1968) Darwin and the Darwinian Revolution. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Hölder, H. (1960) Geologie und Paläontologie in Texten und ihrer Geschichte.
Freiburg: Alber.
Hull, D. L. (1988) Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and
Conceptual Development of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Huxley, J. (1942) Evolution: The Modern Synthesis. London: Allen & Unwin.
Huxley, T. H. (1863 [2001]) Man’s Place in Nature. New York: Modern Library.
Junker, T., Hossfeld, U. (2001) Die Entdeckung der Evolution. Eine revolutionäre
Theorie und ihre Geschichte. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Kutschera, U., Niklas, K. J. (2004) The modern theory of biological evolution:
an expanded synthesis. Naturwissenschaften 91, 255–276.
Lennox, J. G. (1993) Darwin was a teleologist. Biol. Philos. 8, 409–421.
Lovejoy, A. O. (1936) The Great Chain of Being. A Study of the History of an Idea.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Lovejoy, A. O. (1959) Buffon and the Problem of Species. In: Glass, B., Temkin,
O., Straus, W. L. (Eds.), Forerunners of Darwin 1745–1859. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins Press, 84–113.
Manier, E. D. (1978) The Young Darwin and His Cultural Circle. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Mayr, E. (1963) Animal Species and Evolution. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Mayr, E. (1982) The Growth of Biological Thought. Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Mayr, E. (1988) Toward a New Philosophy of Biology. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Mayr, E. (1991) One Long Argument. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Mayr, E. (1997) This is Biology: The Science of the Living World. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Mayr, E. (2000) Darwin’s Influence on Modern Thought. Sci. Am. 283 (1), 78–83.
Mayr, E. (2002) Die Autonomie der Biologie. Naturw. Rdsch. 55, 23–29.
Mayr, E. (2004) The Autonomy of Biology. Ludus Vitalis 12, 15–27.
Midgley, M. (1985) Evolution as a Religion: Strange Hopes and Stranger Fears.
London: Methuen.
Müller, G. B. (2003) Homology: The Evolution of Morphological Organization.
In: Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A. (Eds.), Origination of Organismal Form:
Beyond the Gene in Developmental and Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 51–69.
Nitecki, M. H. (Ed.) (1988) Evolutionary Progress. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
4.7  References

84
4  The Theory of Biological Evolution: Historical and Philosophical Aspects
Oeser, E. (1996) System, Klassifikation, Evolution. Historische Analyse und Rekon-
struktion der wissenschaftstheoretischen Grundlagen der Biologie. Vienna: Braumüller.
Oldroyd, D. R. (1986) Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution: a review of our
present understanding. Biol. Philos. 1, 133–168.
Popper, K. R. (1984) Auf der Suche nach einer besseren Welt: Vorträge und Aufsätze
aus Dreißig Jahren. Munich: Piper.
Price, P. W. (1996) Biological Evolution. Philadelphia: Saunders College Publishing.
Reif, W.-E., Junker, T., Hossfeld, U. (2000) The synthetic theory of evolution:
general problems and the German contribution to the synthesis. Theor. Biosci.
119, 41–91.
Richards, R. A. (1998) Darwin, domestic breeding and artificial selection.
Endeavour 22 (3), 106–109.
Ruse, M. (1982) Darwinism Defended: A Guide to the Evolution Controversies.
London: Addison-Wesley.
Ruse, M. (1986) Taking Darwin Seriously: A Naturalistic Approach to Philosophy.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Simpson, G. G. (1951) The Meaning of Evolution. New York: New American Library.
Simpson, G. G. (1963) This View of Life: The World of an Evolutionist. New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World.
Simpson, G. G. (1980) Why and How: Some Problems and Methods in Historical
Biology. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Smocovitis, V. B. (1992) Unifying biology: the evolutionary synthesis and
evolutionary biology. J. Hist. Biol. 25, 1–65.
Stebbins, G. L., Ayala, F. J. (1985) The evolution of Darwinism. Sci. Am. 53 (1),
54–64.
Stott, R. (2003) Darwin and the Barnacle: The Story of one Tiny Creature and
History’s Most Spectacular Scientific Breakthrough. London: Faber & Faber.
Taylor, F. S. (1963) A Short History of Science and Scientific Thought. New York:
Norton.
Vollmer, G. (1995) Biophilosophie. Stuttgart: Reclam.
Wagner, A. (1908) Geschichte des Lamarckismus. Als Einführung in die psycho-
biologische Bewegung der Gegenwart. Stuttgart: Franck.
Weismann, A. (1904) Vorträge über Deszendenztheorie. Jena: Fischer.
Weiss, K. M. (2004) Thomas Henry Huxley (1825–1895) puts us in our place.
J. Exp. Zool. 302B, 196–206.
Wieser, W. (Ed.) (1994) Die Evolution der Evolutionstheorie. Von Darwin zu DNA.
Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
Wuketits, F. M. (1988) Evolutionstheorien. Historische Voraussetzungen, Positionen,
Kritik. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Wuketits, F. M. (1989) Grundriß der Evolutionstheorie. Darmstadt:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Wuketits, F. M. (1997) The philosophy of evolution and the myth of progress.
Ludus Vitalis 5 (2), 5–17.
Wuketits, F. M. (1998) Naturkatastrophe Mensch: Evolution ohne Fortschritt.
Düsseldorf: Patmos.

85
Wuketits, F. M. (2000a) Evolution. Die Entwicklung des Lebens. Munich: Beck.
Wuketits, F. M. (2000b) The organism’s place in evolution: Darwin’s views and
contemporary organismic theories. In: Peters, D. S., Weingarten, M. (Eds.),
Organisms, Genes and Evolution: Evolutionary Theory at the Crossroads. Stuttgart:
Steiner, 83–91.
Wuketits, F. M. (2003) Evolution heute: Kontroversen, Paradigmen,
Perspektiven. In: Fasterding, M. (Ed.), Aufbruch der Wissenschaft. Forschung
am Anfang des dritten Jahrtausends. Gelsenkirchen: Edition Archaea, 37–62.
Wuketits, F. M. (2004) This is Biology: Ernst Mayr and the autonomy of biology
as a science. Ludus Vitalis 12 (1), 149–160.
Young, D. (1992) The Discovery of Evolution. London: Natural History Museum.
Zimmermann, W. (1953) Evolution. Die Geschichte ihrer Probleme und Erkenntnisse.
Freiburg: Alber.
Zimmermann, W. (1967) Vererbung „erworbener Eigenschaften” und Auslese.
Stuttgart: Fischer.
4.7  References

87
5
Evolutionary Developmental Biology
Gerd B. Müller
5.1
Introduction
The interrelation between proximate and ultimate causation is the central problem
of any explanatory theory of organismal form. During certain periods of biological
research these causalities were treated discretely, separating evolution from
embryonic development, but during more synthetic times attention was paid to
their systemic linkage. We have again entered such a phase. Whereas embryology
and development had played an important role in the first inceptions of evolutionary
theory, they were conspicuously absent from the neo-Darwinian orthodoxy prevailing
through the second half of the 20th century. No formalized principles of development
could be introduced into the central, population–genetic framework of neo-
Darwinism and experimental embryology was much occupied with deciphering
the very basic mechanisms of development. As a consequence, evolutionary biology
and developmental biology were pursued as largely independent disciplines, even
after both fields had reached molecular levels of analysis. The “black boxing” of
development in evolutionary theory was often lamented, but until recently no
significant alterations of the theory’s major tenets were expected from adding
“details” of development.
The past two decades have seen a remarkable revival of interest in the inter-
relations between proximate and ultimate causation in biology. Development has
returned with great vigor to the evolutionary arena. New research programs now
focus explicitly on the interactions between developmental and evolutionary
processes, a rapidly growing number of scientific publications and meetings address
these topics, and funding agencies recognize their importance. This expansion of
interest has led in rapid succession to the founding of new scientific journals, the
creation of new divisions in professional societies, the specific dedication of
academic positions, and other epistemological and institutional adjustments.
A distinct field of study has emerged, which is often proposed to represent a new
subdiscipline of the biosciences, called evolutionary developmental biology or,
briefly, EvoDevo. Stimulated by the fresh agenda, development provides innovative
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

88
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
input for evolutionary biology and, at the same time, the evolutionary perspective
has triggered new approaches to the study of development. EvoDevo is generally
welcomed as a new research paradigm that might finally provide access to the
long-sought rules relating genotype with phenotype.
In a short time span EvoDevo has attained the reputation of a coherent field of
study or a unifying discipline in the making. With closer observation, however, it is
apparent that rather diverse opinions exist about its conceptual origins, its aims,
its empirical agendas, its theoretical significance, and its future potential. Very
different expectations are associated with EvoDevo, depending on the points of
view of the respective commentators. In addition, the inclusion of development
imports a number of new (and old) problems into current evolutionary theory.
Developmental data consist mostly of observations in single organisms, which
cannot easily be integrated into a population-theoretical framework. However,
development is also complex, nonlinear, stochastic, and self-organizing – properties
that are not readily formalized. Most significantly, development cannot be reduced
to the mechanisms of gene activity, but includes a multitude of nonprogrammed
factors that interact with gene activation – the old problem of epigenesis, which
many evolutionary theorists were happy to abandon, has returned.
An intensive debate has arisen over whether, and to what degree, evolutionary
orthodoxy is challenged by the EvoDevo approach. It has been argued that EvoDevo
could extend or even supersede neo-Darwinism, whereas others categorically deny
any such possibility or necessity, or even reinforce Dawkins’s (1976, p. 62) belief
that “the details of the embryonic developmental process, interesting as they may
be, are irrelevant to evolutionary considerations” (e.g., Wallace 1986). Some see in
EvoDevo a straightforward extension of the evolutionary genetics agenda; others
see in it an explicitly organismal and systemic approach that will enable us to solve
long-standing macroevolutionary issues. Some regard EvoDevo as perfectly
compatible with a strictly selectionist theory of evolution; others claim it represents
a strong departure from it. However, beyond these debates, and beyond uniting
core subjects of evolutionary and developmental biology, EvoDevo is becoming a
conceptual and organizational nucleus for a comprehensive integration of research
areas in organismal biology, including domains of genetics, ecology, paleontology,
anthropology, behavior, cognition, and other fields. This integrative capacity, the
range of positions, the multitude of theoretical implications, and the historical as
well as philosophical aspects of EvoDevo have already generated a number of
metatheoretical reflections (e.g., Robert 2004; Amundson 2005; Laubichler and
Maienschein 2005) which indicate the importance attributed to the new discipline.
This chapter provides an overview of the historical roots and the present status of
EvoDevo, including its key concepts, its empirical research programs, its theoreti-
cal consequences, and its future prospects. In going through these issues I will iden-
tify several conceptual and empirical domains within EvoDevo, and I will examine
in which ways these differ from other programs. I will also explore whether EvoDevo
can solve problems that are not solved by earlier approaches, whether it is heu-
ristically fruitful and generates new research initiatives, and whether it can lead to
an improved conceptual framework for the understanding of organismal evolution.

89
5.2  Historical Roots
5.2
Historical Roots
Developmental and evolutionary biology are historically interwoven in many ways.
After “parallels” between embryonic stages and the “scale of beings” had been much
discussed in pre-Darwinian times, the foundation of a scientific theory of evolution
was also linked to embryological arguments. Not only did Darwin assign an entire
chapter of the Origin of Species to embryology and asserted (in a letter to Asa Gray)
that it provided “by far the strongest single class of facts in favor of a change of
form”, but his first sketches of a phylogenetic tree possibly were also inspired by
tree-like renderings of embryological differences between species – based on work
of the contemporary embryologist von Baer (Richards 1992). Even the very term
“evolution”, so notably absent in Darwin’s early publications, had a (preformationist)
developmental meaning before it came to be widely applied to phylogenetic
“transmutation” (Bowler 1975).
After evolution had become a distinct subject of biological investigation and before
it was wholesale “geneticized”, many scholars were interested in the relation of
phylogenetic patterns with ontogenetic development. In the beginning much of
this interest focused on the taxonomical uses of embryonic characters. Francis
Balfour, William Brooks, Karl Gegenbaur, Alexandre Kowalevsky, Fritz Müller, and
many others successfully applied the comparative method to embryology, and
obtained new data that helped discern hitherto unknown relationships among taxa.
Kowalevsky’s finding that ascidians are related to the vertebrates because their larvae
possess a notochord, gill slits, neural folds, and other shared traits is one of the
great successes of this method (Kowalevsky 1866, 1871).
These comparative endeavors were mostly descriptive and phenomenological,
but a number of more mechanistically oriented and theoretically grounded programs
also emerged. One sprang from the joining of the concept of recapitulation with a
mechanism for effecting developmental change. Recapitulation, a widespread notion
in late 18th century “Naturphilosophie”, rooted in the Greek analogistic tradition,
was elaborated primarily by Ernst Haeckel into a mechanistic concept of morpho-
logical evolution (Haeckel 1866) by uniting it with developmental timing as a key
mechanism for embryonic change. Under Haeckel’s patronage this approach
assumed programmatic and even ideological status. Recapitulation remained the
only thinkable way by which ontogeny and phylogeny would be tied together well
into the 20th century. The rise of experimental embryology, on the one hand, and
that of genetics, on the other, eventually stifled the – by then often exaggerated –
recapitulationist claims. The new paradigm of genetic variation and differential
inheritance eclipsed recapitulation as a general explanatory principle for the
progression of organic life.
The fall of recapitulationism was widely viewed as a “disproof” of all recapitulatory
events in developing embryos. Although the temporary presence of ancestral
character states is an embryological fact that should be distinguished from a theory
of recapitulation (Mayr 1997), the disdain for recapitulation is widespread among
experimental embryologists and evolutionary biologists alike. Any mention of such

90
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
links between development and evolution has raised, and still raises, strong
aversions (Wilkins 2002). Thus, it was generally overlooked that Haeckel’s concept
– although incorrect in many details – contained a mechanism for evolutionary
change, i.e., the modification of development through heterochrony, a point that
was only resurrected in the late 1970s (Gould 1977).
A second major movement related to the ontogeny–phylogeny question, taking
place in the first half of the 20th century, was the study of environmental influences
on embryogenesis and the maintenance of so-induced effects in subsequent
generations. Most of these widespread endeavors were carried out in a neo-
Lamarckian belief and the experiments were designed to test for the possibility of
an inheritance of acquired characters. An extensive amount of data was generated
by ingenious modifications of external parameters in the development of insects
(Jollos 1934), amphibians (Kammerer 1923), and other taxa (Kammerer 1925;
Hämmerling 1929). Entire institutions, such as the Vivarium Institute in Vienna
(1902–1945), devoted their efforts to the study of the environment–development–
evolution interaction. The conclusiveness of the results was debated heatedly (e.g.,
McBride versus opponents in Nature during the 1920s). Eventually the neo-
Lamarckian interpretations lost credibility. However, these early experimental
attempts to combine environmental modification with breeding regimes represent
a body of evidence that merits attention independently from their Lamarckian
interpretations. Recently the importance of “enduring modifications” and “epi-
genetic inheritance” have been reconsidered (Rubin 1990; Jablonka and Lamb 1995),
and EvoDevo has actively readdressed the issue of environmental influences on
development and evolution (Gilbert 2001; Gilbert and Bolker 2003; Hall et al. 2003).
A third initiative arose with early attempts to include the genetics of development
into evolutionary theory, based on theoretical considerations, breeding studies, and
quantitative genetics. A number of concepts were proposed that related to the
development–evolution problem, such as reaction norms (Woltereck 1909), rate
genes (Goldschmidt 1940), assimilation (Waddington 1956), and the whole field of
epigenetics (in the Waddingtonian sense). These developments took place before
the rise of DNA genetics and in the absence of molecular tools for genetic analysis.
However, the calls for a more prominent role for these mechanisms in evolutionary
theory, such as expressed by Goldschmidt and Schmalhausen, and later by
Waddington, went largely unheard. Attention concentrated on transmission genetics
and quantitative genetics, whereas developmental genetics, and developmental
biology for that matter, was left aside.
These off-the-mainstream initiatives all addressed facets of the ontogeny–
phylogeny or development–evolution interface and thus kept the connections
between the fields alive even during prolonged periods of their largely separate
study in the 20th century. Apart from certain conceptual traces, not much of these
traditions has survived in modern EvoDevo and none of them can be considered
its immediate forerunner or the key initiator of its sudden rise roughly 20 years
ago. Two developments were more directly responsible. One stimulus was the
increasing awareness of explanatory deficits in the prevailing paradigm of evolution.
Neo-Darwinism worked well for the population genetic phenomena it concentrated

91
on, but in the late 1970s and early 1980s concern accumulated about its difficulty
to account for the characteristics of phenotypic evolution. Such considerations
included biased variation (Alberch 1982; Maynard Smith et al. 1985), rapid changes
of form (Eldredge and Gould 1972), the occurrence of nonadaptive traits (Gould
and Lewontin 1979), and the origination of higher-level organization such as
homology and body plans (Riedl 1978). Most of the criticisms attributed the
explanatory deficits of neo-Darwinism to the neglect of the generative processes
that relate between genotype and phenotype, and to the exclusion of developmental
theory from the evolutionary synthesis (Hamburger 1980; Reid 1985b).
As a response to this situation a number of scientific meetings (such as those
held in Dahlem in 1981, Sussex in 1982, Plzen in 1984, Columbia in 1985, and
Woods Hole in 1985) and books (Gould 1977; Bonner 1982; Goodwin et al. 1983;
Raff and Kaufman 1983) began to concentrate on the intersections between
development and evolution. Empirical research initiatives took up the theme (e.g.,
Katz et al. 1981; Alberch and Gale 1983, 1985; Raff et al. 1984; Müller 1986, 1989),
using classical techniques of comparative and experimental embryology at first,
and later, increasingly, the methodologies of molecular biology. This new agenda,
which aimed at delineating the role of developmental processes in organismal
evolution, was initially called “ontophyletics” (Katz et al. 1981; Katz 1983) or
“evolutionary embryology” (Müller 1991) until “evolutionary developmental biology”
(Hall 1992; Wake 1996) became the generally accepted label.
A second initiating factor of modern EvoDevo was the rise of molecular develop-
mental genetics, which brought about the cloning of regulatory genes and
techniques for the visualization of their activation sites in the developing embryo.
This created a new way of comparing the development of different taxa and led to
the discovery of unexpected similarities in gene regulation among distantly related
species (McGinnis et al. 1984). The similarities were found to extend to the spatial
and temporal sequences of early gene expression in anatomically different embryos
such as insects and mammals (Duboule and Dollé 1989; Graham et al. 1989). In
contrast to earlier beliefs, which viewed the diverse ways in which different animals
develop as a result of an equally diverse genetic apparatus, it became increasingly
clear that relatively few genetic regulators are implicated in the embryonic
foundations of all animal body plans (Akam 1989; Holland 1992; Holland et al.
1996). The search for commonalities and differences in gene expression patterns
and gene regulation gained rapid momentum, and has led to an understanding of
many molecular details of animal development (Carroll et al. 2001; Davidson 2001).
Today, the evolution of developmental gene regulation and of gene regulatory
networks has become a major theme in empirical EvoDevo research.
The general excitement over the successes of comparative developmental genetics
has led to pronouncements that EvoDevo is synonymous with the comparative
study of the developmental genetic machinery (Arthur 2002; Tautz 2002; Wilkins
2002). However, EvoDevo is more encompassing and explicitly reached beyond the
genome from the very outset (Katz 1983). The deep questions that triggered the
formation of this new field are predominantly situated in the realm of the phenotype
(Love 2003, 2005). Organismal form, shape, morphological structure, and the
5.2  Historical Roots

92
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
generative mechanisms underlying their evolution represent the essential questions
within EvoDevo. This objective predates the discoveries in developmental genetics,
even though these have immensely boosted the research activity in the new field,
providing new molecular insights and analytical tools. However, as pointed out
above, the modern discipline of EvoDevo is also not a direct continuation of any
one of the earlier approaches. Rather, its explosive rise in the mid-1980s was possible
because of the continuous presence of the historical questions onto which a new,
mechanistic, multilevel analysis of genetic and developmental processes was
superimposed.
5.3
Agenda and Concepts
In modern EvoDevo a general agenda can be distinguished from individual concepts
that address particular issues of the development–evolution relationship. The
general agenda rests on the theoretical frameworks of developmental biology and
evolutionary biology. It postulates that a causal–mechanistic interaction exists
between the processes of individual development and the processes of evolutionary
change (Wagner et al. 2000). The nature of these interactions and their consequences
for organismal evolution represent the central research goal. Hence, EvoDevo
consists of two interconnected parts – one addressing evolution’s influence on
development and the other development’s influence on evolution. This reciprocal
interrelationship constitutes a genuinely dialectical and systemic research agenda,
with particular questions arising from both aspects. Although distinctions between
the two principal subagendas (evo-devo and devo-evo) have been discussed (Hall
2000; Gilbert 2003), only the systemic combination of both makes EvoDevo a
coherent discipline (Müller 2005).
A number of specific concepts can be distinguished within the general agenda.
Some of these were formulated well before the EvoDevo era and are only of historical
interest, or are now revived and elaborated based on fresh evidence. Others were
prompted by the new research focus and the necessity to define principles of the
mechanistic realization of the development–evolution linkage. These concepts can
be grouped according to the specific questions they address (Arthur 2002; Müller
2005). Three major categories of concepts are distinguished. The first concerns the
evolution of development, relating to issues such as the origin of developmental
systems, the evolution of the developmental repertoire, and the evolutionary
modification of developmental processes. A second set of concepts concerns the
effects that the properties of developmental systems have on phenotypic evolution,
including the patterns of phenotypic variation, the origin of phenotypic novelty,
and the fixation of morphological motifs, i.e., the organization of the phenotype.
A third group concerns the interrelations between environment and development,
and their evolutionary consequences, such as polyphenism and plasticity. The
following subsections briefly characterized some of the major concepts of each
category.

93
5.3.1
The Origin of Developmental Systems
Relatively little is known about how the first systems of development arose, but
clearly this problem is related to the origins of multicellularity and the evolution of
life cycles. John Bonner, one of the most influential individuals in triggering the
EvoDevo revolution, has concentrated on this issue, and has proposed a number of
concepts on the relations between organism size, internal complexity, reproductive
success, and life cycle selection (Bonner 1965, 1988). Many of these concepts are
based on the study of extant colonial or aggregating unicellular organisms such as
cellular slime molds. In a similar vein, Buss (1987) suggested that development
resulted from competition among cells in early multicellular aggregates to become
the ones capable of propagating the next generation. Development would thus have
been a consequence of the transition between the cell as the unit of selection and
the multicellular individual as the unit of selection.
A strikingly different conceptualization concentrates on the physical origins of
developmental systems (Forgacs and Newman 2005). Given that single-cell
organisms that existed before the emergence of multicellularity possessed certain
physical properties, such as liquid-like viscoelasticity, adhesiveness, and chemical
excitability, proto-metazoan aggregates must have had an inherent capacity to self-
organize spatial patterns. Development would have arisen at the point when certain
cells achieved organizational control over other cells, e.g., by releasing a diffusible
chemical substance, and this capacity would have resulted in cell aggregates
consisting of nonuniformly distributed cell states. In conjunction with differential
adhesion (Steinberg 1963) and other generic physical mechanisms (Newman 1992,
1994), such systems could produce an array of “generic forms”, whose shape and
size would have been much influenced by the physicochemical conditions of the
environment. Because of the strong environmental influence, it is assumed that in
early forms of development the close correlation between genotype and phenotype
observed in modern organisms would not have existed yet. Rather, the genotype–
phenotype relation might have been one-to-many during what has been called a
“pre-Mendelian phase” of evolution (Newman and Müller 2000). Only subsequent
selectional fixation and genetic routinization would have resulted in robust forms
of development and the faithful, Mendelian kind of inheritance seen in advanced
taxa.
5.3.2
Evolution of the Developmental Repertoire
As developmental systems evolve, the mechanisms and components of such systems
change and diversify. Concepts relating to these topics concern primarily the genetic
aspects of developmental evolution, such as gene duplication, especially of regulatory
genes (McGinnis and Krumlauf 1992; Holland 1999), and the evolution of gene
regulatory networks (Davidson et al. 1995; Wray and Lowe 2000). The genetic
redundancy generated by such mechanisms can be exploited through the acquisition
5.3  Agenda and Concepts

94
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
of new functions for these genes – a process referred to as recruitment (Keys et al.
1999) or cooption (True and Carroll 2002). Present summaries on the evolution of
developmental pathways rely almost exclusively on genetics (Carroll et al. 2001;
Wilkins 2002), but the epigenetic mechanisms controlling gene activation also
evolve, including the repertoire of mechanisms of cell and tissue interaction and
embryonic induction, which has led to a number of conceptualizations of the
evolutionary roles of these mechanisms (Løvtrup 1974; Hall 1983; Edelman 1988;
Newman and Müller 2000).
Modularity is a concept that targets specifically the evolution of developmental
repertoires (Schlosser and Wagner 2004; Callebaut and Rasskin-Gutman 2005). It
recognizes that developmental systems are decomposable into components that
operate according to their own, intrinsically determined principles. Such modules
can be characterized as integrated structural or process units that depend on input
from other components and, in turn, influence other components by their outputs,
represented, for example, by gene signaling pathways or inductive interaction
networks. The evolutionary function of developmental modules would be their
phenotypic selectability. A selectable developmental module can consist of a set of
genes, their products, and their developmental interactions, including the resulting
character complex and the functional effect of that complex. The genes affecting
the modular character complex would be characterized by a high degree of internal
integration and a low degree of external connectivity, i.e., pleiotropic connections
would be largely within-module. Modularity constitutes a principle connecting the
genetic and epigenetic components of evolving developmental repertoires and has
the potential to assume a central role in the EvoDevo framework (von Dassow and
Munro 1999).
5.3.3
The Evolutionary Modification of Developmental Processes
This is the topic of a host of EvoDevo concepts. Into this category fall all mechanisms
that have the capacity to modulate quantitatively or qualitatively the established
processes that compose a developmental system, e.g., mutations affecting the
regulation of developmental pathways. The most prominent concept here is
heterochrony, i.e., evolutionary changes in the relative timing and rates of develop-
mental processes. This classical idea has been revived by the books of Gould (Gould
1977) and Raff and Kaufman (Raff and Kaufman 1983), and has since been
elaborated into a comprehensive explanatory framework (McKinney and McNamara
1991; Parichy et al. 1992; McNamara 1997). Different forms and mechanisms of
heterochrony were shown to be associated with different life history strategies and
produce different phenotypic results (Hall 1984; Raff and Wray 1989). Heterochrony
has been documented in most groups of organisms, and its analysis is taken to
molecular and genetic levels (Parks et al. 1988; Wray and McClay 1989; Kim et al.
2000). Mutations that directly affect developmental timing have been demonstrated
in animals (Ruvkun and Giusto 1989) and plants (Dudley and Poethig 1991).
A number of genetic mechanisms affecting developmental timing have been

95
experimentally tested (Dollé et al. 1993; Zakany et al. 1997). There is no doubt that
heterochrony based on genetic change represents a powerful mode for altering
morphological characters and body plans (Duboule 1994). However, a major
difficulty remains the distinction between those heterochronic phenomena that
are simply a consequence of any change to development and those cases in which
heterochrony of a particular process represents the causal mechanism for the
evolutionary modification of a trait.
5.3.4
The Patterns of Phenotypic Variation
The question as to what extent the properties of developmental systems influence
the variational and directional dynamics of phenotypic evolution is primarily
addressed by the concept of developmental constraint. This was one of the key
themes that spurred modern EvoDevo (Alberch 1982) and a consensus definition
of developmental constraint was soon reached: “a bias on the production of variant
phenotypes, or a limitation on phenotypic variability, caused by the structure,
character, composition, or dynamics of the developmental system” (Maynard Smith
et al. 1985). A rich variety of case studies provided empirical evidence for such
constraints being effective in evolution, with data coming from comparative
morphology (e.g., Wake 1982; Bell 1987; Vogl and Rienesel 1991; Caldwell 1994),
comparative and experimental embryology (e.g., Alberch and Gale 1983, 1985;
Müller 1989; Webb 1989; Streicher and Müller 1992), plant biology (e.g., Donoghue
and Ree 2000), and quantitative genetics (e.g., Cheverud 1984; Rasmussen 1987;
Wagner 1988). Whereas early conceptualizations concentrated on the limitational
aspects of developmental constraints, later treatments also emphasized the
heightened potentialities for change in a particular aspect of the phenotypic character
space of a lineage that can arise from such limitations (Arthur 2001). Hence,
counterintuitively, developmental constraints can also contribute to evolvability,
i.e., the facilitation of variation. A taxon’s capacity to generate heritable phenotypic
variation or innovation can also depend on mechanisms that reduce (Kirschner
and Gerhart 1998) or overcome (Müller and Wagner 1991) constraints, an issue
that is controversially debated (Eberhard 2001; Wagner and Müller 2002).
5.3.5
The Origin of Phenotypic Novelty
The issue of evolutionary innovation and phenotypic novelty has recently come
much to the fore, because it is perceived as one of the areas of evolutionary biology
to which EvoDevo could make a major contribution (Müller and Wagner 1991;
Wagner 2000). This contention is based on the observation that neo-Darwinian
theory concentrates on variation and adaptation, and is, itself, adapted to the task
of explaining this spectrum of evolutionary phenomena. In contrast, novelties are
phenotypic changes in which no or very limited variation has preceded their
origination and which are not seen to arise directly from a process of adaptation.
5.3  Agenda and Concepts

96
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
Thus novelties represent a distinct class of phenotypic change and the mechanisms
for generating innovation should be distinguished from those generating variation
(Müller and Newman 2003b; Müller and Wagner 2003). While earlier conceptions
concerning innovation have dealt with function shift (Mayr 1960), macro-mutation
(Goldschmidt 1940), and symbiosis (Margulis and Fester 1991), EvoDevo approaches
concentrate on the roles of development.
One specific proposal is epigenetic causation (Müller 1990; Newman and Müller
2000). Here, the central issue is a distinction between general selectional trends
and the specificity of phenotypic response conferred by the developmental system.
Selection acting on general organismal features, such as shape, proportion, function,
or behavior, can elicit epigenetic byproducts that arise from the generic properties
of developing cell and tissue systems, e.g., following changes in blastema size or
mechanical load. New structural elements, such as skeletal parts, can arise through
this mode, without having been selected for, as a side-effect of the evolutionary
modification of developmental parameters (Müller 1990). Epigenetic mechanisms
could have had a significant role in the origination of body parts and organismal
form (Müller and Newman 2003a). This approach can also be formulated as part of
the developmental plasticity concept discussed below.
5.3.6
The Organization of the Phenotype
Although they seem to be themes of the past, the evolution of homology and of
body plans represents a key issue of EvoDevo (Raff 1996). Such higher-level
organizational phenomena had been difficult to explain from a strictly population
genetic perspective. Although the connections between development and homology
are rooted deep in the history of biological ideas (Laubichler 2000), only sporadic
attempts were made towards a developmental explanation of homology. EvoDevo
has revived the issue (Hall 1995). Many of the new ideas were triggered by the
surprising conservation of the gene regulatory apparatus underlying the develop-
ment of very diverse organisms. This led to gene-based definitions of homology
(Holland et al. 1996; Abouheif 1997), although others have pointed out the
shortcomings of such reasoning (Bolker and Raff 1996; Minelli 1997). While the
most notoriously conserved developmental control genes, the homeobox genes,
exhibit nonhomologous expression domains in comparative maps of vertebrate
and invertebrate embryos, the reverse also applies: homologous structures can be
specified by nonhomologous genes (Wray 1999). Several developmental concepts
of homology concentrate on commonalities of developmental pathways (Wagner
1989; Wagner 1996) or on the modularity of developmental systems (Minelli 1997;
Gilbert and Bolker 2001). Recently, it was proposed that the evolution of homology
consists of three stages, in two of which (the generative stage and the integrative
stage) development plays a decisive role, whereas the third, the autonomized stage,
is characterized by achieving independence from the underlying generative
mechanisms. According to this position, homology is a consequence of structural
organization that maintains the identity of building elements despite variation in

97
their molecular, developmental, and genetic makeup (Müller and Newman 1999;
Müller 2003).
5.3.7
The Environment–Development–Evolution Interaction
This is yet another conceptual domain of EvoDevo. Once thought of as crucial for
understanding evolution, the field had been marginalized for several decades
because of its seemingly Lamarckian connotations. However, new data on the genetic
and environmental components of developmental phenomena such as phenocopy,
polyphenism, and plasticity have revitalized the interest in their evolutionary roles,
and led to proposals of an enlarged scope of EvoDevo research (Gilbert 2001; Hall
et al. 2003). The central conceptual framework in this domain is plasticity (Pigliucci
2001; West-Eberhard 2003). It provides a unifying theoretical background for the
quantitative genetic, developmental, and phenotypic responses to environmental
influences in evolving populations. The concept of plasticity is tightly interconnected
with that of reaction norm (Schlichting and Pigliucci 1998; Sarkar 2003), i.e., the
range of variation and phenotypes that can result from a single genotype as a
response to different environmental conditions. Developmental plasticity, the
phenotypic realization of this responsiveness, is thought to represent in itself an
adaptive trait of a taxon. However, developmental plasticity has a second aspect in
referring to the evolutionary modification of developmental systems without any
significant effect on the phenotypic outcome, a phenomenon frequently observed
in species level comparison. This notion of developmental plasticity is distinct from
the classical concept of plasticity, understood as environmentally mediated variation,
in that it refers to the changes that occur during the evolution of ontogenies
(Chipman 2002).
Although this brief overview is far from exhaustive, it is evident that a rich variety
of individual concepts make up the theoretical background of the EvoDevo discipline.
None of them covers the entire field (more inclusive theories will be discussed in
the section on integration), but all contribute to its present unification. It is evident
that the conceptual focus of EvoDevo is on the problems of phenotypic evolution.
This does not always coincide with the predominant topics in the empirical research
carried out.
5.4
Research Programs and Methods
Empirical research in EvoDevo is largely driven by methodological aspects. Hence,
the individual projects do not exactly match the conceptual categories, but rather
represent separate research strategies. Several distinct “programs” can be distin-
guished, although the respective researchers engaging in these studies may not
have defined their particular approach in such a way. The four principal programs
distinguished in the following also reflect a methodological evolution of EvoDevo.
5.4  Research Programs and Methods

98
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
5.4.1
The Comparative Morphology Program
This program represents the classical approach, but it is by no means outdated. In
fact, much of present developmental biology represents a comparative approach
with molecular tools. However, many of the major contributions do not even come
from the embryology of extant organisms, but, increasingly, from paleontology.
The paleontological data can include direct embryological evidence, such as
information from fossilized dinosaur eggs (Carpenter et al. 1996) or from early
stages of invertebrate development (Bengtson and Zhao 1997). Foremost, paleon-
tology provides extensive information about the developmental factors underlying
phenotypic evolution, such as the occurrences of heterochrony, developmental
constraint, and ontogenetic innovation in many different taxa (McNamara 1997;
Vrba 2003). This is especially true for characters that represent “frozen” stages of
development such as teeth or hard shells. This kind of evidence yields the
phylogenetic morphospaces against which to test the developmental capacities of
extant taxa. Increasingly, the relationships between variational data from fossils
and the developmental processes responsible for their generation are explicitly
addressed (Shubin et al. 1997). At the same time the morphological approach
provides the data sets for what could be called the phylogenetic systematics program
of EvoDevo. This work seeks to provide robust phylogenetic reference systems for
the interpretation of the evolution of developmental mechanisms – an essential
prerequisite for the EvoDevo synthesis (Mabee 2000).
5.4.2
The Epigenetic and Experimental Program
Following the traditions of experimental embryology a variety of strategies have
been devised in order to specifically address evolutionary questions (Müller 1991).
The aim is to probe the epigenetic properties of developmental systems with regard
to their intrinsic capacities to generate evolutionarily relevant phenotypes. Per-
turbations of cell number, cell cycle, developmental timing, or inductive interactions
were shown to produce both ancestral character states as well as phenocopies of
derived states (e.g., Alberch and Gale 1983 1985; Müller 1989). Such experiments
directly address the developmental and, hence, the evolutionary dissociabilities of
temporal, spatial, and functional interactions in developmental systems. The results
highlight the existence of constraints and threshold effects in developmental
processes that contribute to the evolvability of a lineage, influencing phenotypic
evolution and providing new heritable variation and novel character states. In
particular, the experimental approach exposes mechanisms through which quan-
titative selectional processes may be transformed into qualitative phenotypic change.
The classical perturbation method is expanded by genetic and molecular tools
such as gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments that are increasingly used
in developmental genetics. This is further complemented by experiments that
attempt to redesign organismal structures with well-chosen mutations. This

99
designer approach (Dworkin et al. 2001; Larsen 2003) tests the range of possible
morphologies that can be achieved by a developmental system through small
changes in cell behavior. While it does not automatically follow that new structures
actually arose through similar mutations, such experiments indicate that even highly
conserved phenotypes are not necessarily strongly constrained. Using mutations
to compare the relative stability of characters, this approach further elucidates the
nature of developmental constraints and will assist in revealing the genetic
backgrounds that are required for stabilizing phenotypic innovations. Combining
experimental studies of new forms generated by a developmental system with
theoretical morphospace predictions (see below) could lead to further EvoDevo
insights.
The epigenetic and experimental program intersects with the field of study
focusing on developmental plasticity, especially as it relates to environmental
influences in what has recently been termed ecological developmental biology or
eco-devo (Gilbert 2001; Hall et al. 2003). The essence here is that the regulating
factors of developmental processes (and their evolutionary modifiability) do not all
reside within the embryo but depend substantially on the ecological context.
Although these effects eventually feed into developmental–genetic pathways, the
causality resides in an interplay between internal and external factors, such as diet,
pH, humidity, temperature, photoperiod, seasonality, population density, predator
presence, etc. Particular attention is paid to physiological and metabolic processes
that mediate interactions between the environment and development, such as
endocrine and hormone activity.
A number of experimental studies begin to unravel these mechanisms, focusing
on hormonal effects in vertebrates and invertebrates (Davey 2003; Rose 2003),
predator-induced polyphenisms in crustaceans and other taxa (Tollrian and Harvell
1999), nutrient regimes in sea squirts (Newlon et al. 2003), environmental regulation
during insect development (Nijhout 1999), and many more (see Schlichting and
Pigliucci 1998; Gilbert 2001; Hall et al. 2003)). Although these kinds of study have
a long tradition, there is a new awareness that developmental plasticity and
environmental induction have an important function in the origination of evo-
lutionary novelty (West-Eberhard 2003), an opinion pioneered by Riuchi Matsuda
(Matsuda 1987) whose work is receiving renewed attention (Hall et al. 2003). One
of the reasons for the notion that this mechanism could be even more important
than mutational change is the fact that environmental factors affect entire
populations at once, whereas mutation initially affects only one individual. The
importance of epigenetic parameters is also increasingly recognized in hominid
evolution (Lovejoy et al. 1999).
5.4.3
The Evolutionary Developmental Genetics Program
This program, now often called EvoDevo as such, is “focused on the developmental
genetic machinery that lies behind embryological phenotypes” (Arthur 2002). This
EvoDevo is said to be “born on the day when Bill McGinnis developed the first
5.4  Research Programs and Methods

100
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
‘Zooblot’ that was incubated with a homeobox probe” (Tautz 2002). Henceforth,
“which Hox gene turns on, where does it turn on, and when does it turn on”
represented “the crux of molecular evo-devo questions” (Goodman and Coughlin
2000). The rapid cloning of an increasing number of homeobox genes and the
concurrent development of in situ hybridization techniques that enable the precise
mapping of their embryonic expression patterns has made this the most active
area of empirical EvoDevo research. Two overlapping subprograms can be distin-
guished. One is the molecular body plans program, which aims for an understanding
of the role of developmental control genes in the patterning of phylogenetically
and anatomically diverse body plans such as arthropods (Akam 1994), vertebrates
(Holland 1992), and other taxa (Carroll et al. 2001). This program has moved beyond
the model organisms usually studied by developmental biologists and reveals
interesting gene expression patterns that are associated with the development of
body plan novelty (Lee et al. 2003). It has led to an impressive amount of information
concerning the commonalities and differences in the deployment of regulatory
genes during the establishment of basic body patterns, including evidence that the
evolutionary modification of major body regions in vertebrates is associated with
the axial shifts of Hox gene expression boundaries (Burke et al. 1995) or that the
evolution of mesopodial limb elements is associated with shifts in Hoxa-11/a-13
expression regions (Wagner and Chiu 2001). In insects, the differences in bristle
patterns on different species of Drosophila is associated with a variation of Ubx
expression (Stern 1998) and the evolution of butterfly eyespot patterns involves
recruitment of a hedgehog regulatory circuit (Keys et al. 1999). A future goal must
be to ascertain that observed shifts of gene expression regions were actually causal
for the derived developmental and phenotypic condition (Wagner 2001).
A second subfield or emphasis of evolutionary developmental genetics could be
called the developmental regulation program. Here, the empirical research
concentrates on changes in the evolving architecture of the regulatory circuitry.
Tremendous progress was achieved regarding the understanding of gene regulatory
pathways and networks (Davidson 2001; Wilkins 2002). Increasingly complex gene
interaction networks are unraveled and a kind of regulatory gene cladistics is
emerging. The conclusions following from this program posit that the evolution of
organismal form is much less a direct consequence of mutational genetic inno-
vation, as believed earlier, but depends on a continuous and continuing process of
shift, recruitment, and re-wiring of regulatory interactions in development. In
parallel with the evolution of redundancy in the regulatory genome, evolution favors
the generation of alternative genetic circuits which are subsequently coopted into
new regulatory functions. The working out of the complex details of these processes
are going to keep the program active for a long time to come, especially as it is
moving into genomics and proteomics. Whole genome analyses using high-
throughput molecular technology will provide a new level of comparing gene
activation quantitatively across taxa.

101
5.4.4
The Theoretical Biology Program
Biometrics, multivariate statistics, theoretical and computational modeling,
computer simulation, and various domains of bioinformatics have recently taken
much interest in EvoDevo, and begin to address some of its questions. A central
issue, in one form or another, is the elucidation of the rules governing the genotype–
phenotype relationship, which requires computation because of the complexity of
epigenesis and the avalanche of data that is being generated on the genotype side.
Since developmental evolution resides in the modification of the dynamics of gene,
cell, and tissue interactions, the precise topology, timing, and quantity of gene
expression as related to changes of cell behavior and tissue properties becomes a
target issue in those studies that focus on realistic processes. These requirements
have led to the development of computational tools for the representation and
quantification of gene expression in developing embryos (Streicher et al. 2000;
Sharpe et al. 2002; Weninger and Mohun 2002), and new bioinformatic techniques
for the analysis of such data are explored (Fontoura Costa et al. 2004). The aim is to
understand the topological evolution of gene expression patterns in a given
developmental system in order to determine the spatiotemporal modifications of
gene activation that are associated with phenotypic variation. This kind of detailed
knowledge can be used for the biomorphic modeling of concrete developmental
systems, such as tooth development (Jernvall 2000; Jernvall et al. 2000) or limb
development (Hentschel et al. 2004), illustrating how the differential activation of
genes and gene products can affect morphogenesis and evolutionary variation or
innovation.
A more abstract approach is the modeling of evolving developmental networks,
although still based on realistic processes, such as regulatory circuits with positive
and negative feedback control. Using such models it was recently demonstrated
that evolution has a tendency to substitute emergent developmental networks by
hierarchically organized networks (Salazar-Ciudad et al. 2001). This indicates that
the routinized and genetically entrenched ontogenies of extant species, from which
our knowledge of development is derived, constitute a highly evolved and stabilized
condition, whereas greater flexibility and innovative potential may have existed in
primitive systems. In a “pre-Mendelian” world, genes and form would not have
been inherited in the same closely corresponding manner as in the genetically
overdetermined “Mendelian” period that ensued (Newman and Müller 2000). Such
scenarios, emerging in part from a modeling approach, call for a re-evaluation of
the earlier concepts of canalization and assimilation (Waddington 1942).
A different kind of theoretical biology of EvoDevo is based on the morphospace
approach. The class of generative morphospaces, in particular, provides a framework
in which a set of given rules produces a range of possible patterns that can be
compared with forms that did or did not appear in natural systems (Thomas and
Reif 1993; Eble 2001; Rasskin-Gutman 2003). These models can be used to detect
general developmental rules that underlie the patterns of phenotypic variation and
they permit predictions about the generative capacities of a given developmental
5.4  Research Programs and Methods

102
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
system. Morphospace modeling indicates that only a limited number of phenotypic
solutions can be obtained from a given developmental system, even in the presence
of ample genetic variation. However, these effects are not only limitational. Certain
morphological solutions, for example, are more likely to arise than others,
independent from the molecular and genetic circuitry associated with their
generation, pointing to inherent properties of the developmental system involved.
Multivariate statistics is a theoretical tool that is increasingly applied, in particular
as EvoDevo extends into paleontology and anthropology. Although research on
human evolution had a traditional focus on quantifying the patterns of variation
represented by the fossil record, including patterns of heterochrony, relatively little
attention had been paid to the actual ontogenetic mechanisms that underlie the
crucial phenotypic transformations in hominid evolution, with few noticeable
exceptions (Lovejoy et al. 1999; Minugh-Purvis and McNamara 2001; Lieberman et
al. 2002). As landmark-based approaches are gaining wide acceptance in anthropo-
logy (Bookstein 1991; Eble 2001), the analyses of ontogenetic shape trajectories
receives heightened attention (Prossinger and Bookstein 2003; Cobb and O’Higgins
2004; Mitteroecker et al. 2004), paving the way for EvoDevo in anthropology.
Multivariate shape analyses help not only quantify the evolutionary modifications
that took place in hominid evolution, but are essential for defining their ontogenetic
locations and, hence, assist the identification of the developmental pathways that
are responsible for effectuating these changes. In addition, the multivariate approach
links EvoDevo with quantitative genetics and the concepts of morphological
integration (Cheverud 1982).
Finally, the theoretical biology program in EvoDevo includes the aspect of
modeling, an area in which a lot of advancement will take place in the future.
Modeling approaches are well under way both in evolutionary and in developmental
biology, but have only recently begun to address explicitly the evolution–development
interface. First models concentrate on molecular worlds (Fontana 2002) and the
evolution of developmental regulatory networks (Salazar-Ciudad et al. 2001). Projects
are under way that attempt to model the interaction between genes, cell behavior,
and higher-order tissue organization under the perspective of their evolutionary
modifiability (Minsuk, in preparation). These new approaches are characteristic
consequences of the EvoDevo agenda. They will facilitate the theoretical integration
of EvoDevo, improve its predictive scope, and sharpen the questions that biologists
can ask effectively in their analysis of embryonic development. The rapid progress
in molecular technology, computing technology, and visualization technology greatly
assists the development of modeling methodologies (Gerson 2005), in particular
as they apply to morphogenesis. At the same time expectations that mathematical
modeling will soon be able to describe an orderly mapping between genotype and
phenotype variation must be met with caution, given the extent of cryptic genetic
variation and the possibility that the inheritance of transcription and translation
might be extensively nonadditive (Gibson and Dworkin 2004).

103
5.5
Practical and Theoretical Integration
It is frequently pointed out that one of the hallmarks of EvoDevo is its integrative
potential. Integration is an important trait of EvoDevo indeed, but in at least two
different ways. One is practical. EvoDevo unites several fields of research by defining
new common questions and methods, and by creating joint research initiatives,
academic curricula, etc. As well as developmental and evolutionary biology (and
genetics as part of both), it is foremost paleontology, ecology, and anthropology that
become directly involved. Beyond that, EvoDevo forms connections with theoretical
biology, theoretical chemistry, systems biology, and the philosophy of science. This
is an interesting feat, akin to the effect the evolutionary synthesis had in the last
century, and it indicates that all participating disciplines expect progress in their own
domains from the joint approach. This functional integrative effect is undeniable
and takes place with astonishing alacrity. There is, however, a second kind of
integration that is usually associated with EvoDevo and that is actually expected to
result from it. This integration is theoretical. It would be achieved by the accommo-
dation of a theory of development into the standard, neo-Darwinian theory of evo-
lution. Thus, the black box(es) of the genotype–phenotype connection would be re-
placed by formalized rules, and the explanatory capacity of evolutionary theory would
be enlarged. The extent to which these expectations will be satisfied is not yet clear.
On the one hand, extant EvoDevo has already expanded the explanatory reach of
evolutionary theory in as much as explanation was extended to phenomena that
were not formerly addressed by the theory. Foremost of these are phenomena
pertaining to higher levels of phenotypic organization, such as the establishment
of standardized building units (homology), the arrangement of such units in lineage-
specific sets (body plans), the directionality of change imposed by the developmental
systems (constraint), the generation of new structural elements (novelty), the
repeated generation of similar forms in independent taxa (homoplasy), and the
redeployment of established sets of organization (modularity). All these themes
are addressed by the empirical and conceptual approaches described above. In
addition, EvoDevo has achieved progress in explaining how development itself
evolves and how the control of developmental processes is mutually effected by
genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. But will EvoDevo also lead to an
expanded theoretical framework, sometimes termed the EvoDevo synthesis, as
predicted and hoped for by many? And will such an integrative theory be able to
bridge the formal gap that exists between developmental and evolutionary theory
in neo-Darwinism?
It seems that EvoDevo has not yet made much progress concerning the formal
integration with neo-Darwinian theory, but a number of theoretical frameworks
that hold such a possibility can already be discerned at this point. These tend to
concentrate either on the mechanistic, regulatory interactions between realistic
molecular, developmental, and evolutionary processes or they take an abstract,
quantitative statistical approach to relating phenotypic, developmental, and
environmental variables.
5.5  Practical and Theoretical Integration

104
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
An example of the first kind, much overlooked in recent considerations, is the
“morphoregulator hypothesis” proposed in the mid-1980s (Edelman 1986, 1988).
This model assumes that the cell is the unit of morphogenetic control and that
cell collectives are the units of morphogenetic signaling that are modified in
evolution. The model accounts for the epigenetic component of morphogenesis
in terms of a place-dependent, topological response of cells to a suite of inductive
signals, mediated by the activation of specific regulatory genes that modulate cell
behaviors (proliferation, migration, death, etc.). In this mechanistic framework,
morphoregulatory and historegulatory gene activation play an essential role, but
mechanochemical components contribute at all levels to the dynamic regulatory
loop reiterating between genes, cells, tissues, and organs, and back from the levels
of higher organization to the level of molecular regulation. Due to these epigenetic
properties no complete specification of organismal form by the genome is
required. Genes, in this view, are regulators of dynamical systems that depend
on local, topological control. The key evolutionary proposal is heterochronic: small,
mutational changes affecting the response time of morphoregulatory genes for
cell adhesion would lead to amplified, nonlinear changes in morphology. The
model is in accordance with the standard neo-Darwinian paradigm but extends it
by a feedback loop joining the morphogenetic level and the evolving regulatory
genome.
The greatest potential for formalizations that could pave the way toward a unified
theory possibly resides in a fusion of developmental plasticity calculations with
quantitative genetics and the life history framework. Major works summarizing
the pivotal role of developmental plasticity in connecting the environment with
evolution have recently appeared (Pigliucci 2001; West-Eberhard 2003). Develop-
mental plasticity can be defined as the potential of a developmental system based
on a given genotype to express a series of morphogenetic trajectories that result in
different phenotypes, depending on the environmental conditions to which the
individual (or population) is exposed. The range of phenotypic variation that can
be attained can be quantified and expressed as the “reaction norm” of a develop-
mental system or phenotype. These data can be entered into formalisms relating
genetic variation and its constraints with phenotypic variation and reproductive
success via the middle ground of reaction norms and trade off structures –
a framework readily provided by life history theory (Stearns 1992). The mechanism
of developmental plasticity implies that no genetic change is required for an
organism (or a population) to respond to environmental conditions. However,
natural selection can act on the phenotypic variation thus obtained and lead to the
fixation of adaptive phenotypes – a process known as assimilation (Waddington
1956). In certain threshold cases the plastic response can go beyond the “norm”
and provide phenotypic innovations outside the reaction norm, due to new
epigenetic interaction between parts of the developmental system that do not usually
interact (Müller 1990; Müller and Wagner 1991). Plasticity theory thus holds the
potential to provide the formal basis for a long awaited second synthesis in
evolutionary theory, a synthesis that would include environmental, developmental,
and evolutionary principles (Hall et al. 2003).

105
5.6
Prospects
EvoDevo has enormously stimulated biological research, both empirically and
theoretically, and much has been achieved in a very short period of time. This
success is based on conceptual and technological advances in the last quarter of a
century. During that period EvoDevo has developed a distinct set of questions,
concepts, methods, and empirical research programs. New kinds of data are
generated and explanations are provided for biological problems that were out of
reach for earlier explanatory frameworks. Academic structures adapt in response
to these activities. EvoDevo thus bears all the signs of distinctiveness required of
an independent discipline. The scientific scope of this discipline, as shown in the
sections above, is far greater than evolutionary developmental genetics, which
represents one of the subprograms of EvoDevo, but is not synonymous with it as
sometimes claimed. Such claims are unfortunate because they reduce the capacities
of the discipline to a single level of explanation, when integration of multiple levels
is the main feature of EvoDevo.
Where will the field go from here? The four empirical programs will certainly be
pursued for some time to come. More information will be gained from the
comparative and biometric analyses of embryological, paleontological, and anthropo-
logical data, and more will be learned from the environment–development
interaction and other epigenetic conditions such as the generic physical properties
of embryonic materials. A host of new data will also come out of the developmental
genetics program which will be extended to genomics and proteomics, increasingly
using high-throughput molecular technologies and bioinformatic tools, in an
approach now often called “systems biology”. But with regard to conceptual advance-
ment, maybe the greatest future potential of EvoDevo lies in the theoretical biology
program. New methods of visualization, quantification, and mathematical analysis
of developmental processes are being developed, and can be used in a comparative
way. Computational modeling and simulation, in particular, will be able to address
EvoDevo questions, and enhance the predictive capacities of evolutionary theory.
These methods can assist the formal integration of developmental and evolutionary
theory in defining the epigenetic rules of the genotype–phenotype relation. They
are also going to help identify new biological questions for empirical study.
Innovation, modularity, and plasticity appear as major guiding themes of EvoDevo
for the near future. These topics have in common that a generative component is
required for their explanation, an element that was missing in the pre-EvoDevo
frameworks. Here, the principles contained in the black box need to be entered,
and EvoDevo goes beyond the central neo-Darwinian tenets of historical contingency
and deterministic adaptation. The new tenets added by EvoDevo may be called
“emergence” and “inherency”. Emergence complements adaptation in that it
introduces the nondeterministic factors responsible for the origination of innova-
tions. Emergence is a consequence of interactive systems, such as development, in
which the recombination of pre-existing components can lead to unpredicted results
(Reid 1985a). Inherency complements contingency. Whereas historical contingency
5.6  Prospects

106
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
signifies the lawful dependence on conditions that involve a large component of
chance, inherency is something that will always happen because the potentiality is
immanent to the system and can actually only be inhibited (Newman and Müller
2004). The accommodation of emergence and inherency expands evolutionary
theory by those generative principles that were missing in the traditional framework
and that are now captured by Evolutionary Developmental Biology.
Acknowledgments
I thank Werner Callebaut, Scott Gilbert, Brian Hall, Manfred Laubichler, Stuart
Newman, and Günter Wagner for sharing their thoughts on EvoDevo so generously
with me over many years, although they might not agree with everything said herein.
I am grateful to Werner Callebaut, Ellen Larsen, Sharon Minsuk, and Stuart
Newman for their critique and comments on earlier drafts of this chapter. The staff
and fellows of KLI are cordially thanked for their continued dedication to supporting
the development of EvoDevo theory.
5.7
References
Abouheif, E. (1997) Developmental genetics and homology: a hierarchical
approach. Trends Ecol. Evol. 12, 405–408.
Akam, M. (1989) Hox and HOM: homologous gene clusters in insects and
vertebrates. Cell 57, 347–349.
Akam, M. (1994) The evolving role of Hox genes in Arthropods. Dev. Suppl.,
209–215.
Alberch, P. (1982) Developmental constraints in evolutionary processes.
In: Bonner, J. T. (Ed.), Evolution and Development. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
313–332.
Alberch, P., Gale, E. A. (1983) Size dependence during the development of
the amphibian foot. Colchicine-induced digital loss and reduction. J. Embryol.
Exp. Morphol. 76, 177–197.
Alberch, P., Gale, E. A. (1985) A developmental analysis of an evolutionary
trend: digital reduction in amphibians. Evolution 39, 8–23.
Amundson, R. (2005) The Changing Role of the Embryo in Evolutionary Thought.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arthur, W. (2001) Developmental drive: an important determinant of the
direction of phenotypic evolution. Evol. Dev. 3, 271–278.
Arthur, W. (2002) The emerging conceptual framework of evolutionary
developmental biology. Nature 415, 757–764.
Bell, M. A. (1987) Interacting evolutionary constraints in pelvic reduction of
threespine sticklebacks, Gasterosteus aculeatus (Pisces, Gasterosteidae).
Biol. J. Linnean Soc. 31, 347–382.

107
Bengtson, S., Zhao, Y. (1997) Fossilized metazoan embryos from the earliest
Cambrian. Science 277, 1645–1648.
Bolker, J. A., Raff, R. A. (1996) Developmental genetics and traditional
homology. BioEssays 18, 489–494.
Bonner, J. T. (1965) Size and Cycle. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bonner, J. T. (Ed.) (1982) Evolution and Development. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Bonner, J. T. (1988) The Evolution of Complexity by Means of Natural Selection.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bookstein, F. L. (1991) Morphometric Tools for Landmark Data: Geometry and
Biology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bowler, P. (1975) The changing meaning of “evolution”. J. History Ideas 36,
95–114.
Burke, A. C., Nelson, C. E., Morgan, B. A., Tabin, C. (1995) Hox genes and the
evolution of vertebrate axial morphology. Development 121, 333–346.
Buss, L. W. (1987) The Evolution of Individuality. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Caldwell, M. W. (1994) Developmental constraints and limb evolution in
Permian and extant lepidosauromorph diapsids. J. Vertebr. Paleontol. 14,
459–471.
Callebaut, W., Rasskin-Gutman, D. (2005) Modularity: Understanding the
Development and Evolution of Complex Natural Systems. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Carpenter, K., Hirsch, K. F., Horner, J. R. (1996) Dinosaur Eggs and Babies.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carroll, S. B., Grenier, J. K., Weatherbee, S. D. (2001) From DNA to Diversity:
Molecular Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design. Malden: Blackwell Science.
Cheverud, J. M. (1982) Phenotypic, genetic, and environmental morphological
integration in the cranium. Evolution 36, 499–516.
Cheverud, J. M. (1984) Quantitative genetics and developmental constraints on
evolution by selection. J. Theor. Biol. 110, 155–171.
Chipman, A. D. (2002) Variation, plasticity, and modularity in anuran
development. Zoology 105, 97–104.
Cobb, S. N., O’Higgins, P. (2004) Hominins do not share a common postnatal
facial ontogenetic shape trajectory. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 302, 302–321.
Davey, K. G. (2003) Evolutionary aspects of thyroid hormone effects in invertebrates.
In: Hall, B. K., Pearson, B. J., Müller, G. B. (Eds.), Environment, Development,
and Evolution Cambridge: MIT Press, 279–295.
Davidson, E. H. (2001) Genomic Regulatory Systems: Development and Evolution.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Davidson, E. H., Peterson, K., Cameron, R. A. (1995) Origin of the adult
bilaterian body plans: evolution of developmental regulatory mechanisms.
Science 270, 1319–1325.
Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dollé, P., Dierich, A., LeMeur, M., Schimmang, T., Schuhbaur, B.,
Chambon, P., Duboule, D. (1993) Disruption of the Hoxd-13 gene induces
localized heterochrony leading to mice with neotenic limbs. Cell 75, 431–441.
5.7  References

108
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
Donoghue, M. J., Ree, R. H. (2000) Homoplasy and developmental constraint:
a model and an example from plants. Am. Zool. 40, 759–769.
Duboule, D. (1994) Temporal colinearity and the phylotypic progression: a basis
for the stability of a vertebrate bauplan and the evolution of morphologies
through heterochrony. Dev. Suppl. 135–142.
Duboule, D., Dollé, P. (1989) The structural and functional organisation of the
mouse Hox gene family resembles that of Drosophila homeotic genes.
EMBO J. 8, 1497–1505.
Dudley, M., Poethig, R. S. (1991) The effect of a heterochronic mutation,
Teopod2, on the cell lineage of the maize shoot. Development 111, 733–739.
Dworkin, I. M., Tanda, S., Larsen, E. (2001) Are entrenched characters
developmentally constrained? Creating biramous limbs in an insect. Evol. Dev.
3, 424–431.
Eberhard, W. G. (2001) Multiple origins of a major novelty: moveable
abdominal lobes in male sepsid flies (Diptera: Sepsidae), and the question of
developmental constraints. Evol. Dev. 3, 206–222.
Eble, G. J. (2001) Multivariate approaches to development and evolution.
In: Minugh-Purvis, N., McNamara, K. J. (Eds.), Human Evolution through
Developmental Change. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 51–78.
Edelman, G. M. (1986) Evolution and morphogenesis: the regulator hypothesis.
In: Gustafson, J. P., Stebbins, G. L., Ayala, F. J. (Eds.), Genetics, Development,
and Evolution. New York: Plenum Press, 1–27.
Edelman, G. M. (1988) Topobiology. New York: Basic Books.
Eldredge, N., Gould, S. J. (1972) Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to
phyletic gradualism. In: Schopf, T. J. M. (Ed.), Models in Paleobiology.
San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper, 82–115.
Fontana, W. (2002) Modelling ‘evo-devo’ with RNA. BioEssays 24, 1164–1177.
Fontoura Costa, L., Barbosa, M. S., Manoel, E. T., Streicher, J., Müller, G. B.
(2004) Mathematical characterization of three-dimensional gene expression
patterns. Bioinformatics 20, 1653–1662.
Forgacs, G., Newman, S. A. (2005) Biological Physics of the Developing Embryo.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gerson, E. (2005) The juncture of evolutionary and developmental biology.
In: Laubichler, M. D., Maienschein, J. (Eds.), From Embryology to Evo-Devo:
A History of Embryology in the 20th Century. Cambridge: MIT Press, in press.
Gibson, G., Dworkin, I. (2004) Uncovering cryptic genetic variation. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 5, 681–90.
Gilbert, S. F. (2001) Ecological developmental biology: developmental biology
meets the real world. Dev. Biol. 233, 1–32.
Gilbert, S. F. (2003) Evo-Devo, Devo-Evo, and Devgen-Popgen. Biol. Phil. 18,
347–352.
Gilbert, S. F., Bolker, J. A. (2001) Homologies of process and modular
elements of embryonic construction. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 291, 1–12.
Gilbert, S. F., Bolker, J. A. (2003) Ecological developmental biology: preface to
the symposium. Evol. Dev. 5, 3–8.

109
Goldschmidt, R. (1940) The Material Basis of Evolution. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Goodman, C. S., Coughlin, B. C. (2000) The evolution of evo-devo biology.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 4424–5.
Goodwin, B. C., Holder, N., Wylie, C. C. (Eds.) (1983) Development and Evolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gould, S. J. (1977) Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
Gould, S. J., Lewontin, R. C. (1979) The spandrels of San Marco and the
Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationist programme. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. B 205, 581–598.
Graham, A., Papalopulu, N., Krumlauf, R. (1989) The murine and Drosophila
homeobox gene complex have common features of organisation and
expression. Cell 57, 367–378.
Haeckel, E. (1866) Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Berlin: Verlag von
Georg Reimer.
Hall, B. K. (1983) Epigenetic control in development and evolution. In:
Goodwin, B. C., Holder, N., Wylie, C. G. (Eds.), Development and Evolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 353–379.
Hall, B. K. (1984) Developmental processes underlying heterochrony as an
evolutionary mechanism. Can. J. Zool. 62, 1–7.
Hall, B. K. (1992) Evolutionary Developmental Biology. London: Chapman & Hall.
Hall, B. K. (1995) Homology and embryonic development. Evol. Biol. 28, 1–37.
Hall, B. K. (2000) Evo-devo or devo-evo – does it matter? Evol. Dev 2, 177–178.
Hall, B. K., Pearson, B. J., Müller, G. B. (Eds.) (2003) Environment, Development,
and Evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hamburger, V. (1980) Embryology and the modern synthesis in evolutionary theory.
In: Mayr, E., Provine, W. B. (Eds.), The Evolutionary Synthesis: Perspectives on the
Unification of Biology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 96–112.
Hämmerling, J. (1929) Dauermodifikationen. Berlin: Borntraeger.
Hentschel, H. G., Glimm, T., Glazier, J. A., Newman, S. A. (2004) Dynamical
mechanisms for skeletal pattern formation in the vertebrate limb. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. B 271, 1713–1722.
Holland, L. Z., Holland, P. W., Holland, N. D. (1996) Revealing homologies
between body parts of distantly related animals by in situ hybridization to
developmental genes: Amphioxus versus vertebrates. In: Ferraris, J. D.,
Palumbi, S. R. (Eds.), Molecular Zoology. New York: Wiley-Liss, 267–295.
Holland, P. W. (1992) Homeobox genes in vertebrate evolution. BioEssays 14,
267–273.
Holland, P. W. (1999) Gene duplication: past, present, and future. Semin. Cell
Dev. Biol. 10, 541–547.
Jablonka, E., Lamb, M. J. (1995) Epigenetic Inheritance and Evolution. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Jernvall, J. (2000) Linking development with generation of novelty in
mammalian teeth. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 2641–2645.
5.7  References

110
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
Jernvall, J., Keranen, S. V., Thesleff, I. (2000) Evolutionary modification of
development in mammalian teeth: quantifying gene expression patterns and
topography. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 14444–14448.
Jollos, V. (1934) Inherited changes produced by heat treatment in Drosophila
melanogaster. Genetica 16, 476–494.
Kammerer, P. (1923) Breeding experiments on the inheritance of acquired
characters. Nature 111, 637–640.
Kammerer, P. (1925) Neuvererbung oder Vererbung erworbener Eigenschaften.
Stuttgart: Walter Seifert Verlag.
Katz, M. J. (1983) Ontophyletics: studying evolution beyond the genome.
Perspect. Biol. Med. 26, 323–333.
Katz, M. J., Lasek, R. J., Kaiserman-Abramof, I. R. (1981) Ontophyletics of the
nervous system: eyeless mutants illustrate how ontogenetic buffer
mechanisms channel evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 78, 397–401.
Keys, D. N., Lewis, D. L., Selegue, J. E., Pearson, B. J., Goodrich, L. V.,
Johnson, R. L., Gates, J., Scott, M. P., Carroll, S. B. (1999) Recruitment of
a hedgehog regulatory circuit in butterfly eyespot evolution. Science 283,
532–534.
Kim, J., Kerr, J. Q., Min, G. S. (2000) Molecular heterochrony in the early
development of Drosophila. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 212–216.
Kirschner, M., Gerhart, J. (1998) Evolvability. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95,
8420–8427.
Kowalevsky, A. (1866) Entwicklungsgeschichte der einfachen Ascidien. Mém.
Acad. Sci. St Petersbourg 7, 11–30.
Kowalevsky, A. (1871) Weitere Studien über die Entwicklung der einfachen
Ascidien. Arch. Mikrosk. Anat. 13, 181–204.
Larsen, E. (2003) Genes, cell behavior, and the evolution of form. In: Müller,
G. B., Newman, S. A. (Eds.), Origination of Organismal Form. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 119–131.
Laubichler, M. D. (2000) Homology in development and the development of
the homology concept. Am. Zool. 40, 777–788.
Laubichler, M. D., Maienschein, J. (Eds.) (2005) From Embryology to Evo-Devo:
A History of Embryology in the 20th Century. Cambridge: MIT Press, in press.
Lee, P. N., Callaerts, P., De Couet, H. G., Martindale, M. Q. (2003)
Cephalopod Hox genes and the origin of morphological novelties. Nature 424,
1061–1065.
Lieberman, D. E., McBratney, B. M., Krovitz, G. (2002) The evolution and
development of cranial form in Homosapiens. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99,
1134–1139.
Love, A. C. (2003) Evolutionary morphology, innovation, and the synthesis of
evolutionary and developmental biology. Biol. Phil. 18, 309–345.
Love, A. C. (2005) Morphological and paleontological perspectives for a history
of Evo-Devo. In: Laubichler, M. D., Maienschein, J. (Eds.), From Embryology
to Evo-Devo: A History of Embryology in the 20th Century. Cambridge: MIT Press,
in press.

111
Lovejoy, C. O., Cohn, M. J., White, T. D. (1999) Morphological analysis of the
mammalian postcranium: a developmental perspective. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 96, 13247–13252.
Løvtrup, S. (1974) Epigenetics. London: Wiley.
Mabee, P. M. (2000) Developmental data and phylogenetic systematics:
evolution of the vertebrate limb. Am. Zool. 40, 789–800.
Margulis, L., Fester, R. (Eds.) (1991) Symbiosis as a Source of Evolutionary
Innovation. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Matsuda, R. (1987) Animal Evolution in Changing Environments with Special
Reference to Abnormal Metamorphosis. New York: Wiley.
Maynard Smith, J., Burian, R., Kauffman, S., Alberch, P., Campbell, J.,
Goodwin, B., Lande, R., Raup, D., Wolpert, L. (1985) Developmental
constraints and evolution. Q. Rev. Biol. 60, 265–287.
Mayr, E. (1960) The emergence of evolutionary novelties. In: Tax, S.
(Ed.), Evolution after Darwin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
349–380.
Mayr, E. (1997) This is Biology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
McGinnis, W., Garber, R. L., Wirz, J., Kuroiwa, A., Gehring, W. J. (1984)
A homologous protein-coding sequence in Drosophila homeotic genes and its
conservation in other metazoans. Cell 37, 403–408.
McGinnis, W., Krumlauf, R. (1992) Homeobox genes and axial patterning.
Cell 68, 283–302.
McKinney, M. L., McNamara, K. J. (1991) Heterochrony. New York: Plenum
Press.
McNamara, K. J. (1997) Shapes of Time: The Evolution of Growth and Development.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Minelli, A. (1997) Molecules, developmental modules, and phenotypes:
a combinatorial approach to homology. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 9, 340–347.
Minugh-Purvis, N., McNamara, K. J. (2001) Human Evolution through
Developmental Change. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mitteroecker, P., Gunz, P., Bernhard, M., Schaefer, K., Bookstein, F.
(2004) Comparison of cranial ontogenetic trajectories among hominoids.
J. Human Evol. 46, 679–697.
Müller, G. B. (1986) Effects of skeletal change on muscle pattern formation.
Bibl. Anat. 29, 91–108.
Müller, G. B. (1989) Ancestral patterns in bird limb development: a new look at
Hampé’s experiment. J. Evol. Biol. 2, 31–47.
Müller, G. B. (1990) Developmental mechanisms at the origin of morphological
novelty: a side-effect hypothesis. In: Nitecki, M. H. (Ed.), Evolutionary
Innovations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 99–130.
Müller, G. B. (1991) Experimental strategies in evolutionary embryology.
Am. Zool. 31, 605–615.
Müller, G. B. (2003) Homology: The evolution of morphological organization.
In: Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A. (Eds.), Origination of Organismal Form.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 51–69.
5.7  References

112
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
Müller, G. B. (2005) Six memos for EvoDevo. In: Laubichler, M. D.,
Maienschein, J. (Eds.), From Embryology to Evo-Devo: A History of Embryology
in the 20th Century. Cambridge: MIT Press, in press.
Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A. (1999) Generation, integration, autonomy:
Three steps in the evolution of homology. In: Cardew, G., Bock, G. R. (Eds.),
Homology. Chichester: Wiley, 65–73.
Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A. (Eds.) (2003a) Origination of Organismal Form:
Beyond the Gene in Development and Evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A. (2003b) Origination of organismal form:
the forgotten cause in evolutionary theory. In: Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A.
(Eds.), Origination of Organismal Form. Cambridge: MIT Press, 3–10.
Müller, G. B., Wagner, G. P. (1991) Novelty in evolution: restructuring the
concept. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 22, 229–256.
Müller, G. B., Wagner, G. P. (2003) Innovation. In: Hall, B. K., Olson, W.
(Eds.), Keywords and Concepts in Evolutionary Developmental Biology. Cambridge:
Haward University Press, 218–227.
Newlon, A. W., 3rd, Yund, P. O., Stewart-Savage, J. (2003) Phenotypic
plasticity of reproductive effort in a colonial ascidian, Botryllus schlosseri.
J. Exp. Zool. A Comp. Exp. Biol. 297, 180–188.
Newman, S. A. (1992) Generic physical mechanisms of morphogenesis and
pattern formation as determinants in the evolution of multicellular organi-
zation. In: Mittenthal, J. B. A. (Ed.), Principles of Organization in Organisms,
SFI Studies in the Sciences of Complexity. Reading: Addison-Wesley, 241–267.
Newman, S. A. (1994) Generic physical mechanisms of tissue morphogenesis:
a common basis for development and evolution. J. Evol. Biol. 7, 467–488.
Newman, S. A., Müller, G. B. (2000) Epigenetic mechanisms of character
origination. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 288, 304–317.
Newman, S. A., Müller, G. B. (2004) Inherency, interaction, and integration in
the evolution of developmental mechanisms. In: Rehmann-Sutter, C.,
Neumann-Held, E. (Eds.), Genes in Development. Rereading the Molecular
Paradigm. Durham: Duke University Press, in press.
Nijhout, H. F. (1999) Control mechanisms of polyphenic development in
insects. BioScience 49, 181–192.
Parichy, D. M., Shaffer, H. B., Mangel, M. (1992) Heterochrony as a unifying
theme in evolution and development. Evolution 46, 1252–1254.
Parks, A. L., Parr, B. A., Chin, J.-E., Leaf, D. S., Raff, R. A. (1988) Molecular
analysis of heterochronic changes in the evolution of direct developing sea
urchins. J. Evol. Biol. 1, 27–44.
Pigliucci, M. (2001) Phenotypic Plasticity: Beyond Nature and Nurture.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Prossinger, H., Bookstein, F. (2003) Statistical estimators of frontal sinus
cross section ontogeny from very noisy data. J. Morphol. 257, 1–8.
Raff, R. (1996) The Shape of Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Raff, R. A., Kaufman, T. C. (1983) Embryos, Genes, and Evolution. New York:
MacMillan.

113
Raff, R. A., Wray, G. A. (1989) Heterochrony: developmental mechanisms and
evolutionary results. J. Evol. Biol. 2, 409–434.
Raff, R. A., Anstrom, J. A., Huffman, C. J., Leaf, D. S., Loo, J.-H., Showman,
R. M., Wells, D. E. (1984) Origin of a gene regulatory mechanism in the
evolution of echinoderms. Nature 310, 312–314.
Rasmussen, N. (1987) A new model of developmental constraints as applied to
the Drosophila system. J. Theor. Biol. 127, 271–299.
Rasskin-Gutman, D. (2003) Boundary constraints for the emergence of form.
In:  Müller, G. B., Newman, S. A. (Eds.), Origination of Organismal Form.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 305–322.
Reid, R. G. B. (1985a) Unpredicted factors of evolution. The theory of emergence
revisited. Riv. Biol. 78, 493–512.
Reid, R. G. B. (1985b) Evolutionary Theory: The Unfinished Synthesis. New York:
Cornell University Press.
Richards, R. J. (1992) The Meaning of Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Riedl, R. (1978) Order in Living Organisms. Chichester: Wiley.
Robert, J. S. (2004) Embryology, Epigenesis, and Evolution: Taking Development
Seriously. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rose, C. S. (2003) Thyroid hormone-mediated development in vertebrates: What
makes frogs unique. In: Hall, B. K., Pearson, B. J., Müller, G. B. (Eds.),
Environment, Development, and Evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press, 197–237.
Rubin, H. (1990) On the nature of enduring modifications induced in cells and
organisms. Am. J. Physiol. 258, L19–L24.
Ruvkun, G., Giusto, J. (1989) The Caenorhabditis elegans heterochronic gene
lin-14 encodes a nuclear protein that forms a temporal developmental switch.
Nature 338, 313–319.
Salazar-Ciudad, I., Newman, S. A., Sole, R. V. (2001) Phenotypic and
dynamical transitions in model genetic networks. I. Emergence of patterns
and genotype–phenotype relationships. Evol. Dev. 3, 84–94.
Sarkar, S. (2003) Generalized norms of reaction for ecological developmental
biology. Evol. Dev. 5, 106–115.
Schlichting, C., Pigliucci, M. (1998) Phenotypic Evolution: A Reaction Norm
Perspective. Sunderland: Sinauer.
Schlosser, G., Wagner, G. P. (Eds.) (2004) Modularity in Development and
Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sharpe, J., Ahlgren, U., Perry, P., Hill, B., Ross, A., Hecksher-Sorensen, J.,
Baldock, R., Davidson, D. (2002) Optical projection tomography as a tool for
3D microscopy and gene expression studies. Science 296, 541–545.
Shubin, N., Tabin, C., Carroll, S. (1997) Fossils, genes and the evolution of
animal limbs. Nature 388, 639–648.
Stearns, S. C. (1992) The Evolution of Life Histories. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Steinberg, M. S. (1963) Reconstruction of tissues by dissociated cells. Science
141, 401–408.
5.7  References

114
5  Evolutionary Developmental Biology
Stern, D. L. (1998) A role of Ultrabithorax in morphological differences between
Drosophila species. Nature 396, 463–466.
Streicher, J., Donat, M. A., Strauss, B., Spörle, R., Schughart, K., Müller,
G. B. (2000) Computer based three-dimensional visualization of develop-
mental gene expression. Nat. Genet. 25, 147–152.
Streicher, J., Müller, G. B. (1992) Natural and experimental reduction of the
avian fibula: developmental thresholds and evolutionary constraint. J. Morphol.
214, 269–285.
Tautz, D. (2002) Evo-Devo – Evolution von Entwicklungsprozessen. Laborjournal
5, 18–21.
Thomas, R. D. K., Reif, W.-E. (1993) The skeleton space: a finite set of organic
designs. Evolution 47, 341–360.
Tollrian, R., Harvell, C. D. (Eds.) (1999) The Ecology and Evolution of Inducible
Defenses. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
True, J. R., Carroll, S. B. (2002) Gene co-option in physiological and
morphological evolution. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 18, 53–80.
Vogl, C., Rienesel, J. (1991) Testing for developmental constraints: carpal
fusions in urodeles. Evolution 45, 1516–1519.
von Dassow, G., Munro, E. (1999) Modularity in animal development and
evolution: Elements of a conceptual framework for EvoDevo. J. Exp. Zool. B
Mol. Dev. Evol. 285, 307–325.
Vrba, E. S. (2003) Ecology, development, and evolution: perspectives from the
fossil record. In: Hall, B. K., Pearson, B. J., Müller, G. B. (Eds.),
Environment, Development, and Evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press, 85–105.
Waddington, C. H. (1942) Canalization of development and the inheritance of
acquired characters. Nature 150, 563–565.
Waddington, C. H. (1956) Genetic assimilation. Adv. Genet. 10, 257–290.
Wagner, G. P. (1988) The influence of variation and of developmental
constraints on the rate of multivariate phenotypic evolution. J. Evol. Biol. 1,
45–66.
Wagner, G. P. (1989) The biological homology concept. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 20,
51–69.
Wagner, G. P. (1996) Homologues, natural kinds, and the evolution of modularity.
Am. Zool. 36, 36–43.
Wagner, G. P. (2000) What is the promise of developmental evolution?
Part I: why is developmental biology necessary to explain evolutionary
innovations? J. Exp. Zool. 288, 95–98.
Wagner, G. P. (2001) What is the promise of developmental evolution?
Part II: a causal explanation of evolutionary innovations may be impossible.
J. Exp. Zool. 291, 305–309.
Wagner, G. P., Chiu, C. H. (2001) The tetrapod limb: a hypothesis on its origin.
J. Exp. Zool. 291, 226–240.
Wagner, G. P., Müller, G. B. (2002) Evolutionary innovations overcome
ancestral constraints: a re-examination of character evolution in male sepsid
flies (Diptera: Sepsidae). Evol. Dev. 4, 1–6.

115
Wagner, G. P., Chiu, C., Laubichler, M. (2000) Developmental evolution as a
mechanistic science: the inference from developmental mechanisms to
evolutionary processes. Am. Zool. 40, 819–831.
Wake, D. B. (1982) Functional and developmental constraints and opportunities
in the evolution of feeding systems in urodeles. In: Mossakowski, D., Roth,
G. (Eds.), Environmental Adaptation and Evolution. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer,
51–66.
Wake, D. B. (1996) Evolutionary developmental biology – prospects for an
evolutionary synthesis at the developmental level. Mem. Calif. Acad. Sci. 20,
97–107.
Wallace, B. (1986) Can embryologists contribute to an understanding of
evolutionary mechanisms? In: Bechtel, W. (Ed.), Integrating Scientific
Disciplines. Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 149–163.
Webb, J. F. (1989) Developmental constraints and evolution of the lateral line
system in teleost fishes. In: Coombs, S., Gäner, P., Münz, H. (Eds.),
The Mechanosensory Lateral Line: Neurobiology and Evolution. New York:
Springer, 79–97.
Weninger, W. J., Mohun, T. (2002) Phenotyping transgenic embryos: a rapid
3D screening method based on episcopic fluorescence image capturing.
Nat. Genet. 30, 59–65.
West-Eberhard, M. J. (2003) Developmental Plasticity and Evolution. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Wilkins, A. (2002) The Evolution of Developmental Pathways. Sunderland:
Sinauer.
Woltereck, R. (1909) Weitere experimentelle Untersuchungen über Art-
veränderung, speziell über das Wesen quantitativer Artunterschiede bei
Daphniden. Verh. Deutsch. Zool. Gesell. 1909, 110–172.
Wray, G. A. (1999) Evolutionary dissociations between homologous genes and
homologous structures. In: Bock, G. R., Cardew, G. (Eds.), Homology.
Chichester: Wiley, 189–203.
Wray, G. A., Lowe, C. J. (2000) Developmental regulatory genes and echinoderm
evolution. Syst. Biol. 49, 151–174.
Wray, G. A., McClay, D. R. (1989) Molecular heterochronies and heterotopies in
early echinoid development. Evolution 43, 803–813.
Zakany, J., Gerard, M., Favier, B., Duboule, D. (1997) Deletion of a HoxD
enhancer induces transcriptional heterochrony leading to transposition of the
sacrum. EMBO J. 16, 4393–4402.
5.7  References

117
6
Human Biological Evolution
Winfried Henke
6.1
Summary
This chapter provides a comprehensive compilation of evidence, current ideas, and
interpretation of human biological evolution. Paleoanthropological research aims
to explain the process of hominization. The biological approach to understanding
human evolution as a self-organizing process focuses on the structural and functio-
nal adaptations within the order Primates. During the past decades, significant
advances in our biological research concepts allowed an increased understanding
of the complexity of the origin of Homo sapiens from early primate ancestors. The
issue is introduced by a short review of the main subjects involved in reconstruction
of the straightforward evolutionary processes, which led to our uniqueness. Humans
are primates, and thus it is the challenge of evolutionary research to explain their
emergence exclusively through the mechanisms of natural selection. The main
subjects of research being discussed are taxonomy, functional, constructional, and
evolutionary morphology, taphonomy as well as paleoecology and paleogenetics.
Within a multidisciplinary and multifaceted approach, paleoanthropology tries to
decipher the adaptive problems that have been important in human evolution. This
chapter outlines biological human evolution from the emergence of primates to the
origin of anatomically modern humans. The main discussions concentrate on
evolutionary trends within nonhuman primates, the adaptive problems that the
australopithecines faced living in tropical environments as large, ground-dwelling
mammals, the evolution of habitual bipedality, the nutritional change from herbivory
to carnivory, and the increase of neuronal complexity (encephalization) within the
genus Homo.
Finally, the taxonomical problems within our genus and the Eurasian dispersal
of an early Homo are discussed on the basis of the actual fossil record. At present,
the most debated paleoanthropological problem is the origin of modern humans.
The competing models, the ‘recent African origin model’ and the ‘multiregional
model’, are discussed thoroughly. A special section debates the image and fate of
the Neanderthals, also taking recent aDNA results into consideration.
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5

118
6  Human Biological Evolution
6.2
Introduction to the Issue
Although Darwin did not mention the descent of man in his principal work
published in 1859, his masterpiece left no doubt about the consequences for our
self-understanding. Darwin focused on this hot issue for the first time in 1871 in
his essential book The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. T. H. Huxley
published soon after, despite the bitter protests of traditional creationists, a
comparative analysis On Evidences as to Man’s Place in Nature in 1863. He gathered
all contemporary arguments for the provoking thesis that human beings are just
another kind of animal, but he professed simultaneously that man is not just an
animal, but more than that. No evolutionist will deny that humanity has a special
status, because there are obvious differences that set us apart, e.g., our capacity for
communication and our complex social interaction, as well as civilization and
technology. Thus, to characterize Homo sapiens by a paradox, we are merely ‘another
unique species’ (Foley 1987). Uniqueness arises for all species through the
mechanism of natural selection, and it is the challenge of the paleoanthropological
sciences to give conclusive answers regarding the questions of our own origins,
the most mysterious and complex process in all of biology (Campbell 1998, Foley
1995, Henke and Rothe 1994, 1998, Jones et al. 1992, Tattersall 1995, 1997). The
major questions about human evolution still remain the same:
 When and where did the first ancestors of our own species evolve?
 What are the essential phylogenetic adaptations of the hominins?
– What were the ecological niches of our different Plio- and Pleistocene ancestors?
– What did our early hominin forerunners look like?
– How did they behave?
 What are the special relationships within the hominin primates?
 Where and when did our own species evolve?
 How did we become a bipedal, large-brained, culturally dependent animal?
Evolutionary anthropology must explain not only upright walking, orthognathy,
and loss of body hair, but it is also necessary to explain how evolution, based mainly
on natural selection and not on a creative master plan, could bring about an
organism that has ‘culture as its nature’ (Vogel 2000). A biological reconstruction
of the path to humanity is based on two sources: fossils and living, ‘recent’ primates.
Fossils, petrified remains of earlier animals (or plants), represent important evidence
of phylogeny, but the biological remains do not constitute direct factual information
concerning the course of evolution. The idea that fossils are capable of narrating
their own history is therefore erroneous: well founded theories concerning our
phylogenetic pathway are the necessary precondition for valid thought processes
about hominization.
Although fossils provide the basic physical evidence and characteristics for our
attempts at phylogenetic reconstruction, hominization can be understood only as
a complex psychophysical adaptive process and as such can only be explained by a

119
6.2  Introduction to the Issue
broad multifaceted multi- and interdisciplinary approach within the framework of
primatology (Jones et al. 1992, Martin 1990). Phylogenetic research exploits the all-
encompassing investigation of both extinct and extant forms of primates. Human
phylogenetics research proves to be the interaction of numerous neighboring
disciplines (Figure 6.1). Sciences of major importance include primatology,
taxonomy, functional and evolutionary morphology, taphonomy, and evolutionary
ecology. The revolution in molecular biology has overrun paleoanthropology and
established new fields of research: paleogenetics (archaeometrics) and molecular
population genetics, which have yielded much-popularized results on human
evolution, especially concerning the phylogenetic relationships within the order
Primates. The science of paleoanthropology is – as is anthropology itself –
a comparative human biology that describes and interprets:
 communalities between nonhuman primates and humans
 the ‘distinctiveness’ of the human being
The understanding of evolution as a self-organizing problem-solving process shapes
paleoanthropology as a discipline that integrates knowledge from biological and
earth sciences as well as the social sciences, especially archeology and cultural
anthropology (ethnology). Within an integrative and broadly conceived approach,
Figure 6.1  Disciplines that contribute to the reconstruction of the process
of human evolution. Bold: subjects discussed in detail in this chapter
(from Henke and Rothe 1994).

120
6  Human Biological Evolution
paleoanthropology tries to establish a valid phylogenetic model on the adaptive
processes that made us human. As a result of sophisticated planned excavations
there has actually been a dramatic increase in fossilized bones and archaeological
material, which enables us to unravel our history and its spatial and chronological
patterns. But just as important are methodological and technical improvements,
as in the paleoecology and molecular biology. Although many special questions are
still open, there is a consensus that human evolution followed the same principles
as that of all other organisms. From an evolutionary standpoint, we are the product
of straightforward evolutionary processes. The most fascinating aspect (and the
most confusing, not only for laymen) is that we are the only recent species with
self-consciousness. A pithy characterization of man is “Humans are animals who
wonder intensely and endlessly about their origin” (anonymous).
Even this unique feature, which enables us to reflect about our origin, is
explainable within the pattern of teleonomy and does not need a teleological theory
(Pittendrigh 1958). Although Darwin’s great idea transforms and illuminates our
traditional view of humanity’s place in the universe, we have to realize that the
most fundamental and contentious question, that of why we evolved, is more than
a biological problem.
In spite of vehement criticism from creationists and their intellectual allies,
evolutionary biologists have an enormous amount of convincing evidence and
concise arguments for our evolution by natural selection; as Dobzhansky put it:
“Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution” (Freeman and
Herron 1998, p. 51). But science has evidence without certainty. Paleoanthropo-
logists just model, and there is no doubt that evolution is a fact or – somewhat less
apodictically formulated – at least the evidence for it is plausible or even convincing
by reason of the overwhelming details that have been gathered. And despite the
fact that no alternative interpretation for this evidence has ever been offered, there
are many controversies within the science of paleoanthropology. Not only do the
scanty and scrappy fossils generate divergent interpretations, but different metho-
dological approaches and their steady improvement also sometimes yield dramatic
changes in our phylogenetic models. For this reason a paleoanthropologist “must
constantly refine the research strategy, thoughtfully integrate the diversity of
disciplines, carefully phrase questions, apply new methodologies, and implement
targeted survey and excavation to significantly augment our knowledge of human
evolution” (Johanson and Edgar 1996, p. 22).
The main subjects involved in the reconstruction of the human evolutionary
process are characterized below.
Primatology is a vast field of biological and paleontological research on primates,
an order of mammals. The broad catalogue of scientific approaches reaches from
the fossil record of the primates that originated around 70–80 myr ago in the
Paleocene to phylogenetic reconstruction according to all kinds of biological features.
The primary objective of the interspecific morphological, physiological, cytogenetic,
serological, molecular, biochemical, and behavioral comparison is to identify key
characteristics in the earliest primates and investigate the fate of these features
during the subsequent evolution of the group (Martin 1990, Szalay and Delson

121
1979). This kind of approach within a broad evolutionary context is essential for
gaining knowledge about human evolution.
Long before Darwin’s theory of a historical–genetic relationship among all
organisms, the similarity between monkeys, apes, and humans had been pointed
out by natural scientists from ancient Greece and the late Middle Ages. The first
person to examine the anatomy of an ape was the Dutch physician Nicolaas Tulp
(1641), who published a book on Satyrus indicus. Although he described the ape as
an orangutan, there is evidence that it was a pygmy chimpanzee (bonobo).
Somewhat later, the English anatomist Edward Tyson (1699) examined the common
chimpanzee in comparison with a monkey and a human and placed the ‘pygmie’,
as he called the autopsied ape, as an intermediate link between them. From this
kind of pre-Darwinian phenomenological studies resulted the view that all superficial
similarities are evidence for a homogeneous creative plan for the immutability of
species. Darwin’s theory refuted this traditional view by describing a mindless,
purposeless, mechanical process he called natural selection. Darwin wrote in a
notebook: “He who understands baboon would do more towards metaphysics than
Locke” (Barrett et al. 1987, cited in Dennett 1995, p. 61).
T. H. Huxley (1863) was the first who presented comprehensive primatological
arguments for a human–ape relationship. Somewhat later, Darwin (1871) pointed
to Africa as the continent where the human lineage originated, a prognosis that
proved to be correct. But primatology not only gives answers about where the cradle
of mankind is situated. Comparison of the human with the nonhuman serves to
enlighten the determination of what is specifically human. Thus, primatology can
contribute essentially to our self-comprehension. Not only are the differences, i.e.,
the contrasting features, of anthropological interest, but also the similarities. A look
at the broad spectrum of specializations within the order primates allows the
recognition of evolutionary tendencies (optimization of the visual and tactile senses;
enlargement of brain capacity, increase in body size, extension of the individual
life span and developmental stages, reduction of the number of offspring, increase
of parental investment, intensified behavioral flexibility, intensive build up and
growth of traditions within a social group). In light of this view, humans are
“intensified progressions of phylogenetic trends” (Vogel 1975). Within the pre-
adaptations (predispositions) for human evolution there is, above all, a recognizable
shift from emphasis on information by inheritance via the genes to a much greater
emphasis on a tradigenetic evolution, that is, the passing on of learned/acquired
abilities and individual experiences. The challenge of evolutionary biology is to
explain, within Darwinian principles, the enormous intensification of cognitive/
intellectual abilities, the conscious control of one’s own behavior, and the in-
creasingly complex tool manufacturing and tool usage.
An essential condition for technological evolution within the framework of culture
was the development of symbolic language(s), combined with a system of in-
formation communication from one individual brain to another (tradigenetic
information).
Furthermore, there are the problems concerning the evolution of personal and
social responsibility and morality. These questions continuously lead to the
6.2  Introduction to the Issue

122
6  Human Biological Evolution
sociobiological problem of whether the ‘good’ is also the human. If we ask how our
animal heritage affects the way we live, we touch fundamental problems that were
formerly only the demesne of existentialist philosophy and ethics – no wonder that
primatology and especially the ethological field studies (e.g., Boesch 1996, Boesch-
Achermann and Boesch 1994, Goodall 1986), as well as laboratory research on
cognition and language (e.g., Premack 1976, Savage-Rumbough and Lewin 1995,
Savage-Rumbough et al. 1978), have piqued tremendous public interest. The same
is true concerning the gene called FOXP2, which is involved in the face and jaw
movements necessary for speech. This is hopefully the first of many language genes
to be discovered, and the geneticist Wolfgang Enard further estimates that this
gene variant that permits language may have become widespread during the last
200 000 years (Enard et al. 2002).
The intensive anthropological focus on primates comes from the fact that
primatological research allows us to test hypotheses by further observation and
discoveries. Comparative research on living and fossil primates is therefore
indispensable for the reconstruction of human evolution.
Taxonomy is the theoretical study of the laws, procedures, and principles of the
arrangements of organisms. A taxon is thus defined as a group of organisms at any
level of the hierarchy (e.g., species, genus, family). Although the listing and
application of names (nomenclature) must follow established rules of the Inter-
national Code of Zoological Nomenclature, the recognition of species and taxa,
their integration and assignment in a classificatory hierarchy, is less clear-cut,
engendering much discussion. The most controversial viewpoints concern the
definition and recognition of species. The most common definition of a species is
the biospecies (Mayr 1969, 1975), i.e., a group of actually or potentially interbreeding
natural populations, which is reproductively isolated from other species. Because
this definition is applicable only to contemporaneous living organisms, alternative
definitions have been proposed (Simpson 1961, Wiley 1978). Paleontologists very
often describe fossil species as morphospecies, based on morphological or
anatomical similarity, or refer to temporally successive species in a single lineage,
so-called paleospecies or chronospecies. The most accepted definition of a species
is given by Wiley (1978, p. 18) as “a single lineage of ancestral descendant
populations of organisms which maintains its identity from other such lineages
and which has its own evolutionary tendencies and historical fate.”
An evolutionary analysis of fossils is based on the simple principle of morpho-
logical (or molecular) similarity. But we know from many false pre-Darwinian
classifications that there is a serious problem, because similarity is not equality.
On the one hand, one must describe similar features, which are based on common
ancestry or a common ancestor, the homologs. The homology of characters is
determined by the similarity of location, composition, and development. Although
homologies can have a structural similarity to each other, this is not always true,
due to functional differentiations. Take, for example, the bat wing and the forelimb
of humans.
On the other hand, there can be a similarity between features of different animals
without inheritance from a common ancestor. These kinds of features, which are

123
similar by virtue of function, are called homoplasies. Within the homoplastic features
are different categories such as parallelism, convergence, and analogy, whose
difference is basically one of degree (Aiello and Dean 1990, contra Martin 1990).
Evolutionary analyses must be based on homologous features, because only these
features provide evidence of genetic continuity. However, it is not sufficient to rely
on a simple distinction between apparently homologous similarities and apparently
analogous (convergent, parallel) similarities. A successful attempt needs a further
separation of homologous similarities into initial ancestral features, which may be
labeled ‘primitive’ or plesiomorphic (Hennig 1950, 1966), and derived (Mayr 1969)
or apomorphic, features, respectively (Hennig 1950, 1966). The more remote
homologies are called symplesiomorphic features, or ancestral features, and
homologies shared by closely related taxa are called synapomorphic features (or
shared ancestral features). Those features that are unique to a particular taxon are
called autapomorphic features.
Evolutionary analyses aim to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships and thus
hierarchical grouping of taxa based on three different theoretical and methodological
concepts:
 Evolutionary taxonomy (Simpson 1961, Mayr 1975).
 Phylogenetic systematics or cladistic (Hennig 1950, Wiley 1978, Ax 1984).
 Numerical taxonomy or phenetic (Sneath and Sokal 1973).
A main aspect of these different approaches is the fact that they are either pre-
ferentially based on grades, i.e., groups of animals similar in general levels of organi-
zation, or strictly on clades, i.e., groups of organisms with a common genetic origin.
Evolutionary systematics (taxonomy) is a grade-based concept. Grades are
composed of independent lineages that may or may not be monophyletic. This
kind of grouping is characterized by the inherent general level of organization or
the share of a set of features. Simpson (1961) and Mayr (1969), the proponents of
this approach, argue that a classification should not only be consistent with the
evolutionary history of a group of organisms, but should also reflect other things
about the organisms besides merely the branching pattern of a cladogram. Although
the grade systematicists allow polyphyletic or paraphyletic taxa at higher levels of
the hierarchy, they do not reject the criterion of monophyly completely, and
phylogenetic systematics are strictly bound to a clade-based concept. The method
of cladistic analysis is, despite much confusion on the diversity of viewpoints, a
straightforward approach. The analysis of relationships relies most heavily on
informative characters, but which are the most informative features for inferring
evolutionary relationships?
Besides the just-mentioned criteria (homology, synapomorphy), phylogenetically
informative traits must be independent and available in great numbers. Since every
living or fossil species exhibits a large amount of traits, not all of them are useful
for reconstructing evolutionary relationships. If a cladist has chosen features that
are both shared and derived, the phylogenetic analysis proceeds by a series of logical
steps:
6.2  Introduction to the Issue

124
6  Human Biological Evolution
 establishing a morphocline, a serial arrangement of the conditions of a trait such
that each condition is logically derivable from its neighbors in the sequence,
 determining the direction of change in the morphocline,
 constructing a cladogram, i.e., a construct that indicates the order in which the
species diverged; a cladogram shows which species are more closely related to
each other,
 deriving a phylogeny,
 postulating an evolutionary scenario.
Finally, the concept of numerical taxonomy, which is based directly on the
assessment of similarities between species, needs to be explained. This approach
does not recognize the need to link classification to inferred phylogenetic relation-
ships at all, and furthermore, does not require that taxa should be monophyletic.
It is obvious from this short review that much remains to be done to establish
methods that will lead us to objective, reliable, and valid reconstructions of our
ancestry (Henke and Rothe 1994, 1998, Johanson and Edgar 1996, Martin 1990,
Wiesemüller et al. 2003).
Functional, constructional, and evolutionary morphology: Morphology is the science
of the form and structure of animals. Within the concept of comparative biology,
this discipline actually provides the main basis for our knowledge of the fossil trail
to humanity. Although the traditional morphological approach was highly descriptive
and – as some biologists proposed – would better be called ‘morphography’, the
actual concept attempts especially to analyze those processes that enforce and
determine the organismic form. The new morphological approach aims at the
operational interactions between form and function. Fossils, mostly very scanty
sources, provide us with little more than structural information. But because bone
shapes are so closely related to function, they offer an opportunity for an under-
standing of extinct animals and our human ancestors, too. The importance of
functional morphology/anatomy is eclipsed by its basic contribution to a deeper
appreciation of biological adaptation (Bock and von Wahlert 1965). Although the
analysis of the correlation between form (shape) and function is the subject of
functional morphology, constructional morphology is defined by Schmidt-Kittler
and Vogel (1991, p. 1) as
the study of organisms and their parts as coherent systems and subsystems
that obey statically and dynamically (at rest and in movement) physical
principles and processes. The choice of this term also focuses attention on
potentials and limitations set on these systems by ontogenetic growth and
evolutionary history. It includes exploration of how mechanical and chemical
forces and processes influence each other and how construction, behavior,
and environment act and react on each other.
The phylogenetic interpretations of form–function complexes are the subject of
evolutionary morphology. The simplified scheme in Figure 6.2 illustrates the
hierarchy and relationships between the components of the organism and the

125
environment, which are both pertinent to the understanding of biological adaptation.
Because bone shapes are closely related to function (form follows function),
paleoanthropologists have an opportunity to understand, how our forerunners
mastered the mechanical problems connected with the acquisition of uprightness,
orthognathy, and encephalization. Not only did the improvement of the methodo-
logical basis of the morphological sciences lead to an enormous increase in our
paleoanthropological knowledge, but technological progress (e.g., computerized
tomography, cinematography; Figure 6.3) is also responsible for our growing
confidence in our conclusions about the nature of our evolutionary ancestors
(Helmuth and Henke 1999, Henke and Rothe 1998).
Taphonomy is the study of the process that affects the remains of organisms
from their death through to fossilization. It seeks to answer the question: How
representative of life in the past is the fossil record? (Foley 1987, p. 82). The Russian
paleontologist Efremov (1940, p. 85) conceived this new branch of paleontology
(formerly biostratinomy). He described the concerns of this new science as the
“study of the transition (in all its details) of animal remains from the biosphere
into the lithosphere.”
A fossil in its broadest definition is “any trace, impression, or remains of a
once-living organism” (Shipman 1981, p. 5), and it is an obvious and trivial fact
that “fossils are dead animals” (Hill 1975, p. 18). For this reason, as Shipman
(1981, p. 5) emphasized, some traditional assumptions cannot be maintained any
longer:
 that life environments are equivalent to death environments,
 that abundance in the fossil record reflects abundance in the original state,
 that species found in the same fossil assemblage reflect sympatry of those species
in life,
 that the absence of a species from the fossil record reflects absence or rarity in
the original animal community.
Figure 6.2  Simplified scheme of the hierarchy and relationships between compo-
nents of the organism and the living space (after Bock and von Wahlert 1965).
6.2  Introduction to the Issue

126
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.3  Approaches to solving the question of how bipedality evolved
(after Henke and Rothe 1994).

127
Binford (1977, 1981) referred to the principles that relate past to present as ‘middle-
range theory’. The route of inference for knowledge about life in the past depends
on observations of the fossil record, but interpreting this record depends on
understanding the process of transformation during fossilization. This in turn
depends on observations of contemporary fossil formation or of the way in which
observable behavior in the present would be visible in the fossil record (Figure 6.4).
Paleoanthropology deals, foremost, with bones and teeth of our ancient ancestors
and – within a paleoecological approach – with, of course, all other species of the
early hominin ecological community, competitors and predators as well as potential
prey. The fossilized remains differ substantially from their nonfossilized counter-
parts. During the long geological times, the organic material of hard tissue is slowly
impregnated with minerals present in the sediments.
Another interesting variant are ‘behavioral fossils’, e.g., the famous footprints
from Laetoli. But these kind of fossils are extremely rare. The reconstruction of the
‘life history of a fossil’ deals with the problem of obtaining and arranging the
historical data and of determining the processes that operated to produce the
transformation. Shipman (1981, p. 12) formulated the first law of taphonomy: “The
present is the key to the past.” The second law stipulates: “The occurrence of the
Figure 6.4  Linking the past and the present: the route of inference for
knowledge about life in the past (d) depends on observations of the
fossil record (c), but interpreting this record depends on understanding
the process of transformation during fossilization (c and d). This in turn
depends on observations of contemporary fossil formation (b) or on the
way in which observable behavior in the present (a) would be visible in
the fossil record (after Foley 1987, Figure 4.4, p. 82).
6.2  Introduction to the Issue

128
6  Human Biological Evolution
past event can be deduced only by demonstrating that its effects differed from
those of other similar events.”
The effects of postmortem events are caused by different destructive forces, e.g.,
predators and scavengers, hydraulic, subaerial, aeolian transport, manipulation by
tools, and all kinds of decay by chemicals, roots, invertebrates, soil, and water. The
most important aspect is that only a very small percentage of all bones ‘survive’. In
other words, the taphonomic history of a bone assemblage can be taken as a story
of information loss. The preservation potential of a bone is a function of many
biotic and abiotic environmental factors. Sophisticated approaches in paleotapho-
nomy, the branch of taphonomy that studies the characteristics of fossil assemblages
and their enclosing sediments, refer to neotaphonomy, which studies the modern
processes of death, decay, destruction, dispersal, and the concentration of skeletal
remains. Experimental approaches in paleoanthropological taphonomy and
ethnoarchaeology try to establish methods for a differential diagnosis of manmade
cutting, chopping, and slicing marks from those that stem from other causes.
A continued pursuit of taphonomic research and improvements in its theoretical
and methodological bases are essential for developing our understanding of the
past and for finally giving exact answers as to what the past was really like.
Evolutionary paleoecology is the branch of paleontology that deals with the function
of ancient organisms and their relationships to their environments and to each
other (Etter 1994). In particular, paleosynecology enables us to see assemblages of
fossils as parts of former communities and ecosystems. The close correlations
between communities and their environment make fossil community relics suitable
tools for identifying ancient environments. Paleoecology enables us to trace changes
in ecosystems through time. Because fossils cannot tell their own stories, taphonomy
has been established as a successful tool for paleoenvironmental reconstructions
(see above). A reliable taphonomic analysis is a prerequisite for any paleoecological
analysis. Ecology is understood by Pianka (1983, p. 3) as “the study of the relations
between organisms and the totality of the physical and biological factors affecting
them or influenced by them.”
To learn more about these interactions in paleoanthropology, one seeks to
understand how the early hominins affected their surroundings and how, in turn,
the surroundings affected them. The understanding of adaptations as the solution
to the problems an animal faced leads paleoecologists to ask which problems the
early hominins faced (Foley 1987, p. 90). Within this context, paleoecologists
describe the broad spectrum of biological and ecological problems in early mankind
and analyze the significance of tropicality, body size, terrestriality, seasonality, and
interspecific competition within the framework of uniformitarian principles and
the explicit use of middle-range theory. The central statement stipulates: “What
will constitute human uniqueness is not any particular adaptations, but the
combinations of them” (Figure 6.5). Pianka (1983, p. 3) is correct, when he claims
that no one can master this enormous field of research alone, because there are
direct or indirect interactions between almost all organisms in a given area, and
great complexity couples these with a multifaceted physical environment, which
makes ecology an exceedingly broad subject.

129
One fascinating output of paleoecological research is that there was not just a
single lineage of hominins. There are good indications that the ecological niches
of our Plio-Pleistocene and Pleistocene relatives were very different. But evolutionary
ecological research on hominins is still in the beginning. Because paleoecological
studies are beyond the expertise of individual paleontologists/anthropologists, they
require teamwork involving ecologists, taxonomists, and others. A topic of special
interest is paleobiogeography which is still in its infancy, but there is good hope
that increased knowledge of the global distribution pattern of organisms with respect
to the evolutionary and adaptational history of taxa, as well as to major climatic and
oceanographic changes and plate tectonic will improve our picture of the distribution
pattern of early mankind.
Paleogenetics, the study of human evolution, as well as the whole field of biological
research, was dramatically revolutionized in the second half of the twentieth century
by innovative techniques.
The first revolution in biology was induced by absolute dating techniques, such
as radioisotope tests, the determination of paleomagnetism, electron spin resonance,
and thermoluminescence. The rise of molecular biology, and, in particular, of
molecular evolutionary studies (Zuckerkandl and Pauling 1962, Goodman 1962,
Sarich and Wilson 1967) suggested that molecules could serve as an evolutionary
clock. The hypothesis of a molecular evolutionary clock asserts that informational
macromolecules (such as proteins and nucleic acids) evolve at rates that are constant
through time and for different lineages. However, this general assumption has
been criticized many times. Ayala (1997) referred to the ‘vagaries of the molecular
clock’, alluding to the fact that these clocks sometimes behave in an erratic manner,
which calls their use and the neutral theory of evolution into question.
Figure 6.5  Venn diagram of human uniqueness and the human adaptive
strategy (shaded area) as the interaction of the biological categories to
which hominins belong (after Foley 1987, p. 91).
6.2  Introduction to the Issue

130
6  Human Biological Evolution
In spite of much criticism on the molecular genetics data, a spate of new evidence
was derived from analysis of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in recent populations.
MtDNA became a source of new perspectives concerning the evolutionary history
of our species and the genetic relatedness of human populations (Wilson et al.
1985). By virtue of its ease of analysis, rapid rate of evolution, and strictly maternal
and haploid mode of inheritance, analysis of mtDNA promised to unravel the genetic
history of mankind (Stoneking and Cann 1989). Genealogical analysis based on
the mtDNA types of people occupying five different geographic regions, published
by Cann et al. (1987), was at first glance taken as proof of a recent African origin of
modern humans (Brenner and Hanihara 1995, Clark and Willermet 1997). Until
these initial studies, comparison of mtDNA had been particularly used for tracing
the inheritance and migration patterns of human populations during the Holocene
and even later. Cavalli-Sforza (1992) and Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) came up with
an innovative new approach to bringing genetic, archaeological, and linguistic data
together. A new subject, molecular population genetics, thus tries to bring such
entities as population size, migration, selection, admixture, and gene flow, as well
as demographical data into the focus of research. The second revolution in biology
emerged after the realization that DNA may survive in ancient tissues. Because
ancient DNA molecules are normally few and fragmented, and preserved soft tissue
is rare, there was initially little hope of finding and analyzing ancient genetic
material. The breakthrough in the study of DNA came with the application of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology in 1983, a method for copying any
fragment of DNA (Mullis 1990). Sourcing ancient remains for traces of DNA was
all but impossible until the development of this procedure. PCR starts with splitting
the double helix of a sample of target DNA into its two single strands. Then enzymes
build a new second strand from a bath of free-floating nucleic acid bases. By
repetition of the process, a single molecule of DNA becomes two, then four, and so
on. The successful recovery of ancient DNA from preserved hard tissues, bones
and teeth, allow taxonomic and genealogical relationships to be analyzed (Herrmann
and Hummel 1994, Hummel 2002) and yields many other exciting results. Nucleic
acids and proteins trapped in ancient bones thus serve as time capsules of history.
An aDNA study of the classical Neanderthal is the latest milestone in this kind of
research (Krings et al. 1997), and there is ground for optimism that there will be
much more highlights in the near future. But there are essential problems
concerning the degree of degradation of the aDNA as well as contamination. The
locational milieu of the samples under study is essential for their preservation, but
until now there has been very little research on artificial diagenesis in paleontological
material (Burger et al. 1999, Hummel 2002).
The fascinating catalogue of aDNA studies includes the ability to detect aDNA
from archaeological and paleontological findings, as well as from medical and
forensic specimens. Microbiologists have been successful in amplifying aDNA
segments from the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), which regulates the
immune system. The MHC alleles contain information that allows one to infer
what diseases ancient populations were or were not resistant to (Ross 1992).
Furthermore, there is a good chance in the near future to monitor rapid genetic

131
processes such as recombination events, for example, in human parasites (e.g.,
Yersinia pestis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis). Besides the human biological research,
there are other paleogenetics projects that focus on the evolution and relationships
of domestic animals and plant seeds or compression fossils. For the past few years
has been enormous progress in this field of research, which ranges from purely
scientific to very practical applications (Burke et al. 1991, Ross 1992, Hummel 2002).
6.3
Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review
6.3.1
Emergence of Primates
The question as to which diagnostic features essentially define primates is rather
difficult to answer. Many attempts at a definition are a compromise, because they
suffer from the inclusion of likely plesiomorphic features of placental mammals
and features that have arisen by convergent evolution in other mammal groups.
Furthermore, Martin (1986, p. 8) complains that it is not useful to include trends –
as is usually done – in any definition of primates. Unlike other mammals, primates
lack any clear-cut diagnostic features. Interpretation of the skeletal features
identifiable from the fossil record especially creates fundamental classification
problems. On the other hand, there are fewer difficulties to decide on what
anatomical and behavioral characteristics in living species define a primate.
A preliminary catalogue of characteristics for the ‘definition’ of primates is given
below (Table 6.1 and Figure 6.6).
Based on the Hennigian phylogenetic systematics, taxa have to be defined in
terms of synapomorphies, or shared derived traits. Comparative anatomical analyses
deliver good indications that the primates may be closely related to tree shrews
(Order Scandentia), flying lemurs or colugos (Order Dermoptera), and bats
(Chiroptera) (Figure 6.7). Actually there is great disagreement and debate about
the correct phylogeny among these groups (Cartmill 1992, Schmitz and Zischler
2002, Schmitz et al. 2003).
Although fossil evidence from the earliest representatives of the order primates
is missing, there is a broad consensus that the first primates evolved from
insectivore-like, archaic terrestrial and nocturnal mammals some time in the latest
part of the Cretaceous period (70–80 myr). Among the substantial fossils from the
latest epoch of the Cretaceous or the earliest part of the Paleocene period is the
mouse-sized Purgatorius from North American sites, the fossil that anatomically
most closely resembles later primates. The dentition of this genus indicates a
primarily insectivorous nutrition, but a trend from vertical shearing toward more
transverse shearing and crushing is an indication of an omnivorous diet. Because
the features Purgatorius shares with later primates are so general, its classification
as a primate has been questioned by several experts. Still, Fleagle (1988, p. 271)
emphasizes: “this genus is a placental mammal that could easily have given rise to
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

132
6  Human Biological Evolution
Table 6.1  Catalog of criteria for the definition of primates (from Martin 1986, Henke and Rothe
1994, 1998; numbers correspond to illustrations in Figure 6.6).
 Arboriality (arboricoly) in tropical and 
subtropical forest ecosystems (1). 
 Hands and feet with grasping abilities at 
extremities, but essentially adapted for 
prehension rather than grappling 
arboreal supports (2–5). 
 Opposable thumbs and opposable great 
toes (2, 3). 
 Fingers and toes with flat nails, not 
bilaterally compressed claws (4, 5). 
 Palms and soles have cutaneous ridges 
(dermatoglyphs) with optimized grasping 
and touch sensitivity functions (4, 5). 
 Hind limb-dominated primate loco-
motion, center of gravity is located near 
the hind limbs (6, 7). 
 Diagonal gait, i.e., forefoot preceding 
hind foot on each side (7). 
 Foot typically adapted for tarsi-fulcru-
mation, with at least some degree of 
relative elongation of the distal segment 
of the calcaneus, commonly resulting in 
reverse alteration of the tarsus (calcaneo-
navicular articulation) (8). 
 Visual sense greatly emphasized; eyes 
relatively large and the orbits possess 
(at least) a postorbital bar; forward 
rotation of the eyes ensures a large 
degree of binocular overlap (10–13). 
 Ipsilateral and contralateral fibers are 
approximately balanced in numbers on 
each side of the brain and organized in 
such a way that the contralateral half of 
the visual field is represented (13). 
 Enlargement and medial approximation 
of the orbits is typically associated with 
ethmoid exposure in the orbital wall (17). 
 The ventral floor of the well developed 
auditory bulla is formed predominantly 
by the petrosal (15). 
 The olfactory system is unspecialized in 
most nocturnal forms and reduced in 
diurnal forms. 
 The brain is typically moderately 
enlarged relative to the body size, in 
comparison to other living mammals 
(16–18). 
 The brains of living primates always 
possess a true Sylvian sulcus (confluent 
with the rhinal sulcus) and a triradiate 
calcarine sulcus (18). 
 Primate brains constitute a significantly 
larger portion of body weight at all stages 
of gestation than among other living 
mammals. 
 Male primates are characterized by 
permanent precocial descent of the testes 
into a postpenial scrotum. 
 Female primates are characterized by the 
absence of an urogenital sinus. 
 In all primates, involvement of the 
yolk-sac in placentation is suppressed, 
at least during the latter half of gestation 
(22). 
 Primates have long gestation periods 
relative to maternal body size, and 
produce small litters of precocious 
neonates. 
 Fetal growth and postnatal growth are 
characteristically slow in relation to 
maternal size. 
 Sexual maturity is attained late and life 
spans are correspondingly long relative to 
body size; primates are, in short, adapted 
for slow reproductive turnover. 
 The dental formula exhibits a maximum 
of 2.1.3.3/2.1.3.3 (24). 
 The size of the premaxilla is very limited, 
in association with the reduced size of 
incisors, which are arranged more 
transversely than longitudinally. 
 The cheek teeth are typically relatively 
unspecialized, although cusps are 
generally low and rounded and the lower 
molars possess raised, enlarged talonids 
(25, 26). 
 

133
Figure 6.6  Features defining primates (numbers correspond to those in Table 6.1)
(from Henke and Rothe 1998).
all later primates, and it is the only primate-like mammal from the earliest part of
the Palaeocene.”
Otherwise, Fleagle and Kay (1994a, p. 678) notice that “all known plesiadapiforms
are either too specialized to be ancestral to any later primates or, in the case of
Purgatorius, too generalized or poorly known to share any particular features with
primates to the exclusion of many other orders. At this time, all that seems certain
is that primates, plesiadapiforms, tree shrews, and bats seem to share a common
ancestry relative to other orders, but the branching sequence among these groups,
usually grouped in the superorder Archonta, is unsolved.”
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

134
6  Human Biological Evolution
The fact that the earliest primate fossils have been described from the New World
exemplarily demonstrates that the fossil record is geographically unbalanced, which
in turn yields many controversies. Although only little primate fossil material from
Africa has been described before the Oligocene period, many authorities have no
doubt, that Africa was the center of early primate evolution and that the fossil
samples from the Paleo- and Eocene of North America as well as Europe reflect
migrations from the south (Simons 1992). The principal sites of discovery of archaic
primates in the Paleocene and Eocene indicate that the initial radiation of the
plesiadapiforms occurred in the Northern Hemisphere. Fossils of the genus that
lend its name, Plesiadapis, have been found in Colorado (U.S.A.) and France,
suggesting that this group may indeed have originated in these regions. Because
there are strong anatomical similarities between the archaic Primates (e.g.,
Plesiadapis) and the Eocene forms called adapids (e.g., Nothartcus) some authorities
suggest a direct relationship between the infraorder Plesiadapiformes and the
Eocene and more recent primates. The archaic primates exhibit many skeletal and
dental specializations that show an evolutionary trend toward leaf- and fruit-eating,
setting them apart from the primitive dental patterns of their insect-eating
predecessors (Hartwig 2002, Ross and Kay 2004).
In the early Eocene the plesiadapiforms began to decline, while early modern-
looking primates from the families Omomyidae (e.g., Teilhardina) – tiny nocturnal,
preferably fruit-eating species that were probably ancestral to modern tarsiers –
and Adapidae (e.g., Cantius) – diurnal folivores and frugivores, which were probably
ancestral to the lemurs and lorises – started to increase in number. Although there
are no indications that the first (eu-)primates out-competed and replaced the archaic
group, it seems to be most likely that they took over their vacant ecological niches
(Simons 1992, p. 202).
Figure 6.7  Archontan phylogeny – traditional hypothesis (adapted from Cartmill 1992).

135
Although there are more than 40 genera of Eocene tarsier-like and lemur-like
primates that share many dental and postcranial features with modern prosimians,
none of these northern Eocene forms has characteristics of the suborder Anthro-
poidea, which must have arisen before the second half of the Eocene, very likely in
Africa (Simons 1992). As yet, it is unclear whether anthropoids (monkeys, apes,
and humans) are derived from adapids, from omomyids, or from some still
unknown African taxon. Ross et al. (1998) prefer the phylogeny shown in Figure 6.8.
Whether the origin of the anthropoids was within the adapids or the omomyids
makes no difference concerning the time span of their expected origin, ranging
between 35 and 50 myr. But if neither one is ancestral to anthropoids, the roots
may date back to approximately 60 myr, should it turn out that Algeripithecus minutus
from Algeria is indeed a reliable candidate for an archaic ancestor of the anthropoids
(Lewin 1993, p. 48). As can be seen in a review by Fleagle and Kay (1994a, p. 675),
“there are proponents for an African, Asian, or, ultimately, North American or
European origin for anthropoids” (Fleagle and Kay 1994b, Hartwig 2002, Ross and
Kay 2004).
The earliest known relatives of tarsiers (Afrotarsius), lorises, and Old World
anthropoids have been found in the ca. 31–40-myr-old Qatrani Formation at the
Oasis El-Fayum near Cairo. There are many indications from these Egyptian and
other fossil sites in Algeria and Morocco that a primate radiation took place in the
late Eocene at the latest. A cranial fossil has been recovered, probably from late
Eocene layers; it is classified as Catopithecus and exhibits, among other features,
postorbital plates, a distinctive anthropoid feature. Further possible catarrhine
primates of a somewhat younger age and dating in the earliest Oligocene are
classified as genera Oligopithecus and Qatrania. Both of these show close similarities
in their dental features with the later Oligocene El-Fayum anthropoids Aegypto-
pithecus (Figure 6.9) and Propliopithecus.
Besides the described genera, there are two additional anthropoid primates from
El-Fayum of great interest: Apidium and Parapithecus. Together with Qatrania they
form the family Parapithecidae. Although Apidium especially resembles recent Old
World monkeys in many features of the teeth, Aegyptopithecus and Propliopithecus
exhibit similarities with apes and are considered by some authorities to be the
earliest members of the Hominoidea, although others regard them simply as
primitive catarrhines (Simons 1992, p. 207).
Actually, all the El-Fayum species are thought to antedate the evolutionary
divergence of the anthropoid stock into Old World monkeys and apes. Aegypto-
pithecus and Propliopithecus may even represent the basic condition prior to the
split between Old World and New World anthropoids. Aegyptopithecus, a monkey-
like frugivore with a body weight around 6 kg, as a generalized arboreal quadruped,
best resembles the howler monkey, exhibiting neither arm swinging nor upright
walking. The skeletal and dental material of Aegyptopithecus, Propliopithecus, and
Apidium indicates significant sexual dimorphism, possibly as a correlate of some
kind of polygynous social system.
As has been roughly sketched, there is a remarkable Oligocene collection of
intermediate forms, which led to competing hypotheses concerning anthropoid
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

136
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.8  Primate phylogeny (after Ross et al. 1998, modified).

137
origins (anthropoids = primate taxon including monkeys, apes, and humans, which
are separated from the prosimians). The phyletic issue is however much more
complicated, especially if we take Far Eastern anthropoids into consideration (e.g.,
Holroyd and Ciochon 1994). As Fleagle and Kay (1994a, p. 694 f.) emphasize, “there
are proponents for an African, Asian, or, ultimately, North American or European
origin for anthropoids.” Their final conclusion is that “Anthropoidea appears to be
very bushy at its base; only when we can more clearly sort through these early
branches will we have a clearer view of the roots of the group.”
In terms of human evolution, the discussion of the origin of the Old World higher
primates, the Catarrhini, is of first-rate interest. They are taxonomically more diverse
today, but morphologically are more homogeneous than the New World sister taxon
(Platyrrhini) and separated into only two superfamilies, the Old World monkeys
(Cercopithecoidea) and the apes and humans (Hominoidea).
As mentioned above, the African parapithecines Aegyptopithecus and Proplio-
pithecus could be Oligocene forerunners of the Miocene Hominoidea, while the
genus Victoricapithecus, which is known by abundant fossils from deposits at Maboko
Island, Kenya, is a key to Old World Monkey and Catarrhine origins (Benefit 1999).
This middle Miocene monkey exhibits semiterrestrial adaptations that may hint of
a nonarboreal lifestyle.
Although Old World monkeys are quite rare throughout the early Miocene, there
is an intensive radiation from the Pliocene to the present. During the past 20 myr,
the diversity of monkeys in Africa has increased as the diversity of hominoids has
decreased (Andrews 1986). During this early period Cercopithecoids even lived in
those parts of Africa, Europe, and Asia from which they are absent today (Fleagle
1988, p. 397). The well founded aspect of coevolution of Hominoidea and Cerco-
pithecoidea yields more and more interest.
Fossil evidence place the cradle of the Hominoidea to the early Miocene of East
Africa. The classification and phylogenetic relationships of the fossils are still under
discussion. Early Miocene Hominoidea such as Proconsul (Figure 6.10), Afropithecus,
Figure 6.9  Skull of Aegyptopithecus zeuxis.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

138
6  Human Biological Evolution
Kenyapithecus, Rangwapithecus, and Turkanapithecus are generalized as above-branch
arboreal, quadrupedal, tailless, middle-sized to big forms that lived in very different
habitats. Their postcranial features correspond highly not only with one another
but also with much more ancient primates, such as the late Oligocene proplio-
pithecids (e.g., Aegyptopithecus) and many of the recent cebids, especially the
Atelinae, as far as this can be judged from the fossil material. Their postcranial
configuration is described as ancient hominoid morphology. They are characterized
by intensified mobility (degrees of freedom) of the extremities as well as a more
developed grasping ability of the hands and the feet, an adaptation that was
intensified during the hominoid evolution in the Miocene and the development of
a suspensory locomotion.
The described changes in the morphological pattern of the extremities and the
trunk skeleton are an essential (pre)adaptive step towards the evolution of upright-
ness in recent Hominoidea and the expansion to new niches. None of the known
Miocene hominoids show the morphological locomotion pattern of recent great
apes or humans, which were obviously developed during terricoly of the Pliocene
hominoids.
In 1934 Lewis described a new primate that he had unearthed in the Siwalik
Hills of India as Ramapithecus brevirostris and considered this species the most
manlike of the dryopithecines. Dryopithecines are the most widespread and widely
discussed fossil primates, which have been subject to several revisions and
innumerable comments (Szalay and Delson 1979). In his Ph.D. thesis, in 1937,
Lewis described Ramapithecus as a hominid [new taxonomy: hominin] ancestral to
Australopithecus, a sister taxon of Homo, but his study remained unpublished. In
the 1960s Simons and Pilbeam (1965) began a revision of the Dryopithecinae
(Pongidae, Anthropoidea) and concluded that the morphological evidence and
functional conclusions drawn from the facial–dental complex were characteristic
of later ‘hominids’ [traditional taxonomy]. Pilbeam (1972, p. 95) summarized:
Figure 6.10  Proconsul africanus (drawn by Pavel Dvorský).

139
“On paleontological evidence we can therefore place it on the line leading to Australo-
pithecus and Homo, after this lineage diverged from the other hominoids.”
Although only dentition was known from Ramapithecus, he concluded that it
was more hominid- than pongid-like [traditional taxonomy] and for this reason he
classified the Ramapithecus as a ‘hominid’. But the issue of humans’ Miocene–
Pliocene ancestry was far from being closed. New fossil discoveries increased doubt
about the hominin affinities of Ramapithecus. Especially the discovery of many
additional new Miocene hominoid specimens of the genus Sivapithecus (Figure 6.11)
in the late 1970s and reinterpretations of the postcranial data in Miocene hominoid
evolution, particularly the more derived upper Miocene material from Potwar (India)
and Rudabanya (Hungary) as opposed to the more primitive remains known from
the lower Miocene deposits in Africa, changed many minds about the phylogenetic
position of Ramapithecus.
Besides the morphological findings, which demonstrate that Ramapithecus has
its nearest affinities with Sivapithecus and the recent orangutan (Pongo), the most
important fact for a reconceptualization of the Miocene Hominoidea was the
increasing acceptance or influence of biomolecular data for understanding the
timing and relationships of hominoid cladogenesis (Ciochon and Corruccini 1982,
1983, Cronin et al. 1983, Goodman et al. 1983, Sarich 1983).
In the 1980s the scenario of hominoid evolution, as based on molecular data,
changed from an early divergence of the gorillins/panins and the hominins to a
very late divergence. The broad outline of human evolution has been painted in a
very unexpected way, because the divergence of the lineages leading to recent African
apes and humans occurred in the range of 5.5–8 myr BP (Figure 6.12; Henke and
Rothe 1994, Lewin 1998). The fact that Homo, Pan, and Gorilla form a clade that
split at a maximum of 8 myr BP indicates that all fossils older than this cannot be
regarded as hominin (traditional taxonomy: hominid).
Figure 6.11  Sivapithecus indicus (GSP 15 000), frontal view.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

140
6  Human Biological Evolution
During the last two decades it became increasingly evident from molecular as
well as cytogenetic data that African apes and modern humans differ in < 2% of
their genomes. This extremely close relationship is reflected in the a change of the
traditional systematics (Figure 6.13; Bilsborough 1992, Henke and Rothe 1998).
In spite of the steady increase in knowledge concerning the possible appearance
of the last common ancestor of apes and man, the relationships of the Miocene
hominoids remain a matter of controversy. Although the features of the teeth and
the cranial pattern of the Miocene genera Proconsul and Dryopithecus (generalized
frugivors), Afropithecus and Ouranopithecus (specialized for tough, hard nutrition),
and finally Kenyapithecus, Rangwapithecus, and Oreopithecus (folivors) differ inten-
sively in relation to their food resources, the postcranial patterns are very similar in
the early and middle Miocene and maybe even in the late Miocene. The diagram
(Figure 6.14) of the ecology of fossil and recent Hominoidea by Begun and Kordos
(1997) demonstrates the functional changes within the hominoids during phylogeny.
Figure 6.12  Phylogenetic tree: data from DNA
hybridization experiments give a range of dates
for the evolutionary origins of the hominoids.
Figure 6.13  Phylogenetic relationship of the hominoids:
(a) traditional systematic; (b) revised systematic.

141
In terms of the radiation of the nonhuman Hominoidea, different models, which
can be described as African or Asian hypotheses, exist. None of them can be falsified,
but doubtless the more ancient forms lived in the marginal areas of the distribution
zones, while the more evolved forms of the superfamily were in the core regions.
The most parsimonious cladogram, which was calculated by Begun et al. (1997) on
the basis of 240 craniodental and postcranial features, mirrors the most probable
relationships of Miocene–Pliocene Hominoidea (also Martin 1990, Henke and Rothe
1994). As can be seen in Figure 6.15, the recent chimpanzee (Pan) clusters with
the fossil genus Australopithecus. The adelphotaxon of this clade is Gorilla, and the
plesion Dryopithecus forms the adelphotaxon of Gorilla and the Pan-Australopithecus
clade. Furthermore, it must be mentioned that the relationship of Kenyapithecus
and Proconsul to the hylobatids is somewhat unexpected, because for a long time,
Kenyapithecus was thought to be the last common ancestor of the recent African
apes and man. One explanation could be the scarce fossil report, and for this reason
we have to keep in mind that an increase in the fossil record may change the
cladogram. But if we look for alternative models on the basis of current fossils, the
phylogenetic relationships of Gorilla, Pan, and Australopithecus remain stable.
Figure 6.14  Ecology of fossil and recent hominoids (after Begun and Kordos 1997).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

142
6  Human Biological Evolution
6.3.2
The First Hominins: Ardipithecus, Australopithecus, Paranthropus
6.3.2.1
Historical Outlines of Discovery and Fossil Evidence
Since humans and chimpanzees share more than 98.4% of their nDNA, paleo-
geneticists are convinced that fossils older than 8 myr can no longer be considered
hominin. The phylogenetic scenario of how recent apes and modern humans can
be traced back in time through a sequence of separate species that converge at the
most ancient common ancestor is one of the foremost problems in paleoanthropo-
logy. There is no doubt that the common forerunner of the panins/gorillins and
the Hominins lived in Africa. But the scenarios concerning the putative candidate
change frequently. Those models that describe our ancient forerunners as an
imperfect version and mixture of recent apes and humans are obsolete, because
every species – including the extinct ones – are successful in their own right (Foley
1987, 1995, Johanson and Edgar 1996). Therefore we have to assume that a common
hominid ancestor was a generalized ape and that ancient hominins were more
ape-like in appearance.
It took more than 50 years after Darwin’s prognosis that Africa could be the
cradle of mankind before Dart (1925), a young anatomist from the University of
Witwatersrand, discovered and proposed a possible ‘ape-man’ that fits the role of
common ancestor. The type specimen from Taung (Rep. South Africa) was an infant
facial skeleton and a brain cast, which was discovered in 1924 by limestone workers
in dolomite cave deposits. This first piece of evidence to demonstrate that fossil
hominins existed beside our own genus Homo was harshly criticized by the
Figure 6.15  Most parsimonious cladogram of the
hominoids (after Begun et al. 1997).

143
paleoanthropological authorities of that time. In their opinion, the infant fossil
was not convincing proof of the existence of an early hominin taxon – in addition
to the fact that the scientific establishment regarded the research of a paleoanthropo-
logical newcomer such as Dart as presumptuous.
Dart’s hypothesis stated that Australopithecus was an ancient forerunner of
humans, but which should be excluded from the genus Homo due to its small
cranial capacity. In addition, it did not belong to the recent African apes (Panini)
due to undoubtedly hominin features. The intermediate status made the Taung
fossil a ‘problem child’ until Broom (1937) discovered a cranium in Sterkfontein,
which has been nicknamed Mrs. Ples (Sts 5) and was first classified as Australo-
pithecus transvaalensis (renamed Plesianthropus soon afterwards). Additional fossils
from Makapansgat (Transvaal, Rep. South Africa) demonstrated the similarity of
the taxa, which is why all of them are now included in the same species Australo-
pithecus africanus. For a very long time the taxon Australopithecus included all those
fossil hominins of the Pliocene and early Pleistocene that were not considered
Homo.
That another, mostly contemporary and sympatric, taxon in the Pliocene and
early Pleistocene existed became evident by fossils that had been described as much
more ‘robust’ in comparison to the ‘gracile’ forms from Taung, Sterkfontein, and
Makapansgat (Figure 6.16). The term ‘gracile’ means ‘slender’ and has been used
as an antonym to ‘robust’, a characterization that was later strongly criticized (Grine
1993; Table 6.2). The split into gracile and robust forms is still pertinent, and what
the functional relevance of the morphological differences may be is explained later.
The robust specimens came from Kromdraai and Swartkrans (Rep. South Africa)
and were classified by Broom as Paranthropus robustus and Paranthropus crassidens,
respectively. Although the phylogenetic relationships of the Australopithecus and
Paranthropus taxa are still under discussion, which can be seen from the use of the
trivial name australopithecines as well as from the terms Australopithecus sensu lato
and sensu stricto, there is certainty that the differences between the samples cannot
be explained by sexual dimorphism within a single species, since the two forms
are obviously adapted to different ecological niches and demonstrate different dietary
adaptations. Furthermore, the single-species explanation has been simply falsified
by the chronological order: Australopithecus is the older taxon, and Paranthropus
the somewhat younger hominin. Although there are still arguments against a
generic differentiation, I consider this solution the most uncontroversial classifi-
cation. Strong arguments for the split into Australopithecus and Paranthropus are
given by fossils from Kromdraai and Swartkrans and additional fossils from
Drimolen (Keyser 2000). Especially are the so-called hyper-robust australopithecine
specimens from Plio–Pleistocene sites in eastern Africa a strong argument for
generic separation.
The first primate fossil from eastern Africa, which was later classified as
Praeanthropus africanus and Meganthropus africanus, was found in 1936 in Garusi
(Laetoli, Tanzania) by the German ethnologist Kohl-Larson. It was more than 33
years after this first discovery that a hominin fossil was found in the Rift Valley by
the Leakeys, who were still sounding out this area in 1935 without success – a skull
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

144
6  Human Biological Evolution
with a ‘nutcracker face’, the so-called ‘dear boy’ (O.H. 5). In 1959 L. Leakey attributed
this massively built australopithecine cranium from Bed I of Olduvai Gorge to the
taxon Zinjanthropus boisei.
Robinson (1954) compared this fossil to those from South Africa and developed
the hypothesis that the gracile and robust forms represented separate phylogenetic
lines. Since the late 1950s, East Africa had come more and more into the focus of
paleoanthropological research, and sites other than Olduvai still yielded fossils from
Parantropus boisei, e.g., Peninj (Tanzania), Omo and Konso-Gardula (Ethiopia), Illert,
Koobi Fora, and Chesowanja (Kenya).
The fact that gracile hominins of Plio–Pleistocene age existed in east Africa
became evident for the first time in 1964 by the discovery of a skull from West
Turkana, labeled KNM-ER 1470, which was classified as Homo habilis. Although
Figure 6.16  Locations of the main Plio-Pleistocene sites in Africa
(redrawn from Henke and Rothe 1999).

145
H. habilis remained a ‘premature species’ for a very long time, as Tobias, the
outstanding nestor of paleoanthropology, stated, evidence for a much older hominin
– perhaps a direct forerunner of Homo – came from Hadar, in the Afar region of
Ethiopia. In the 1970s, Johanson, Coppens, and Taieb conducted the famous
Afar Research Expedition and for the first time discovered a nearly half-complete
skeleton of an australopithecine; Lucy, as fossil A.L. 288-1 was nicknamed, became
the best-known hominin, classified by Johanson et al. (1978) as Australopithecus
afarensis.
In addition to the specimens from Hadar, fossils from Middle Awash, Fejej, and
Omo (Ethiopia), East Turkana, Lothagam, Tabarin, and Chemeron (Kenya), and
Laetoli (Tanzania) are attributed to A. afarensis, but some classifications remain
unclear. Most interesting is the fact that the Garusi-Maxilla that was found by Kohl-
Larsen (see above) belongs to the hypodigm, i.e., the former taxon Praeanthropus
(Meganthropus) africanus is no longer valid (contra Strait et al. 1997).
Table 6.2 Species of the Genera Ardipithecus, Australopithecus, and Paranthropus.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review
Taxa 
Synonyma (excerpt) 
Ardipithecus ramidus ramidus  
White et al., 1995 
 
Ardipithecus ramidus kadabba 
Haile-Selassie, 2001 
 
Australopithecus garhi Asfaw et al., 1999 
 
Australopithecus anamensis 
M. G. Leakey et al., 1995 
 
Australopithecus bahrelghazali 
Brunet et al., 1996 
 
Australopithecus afarensis 
Johanson et al., 1978 
Australopithecus africanus tanzaniensis und 
Australopithecus africanus aethiopicus Tobias, 1980 
Australopithecus africanus Dart, 1925 
  
Australopithecus transvaalensis Broom, 1936 
Plesianthropus transvaalensis Broom, 1937 
Australopithecus prometheus Dart, 1948 
Paranthropus robustus Broom, 1938 
Australopithecus robustus Oakley, 1954 
Paranthropus robustus robustus Robinson, 1954 
Australopithecus robustus robustus Campbell, 1964 
Paranthropus crassidens Robinson, 1960 
Australopithecus crassidens Oakley, 1954 
Paranthropus boisei Robinson, 1960 
Zinjanthropus boisei Leakey, 1959 
Australopithecus Zinjanthropus boisei 
Leakey et al., 1964 
Australopithecus boisei Tobias, 1967 
Paranthropus aethiopicus 
Kimbel et al., 1988 
Paraustralopithecus aethiopicus 
Arambourg and Coppens, 1968 
 

146
6  Human Biological Evolution
Johanson et al. (1978) described A. afarensis as an ancient gracile australopithecine,
and Rak (1983) explained its facial morphology as plesiomorphic in comparison to
the other australopithecine taxa, interpreting the different facial features of africanus
and robustus/boisei as functional adaptations within an evolutionary sequence.
A very recent discovery from the western side of Lake Turkana, which was named
KNM-WT 17 000 or ‘black skull’ and was first attributed to the species Paraustralo-
pithecus aethiopicus, was later classified as Paranthropus aethiopicus. Many experts
questioned this explanation insofar as there are apparently two distinct genera of
so-called robust and hyper-robust specimens. Today we have good arguments and
justifications from evolutionary morphological research on cranial and dental
remains of both taxa that Australopithecus and Paranthropus occupied different
adaptive zones. The phylogeny is still the subject of intense debate, as gradualistic
and cladistic approaches have created highly controversial models and scenarios.
The phylogenetic interpretation became much more complicated when White et
al. (1994) described a 4.4-myr-old fossil that was found in Aramis (Ethiopia) as
Australopithecus ramidus sp. nova. The finds are attributed to 17 individuals and
consist of teeth, jaws, and cranial and postcranial remains. The fossils surprised
the experts because there is indirect evidence that this early hominin was possibly
habitually bipedal but still has arboreal-dwelling characteristics. Although paleonto-
logists had expected such an intermediate pattern by reason of mosaic evolution,
the unexpected aspect was that this species was a forest dweller, which raises
tremendous problems concerning the credibility of the formerly well accepted
hypothesis which states that the essential steps of hominization took place in a
savannah habitat. The indication that ramidus was a forest dweller gave an impulse
to rethink our current theories about how hominins became bipedal.
Very soon after the first publication on Australopithecus ramidus, harsh criticism
by numerous taxonomists induced a revision of the classification. White et al. (1994)
came to the conclusion that the former attribution to the genus Australopithecus
could no longer be supported. A reevaluation resulted in a revision of the former
diagnosis and classification of the fossils as Ardipithecus genus novum (White et al.
1995, Rothe et al. 1997). How to interpret the phylogenetic position of this oldest
hominin taxon is still under debate, especially the question as to which species is
the best representative of the so-called common ancestor. Although Ar. ramidus
remains dated to about 4.4 myr, the additional fossil material from Ethiopia that
was attributed to the same taxon was about a million year older (5.8–5.2 myr). The
morphological differences between these specimens led Yohannes Haile-Selassie
to argue for a subspecies differentiation; the taxon was assigned as Ardipithecus
ramidus kadabba, while the younger specimens became Ardipithecus ramidus ramidus
(Haile-Selassi 2001).
Until recently we knew very little about the phylogenetic tree during the late
Miocene, the time span between 10 and 5 myr ago. But in this blank area there has
been a tremendous increase in discoveries. Late in 2000 a team from the Collège
de France and the Community Museums of Nairobi, led by Brigitte Senut and
Martin Pickford, discovered fossil material from ca. 6.0-myr-old deposits in Tugen
Hills. The material, which was nicknamed Millennium Man, has been assigned to

147
a new genus and species, Orrorin tugenensis. The status and phylogeny of this earliest
bipedal species are contested. Fossils even older than Orrorin have been found in
the southern Sahara by Brunet and coworkers. The age of the tremendously
interesting skull nicknamed Toumaï is 7.0–6.0 myr. The interpretation of the mosaic
pattern of the neuro- and viscerocranium is difficult. For this reason Sahelanthropus
tchadensis actually yields more problems than solutions (Brunet et al. 2002, Wolpoff
et al. 2002), but this fossil provides evidence that human evolution was a pan-
African phenomenon and not restricted to East and South Africa (Tobias 2003).
Some Plio–Pleistocene fossils have been classified to formerly unknown species
of the human family, such as Australopithecus anamensis, Australopithecus bahrel-
ghazali and Australopithecus garhi, Australopithecus sp. indet., and Kenyanthropus
platyops.
During the last decade fossils attributed to A. anamensis were found in Kanapoi
and Allia Bay (northern Kenya) by Mary Leakey and Alan Walker, although the first
fossil from the Kanapoi site was unearthed by Patterson in 1965. The distal humerus
was analyzed in 1981 by Senut who ascribed a Homo status to the fossil. The new
material discovered so far displays plesiomorph characteristics along with more
derived features typical of later Australopithecus species (Leakey et al. 1995, 1998,
2000, Ward et al. 1999). The excavators are convinced that the special mosaic of
features of A. anamensis belong closely to the ancestry of this genus. Taphonomic
and paleoecological results allow the reconstruction of riverine woodlands and
gallery forests between 3.8 and 4.2 myr. The morphology of A. anamensis shows
that this species was still adapted to an arboreal biotope, but the tibia, for example,
differs from those of all African apes in having indications of terrestrial locomotion.
The knee is placed directly over its ankle joint, an obvious adaptation for bipedal
walking (Leakey et al. 2000). The reconstruction of the paleobiotope at Kanapoi
and Allia Bay delivers rich insights concerning the ecological niche of these perhaps
earliest Australopithecus species.
Evidence that the early hominin phylogeny may be much more complicated than
we believed hitherto comes from south African fossils that are older than A. africanus
and similar in age to A. afarensis. These extremely interesting discoveries were
made by R. J. Clarke (1999), who continued long-term excavations in the dolomite
caves of Sterkfontein. While doing archaeozoological research on fossil bones of
bovids, carnivores, and primates in September 1994, he found hominin foot bones
that revealed ape-like and human characteristics. These included a first metatarsal
that showed very strong indication that StW 573-ape man was adapted for tree
climbing, while still demonstrating adaptations for terrestrial locomotion.
Nearly three years later, Clarke was lucky enough to find among material stored
in his laboratory other bones of the same individual, but the rest of the skeleton
was likely still encased in the cave breccia of the Silberberg Grotto. During 1998 he
then made the first-ever discovery of a well preserved skull and an associated skeleton
of Australopithecus. The species status as well as the sex are still unclear (Australo-
pithecus sp. indet.), but the skull remains, which are embedded in a hard breccia,
leave no doubt that this is a mature adult with a massive zygomatic arch, unlike the
pattern known from A. africanus. The Sterkfontein hominin has been dated to
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

148
6  Human Biological Evolution
3.22–3.58 myr and is older than Lucy (3.2 myr), falling into the time span when
A. afarensis existed (3.0–3.9 myr).
Besides the new discoveries from Sterkfontein, there is much digging activity at
new fossil sites like Gondolin, Drimolen, and Gladysvale (Rep. South Africa), and
we may expect instructive paleoanthropological news from these caves in the near
future (Schmid 2000).
Very exiting news has been published by Asfaw et al. (1999) on fossil material
from Ethiopia. The discovery from the Hata beds of Ethiopia’s Middle Awash allows
recognition of a new species named Australopithecus garhi. The 2.5-myr-old hominin
cranial and dental remains demonstrate the occurrence of different locomotion
patterns in association with an apparently australopithecine skull and dentition.
The discoverers speculate that A. garhi descended from A. afarensis and is thus a
candidate for an ancestor of early Homo. Arguments for this hypothesis are not
clear, because the picture is blurred by the fact that the connection between the
cranial and postcranial remains was not proven conclusively. We cannot be sure
that the limb bones, which show a human-like ratio between the humerus and
femur, and the lower and upper arm bones, whose proportions are ape-like, belong
to the same species as the cranial remains. The skull differs from those of previous
australopithecine species in the combination of features, notably the extremely
large teeth, especially the rear ones, and the primitive skull morphology.
Finally, it is necessary to mention the Hominid Corridor Research Project in
Northern Malawi. Schrenk, Bromage, and coworkers recovered an earliest Homo
[Homo rudolfensis] and a Paranthropus specimen [aff. Paranthropus boisei] from two
contemporaneous sites called Uraha and Malema. Faunal dating suggests an age
of 2.5–2.3 myr for both fossils (Bromage and Schrenk 1995, Bromage et al. 1995,
Kullmer et al. 1999, Schrenk and Bromage 1999, Schrenk et al. 1993, 1997). The
hominins, as well as the faunal remains, link this area to the east and south African
sites and allow reconstruction of a Pan African scenario of hominin evolution (see
Section 6.2.3).
6.3.2.2
Chronological and Geographical Distribution
The taphonomic and diagenetic analyses of Taung and other southern African sites
such as Sterkfontein, Makapansgat, Kromdraai, Swartkrans, Gondolin, Drimolen,
and Gladysvale are still creating enormous problems concerning interpretation of
the faunal context, because the australopithecines were discovered in dolomite caves,
which they obviously did not occupy. There are many indications that these early
hominins were actively transported to these places, e.g., by porcupines, or reached
them by falling through the dolomite chimneys from the feeding trees of leopards.
Faunistic comparisons with the well dated east African fossil sites and improvements
in dating techniques have increased our knowledge recently. The east African
hominin fossils were found in a stratigraphic context that allowed relative and
absolute dating according to volcanic layers. The lava and tuff beds and their exact
calibration were a great step forward in establishing a precise chronology of hominin
evolution. Based on the comparison of faunal complexes (e.g., Bovidae, Suidae,
Papionini), the data from, e.g., Olduvai, Koobi Fora, or Omo make it possible to

149
establish a more and more reliable chronology of the south African sites too. The
chronology of those sites where Ardipithecus, Australopithecus, and Paranthropus
were discovered (Figure 6.17) demonstrates the chronological diagram of early
hominin fossils in comparison to the genus Homo. Within this sequence, Ardi-
pithecus ramidus is the oldest one, followed by A. anamensis, which antedates
A. afarensis. The still unclassified South African australopithecine that was described
by Ron Clarke also overlaps in time with A. afarensis and A. africanus, but with a
Figure 6.17  Chronology of sites where Ardipithecus, Australopithecus, or
Paranthropus were discovered.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

150
6  Human Biological Evolution
clear tendency to younger periods. A. bahrelghazali, which was unearthed in Chad
is contemporary with A. afarensis and A. africanus, and A. garhi overlaps only with
A. africanus and P. aethiopicus. This hyper-robust species is distinctly older than
P. boisei and P. robustus, which overlap in time but are not sympatric (Figure 6.18).
The phylogenetic relationships of these species is discussed in Table 6.2 (see p. 145).
6.3.2.3
Morphological Patterns, Phylogenetic Relationship, and Paleoecology
What are the diagnostic features that characterize Australopithecus and Paranthropus
and distinguish them as hominins from the panins/gorillins? From the vast
catalogue given in Henke and Rothe (1994, S. 267) only some essential structures
are mentioned here, indicating:
 Adaptations of habitual bipedality:
– s-shaped vertebral column,
– broader sacrum, enlarged hip joints, more human-like pelvic bones,
– iliac crest,
– gliding groove for the iliopsoas muscle at the pubis bone,
– physiologically x-shaped legs, indicating a bipedal locomotion pattern.
 Very slight increase in cerebralization:
– cranial capacity within the range of recent apes, but significantly evolved
in comparison to the estimated body weights,
Figure 6.18  Chronological distribution of fossil hominin species.

151
– enlarged neurocranial height and more rounded vault,
– more flexed cranial base,
– more anterior position of the occipital foramen,
– diminished nuchal plane.
 Obvious changes in dietary adaptation:
– alveolar arc highly variable (parabolic to V-shaped; or V- to U-shaped),
– diastema in the upper jaw missing,
– frontal teeth small, postcanine teeth heavily enlarged (molarization of
premolars),
– homomorphic incisivi,
– canines with low crowns, not jutting out of the occlusal plane,
– P and M heavily enlarged, especially large occlusal areas in Paranthropus.
The morphological pattern of the australopithecines characterizes these early
hominins as substantially adapted for bipedal walking, although their special
locomotion pattern(s) would differ from the bipedality of recent humans. The
australopithecine limb bones could resist the loads and stresses of upright stance
and locomotion, although their pelvis girdle and femur were not fully shaped like
those of humans.
Furthermore, there are obviously essential differences between the described
species concerning their locomotion capabilities. For example, A. anamensis from
the gallery forest at Allia Bay and Kanapoi and the newly described A. sp. indet.
from Sterkfontein retained grasping functions of their extremities. These features
indicate that they did not loose arboreal adaptations in total, perhaps using them
in the context of their feeding or resting patterns (sleeping in the trees?) (M. Leakey
et al. 1995, 2000).
The dental and cranial features of Australopithecus and Paranthropus are indicators
of special feeding adaptations. The robust australopithecines were vegetarians with
heavily specialized teeth (Henke and Rothe 1994, 1997, Walker 1981, Walker and
Leakey 1978, 1988; Figure 6.19).
The morphology of Ardipithecus ramidus, the earliest member of the broadly
accepted hominins, shows many similarities to that of chimpanzees, including
thinner tooth enamel and smaller molars. Although the genera Australopithecus
and Paranthropus differ essentially in morphology, thus making a differentiation
plausible (which is why we divided them), other authors argue that such a decision
is ill-advised because the robust australopithecines may not form a monophyletic
group (Bilsborough 1992, Henke and Rothe 1998, Skelton and McHenry 1992,
Skeleton et al. 1986, Strait et al. 1997, Ward et al. 1999). Below, a short morphological
description is given only for the fully described species:
 Australopithecus afarensis (species time range: 3.9–3.0 myr; Figure 6.20):
– ape-sized brain with an endocranial volume of 415 cc,
– big snout; flat jaw joint; nasal sill,
– highest point of the sagittal crest in the occipital region,
– ape-like large central and small lateral incisors,
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

152
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.19  Morphological features of the dentition of Australopithecus and
Paranthropus: two mandibles of each genus in occusal and dextrolateral
view. Note the size differences, especially the enlarged postcanine chewing
areas of Paranthropus (after Coppens 1978).
– reduced upper canines (human-like), but still large and with shear facets formed
against the lower premolar (ape-like),
– premolars (ape-like); cusps variable, some resembling those of humans,
– parallel or convergent tooth rows (ape-like),
– large cheek teeth in relation to body weight,
– mostly human-like hip, thigh, knee, ankle, and foot,
– more apelike elongated and curved fingers and toes; relatively short thigh,
backwardly facing pelvic bones,
– sexual dimorphism in body size greater than in modern humans, but less
than in Gorilla,
– estimated weight:  45 kg,  29 kg,
– estimated body height:  151 cm,  105 cm.

153
 Australopithecus africanus (species time range: 2.4–2.8 myr; Figure 6.21):
– in relation to A. afarensis, more Homo-like cranio–dental features,
– higher and more rounded vault than earlier species,
– endocranial capacity 442 cc,
– less prognathic face than A. afarensis,
– larger cheek teeth than A. afarensis,
– postcranium similar to A. afarensis; hand bones more Homo-like,
– estimated weight:  41 kg,  30 kg,
– body size resembles A. afarensis  138 cm,  115 cm.
Figure 6.21  Australopithecus africanus (STs 5, Mrs. Ples), lateral and frontal view
(adapted from Freeman and Herron 1998).
Figure 6.20  Australopithecus afrarensis (A.L. 444-2), lateral and frontal view
(adapted from Freeman and Herron 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

154
6  Human Biological Evolution
 Paranthropus aethiopicus (species time range: ~1.9–2.7 myr; Figure 6.22):
– small cranial capacity (419 cc),
– unflexed cranial base,
– heart-shaped foramen magnum as in P. boisei,
– flat jaw joint,
– very strong prognathism; dished face with zygomatics raked forward,
– smooth transition between the naso–alveolar clivus and the floor of the nose,
– deep tympanic plate,
– massive cheek teeth for heavy chewing activities,
– postcranial features unknown.
 Paranthropus robustus (species time range: ~1.0–2.0 myr; Figure 6.23):
– endocranial capacity (530 cc) relatively large in comparison with that of other
Plio–Pleistocene non-Homo species,
Figure 6.22  Paranthropus aethiopicus (KNM-WT 17 000), lateral and frontal view
(adapted from Freeman and Herron 1998).
Figure 6.23  Paranthropus robustus (SK 48), lateral and frontal view
(adapted from Freeman and Herron 1998).

155
– moderate prognathic, flat face with cheek bones raked forward, specialized for
heavy chewing,
– robust jaws,
– cranial base strongly flexed,
– large postcanine teeth, molarization of premolars; cheek teeth larger than those
of Australopithecus,
– relatively small-bodied with slight sexual dimorphism,
– estimated weight:  40 kg,  32 kg,
– body height  132 cm,  110 cm.
 Paranthropus boisei (species time range: 1.4–2.3 myr; Figure 6.24):
– endocranial capacity 551 cc,
– extremely specialized for heavy chewing; massive cheek teeth, jaws, and
supporting architecture of the cranium to withstand chewing stress,
– flat face,
– strongly flexed cranial base,
– deeper jaw joint,
– estimated weight:  49 kg,  34 kg,
– body size  137 cm,  124 cm.
The known fossil record can be interpreted in a variety of ways, but in spite of all
the different approaches in the literature, one can recognize a number of time-
successive events. These evolutionary trends within the mosaic evolution show
that the first trend is the adoption of bipedalism maybe ca. 7–6 myr or at least
4 myr ago, followed by a change in the mastication apparatus, e.g., incisivation of
the canines, molarization of the premolars, and enlargement of the molars (mega-
dontism). Although dental enlargement and adaptation for heavy chewing cannot
be observed in the Homo lineage, which exhibits steady brain enlargement, it is
significant in the australopithecine lineage. How A. afarensis, whose postcranium
(Figure 6.26) is best known of all australopithecines, moved, is still controversial.
Figure 6.24  Paranthropus boisei (KNM-ER 406), lateral and frontal view
(adapted from Freeman and Herron 1998)
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

156
6  Human Biological Evolution
Although some authors see these early hominins as habitual bipeds, others suggest
that they had a gait completely their own (Rak 1991). New biomechanical approaches
seem to support the latter opinion, stating that A. afarensis was neither pre-
dominantly arboreal nor fully bipedal (Aiello 1996, 1990, Aiello and Dean 1990).
A. africanus and the other gracile australopithecines such as A. anamensis and
A. garhi may have preserved an adaptation pattern of arboreality in addition to the
capability for terrestrial upright locomotion unlike that of apes and modern humans.
Perhaps they spread out bipedally to forage on the ground and then slept in trees
during the night. It may be expected that the A. sp. indet. from Sterkfontein will
allow more precise information in the near future (Clarke 1999).
Figure 6.25  Features of the facial skeleton: (a) Australopithecus; (b) and (c) Paranthropus.

157
Paranthropus probably moved in the same way as Australopithecus, although they
had smaller heads and necks of the femur, the biomechanical relevance of which is
not yet fully understood.
Concerning the dietary adaptations, there is good indication from the teeth and
jaws that the gracile Australopithecines were mostly herbivorous. Their pattern
and wear is consistent at least with some fruit-eating, whereas the less prognathic,
flat broad faces of P. robustus and P. boisei, the massive mandibles, the increase in
facial height, and the chewing areas of the premolars and molars, paralleled by a
diminishing of the front teeth suggest a diet that involved much force between the
Figure 6.26  (a) and (b) Morphological features of the pelvis of A. afarensis
compared with that of Homo; (c) extremities of A. afarensis compared with
those of Pan and Homo – A. afarensis exhibits no physiological X-leg position
(after Zihlman 1982, from Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

158
6  Human Biological Evolution
teeth and a high amount of food processing. They could have been foli- and
herbivorous or – more probable in a savannah – graminivorous. Research on the
rate and formation of the hard outer enamel suggests faster growth and development
than in modern humans and apes. The adaptive pattern of P. aethiopicus, which is
represented only by a partial mandible from Omo and the nearly complete cranium
KNM-WT 17 000, exhibits heavy chewing functions, but the combination of
primitive traits with highly derived features is very difficult to interpret (Kimbel et
al. 1988). No wonder that there are highly controversial hypotheses on the
phylogenetic relationships. This is due to the fact that there could be significant
convergent evolution, and we have no way to sort it out. For example, it could be
that either heavy chewing resulted in the independent evolution of P. aethiopicus,
P. robustus, and P. boisei or that other selection forces shaped P. boisei, P. robustus,
and early Homo to resemble each other in encephalization, basicranial flexion,
anterior dentition, and orthognathism (McHenry 1996). Whatever the true phylo-
geny may be – and there can be only one – the present record gives diverse views
that are intensely discussed. And with every new species the Plio–Pleistocene
hominin evolution becomes more complex. Only one point seems to be clear, that
Paranthropus, which literally means ‘parallel to man’, was a well adapted primate
genus that existed for a period of at least 1.5 million years alongside our own
ancestral lineage and can be excluded from our direct ancestorship.
Several hypotheses regarding the phylogeny are shown in Figure 6.27. Hypothesis
one shows A. afarensis as the common ancestor of two lineages, one leading to
Homo, the other leading to A. africanus, from which Paranthropus splits. In this
hypothesis, the south African gracile Australopithecus is the ancestor of all the robust
forms. Hypothesis two views A. africanus as the common ancestor of the Homo
and Paranthropus lineages. Hypothesis three also sees A. afarensis as the common
ancestor, integrating P. aethiopicus as a possible ancestor of P. robustus and P. boisei.
Hypothesis four may become important when we know more about the phylogenetic
role of A. anamensis or the unclassified material from Sterkfontein. This scheme
shows the 4.5-myr-old A. anamensis as ancestral to A. afarensis and A. africanus, but
there are many question marks concerning further relationships (Tobias 1988).
Whatever the correct pedigree is, there is no doubt that, during a long period of
the Plio–Pleistocene transition, the early Pleistocene, several hominin taxa lived
contemporaneously and sympatrically. For this reason we can conclude that they
must have occupied different ecological niches. The most probable hypothesis is
that Homo was so tremendously successful because this species was the one who
became tool users and tool makers and who pursued different subsistence strategies
than the australopithecines. The reduced dentition and increased encephalization
are seen as plausible indications that selection pressure on mental skills separated
the australopithecines and Homo. The association with more complex subsistence
strategies (e.g., scavenging, hunting, and gathering) on one hand and more complex
social interaction on the other hand (home base, tradigenetic behavior, male parental
investment) may have been the triggers.
Tobias (1989, p. 148) puts it this way: “Man-plus-culture makes the environment;
environment-plus-culture makes man; therefore man makes himself.”

159
Figure 6.27  Pedigrees: (a) after Johanson and White (1979); (b) after Skelton et al. (1986);
(c) after Grine (1993); (d) after Johanson and Edgar (1996).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

160
6  Human Biological Evolution
6.3.3
The Earliest Evidence of the Genus Homo
There are few problems in paleoanthropology, says Howell (1978, p. 1985) that
“have been more persistently troublesome than recognizing and defining the genus
Homo because of its fragmentary hominid fossil record, the tendency to over-split
hominid taxa and emphasize differences rather than similarities, and the lack of
suitable methods to resolve the relative and absolute ages of fossil samples.”
It is unrealistic to expect that the boundaries of the genus Homo are well defined
(Wood 1992, 1996). Traditional expectations concerning Homo are full uprightness,
reduction of the mastication apparatus as adaptation to changed food processing,
encephalization, and evidence of cultural abilities. Morphological trends, like an
enlarged brain and reduced dentition, do not meet an adequate definition of our
own genus, which contains not only all living people, belonging to Homo sapiens,
but also our closest fossil relatives as well.
Whether the fossil species attributed to Homo had already developed a language,
a human-like society, or art can only be judged with great uncertainty, if at all. For
example, allometrical effects may cover the real abilities, i.e., body sizes have to be
taken into account to achieve an idea of the relative brain size. Current research on
cultural behaviors and underlying cognitive and linguistic competences in early
hominins is a highly interdisciplinary enterprise, which gives only very rough
information concerning the first appearance of the genus Homo.
In spite of these problems, most anthropologists agree that early Homo emerged
in Africa, where the oldest Homo specimens were described as Homo habilis in
1964 by L. Leakey, Napier and Tobias. Tobias (1989) claimed later that it was a
“premature discovery”, which means, after Stent (1972, p. 84) that “its implications
cannot be connected by a series of simple logical steps to canonical, or generally
accepted knowledge.” The nomenclators of Homo habilis described the species nova
as being more advanced than A. africanus and not as hominized as H. erectus. But
even 15 years after the species was described for the first time, the majority of
competent scholars in the field did not accept H. habilis as a valid taxon. The reason
was that there was a lack of ‘morphological space’ between A. africanus and
H. erectus, as Stringer (1986) surmised in his article on “The Credibility of Homo
habilis”, i.e., the new species was strongly criticized in the beginning, for many
experts argued that the Olduvai specimens could be classified within existing taxa.
Meanwhile, there seems to be worldwide acceptance of the fact that specimens
with smaller endocranial capacities need not be excluded from membership in
Homo and that the fossils are not a normal variant of either the putative australo-
pithecine ancestor or the putative descent H. erectus. Within this material, attributed
to ‘early Homo’ (Wood 1996), three species can be identified today, one of them
resembles Homo erectus and is interpreted as either ‘early African Homo erectus’ or
Homo ergaster, and the two other species are Homo habilis (sensu stricto) and Homo
rudolfensis.

161
6.3.3.1
Homo rudolfensis and Homo habilis (s. str.)
Although Tobias (1991) made a strong case for only one species being represented
among specimens attributed to H. habilis, other authors see evidence that there
may be two species, one named H. rudolfensis, which was proposed in 1986 by the
Russian anthropologist Valeri Alekseev for specimen KNM-ER 1470, and the other
H. habilis [s. str.] (also Wood 1991, Stringer 1996, Tattersall 2000), which are sister
taxa within a monophyletic Homo clade. However, this phylogenetic interpretation
is only a little more parsimonious than a polyphyletic one, explaining the features
typifying each species as parallel developments (also Bilsborough 1992). Anyway,
whatever may be the correct taxonomic solution, there are strong arguments against
a H. habilis [sensu lato] concept while the hypodigm remains unsure.
H. rudolfensis shows, apart from an increased average brain size of ca. 750 cc,
features of the face and masticatory apparatus that parallel those of Paranthropus,
e.g., marked orthognathy, broader midface than upper face, and large palate, but
H. habilis s. str. shows a moderate average brain size of 610 cc and progressive
features of cranium, face, and jaws (Figure 6.28).
Figure 6.28  (a) Homo habilis (KNM-ER 1813); (b) Homo rudolfensis (KNM-ER 1470);
(c) morphological features of Homo habilis s.l. (from Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

162
6  Human Biological Evolution
The postcranium of H. rudolfensis is evidently more derived, like that of later
Homo, although the association with the skull fragments is not confirmed. In
contrast, H. habilis s. str. shows a very plesiomorphic, australopithecine-like
postcranium.
The described combination of australopithecine-like cranio–dental features with
a derived postcranium in H. rudolfensis and of progressive cranium and dentition
with primitive body proportions in H. habilis s. str. (a highly putative association)
allows the conclusion that neither of the two species represents a reliable ancestor
of later Homo (see Homo ergaster), because every interpretation has to take very
unlikely evolutionary changes into account to explain these unusual mosaics.
6.3.3.2
Chronological and Geographical Distribution
Fossils representing H. habilis [s.l.] were first described from Olduvai, where they
were uncovered from layers that have also yielded australopithecine skeletal material
(Bed I and Bed II), but the largest contribution to the hypodigm comes from another
site in east Africa, Koobi Fora, on the northeast shore of Lake Turkana (Figure 6.16).
Further remains of the species have been recovered from Members G and H of
the Omo Shungura Formation. From the western shore of Lake Turkana, a cranial
fragment from the Nachukui Formation has been described, and a fragmentary
skull, Stw 53, was recovered from the South African cave of Sterkfontein in Member
5. The attribution of hominin material from Member 4 of Sterkfontein to H. habilis
s.l. is uncertain, although material from Swartkrans Member I (Sk 847, Sk 27) was
recently confirmed as belonging to this species.
In addition to the fossils from sub-Saharan sites, there are reports on H. habilis
s.l. fossils from sites beyond Africa, the Near East and Asia, which have only little
reliability and acceptance. The actual hypodigm concentrates especially on East
Africa.
A newly unearthed mandible from Uraha (U501, Malawi), which was attributed
to H. rudolfensis by Bromage et al. (1995) forms a link to the more northern sample
(Schrenk and Bromage 1995, 1999).
The recognition of H. habilis s.l. and the dating of some specimens from Olduvai
to about 2.0 myr BP was the first compelling evidence for the existence of Tertiary
man in the sense of a species of the genus Homo (Tobias 1989). After improvements
in dating methods and the discovery of new remarkable fossils, it is generally
accepted that the genus Homo emerged before the end of the Pliocene. Stone tools,
identified as Oldowan in character, have been traced back to about 2.6 to 2.7 myr
BP; however, there is no proof that these implements testify to the presence of a
particular hominin species. The definition of H. habilis is, essentially, an anatomical
one, although ethological evidence may be added in support (Tobias 1989). The
most recent occurrences of H. habilis are from Olduvai Bed II, dating to about
1.6 myr BP (Table 6.3).
The higher age of H. rudolfensis (2.5–1.8 myr) in comparison to H. habilis s. str.
(2.1–1.6 myr) cannot be taken as evidence that this species is the better candidate
for the direct Homo lineage, because the phylogenetic analysis has to be based on
relevant diagnostic features.

163
Table 6.3a  Earliest dispersal sites of the genus Homo
(see also Henke and Rothe 1994, Larick and Ciochon 1997).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review
Sites 
Age 
(myrs) 
Hominid fossils and 
stone-tool technology 
Taxa 
Hadar (Ethiopia) 
Kada Gona 
Kada Hadar 
 
2.7–2.5 
2.3–2.2 
 
core–flake (Omo) 
mandible  
core–flake (Omo/Oldowan)
 
 
Homo sp. indet. 
Omo Shungura (Ethiopia) 
Member D 
Member E 
 
2.5–2.4 
2.4–2.3 
 
teeth 
teeth  
core–flake (Omo) 
 
Homo sp. indet. 
Homo sp. indet. 
Baringo (Kenya) 
Chemeron 
 
2.4 
 
temporal BC 1 
 
Homo sp. indet. 
Uraha (Malawi) 
Chiwondo beds 
 
2.5–2.1 
 
mandible UR 501 
 
H. rudolfensis 
Nachukui (West Turkana)  
Kalochoro 
Nariokotome, Lower Natoo 
 
2.35–1.9 
1.5 
 
core–flake (Omo) 
skeleton WT 15000 
 
 
H. ergaster 
Koobi Fora (East Turkana) 
Upper Burgi 
 
 
 
 
KBS 
Okote 
 
1.90–1.88 
 
 
 
 
1.78 
1.65–1.50 
 
mandible ER 1812 
core–flake (Omo/Oldowan)
occiput ER 2598 
pelvis ER 3228 
skull ER 1470 
skull ER 3733 
skull ER 3883  
mandible ER 992 
 
H. ergaster 
 
H. ergaster 
H. ergaster 
H. rudolfensis 
H. ergaster 
H. ergaster 
H. ergaster 
Swartkrans (South Africa) 
Member 1 
 
1.7–1.8 
 
skull SK 847 
 
H. ergaster 
Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) 
Bed I 
 
Lower bed II 
 
1.8 
 
1.6 
 
mandible OH 7 
core–flake (Oldowan) 
skull OH 13 
core flake 
(Developed Oldowan) 
 
H. habilis 
 
H. habilis 
Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) 
Upper bed II 
 
1.25/1.4 
 
skull OH 9  
biface (Acheulian) 
 
H. erectus [?] 
Konso-Gardula (Ethiopia) 
KGA 4-KGA 12 
 
1.4 
 
mandible KGA 10-1 
biface (Acheulian) 
 
H. ergaster 
 

164
6  Human Biological Evolution
Table 6.3b  Early and later Eurasian dispersal sites
(see also Henke and Rothe 1994, Larick and Ciochon 1997).
Sites 
Age 
(myrs) 
Hominid fossils and 
stone-tool technology 
Taxa 
Yiron (Israel) 
2,4 [?] 
‘tools’ 
 
Erq el-Ahmar (Israel) 
1.96–1.78 
Upper Erq el-Ahmar,  
2 core tools 
 
Ubeidiya (Israel) 
Ubeidiya form,  
 
upper layers 
 
1.4 
 
biface (Acheulian) 
lower layers  
core–flake 
(Developed Oldowan) 
 
Riwat (Pakistan) 
1.96–1.78 
artifact horizon,  
3 core tools 
 
Pabbi Hills (Pakistan) 
2.0–0.90 
fossil horizons,  
core–flake (Omo) 
 
Longgupo (China) 
Middle zone 
 
1.96–1.78 
 
mandible CV.939.1 
2 core tools  
incisor CV.939.2 
 
Homo sp. indet. [?] 
 
Homo sp. indet. [?] 
Sangiran (Java, Indonesia) 
Pucangan formation 
 
1.66 
 
2 skulls S 27, S 31 
 
H. erectus 
Modjokerto (Java, Indonesia)
Pucangan formation 
 
 
1.81 
 
 
skull Perning 1 
 
 
H. erectus 
Ngebung (Java, Indonesia) 
Kabuh Formation 
 
0.75–0.25 
 
core–flake 
(Sangiran Flake Industry) 
 
Dmanisi (Georgia) 
hominid locality 
 
1.9 (?) 
 
mandible, 3 crania on 
underlying basalt ca. 2.0 
core–flake 
 
H. erectus [?] 
Atapuerca (Spain)  
Gran Dolina (TD) 4 
Gran Dolina (TD) 6 
 
1.6–0.75 
0.99–0.78 
 
core–flake 
frontal, maxilla, mandible 
core–flake 
 
H. antecessor 
Orce (Spain) 
Fuentenueva 3 
 
1.07–0.99? 
 
temporal  
core–flake 
 
Homo sp. indet. 
Isernia la Pineta (Italy) 
Sector I 
Sector II 
 
0.99–0.78 
0.8–0.5 
 
core–flake 
 
Ceprano (Italy) 
< 1.0 
cranium 
H. erectus 
 

165
6.3.3.3
Morphological Patterns, Phylogenetic Relationships, and Paleoecology
Tobias’ (1989) review of the morphology of H. habilis s.l. lists the following critical
morphological features of the first description, which have been strengthened and
supplemented by subsequent studies:
 absolute and estimated relative brains size (average 640 cc) with spectacular
advance over australopithecines; exaggerated encephalization,
 brow ridges vertically thin,
 relatively open-angled external sagittal curvature to occipital,
 thin-walled braincase,
 light pneumatization of cranial bones,
 face moderately prognathous, but less marked than in A. africanus,
 retreating chin, with a slight or absent mental trigone,
 foramen magnum slightly in front of the basis cranii,
 large canines in comparison with australopithecines and H. erectus,
 canines large compared with premolars,
 petrous pyramid of the temporal bone lying in nearly transverse and coronal
plane,
 cheek-teeth with reduced crown diameters and crown area in comparison to those
of australopithecines,
 molar crowns small buccolingually and elongated mesiodistally,
 third molars tending to be smaller than second molars,
 especially P3, P4, M1 showing buccolingual narrowing of the crowns,
 lateral aspect of the frontal lobe exhibiting a pattern of sulci, typical of Homo
sapiens,
 well developed bulges in Broca’s area and in the inferior parietal lobule (part of
Wernicke’s area),
 complex middle meningeal vascular pattern.
* Classification based on actual phylogenetic models.
Table 6.3b  (continued)
Sites 
Age 
(myrs) 
Hominid fossils and 
stone-tool technology 
Taxa 
Bodo (Ethiopia) 
Upper Bodo sand unit 
 
0.6 
 
skull  
biface (Acheulian) 
 
*H. heidelbergensis 
Elandsfontein (South Africa) 
Saldanha Bay 
 
 
0.7–0.4 
 
 
skull  
 
 
*H. heidelbergensis 
Mauer (Germany) 
0.5 
mandible  
biface (Acheulian) 
*H. heidelbergensis 
Boxgrove (England) 
Quarry 1 
 
0.5 
 
tibia  
biface (Acheulian) 
 
*H. heidelbergensis 
 
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

166
6  Human Biological Evolution
The postcranium exhibits a very controversial morphological pattern: on the one
hand there are distinct similarities with H. sapiens (e.g., clavicle, broad terminal
phalanges, capitate metacarpophalangeal articulations, stout and adduced big toe,
well marked foot arches) and on the other hand distinguished differences (e.g.,
scaphoid, trapezium, trochlea surface of the talus, robust metatarsal III). The partial
skeleton OH 62, a H. habilis s. str., which was found by Johanson et al. (1987), has
especially caused much discussion (Hartwig-Scherer and Martin 1991), because
the estimated length and robustness of the humerus and forearm bones of OH 62
suggest that its proportions are remarkably ape-like, and the predicted weight/
stature relationships are also more ape-like (Aiello 1990, 1996), but the phylogenetic
status of ‘Lucy’s child’ remains uncertain.
Although Tobias (1988) gave an extremely detailed description of H. habilis s.l.,
listing 334 cranial, mandibular, and dental features, the question of what auta-
pomorphic features define H. habilis is still controversial (Bilsborough 1986,
Chamberlain and Wood 1987, Henke and Rothe 1998, Stringer 1986, 1994, Walker
and Leakey 1978, Wood 1985, 1987, 1991, 1992). The main reason for the uncertainty
in the interpretation of the diversity of early Homo is that the fossil hominin remains
that are formally or informally allocated to H. habilis or declared to have affinities
with this species vary from one author to another; in other words, there are multiple
taxon solutions. The claimed heterogeneity of the H. habilis s.l. material from Olduvai
(e.g., OH 7, 13, 16, 24), Koobi Fora (e.g., KNM-ER 1470, 1590, 1805, 1813, 3732),
Omo (L 894-1, Omo 75-14, Omo 222-2744), and Chemeron (KNM-BC1), as well as
from Sterkfontein (e.g., Stw 53) caused different approaches to find a better-
supported classification, but the split into two species is taxonomically ambiguous
(Wood 1996, Henke and Rothe 1994, 1998).
Cladistics have made little contribution to the search for distinctive features, or
autapomorphies, of H. habilis. For example, Delson et al. (1977, p. 273) stated “we
have been able to identify no autapomorphic features of Homo habilis”. Chamberlain
and Wood (1987) concluded that when H. habilis s. str. and H. rudolfensis are
separately included in a cladistic analysis, they are linked as sister taxa within a
clade defined by the feature states of elongated anterior basicranium, higher cranial
vault, mesiodistally elongated M1 and M2, and narrow mandibular fossa. The most
complex cladistic analysis of early hominin relationship was conducted by Strait et
al. (1997). Eight different approaches agreed in indicating that the robust australo-
pithecines form a clade, that A. afarensis is the sister taxon of all hominins, and
that the genus Australopithecus, conventionally defined, is paraphyletic. Concerning
H. habilis, the relationships of A. africanus and H. habilis were unstable in the
sense that their positions varied in trees that were marginally less parsimonious
than the favored one. One solution is shown in Figure 6.29.
The paleoecological scenario that explains the observed phylogenetic pattern states
that it is possible that bipedalism (and hence, the earliest hominins) evolved in
response to changing ecological conditions in Africa during the late Miocene and
early Pliocene. Vrba’s (1988) faunal reconstructions indicate that hominin diversity
between 2.5 and 1.5 myr BP was possibly associated with environmental desiccation.
After 2.5 myr, hominin diversity is represented primarily by two distinct lineages,

167
Figure 6.29  (a) Cladogram after Strait et al. (1997) demonstrating the
most parsimonious solution of the relationships of the early hominins;
(b) phylogenetic model after Strait et al. (1997).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

168
6  Human Biological Evolution
Paranthropus and Homo, which reacted to such desiccation by following different
evolutionary trajectories (i.e., hypermastication vs. hypercephalization) (Strait et
al. 1997, p. 56). The morphological changes demonstrate that the masticatory
apparatus increased moderately in the early stages of human evolution. Subse-
quently it increased markedly in Paranthropus and decreased in Homo, a dichotomy
that almost certainly represents a divergence in trophic adaptations, as can be seen
from the adaptive niche model (Figure 6.30).
A cladistic analysis conducted by Wood and Collard (1999) showed that neither
H. habilis nor H. rudolfensis can be assumed with any degree of reliability to be
more closely related to H. sapiens than they are to species allocated to other genera.
6.3.4
Lower and Middle Pleistocene Homo
6.3.4.1
Homo erectus (incl. Homo ergaster)
At the end of the Basal Pleistocene (ca. 1.5 myr), H. habilis and H. rudolfensis
disappear from the fossil record, followed somewhat later by P. robutus and P. boisei.
The exact reason for their extinction is not known, but there are indications from
high faunal turnovers that climatic fluctuations may have caused dramatic ecological
Figure 6.30  Model of niche separation (from Henke and Rothe 1998).

169
shifts. At the beginning of the Pleistocene, the first epoch of the Quaternary, which
was characterized by a series of glacial and interglacial periods, a new hominin
emerged, Homo erectus. There is a long-standing hypothesis that populations similar
to this species were directly ancestral to the earliest members of the living species
H. sapiens, whereas hypotheses concerning the link to hominin forerunners changed
with the increase in the fossil record and are still under ongoing discussion (Franzen
1994a, Henke and Rothe 1995).
The first fossil finds of H. erectus were made in 1891 by Eugene Dubois in Central
Java and were described as Pithecanthropus. The Dutch army doctor was convinced
at that time that he had discovered the presumed ‘missing link’, the transitional
form between apes and humans. The conviction that the new human form had
been an erect bipedal creature resulted in the species name erectus. Because the
Java man was the first non-European fossil in paleoanthropology, the discovery led
to questioning of the European-centered world view, that had so far been supported
by the famous Neanderthal fossils. From now on, Asia was expected to be the ‘cradle
of mankind’ and became the center of the search for the earliest human fossils,
until it became evident that hominins of a H. erectus grade existed in Europe and
Africa too.
It became the favored phylogenetic hypothesis that H. erectus originated in Africa
from an earlier species of the same genus, H. habilis s.l., forming an intermediate
position in the human family tree between the ancient forerunner and H. sapiens.
This species was said to be the conqueror of the Old World, the first hominin to
emigrate out of Africa and successively occupy Asia and Europe. But its evolutio-
narily intermediate position in the human family tree has been questioned more
and more recently (e.g., Franzen 1994a, Henke and Rothe 1995, Rightmire 1990,
Tattersall 1997, Tattersall and Schwartz 2000). Definitions of H. erectus still rest on
the Far Eastern fossils from Zhoukoudian and Java (Jacob 1976, Howells 1980,
Weidenreich 1943). The species H. erectus came to replace a variety of contempora-
neous geographically distinguished genera, including ‘Pithecanthropus’, ‘Sinan-
thropus’, ‘Meganthropus’, and ‘Atlanthropus’. A taxonomic revision by Campbell (1965)
deleted older genera and species, lumping these Lower and Middle Pleistocene
hominin taxa into a single species and separating them only on the subspecies
level (H. erectus erectus; H. e. modjokertensis, H. e. pekinensis, H. e. capensis, H. e.
leakeyi, H. e. mauritanicus, H. e. heidelbergensis, H. e. ngandongensis, H. e. yuan-
mouensis, H. e. bilzingslebenensis, H. e. tautavelensis, and others). But this taxonomic
approach was obviously not the complete solution to all problems, because the
more fossils were found and the more precise our datings became, the more complex
the whole situation has become.
Franzen (1994b, p. 9) asked among others the following burning questions: “What
really is Homo erectus? Is it a good species? Is it a phantom, a chimera behind
which two or even more ‘true’ species may be hidden? … How can Homo erectus be
defined, particularly if it is not the result of a speciation event but just a transitional
phase of phylogenetic development on the way to modern man? … How can it be
separated from ‘archaic’ Homo sapiens? … And then again, is Homo erectus the
result of a cladogenetic event or is it the result of continuous transition? Is it possible
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

170
6  Human Biological Evolution
to distinguish between an Asian, and African and/or European branch of Homo
erectus? Should the African and European branches, if they really exist, be called
species of their own?”
The answers are as diverse as the questions, as is not unexpected in paleoanthro-
pology, especially in regard to weaknesses in principal taxonomic approaches.
Although some anthropologists regard H. erectus as a grade within a transitional
phylogenetic model (e.g., Frayer 1992, Frayer et al. 1993, Thorne and Wolpoff 1981,
1992, Wolpoff 1984, 1989, 1992, 1996, 1996–97, 1999, Wolpoff and Caspari 1997a, b,
Wolpoff et al. 1994), other authorities hold the view that H. erectus originated from
a hominin branch of African origin – possibly H. ergaster – in Asia and remained
restricted to the Far East (e.g., Tattersall 1995a, b, 1996, 1997, 2000, Tattersall and
Schwartz 2000). Some experts claim that the Asian and African wings of H. erectus
exhibit no autapomorphic features and that the early Europeans originated form
an African species other than H. erectus, named Homo heidelbergensis (Rightmire
1990, 1992, 1998).
The recent discussion on the question of whether H. erectus was an ancestor of
our own species or only an evolutionary side branch received new stimuli from
fossils from Dmanisi (Georgia). From this site at the gates of Europe, Antje Justus,
a coworker of Gerhard Bosinski (RGZM, Mainz, Germany) and Georgian staff
unearthed in 1991 a fossil mandible and in 1999 two skulls whose unexpected high
age (max. 1.9 myr; most reliable date 1.75 myr BP) and morphology indicate a much
earlier Eurasian dispersal of Homo than was believed before (Bräuer et al. 1995,
Henke et al. 1995, 1999a, Henke and Rothe 1999b, Gabunia et al. 2001). Further
cranial and postcranial material led to the conclusion that hominins like those
from Dmanisi may have played an important role in the peopling of Eastern Asia
(Gabunia et al. 2001)
Because early Homo fossil material from Africa that has been classified as
H. ergaster (Groves and Mazak 1975; formerly attributed as ‘African’ H. erectus) has
a maximum age of only ca. 1.9 myr BP, and the hominin fossils from Dmanisi
(Schmincke and van den Bogaard 1995, Gabunia et al. 2001), Sangiran and
Modjokerto (Java, Swisher III 1994), and Longgupo, China (Huang et al. 1995,
possibly pongid) may be around the same age or a little younger, there is a severe
problem of explaining the very early Eurasian dispersal of finding out which species
was the pioneering emigrant. The Dmanisi skulls, with their small cranial capacities
and plesiomorphic features (e.g., postorbital constriction), will be key fossils in the
current discussion.
6.3.4.2
Geographical and Chronological Distribution
For a better understanding of the complex phylogenetic pattern and deciphering of
the ‘muddle in the middle’, as Rightmire (1998) characterized the problems
concerning Late Lower and Middle Pleistocene human evolution, we have to analyze
the regional and chronological hypodigm and discuss possible African origin and
early Asian dispersal (Henke and Rothe 1994, 1999a, 1999b; Larick and Ciochon
1996; Wolpoff 1996–97). Only when species – in the sense of an evolutionary species
(Wiley 1978) – have been adequately defined morphologically can appropriate

171
comparisons be made and the distribution of character states across species be
used to generate phylogenetic hypotheses. But until now, we do not have any
consensus of the H. erectus hypodigm, which means that we have no agreement on
the question of which fossils belong to the taxon that has been defined as Homo
erectus (Franzen, 1994a, b, Henke and Rothe 1995, Howell 1996, Howells 1980,
1992). For this reason, those Homo fossils are listed in Table 6.3 which indicate the
earliest appearance of H. erectus (or H. ergaster) or their possible forerunners
H. rudolfensis and H. habilis, as well as presumable successors like H. antecessor or
H. heidelbergensis, and H. sapiens. There is further information on the first wave of
elementary tool technology in which association with early Homo is suspected but
of course not proven. Information concerning the earliest traces of the genus Homo
and the fossil sequence can be seen in Figure 6.31.
Because those hominins that were found in Java since 1891 and at Zhoukoudian,
near Beijing., in the 1930s, now known as H. erectus, were clearly more archaic
than fossils from Europe (e.g., Mauer) and Northwest Africa (e.g., Ternifine), it
was initially stated that Homo emerged in East Asia and dispersed westward. Since
around 1960, when specimens from different localities in the eastern Rift Valley
and South Africa were assigned to ‘early Homo’ for the first time, the picture has
changed. Especially have the hominin fossils around Lake Turkana, classified as
H. erectus (now H. ergaster), proved to be the oldest ones and the more primitive
forms too. Consequently, the now-preferred dispersal hypothesis sees the ‘African
H. erectus’ as that species which immigrated to Asia and subsequently to Europe.
Concerning the time span there was much debate, but no reliable hypothesis
guessed a higher age than 1 myr BP. Advances in dating methods and new finds
from Georgia, China, and Indonesia indicate that early Homo may have arrived in
East Asia by ca. 2 myr ago (Figures 6.32 and 6.33).
Alan Turner stated recently that the effects of tectonic and climatic changes on
the Levantine route during the Plio–Pleistocene suggests that a late Pliocene
dispersion should be given serious consideration, because the Homo dispersal can
be seen as part of the pattern of dispersion by members of the terrestrial mammalian
fauna (Hemmer 1999, Torre et al. 1992).
From a paleoecological view, those hypotheses should not be neglected that
propose that H. erectus may have reached Europe from Far East Asia and not directly
from Africa via the Levant. To prove such dispersal scenarios, faunistic information
should be taken much more into account, because of the coevolution of hominin
predators with carnivores (Felidae, Canidae). Further information can be gained
from the dispersal pattern of the mammals that they scavenged or hunted (Henke
et al. 1999, Torre et al. 1992, Turner 1999).
The regional fossil records of the Lower and Middle Pleistocene hominins from
Africa, Asia, and Europe demonstrate broadly similar morphological trends. There
is – in the opinion of the gradualists – no convincing evidence to support a Middle
Pleistocene speciation event leading to a distinct H. sapiens – quite the contrary,
the proponents of the so-called multiregional theory of hominin evolution (see
below) point out that there is morphological continuity between H. erectus and
H. sapiens. For example, the Ngandong skulls from Java, whose age may be no
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

172
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.31  Earliest traces of the genus Homo.

173
more than 34 000 years, have been described by some authors as H. erectus and by
others as archaic H. sapiens. Due to the repeated occurrence of fossil specimens
exhibiting a morphologically intermediate pattern between H. erectus and H. sapiens,
which is obviously incompatible with a punctuational interpretation of human
evolution, there is cause for much debate on stability and change in H. erectus.
Figure 6.32  Time scale of fossil sites of Homo in China, Southeast Asia, and Australia.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

174
6  Human Biological Evolution
6.3.4.3
Morphological Patterns, Phylogenetic Relationships, and Paleoecology
Those anthropologists who argue that a speciation event took place during the
lower and middle Pleistocene within the genus Homo describe many morphological
characteristics of H. erectus (incl. H. ergaster) (Figure 6.34), but those that are
autapomorphic are rare and controversial (Andrews 1984, Bilsborough and Wood
1986, Bräuer and Mbua 1992, Henke and Rothe 1994, Howell 1986, Howells 1980,
Figure 6.33  Time scale of fossil sites of Homo in Africa and Europe.

175
1993, Hublin 1986, Kennedy 1991, Rightmire 1990, 1992, 1998, Wolpoff 1996–97;
Tattersall and Schwartz 2000). The splitting of the Homo hypodigm on the species
level is, even if one does not take the extreme ‘lumper’ position of Wolpoff et al.
(1994), explaining the variability by polymorphism and polytypism, which is
methodologically highly suspect. As some ‘splitters’ confess, the decisions come
much more from the stomach than the brain.
The following list describes some of the traits that set H. erectus apart from
H. habilis/H. rudolfensis and H. sapiens as well (also Henke and Rothe 1994, 1998,
1999; Figure 6.35):
 cranial capacity ranging from 800 to 1225 cc,
 thick brow ridge (torus supraorbitalis), especially in the later forms,
 special neurocranial proportions: wide cranial base, vault walls relatively vertical
in their lower portions; long, flat, low braincase,
 more arched than bell shaped contour of the braincase seen from the rear,
 occipital large and sharply angled,
 well marked nuchal plane bounded by a distinct nuchal ridge (occipital torus),
 temporal lines distinct and slightly raised, especially anteriorly,
 sagittal keeling and parasagittal depression in Asian skulls only,
 occipital ankles.
The separation of the African sample from the Asian is highly questioned. Wood
(1984) for example describes the following autapomorphies of the Asian H. erectus:
 occipital torus with sulcus above,
 angular torus and mastoid crest,
 sulcus on frontal behind torus,
 proportions and shape of occipital bone,
 relatively large occipital arc.
Figure 6.34  (a) Homo ergaster (KNM-ER 3733); (b) Homo erectus (Sangiran 17)
(from Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

176
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.35  Morphological features of the skull of Homo ergaster and Homo erectus,
demonstrated by the specimen KNM-ER 3733 and the reconstruction of the female
‘Sinanthropus’ from Weidenreich (1943), norma occipitalis of ZH XII (from Henke
and Rothe 1998).

177
He argues that H. erectus is an exclusively Asian taxon which possesses features
not present in African specimens and not present in H. sapiens either. For this
reason he sees better arguments for an African than for an Asian origin of H. sapiens.
Strong opposition comes from multiregionalists, because the supposed autapo-
morphic characters that underline the uniqueness of the Asian sample are not
truly independent characters, because they are correlated within functional units
of adaptation. No anthropologist denies that there are differences between the Asian
and African Homo samples under discussion, but the point is whether these
differences are sufficient to warrant taxonomic recognition at the species level
(Bilsborough 1992).
That H. erectus was fully upright and bipedal is still expressed by the species
name, but until the virtually complete skeleton KNM-WT 15 000 (Walker and Leakey
1993) was discovered, we knew very little about the H. erectus postcranium. The
skeleton of the 12-year-old boy from Nariokotome, west Turkana, which has been
dated to 1.6 myr BP, enables us to reconstruct stature, limb proportions, locomotion,
maturation, and gestation. In adulthood the young boy, who measured 1.68 m,
would have been 1.8 m tall and weighed ca. 47 kg. He was tall and thin, resembling
present-day equatorial Africans. Rogers et al. (1996) discussed the behavioral
implications of the archaeological and paleogeographical record and early H. erectus
anatomy. Their summary is given in Figure 6.36.
The physiological changes (e.g., secondary altricality, lower period of maturation,
increase in need for food, increase in long-distance locomotor efficiency, and greater
resistance to heat stress), combined with the implied behavioral changes (e.g., grea-
ter parental investment, larger home ranges) and the archaeological evidence for a
changed behavioral ecology (e.g., lithic standardization by the reduction of single
platform cores, use of large flakes for cores) suggests that the early Homo of the lower
Pleistocene was less constrained than earlier hominins by the natural distribution
of resources. This makes them an ideal candidate for emigrating pioneers.
For this reason and from the total morphological pattern, Wolpoff et al. (1994,
p. 341) see “no distinct boundary between H. erectus and H. sapiens in time and
space.” They regard the lineage as a single evolutionary species, but other authorities
describe different further speciations, stating that the emergence of Homo has not
been a single linear transformation of one species into another (chronospecies),
but rather a “meandering, multifaceted evolution” (Tattersall 2000).
A more moderate speciation model than that of Tattersall (2000, Figure 6.37) has
been proposed by Rigthmire (1998, Figure 6.38), who describes a speciation process
in Africa leading to H. heidelbergensis. This species is said to have given on the one
hand rise to H. neanderthalensis, who split off in Europe, and on the other hand to
H. sapiens, who emerged in Africa and successively occupied all other continents.
As has been expressed in the traditional views by subspecies names such as
H. erectus heidelbergensis, H. erectus bilzingslebenensis, and H. erectus tautavelensis, it
was widely believed that there was a European branch of H. erectus, but there was
always much debate as to the validity of an European H. erectus taxon (Henke and
Rothe 1996). Meanwhile, many paleoanthropologists believe that H. erectus never
did reach Europe, but there are different causes for this change of view.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

178
6  Human Biological Evolution
Although Wolpoff (1996–97) does not believe that the taxon H. erectus is valid in
any event, others regard those European specimens that were formerly discussed
as belonging to H. erectus as a species of their own, which originated in Africa
around 0.6 myr ago. For taxonomic reasons it was named H. heidelbergensis and is
– as proponents of this model claim – best described by a specimen from Broken
Hill (Kabwe, Sambia) (Figure 6.39). Astonishingly enough, this skull was formerly
attributed to ‘archaic’ H. sapiens and is an essential key fossil in the out-of-Africa
hypothesis of Bräuer (1984).
Newly unearthed fossils from Bouri, Middle Awash (Ethiopia) afford unique
insights into unresolved spatial and temporal relationships of H. erectus. The
hominin calvaria and postcranial remains from the Dakanihylo Member of the
Bouri Formation are ~1.0 myr old and are associated with abundant early Acheulean
stone tools and a vertebrate fauna that indicates a predominantly savannah
environment. Asfaw et al. (2002, p. 317) are convinced that the morphological
attributes of the fossils “centre [them] firmly within H. erectus”, and they see strong
indications “that African H. erectus was the ancestor of Homo sapiens.”
Figure 6.36  Adaptation pattern of H. erectus (after Rogers et al. 1996; Henke and Rothe 1999b).

179
Figure 6.37  Speculative family tree showing the variety of hominin species that
have populated the planet – some known only by a fragment of a skull or jaw.
As the tree suggests, the emergence of H. sapiens has – as Tattersall states –
not been a single linear transformation of one species into another but rather
a meandering multifaceted evolution (after Tattersall 1999, redrawn).
The new fossils from Bouri shed light on newly described ca. 0.8 myr old fossils
from the Gran Dolina of Atapuerca (Spain), which have been classified as H. ante-
cessor (Arsuaga et al. 1999, Carbonell et al. 1999). The hypothesis that this taxon
may have originated in Africa and given rise to H. neanderthalensis, which flourished
between ca. 200 000 and 30 000 years ago while H. sapiens evolved as adelphotaxon
of H. heidelbergensis in Africa, successively dispersing worldwide, is now even less
reliable than before.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

180
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.38  Speciation model proposed by Rightmire (1998, from Henke and Rothe 1999).
Figure 6.39  Specimen Kabwe 1 (formerly Broken Hill 1), which is classified
by some authorities as Homo heidelbergensis.

181
6.3.5
Upper Pleistocene Human Evolution
In the Upper Pleistocene there is increased fossil evidence coupled with an expanded
geographical range, paralleled by a more complex archaeological record. The increase
in paleoanthropological and archaeological information within the Upper Pleisto-
cene has a two-sided effect: on the one hand we have decidedly more evidence
from the past, but on the other hand the complexity of the patterns is more and
more difficult to unravel by our methodological skills. For this reason there is need
to reflect on a compound of phylogenetic events to explain the phyletic changes
and to interpret the regional diversity.
6.3.5.1
How Many Species?
As described above, there are highly differing scenarios of the origin of ‘anatomically’
modern human beings. (Tobias 1995, argues, as do Wolpoff and Caspari 1997b,
that the term ‘anatomically modern humans’ should be discarded; we should speak
of ‘modern’ or ‘recent’ humans, using a temporal not a morphological descriptor.)
The irreconcilable standpoints have been hardened by totally different species
concepts. The reproach of Tattersall (cited by Flanagan 1996, taken from Wolpoff
1999, p. 376) is that the multiregionalists are “linking everything from H. erectus to
Homo sapiens into ‘one big happy family’ … Paleontologists do not give other animals
such a special treatment.”
Wolpoff, the protagonist of the multiregionalists, comments by quoting the
evolutionary geneticist A. Templeton: “We make far too much of our anatomical
difference … Biologists who study, say, fruit flies know that each population can
look quite distinct … and yet they are tempted to hastily split them into separate
species. Why must we look at ourselves any differently?” (Wolpoff 1999, p. 376).
The crucial case of whether there was more than one species in the Upper
Pleistocene comes from the long-standing unsolved debate on the Neanderthal
problem: the fate of the Neanderthals is the longest lasting controversy in
paleoanthropology and, in spite of contrary reports, especially comments on
molecular biological results, there is currently no solution to the problem.
6.3.5.2
Geographical and Chronological Distribution
As can bee seen from Table 6.3 and Figures 6.40 to 6.42, there are a great amount
of Homo fossils in Africa, Asia, and Europe from the late Middle and Upper
Pleistocene whose morphology differs – in comparison to earlier specimens – only
within a moderate range. There is a well described diachronic trend to less massive
faces and larger neurocrania, approaching step by step the pattern of [anatomically]
modern man in Africa. Because this gradual process is less convincingly verified
in Asia and extremely controversial in Europe, so-called out-of-Africa hypotheses
have been proposed (Stringer 1982, 1992, Bräuer 1984, 1992, Cann and Wilson
1992), which compete with the multiregional evolution model (Thorne and Wolpoff
1992, Wolpoff 1996–97, 1999, Wolpoff et al. 1984).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

182
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.40  Fossil sites of hominins of the genus Homo
(classified as Homo spec. indet., H. ergaster, H. erectus, or H. sapiens)
(from Henke and Rothe 1998).

183
Figure 6.41  Fossil sites of Pleistocene hominins in the Far East (from Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

184
6  Human Biological Evolution
6.3.5.3
Multiregional Model versus Recent African Origin
Where did modern humans originate? This question divides paleoanthropologist.
Two markedly contrasting theories on modern human origins have been intensely
debated for around two decades (Bräuer and Smith 1992, Henke and Rothe 1994,
1999, Smith and Spencer 1984, Smith et al. 1989, Wolpoff 1996–97):
 The multiregional evolution model (MRE) traces all modern populations back to
more than a million years ago when humans walked out of Africa for the first
time. Since this phase there have been no speciations, but an interconnected
web of ancient lineages existed in which the genetic contributions to all living
peoples varied regionally and temporally (Thorne and Wolpoff 1981, 1992, Wolpoff
1989, 1992, 1996–97). The MRE has its historic base in the polycentric evolution
hypothesis of Franz Weidenreich, proposing “that the conditions associated with
the initial migrations of humans from Africa … created the central and peripheral
contrasts that affected the early establishment of regional features at the
peripheries of the human range” (Wolpoff 1992, p. 26; Figure 6.43).
Figure 6.42  Fossil sites of early European hominins classified as H. antecessor,
H. erectus, H. heidelbergensis, H. neanderthalensis, or H. sapiens
(from Henke and Rothe 1998).

185
Figure 6.43  Multiregional evolution, illustrated as ‘pattern’ by David Frayer
(the diagram does not show ‘details’, for further comments see Wolpoff 1999).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

186
6  Human Biological Evolution
 The recent African origin (RAO) model suggests that modern humans descend
from a very recent modern population that lived in Africa only around 200 000
years ago and replaced early humans elsewhere. This hypothesis has been called
‘Garden of Eden model’ by its opponents because it pleads for a single regional
human origin. The main elements of this theory are derived from the chrono-
logical and morphological comparison of the African and non-African fossil speci-
mens. The presence of regional continuity only in Africa and the first appear-
ance of modern human features in this continent were taken as strong arguments
for different replacement models (Protsch 1975; Afro–European sapiens hypoth-
esis of Bräuer 1984). Although Bräuer’s hypothesis supported the idea of a re-
placement with hybridization, other authorities spoke for a total replacement,
for paleoanthropological (Stringer 1986, Stringer and Andrews 1988) or paleo-
genetic reasons (mtDNA research; Stoneking and Cann 1989, Wilson and Cann
1992). Especially have the genetic studies, which revealed that an African woman
from ca. 200 000–150 000 years ago – called Eve or ‘Lucky Mother’ – was our
common ancestor, gained much credit in public discussion and in the popular
summary ‘we are all Africans’ (Figure 6.44).
In spite of contrasting assertions by the proponents of the different models, it can
be concluded that none of them is unequivocally supported by the available data,
although the out-of-Africa model gained tremendous support by the aDNA results
from Neanderthal fossils. The voluminous literature on the topic of modern human
origins allows us only to point to some of the pros and cons of the different models.
Figure 6.44  The out-of-Africa model argues that modern regional differences
arose recently in populations that originated in Africa; existing populations
in Europe, Asia, and Australia were replaced by these incoming populations
(after Stringer 1990, from Henke and Rothe 1999a).

187
If we understand paleoanthropology as a hypothesis-testing natural science, we
have to formulate predictions and to verify or falsify them. Slightly contrasting
predictions of the out-of-Africa model have been formulated, e.g., by Stringer (1988),
Bräuer (1984, 1992), Wolpoff (1984, 1992), or Smith et al. (1989, 1992). Some
essential predictions that should be met in the RAO are:
 Transitional fossils that link archaic and modern humans should be found only
in Africa, since the only transition to modern humans occurred there.
 Regional clade features should be of low antiquity except in Africa; presumably
they should not predate the appearance of earliest modern humans anywhere in
Eurasia.
 Modern humans should have a greater antiquity in Africa than anywhere else in
the world (Smith 1992, p. 147).
There are unbridgeable controversies between the proponents of the RAO and the
MRE models concerning the answers to the above predictions, but in spite of still-
unsolved discrepancies there is consensus, e.g., in the underlying assumption of
an ultimately African ancestor for all populations and the widespread movements
of genes throughout the range of Pleistocene human populations, but within an
extremely divergent chronological pattern ranging from the early-middle Pleistocene
to the late Pleistocene.
The RAO (Stringer and Andrews 1988) model most strongly implies that modern
humans did not assimilate or hybridize with the archaic humans. For this reason
there should have been a total replacement of the Eurasian Neanderthals or archaic
East Asian populations represented, e.g., by specimens from Dali, Maba, or
Ngandong. In addition to those proponents who strictly toed the line of the RAO,
arguing that all Eurasian archaic humans became extinct without making any
contribution to modern human gene pools, there are other anthropologists, like
Bräuer (1984, 1992), who plead for a ‘hybridization and replacement model’. If
there has been gene flow between regional archaic populations (e.g., Neanderthals)
and modern H. sapiens, what is the acceptable position of this compromise model
in terms of population genetics and taxonomy? The essential polarity between the
RAO and the MRE is formed by a monocentric view on the one side and a polycentric
view on the other side. The acceptance of hybridization cancels the principal position
of the RAO. But does this simultaneously mean that a multiregional transition is
accepted? The RAO with hybridization sees the movement of modern populations
as a gradual process but does not view modern humans as the result of a biological
speciation event. If the expanding modern populations assimilated some archaic
genes into their gene pools, it recognizes that at least some degree of local continuity
between archaic and modern humans existed. What makes this hypothesis a RAO
model then? In Bräuer’s view, the most dominant factor responsible for the
emergence of modern humans in Asia and Europe remains the migration of African-
derived populations into these parts of the Old World. The foremost factor is, for
this reason, not regional continuity as in the MRE; instead, the RAO with
hybridization regards examples of diachronic change other than in Africa as
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

188
6  Human Biological Evolution
parallelisms or misinterpretations of the fossils. The defenders of the MRE (Wolpoff
1990, 1992, 1997–98, Thorne and Wolpoff 1992) obviously do not accept this
explanation, but see plausible explanations within their model, which states:
 that no single definition of modern humans will apply in all regions,
 that modern human anatomical form does not necessarily have to appear earliest
in Africa,
 that the earliest modern people in Eurasia will lack distinctly African regional
features, since they are not the result of migrating Africans,
 that nonadaptive or regional clade features will be identifiable earliest in the
most peripheral regions of the human range, before the appearance of modern
humans, and latest in the central region (also Smith et al. 1989, p. 39).
The debate has received a new dynamic by the results of evolutionary human genetic
research, which is outlined below. Before discussing the mtDNA analyses of recent
samples (Cann and Stoneking 1989, Wilson and Cann 1992) and explaining the
aDNA results from the classical Neanderthal specimens from Felderhofer Grotte
(Krings et al. 1997), Mezmaiskaya Cave (Ovchinnikow et al. 2000), and other fossils,
a view of the regional morphological patterns and the implications for the acceptance
of a single origin model or a multiregional model is given.
6.3.6
Morphological Patterns and Paleoecology
Before the Afro–European H. sapiens hypothesis was advanced (Bräuer 1984), there
were single statements on the possibility that [anatomically] modern humans were
present earlier in Africa than in other continents (Stringer 1974, Protsch 1975).
Upper Pleistocene hominins that served as key fossils came, e.g., from Border
Cave, Klasies’ River Mouth (Rep. South Africa), or Omo (Ethiopia). The cranium
Omo I is very modern looking. It has a rounded vault, lacks a supraorbital torus,
and exhibits an expanded parietal region, a canine fossa, and a prominent chin
(Figure 6.45). Close morphological relationships have been described for Omo I
with the so-called Cro-Magnon man. The affinities of these Upper Paleolithic people
from Europe to the broadly [anatomically] modern populations from the Near East
(Skhul, Qafzeh; Figure 6.46), which have been described as Proto-Cro-Magnons
but are still linked with a Levallois–Mousterian culture, advanced the idea of a
recent successive immigration of modern Homo sapiens from Southern and Eastern
Africa via the Near East to Eastern Asia and Europe.
Although the chronological pattern of the paleontological and archaeological
record has become more and more accurate as a result of the application of relative
and absolute dating techniques, it became evident that the Neanderthals and broadly
[anatomically] modern humans apparently coexisted in the Middle East for as long
as 60 000 years (Figure 6.47). The strong affinities between the African modern
H. sapiens and the Skhul–Qafzeh population on the one side, and the increasing
acceptance of the idea that the nearly ‘anatomically’ modern populations from the

189
Near East are cranially and postcranially the most probable forerunners of Upper
Paleolithic humans in Europe on the other, gave strong support to the single African
origin model.
Arguments for a replacement were seen from the change of the Neanderthals to
modern H. sapiens in Europe, which has been described as abrupt and obviously
accompanied by a clear-cut cultural change (Henke 1990, 1992). New data de-
monstrate that the chronological overlap lasted much longer than formerly thought.
Further, the Chatelperronian, which is regarded as the earliest Upper Paleolithic
culture, was associated with Neanderthals, as proven in St. Césaire (France). In
spite of these discrepancies within the fossil and cultural record, there are strong
indications that the European modern H. sapiens differed from the Neanderthals
in many ways. The Upper Paleolithics obviously had a great selective advantage
Figure 6.45  Specimen Omo I
(from Johanson and Edgar 1996).
Figure 6.46  ‘Proto-Cro-Magnons’. (a) Skhul v, (b) Qatzeh 9 (from Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

190
6  Human Biological Evolution
from their biology, which allowed them to become the sole pattern of human
behavior after a relatively short period of evolutionary time (Henke 1989, Trinkaus
and Shipman 1993, Bar-Yosef and Vandermeersch 1993).
Morphological and cultural evidence for a transition in Eastern and Southeast
Asia is not very convincing, as the proponents of the replacement model claim.
Although the fossil record is sparse, the advocates of the MRE see, e.g., in Indonesia,
a continued regionality of the combination of Australasian skeletal features. The
fact that the combination of features that distinguishes modern Australoids from
other living human populations is – as Wolpoff (1996–1997, p. 566) mentions –
“precisely that which distinguished their regional predecessors from their con-
temporaries in East Asia, Africa and Europe.”
Transitional sequences are also seen in the fossil record from China (Maba, Dali,
Zhoukoudian). The confusing classification of the sparse Far Eastern fossil material
as H. erectus, or alternatively within the very problematical term ‘archaic’ H. sapiens
by the single origin proponents, demonstrates the difficulties to defining clear-cut
species differences (Figure 6.41).
Taxonomical uncertainties, which are also evident in the alternative attribution
of fossils from Africa to H. erectus, H. rhodesiensis, H. heidelbergensis, or archaic
H. sapiens (e.g., Broken Hill (Kabwe, Sambia), Saldanha (Rep. of South Africa) or
Omo 2 (Ethiopia) are strong indication for gradualism, because they can be explained
within the model without problem.
Actually, there is little hope that the archaeological record will help to unravel the
pattern of modern human origins (Klein 1989, 1992, Lewin 1998; Figure 6.48),
though there are more and more indications for an African origin of modern cultures
(McBrearty and Brooks 2000). The fact that modern H. sapiens preceded Neander-
thals on Mount Carmel and followed a similar pattern of life for 60 000 years can be
taken as an indication that biology alone cannot explain the cultural revolution that
ensued (Bar-Yosef and Vandermeersch 1993), but comparison of the paleoecological
Figure 6.47  Fossil sites of Neanderthals
and early modern humans in the Middle
East (from Henke and Rothe 1998).

191
records of modern Homo sapiens (Upper Paleolithic humans) and Neanderthals gives
good indications that there must have been essential differences in their behavior
and skills, especially concerning how modern humans planned ahead. A prehistory
of mind, which analyses the evolution of human cognitive abilities, has been
reconstructed from the archaeological evidence, but a conclusive model that explains
the very late and extremely impressive development of human capabilities in the
Upper Paleolithic is still under discussion (Mithen 1996, Noble and Davidson 1996).
Figure 6.48  Approximate chronological arrangement of the major cultural units and
fossil human types since the penultimate glaciation (adapted from Klein 1992).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

192
6  Human Biological Evolution
6.3.7
The Role of the Neanderthals
Since the discovery of fossils of a premodern human in the Neander Valley (near
Düsseldorf, Germany) in 1856, the Neanderthals have provoked controversy. No
early human relative has triggered more scientific debate or more inspired our
fantasy than Neanderthal Man. They existed 200 000 years (or even much longer)
ago, surviving under severe Ice Age glaciations until they dropped out of sight
around 30 000 years ago, or as evidenced by new finds from Zafarraya (Spain) even
down to 27 000 years (Hublin 1998).
Who were the Neanderthals? How did they live? What was their fate? (Henke et
al. 1996, Henke and Rothe 1998, Tattersall 1995, Trinkaus and Shipman 1993,
Stringer and Gamble 1993, Trinkaus 1989, Vandermeersch 1990, Wolpoff and
Caspari 1997a).
There are many divergent answers to these essential questions: here, contradictory
pairs, such as continuity versus discontinuity, gradualism versus replacement,
regional evolution versus migration, characterize the diverging interpretations of
the various authors regarding what happened toward the transition from the Middle
to the Upper Paleolithic.
As can be seen from the huge number of popular publications as well, it has
never been easy to be objective about Neanderthals, the most fascinating fossil
human. As their craniofacial and postcranial morphology is undoubtedly different
from that of modern humans, paleoanthropologists have asked about the adaptive
and taxonomical relevance of their special features (Churchill 1998, Henke 1988,
1990, Henke and Rothe 1994, 1998, 1999, Henke et al. 1996, Trinkaus and Howells
1979). The first extraction of mtDNA from a Neanderthal-type specimen (Krings et
al. 1997) initiated a totally new discussion focusing on the question of whether the
Neanderthals can be definitely excluded from our direct ancestorship (Henke and
Rothe 1999a, Lahr and Foley 1999, Relethford 1998, 2001).
6.3.7.1
Geographical and Chronological Distribution
Human fossils attributed to Neanderthals have been found from the Atlantic sea-
board eastward across Europe and western Asia as far as Teshik Tash (Uzbekistan),
and southward through the Crimea into the Middle East to Amud and Tabun (Israel)
and Shandiar (Iraq) (Figure 6.49). Those specimens that were formerly discussed
as North African or Far Asian Neanderthal remains have been excluded from the
hypodigm. The inclusion of fossils that are older than 250 000 years – sometimes
called Ante-Neanderthals (actually described by those paleoanthropologists who
see different waves of immigration as H. antecessor and/or H. heidelbergensis) – is
controversial, especially depending on the different taxonomical approaches. Within
the Upper Pleistocene sample, a sequence of Pre-Neanderthals, early Neanderthals,
and classical Neanderthals has been described. Furthermore, the European
Neanderthals have been separated from the Middle (or Near) East Neanderthals.
Within these, different subsamples of the western European Neanderthals best
exhibit the pattern that has been described as classical Neanderthal.

193
6.3.7.2
Characteristic ‘Neanderthal’ Morphology
Craniofacial and postcranial features of the Neanderthal specimens that serve to
identify them as a distinctive variant of ancient humans are described, e.g., by
Vandermeersch 1985, Aiello and Dean 1980, Stringer and Gamble 1993, Henke
and Rothe 1999a, Zollikofer et al. 1998 (Table 6.4).
Besides the above-mentioned features (Figure 6.50), very special morphological
traits have been analyzed, e.g., by Hublin (1998; ear ossicles) or Schwartz and
Tattersall (1999; internal nasal structure), which have been interpreted as indicating
a long-lasting isolation of the Neanderthal population and a proof that Neanderthals
were a species of their own: Homo neanderthalensis.
Adaptive significance of the ‘Neanderthal’ morphology
In morphological comparisons, the skeleton of the Neanderthals versus that of
modern humans is surprisingly robustly built. The distinct muscle markings can
be seen as an indication of a stronger development of the total muscle apparatus.
Enlargements of muscle attachment areas are seen as an optimization of muscle
forces. There is good evidence for adaptations toward an increased load-bearing
capability in the lower extremities, which can be deduced from the characteristic
robustness of the extremely strong bones such as the femur, as well as the tibia and
Figure 6.49  Fossil sites of important pre-Neanderthals, as well as late or
classical Neanderthals (after Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

194
6  Human Biological Evolution
Table 6.4  Craniofacial and postcranial features of the Neanderthals
(see Henke and Rothe 1994, 1998).
 High cranial capacity 
 Dolichocephalic, low skulls 
 Large face, both long and wide 
 Large, double-arched supraorbital ridges 
 High rounded orbits 
 High, wide and voluminous nose relative 
to face 
 Horizontally oriented distal nasal bones 
 The sub-orbital region comprises an 
extended maxilla and a flat malar, oblique 
backwards and outwards 
 Inflated cheek bones are reduced and 
retreating; no fossa canina 
 Expanded maxillary sinuses 
 Week chin 
 Retromolar space 
 Large frontal teeth; shovel-shaped 
incisors 
 Taurodontism (large-sized pulp cavities) 
 Subspherical vault from rear view  
 Occipital bunning (‘chignon’) 
 Torus occipitalis is always subdivided in the 
sagittal region into two lips limiting a 
supra-iniac fossa with a transverse 
elongation 
 External auditory meatus lying in the level 
of the zygomatic process 
 Large and wide rib cage 
 Hand with strong grip and wide fingertips 
 Long clavicle 
 Large shoulder and elbow joints 
 Large hip joint, rotated outwards 
 Long pubic bone 
 Limb proportions stout 
 Rounded, curved and thick-walled femur 
shaft 
 Short, flattened and thick-walled patella 
 Wide and strong toe bones 
 
even the patella. All three bones are equipped with proportionately more robustness
and with rather massive articular ends and facets. Their wall thickness is streng-
thened, and the shape of the bones actually increases their resistance to fractures.
Increased skeletal strength and leverage may be expected to positively co-occur in
populations with an evolutionary history of high activity (Churchill 1998).
The accumulated evidence and results of the large number of studies performed
with Neanderthal skeletons and bones point to many adaptations as being essential
biological adaptations for a stronger physique and more intensive activities in a
much wilder and more-unforgiving environment than we are used to.
In a study of traumatic injury patterns in Neanderthals, Trinkaus (1995) found
evidence that they resembled the pattern of lesions found among modern rodeo
performers, with a high frequency of head and neck injuries. He concluded that
Neanderthals were more involved in close struggles with big game, whereas modern
humans from the Upper Paleolithic used a less dangerous long-distance modern
style of hunting (Frayer 1984, Henke 1990, Henke and Rothe 1999a).
Judging by the average height of modern Europeans during earlier times, the
Neanderthal stature does not seem to justify the conclusion that the latter were par-
ticularly short, although their limb proportions were more cold-adapted, in being re-
latively short in their distal parts (Allen’s rule). Body weight estimations of the Nean-
derthals indicate that they had a 30% larger body mass than recent H. sapiens, which
can be attributed to either the more Northern latitude habitats, their greater mus-
cularity, or both. Their height and weight can be used to estimate their surface areas,
which can be interpreted as decidedly cold-adapted when compared to the relative
surface areas of modern humans (Bergmann’s rule; Coon 1939, 1962, 1982, Chur-
chill 1998, Helmuth 1998, Henke 1995, Trinkaus and Shipman 1993; Figure 6.51).

195
Figure 6.51  Neanderthal skeleton exhibiting characteristic features (from Churchill 1998).
Figure 6.50  Morphological features of the Neanderthal skull, demonstrated by the
specimen La Ferrassie 1 (after Heim 1976; Henke and Rothe 1998).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

196
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.52  Effects of three endocrine axes on osteogenic and chondogenic
cells and their resulting effects on skeletal morphology. Only two of these
axes (sex steroids and growth hormone) have a major effect on the gross
morphology of skeletal elements (after Churchill 1998).
Figure 6.53  Proposed effects of an epigenetic shift affecting the combined
growth-hormone and sex-steroid axis on Neanderthal skeletal morphology.
In this model, increased production of osteogenically active hormones
produces a myriad of seemingly independent Neanderthal characteristics
in the skeleton, ranging from unique craniofacial morphology to great
postcranial robustness (after Churchill 1998).

197
When we look at the skulls of the Neanderthals, the pointed wedge-shaped face
and, in particular, the long high nose were considered to be cold-adapted cha-
racteristics (Coon 1982). They could have insulated the cold-sensitive brain from
the nasal cavity and provided a larger space for prewarming inhaled cold air.
Disregarding that one cannot find any proof for this assumption, other physiological
explanations for the nasal morphology, especially the capacious nasal cavity, have
been proposed (Franciscus and Trinkaus 1995, Tattersall and Schwartz 1999).
The typical midfacial morphology of Neanderthals has been discussed, e.g., by
Rak (1987) and Demes (1987), who argue that this suite of characters reflects the
fact that the face is adapted to resist the bending and torsion in the sagittal plane
that results form loading the anterior dentition. The special wear pattern of the
incisors and the retromolar space also fit the ‘teeth as tools’ hypothesis. It may be
that even the occipital bunning, the protrusion of the occipital bone of the
neurocranium, can be explained as a biomechanical compensation pattern for the
special masticatory and paramasticatory chewing activities of the Neanderthals.
Churchill (1998) recently gathered all available data on cold adaptation and
heterochrony, a change in the form of descendants relative to their ancestors that
is brought about by an alteration in the timing of developmental events. His
sophisticated integrated approach, giving due respect to structuralist as well as
adaptationist perspectives, tries to explain the morphology of the Neanderthals.
Churchill’s (1998, p. 49) inspiring hypothesis is that “it is possible that many
Neandertal features were the correlated results of a change in a few regulatory
genes.” It is obvious that the heterochronic model is a very speculative hypothesis
and largely untested, yet there is compelling paleontological, comparative, and
experimental evidence from other animals that climate affects developmental rates
and patterns. Endocrinological results show that sex steroids, growth hormones,
calcitonin, and parathyroid hormones affect the activation and regulation of
estrogenic and chondogenic cells (Figures 6.52 and 6.53). Churchill proposes that
the sex steroids and growth hormones, which have a major effect on the gross
morphology of skeletal elements, may have induced changes via an epigenetic shift,
resulting in increased production of osteologically active hormones. These would
have produced integrated changes of seemingly independent Neanderthal cha-
racteristics. If the change in a few regulatory genes may have caused the Neanderthal
features, this possibility has deep implications for both cladistic and phenetic
approaches to late Pleistocene phyletic evolution (also Schwartz 1999).
6.3.7.3
Paleoecological Remarks on the Neanderthals
Traditionally, the Neanderthals were portrayed in a dehumanized fashion, but a
reexamination of the arguments and data indicates that they were not the fools or
simpletons they were characterized as. There are reliable sources that indicate that
they had skills for some specialized and structured use of space. Their settlement
preferences demonstrate that they inhabited, e.g., rock shelters pointing south,
and thereby providing protection from cold northerly winds, and were able to
construct shelters. Furthermore, they used a sophisticated technology involving
standard tools, basic bone tools, as well as evolved stone blades and other complex
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

198
6  Human Biological Evolution
tools. In spite of these findings, archaeological evidence suggests that the elaborate-
ness and efficiency of Neanderthal technology were apparently much poorer than
those of anatomically modern man from the Upper Paleolithic. Trinkaus and
Shipman (1996, p. 417) suggest, from all the archaeological and behavioral findings,
that Neanderthals had “no choice but to accomplish the tasks of daily life through
brute strength, incredible stamina, and dogged perseverance.”
Neanderthal hunter–gatherers had a harsh lifestyle, as can be deduced from a
high frequency of trauma. One particular paleopathological case from Shanidar is
always cited as the most convincing evidence for a severe injury suffered in life,
which was healed with the help of intensive social care. Those who were too weak
to procure food by themselves received support from their companions. Further-
more, scarce and fluctuating resources made altruistic support, a high degree of
food sharing, and cooperative alliances imperative within Neanderthal society. The
average life expectancy was extremely low; most adults died in their twenties and
thirties. They were intentionally buried in plain graves (e.g., La Ferrassie, Le
Moustier, Teshik-Tash, Shanidar, Kebara). The mortuary practices are taken as
irrefutable evidence for the existence of rituals. Analysis of pollen and anthers from
Shanidar Cave leave little doubt that flowers were used in some Neanderthal burials,
constituting “an apparent example of symbolic and religious behavior” (Hayden
1993, p. 120).
The various indications of nursing, foresight capabilities, and mental templates,
as well as evidence for strong social ties within a complex society, point toward an
elaboration of different roles in Neanderthal society: “different individuals did
different things” (Trinkaus and Shipman 1993, p. 418). Within the Neanderthal
society, individuality reached a level that seems to have been previously unknown.
A question often asked in this context is whether or not the Neanderthals possessed
the capability of language, that is, a symbolic–verbal means of communication.
The answer is hard to estimate: Crelin (1987) raised the important issue of how
much language is required to make ‘language’ (also Lieberman et al. 1992). From
an anthropological standpoint, it appears to be most unlikely that they were without
language. But the fact that they buried their dead and that they may have cared for
their sick and disabled comrades is only indirect evidence. Anatomical evidence
comes from a fossil hyoid, a small bone lying above the larynx to which the tongue
muscles attach, which was found in Kebara. The fossil is identical to the hyoid
bone of modern humans, and the large noses, sinuses, and mouth of the Neander-
thal face allow no dispute about their capability for vocal communication. But did
Neanderthals have an articulate language, a complex system of syntax, grammar,
and object naming? Did they have mental and symbolic capabilities? The essential
differences between the Middle and Upper Paleolithic in ritual, symbolism, and
art are often seen as a unbridgeable gap between Neanderthals and anatomically
modern humans.
Overall, the paleoecology of the Neanderthals is indicative of new facts of behavior
in the social and organizational field within human evolution; they cannot be
interpreted as crude prototypes of modern H. sapiens, as Trinkaus and Shipman
(1993, p. 419) notice: “they were themselves; they were Neanderthals – one of the

199
most distinctive, successful, and intriguing groups of humans that ever enriched
our family history.” Although Tattersall (1995, p. 203) regards the Neanderthals as
‘losers’ in the evolutionary game, he notes that they were “highly successful for a
long time, longer certainly than we have yet been, and they occupied a unique
place in nature. … It is profoundly misleading to see them simply as an inferior
version of ourselves.”
6.3.7.4
Neanderthal aDNA Sequences and the Origin of Modern Humans
The first isolation and sequencing of Neanderthal mtDNA by Krings et al. (1997)
was published to lavish media fanfare on 11 July 1997 and was interpreted as
powerful support for the out-of-Africa model. The cover of the scientific journal
Cell announced in big letters: “Neanderthals Were Not Our Ancestors”. Are the
aDNA results really the ultimate solution to the long-standing Neanderthal problem?
Besides those who claimed that debate about the phylogenetic role of the Neander-
thals had once and for all come to a conclusion, there were very skeptical comments.
In the beginning it was questioned whether the DNA found had remained intact
and whether it may have been affected by degradation and contamination, a criticism
that had already been refuted by the sophisticated design of the study: multiple
controls indicated that the sequence was endogenous to the fossil. Others, e.g.,
Wolpoff, said that the researchers had jumped to conclusions too soon. Interesting
enough, the paleogeneticists themselves were much more cautious than the
newspapers with their flashy headlines. Their comments on their brilliant,
innovative piece of work were very down-to-earth: DNA was extracted from the
Neanderthal-type specimen, and by sequencing clones of short overlapping PCR
products they were able to determine a hitherto unknown mitochondrial DNA
sequence. Sequence comparisons with recent human mtDNA showed that the
Neanderthal sequence falls outside the variation of modern humans, and phylo-
genetic analyses based on the mtDNA data supported the separate position of the
Neanderthals. Compared with mtDNA from living humans, the Neanderthal
specimen is different at 27 positions, considerably more than the average of
8 differences among recent humans. There is only very slight overlap, because the
number of mtDNA differences between living humans and the Neanderthal
specimen ranges from 22 to 36 substitutions, whereas the number of mtDNA
differences among living humans ranges from 1 to 24 substitutions (Figure 6.54).
Furthermore, molecular clock calculations suggested that the common ancestor
of Neanderthal and modern human mtDNAs was roughly four times longer ago
(550 000 to 690 000 years) than the common ancestor of human mtDNAs.
The final conclusion of these results is “that Neandertals went extinct without
contributing mtDNA to modern humans” (Krings et al. 1997, p. 19). However,
they made the point that Neanderthals did not contribute any mtDNA to living
humans, the possibility that Neanderthals contributed nuclear genes could not
be ruled out.
Relethford (1998, p. 18) gives some additional arguments why there is need for
more research, to put the 27-base pair difference into perspective. He asks whether
the Neanderthal specimen is different “because he belonged to a different species,
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

200
6  Human Biological Evolution
because he lived many ten thousand years ago, because of demographic shifts over
time, or because of recent natural selection?”
The paleogeneticists and population geneticists are working on the problem.
Svante Pääbo and coworkers were able to extract a second mtDNA which confirmed
the first analysis from 1997. More information that points into the same direction
has been published by Ovchinnikov et al. (2000), who analyzed Neanderthal DNA
from Mezmaiskaya (Northern Caucasus), and further results are based on the
Vindija (Croatia) fossils. Although Caramelli et al. (2003) found clear evidence for
a genetic discontinuity between Neanderthals and 24 000-year-old anatomically
modern Europeans, based on fossil remains from the Paglicci Cave (Southern Italy),
we need information about additional fossil specimens (e.g., Skhul, Qafzeh), further
loci, and the possible roles of selection and neutrality (e.g., Hawks and Wolpoff
2001). There are many controversies relating to population genetics interpretations,
especially concerning the factors that could affect the relationship between
population size and census population size (e.g., Lahr and Foley 1998). As Relethford
(1998, p. 19) notices, the breathtaking pace of discovery will soon change our present-
day views. “Currently, neither phylogenetic model of modern human origins is
unequivocally supported to the exclusion of the other” (Relethford 1998, p. 1; also
Relethford 2001). In spite of much current debate, most of the molecular genetics
“results suggest a pattern of genetic continuity in the modern human’s genealogy
from the Upper Paleolithic period to the present, but a clear discontinuity with
respect to Neandertals of similar ages” (Caramelli et al. 2003, p. 6596).
Figure 6.54  Distributions of pairwise sequence differences between humans,
Neanderthals, and chimpanzees; x-axis = number of sequence differences;
y-axis = percent of pairwise comparisons (from Krings et al. 1997).

201
6.3.8
Molecules and the Origin of Recent Humankind
The primary concept of an African origin of modern humankind was initially based
on a cluster of crania that showed some morphological traits that were considered
to be the mark of modern humanity (Bräuer 1984). Smooth-browed specimens
from South African sites (e.g., Kanjera, Border Cave, Bushman Rock Shelter, Klasies
River Mouth Cave), attributed to anatomically modern Homo sapiens, played a
significant role in the 1970s, when improved dating techniques suggested that
several of them were over 100 00 years old and thus apparently more ancient than
the oldest anatomically modern H. sapiens from outside Africa. Protsch (1975,
p. 297 f.) concluded “Based on … the absolute dates [of African Late Pleistocene
hominins,] I propose the worldwide evolution of all earliest anatomically modern
fossil hominids from Homo sapiens capensis of Africa.”
When further evidence for a modern-appearing people of very high Late
Pleistocene age were obtained in the Middle East (Mugharet es-Skhul, Qafzeh;
Bar-Yosef and Vandermeersch 1993), the proponents of the ‘replacement model’
looked upon these new data as proof of their out-of-Africa models (see above).
In spite of many conflicting interpretations of the fossils (e.g., Wolpoff 1992,
1996–1997, Tobias 1995), the morphognostical and morphometrical affinities to
other Late Pleistocene representatives of H. sapiens were obvious. But one unsolved
question remained: are the morphological similarities really indicative of direct
genealogical relationships of African and non-African populations or just paralle-
lisms? The debate based exclusively on the fossil record promised no solution of
the controversy on ‘continuity or replacement’ (Bräuer and Smith 1992). Finally,
new approaches in molecular genetics were heralded as being able to finally solve
the puzzle of the origin of recent humankind. The source of new perspectives
concerning the evolutionary history of our species and the genetic relatedness of
human populations was the mtDNA of recent populations. Cann et al. (1987)
proposed that all mtDNAs found in modern human populations are descended
from a single common ancestor who lived in Africa 200 000 years ago. Those
paleoanthropologists who espoused the out-of-Africa models enthusiastically
welcomed the molecular data that supported their theories (Stringer 1988, Stringer
and Andrews 1988).
Cann et al. (1987) studied DNA of mitochondria, i.e., cellular organelles
responsible for generating energy, in specimens taken from various living human
populations. mtDNA is inherited strictly through the maternal line without
segregation or recombination. In their basic study, Wilson and colleagues analyzed
restriction enzyme maps of individuals from all continents and produced a pattern
of 182 different types (Figure 6.55). The inferred evolutionary relationship among
these types implies an African origin of recent mankind. The conclusion from the
mtDNA data was that a single woman, who lived in Africa as recently as the end of
the Middle Pleistocene between 140 000 and 290 000 years BP (since then narrowed
to ca. 200 000 years BP, Wilson and Cann 1992), was our common ancestor.
Additionally, African populations display the greatest variation in mtDNA, which
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

202
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.55  African origin of modern humans based on mitochondrial DNA
analysis. Analysis of restriction enzyme maps of individuals from all geo-
graphic regions produced a pattern of 182 different types (outer edges).
The inferred evolutionary relationships among these types implies an African
origin. In addition, African populations display the greatest variation in
mtDNA, which also supports an African origin (from Lewis 1998).

203
also supports the out-of-Africa model. The inheritance of mtDNA from only a single
mother led them to name the founding mother of humanity ‘Eve’ or ‘African Lucky
Mother’. The Eve hypothesis met with some vehement criticism, because, right
from the beginning, there was confusion (Wolpoff 1992). The biblical image of the
African Eve was totally misleading, because the ‘mitochondrial Eve’ was not the
literal mother of us all. She was merely the female from whom all of our mtDNA
derives; many of the nuclear genes would have originated from other females –
and from males as well (Relethford 1998, 2001). It simply refers to the fact that a
single mtDNA type may have been present in a population of several hundred or
even thousand females, most of whom left no mtDNA descendents due simply to
chance.
In this context, the bottleneck principle plays an important role. Population
geneticists speak of a bottleneck when the number of individuals in a population is
drastically reduced and may afterward increase again. Bottlenecks are periods of
intense selection (e.g., by a severe habitat change) or of very small population size
during which only certain genes survive that eventually characterize the whole
population. Compared to the original population, the new population possesses
only a fraction of the former genetic variation that it in turn can pass on to future
generations. Given a scenario of small populations sizes, small sibships, and high
mortality rates in Pleistocene human populations, as well as a sex ratio of 1 : 1
(males never transmit their mtDNA type), there is a high probability that mito-
chondrial diversity would be progressively reduced to a single type as a result of
random factors (Bilsborough 1992, Relethford 1998, 2001, Templeton 1992, 1993).
Much criticism has been formulated, focused on (1) the sample, which was
composed of African Americans, which functioned as a substitute for African
populations, (2) the use of restriction analysis instead of more detailed comparisons
between complete sequences, and (3) the lack of an outgroup, such as Pan, for a
more accurate rooting of the human family tree. In response to the diverse criticism,
the research was refined. The branching model remained principally the same as
before, giving new support for an recent African origin of mankind – but not for
long. The phylogenetic method of constructing the human tree was claimed to be
inappropriate. The use of the computer program PAUP (Phylogenetic Analysis
Using Parsimony), which ranks different trees according to the principle of
parsimony, was heavily discredited as incorrect. Templeton’s (1993) recalculations
demonstrated that other parsimonious solutions are possible, which give no
convincing support to the RAO and a recent branching of African and non-African
populations.
As mtDNA research went on, and it became increasingly evident that, when
working with DNA sequences only, it is extremely difficult to design tests that
distinguish the African replacement model from the multiregional evolution model
(Tishkoff et al. 1996, Wolpoff 1996). The trouble is that both models describe a
species originating in Africa and spreading throughout Europe and Asia, then
differentiating into regional subpopulations that nonetheless remain interconnected
by gene flow. Both models include a common ancestry for all present-day humans
that traces back to Africa. The essential difference is the time pattern of the dispersal.
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

204
6  Human Biological Evolution
The molecular evidence for a recent origin of H. sapiens was poorly grounded
statistically, although the conclusions may be correct after all (Relethford 1998,
2001, Zischler et al. 1995).
One crucial point in the discussion is the molecular clock, the means of
determining dates of evolutionary divergences using genetic similarities between
extant species, based on the assumption that molecular evolution proceeds at a
constant rate. Since rates of molecular evolution vary among lineages, one should
be extremely cautious about extrapolating a calibration made for a particular
taxonomic group to other species (Hillis et al. 1996).
Until now, there is no unequivocal answer from the genetic data, quite the
opposite; so the situation concerning modern human origins remains problematic.
Any attempt to force the genetic data from regional subpopulations into a
phylogenetic branching model is invalid, because they are not separate evolutionary
entities, as Relethford (1998) noted. Even if regional differences began only around
100 000 years ago as a “result of dispersal from Africa and subsequent branching,
the continued action of gene flow makes the reconstruction of phylogenetic trees
and the dating of population splits difficult at best” (Relethford 1998, p. 5). In spite
of many discrepancies concerning the interpretation of the molecular data, it is
becoming clearer that, due to the larger effective population size in Africa throughout
this time and especially after an expansion, continued gene flow led to greater total
African ancestry in all regions, as Relethford (2001) suggests. For this reason he
proposes the ‘mostly out of Africa’ model, a multiregional model in which Africa
contributes the most to accumulated ancestry in all regions (Figure 6.56), as the
most parsimonious interpretation.
The male analog to the maternal mtDNA is the Y chromosome. The Y chromo-
some is paternally inherited, and, except for a small section, does not recombine
(Hammer and Zegura 1996). Several attempts to estimate the coalescence date
have been made (e.g., Whitfield et al. 1995, Underhill et al. 1997). Although some
results are consistent with a recent African origin within the range of the mtDNA
estimates, some data point to a much more recent date (37 000 to 49 000 years BP).
Figure 6.56  The ‘mostly out of Africa’ model (after Figure 9.3 in Relethford 2001).

205
Besides the mtDNA and Y chromosomal data, which are often cited as convincing
support for a recent African origin, there is further molecular evidence from the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and from β-globulin and other poly-
morphisms, which have yielded controversial results.
Cavalli-Sforza’s (1991) ‘human diversity project’ yielded many results that indicate
an African origin (Figure 6.57). This holds also for new approaches: Cavalli-Sforza
et al. (1994) analyzed microsatellites in nuclear DNA using two parts of the CD4
gene on chromosome 12 from a global sample of 1600 individuals in 42 populations.
The results demonstrated that the greatest diversity existed among sub-Saharan
populations and that all populations outside of Africa were much more homo-
geneous.
A recent analysis of Alu insertion polymorphisms, a noncoding locus near the
short tandem repeat (STR) locus on chromosome 12, estimated a date of approxi-
mately 1.4 myr ago for the human coalescence (Sherry et al. 1997).
In spite of tremendous discrepancies in interpretation of the molecular data
(Tobias 1995, Relethford, 2001), the genetic evidence for modern human origins
has most often been portrayed as support for a recent African origin model involving
near-complete replacement (Freeman and Herron 1998, Lewin 1998). Because the
evidence is not as conclusive as one might think, there is much more work needed
on other loci and especially from the population structure perspective to achieve
unequivocal results. Irrespective of the final outcome, there is no doubt that
paleoanthropology has gained immensely from the paleogenetic approach.
Figure 6.57  Evidence from nuclear DNA supports an African origin.
The data separate African and non-African populations and indicate an
African origin (from Cavalli-Sforza 1991).
6.3  Human Biological Evolution: a Current Review

206
6  Human Biological Evolution
Figure 6.58  A hominin family tree as the current best guess of the so-called splitters
(from Henke and Rothe 2003).

207
6.4
Concluding Remarks
This review of human biological evolution demonstrates that no conclusive
agreement has been reached in the long-lasting controversies on human origins.
On the one hand, there are obviously many biases and misreadings of the different
viewpoints, which have increased the vigor of the debate. But on the other hand,
there are essential differences in principal assumptions and preconditions (Tattersall
1996; Wolpoff and Caspari 1997a, b, Relethford 2001, Henke and Rothe 2003).
The crucial point for controversies are polarized positions concerning realistic
criteria for species recognition in the human fossil record. There have been major
advances in the acquisition and analysis of evidence for human evolution. But
despite a tremendous increase in fossil evidence and a dramatic revolution in
technical approaches, much work still needs to be done. This holds especially true
for the conceptual framework for handling the resulting information from all kinds
of paleoanthropological research. Although the scenario of human evolution is
much more detailed and complex (Figure 6.58) than it was three decades ago;
paradoxically, the more precise the picture became, the more questions arose. This
is absolutely typical of science and not retrogressive at all.
In a general review it is not particularly useful to advocate a fixed position, although
there are of course preferences for one or another finding which may become
obvious to the close reader. Paleoanthropologists seek the doorways to the past and
– as has been shown – have been very successful recently in developing new sets of
keys. McHenry (1996, p. 86) puts it this way: “One needs to make the best of our
tiny sample of life in the past. To be open to new discoveries and ideas, and to enjoy
the pleasure of learning and changing.”
6.5
References
Aiello, L. C. (1990) Patterns of stature and weight in human evolution.
Am. J. Phys. Anthrop. 81, 186–187.
Aiello, L. C. (1996) Terrestriality, bipedalism and the origin of language. In:
Runciman, W. G., Maynard Smith, J., Dunbar, R. I. M. (Eds.), Evolution of
Social Patterns in Primates and Man. London: The British Academy, 269–289.
Aiello, L. C., Dean, C. (1990) An Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anatomy.
San Diego: Academic.
Andrews, P. (1984) On the characters that define Homo erectus. Cour. Forsch.
Senckenb. 69, 167–178.
Andrews, P. (1986) Molecular evidence for catarrhine evolution. In: Wood,
B. A., Martin, L. B., Andrews, P. J. (Eds.), Major Topics in Primate and Human
Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 107–129.
Arambourg, C., Coppens, Y. (1968) Découverte d’un Australopithecien nouveau
dans les gisements de l’Omo (Ethiopie). S. Afr. J. Sci. 64, 58–59.
6.5  References

208
6  Human Biological Evolution
Arsuaga, J.-L., Martínez, I., Lorenzo, C., Gracia, A., Munoz, Alonso, O.,
Gallego, J. (1999) The human cranial remains from Gran Dolina Lower
Pleistocene site (Sierra de Atapuerca, Spain). J. Hum. Evol. 37, 431–457.
Asfaw, B., Withe, T., Lovejoy, O., Latimer, B., Simpson, S., Suwa, G. (1999)
Australopithecus garhi: a new species of early hominid from Ethiopia. Science
284, 629–635.
Asfaw, B., Gilbert, W. H., Beyene, Y., Kart, W. K., Renne, P. R.,
WoldeGabriel, G., Vrba, E. S., White, T. (2002) Remains of Homo erectus
from Bouri, Middle Awash, Ethiopia. Nature 416, 317–320.
Ax, P. (1984) Das phylogenetische System. Stuttgart, New York: Gustav Fischer Verlag.
Ayala, F. J. (1997) Vagaries of the molecular clock. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
94 (15), 7776–7783.
Barrett, P. H., Gautey, P. J., Herbert, S., Kohn, D., Smith, S. (Eds.) (1987)
Charles Darwin’s Notebooks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1836–1844.
Bar-Yosef, O., Vandermeersch, B. (1993) Koexistenz von Neandertaler und
modernem Homo sapiens. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 6, 32–39.
Begun, D. R., Kordos, L. (1997) Phyletic affinities and functional convergence
in Dryopithecus and other Miocene and living hominids. In: Begun, D. R.,
Ward, C. V., Rose, M. D. (Eds.), Function, Phylogeny and Fossils. Miocene
Hominoid Evolution and Adaptations. New York: Plenum, 291–316.
Begun, D. R., Ward, C. V., Rose, M. D. (1997) Events in hominoid evolution.
In: Begun D. R., Ward C. V., Rose M. D. (Eds.), Function, Phylogeny and Fossils.
Miocene Hominoid Evolution and Adaptations. New York: Plenum, 389–415.
Begun, D. R., Ward, C. V., Rose, M. D. (Eds.) (1997a) Function, Phylogeny and
Fossils. Miocene Hominoid Evolution and Adaptations. New York: Plenum.
Benefit, B. R. (1999) Victoriapithecus: the key to old world monkey and
catarrhine origins. Evol. Anthropol. 7, 154–174.
Bilsborough, A. (1986) Diversity, evolution and adaptation in early hominids.
In: Aily, G. N., Callow, P. (Eds.), Stone Age Prehistory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 197–220.
Bilsborough, A. (1992) Human Evolution. London: Blackie.
Bilsborough, A., Wood, B. A. (1986) The nature, origin, and fate of Homo
erectus. In: Wood, B. A., Andrews, P. (Eds.), Major Topics in Primate and
Human Evolution, Cambridge. Cambridge University Press, 295–316.
Binford, L. R. (Ed.) (1977) For Theory Building in Archaeology. London: Academic
Press.
Binford, L. R. (1981) Bones: Ancient Man and Modern Myths. New York:
Academic Press.
Bock, W. J., von Wahlert, G. (1965) Adaptation and the form-function complex.
Evolution 19, 269–299.
Boesch, C. (1996) The emergence of cultures among wild chimpanzees. In:
Runciman, W. G., Maynard Smith, J., Dunbar, R. I. M. (Eds.), Evolution of
Social Patterns in Primates and Man. London: The British Academy, 251–268.
Boesch-Achermann, H., Boesch, C. (1994) Hominization in the rainforest:
the chimpanzee’s piece in the puzzle. Evol. Anthropol. 3, 9–16.

209
Bräuer, G. (1984) The ‘Afro-European sapiens hypothesis’ and hominid evolution
in East Asia during the late Middle and Upper Pleistocene. Cour. Forsch.
Senckenb. 69, 145–165.
Bräuer, G. (1992) Africa’s place in the evolution of Homo sapiens. In: Bräuer,
G., Smith, F. H. (Eds.), Continuity or Replacement: Controversies in Homo
sapiens Evolution. Rotterdam: Balkema, 83–98.
Bräuer, G., Mbua, E. (1992) Homo erectus features used in cladistics and their
variability in Asian and African hominids. J. Hum. Evol. 22, 79–108.
Bräuer, G., Smith F. H. (Eds.) (1992) Continuity or Replacement. Controversies
in Homo sapiens Evolution. Rotterdam: Balkema.
Bräuer, G., Henke, W., Schultz, M. (1995) Der hominide Unterkiefer von
Dmanisi: Morphologie, Pathologie und Analysen zur Klassifikation. Jahrb. des
RGZM 42, 183–203.
Brenner, S., Hanihara, K. (Eds.) (1995) The Origin and Past of Modern
Humans as Viewed from DNA. Proceedings of the Workshop on the Origin and
Past of Homo sapiens sapiens as Viewed from DNA: Theoretical Approach.
Singapore: World Scientific.
Bromage, T. G., Schrenk, F. (Eds.) (1995) Evolutionary history of the Malawi
Rift. J. Hum. Evol. 28, 1–120.
Bromage, T. G., Schrenk, F., Zonneveld, F. (1995) Paleoanthropology of the
Malawi Rift: an early hominid mandible from the Chiwondo beds, northern
Malawi. J. Hum. Evol. 28, 71–108.
Broom, R. (1937) The Sterkfontein ape. Nature 139, 326.
Broom, R. (1938) The Pleistocene anthropoid apes from South Africa. Nature
142, 377–379.
Burger, J., Hummel, S., Herrmann, B., Henke, W. (1999) DNA preservation:
a microsatellite-DANN study on ancient skeletal remains. Electrophoresis 20,
1722–1728.
Burke, T., Dolf, G., Jeffreys, A. J. Wolff, R. (Eds.) (1991) DNA Fingerprinting:
Approaches and Applications. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Brunet M., Guy F., Pilbeam, D., MacKaye, H. T., Likius A., Djimboumalbaye,
A. et al. (2002) A new hominid from the upper Miocene of Chad, central
Africa. Nature, 418, 145–151.
Campbell, B. G. (1964) Quantitative taxonomy and human evolution. In:
Washburn, S. L. (Ed.) Classification and Human Evolution. London: Metheun,
50–74.
Campbell, B. G. (1965) The nomenclature of the Hominidae. Occas. Pap. Roy.
Anthropol. Inst. London, Vol. 22.
Campbell, B. G. (1998) Human Evolution, 4th ed. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Cann, R. L., Stoneking, M., Wilson, A. C. (1987) Mitochondrial DNA and
human evolution. Nature 325, 31–36.
Caramelli, D., Lalueza-Fox, C., Vernesi, C., Lari, M., Casoli, A., Mallegni, F.,
Chiarelli, B., Dupanloup, I., Bertranpetit, J., Barbujani, G., Bertorelle, G.
(2003) Evidence for a genetic discontinuity between Neandertals and 24,000-year-
old anatomically modern Europeans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 6593–6597.
6.5  References

210
6  Human Biological Evolution
Carbonell, E., Bermúdez, J.-M., Arsuaga, J. L. (1999) Preface. J. Hum. Evol. 37,
309–311.
Cartmill, M. (1992) New views on primate origins. Evol. Anthropol. 1, 105–111.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. (1992) Stammbäume von Völkern und Sprachen.
Spektrum der Wissenschaft 1, 190–198.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., Menozzi, P., Piazza, A. (1994) The History and
Geography of Human Genes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chamberlain, A. T., Wood, B. A. (1987) Early hominid phylogeny. J. Hum. Evol.
16, 119–133.
Churchill, S. M. (1998) Cold adaptation, heterochrony, and Neandertals.
Evol. Anthropol. 7, 46–61.
Ciochon, R. L., Corruccini, R. S. (Eds.) (1983) New Interpretations of Ape and
Human Ancestry. New York: Plenum.
Clark, G. A., Willermet, C. M. (Eds.) (1997) Conceptual Issues in Modern
Human Origins Research. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Clarke, R. J. (1999) First ever discovery of a well-preserved skull and associated
skeleton of Australopithecus. Beitr. z. Archäozool. Prähist. Anthrop. II, 21–27.
Coon, C. S. (1939) The Races of Europe. New York: Macmillan.
Coon, C. S. (1962) The Origin of Races. London: Jonathan Cape.
Coon, C. S. (1982) Racial Adaptations. A Study of the Origins, Nature, and
Significance of Racial Variations in Humans. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Crelin, E. S. (1987) The Human Vocal Tract: Anatomy, Function, Development, and
Evolution. New York: Vantage.
Cronin, J. E. (1983) Ape, humans, and molecular clocks: a reappraisal.
In: Ciochon, R. L., Corruccini, R. S. (Eds.), New Interpretations of Ape and
Human Ancestry. New York: Plenum, 115–137.
Dart, R. (1925) Australopithecus africanus: the man-ape of South Africa.
Nature 115, 195–199.
Dart, R. (1948) The Makapansgat proto-human Australopithecus prometheus.
Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop. 6, 259–284.
Darwin, C. (1859) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection.
London: Murray (dt. Übers.: Schmidt, H., 1982, 4. Aufl.).
Darwin, C. (1871) The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex.
London: Murray (dt. Übers.: Neumann, C. W. , 1967).
Delson, E., Eldredge, N., Tattersall, I. (1977) Reconstruction of hominid phylo-
geny: a testable framework based on cladistic analysis. J. Hum. Evol. 16, 297–305.
Demes, B. (1987) Another look at an old face: biomechanics of the Neanderthal
facial skeleton reconsidered. J. Hum. Evol. 16, 297–305.
Dennett, C. D. (1995) Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. Evolution and the Meanings of
Life. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Efremov, I. A. (1940) Taphonomy: a new branch of paleontology. Pan. Am. Geol.
74, 81–93.
Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S. E., Lai, C. S., Wiebe, V., Kitano, T.,
Monaco, A. P., Pääbo, S. (2002) Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene
involved in speech and language. Nature 418, 869–872.

211
Etter, W. (1994) Palökologie. Eine methodische Einführung. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Fleagle, J. G. (1988) Primate Adaptation and Evolution. San Diego: Academic.
Fleagle, J. G., Kay R. F. (1994a) Anthropoid origins. past, present, and future. In:
Fleagle, J. G., Kay R. F. (Eds.), Anthropoid Origins. New York: Plenum, 675–698.
Fleagle, J. G., Kay, R. F. (Eds.) (1994b) Anthropoid Origins. New York: Plenum.
Foley, R. A. (1987) Another Unique Species. Patterns in Human Evolutionary
Ecology. Harlow: Longman.
Foley, R. A. (1995) Humans before Humanity. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Franciscus, R. G., Trinkaus, E. (1988) Nasal morphology and the emergence of
Homo erectus. Am. J. Phys. Anthrop. 75, 517–527.
Franzen, J. L. (Ed.) (1994a) 100 Years of Pithecanthropus. The Homo erectus Problem.
Cour. Forsch.-Inst. Senckenberg 171. Frankfurt a. M.: Senckenberg.
Franzen, J. L. (1994b) The Homo erectus problem. In: Franzen, J. L. (Ed.),
100 Years of Pithecanthropus. The Homo erectus Problem. Cour. Forsch.-Inst.
Senckenberg 171, 9–10. Frankfurt a. M.: Senckenberg.
Frayer, D. W. (1984) Biological and cultural change in the European Late Pleisto-
cene and Early Holocene. In: Smith, F. H., Spencer, F. (Eds.), The Origins of
Modern Humans. A World Survey of the Fossil Evidence. New York: Liss, 211–250.
Frayer, D. W. (1992) Evolution at the European edge: Neanderthal and upper
Paleolithic relationships. Préhist. Europ. 2, 9–69.
Frayer, D. W., Wolpoff, M. H., Smith F. H., Thorne, A. G., Pope, G. G. (1993)
The fossil evidence for modern human origins. Am. Anthrop. 95, 14–50.
Freeman, S., Herron, J. C. (1998) Evolutionary Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Gabunia, L., Antón, S. C., Lordkipanidze, D., Vekua, A., Justus, A., Swisher,
C. C. III (2001) Dmanisi and dispersal. Evol. Anthropol. 10, 158–170.
Goodall, J. (1986) The Chimpanzees of Gombe. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Goodman, M. (1962) Immunochemistry of the primates and primate evolution.
Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 102, 219–234.
Goodman, M., Baba, M. L., Darga, L. L. (1983) The bearing of molecular data
on the cladogenesis and times of divergence of hominoid lineages. In:
Ciochon, R. L., Corruccini, R. S. (Eds.), New Interpretations of Ape and
Human Ancestry. New York: Plenum, 67–86.
Grine, F. E. (1993) Australopithecine taxonomy and phylogeny: historical back-
ground and recent interpretation. In: Ciochon, R. L., Fleagle, J. G. (Eds.),
The Human Evolution Source Book. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 198–210.
Groves, C. P., Mazak, V. (1975) An approach to the taxonomy of the Hominidae:
gracile Villafranchium hominids of Africa. Can. Min. Geol. 20, 225–247.
Haile-Selassie, Y. (2001) Late Miocene hominids from Middle Awash, Ethiopia.
Nature 412, 178–181.
Hammer, M. F., Zegura, S. L. (1996) The role of the Y chromosome in human
evolutionary studies. Evol. Anthropol. 5, 116–134.
Hartwig, W. C. (Ed.) (2002) The Primate Fossil Record. Cambridge: Cambridge
Univ. Press.
6.5  References

212
6  Human Biological Evolution
Hartwig-Scherer, S., Martin, R. D. (1991) Was ‘Lucy’ more human than her
‘child’? Observations on early hominid postcranial skeletons. J. Hum. Evol. 21,
439–449.
Hawks, J., Wolpoff, M. H. (2001) Paleoanthropology and the population
genetics of ancient genes. Amer. J. Phys. Anthropol. 114, 269–272.
Hayden, B. (1993) The cultural capacities of Neandertals: a review and re-evaluation.
J. Hum. Evol. 24, 113–146.
Heim, J. L. (1976) Les hommes fossiles de la Ferrassie (Dordogne) et la problème
de la definition des Néandertaliens classiques. L’Anthropologie 74, no. 1/2.
Helmuth, H. (1998) Body height, body mass and surface area of the Neandertals.
Zschr. Morph. Anthrop. 82, 1–12.
Helmuth, H., Henke, W. (1999) The Path to Humanity. Toronto: Canadian Scholars’
Press.
Hemmer, H. (1999) Die Feliden aus dem Epivillafranchium von Untermaßfeld
bei Meiningen (Thüringen). In: Kahlke, R. D. (Ed.), Das Pleistozän von
Untermaßfeld bei Meiningen (Thüringen), Teil II. Römisch-Germanisches
Zentralmuseum, Mainz. Monographien.
Henke, W. (1988) Die Menchen der letzten Eiszeit: Zur Frage der Differenzie-
rung der endpleistozänen Hominiden Europas. Anthrop. Anz. 46, 289–316.
Henke, W. (1990) Jungpaläolithiker und Mesolithiker Europas, Habil. Thesis.
University of Mainz, Germany, Fachbereich (Microfiche) Biologie.
Henke, W. (1992) Die Proto-Cromagnoiden: Morphologische Affinitäten und
phylogenetische Rolle. Anthropologie 30, 1–36.
Henke, W. (1995) Spätpleistozäne und frühholozäne Hominidenmorphologie
und Klima. In: Ullrich, H. (Ed.), Man and Environment in the Palaeolithic.
Etudes et Recherches Archéologiques de L’Université de Liège, 111–136.
Henke, W. (1998) Current aspects of dental research in palaeoanthropology. In:
Alt, K. W., Rösing, F. W., Teschler-Nicola, M. (Eds.), Dental Anthropology.
Vienna: Springer, 179–200.
Henke, W., Kieser, N., Schnaubelt, W. (1996) Die Neandertalerin. Botschafterin
der Vorzeit. Gelsenkrichen, Schwelm: Edition Archaea.
Henke, W., Roth, H., Alt, K. W. (1999) Dmanisi and the early Eurasian
dispersal of the genus Homo. In: Ullrich, H. (Ed.), Lifestyles and Survival
Strategies in Pliocene and Pleistocene Hominids. Gelsenkirchen, Schwelm:
Edition Archaea. 138–155.
Henke, W., Roth, H., Simon, C. (1995) Qualitative and quantitative analysis of
the Dmanisi mandible. In: Radlanski, R. J., Renz, H. (Eds.), Proceedings of the
10th International Symposium on Dental Morphology, Berlin 1995. Berlin:
Brünne, 6–10.
Henke, W., Rothe, H. (1994) Paläoanthropologie. Berlin: Springer.
Henke, W., Rothe, H. (1995) Homo erectus: valides Taxon der europäischen
Hominiden? Bull. Soc. Suisse d’Anthrop. 1, 15–26.
Henke, W., Rothe H. (1997a) Zahnphylogenese der nicht-menschlichen
Primaten. In: Alt, K. W., Türp, J. C. (Eds.), Die Evolution der Zähne. Phylogenie,
Ontogenie, Variation. Berlin: Quintessenz, 229–278.

213
Henke, W., Rothe, H. (1997b) Zahnphylogenese der Hominiden. In: Alt, K. W.,
Türp, J. C. (Eds.), Die Evolution der Zähne. Phylogenie, Ontogenie, Variation.
Berlin: Quintessenz, 279–360.
Henke, W., Rothe, H. (1998) Stammesgeschichte des Menschen. Eine Einführung.
Heidelberg: Springer.
Henke, W., Rothe, H. (1999a) Die phylogenetische Stellung des Neandertalers.
Biologie in unserer Zeit 29, 320–329.
Henke, W., Rothe, H. (1999b) Migrationen früher Hominini: Überlegungen zu
Eurytopie, Exogenie und Expansion in Verbindung mit tiergeographischen
Befunden. Betr. z. Archäozool. Prähist. Anthrop. II, 28–35.
Hennig, W. (1950) Grundzüge einer Theorie der Phylogenetischen Systematik.
Berlin: Deutscher Zentralverlag.
Hennig, W. (1966) Phylogenetic Systematics. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Herrmann, B., Hummel, S. (Eds.) (1994) Ancient DNA: Recovery and Analysis of
Genetic Material from Paleontological, Archaeological, Museum, Medical, and
Forensic Specimens. New York: Springer.
Hill, A. (1975) Taphonomy of contemporary and Late Cenozoic East African
Vertebrates, Ph. D. thesis. London: University of London.
Hillis, D. M., Mable, B. K., Moritz, C. (1996) Applications of molecular
systematics: the state of the field and a look to the future. In: Hillis, D. M.,
Moritz, C., Mable, B. K. (Eds.), Molecular Systematics. Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer.
Holroyd, P. A., Ciochon, R. L. (1994) The Asian origin of Anthropoidea
revisited. In: Fleagle, J. G., Kay, R. F. (Eds.), Anthropoid Origins. New York:
Plenum, 143–162.
Howell, F. C. (1978) Hominidae. In: Maglio, V. J., Cooke, H. B. S. (Eds.),
Evolution in African Mammals. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
154–248.
Howell, F. C. (1986) Variabilité chez Homo erectus et problème de la présence de
cette espèce en Europe. L’Anthropologie 90, 447–481.
Howell, F. C. (1996) Thoughts on the study and interpretation of the human
fossil record. In: Meikle, W. E., Howell, F. C, Jablonski, N. G. (Eds.),
Contemporary Issues in Human Evolution. San Francisco: California Academy of
Sciences, 1–45.
Howells, W. W. (1980) Homo erectus: who, when and where: a survey. Yrb. Phys.
Anthrop. 23, 1–23.
Howells, W. W. (1993) Getting Here. The Story of Human Evolution. Washington,
DC: Compass.
Huang W.-P., Ciochon, R., Yúmin, G., Larick, R., Qiren, F., Schwarcz, H.,
Yonge, C., de Vos, J., Rink, W. (1995) Early Homo and associated artefacts
from Asia. Nature 378, 275–278.
Hublin, J. J. (1986) Some comments on the diagnostic features of Homo erectus.
Anthropos (Brno) 23, 175–187.
Hublin, J. J. (1998) Die Sonderevolution der Neandertaler. Spektrum der
Wissenschaft 7, 56–63.
6.5  References

214
6  Human Biological Evolution
Hummel, S. (2002) Ancient DNA Typing. Methods, Strategies and Applications.
Berlin: Springer.
Huxley, T. H. (1863) Evidences as to Man’s Place in Nature. London: William and
Norgate (dt. Übers.: Carus, J. V.).
Jacob, T. (1976) Early population in the Indonesian region. In: Krik, R. L.,
Thorne, A. G. (Eds.), The Origin of the Australians. Austra. Inst. Aboriginial
Studies, Canberra, 81–93.
Johanson, D. C. (1989) A partial Homo habilis skeleton from Olduvai Gorge,
Tanzania: a summary of preliminary results. In: Giacobini, G. (Ed.),
Hominidae. Proc. 2nd Int. Congr. Hum. Paleiont, Turin 1987. Milan: Jaca Books,
155–166.
Johanson, D. C., Edgar, B. (1996) From Lucy to Language. New York: Nevraumont.
Johanson, D. C., White, T. D. (1979) A systematic assessment of early African
hominids. Science 202, 321–330.
Johanson, D. C, White, T. D., Coppens, Y. (1978) A new species of the genus
Australopithecus (Primates; Hominidae) from the Pliocene of Eastern Africa.
Kirtlandia 28, 1–14.
Johanson, D. C., Masao, F. T., Eck, G. G., White, T. D., Walter, R. C., Kimbel,
W. H., Asfaw, B., Manega, P., Ndessokia, P., Suwa, G. (1987) New partial
skeleton of Homo habilis from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Nature 327, 205–209.
Jones, S., Martin, R. D., Pilbeam, D. (Eds.) (1992) The Cambridge Encyclopedia
of Human Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kennedy, G. E. (1991) On the autapomorphic traits of Homo erectus. J. Hum.
Evol. 20, 375–412.
Keyser, A. W. (2000) The Drimolen skull: the most complete australopithecine
cranium and mandible to date. South African Journal of Science 96, 189–193.
Kimbel, W. H., White, T. D., Johanson, D. C. (1988) Implications of KNM-WT
17000 for the evolution of ‘robust’ Australopithecus. In: Grine, F. E. (Ed.),
Evolutionary History of the ‘Robust’ Australopithecines. New York: Aldine de
Gruyter, 259–268.
Klein, R. G. (1989) The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Klein, R. G. (1992) The archeology of modern human origins. Evol. Anthropol. 1,
5–14.
Krings, M., Stone, A., Schmitz, R. W., Krainitzki, H., Stoneking, M.,
Pääbo, S. (1997) Neandertal DNA sequences and the origin of modern
humans. Cell 90, 19–30.
Kullmer, O., Sandrock, O., Abel, R., Schrenk, F., Bromage, G., Juwayeyi, M.
(1999) The first Paranthropus from the Malawi Rift. J. Hum. Evol. 37, 121–127.
Lahr, M. M., Foley, R. A. (1998) Towards a theory of modern human origins:
geography, demography, and diversity in recent human evolution. Yrbk. Phys.
Anthrop. 41, 137–176.
Larick, R., Ciochon, R. L. (1996) The African emergence and early Asian
dispersal of the genus Homo. Amer. Sci. 84, 538–551.
Leakey, L. S. B. (1959) A new fossil skull from Olduvai. Nature 201, 967–970.

215
Leakey, L. S. B, Tobias, P. V., Napier, J. R. (1964) A new species of the genus
Homo from Olduvai Gorge. Nature 202, 7–9.
Leakey, M. G., Feibel, C. S., McDougall, I., Walker, A. (1995) New four-
million-year-old hominid species from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya. Nature
376, 565–571.
Leakey, M. G., Feibel, C. S., McDougall, I., Ward, C., Walker, A. (1998)
New specimens and confirmation of an early age for Australopithecus
anamensis. Nature 393, 62–66.
Leakey, M. G., Ward, C. V., Walker, A. C. (2000) Australopithecus anamensis:
a new hominid species from Kanapoi. In: Schultz, M., Christiansen, K.,
Greil, H., Henke, W. et al. (Eds.) Schnittstelle Mensch – Umwelt in
Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft. Proceedings 3. Kongress der Ges. für
Anthropologie 1.–3. Oktober 1998 in Göttingen. Göttingen: Cuvillier, 5–8.
Lewin, R. (1993) Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction, 3rd ed.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Lewin, R. (1998) The Origin of Modern Humans. New York: Scientific American
Library.
Lieberman, P., Laitman, J. T., Reidenberg, J. S., Gannon, P. J. (1992) The ana-
tomy, physiology, acoustics, and perception of speech: essential elements in
analysis of the evolution of human speech. J. Hum. Evol. 23, 447–467.
Martin, R. D. (1986) Primates: a definition. In: Wood, B. A., Martin, R. D.,
Andrews, P. (Eds.), Major Topics in Primate and Human Evolution. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1–31.
Martin, R. D. (1990) Primate Origin and Evolution: A Phylogenetic Reconstruction.
London: Chapman and Hall.
Martin, R. D. (1995) Hirngröße und menschliche Evolution. Spektrum der
Wissenschaft 9, 48–55.
Mayr, E. (1969) Principles of Systematic Zoology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Mayr, E. (1975) Grundlagen der zoologischen Systematik. Berlin: Parey.
McBrearty, S., Brooks, A. S. (2000) The revolution that wasn’t: a new inter-
pretation of the origin of modern human behavior. Hum. Evol. 39, 453–563.
McHenry, H. M. (1996) Homoplasy, clades, and hominid phylogeny.
In: Meikle, W. E., Howell, F. C., Jablonski, N. G. (Eds.), Contemporary Issues
in Human Evolution. San Francisco: California Academy of Sciences, 77–92.
Mithen, S. (1996) The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art,
Religion, and Science. London, New York: Thames and Hudson.
Mullis, K. B. (1990) Eine Nachfahrt und die Polymerase-Kettenreaktion.
Spektrum der Wissenschaft 6, 60–67.
Noble, W., Davidson, I. (1996) Human Evolution, Language and Mind: A Psycho-
logical and Archaeological Inquiry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oakley, K. P. (1954) Dating the Australopithecus of Africa. Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop.
12, 9–23.
Ovchinnikov, I. V., Götherström, A., Romanova, G. P., Kharitonov, V. M.,
Lidén, K. Goodwin, W. (2000) Molecular analysis of Neanderthal DNA from
the northern Caucasus. Nature 404, 490–493.
6.5  References

216
6  Human Biological Evolution
Pianka, E. R. (1983) Evolutionary Ecology, 3rd ed. New York: Harper and Row.
Pilbeam, D. (1972) The Ascent of Man: An Introduction to Human Evolution.
New York: Macmillan.
Pittendrigh, C. S. (1958) Adaptation, natural selection, and behavior.
In: Roe A., Simpson, G. G. (Eds.), Behavior and Evolution. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 390–416.
Premack, D. (1976) On the study of intelligence in chimpanzees. Curr. Anthropol.
17, 516–521.
Protsch, R. R. R. (1975) The absolute dating of Upper Pleistocene subsaharian
fossil hominids and their place in human evolution. J. Hum. Evol. 4, 297–322.
Rak, Y. (1983) The Australopithecine Face. New York: Academic.
Rak, Y. (1986) The Neanderthal: a new look at an old face. J. Hum. Evol. 15,
151–164.
Rak, Y. (1991) Lucy’s pelvic anatomy: its role in bipedal gait. J. Hum. Evol. 20,
283–290.
Relethford, J. H. (1998) Genetics of modern human origins and diversity.
Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 27, 1–23.
Relethford, J. H. (2001) Genetics and the Search for Modern Human Origins.
New York: Wiley-Liss.
Rightmire, G. P. (1990) The Evolution of Homo erectus: Comparative Anatomical
Studies of an Extinct Human Species. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rightmire, G. P. (1992) Homo erectus: ancestor or evolutionary side branch?
Evol. Anthropol. 2, 43–49.
Rightmire, G. P. (1998) Evidence from facial morphology for similarity of Asian
and African representatives of Homo erectus. Am. J. Phys. Anthrop. 106, 61–85.
Robinson, J. T. (1954) The genera and species of the Australopithecinae.
Am. J. Phys. Anthrop. 12, 181–200.
Robinson, J. T. (1960) The affinities of the new Olduvai Australopithecine.
Nature 186, 456–458.
Rogers, M. J., Feibel, C. S., Harris, J. W. K. (1996) Deciphering early hominid
land use and behaviour: a multidisciplinary approach from the Lake Turkana
basin. In: Magori, C. C., Saanane, C. B., Schrenk, F. (Eds.), Four Million
Years of Hominid Evolution in Africa: Papers in Honour of Dr. Mary Douglas
Leakey’s Outstanding Contribution in Palaeoanthropology. Kaupia 6, 9–19.
Ross, C. F., Kay, R. F. (Eds.) (2004) Anthropoids Origins. New Visions. Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ. Press.
Ross, C. F., Williams, B., Kay, R. F. (1998) Phylogenetic analysis of anthropoid
relationships. J. Hum. Evol. 35, 221–306.
Ross, P. E. (1992) Nucleic acids and proteins trapped in ancient mummies and
still more ancient bones can serve as time capsules of history: molecular
biologists are beginning to unlock their secrets. Scientific American 5, 82–91.
Rothe, H., Wiesemüller, B., Henke, W. (1997) Phylogenetischer Status des
fossilen Neulings Ardipithecus ramidus: eine kritische Evaluation gegenwärti-
ger Konzepte. In: Überseemuseum Bremen, König, V., Hohmann, H. (Eds.),
Bausteine der Evolution. Gelsenkirchen, Schwelm: Edition Archaea, 159–168.

217
Sarich, V. M. (1983) Appendix: retrospective on hominoid macromolecular
systematics. In: Ciochon, R. L., Corrucini, R. S. (Eds.), New Interpretations of
Ape and Human Ancestry. New York: Plenum, 137–150.
Sarich, V. M., Wilson, A. C. (1967) Immunological time scale for hominoid
evolution. Science 158, 1200–1203.
Savage-Rumbough, S., Lewin, R. (1995) Kanzi, der sprechende Schimpanse. Was
den tierischen vom menschlichen Verstand unterscheidet. München: Droemersche
Verlagsanstalt, Th. Knaur Nachf.
Savage-Rumbough, E. S., Rumbough, D. M., Boysen, S. (1978) Symbolic commu-
nication between two chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Science 201, 641–644.
Schmid, P. (2000) Neueste Entdeckungen in den Australopithecus-Fundstellen
Südafrikas. In: Schultz, M., Christiansen, K., Greil, H., Henke, W. et al.
(Eds.) Schnittstelle Mensch – Umwelt in Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft.
Proceedings 3. Kongress der Ges. für Anthropologie 1.–3. Oktober 1998 in
Göttingen. Göttingen: Cuvillier, 33–39.
Schmidt-Kittler, N., Vogel, K. (Eds.) (1991) Constructional Morphology and
Evolution. Berlin: Springer.
Schmincke, H.-U., van den Bogaard, P. (1996) Die Datierung des Mašavera-
Basaltlavastroms. Jahrb. RGZM 42, 1995, 75–76.
Schmitz, J., Zischler, H. (2002) A novel family of tRNA-derived SINEs in the
colugo and two retrotransposable markers separating dermopterians from
primates. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 28, 341–349.
Schmitz, J., Oehme, M., Suryobroto, B. Zischler, H. (2003) The colugo
(Cynocephalus variegatus, Dermoptera): the primates’ gliding sister. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 19, 2308–2312.
Schrenk, F., Bromage, T. G. (1999) Climate change and survival strategies of
early Homo and Paranthropus in the Malawi Rift. In: Ullrich, H. (Ed.),
Hominid Evolution: Lifestyles and Survival Strategies. Gelsenkirchen, Schwelm:
Edition Archaea, 72–88.
Schrenk F., Bromage T. G., Betzler C. G., Ring, U. (1993) Oldest Homo and
Pliocene biogeography of the Malawi Rift. Nature 365, 833–836.
Schwartz, J. H. (1999) The Origin and Identification of Species. Anthropologie
(Brno) 37, 211–220.
Schwartz, J. H., Tattersall, I., Laitman, J. T. (1999) New thoughts on Neander-
thal behaviour: evidence from nasal morphology. In: Ullrich, H. (Ed.),
Hominid Evolution: Lifestyles and Survival Strategies. Gelsenkirchen/Schwelm:
Edition Archaea, 166–186.
Senut, B. (1981) Outlines of the distal humerus in hominoid primates: applica-
tion to some Plio–Pleistocene hominids. In: Chiarelli, B., Corruccini, R. S.
(Eds.), Primate Evolutionary Biology. Berlin: Springer, 81–92.
Sherry, S. T., Harpending, H. C., Batzer, M. A., Stoneking, M. (1997)
Alu evolution in human populations: using the coalescent to estimate effective
population size. Genetics 147, 1977–1982.
Shipman, P. (1981) Life History of a Fossil. An Introduction to Taphonomy and
Palaeoecology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
6.5  References

218
6  Human Biological Evolution
Simons, E. L. (1992) The primate fossil record. In: Jones, S., Martin, R. D.,
Pilbeam, D. (Eds.), The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 197–208.
Simons, E. L., Pilbeam, D. R. (1965) Preliminary revision of the Dryopithecinae
(Pongidae, Anthropoidea), Folia. Primat. 3, 81.
Simpson, G. G. (1961) Principles of Animal Taxonomy. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Skelton, R. R., McHenry, H. H. (1992) Evolutionary relationships among early
hominids. J. Hum. Evol. 23, 309–349.
Skelton, R. R., McHenry, H. M., Drawhorn, G. M. (1986) Phylogenetic
analysis of early hominids. Curr. Anthrop. 27, 21–43.
Smith, F. H. (1992) The role of continuity in modern human origins. In:
Bräuer, G., Smith, F. H. (Eds.), Continuity or Replacement. Controversies in
Homo sapiens Evolution. Rotterdam: Balkema, 145–156.
Smith, F. H., Spencer, F. (Eds.) (1984) The Origins of Modern Humans:
A World Survey of the Fossil Evidence. New York: Liss.
Smith F. H., Falsetti, A. B., Donnelly, S. M. (1989) Modern human origins.
Ybk. Phys. Anthrop. 32, 35–68.
Sneath, P. A. H., Sokal, R. R. (1973) Numerical Taxonomy: The Principles and
Practice of Numerical Classification. San Francisco: Freeman.
Stent, G. S. (1972) Prematurity and uniqueness in scientific discovery.
Scientific American 227, 84–93.
Stoneking, M., Cann, R. L. (1989) African origin of human mitochondrial
DNA. In: Mellars P., Stringer C. B. (Eds.), The Human Revolution:
Behavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 17–30.
Strait, D. S., Grine F. E., Moniz, M. A. (1997) A reappraisal of early hominid
phylogeny. J. Hum. Evol. 32, 17–82.
Stringer, C. (1974) Population relationships in later Pleistocene hominids:
a multivariate study of available crania. J. Archaeol. Sci. 1, 317–342.
Stringer, C. B. (1984) The definition of Homo erectus and the existence of the
species in Africa and Europe. Cour. Forsch. Senckenb. 69, 131–144.
Stringer, C. B. (1986) The credibility of Homo habilis. In: Wood, B. A.,
Martin, L. B., Andrews, P. (Eds.), Major Topics in Primate and Human
Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 266–294.
Stringer, C. B. (1988) The dates of Eden. Nature 331, 565–566.
Stringer, C. B. (1990) The emergence of modern humans. Scientific American
263, 98–104.
Stringer, C. B. (1992) Replacement, continuity and the origin of Homo sapiens.
In: Bräuer, G., Smith F. H. (Eds.), Continuity or Replacement. Controversies in
Homo sapiens Evolution. Rotterdam: Balkema, 9–24.
Stringer, C. B. (1996) Current issues in modern human origins.
In: Meikle, W. E., Howell, F. C., Jablonski, N. G. (Eds.), Contemporary
Issues in Human Evolution. San Francisco: California Academy of Sciences,
116–134.

219
Stringer, C. B., Andrews, P. (1988) Genetic and fossil evidence for the origin of
modern humans. Science 239, 1263–1268.
Stringer, C. B., Gamble, C. (1993) In Search of the Neanderthals. London:
Thames and Hudson.
Swisher, C. C. III, Curtis, G. H., Jacob, T., Getty, A. G., Suprijo, A.,
Widiasmoro (1994) Age of the earliest known hominids in Java, Indonesia.
Science 263, 1118–1121.
Szalay, F. S., Delson, E. (1979) Evolutionary History of the Primates. New York:
Academic.
Tattersall, I. (1986) Species recognition in human paleontology. J. Hum. Evol.
15, 165–175.
Tattersall, I. (1995a) The Fossil Trail: How We Know What We Think We Know
about Human Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tattersall, I. (1995b) The Last Neanderthal: The Rise, Success, and Mysterious
Extinction of Our Closest Relatives. New York: Nevraumont.
Tattersall, I. (1996) Paleoanthropology and preconception.
In: Meikle, W. E., Howell, F. C., Jablonski, N. G. (Eds.), Contemporary
Issues in Human Evolution. San Francisco: California Academy of Sciences,
47–54.
Tattersall, I. (1997) Puzzle Menschwerdung. Auf der Spur der menschlichen
Evolution. Berlin: Spektrum.
Tattersall, I. (2000) Once We Were Not Alone. Scientific American 2, 56–63.
Tattersall, I., Schwartz, J. (2000) Extinct Humans. New York: Westview.
Tattersall, I., Delson, E., van Couvering, J. (Eds.) (1988) Encyclopedia of
Human Evolution and Prehistory. New York: Garland.
Templeton, A. R. (1992) Human origins and analysis of mitochondrial DNA
sequences. Science 255, 737.
Templeton, A. R. (1993) The ‘Eve’ hypothesis: a genetic critique and reanalysis.
Am. Anthropol. 95, 51–72.
Templeton, A. R. (1997) Out of Africa? What do genes tell us? Curr. Opinions
Genet. Dev. 7, 841–847.
Thorne, A. G., Wolpoff, M. H. (1981) Regional continuity in Australasian
Pleistocene hominid evolution. Am. J. Phys. Anthrop. 55, 337–349.
Thorne, A. G., Wolpoff, M. H. (1992) Multiregionaler Ursprung des modernen
Menschen. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 6, 80–87.
Tishkoff, S. A., Dietzsch, E., Speed, W, Pakstis, A. J., Kidd, J. R., Ceung, K.,
Bonné-Tamir, B., Santachiara-Benerecetti, A. S., Moral, P., Krings, M.,
Pääbo, S., Watson, E., Risch, N., Jenkins, T., Kidd., K. K. (1996)
Global patterns of linkage disequilibrium at the CD4 locus and modern
human origins. Science 271, 1380–1387.
Tobias, P. (1967) Olduvai Gorge, Vol. 2. The Cranium and Maxillary Dentition
of Australopithecus (Zinjanthropus) boisei. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press.
Tobias, P. V. (1980) “Australopithecus afarensis” and A. africanus: Critique and
alternative hypothesis. Paleontol. Afr. 23, 1–17.
6.5  References

220
6  Human Biological Evolution
Tobias, P. V. (1988) Numerous apparently synapomorphic features in Australo-
pithecus robustus, Australopithecus boisei and Homo habilis: support for the
Skelton–McHenry–Drawhorn hypothesis. In: Grine, F. E. (Ed.), Evolutionary
History of the ‘Robust’ Australopithecines. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 293–308.
Tobias, P. V. (1989) The status of Homo habilis in 1987 and some outstanding
problems. In: Giacobini, G. (Ed.), Hominidae: Proc. 2nd Int. Congr. Hum.
Paleont., Turin, 1987. Milan: Jaca Books, 141–149.
Tobias, P. V. (1991) Olduvai Gorge, Vol. 4, parts V–IX. The Skulls, Endocasts and
Teeth of Homo habilis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tobias, P. V. (1995) Africa-derived skulls and Africa-derived mitochondrial DNA:
towards a reconciliation. In: Brenner, S., Hanihara, K. (Eds.), The Origin and
Past of Modern Humans as Viewed from DNA. Proceedings of the Workshop on the
Origin and Past of Homo sapiens sapiens as Viewed from DNA: Theoretical
Approach. Singapore: World Scientific, 189–215.
Tobias, P. (2003) Twenty questions about human evolution. Int. J. Anthropol. 18,
9–63.
Torre, D., Ficcarelli, G., Masini, F., Rook, L., Sala, B. (1992) Mammal
dispersal events in the early Pleistocene of western Europe. Cour. Forsch.
Senckenb. 153, 51–58.
Trinkaus, E. (1983) The Shanidar Neanderthals. New York: Academic.
Trinkaus, E. (Ed.) (1989) The Emergence of Modern Humans: Biocultural
Adaptations in the Later Pleistocene. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trinkaus, E. (1995) Patterns of trauma among Neanderthals. J. Archaeol. Science
22, 841–852.
Trinkaus, E., Howells, W. W. (1979) The Neanderthals. Scientific American 241,
122–133.
Trinkaus, E., Shipman, P. (1993) Die Neanderthaler. Spiegel der Menschheit.
München: Bertelsmann.
Turner, E. (1999) The problem of interpreting hominid subsistence strategies at
Lower Palaeolithic sites: Miesenheim I: a case study from Central Rhineland of
Germany. In: Ullrich, H. (Ed.), Lifestyles and Survival Strategies in Pliocene and
Pleistocene Hominids. Gelsenkirchen, Schwelm: Edition Arachae, 365–382.
Tulp, N. (1641) Observationum medicarum. Amsterdam: libri tres, 274–279.
Tyson, E. (1699) Orang-outang, sive Homo sylvestris. London: Bennet.
Underhill, P. A., Jin, L., Lin, A. A., Mehdi, S. Q., Jenkins, T. et al. (1997)
Detection of numerous Y chromosome biallelic polymorphisms by denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography. Genome Res. 7, 996–1005.
Vandermeersch, B. (1990) Les Néanderthaliens et les premièrs Hommes
modernes. In: Huys, M. et al. (Ed.), 5 Millions d’Années. L’Aventure Humaine.
Palais de Beaux-Arts de Bruxelles, 68–86.
Vogel, C. (1975) Praedispositionen und Praeadaptationen der Primaten-Evolution
im Hinblick auf die Hominisation. In: Kurth, G., Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (Eds.),
Hominisation und Verhalten. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer, 1–31.
Vogel, C. (1999) Anthropologische Spuren (Hrsg. von Volker Sommer),
Zur Natur des Menschen. Stuttgart: Hirzel.

221
Vrba, E. S. (1988) Late Pliocene climatic events and hominid evolution.
In: Grine, F. E. (Ed.), Evolutionary History of the ‘Robust’ Australopithecines.
New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 405–426.
Walker, A. C. (1981) Diet and teeth: dietary hypotheses and human evolution.
Phil. Trans. Royal Soc., London, Ser. B 292, 57–64.
Walker, A. C., Leakey, R. E. F. (1978) The hominids of East Turkana. Scientific
American 239, 54–66.
Walker, A. C., Leakey, R. E. F. (1988) The evolution of Australopithecus boisei.
In: Grine, F. E. (Ed.), The Evolutionary History of the ‘Robust’ Australopithecines.
New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 247–258.
Walker, A. C., Leakey, R. E. F. (Eds.) (1993) The Nariokotome Homo erectus
skeleton. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ward, C. V., Leakey, M. G. Brown, B., Brown, F., Harris, J., Walker, A. (1999)
South Turkwell: a new Pliocene hominid site in Kenya. J. Hum. Evol. 36,
69–95.
Weidenreich, F. K. (1943) The skull of Sinanthropus pekinensis: a comparative
study on a primitive hominid skull. Paleont. Sinica, neue Serie D 10, 1–485.
Wiesemüller, B., Rothe, H., Henke, W. (2003) Phylogenetische Systematik.
Eine Einführung. Berlin: Springer.
White, T. D., Suwa, G., Asfaw, B. (1994) Australopithecus ramidus, a new species
of early hominid from Aramis, Ethiopia. Nature 371, 306–312.
White, T. D., Suwa, G., Asfaw, B. (1995) Corrigendum. Nature 375, 88.
Whitfield, L. S., Sulston, J. E., Goodfellow, P. N. (1995) Sequence variation
of the human Y chromosome. Nature 378, 379–380.
Wiley, E. O. (1978) The evolutionary species concept reconsidered. Syst. Zool. 27,
17–26.
Wilson, A. C., Cann, R. L. (1992) Afrikanischer Ursprung des modernen
Menschen. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 6, 72–79.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1984) Evolution of Homo erectus: the question of stasis.
Palaeobiology 10, 389–406.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1989) Multiregional evolution: the fossil alternative to Eden.
In: Mellars, P., Stringer, C. (Eds.), The Human Revolution: Behavioural and
Biological Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans. Edinburgh: University
of Edinburgh Press, 62–108.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1992) Theories of modern human origins. In: Bräuer, G.,
Smith, F. H. (Eds.), Continuity or Replacement. Controversies in Homo sapiens
Evolution. Rotterdam: Balkema, 25–63.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1996a) Neandertals are a race of Homo sapiens. J. Hum. Evol.
32, A25.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1996b) Interpretations of multiregional evolution. Science 274,
704–706.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1996) Human Evolution. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wolpoff, M. H. (1999) Paleoanthropology, 2nd ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Wolpoff, M. H., Caspari, R. (1997a) Race and Human Evolution. A Fatal
Attraction. New York: Simon and Schuster.
6.5  References

222
6  Human Biological Evolution
Wolpoff, M. H., Caspari, R. (1997b) What does it mean to be modern? In:
Clark, G. A., Willermet, C. M. (Eds.), Conceptual Issues in Modern Human
Origins Research. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 28–44.
Wolpoff, M. H., Thorne, A. G., Jelinek, J., Yinyun, Z. (1994) The case for sinking
Homo erectus. 100 years of Pithecanthropus is enough! In: Franzen, J. L. (Ed.),
100 Years of Pithecanthropus: The Homo erectus Problem. Cour. Forsch. Senckenb.
171, 341–361.
Wolpoff, M., Senut, B., Pickford, M., Hawks, J. (2002) Sahelanthropus or
‘Sahelpithecus’? Nature 419, 581–582.
Wood, B., Collard, M. (1999) The changing face of genus Homo. Evol.
Anthropol. 8, 195–207.
Wood, B. A. (1984) The origin of Homo erectus. Cour. Forsch.-Inst. Senckenberg 69,
99–111.
Wood, B. A. (1985) Early Homo in Kenya and its systematic relationships.
In: Delson, E. (Ed.), Ancestors: The Hard Evidence. New York: Liss, 206–214.
Wood, B. A. (1987) Who is the real ‘Homo habilis’? Nature 327, 187–188.
Wood, B. A. (1991) Koobi Fora Research Project IV: Hominid Cranial Remains from
Koobi Fora. Oxford: Clarendon.
Wood, B. A. (1992) Origin and evolution of the genus Homo. Nature 355, 783–790.
Wood, B. A. (1996) Human evolution. BioEssays 18, 945–954.
Zischler, H., Geisert, H., von Haeseler, A., Pääbo, S. (1995) A nuclear ‘fossil’ of
the mitochondrial D-loop and the origin of modern humans. Nature 378, 489.
Zollikofer, C. P. E., Ponce de Léon, M. S., Martin, R. D. (1998) Computer-
assisted paleoanthropology. Evol. Anthropol. 6, 41–54.
Zuckerkandl, E., Pauling, L. (1962) Molecular disease, evolution and genetic
heterogeneity. In: Kash, M., Pullman, B. (Eds.), Horizons in Biochemistry.
New York: Academic.

273
Index
Index
Handbook of Evolution, Vol. 2: The Evolution of Living Systems (Including Hominids)
Edited by Franz M. Wuketits and Francisco J. Ayala
Copyright © 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ISBN: 3-527-30838-5
a
Acheulean    228
actual causes    62
adaptation(s)    2, 13, 76, 95, 105,
124, 227
– cultural    233
– functional    117
– gradual    18
– structural    117
adaptationism    76
adaptive advantage    39
adaptive landscapes    223
adaptive radiation    20, 52
– of cultures    237
aDNA    130, 188, 199
Aegyptopithecus    135
African origin    202, 205
Afropithecus    137
Afrotarsius    135
aggregation    50
aggression    38
agriculture    234, 248, 256
altruism    54
altruistic behavior    17
amino acids    3
anagenesis    21
analogistic tradition    89
analogy    22, 63
analytical method    64
Ante-Neanderthals    192
“Anthropocene”    236
anthropology    102, 119
“Anthropomorpha” (Linné)    71
ants    53
Apidium    135
Archaeopteryx    62
archetype    63
Ardipithecus    145
Aristotle    58
artifacts    227
artificial selection    76
Australopithecines    157, 226
Australopithecus    138, 143, 145, 228
Australopithecus afarensis    16, 151
Australopithecus africanus    153
autapomorphic features    123
autonomy of biology    72
b
Baer, Karl E. von    62
barnacles    8
Bateson, William    29
behaviorism    260
binominal nomenclature    72
biodiversity    47, 55
biogeochemistry    224
biogeography    6, 8, 59
biological classification    72
biological development    8
biological systematics    71
biomass    47, 51
biometrics    101
biosphere    125, 252
bipedality    150
body plans    96
Bonner, John    93
Bonnet, Charles    60

274
Index
bottleneck principle    203
brain capacity    256
brain size    161, 228, 231
Bronze Age    253
Bruno, Giordano    162
Buch, Leopold von    62
Buffon, Georges L. L.    59
c
Cambrian explosion    35
canalization    101
cantius    134
catastrophism    69
causality network    244
Cenozoic    225
Ceropithecoids    137
cerebralization    150
Chambers, Robert    31
chimpanzees    2, 18, 71, 121, 231, 255
Christianity    29
chromosomes    3, 12, 21
chronospecies    51
civilization(s)    248, 253, 269
– collapses of    235
clade    52
cladistics    166
cladogenesis    21
cladogram    124, 167
climate    227, 232, 254
– changes    171, 225
– evolution of    236
Club of Rome    249
colonial invertebrates    54
common descent    2, 4, 6, 8, 60, 73
comparative anatomy    4, 6, 22, 59
comparative method    89
competition    11
continental drift    225
convergence    123
Creationism controversy    40
Creationists    8, 40, 120
Cretaceous    131
Crick, Francis    3
cultural comparison    266
cultural creativity    247
cultural design    266
cultural traditions    233
culture    227, 232, 235, 243, 255, 258
Cuvier, George    27, 68
– types of animal organization    69
cytochrome c    25
d
Darwin, Charles    1, 4, 8, 17, 27, 33,
70, 73, 89, 118, 121, 247, 261
– “Beagle” voyage    74
– “forerunners” of    58
Darwin, Erasmus    27, 74
Darwinian fitness    11
Darwinian Revolution    57
Darwinism    29, 34, 36, 38, 43
Darwin’s finches    20
DDT    13
decision-making strategies    231
decomposers    251
determinism    77
developmental biology    78, 87
developmental constraints    34, 95
developmental-genetic pathways    99
developmental genetics    90, 98
developmental modules    94
developmental networks    101
developmental pathways    102
developmental plasticity    96
developmental processes    94
developmental repertoire    93
developmental systems    97
Diderot, Denis    59
differential reproduction    11
dimorphism    17
dinosaur    62
– eggs    98
directional selection    16
diversifying selection    17
diversity    1, 8, 15, 51, 267
DNA    3, 9, 24, 26, 256, 257
– sequences    12
Dobzhansky, Theodosius    3, 29
domestic breeding    76
dominance    51

275
Index
Drosophila    6, 21, 72, 100
Dubois, Eugene    169
e
ecological cycle    251
ecological niches    8, 129
ecological-social dilemma    264
ecology    103, 128, 249
ecosystems    128, 249
élan vital    250
El-Fayum    135
embryogenesis    90
embryology    6, 8, 29, 89
– comparative    91
– evolutionary    91
– experimental    91, 98
embryo(s)    9, 99
encephalization    158, 160, 229
encymes    3, 9
energy resources    245
entropy    250
environmental change    223
environmental constraints    12
environmental selection    77
environmental variability    223
epigenesis    88
epigenetic causation    96
epigenetic inheritance    90
epigenetic mechanisms    94
epigenetic parameters    99
epigenetic rules    105
essentialism    68, 77
eukaryotic cells    5
eusocial insects    47, 53
Eve hypothesis    203
EvoDevo    87, 92, 96, 105
– programs    97
evolution    1, 10, 29, 47, 58, 60, 73,
225, 264
– agricultural    235
– as gradual process    19
– biological (organic)    2, 11, 32, 57,
231, 244, 248, 257
– – human    117
– – integrative view of    78
– chromosomal    48
– critical phase of    269
– cultural    223, 234, 237, 244, 262
– – acceleration of    256
– developmental    101
– evidence for    4
– fact of    4
– genetics of    11
– metaphysical interpretation of    81
– modes of    63
– molecular    24, 204
– monistic theories of    79
– morphological    23
– organismal    88
– phenotypic    91, 97
– pluralistic theories of    79
– progressive    79
– punctuational    21
– rapid    48
– rate of    48
– social    49
evolutionary anthropology    118
evolutionary biology    29, 72, 78, 87, 260
evolutionary change    11, 29, 90
– mechanisms of    63
– theory of    64
evolutionary developmental biology    87
evolutionary developmental genetics
105
evolutionary ecology    119
evolutionary history    6, 10, 21, 24, 64
evolutionary morphology    29, 119,
124
evolutionary paleoecology    128
evolutionary taxonomy    123
evolutionary theory    4, 10, 28, 34, 58,
60, 63, 90, 103, 268
– as historical theory    72
evolutionary thinking    57, 64
– obstacles to    67
evolutionary trees    24
evolutionism    28, 59, 62, 67, 69
– universal    76
exploitation strategies    243
extinction    68, 246

276
Index
f
Fisher, R. A.    3, 29
forelimbs (vertebrates)    7
fossil energy    243
fossil record    4, 22, 36, 102, 125,
155, 207
fossilization    127
fossilized carbon    254
fossils    4, 8, 68, 77, 98, 118, 124
– “behavioral”  127
free oxygen    252
functional morphology    124
future    247
g
Galapagos    6, 20
Galilei, Galileo    162
gene duplication    93
gene
– duplication    93
– expression    91
– flow    14, 49
– frequencies    15
– pool    11, 19
– regulation    91
generative morphospaces    101
genes    2, 9, 39, 102, 257
Genesis    41, 67
genetic change    13
genetic code    10
genetic drift    14, 34
genetic equilibrium    13
genetic information    12
genetic polymorphism    17
genetic programs    261
genetic recombination    79
genome    100, 256
genomics    100, 105
genotype-phenotype relationship
101
genotype-phenotype transformation
103
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Etienne    69
geographic range    52
geographical isolation    49
geological record    5
glacial-interglacial cycles    227
globalization    267
gorillas    2, 71
Gould, Stephen J.    28, 36
grades    123
gradualism    73, 78
Grant, Robert E.    62
Gray, Asa    89
growth hormone    196
h
Haeckel, Ernst    29
Haldane, J. B. S.    3, 29
Hardy-Weinberg law    13
Hawaiian islands    8, 20
heat engines    253
Henslow, John S.    62
hereditary variation    11
heredity    3
– Mendel’s theory of    3
hermaphroditic animals    21
heterochrony    90, 94, 102
historical geology    62
historical narrative    72
hominins    129, 166, 171, 228, 232
– family trees    179, 206
Hominoidea    135, 138
Holocene    130, 225, 234
hominization    117, 146
Homo    52, 138, 148, 158, 160, 177,
182, 226
– earliest traces of    172, 228
– fossil sites of    173, 182
Homo erectus    19, 160, 168, 175,
229, 245
– adaptation pattern of    178
Homo ergaster    160, 168, 175, 229
Homo habilis    144, 160
Homo heidelbergensis    170, 229
Homo neanderthalensis    193
Homo rudolfensis    167
Homo sapiens    16, 19, 80, 118,
188, 201, 244, 256
– competitive superiority of    54

277
Index
homology (homologies)    6, 63, 96,
123
– serial    22
homoplasies    123
homosexuality    39
Hox gene    100
“human diversity project”    205
human impact    243
humanism    77
hunter-gatherers    233
Huxley,  Julian    3
Huxley, Thomas H.    27, 29, 62, 70,
121
hybridization    20
i
Ice Age    192
ideology    28, 39
imitation    232
imprinting    261
inclusive fitness    54
induction    77
industry    248
infanticide    39
inheritance of acquired character-
istics    64
intelligent design    28, 41
internal selection    79
j
Johnson, Philip    27
k
Kenyapithecus    138
kin selection    17
l
Lamarck, Jean-B. de    27, 64
Lamarckism    64
language acquisition    260
learning    227
– individual    232
– social    230
learning dispositions    262
Leibniz, Gottfried W.    247
Lewontin, Richard    27
Liebig, Justus    248
life history strategies    94
life’s origin    31
Lingula    23
Linné, Carl von    71
Linnean Society    75
lithosphere    125
living fossils    52
longevity    15, 51
ludus naturae    69
Lyell, Charles    62
m
Machiavelli, Niccolo    263
macroevolution    49
macromolecules    24
macro-mutation    96
Malthus, Thomas R.    75, 248
mass extinctions    245
Maynard Smith, John    34
Mayr, Ernst    3
Meganthropus africanus    143
Mendel, Gregor    3
methodology    58
MHC    130
microniches    54
migration    15
Miller, Stanley    32
Miocene    226
modeling    102
– biomorphic    101
– theoretical    101
modularity    94
molecular biology    1, 9, 33, 119, 129
molecular clock    24, 129, 199, 204
molecular technology    100
monophyletic    52, 161
Morgan, Thomas H.    29
morphocline    124
morphogenesis    101
morphological integration    102
morphology    124
– comparative    98
morphospecies    122

278
Index
mosaic evolution    155
mtDNA    130, 188, 199
multiplication of species    73
multiregional theory (model)    171,
181, 184
multivariate statistics    102
mutation(s)    15, 79, 94, 98
– chromosomal    12
– gene (point)    12
– harmful    13
mutation experiments    72
mutation rates    13
mutation theory    79
n
natural selection    2, 12, 15, 18, 20, 37,
41, 70, 118, 121
– theory of    73, 75, 78, 81
Natural theologians    67
Neanderthals    117, 130, 181, 188, 192
– craniofacial and postcranial features
of    194
neo-Darwinism    78, 88, 90, 103
neo-Lamarckism    79
nervous system(s)    227, 257
neurocrania    181
neutrality theory    79
niche separation    168
non-Darwinism    37
nucleic acids    24
numerical taxonomy    123
o
Olduvai    162
Old World monkeys    137
Oligocene    134
Oligopithecus    135
ontogenetic innovation    98
Oparin, A. I.    31
Oparin-Haldane hypothesis    32
orangutan    139
orthognathy    118
Ouranopithecus    140
out-of-Africa hypothesis    181
Owen, Richard    62
p
paleoanthropology    119, 128, 181
paleobiogeography    129
Paleocene    120, 131, 134
paleoclimatology    225
paleoecology    150, 165, 188
paleogenetics    119, 129
paleontology    4, 68, 98, 102
paleospecies    122
Paleozoic    224
Paley, William    67
parallelism    123
Paranthropus    145
Paranthropus aethiopicus    146
Paranthropus africanus    143
Paranthropus boisei    144
Paranthropus crassidens    143
Paranthropus robustus    143
Parapithecus    135
Pasteur, Louis    31
PCR    130
phenocopy    97
phenotypic novelty    95
phenotypic selectabilty    94
phenotypic traits    15
philosophy    58
philosophy of science    79, 103
photosynthesis    250
phylogenetic morphospaces    98
phylogenetic systematics    123, 131
Plantinga, Alvin    27
plasticity    92, 97
Plato    68, 257
Pleistocene    129, 181, 234
Plesiadapis    134
Pliocene    226
Plio-Pleistocene    129
polyphenism    92, 97
polyphyletic    52, 161
polyploidy    21
Pongidae    138, 140
population    12, 15, 20, 47
– biology    78
– genetics    78
– growth    243

279
Index
– size    52
postcranium    166
Praeanthropus    143
preadaptations    232
predator-prey coevolution    224
predisposition    121
pre-established harmony    246
Pre-Neanderthals    192
– fossil sites of    193
primate phylogeny    136
primates    26, 117, 131, 136, 244
– definition    132
– phylogeny    136
– specializations in    121
primatology    119, 121
Proconsul    137
progress    28, 64, 234, 248
Propliopithecus    135
proteins    4, 9, 24, 26
proteomics    100, 105
Proto-Cro-Magnons    188
psycho-Lamarckism    79
punctuated equilibria    36, 79
Purgatorius    131
pur pose    69
q
quantitative genetics    90, 95, 102
quantum speciation    21
Quaternary    169
Quatrania    135
r
Ramapithecus    138
RAO model    186
Rangwapithecus    138
rats    231
recapitulation    89
reciprocal altruism    18
reproductive isolation    20
reproductive success    18, 76
respiration    252
RNA    33
Robinet, Jean R.    62
romanticism    63
s
saltations    74
saltationism    79
scala naturae    60
Scopes, John T.    27
Sedgwick, Adam    28
sex steroids    196
sexual orientation    39
sexual selection    17
sexuality    33
Shanidar    198
Simpson, George G.    3
Sivapithecus    139
Skinner box    260
social behavior    37
social life    47, 53
social mammals    50
social organization    233
social vertebrates    48
sociality    48, 51
sociobiology    37
speciation    48
speciosity    51
Spencer, Herbert    29, 76
Sphenodon    23
spontaneous generation    31, 58
stasis    23
Stebbins, George L.    3
struggle for existence    34
success    51
supercolony species    50
survival of the fittest    76
sustainability    252, 265
symplesiomorphic features    123
synapomorphy    123
synthetic theory    3, 79
systems biology    103
systems theory    79
t
taphonomy    119, 125
taxonomy    71, 119, 122
teaching    233
technology    254
Teilhardina    134

280
Index
teleological explanations    70
teleological thinking    81
teleology    69
– cosmic    70, 77
teleonomy    70
Telliamed    58
theoretical biology    101
theoretical chemistry    103
time scale    67
Tonga    265
tool-making    232
transmission genetics    90
transmutation    67, 74, 89
Tulp, Nicolaas    121
Turkanapithecus    138
type(s)    57, 68
typological  thinking    63
Tyson, Edward    121
u
uniformitarianism    62
Upper Paleolithics    189, 198
upright posture    232
upright walking    118
Urey, Harold    32
Ussher, James    67
v
variation    3, 12, 58, 76, 102
– phenotypic    92, 95
Venn diagram    129
verbal language    259
vis vitalis    250
Vivarium Institute    90
w
Waddington, Conrad    90
Wallace, Alfred R.    74
Watson, James    3
Wilberforce, Samuel    27
Wilson, Edward O.    27
Wright, Sewall    3, 29
y
Y chromosome    204

