
Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 2 
Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 2 
Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 2 
Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Edited by 
Dov M. Gabbay 
Department of Computer Science 
King’s College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
John Woods 
Philosophy Department 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC Canada, V6T 1Z1
and 
Department of Computer Science 
King’s College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
Department of Philosophy
University of Lethbridge
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, T1K 3M4
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
North-Holland is an imprint of Elsevier

Elsevier
Radarweg 29, PO Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK 
First edition 2008 
Copyright © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights 
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333; 
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by 
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting 
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material 
Notice 
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons 
or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use 
or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material 
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent 
verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN:
978-0-444-51625-1 
ISSN:
1874-5857
For information on all Elsevier publications
visit our website at books.elsevier.com 
Printed and bound in Hungary 
08 09 10 11 12  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS
vii
Preface
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods
ix
List of Contributors
1
Logic before 1100: The Latin Tradition
John Marenbon
65
Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
John Marenbon
83
Peter Abelard and his Contemporaries
Ian Wilks
157
The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th
through 14th Centuries
Terence Parsons
281
The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the
Later Thirteenth Century
Henrik Lagerlund
347
Logic and Theories of Meaning in the Late 13th and Early 14th
Century including the Modistae
Ria van der Lecq
389
The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan: A ‘Rational
Reconstruction’
Gyula Klima
433
Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
Catarina Dutilh Novaes

505
Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
Simo Knuuttila
579
Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
609
Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
E. Jennifer Ashworth
645
Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
667
Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
Russell Wahl
701
Index
vi
Contents

PREFACE
As modern readers will be aware, one of logic’s most fruitful periods ﬁlled the
comparatively small space from the mid-19th century to the third quarter of the
century that followed. While classical mathematical logic remains securely situated
in the mainstream of the subject, alternative approaches arising from research
programmes in computer science and philosophy have also ﬂourished. It speaks
to the intellectual gravitas of mathematical logic that it should have dominated
utterly for a century and a quarter, but other developments have had longer runs,
none more so than logic in the ﬁve centuries between the 11th and 16th. This is
staying power of formidable heft, one of the main reasons for which is the rich scope
of logical enquiry during this period. The same is true of modern symbolic logic.
In the period of its exclusivity, it exhibited an agreeable complexity, with a reach
that extends from classical treatments of proof theory, set theory, model theory and
recursion theory, to variations that encompass intuitionist, modal, many-valued,
relevant and dialogue logic, among others. No doubt this complexity is part of
the explanation of the dominance of symbolic logic. If so, a similar explanation
attaches to the staying power of mediaeval logic, whose range is easily as robust
as its modern cousin. While the mediaeval tradition never abandoned the central
fact of the syllogism as its organizing focus, it subjects this focus to the creative
tensions of adaptation, extension and creative reinterpretation.
All in all, the
logicians of the middle ages rang the project of logic through virtually all the
changes that characterize modern logic, at times rivaling the new developments in
conceptual sophistication and theoretical robustness. The coverage of mediaeval
logic is striking, extending from treatments of logical consequence to the intricate
rules of logical disputations, from amalgamations of preceding traditions, whether
Aristotelian or Arabic, to the development of new insights into quantiﬁcation, from
investigations of meaning to the exploration of modal contexts, from enquiry into
the paradoxes to the stirrings of the logic of relations, and much more.
It is agreed that logic lost the vigour and high reputation achieved in the middle
ages, as the Renaissance emerged as Europe’s dominant intellectual and cultural
force, but it is wrong to say that logic was sent into an impotent retirement in
this period. It is more accurate to speak of hibernation, a period of quiescence
during which logic was renewing itself for the challenge of a looming modernity.
Astride the gap between Renaissance and the new world of learning is the work of
the Port Royal logicians, included here for its role as a beacon. The Port Royal
logicians disliked technical formalisms, and are in that respect the forbears of
modern informal logic. But these same logicians did some of the best of the early
work in probability theory, thus anticipating the rise of inductive logic.

viii
Preface
It remains to be seen whether, on the score of intellectual power, methodological
rigour and conceptual inventiveness, the present-day pre-eminence of logic will
extend its reign another three hundred and twenty-ﬁve years. However we reckon
the probabilities, suﬃce to say that if the longevity of mediaeval logic is indeed
bested by our descendants, that will have been an accomplishment of supreme
importance in the annals of human intellectual eﬀort.
Once again the Editors are deeply and most gratefully in the debt of the vol-
ume’s superb authors.
The Editors also warmly thank the following persons:
Professor Margaret Schabas, Head of the Philosophy Department and Professor
Nancy Gallini, Dean of the Faculty of Arts, at the University of British Columbia;
Professor Michael Stingl, Chair of the Philosophy Department and Christopher
Nicol, Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science, at the University of Lethbridge;
Jane Spurr, Publications Administrator in London; Carol Woods, Production As-
sociate in Vancouver, and our colleagues at Elsevier, Senior Acquisitions Editor,
Lauren Schultz and Mara Vos-Sarmiento, Development Editor. For their excellent
advice and support the Editors also owe a special debt of gratitude to Martin
Tweedale, Stephen Read, Jennifer Ashworth, Henrik Lagerlund and John Maren-
bon.
Dov M. Gabbay
King’s College London
John Woods
University of British Columbia
and
King’s College London
and
University of Lethbridge

CONTRIBUTORS
E. Jennifer Ashworth
University of Waterloo, Canada.
ejashwor@watarts.uwaterloo.ca
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
cdutilhnovaes@yahoo.com
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Czech Republic.
peterdvorak99@gmail.com
Dov M. Gabbay
King’s College London, UK.
dov.gabbay@kcl.ac.uk
Gyula Klima
Fordham University, USA.
klima@fordham.edu
Simo Knuuttila
University of Helsinki, Finland.
simo.knuuttila@helsinki.ﬁ
Henrik Lagerlund
The University of Western Ontario, Canada.
hlagerlu@uwo.ca
Ria van der Lecq
University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Ria.vanderlecq@phil.uu.nl
John Marenbon
Trinity College, Cambridge, UK.
jm258@cam.ac.uk

x
Terence Parsons
University of California, Los Angeles, USA.
tparsons@humnet.ucla.edu
Russell Wahl
Idaho State University, USA.
wahlruss@isu.edu
Ian Wilks
Acadia University, Canada.
ian.wilks@acadiau.ca
John Woods
University of British Columbia, Cananda.
jhwoods@interchange.ubc.ca
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
University of Jyv¨askyl¨a, Finland.
mikyrjo@cc.jyu.ﬁ
Contributors

THE LATIN TRADITION OF LOGIC TO 1100
John Marenbon
1
INTRODUCTION
The twelfth century, like the fourteenth, was arguably one of the great creative
periods in the history of logic. The same is not true for period that precedes it,
and forms the subject of this chapter: Latin logic in the early Middle Ages, up to
1100, and the Latin tradition from Cicero to Boethius, Cassiodorus and Isidore, on
which, along with some translations of Aristotle and Porphyry, it drew. It had no
great logicians, but only inﬂuential ones, like Boethius, and outstanding philoso-
phers, like Eriugena and Anselm, who were interested in logic. Yet it is worth
studying, for at least two, very diﬀerent reasons. First, twelfth-century logicians
such as Abelard worked in a tradition that continued from the earlier medieval
one: the text-books were the same and the methods and questions asked were
related. Knowing about the Latin tradition and the early medieval background
helps in understanding and assessing their ideas. Second, although the early me-
dieval logicians may not have innovated in the contents of their teaching, they
achieved something importantly novel with regard to the position of logic in the
curriculum.1
In the ancient world, logic had never been a central, or even mainstream, subject
in ordinary education. Educated Romans would have studied, above all, rhetoric
and the literary classics — Augustine gives a vivid account of such an education
in his Confessions. But in the Middle Ages logic became a fundamental disci-
pline for every student who went beyond the elementary level of studying Latin
grammar. This central placing of logic had its origins in the revival of learning
in the Carolingian period: logic was given a position within the standard scheme
1At the beginning of each section and subsection, I give references to the main secondary works
on the area. Parts of the chapter are based on a series of studies I have published on Boethius
and on early medieval logic over the last 25 years. I mention these as and where relevant in these
initial lists, but I do not then repeat my reference to them, except where I wish to indicate some
special discussion. Readers will, therefore, be able to ﬁnd a fuller exposition of the views here
by consulting these more detailed discussions. But in many areas (for example, Eriugena and
Anselm), I have reached diﬀerent conclusions from those I previously argued, and even where
my views have remained more constant, I have taken the opportunity to correct errors, add new
ideas and take account of the most recent scholarship. There has not been any previous attempt
(outside short sections in general histories) to give a complete account of this long period in
Latin logic, but the medieval part of was to some extent treated in [Van de Vyver, 1929; 1942;
Lewry, 1981].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

2
John Marenbon
of education which was new; the position was consolidated in the three centuries
which followed, and logic continued to hold it until the end of the Middle Ages.
By studying logic in the early Middle Ages, therefore, we can hope to gain some
understanding of how and why the subject had its special role within medieval
education and thought. This aim calls for an approach rather diﬀerent from that
of most chapters in this handbook. Consideration of the uses of logic and its con-
nections with other subjects are as important here as the technicalities of logical
doctrine. Indeed, there is a sense in which the treatment here, just because it must
ﬁt into a handbook of the history of logic, must still remain over-theoretical and
insuﬃciently historical. What is most needed to illuminate the broadly human
importance of the subject in this period (and in the twelfth to sixteenth centuries)
is a social history of medieval logic, a type of study that has never until now been
envisaged, let alone attempted. The following pages could be seen as prolegomena
to part of that enterprise.
2
THE ANCIENT LATIN TRADITION
When historians, using the medieval terminology, speak of the logica vetus — the
corpus of ancient logical works used by Latin scholars in the early Middle Ages —
they sometimes take it in a narrow sense to mean just the three Greek logical texts,
Porphyry’s Isagoge, and Aristotle’s Categories and On Interpretation, which were
available in translation. From this perspective, it seems that the ancient Greek
tradition of logic, though in a very curtailed form, is behind the work of the
early medieval logicians. But, by the eleventh century, the logical curriculum —
the logica vetus in a wider and more useful sense — consisted of six works: the
three ancient Greek texts, and three textbooks written early in the sixth-century
by the Latin thinker, Boethius: treatises on categorical syllogisms, hypothetical
syllogisms and on topical argument.
Also attached to the curriculum, though
more peripherally, was a work on deﬁnition attributed to Boethius but in fact
by a Latin predecessor of his, Marius Victorinus, and Cicero’s Topics, along with
Boethius’s commentary on it. And Boethius’s logical commentaries — two on the
Isagoge and On Interpretation, one on the Categories — were the tools with which
these three texts were studied. Other Latin logical texts had been inﬂuential in
the eighth to tenth centuries, although they had mostly lost their importance by
the eleventh: the Ten Categories, a paraphrase of Aristotle’s Categories from the
circle of Themistius, thought at the time to be by Augustine; Apuleius’s Peri
Hermeneias; and the sections on logic in the encyclopaedias of Martianus Capella,
Cassiodorus and Isidore of Seville. For all these reasons, though much in early
medieval logic goes back ultimately to Aristotle or to the ancient Peripatetics
and the Neoplatonists who cultivated Aristotelian logic, they drew more directly
on a distinctively Latin tradition.
It is here that we must begin.
Boethius is
the central ﬁgure but, as the list of names above suggests, his predecessors and
successors should not be neglected.
First, one preliminary, verbal note. Many of the chapters or treatises discussed

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
3
here are titled, not ‘On Logic’ but ‘On Dialectic’, and the logicians treated here
often referred to themselves as ‘dialecticians’ (dialectici) rather than ‘logicians’.
There certainly was a distinction that could be made, and was in some contexts,
between ‘logic’ and ‘dialectic’ in which ‘logic’ stands for the study of demonstrative
reasoning (and so the Analytics), and ‘dialectic’ for persuasive reasoning (and so
the Topics).
Usually, however, in the period until 1100, the words were used
interchangeably, with ‘dialectic’ as the more common, to cover the whole of logic.
In what follows, I shall speak simply of ‘logic’, although the word used in the
sources will often be dialectica. (For a rather diﬀerent view, see [D’Onofrio, 1986]).
2.1
Before Boethius
The Latin logical works from before Boethius’s time divide into two groups: there
are Cicero’s Topics, Apuleius’s Peri Hermeneias, Marius Victorinus’s On Def-
inition and Book IV of Martianus Capella’s On the Marriage of Mercury and
Philology, all of which have various links with each other, as will become clear,
although they also, except for Martianus, provide independent glimpses of Greek
logic. There is also the Ten Categories, which unrelated to these other Latin works.
Cicero ([Huby, 1989; Long, 1995])
The earliest Latin logical text is also treatise in legal rhetoric. Cicero wrote his
Topics (‘Topica’) [Cicero, 1924] in 44 BC, and professes that he will explain there
to his friend Trebatius the doctrine of Aristotle’s Topics. In fact, the work reﬂects
the Rhetoric as much as the Topics, and probably handbooks of rhetorical and
Peripatetic doctrine even more [Long, 1995, 54-7; Stump, 1989, 57-66]. The subject
of the Topics is said to be the ﬁnding of arguments; as his examples show, Cicero
has in mind particularly the needs of an orator in the courts. The aim of argument
is seen in terms of its persuasive eﬀect: it convinces someone of something that was
in doubt (§ 8). The tools for ﬁnding arguments are, as in Aristotle, the topics or
loci. But whereas Aristotle’s topics are a proliferation of argumentative strategies,
linked to his doctrine of the Categories, Cicero’s topics are a short list of types of
relationships, consideration of which can help the orator to discover an argument.
They include, for instance, genus, species, likeness, cause, eﬀect, comparison. For
instance, if the orator needs to show that the heir to a dilapidated house is not
bound to repair it, he can argue that the case is similar to that of an heir to a
slave, who is not bound to replace him if he has died (§15). All these topics and
arguments are intrinsic, but the orator can also argue extrinsically, says, Cicero, by
appealing to authority. The importance for logic of this very practically-oriented,
rhetorically directed treatise lies in the evidence it gives of how Aristotle’s theory
of topics had been changed in later centuries, and in the use that Boethius would
make of it.
For historians of logic, the most important passage in the book is where (§§53-
7) Cicero sets out the modi dialecticorum — which consist of an extended and
slightly mangled list of the Stoic indemonstrables, expressed, not as the Stoics

4
John Marenbon
did, using numbers as propositional variables (‘the ﬁrst’, ‘the second’), but rather
‘this’ and ‘that’. In Cicero’s list, where there is some confusion because the ex-
ample sentences do not always match the vaguely given deﬁnitions, the ﬁrst ﬁve
modes correspond roughly to the ﬁve Stoic modes, and Mode 6 is a re-formulation
of Mode 3; whilst Mode 7 is (§57) ‘Not this and that; but not this; therefore that’
— that is to say: ∼(p&q); ∼p; so q, an obviously invalid inference. (For discus-
sion, see [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, 179-81; Hadot, 1971, 144-56]). This mistake
suggests that, already by Cicero’s time, Stoic propositional logic was not properly
understood (see below, p. 17).
Apuleius ([Sullivan, 1967; Londey and Johanson, 1987])
By contrast with Cicero’s Topics, Apuleius’s Peri Hermeneias (‘On Interpreta-
tion’ — but the Greek title, echoing Aristotle was deliberate and will be retained)
written roughly two centuries later, is very straightforwardly a logical treatise, an
exposition of Aristotelian syllogistic. Apuleius (c. 125 — c. 171) was a writer in
Roman North Africa, most famous for his comic novel, the Golden Ass, but respon-
sible too for a number of philosophical works, including an exposition of Plato’s
thought (De dogmate Platonis). Although his authorship of Peri hermeneias has
been questioned, recent specialists accept it [Sullivan, 1967, 9-14; Londey and Jo-
hanson, 1987, 11-15]. The treatise covers much of the material in Chapters 1-8 of
Aristotle’s On Interpretation and in the Prior Analytics, excluding modal syllo-
gistics. After treating the nature of propositions and their terms, and the square
of opposition, it goes on to explain the principles of the syllogism, giving both the
diﬀerent moods and how the validity of the second and third ﬁgure syllogisms can
be demonstrated by reducing them to ﬁrst-ﬁgure ones. Apuleius’s main diﬀerences
from Aristotle are that he casts syllogisms as inferences, rather than conditionals;
he gives third-ﬁgure syllogisms in a diﬀerent order; and he does not use letters as
variables to stand for predicates. He also stands out in the Latin tradition by his
terminology, which is sometimes a very literal Latin version of the Greek — for
instance, a syllogism is a collectio. Not surprisingly, given his period, Apuleius
knows something of Stoic logic, but he takes the line about it common among the
Peripatetics, condemning it (Chapter 7) without understanding it. For instance,
he rejects the inference ‘If it is day, it is light; but it is day, therefore it is light’, on
the grounds that in the conclusion ‘it is light’ means that it is light now, whereas
in the premisses, ‘it is light’ has a diﬀerent meaning: it is asserted merely that it
follows that if it is day, then it will be light. This criticism shows a clear failure
to distinguish between the propositional operator ‘if . . . then . . . ’ and the propo-
sitional contents it links together: a failure, that is, to grasp the propositionality
which is central to Stoic logic.
Marius Victorinus ([Hadot, 1971])
Marius Victorinus (c. 280-365) was a philosophically-educated pagan rhetorician
who was converted to Christianity about ten years before his death and proceeded
to write on the Trinity. He had been one of the rare writers since Cicero to write

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
5
on logic in Latin. Two of his logical works survive: a translation of Porphyry’s
Isagoge (used by Boethius for his ﬁrst commentary) [Hadot, 1971, 371-80] and On
Deﬁnition (De deﬁnitione/deﬁnitionibus [Hadot, 1971, 331-62]) that was wrongly
attributed to Boethius in the Middle Ages.
Victorinus also wrote a now lost
commentary on Cicero’s Topics (Reconstruction in [Hadot, 1971, 118-41]), which
is mentioned critically by Boethius in his own commentary on the same work, and
from Cassiodorus we know that he wrote, just as Boethius would do, a treatise on
hypothetical syllogisms. (See [Hadot, 1971, 323-7] for an assemblage of possible
traces of the treatise.) According to Cassiodorus, Victorinus also translated the
Categories and On Interpretation and wrote a long commentary on it. But there
is no trace of these works, and it has been argued that Cassiodorus (whose text
presents problems: see below, subsection 2.3, pages 21–22) is misleading here
[Hadot, 1971, 105-8].
Victorinus placed logic within the framework of rhetoric. Study of the Isagoge,
Categories and On Interpretation led, not as in the Aristotelian organon, primarily
to syllogistic (in the Prior Analytics) and its use in demonstration (in the Posterior
Analytics), but to the topics, as expounded by Cicero. And, for Victorinus — to
judge from his words as probably reported by Cassiodorus [Cassiodorus, 1937, 127]
— it is the very fact that the Ciceronian topics presents arguments that are suited,
not just to philosophers, but to orators, lawyers and poets as well, which makes
them so precious. On Deﬁnition and the (lost) treatise on hypothetical syllogisms
can be seen as continuations of the commentary on Cicero’s Topics, since each
corresponds to a part of Cicero’s text (deﬁnition: §§26-37; hypothetical syllogisms
53-7) not treated in the commentary itself, which covers only half the work. On
Deﬁnition draws extensively on Cicero himself in categorizing and explaining the
diﬀerent sorts of deﬁnition — rhetorical deﬁnition, philosophical deﬁnition (which
is based on the ﬁve predicables: genus, species, diﬀerentia, proprium — i.e. an
accident that distinguishes a species, such as ability to laugh in humans — and
accident) and other types of deﬁnition, such as that from a thing’s parts, which
does not explain what the things are, but gives some understanding of them. It has
been suggested that here a work by Porphyry may have been the source. [Hadot,
1968, I, 482-8]
The ‘Ten Categories’ ([Kenny, 2005, 128-33])
The Categoriae Decem(Ten Categories), as it would be called, probably owed
some of its early medieval popularity to the fact that it came to be attributed to
Augustine. But it also deserved to be used, because it is an excellent work for
beginners in logic trying to understand Aristotle. The real author is unknown,
but in a couple of comments (Aristotle, 1961a, 137:20-1; 175:18-9) he makes clear
that he belongs to the circle of Themistius, the fourth-century philosopher and
statesman who was perhaps the last member of the ancient Peripatetic school.
(Anthony Kenny has suggested that the author of the paraphrase might in fact be
Marius Victorinus: [Kenny, 2005, 130-3].)
The paraphraser reveals his approach when (Aristotle, 1961, 148:33 — 149:2),

6
John Marenbon
excusing himself for not going further into the distinguishing features of the ﬁrst
Category, substance, he comments that ‘since they are clear in Aristotle himself,
it seems superﬂuous to explain them, especially since this discourse does not aim
to put down everything that the Philosopher said, but to recount in a simpler way
what seem obscure to the untrained.’ In practice, this means that the paraphraser
omits some of the more complex ideas and concentrates on providing an elegant,
lucid exposition of the Categories. On the question that had exercised readers of
the text since interest in it revived in the ﬁrst century BC, whether it is about
words or things, the paraphraser manages to maintain a neutral position. Aristotle
begins — he says, following Themistius (Aristotle, 1961, 137:20 -138:1) — from
the things that are perceived, but in order to discuss them he has to talk about
both the things that exist, and the things that are said, because what we perceive
is produced by what exists and cannot be demonstrated except with the aid of
what is said. What will follow must therefore be a ‘mixed disputation’.
Martianus Capella (E.L. Burge in [Stahl, 1971, 104-21], very unsatisfactory)
Martianus Capella was a pagan, living in Roman North Africa either near the
beginning of the ﬁfth century or c.
470 [Shanzer, 1986].
His one work is an
encyclopaedia, in prose interspersed with verse passages, called On the Marriage
of Mercury and Philology (De nuptiis Mercurii et Philologiae), because Books I
and II tell the story of the marriage of Mercury (divine reason) and Philology (the
human soul), an allegory of the ascent of the soul to wisdom; Books III — IX
[Martianus Capella, 1983] each treat one of the Liberal Arts. Book IV is devoted
to logic, and Book V to rhetoric. Both books need mentioning, because in Book IV
Martianus treats the material of the Isagoge, the Categories and On Interpretation,
followed by a presentation of syllogistic based on Apuleius (cf. [Sullivan, 1967, 170-
3]) and, near the end of the book, an account of what he calls the ‘conditional
syllogism’, in which he presents a list of seven modes that are the same as Cicero’s,
but he is unusual in, at one point, giving these seven modes in the traditional Stoic
form, using numbers to stand for propositions (‘If the ﬁrst, the second; the ﬁrst;
so the second’) [Martianus Capella, 1983, 144]. Then, in Book V, Martianus goes
into a presentation of the Topics, based on Marius Victorinus. It has been argued
that Victorinus originally incorporated Apuleius’s Peri hermeneias into his own
work, and so Martianus is putting forward a thoroughly Victorine scheme of logic
[Hadot, 1971, 196].
2.2
Boethius
([Chadwick, 1981, 108-73; Marenbon, 2003, 17-65; Cameron, Forthcoming; Ebbe-
sen, Forthcoming; Martin, Forthcoming])
Boethius is the central ﬁgure in the ancient Latin tradition of logic.
A small
part of his importance is due to his continuing the tradition of Cicero and Marius
Victorinus; the far larger part to his making — as a translator, a commentator
and a writer of textbooks — Greek Aristotelian logic available to the Latin world

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
7
in far more breadth and depth than the glimpses which previous Latin texts had
allowed. Yet Boethius, though not himself outstanding, or even particularly good,
at logic, was not a mere passive transmitter of other, more inventive logicians’
ideas: he made what seems to have been a very deliberate choice among the
competing theories, approaches and interpretations available to him, and in doing
so profoundly inﬂuenced the style and contents of medieval logic.
Anicius Severinus Manlius Boethius was born c. 475-7 AD. Although he lived
at a time when Italy was ruled by the Ostrogoths, Roman aristocrats like him
were free to enjoy their wealth, leisure and a limited local power. Fluent in Greek
and in contact with the Greek intellectual world, Boethius chose to devote most
of his life to writing or translating works on arithmetic, music and, most of all,
logic. His earliest work on logic, his ﬁrst commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, dates
from c. 500 and he continued to write mainly in this area until up to about 523,
when he became closely and disastrously involved in the politics of the Gothic
ruler’s court. At one stage [Boethius, 1880, 79:9-80:9], Boethius announced his
intention to translate and comment on all of the works of Aristotle he could ﬁnd,
and Plato’s dialogues, as well as writing a book to show how the two philosophers
are in fundamental agreement with each other. But, in fact, he devoted himself
to the logical part of this task and, in the last ﬁfteen years of his life, he was
especially occupied in composing text-books as well as commentaries. Although
not a priest, Boethius also became involved in the religious controversies of the
time, which divided the Catholics of Italy from those of the Eastern Empire. His
ﬁve short Theological Treatises (opuscula sacra) [Boethius, 2000] have a place in
the history of logic, because his use there of logical techniques would encourage
medieval readers similarly to see in logic a tool for theological speculation and
debate.
Not long after Boethius’s move to Theoderic’s court at Ravenna, he was accused
of treason and found himself imprisoned, awaiting execution. It was during this
time that he wrote The Consolation of Philosophy, the work by which he would
become best known.
Although the Consolation is not directly concerned with
logical questions, it ends with a discussion of God’s foreknowledge and future
contingents that returns to some of the issues Boethius had raised in his logical
writings.
We shall look at each area of Boethius’s contribution to logic in turn: as trans-
lator, as commentator and as a writer of text-books.
Boethius the Translator
Boethius put the whole of Aristotle’s logical Organon (along with Porphyry’s Isa-
goge: see below) into Latin, except for the Posterior Analytics. (Ed. in Aristoteles
Latinus [Aristotle, 1961a; 1961b; 1962; 1966; 1969; 1975].) He seems to have been
led into this task of translation by his work as a commentator.
For the ﬁrst
commentary he wrote, on the Isagoge, he relied on an existing version by Marius
Victorinus. But for his next commentary, on the Categories, he made his own

8
John Marenbon
translation, and he made a fresh translation of the Isagoge for his second com-
mentary on it. Since Boethius’s commentaries, although rarely a word by word
exegesis, would often focus on a particular phrase, it was important to have a lit-
eral translation, which to a considerable extent preserved rather than ironed out
the interpretative diﬃculties commentators puzzled over. Though elsewhere an el-
egant stylist, Boethius translates very closely, often following the Greek syntax as
far, or further, than Latin idiom permits; and he translated with great care, usu-
ally revising his versions at least once [See the prefaces in Aristoteles Latinus]. In
the case of the Categories, the textual history as reconstructed by Minio-Paluello
[1962; Aristotle, 1961a, ix-lxiii] is very complicated and perhaps open to query:
Boethius’s ﬁnal version was combined at some time with another version, also
probably by Boethius, to form a composite version; the composite version, itself
variously corrupted, was the one most usually used, but the original version is
preserved, with corruptions, in some manuscripts and can be reconstructed.
Boethius’s translation of the Organon remained the standard version, through-
out the Middle Ages. Its accuracy and literalness made it possible for some me-
dieval logicians to step out of the commentary tradition, transmitted by Boethius
himself, within which they studied Aristotle’s texts, and reach back to grasp Aris-
totle’s own thought. But this return to origins was more a phenomenon of the
twelfth century than the early Middle Ages, a period in which the three Boethian
translations then available (the Isagoge, the Categories, On Interpretation) had to
share their place, as will become clear, with a variety of other material.
The Neoplatonic Aristotelian Tradition ([Ebbesen, 1990; Sorabji, 2004])
As a commentator, Boethius was certainly dependent on the study of Aristotelian
logic that had been going on in the Neoplatonic schools of Athens and Alexandria
for two centuries. I shall sketch some of the main features of these philosophers’
approach to logic, since this important area of logical history is treated no where
else in the present Handbook (a mark of how little the ‘History of Logic’ served
up by and for logicians has to do with history?).
Although Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism, was hostile to many aspects
of Aristotelian logic, this attitude was not shared by Porphyry (c. 232-305), his
editor and leading follower. Porphyry believed that the ostensible diﬀerences be-
tween Plato and Aristotle could be explained by what we can label the ‘Diﬀerent
Objects Theory’: Plato was discussing the intelligible world, whereas Aristotle
focussed his attention on the world as it appears to the senses. He therefore in-
corporated Aristotelian texts within the Neoplatonic curriculum, and he gave a
particular emphasis to Aristotelian logic, a ﬁeld that seemed especially to interest
him. (See [Karamanolis, 2006]; but [De Haas, 2001], suggests by contrast that
Plotinus’s and Porphyry’s views were not very diﬀerent.)
From then on, logic
was studied enthusiastically in the Neoplatonic schools. Porphyry himself wrote
an introduction (Eisagoge; latinized as Isagoge) to the Categories, which became
incorporated into the Aristotelian Organon as the ﬁrst work to be studied in late
antiquity and the Middle Ages, as well as a short commentary on the Categories,

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
9
and long commentaries, both lost, on this text and on On Interpretation. His im-
portant follower, Iamblichus, produced a commentary on the Categories (also lost)
and Boethius’s contemporary at the School of Alexandria, Ammonius (435/45 —
517/26) seems to have concentrated on Aristotelian commentary. (See [Sorabji,
1990; 2004], for an introduction to these commentators.)
Porphyry’s Diﬀerent Objects Theory gave Neoplatonists a way to be thoroughly
Aristotelian in logic (which was concerned with language, and language with the
world as sensibly perceived [Ebbesen, 1981, 133-70]), and he was certainly a keen
reader of the greatest of the later ancient Peripatetic, Alexander of Aphrodisias.
His Isagoge can be seen as ﬁtting neatly into the Aristotelian Organon as an In-
troduction, although modern assessments of its metaphysical commitments vary
(compare [Porphyry, 1998] and [Porphyry, 2003]). Some later Neoplatonists, how-
ever, did not follow the Diﬀerent Objects theory so consistently. Although the
Aristotelian texts remained for them the basis of the logical curriculum and much
of their discussion concerned the type of issues Porphyry had raised, views of a
Platonic kind inﬂuenced their exegesis. For example, in his Categories commen-
tary, now lost but witnessed through the commentary by Simplicius (early 6th
century), Iamblichus seems to have taken advantage of the idea that the origi-
nator of the Categories was Archytas, a Pythagorean whom he claimed Aristotle
copied, and he attempted to apply the Categories to the supra-sensible realities
of Platonic metaphysics; and Ammonius, commenting on On Interpretation, tries
to insert the teaching of Plato’s Cratylus that words are not merely conventional
signs [Ammonius, 1897, 34:10–41:9].
Boethius and the Commentary Tradition
What was the nature of Boethius’s dependence on the Greek Neoplatonic com-
mentators?
According to James Shiel, it was total.
Boethius simply found a
Greek manuscript crammed with marginalia, themselves drawn from the writings
of several commentators.
‘The translation of these various marginalia and the
arrangement of them into a continuous commentary according to the order of
Aristotle’s words would seem to be Boethius’ only title to originality’, remarks
Shiel [1990, 361], even though he concedes [1990, 370, n. 83] that Boethius himself
contributed expansions and references to Latin authors. Shiel founds his position
on the fact that Boethius’s commentaries are not based on any one known, Greek
source. Most specialists now reject his view [Chadwick, 1981, 129-31; Ebbesen,
1990, 375-7; Ebbesen, forthcoming], because it assumes the very point it claims to
demonstrate, that Boethius was incapable of making his own choice and arrange-
ment of material. Even if his sources included manuscripts with marginal scholia
— and it is a moot point whether any such codices existed at that time — there
is no reason to think that Boethius did not use them selectively, along with the
complete texts of commentaries [De Libera, 1999, 164-8; Magee, 2003, 217].
Boethius, then, was not a mere translating machine. But nor was he an original
thinker in his logical commentaries. He was happy in general, just like his Greek

10
John Marenbon
contemporaries, to put down his own version of the views of his chosen authorities.
It was mainly in making this choice that he could exercise his independence, and he
did so by selecting Porphyry above all as the interpreter to follow. The Categories
commentary is close to the surviving shorter, question-and-answer commentary by
Porphyry [Asztalos, 1993], and from Boethius’s own comments about his sources
it is clear that his longer commentary on On Interpretation is by far the best
guide we have now to the contents of Porphyry’s lost commentary on this text.
By choosing Porphyry, rather than any more recent Greek commentator, as his
main guide, Boethius ensured that his presentation of logic would be, by and large,
faithfully Aristotelian, in line with the Diﬀerent Objects Theory.
Boethius on the ‘Categories’ ([Asztalos, 1993])
Porphyry bore out his general approach to Aristotle with a particular theory about
the subject-matter of the Categories. Interpreters diﬀered as to whether it is about
words or things. Plotinus had taken it to be about things and had been critical of
Aristotle’s discussion, since it said nothing about the Platonic Ideas. Porphyry’s
view, as expressed in his question-and-answer commentary on the work [1887, 90-
1], was that the Categories is about language: it is about words of ﬁrst imposition,
which signify things, as opposed to words of second imposition (such as ‘noun’ and
‘verb’) that signify other words and are treated in On Interpretation. The things
signiﬁed are sensible particulars, since it is to these that people ﬁrst of all attach
names; and the secondary substances, on Porphyry’s view, are concepts, universals
that are abstracted from the particulars, not the Platonic Ideas. The Categories,
then, and even the assertion in it that (2b5-6) ‘if the primary substances’ (that is,
the sensible particulars) ‘did not exist it would be impossible for any of the other
things to exist’ can be accepted since, in this extension of the Diﬀerent Objects
Theory, Aristotle is not concerned here with Platonic Ideas, but with universals
that are mental concepts, gained by abstraction, and dependent for their existence
on the primary substances.
Boethius follows Porphyry’s question-and-answer commentary closely and re-
produces his approach to the subject-matter of the Categories. He dramatizes the
theory by attaching it to a story about the origins of human language placed at
the very beginning of his commentary [Boethius, 1891, 159A-C], in which he tells
how, ﬁrst, names of ﬁrst imposition, such as ‘horse’, ‘branch’ and ‘two-foot long’
were given their meaning, and then names of second imposition such as ‘verb’ and
‘noun’. Boethius is fairly brief in his comments, because he says that he is writing
for beginners. Whether he ever wrote the second, more advanced commentary
that he promises [Boethius, 1891, 160A-B] is very uncertain: he may well have
been reluctant to produce the type of non-Aristotelian, Iamblichan discussion his
description of it suggests [Marenbon, 2003, 23].
Boethius on ‘On Interpretation’ ([Magee, 1989; Lloyd, 1990, 36-75 — a com-
plex discussion of Porphyrian semantics, which may underlie Boethius’s theories;
Cameron, Forthcoming; Sharples, Forthcoming])

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
11
In commenting On Interpretation, Boethius again turned to Porphyry, especially
in the second, more advanced commentary [Boethius, 1880] (the ﬁrst commentary
[Boethius, 1877] was designed just as an aid for beginners to a literal understanding
of the text). He says so himself [Boethius, 1877, 7:5-9], and it seems very likely
that the very inﬂuential ideas on semantics and modality he puts forward were
developed by Porphyry in his detailed commentary, now lost.
At the beginning of On Interpretation, Aristotle says (to translate Boethius’s
Latin version literally):
The things therefore which are in the utterance (in voce) are the marks
(notae) of the passions that are in the mind, and the things that are
written of those that are in the utterance. And just as the letters are
not the same for all, so the utterances are not the same; but what they
are primarily signs of, the passions of the mind, are the same for all,
and the things too, of which these are likenesses, are the same. [16a1-8;
Aristotle, 1965, 5:3-9; cf. Magee, 1989, 21-34]
As the commentary as well as the translation shows, Boethius takes Aristotle to
be presenting a semantics which is in many ways a mental language theory. The
‘passions of the mind’ are the words of this language which, unlike written and
spoken languages, is common to all humans, and these passions are in some way
likenesses of objects in the world.
To an extent, this is indeed Boethius’s approach. He speaks explicitly of mental
discourse (oratio) [Boethius, 1880, 30], and he believes that the thoughts that
are its simple terms are combined into complex thoughts that are true or false.
There is, however, an important diﬀerence between Boethius’s thinking and a
straightforward theory of this sort. When I utter ‘dog’ and you utter ‘dog’, we
are speaking the same word in the sense that utterances are tokens of the same
type, in virtue of a physical resemblance between the sounds we produce, which
a native speaker would judge to be close enough to take us as uttering the same
word. What about my mental concept of dog and your one? For Boethius, they
can be called the same just because they both [Boethius, 1880, 21:18-22] originate
from the same type of animal. We begin from sensory contact with some object
in the world, form a pre-conceptual image in our mind, on which the intellect
works in order to have a thought of it.
It seems, therefore, that in Boethian
mental language, in so far as it is a language, the individual words (‘dog’, ‘cat’,
‘human’) are not imposed on objects, as in a natural language, but derive from
them causally.
When he comes to Chapter 9 of On Interpretation, Boethius has to give his
reading of the much debated passage on future contingents. Earlier (17a1-4) Aris-
totle had asserted the principal of bivalence: every proposition is either true or
false. But it seems that, if propositions about future events are true, or are false,
then no future events will be contingent. Suppose p states that a certain event E
will happen tomorrow. If p is true, it seems that E must happen, and if p is false, it
seems that E cannot happen, and so, whether p is true or false, E will not be con-

12
John Marenbon
tingent. One way out of the problem is to abandon bivalence for future contingent
propositions. Arguably, this was Aristotle’s strategy: so the Stoics thought, and
some modern scholars agree. Boethius, however, believes that Aristotle retains
bivalence, but avoids determinism by holding that future contingent propositions
are indeﬁnitely, and not deﬁnitely, true or false.
What does Boethius understand by this position? (See [Kretzmann, 1998] for
a diﬀerent view.) He thinks that, when we assert or deny a proposition about a
future event without qualiﬁcation, we are saying that it is deﬁnitely true or false,
and we are thereby implying that the event will or will not happen necessarily. In
consequence, any proposition of the type ‘CE will happen’, where CE is a con-
tingent event, is false, because it asserts that a contingent event is not contingent.
What the speaker should do is to say ‘CE will happen contingently’, in which
case — so it seems, tying together the diﬀerent elements of the theory — he is
asserting the indeﬁnite truth of ‘CE will happen’ [Boethius, 1880, 212-3]. In line
with this theory, when he discusses in this commentary the question of God’s fore-
knowledge (not raised by Aristotle, but debated in the commentary tradition, as
witnessed by Ammonius), Boethius says that God knows that future contingents
will take place, but he knows that they will take place contingently, not neces-
sarily [Boethius, 1880, 225:9-226:25]. It may be because even Boethius himself
realized that his theory is inadequate as an explanation that, when he returned to
the problem of divine prescience at the end of his ﬁnal work, the Consolation of
Philosophy, he produced a diﬀerent and far more ambitious solution (cf. [Huber,
1976; Marenbon, 2003, 125-45; Evans, 2004; Sharples, Forthcoming]).
Boethius on the ‘Isagoge’: Porphyry’s Questions ([De Libera, 1999, 159-280; Maren-
bon, 2008])
Boethius could not, as he usually did, turn to a commentary by Porphyry when
he wrote his two commentaries on Porphyry’s own Isagoge [Boethius, 1906]. The
earlier, in dialogue-form, was his ﬁrst piece of writing on logic, dating from c.
500; the later one (c. 510-5) was by far the most commonly studied of the two
at all stages of the medieval tradition. In fact, Boethius continued to show his
adherence to Porphyry’s approach, since in both commentaries he concentrates
largely on straightforward explanation of the ideas in the text, using material
some of which is reﬂected in Ammonius’s commentary, the earliest surviving in
Greek, written at much the same time as his own. One passage, however, led
Boethius and almost every commentator into a long discussion of a subject that
Porphyry explicitly refuses to treat here. Close to the beginning of the Isagoge
[Porphyry, 1887, 1:10-13; Porphyry, 1966, 5:10-14 — Boethius’s Latin translation],
Porphyry puts a set of questions about universals and how they exist (he uses the
word huﬁstasthai, translated by Boethius as subsistere, but here it probably means
the same as ‘exist’ [Porphyry, 2003, 40]) or do they consist only in pure thoughts?
If they exist, are they bodies or incorporeals, and if they are incorporeals, are they
separable or in perceptible things, existing about them? Porphyry himself says he
will not try to gives answers, because the subject is too deep for an introductory

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
13
work.
Boethius puts forward his fullest and most inﬂuential answer in his second
commentary. Even here, he is one sense loyal to the Porphyrian project, since
he turns to one of Porphyry’s preferred sources, the great Peripatetic philosopher
Alexander of Aphrodisias, from whom he says he has taken his position (cf. [De
Libera, 1999]). He begins with a powerful argument [Boethius, 1906, 161:14–164:2]
which claims to show that universals do not exist, and any enquiry into them is
pointless. The ﬁrst premiss resumes Porphyry’s ﬁrst question:
1. Either genera and species exist (sunt atque subsistunt) or they are formed
by the intellect, in thought alone.
He then argues against the truth of the ﬁrst disjunct of (1): -
2. Everything that exists is one in number.
3. Nothing that is common to many at the same time can be one in number.
4. Genera and species are common to many at the same time.
5. Genera and species do not exist. (2,3,4)
It follows, therefore, that
6. Genera and species are formed in the intellect, in thought alone. (1,5; dis-
junctive syllogism)
But to hold (6), Boethius goes on to show, apparently entails a drastic conclu-
sion for the enquirer. Some thoughts — call them ‘corresponding thoughts’ —
correspond to how their object is in reality, some do not.
7. If the thoughts that, by (6), are genera and species are corresponding thoughts,
then genera and species exist in reality in the way they are thought.
8. Genera and species do not exist in reality in the way they are thought. (5)
9. Genera and species are not corresponding thoughts. (7, 8; modus tollens)
10. Thoughts that are not corresponding are empty and false.
11. All enquiry into universals should cease.
Boethius does not, of course, agree with this argument, but one of the remark-
able feature of his answer is that he accepts every stage of this argument up to
(9). He simply denies (10), and therefore (11); the opponent’s argument, in the
main, goes through, but without its sting. Boethius denies (10) by appealing to
the idea of (mathematical) abstraction. He explains [Boethius, 1906, 164:12–14]
that when one thing is abstracted from another ‘the thing is indeed not as the
thought is, but the thought is not however at all false.’ For example, a line cannot

14
John Marenbon
in fact exist apart from a body, but it is thought of in abstraction from any body,
and this thought is not false.
Not only does the appeal to abstraction defeat the argument (1)–(11): it also
suggests a way of explaining what universals are, which we could label ‘Neutral Ab-
stractionism’. According to Neutral Abstractionism, particulars of a given species
each have a nature or, as Boethius calls it here, a ‘likeness’ (similitudo), which
exactly resembles the likeness of any other member of the species. The species is
constituted by the thought which brings together these likenesses, and the genus
by the thought that brings together the likenesses of the species. This solution is
one of those Boethius puts forward.
At the same time, and without marking the diﬀerence, Boethius proposes a
rather diﬀerent solution.
He starts by explaining that the likeness ‘is sensible
to the senses when it is in the singular things, but it is intelligible in universal
things, and in the same way when it is sensible it remains in singular things; when
it is thought in the intellect (intelligitur) it becomes universal’ [Boethius, 1906,
166:18-21]. Then he goes on to say — expanding this idea — that singulars and
universals are two things in the same subject. Just as the same line is convex or
concave depending on how it is regarded, and so it can be considered two things
in one subject, so there is the same subject (for instance, this human, John) for
singularity and universality. When John is perceived through the senses, among
the things in which he has his existence (esse suum habet), he is a singular; but
when he is grasped in thought (as a human), he is a universal [Boethius, 1966:23-
167:7].
This solution diﬀers from Neutral Abstractionism and might be called
‘Realist Abstractionism’ since it suggests that the process of abstracting does not
merely provide a way of regarding a world that is made up only of singular things,
some similar, some diverse, but that it allows people to grasp real universals,
accessible only to thought. [Marenbon, 2008].
Boethius’s Logical Treatises ([Martin, 1991])
The short On Division (De divisione; probably 515-20) [Boethius, 1998 — with
translation and commentary] stands somewhat apart from Boethius’s other logical
treatises. Like much else in his logic, it is probably based on a work by Porphyry,
prolegomena to a now lost commentary by him on Plato’s Sophist. Despite the
Platonic text, the approach is Aristotelian. Using the language and concepts of
the Isagoge and Categories, Boethius explains the diﬀerence between accidental
division (dividing, for instance, humans in virtue of accidents of colour into black,
white and medium) and intrinsic division. Intrinsic division is of a whole into parts,
a genus into species and a word into its diﬀerent meanings. In the twelfth century,
when this treatise was studied most carefully, the section on whole-part division
was especially important. Questions about genera and species were treated more
fully in the Isagoge, and on semantics in On Interpretation, but On Division was
alone in providing a brief introduction to mereology.
All of Boethius’s other logical treatises concern types of argument.
Two of
them, On the Categorical Syllogism (SC) [Boethius, 2001] and Introduction to

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
15
Categorical Syllogisms (ISC) [Boethius, 1891, 761-94], present Aristotle’s doctrine
of (non-modal) syllogisms. The relations between the two treatises are complex.
SC has a ﬁrst book devoted to preliminaries to syllogistic (as discussed in On
Interpretation), and a second book which contains a straightforward account of
syllogistic itself. ISC has one book only, which covers in greater detail the ground
treated in SC, Book I. It seems to be Boethius’s attempt — left unﬁnished or mu-
tilated in transmission — to rewrite and expand SC. Boethius has been accused
[Patzig, 1968, 75-6] of making an innovation in presenting Aristotle’s theory of syl-
logisms that made it less clear. According to Aristotle, the validity of ﬁrst ﬁgure
syllogisms is evident. In his way of stating them, they read like, for example: ‘A
belongs to every B, B belongs to every C, therefore A belongs to every C’ — a
formulation in which, just by looking at the ﬁrst two premisses, the conclusion is
obvious. When, as became usual, the syllogism is constructed using ‘is’ instead of
‘belongs to’, the Greek commentators ensured that this transparency was main-
tained by reversing the order of the premisses: for instance, ‘Every C is B, every
B is A, therefore every C is A.’ But Boethius loses the transparency by using a
formulation with ‘is’ along with the Aristotelian order. In fact, this accusation is
not completely fair. It applies only to the way in which Boethius formulated his
example syllogisms. When he uses letters for terms, he follows a Latin version of
Aristotle’s Greek phrasing, such as ‘A is predicated of every B.’
Boethius is particularly fascinated by the theory of conversion, and he intro-
duces an explicit discussion of how propositions with inﬁnite names (that is, ones
involving negations, like ‘not-man’ and ‘not-animal’) convert (ISC: [Boethius,
1891, 780-5; Prior, 1953]).
Moreover, he extends the theory of conversion to
cases where truth is preserved only so long as the terms in the proposition bear
a certain relation to each other. For instance, ‘Every A is B’ does not convert to
‘Every B is A’, but it does if B is a proprium, as deﬁned in Porphyry’s Isagoge, of
A: ‘Every human is capable of laughing’ — ‘Every thing capable of laughing is a
human being’ (ISC: [Boethius, 1891, 786B]).
On Hypothetical Syllogisms (De hypotheticis syllogismis) [Boethius, 1969] is a
far more interesting work than SC or ISC. It represents a tradition of writing on
hypothetical syllogisms that is found, otherwise, only in a brief scholium preserved
in a tenth-century Byzantine manuscript [Bobzien, 2002]. Presumably there were
some other, now lost accounts of the area (we know that Marius Victorinus gave
one), but Boethius says himself [references are to the section divisions in Boethius,
1969: I.1.3-4] that he is giving a fuller and more systematic treatment than any-
thing he can ﬁnd in the Greek, and there is every reason to accept this claim,
certainly about the detailed working out of the theory in Books II and III (cf.
[Striker, 1973]), but possibly even about Book I. Moreover, the treatise provides
important, though negative, information on Boethius’s grasp of Stoic propositional
logic.
Hypothetical syllogisms are those in which one or both premisses are compound,
rather than simple propositions. Boethius considers two types of compound propo-
sition, those using the connective ‘or’ (aut, understood as exclusive disjunction)

16
John Marenbon
and those using ‘if’ (si/ cum). In practice, he concerns himself almost entirely
with ‘if’. Early in the work [I.3.6-7], he makes a distinction to which he does not
return. There are two sorts of conditionals (hypothetical propositions using si or
cum): accidental (secundum accidens) and those which have a consequence of na-
ture (ut habeant aliquam naturae consequentiam). An accidental conditional is, for
instance, ‘If (cum) ﬁre is hot, the sky is round’. Those which have a consequence
of nature are of two types. In one type the consequence is necessary, but does not
rest on the positing of the terms (positio terminorum), as for example: ‘If (cum)
it’s a human, it’s an animal’. The other type has a necessary consequence that
does rest on the positing of the terms, as for example, ‘If (si) there is an interpo-
sition of the earth, an eclipse of the moon follows’. From the example he gives,
the distinction that Boethius seems to have in mind is that, in a true accidental
conditional, the antecedent and the consequent are both necessarily true, but the
truth of the one is entirely unrelated to the truth of the other. In a natural condi-
tional, the truth of the consequent is related to that of the antecedent, either by
dependency where the conditional rests on the positing of terms — it is because
there is an interposition of the earth that the moon is eclipsed — or by relevance
that is not causal dependency — something’s being a human gives us reason to
say it is an animal, but Boethius would want to say that it is not because it’s
a human that it’s an animal, but rather, because it’s a mortal, rational animal
that it’s a human. The distinction between accidental and natural conditional was
one which would become enormously important in the history of Latin logic from
the twelfth century onwards [Martin, 2005]. But Boethius does not dwell on it;
his standard example conditional, ‘If it is day it is light’, seems to be a natural
conditional resting on the positing of terms.
Rather, Boethius wants to set out which hypothetical syllogisms are valid. Just
as the theory of categorical syllogistic lists the diﬀerent combinations that are
valid, so too hypothetical syllogistic oﬀers a tabulation of valid inference forms.
But the table is vastly more complicated. The simplest form of a hypothetical
syllogism, where the major premiss involves just two terms, is exempliﬁed by ‘If
it is day, it is light.
It is day.
So it is light.’
Varying the quality of each of
the two propositions making up the major premiss yields four types of syllogism.
But the major premiss can involve three terms (for instance, ‘If, if it is A, then
it is B, it is C) or four terms (for instance, ‘If, if it is A, it is B, then if it is
C, it is D’). Taking into account all the combinations of quality, and then the
diﬀerent ways of qualifying them modally, the number of combinations reaches
the ten thousands (I.8.7), and far more if the propositions are quantiﬁed (I.9.2).
But Boethius conﬁnes himself, wisely, to charting the non-modal, non-quantiﬁed
combinations — still a long and tedious task, that occupies Books II and III of
the treatise.
It is tempting to see Boethius as setting out some variety of propositional logic.
‘If it is day, it is light. It is day. So it is light’ looks very like an inference of the
form ‘p →q, p; so q’. Yet it is clear that Boethius conceives himself as doing a
sort of term logic (and the same is true for the Byzantine scholium). Each of the

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
17
propositions is of the form ‘It is (an) A/B/C. . .’, where ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ stand for
predicates, and the conclusion follows — as in a categorical syllogism — because
of the relation between these terms. One moment in the treatise brings out this
point especially clearly. Boethius (II.2.3–4.6) has established that, if the major
premiss is ‘If it is not A, it is B’, then, whilst ‘It is B’ follows when the minor
premiss is ‘It is not A’, and ‘It is A’ follows if the minor premiss is ‘It is not B’,
from the minor premisses ‘It is A’ and ‘It is B’, no conclusion follows. And yet,
Boethius points out, in the nature of things from ‘If it is not A, it is B’ and ‘It is
B’, it does follow that it is not A, and from ‘If it is not A, it is B’ and ‘It is A’, it
does follow that it is not B. The reason (III.10.4) is that the major premiss will be
true only if ‘A’ and ‘B’ are immediate contraries — they are such that everything
is either A or B. If A and B are immediate contraries, then indeed if something
is not A it is B, and if it is not B it is A. This line of thought makes sense only if
Boethius has the connections between terms, not propositions, in mind. As Chris
Martin has shown in his important study [Martin, 1991], whereas Stoic logic is
propositional, Boethius had no grasp of the very notion of propositionality; that is
to say, he was unable to see negation or consequence as propositional operations.
Boethius is not, though, entirely removed from propositional logic. There are
moments, indeed, when he seems to come close to propositional logic, as when he
gives two of the Stoic indemonstrables using, in Stoic fashion numbers to stand for
propositions: ‘if the ﬁrst, then it follows that there is the second’, ‘if the second
is not, it follows necessarily that the ﬁrst is not’ (I.4.6). In his commentary on
Cicero’s Topics, Boethius includes a long passage [Bk. V; Boethius, 1833, 355-9]
discussing Cicero’s seven modes of inference. This passage may be linked, not
just to Cicero’s own text, but to the presentation found in Martianus Capella
and Cassiodorus, which seems to go back to Marius Victorinus.
There is, no
doubt through Cicero, genuine Stoic inﬂuence at the basis of this list. But, well by
Boethius’s time, as Anthony Speca has shown [Speca, 2001], the Peripatetic theory
of the hypothetical syllogism and Stoic propositional logic had become conﬂated,
to the extent that Boethius (and possibly Marius Victorinus before him), reading
Cicero’s Stoic-based list of modes of inference, took them for modes of hypothetical
syllogisms.
Indeed, there is one point here where Boethius makes clear just how far he
was from understanding Stoic logic (pace [Stump, 1989, esp. 19-22]). He knows
what Cicero’s form of the third mode is, but he deliberately changes it [Boethius,
1833, 362]. Instead of ‘Not: A and not B; A; therefore B’, Boethius puts: ‘Not:
if A then not B; A; therefore B’ [Boethius, 1833, 356-7].
If this is translated
into propositional calculus, it gives ∼(p →∼q); p; so q, which is clearly invalid.
Boethius explains, however, that in this mode it is assumed that A and not-
B are incompatible.
He understands ‘Not if A then not B’ as expressing this
incompatibility: to negate ‘If it is day, it is not light’ is, for Boethius, to say that
it cannot be the case that it is day without its being light. And so it follows that,
if it is day, as the minor premiss states, it is light (cf. [Martin, 1991, 293-4]).
Boethius is therefore, as shown by his very willingness to change the formula he

18
John Marenbon
inherited, trying to think about the meaning of these Stoic-derived formulas, but
within the context of his own term-logic.
The strange character of Boethius’s hypothetical syllogistic comes out even more
clearly when he treats the negation of a conditional in On Hypothetical Syllogisms.
Not realizing that his discussions should be construed as term logic, earlier com-
mentators [D¨urr, 1951; Kneale and Kneale, 1975, 191; Barnes, 1981, 83; cf. Martin,
1991, 295-6] argued that Boethius thought the contradictory negation of ‘If p, then
q’ is ‘If p, then not-q’, rather than ‘Not (If p, then q)’ as in classical propositional
calculus. Therefore, they concluded, he had a strange propositional system. But,
as Martin puts it [1991, 279]: ‘The problem is not . . . that Boethius’ logic is not
classical propositional calculus but rather it is not propositional at all.’ Boethius
is in fact both much less strange in his underlying conception than he has been seen
to be, and yet at the same time more distant from contemporary logical models.
Boethius’s account of the state of aﬀairs that must be the case for a conditional to
be ‘negated’ or ‘destroyed’ is exactly the same as the contemporary logician’s ac-
count of what obtains when a whole conditional is negated, but Boethius can only
oﬀer his explanation, however tortuously, using term logic. For the conditional ‘If
A is, B is’ to be destroyed, we must show ‘not that A is not or B is not, but that,
when A is posited, it does not immediately follow that B is, but that A can be
even if the term B is not’ (I.9.7). And even in his extended discussion of the valid
forms of hypothetical syllogisms, Boethius seems, whilst always working in term
logic, to be mimicking the results which would obtain in a propositional calculus,
often employing various extra premisses that allow him to reach the results which,
by means of examples, he has identiﬁed as the correct ones (cf. [Marenbon, 2003,
53-55, 191]).
Boethius and Topical Argument ([Green-Pedersen, 1984, 37-81])
The remaining logical monograph by Boethius, On Topical diﬀerentiae (De topicis
diﬀerentiis) (TD) [Boethius, 1990, 1-92; trsl.
Boethius, 1978; Boethius, 1891,
1173-1216] was written near the end of his life (c. 522-3), at a time when topical
argument became a central concern for him.
Shortly before, he had written a
commentary on Cicero’s Topics (TC) [Boethius, 1833; transl.
Boethius, 1988]
that is closely related to it, translated Aristotle’s Topics into Latin, and probably
written a commentary on it, now lost.
Much as in the case of hypothetical syllogistic, Boethius’ work is the only sub-
stantial survival from the late ancient tradition of topical argument as it had
developed after the time of Cicero. One of its principle exponents had been the
fourth-century Peripatetic philosopher, Themistius. He and Cicero are Boethius’s
special authorities, and one of the main aims of TD is to compare the apparently
diﬀerent lists of topical diﬀerentiae given by these two philosophers, showing that
they really coincide.
In the way it is structured around a list of topical diﬀerentiae, the topical theory
Boethius presents clearly descends from Cicero, though Cicero had just called them
‘topics’. Discussion of the topics is no longer, however, the mixture of law and

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
19
rhetoric with logic that it had been ﬁve centuries before; the proof of this is what
might seem to be the exception, the fact that in Book IV of TD, after devoting
the rest of the work to the logical topics, Boethius gives a separate treatment of
what are identiﬁed explicitly as the rhetorical topics. Topical argument has its
place within logic as the discipline for ﬁnding arguments, whereas the Posterior
Analytics teaches us how to judge them. Boethius thinks of an argument as aiming
to decide to between the disjuncts of what he calls a question: ‘Either A is B or
A is not B’. The argument will be a syllogism with one or other disjunct as its
conclusion. Finding the argument is therefore a matter of ﬁnding an appropriate
middle term, from which a premiss can be formed with A, and a premiss with
B, which yield syllogistically the desired conclusion.
Topical theory does not,
of course, provide a machine, into which the conclusion only need be fed for an
argument to emerge.
There could be no such machine.
Rather, it provides a
method for arguers to search their stock of knowledge in the right way to come up
with an argument. Since the middle term is predicated of, or has as a predicate,
the other two terms, what it designates must be related, even if negatively, to
what they designate. The scheme of diﬀerentiae systematizes the main categories
of such relationships — categories such as, for example, part and whole, genus and
species, more and less, signiﬁed and sign. Suppose [TD II; Boethius, 1847, 1188C
— the new edition and translation reproduce the column divisions of the 1891 ed.]
I want to show that human aﬀairs are ruled by providence. I mentally scan the
list of diﬀerentiae and my attention is caught by that ‘from a whole’: it suggests
to me that what human aﬀairs stand in relation to as a part to a whole provides
me with the middle term I need. I know that the world is ruled by providence.
But human aﬀairs are a part of the world and so they too, I can conclude, are
ruled by providence.
As well as setting out the topical diﬀerentiae, Boethius lists for each a maxima
propositio (‘maximal proposition’) — sometimes giving it in a variety of diﬀer-
ent forms. The maximal proposition is a statement putting in general terms the
pattern of reasoning on which arguments rely which are made using the topical
diﬀerentia in question. So, for the diﬀerentia ‘from a whole’, the maximal propo-
sition is: ‘What is ﬁtting to the whole, also is ﬁtting to the part.’ When I argue,
12. The world is ruled by providence.
13. Human aﬀairs are a part of the world.
so
14. Human aﬀairs are ruled by providence,
I am giving a particular example of how what is ﬁtting to the whole is also ﬁtting
to the part. The maxim has another role too, however. (12–14) is not a valid
argument, although it may seem to be (just about!) a plausible one. If, however,
we add, as an extra premiss
13a. What is ﬁtting to the whole, also is ﬁtting to the part

20
John Marenbon
that is to say, the maximal proposition, the result is (or could be, with a little
re-expression) a formally valid argument.
This example illustrates a general rule in Boethius’s account of the topics: when
the maximal proposition is added as a premiss, the arguments become formally
valid deductions. But Boethius does not suggest that this is how maximal proposi-
tions should be used. Rather, he says [TD 1185B-D; TC, Boethius, 1833, 280:24-7]
that maximal propositions give arguments their force. His idea seems to be that
a formally invalid argument such as (12–14) gains its force as an argument from
the principle encapsulated in the maximal proposition: we are happy to accept
(14) as following, in an informal way, from (12) and (13) because we accept and
have in the back of our minds the principle that what is ﬁtting to the whole is
also ﬁtting to the part. The strength of a topical argument will therefore depend
on the strength of the underlying maximal proposition. Some maximal proposi-
tions are analytic truths (for instance: ‘the cause of anything brings about what it
causes’ TD 1189C; ‘once the antecedent has been asserted, the consequent follows
. . . ’ (i.e. modus ponens) TD 1198D). Some, like the one in the example here, are
much vaguer statements of what is generally the case. Some, like the maximal
proposition of the one topic considered to be extrinsic, ‘from judgement’ — ‘What
seems so to all or to many or to learned people should not be contradicted’ (TD
1190CD) — hardly even amount to useful argumentative rules of thumb.
Boethian Logic and its Survival
Boethius is by far the most important ﬁgure in the ancient tradition of Latin logic,
but it is important to realize that the Boethian Tradition was not the only ancient
Latin one. The logic of the earlier Latin authors, along with, or transmitted by,
later encyclopaedic accounts, provided a separate tradition, which would be the
one on which, more than Boethius, medieval logic depended in the period up to the
late tenth century. It is in the eleventh century that the Boethian Tradition begins
to dominate (See §4 below). The twelfth century was the Golden Age of Boethian
Logic: the six works that formed the core of the logical curriculum were Boethius’s
monographs and his translations of the Isagoge, Categories and On Interpretation,
which were taught making extensive use of his commentaries.
And the Prior
Analytics and Sophistical Refutations, also in his translation, began to be known.
As a result of the introduction of the whole range of Aristotle’s writing and its
adoption, by the mid-thirteenth century, as the Arts course in the universities, and
with the development of the logica modernorum, branches of logic newly devised
by the medieval logicians themselves, Boethian Logic became less important in
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, although his translations continued to be
used by all students of logic, and some outstanding theologians, such as Albert
the Great, Aquinas and William of Ockham, made some use of his commentaries.
Moreover, On Division and TD remained part of the standard university logical
collections — and commentaries were even written on TD in the thirteenth century.
The monographs on categorical syllogisms were no longer useful now that the Prior

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
21
Analytics itself was known, and the treatise on hypothetical syllogisms too was
forgotten [see Martin, 2007].
2.3
The Encyclopaedists
Between Boethius’s death and the late eighth century, no Latin writer worked on
logic in a serious and sustained way. But two accounts of logic written within
longer encyclopaedic works would be important in the centuries following.
Cassiodorus
Cassiodorus (484/90–590) succeeded Boethius in his post at Theoderic’s court,
and he probably had a hand in ensuring the preservation and transmission of
Boethius’s work. In 554, he retired to a monastery at Vivarium in southern Italy
and wrote a handbook called the Institutions (Institutiones) [Cassiodorus, 1937;
transl. Cassiodorus, 1946], which was widely read in the early Middle Ages. In
Book II he gives short accounts of the seven liberal arts among which is logic (II.3.1-
18). There are very summary accounts of the matter of the Isagoge, the Categories
and On Interpretation (which is singled out for its diﬃculty). For all these, he
uses Boethius’s translations [Courcelle, 1941, 80-3]. He then presents categorical
syllogisms, following Apuleius [Sullivan, 1967, 173-7], deﬁnition, basing himself on
Marius Victorinus, and topical argument, in which it seems he is following Marius
Victorinus’s now lost work [Hadot, 1971, 115-41]. There is a list (II,13) of what
he calls ‘the modes of hypothetical syllogisms’: the phrase is Boethius’s, but the
list is closer (though not identical) to that given by Martianus Capella and so,
probably, by Marius Victorinus.
At the end of the section on logic (II,18), Cassiodorus includes a list of those ‘by
whose eﬀorts these things have come into the Latin tongue’. In the standard text
of the Institutions, Marius Victorinus is credited with the major role — as trans-
lator of the Isagoge, Categories and On Interpretation, the writer of monographs
on hypothetical syllogisms and deﬁnition and the commentator on Aristotle’s Cat-
egories and Cicero’s Topics. Apuleius is mentioned for his categorical syllogistic,
and Cicero, of course, for his Topics. Boethius’s role is reduced to that of com-
mentator on the Isagoge and On Interpretation — despite the fact that it was his
translations of Aristotle and Porphyry which Cassiodorus had in fact used (and
it is uncertain whether Victorinus did in fact translate the Categories and On
Interpretation, or comment on the Categories). In one textual tradition, however,
the list is changed, and all the writings attributed to Victorinus are attributed
to Boethius, even the commentary on Cicero’s Topics, where Victorinus and not
Boethius seems to have been the source. A complex explanation involving an orig-
inal draft and additions at various stages has been proposed to explain this strange
diﬀerence in the lists [Courcelle, 1941; Hadot, 1971, 105-9], but perhaps political
factors could provide a better explanation. Another feature of the pro-Boethian
textual tradition is that these manuscripts contain a series of additions of logical

22
John Marenbon
and other material, including extracts from Boethius’s On Topical diﬀerentiae.
[Cassiodorus, 1937, xxv, xxxvii].
Isidore of Seville
Isidore, Bishop of Seville in the early seventh century and relentless collector of
facts, was even further from being a logician in his own right than Cassiodorus. His
most inﬂuential work, surviving in more than a thousand medieval manuscripts,
is called the Etymologies (Etymologiae) [Isidore, 1983], and it is an encyclopaedia
which organizes its discussion around etymologies, usually imaginary and some-
times fantastic. It contains a short account of logic (II, 25-31) mostly borrowed
from Cassiodorus, sometimes with mistakes that show a compiler who does not
understand his material. Thus the Apuleian account of categorical syllogistic reap-
pears, along with the same brief passage on hypothetical syllogisms, the account of
deﬁnition and the topics. Isidore also takes some material from Martianus Capella
and Marius Victorinus’s On Deﬁnition, which he uses, along with Cassiodorus, in
giving summaries of the Isagoge, Categories and On Interpretation. He also seems
to be the ﬁrst author to makes use of the Ten Categories, which would become
popular two centuries later.
The Character of the Encylopaedic Tradition
At ﬁrst sight, it would appear that, alongside the Aristotelian logical tradition
transmitted through Boethius, the encyclopaedists transmitted a more rhetorically-
based tradition, going back to Marius Victorinus, in which Cicero’s Topics is the
central text. The account in Martianus Capella is, arguably, strongly rooted in
Victorinus, and Cassiodorus too seems to have looked to Victorinus, and Isidore
follows Cassiodorus.
But there is also an emphasis on the Categories in these
accounts, which would be taken up strongly by their medieval readers, and Mar-
tianus Capella’s presentation works against a rhetorical conception of logic, by
simply placing the account of the topics in his presentation of rhetoric.
3
CAROLINGIAN BEGINNINGS
([Van de Vyver, 1929; Marenbon, 1981])
For a century and a half from the time of Isidore there seems to have been no
study of logic in Latin Europe, and no writing about it, even third-hand. Logic
was re-discovered at the court of Charlemagne at the end of the eighth century.
3.1
Logic at the Court of Charlemagne
([Marenbon, 1997b])

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
23
There were two diﬀerent strands of logical work among Charlemagne’s court in-
tellectuals, one associated with the Anglo-Saxon Alcuin, the other with Theodulf,
who came from Visigothic Spain.
Alcuin as a Logician
Alcuin (d.
806) was educated at the Cathedral school of York and managed,
from the 780s until he was made Abbot of Tours in 796, to gain a position and,
ultimately, a good deal of inﬂuence, in Charlemagne’s court at Aachen. Among
his compositions are text-books on grammar, rhetoric and logic. The one on logic,
Dialectic (Dialectica) [Alcuin, 1863], written in the form of a dialogue between
Alcuin and Charlemagne himself, can claim to be the ﬁrst medieval work on this
discipline. In setting out these three linguistic arts of what came to be called the
‘trivium’ as basic elements of education, Alcuin was, in a sense, merely following
the lead of Cassiodorus, though unlike him neglecting the mathematical arts of
the quadrivium. But in a preface to the three works, pointedly called On True
Philosophy (De vera philosophia) [Alcuin, 1863, 951-76], Alcuin makes explicitly
the case for the liberal arts as pillars in an education that will ﬁnally lead to the
temple of Biblical wisdom (cf. [Marenbon, 1984, 172-4]). This was an educational
programme that Alcuin ensured was politically underwritten; Charlemagne’s role
as pupil and interlocutor in Dialectic is a ﬂattering endorsement of the direction
of royal policy.
Alcuin did not just help to place the arts of the trivium at the centre of medieval
education: he helped to make logic the foremost among them. But from Dialectic,
a text not only wholly derivative, but copied in the main — with one important
exception — verbatim from the encyclopaedic accounts of Cassiodorus and Isidore
[Prantl, 1885, 16-19; Lehmann, 1917], perhaps with some use of Boethius’s ﬁrst
commentary on On Interpretation (queried in [Kneepkens, 1998]; but [Bullough,
2004, 404] upholds its use), it is not easy at ﬁrst to see how. Certainly not because
of any logical thinking done by Alcuin himself: the one section for which there is no
obvious source, Chapter XII on ‘Arguments’, is simple in the extreme and avoids
giving even the summary accounts of types of categorical syllogisms or modes of
hypothetical syllogisms available in the encyclopaedias.
Yet Alcuin manages his material with a clear sense of his own particular purpose.
In Isidore’s Etymologies, his main source, the presentation centres on logic as a tool
for devising and judging arguments: the section on syllogisms is the longest, and
as in Cassiodorus it comes at the end of the work, along with the presentation of
topical arguments, punctuated by the discussion of deﬁnitions. Alcuin ends with
his treatment of material from On Interpretation, and, as mentioned, he gives a
very simple and brief treatment of syllogistic. The emphasis of Dialectic in terms
of space and detail falls on the exposition of the Categories. Here alone Alcuin
turns to a non-encyclopaedic source, the Ten Categories, the intelligent paraphrase
produced in the circle of Themistius (see above, 2.1). The excerpts from it occupy
two ﬁfths of the whole treatise. To judge from Dialectic, logic is above all about

24
John Marenbon
the doctrine of the Categories.
There is every reason to believe that Alcuin would have been happy to leave
this impression. He believed that the Ten Categories was the work of Augustine,
no less, and he wrote a prefatory poem for it which would accompany it in the
manuscripts [Aristotle, 1961a, lxxxvii] in which we learn that this ‘little book
contains ten words which hold everything that we are able to perceive’.
The
Categories are, therefore, a key to understanding the sensible world — and more
than that. In a letter dedicating his On the Faith of the Holy Trinity (De Fide
Sanctae Trinitatis; ﬁnished 802) to Charlemagne, Alcuin professes the hope that
by his treatise he will convince
. . . those who have been judging as of little use your most noble inten-
tion to want to learn the rules of the discipline of dialectic, that in his
On the Trinity, St Augustine thought them necessary above all, when
he showed that the most profound questions about the Holy Trinity
cannot be explained except through the subtlety of the Categories.
[D¨ummler, 1895, 415]
Alcuin has in mind the passage in On the Trinity (V.2-5) where Augustine asks
whether Aristotle’s Categories apply to God, and decides that, properly speaking,
only the ﬁrst, substance, does. In his own work, based in part on Augustine’s, this
theme is given pride of place in Book I. Just because, as he says in his prefatory
poem, the ten Categories provide a comprehensive classiﬁcation of everything in
the sensible world, they are the perfect tool for understanding the distance be-
tween God and his creation.
Within a programme where studying the liberal
arts, especially the trivium, is justiﬁed as providing the foundations for Christian
wisdom, logic in particular is thus seen to have a special doctrinal role, once the
centrality of the Categories is recognized and their part in clarifying some of the
central mysteries of the faith.
Theodulf of Orleans and the ‘Libri Carolini’
Theodulf of Orleans (d. 821) was another of Charlemagne’s court intellectuals.
Mainly known as a poet, his part in the history of logic is due entirely to King
Charles’s Work against the Synod (Opus Caroli Regis contra Synodum or Libri
Carolini) [Opus Caroli, 1998] — the oﬃcial response from the Latins to the second
Council of Nicaea (787), composed between 790 and 793. Although issued in the
Emperor’s name, the Work against the Synod has now been shown fairly surely
to be the work of Theodulf [Freeman, 2003, collecting her articles on this theme;
Meyvaert, 1979, for a summary of the discussions]. It is only in one chapter (IV,
23) that logic is employed, but here its use is concentrated. The aim is a simple
one: to show that the Greeks are wrong in contending that ‘to kiss’ and ‘to adore’
mean the same thing. Theodulf chooses to make his critique of this (strikingly
weak) position the excuse for a lesson in, and display of, logic. He borrows from
Boethius’s ﬁrst commentary on On Interpretation, and takes a long explanation

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
25
from Apuleius about the truth-values of diﬀerent propositions. Above all, he sees
the chapter as an opportunity to demonstrate his prowess in handling arguments,
even though none of this complicated syllogizing is necessary, or even germane, for
overturning the Greeks’ position.
Theodulf’s logical project diﬀers from Alcuin’s in the emphasis it places on
argument, and its lack of interest in the more metaphysically-inclined logic of the
Categories. I once argued [Marenbon, 1997], using the chronology of Alcuin’s work
established by his biographer, Donald Bullough [Bullough, 1991, 37; Bullough,
1997, 581-2] that the ﬁrst medieval logician was not Alcuin, but Theodulf. But
it turns out to be more plausible to retain the traditional dating of Dialectic to
786-90 [Bohn, 2004], and there is evidence, in any case that Theodulf made use
of it [Opus Caroli, 1998, 61; English version in Freeman, 2003, 88-9]. Despite the
diﬀerence in their main aims and interests as logicians, both Alcuin and Theodulf
are alike in attaching logic to the oﬃcial policy of the Carolingian Empire, as part
of a scheme of Christian education and the defence of Christian doctrine. Between
them, Alcuin and Theodulf map out the three main ways in which logic would be
valued throughout the early medieval ages: as one of the Liberal Arts, themselves
accepted as the beginnings of an ultimately Christian educational scheme; as a
tool in theology; and as a weapon in the ﬁght against heresy.
Theodulf, Alcuin and Alcuin’s pupils
A merging of the approaches of Alcuin and Theodulf may be indicated by the
contents of the earliest surviving logical manuscript, MS Rome, Biblioteca Padri
Maristi, A. II. 1, which belonged to an associate of Alcuin’s, Bishop Leidrad, who
died c. 814. Along with the Ten Categories, Porphyry’s Isagoge and extracts from
Alcuin’s Dialectic, it includes Boethius’s ﬁrst commentary on On Interpretation
and Apuleius’s Peri Hermeneias [Delisle, 1896]. The other piece of evidence that
survives about interest in logic at the turn of the ninth century very much reﬂects
Alcuin’s interests, perhaps because it is found in a set of passages connected with
his pupil, Candidus Wizo [ed., Marenbon, 1981, 151-66]. The logical pieces are
mostly linked to the Ten Categories (I, XIV, XV), though one (XII) takes an
Aristotelian passage from the theologian Claudianus Mamertus, and another (XIII)
may be taken from Boethius’s Categories commentary, though it can perhaps be
explained as an elaboration of Cassiodorus.
3.2
Eriugena and the Ninth Century
([Marenbon, 1981, 67-87])
John Scottus Eriugena, who worked in the 850s and 860s at the court of Charle-
magne’s grandson, Charles the Bald, dominates the logic, as well as the philosophy
and theology, of the ninth century. As in all his work, Eriugena’s logic shows a
strange mixture between ideas that ﬁt closely with the Latin tradition, and ideas
that are foreign to it, introduced by the fact that John learned Greek and was

26
John Marenbon
deeply inﬂuenced by Greek Christian Neoplatonism, combined with an intellec-
tual temperament inclined to take such elements to their extremes. In order to
appreciate this combination, it is important to place John in the context both
of his Latin predecessors and contemporaries, and the gloss traditions that be-
gin shortly after his lifetime; and to look at John’s probably earlier glosses on
Martianus Capella’s logic, as well as his masterpiece, the Periphyseon.
Macarius the Irishman and Ratramnus of Corbie on Universals ([Delhaye, 1950;
Erismann, Forthcoming-a])
An interesting discussion about logic from the time of Eriugena survives in an un-
usual setting. In the early 860s [Bouhot, 1976, 59], Ratramnus of Corbie addressed
his Book on the Soul (Liber de anima) to Bishop Odo of Beauvais [Ratramnus,
1952]. The indexRatramnus of Corbie!Book on the Soul Book is directed against
an anonymous monk of Saint-Germer de Fly, with whom Ratramnus had been
in correspondence, and who claims to be expounding the ideas of his master, an
otherwise unknown Irishman named Macarius. Their diﬀerence was over the un-
derstanding of a passage in Augustine’s On the Quantity of the Soul (xxxii, 69),
where the question is raised, but not resolved, of whether human souls are all
one, are many or are one and many. Macarius and his pupil (it is impossible to
disentangle their contributions), and even more decidedly Ratramnus, make the
issue a logical one: what is the nature of universals?
Macarius’s position has been described as Platonic realism [Delhaye, 1950, 19-
37] and as ‘hyper-Realism’ [Marenbon, 1981, 69]. In fact, it seems to be a rather
crude and incompletely worked out example of what Christophe Erismann has
labelled ‘immanent realism’ and traced back to Porphyry and the Greek Fathers
and through to the twelfth century [Erismann, 2007; forthcoming-b]. He holds
that ‘every human being is one human being through substance and every soul
is one soul through substance’ [Ratramnus of Corbie, 1952, 27:20-2, 29:25-6 and
elsewhere]. As Ratramnus reports, he says that ‘the human soul is a species, and
from this species particular souls descend, which are also contained by it so that
they can exist; for which reason if the species does not exist, nor can that into
which it is distributed exist’ [Ratramnus of Corbie, 1952, 130:20-3]. He looks to
a passage from Boethius’s Theological Treatises [V, 3; Boethius, 2000, 216:213-
217:220], where genera and species are said ‘just to exist’ (subsistunt tantum) and
individuals ‘not only to exist but also to exist as subjects (substant); genera and
species, Boethius goes on, do not need accidents in order to exist. To Macarius
and his pupil, this passage asserts the primacy of genera and species. Although
the idea is not explicitly worked out in what Ratramnus’s comments preserve,
Macarius seems to have held that particular members of a species are individuated
by attaching accidents to the species, which is one and the same in them all.
Ratramnus thinks that, so far from particulars deriving their existence from
species and genera, the basic constituents of the universe are particulars.
His
opponent has entirely misinterpreted Boethius. Just like genera and species, par-
ticulars (which he calls, oddly, propria) do not require accidents in order to exist:

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
27
rather, they make it possible for the accidents themselves to exist, by being sub-
jects for them. [Ratramnus of Corbie, 1952, 86:5-10] Particulars alone exist as
subjects, whereas the genera and species just ‘subsist’; and Ratramnus, giving an
interpretation of Boethius’s discussion of universals in the ﬁrst commentary to the
Isagoge, believes that this means that, in themselves, genera and species do not
exist in reality at all, but merely in thought:
[Boethius] therefore says that species and genera exist, when they are
considered in singulars, that is, when they are pronounced (enun-
ciantur) of particulars; but when they are universals, they are not
then said to exist, but just to be thought, because everything that is
universal consists in cogitation, that is, in rational consideration, not
in anything subsisting that could appear to the senses of the body.
[Ratramnus of Corbie, 1952, 78:3-10].
The controversy between Ratramnus and Macarius’s pupil shows that, even out-
side Eriugena’s learned courtly circle, logic was being studied on the basis of the
Ten Categories and some texts of Boethius, and that it retained the importance
in theological controversy it had in the days of Charlemagne. Macarius’s position
on universals is, arguably, in a basic form that which Eriugena would propose but
twist in his own direction, and Anselm would adopt two centuries later. Ratram-
nus’s response anticipates, in a crude form, the line of argument that would be
opposed to immanent realism when, in the early twelfth century, the theory of
universals became once again a matter for dispute.
Eriugena on Book IV of Martianus ([Marenbon, 1981, 123-4; 2005, 228-30; Von
Perger, 2005, 264-301])
In about 850, John Scottus Eriugena was asked by Archbishop Hincmar of Rheims
to write on predestination, against the views of Gottschalk. Although there are
no records of Eriugena’s life before then, there is reason to think that, at this
time and perhaps earlier, he was teaching the Liberal Arts, probably at Charles
the Bald’s court, and using Martianus Capella’s On the Marriage of Mercury and
Philology as his basic text — his critic, Prudentius of Troyes, remarks [Patrologia
Latina 115, 1294A] that his ‘Capella has led him into a labyrinth.’ The continuous
commentary on Martianus written by Remigius of Auxerre at the turn of the tenth
century draws explicitly on glosses by Eriugena, and from these mentions it is
possible to link the marginal glosses in various manuscripts with him. The glosses
in MS Paris BN 12960 cover the whole work, including Book IV on logic [John
Scottus Eriugena, 1939; for Book IV only, a better edition, giving two diﬀerent
forms of the text, is given in Von Perger, 2005, 281-301]. Although it is not certain
that every gloss on this book is Eriugena’s, it is very likely that many of them
go back to him; but there are great problems in trying to give an authentically
Eriugenian text: two redactions have been distinguished, but further research in
the manuscripts might well ﬁnd more versions, and none of them might correspond
exactly to what Eriugena originally wrote [Marenbon, 1981, 117-9; Moran, 1989,

28
John Marenbon
37-9; Von Perger, 2005, 274-7; and see below, 3.3, on the nature of early medieval
Gloss Traditions]. Parallels between ideas in the Periphyseon and those in the
glosses strengthen the case for attributing them to Eriugena, but also raise the
possibility that they were written in the same period as this work, rather than
much earlier in his career.
Martianus divides his exposition roughly equally between a presentation of the
material of the Isagoge and the Categories, on the one hand, and of that of On
Interpretation and syllogistic (from Apuleius), on the other. Eriugena shows the
direction of his interest by writing about twice as much on the ﬁrst half. Moreover,
the glosses on the second half show an intelligent grasp of the material, but not
the very individual perspectives he brings to the Isagoge and Categories. Two mo-
ments are of particular interest. When Martianus discusses substance [Martianus
Capella, 1983, 117:5], Eriugena writes
He is speaking about substance which is essence, that is hypostasis, not
usia, because usia is beyond all the Categories and does not receive any
accident. Then it descends to substance, that is to hypostasis; then
it receives accidents and has the ﬁrst place in the Categories. [John
Scottus Eriugena, 1939, 95:1-4; Von Perger, 2005, no. 82]
The word ‘usia’ (i.e. the Greek ousia) is not found in Martianus, but is the regular
term in the Ten Categories. But Eriugena uses it to make a distinction not found
in that work, nor indeed anywhere else in the tradition. Eriugena seems to be
thinking, just as he does in the Periphyseon, that there is some universal being,
distinct from the individual beings that receive accidents (such as Socrates and
Fido), from which particular things gain their existence. An earlier gloss [John
Scottus Eriugena, 1939, 84:10-17; Von Perger, 2005, nos.
68, 80] had already,
in line with the theory Eriugena develops in his major work, spoken of ‘essence
that comprehends all nature, by the participation in which eveything that exists
subsists and which is called the most general genus.’
Eriugena also develops a theory about qualities which takes them, not as Aris-
totelian accidental forms, but as Platonic Ideas. Glossing the lemma ‘Qualities
can receive <more and less> through the substances’ [Martianus Capella, 1983,
121:15-16] he explains:
that is, in the substances themselves, as if he were to say: when, in the
soul, you consider a notion of quality, because it is one and perfect, the
quality does not receive in itself more and less. Similarly, if you consider
the individual substance, I say that, because it is perfect and individual
in itself it does not receive more and less. But if <you consider> the
participation of quality through substances, you will ﬁnd more and
less. For there can be a certain substance that participates the same
quality more than another. (. . . )[John Scottus Eriugena, 1939, 97:34
— 98:4; Von Perger, 2005, no. 93]
In the case of human beings, Eriugena suggests [John Scottus Eriugena, 1939,
97:25-33; Von Perger, 2005, no. 92], imperfect participation should be seen in

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
29
terms of ‘reaching after’: a just or learned person really is perfectly just, and so
justice and learning in this case do not receive more or less. But a person can
reach after learning (and, presumably, justice), and this is what is meant when we
speak of people being more or less learned or just.
Logic in Eriugena’s ‘Periphyseon’: the project and its sources
It is not in the glosses to Martianus’s logical treatise, but in his long and am-
bitious theological dialogue, the Periphyseon (c. 862-6) [John Scottus Eriugena,
1996-2003] where Eriugena develops his views on logic most thoroughly. The Pe-
riphyseon treats of universal nature in its four diﬀerent forms: as uncreated and
creating (God) — Book I; as created and creating (the Primordial Forms, which
are similar to the Platonic world of Ideas) — Book II; created and not-creating
(the sensible world) — Book III; uncreated and uncreating (God, as that to which
all things return) — Books IV and V). Eriugena’s main way of articulating the
distinction between God and his creation in Book I is through an extended exam-
ination of whether God ﬁts any of the ten Categories. The theme is Augustinian,
and Alcuin had highlighted it (above, 3.1). Eriugena, however, will give a sharply
diﬀerent answer from Augustine: even with regard to the ﬁrst of the Categories —
substance or, as Eriugena, following the Ten Categories calls it, ousia — it is truer
to deny it of God than attribute it to him. But the innovativeness of Eriugena’s
presentation goes far beyond this daring theology: he has unusual ideas about the
inter-relation of the Categories, universals, particulars and the nature of ousia,
and the relationship between bodies and the system of Categories. But, before
considering these themes, it is worth considering what Eriugena’s sources might
have been: although his method diﬀered radically from the paraphrasing, cutting
and pasting of Alcuin, his ideas had some deﬁnite starting-points.
The number of logical works Eriugena can be shown deﬁnitely to have used,
from explicit references or deﬁnite parallels, is not large. He uses the Ten Cate-
gories extensively, but there is no sign that he knew Aristotle’s Categories itself
or Boethius’s commentary to it. He was also, understandably, inﬂuenced by Mar-
tianus, which he had taught, and which sometimes leaves its traces on his phras-
ing. Although scholars, rightly, have seen Porphyry’s Tree of genera and species,
interpreted in a highly realistic fashion, as a guiding principle of his thought,
there is scant evidence that Eriugena knew the text itself or either of Boethius’s
commentaries, rather than having gathered Porphyry’s main ideas through the
encyclopaedic accounts. One passage in Book III (702D-3B — references are to
the columns of the edition in Patrologia Latina 122, since they are preserved in
the later editions and translations) on substantial species has some loose parallels
with Boethius’s second Isagoge commentary [Boethius, 1906, 200], but nothing
close enough to make borrowing even a probability. (On Eriugena’s knowledge,
indirect and possibly direct, of the Isagoge, see [Erismann, 2004, 405-12].) Eriu-
gena has one, very passing reference to Aristotle’s On Interpretation, in Book II
(597C), where he refers readers to it in order to ﬁnd out about possibility and

30
John Marenbon
impossibility. Although so vague a reference seems second-hand, none of the ency-
clopaedic accounts indicate that Aristotle discusses modality in this treatise, and
so it does seem likely Eriugena had seen the text or one of Boethius commentaries.
There is also strong reason to think that Eriugena knew Boethius’s commentary
on Cicero’s Topics. Eriugena (491CD) identiﬁes enthymemes as being arguments
of the form ∼(p & ∼q); p; therefore q. This idea is not found in any of the
encyclopaedic accounts, nor in Cicero, but it is found in Boethius’s commentary
[Boethius, 1833, 364-5]. Other ninth-century scholars may have known more of
the logical sources: Porphyry’s Isagoge is found in Leidrad’s manuscript, for in-
stance; the Categories and On Interpretation, though rare, exist in ninth-century
manuscripts, as do both of Boethius’s commentaries on the Isagoge (the earliest
manuscript of the ﬁrst commentary, though, MS Paris BN 12958, is s. ix/x), the
Categories commentary and the ﬁrst commentary to On Interpretation. There is
little sign that Eriugena had read any of them.
Eriugena’s logic is, however, also inﬂuenced by some important non-logical
sources. Like Ratramnus of Corbie, he found logical material in Boethius’s The-
ological Treatises, but it was another theological tradition which most shaped his
thought. In the 850s, Eriugena had been given the task of translating the works
of (as it was thought) Dionysius the Areopagite into Latin, and he went on to use
his skills to translate works by Maximus (the Diﬃculties to John (Ambigua ad
Johannem) and To Thalassius) and Gregory of Nyssa (On the Making of Man).
The strongly negative theology evident in Eriugena’s treatment of the Categories
comes from this tradition, and Eriugena also weaves other ideas from Maximus
and Gregory into his treatment of the concepts he took from the Ten Categories
and the logical tradition.
Especially important is the approach to Porphyry’s
tree of genera and species mediated to him by Maximus [Erismann, 2004, 411-2;
Zachhuber, 2005, 162-7].
Eriugena on the scheme of the Categories ([Marenbon, 2005a, 230-1; Von Perger,
2005, 239-64])
In presenting the Categories, Eriugena is not content to list them and explain why
none is applicable to God. He also suggests a number of diﬀerent ways of dividing
them up into larger groups, and of relating them to each other. Let us consider two
of these divisions (a fuller account of the divisions is found in [Von Perger, 2005]).
One of them shows just how idiosyncratic Eriugena is prepared to be in following
through his ideas about ousia, which will be examined below. The division (471C-
2A) is between Categories that are in ousia, and so can be considered its accidents
— quality, relation, condition (habitus), action and being-acted-on — and the
others, which are around ousia like, Eriugena says, limits set for it, whilst it is
like a centre around which they revolve and which they require in order to exist.
While the idea of distinguishing between Categories inside and outside ousia comes
from the Ten Categories [Aristotle, 1961a, 144:21 — 155:6], and there are echoes
of Maximus the Confessor [Diﬃculties to John 30 — in Eriugena’s translation:
Maximus the Confessor, 1988, 167:4 — 168:25], the actual division that Eriugena

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
31
makes is his own. Moreover, it turns out that this is not at all intended to be
a neat division. Another of Eriugena’s novel views is that condition (habitus),
ousia itself, quantity and quality can each be found in all the other Categories
(466A-8B), because, for instance, there is a condition with regard to relationship
between big, small and medium in the Category of quantity, or of father and son
(in the Category of relation) to each other; and one can ask, for instance, ‘What
kind of (qualis) relation?’, ‘What kind of being-acted-on?’ There are, therefore,
varieties of quality and condition that are not in ousia, and Eriugena adds that
relation too can be outside ousia; indeed, it is inside ousia only when it is the
relation between genera and species.
Another division (469A) is between those Categories that are at rest (in statu)
— ousia, quantity, being-in-a-position (situs) and place — and those that are in
motion (in motu) — quality, relation, condition, time, acting, being-acted-upon.
Although these divisions are not altogether intuitively obvious, Eriugena explains
them (469B-70D), calling upon various assumptions he expects his readers to share
or at least accept: for instance, quantity is at rest because everything is trying to
reach its perfect quantity and remain there in it. Von Perger [2005, 246] sees one of
the points behind Eriugena’s multiplying of diﬀerent schemes — schemes that agree
neither with each other nor with the divisions put forward, in their discussions of
God and the Categories by Augustine and Boethius — as an attempt to show that
no matter how the Categories are grouped, they give no knowledge of God.
A more straightforward consequence of grouping the Categories, however, is
that, contrary to Aristotle, they will no longer be the most universal ways of
dividing up things. As Eriugena puts it:
. . .
I have said that more diligent research can ﬁnd some things in
nature besides what is comprehended by the ten Categories — for these
things have been found by the philosophers — lest someone of limited
abilities should think that the careful investigation of things could not
go beyond the number of Categories mentioned before. For there is a
more general classiﬁcation (ratio) of their genera — that they are in
motion and rest. Further, rest and motion are collected by universal
essence, which lets itself be divided to inﬁnity. For the substance which
has the ﬁrst place in the Categories, is ﬁnite and subject to accidents,
but universal essence receives no accidents in itself. Indeed, it is capable
of accidents in its subdivisions extending as far as the individuals, but
it in itself is simple and not subject to accidents. (597A)
Eriugena goes on to suggest that even the division he has just suggested is not
comprehensive, because ‘no one of those who correctly philosophize doubts that
possible things and impossible things should be counted in the number of things’
(597B), and he refers his readers (as noted above) to Aristotle’s ‘Peri ermenias’.
This is an astonishing moment in modal theory, since, at a period when a statistical
account of possibility and necessity in temporal terms was normal, Eriugena in a
stroke conjures up the idea of innumerable possible and even, more strangely,

32
John Marenbon
impossible worlds. But for his broader discussion of logic and the metaphysics he
draws from it, what is more important is the division he makes between two sorts
of substance or essence (parallel to the distinction made in the Martianus glosses).
On the one hand, there is the ﬁrst of the Categories, which he calls ‘substance’
and considers as a concrete individual, much in the way that ﬁrst substances are
envisaged in the Aristotelian logical tradition: it is ‘ﬁnite and subject to accidents’.
On the other hand, there is ‘universal essence’, which is seen as a super-super-
Category, bringing together below it even the super-Categories of motion and
rest.
Ousia, universals and bodies in Eriugena ([Eswein, 1930; Marenbon, 1980; Eris-
mann, 2002; 2004; Kavanagh, 2005; Hochschild, 2007; Erismann, 2007; Erismann,
forthcoming-a])
What is the relation between substance and universal essence? It seems to be one
of universal to particular, but of a rather special kind. We should say, Eriugena
argues (506BC) ‘that from the essence which is created one and universal in all
things and is common to all things and, because it belongs to all of those which
participate in it, is said to be proper to none of the singulars which participate in
it, there ﬂows by natural progression a certain proper substance, which belongs to
none other except that to which it belongs alone.’
What Eriugena has in mind is clariﬁed by his more general comments on partic-
ulars and universals. In his view (471A), a species is just ‘the unity of numbers (i.e.
numbered things = particulars)’ and particulars just ‘the plurality of their species’,
and so there is really no distinction ‘in nature’ between a subject (for instance,
Cicero) and what is ‘said of a subject’ (de subiecto: for instance, human being) —
that is to say, between primary and secondary substances — ‘except that one is in
number and the other in species’. Underlying this assertion is the view that ‘the
species is whole and one in its particulars (numeri) and the particulars are one
individual in the species.’ These surprising statements are, in fact, just the result
of taking to its logical consequences a type of non-Platonic, immanent realism
that seems to have been espoused by Ratramnus’s opponent (see above, pp. 26–
27) and has been traced back through the Greek Neoplatonic tradition [Erismann,
2004; Erismann, forthcoming-a]. If particulars are thought to be diﬀerentiated
only by accidents, then, regarded apart from any of their accidents, they are just
their species; and the same reasoning applies to species, regarded apart from their
diﬀerentiae, which are then just their genera. Eriugena goes somewhat beyond
the ambit of this reasoning, however, by seeing these relationships not merely as
an analysis of how the world really is, but as an account of its production. So
he glosses Genesis 1, xxiv, ‘Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his
kind (genus)’: ‘First he puts down the genus, because in it all the species are
contained and are one, and it is divided into them, and it is multiplied through
general forms and most special species’ (748C; see also 529BC). Porphyry’s tree is
seen — as he presents it explicitly in the preface to his translation of Maximus’s
Ambigua [Maximus the Confessor,1988, 3-4] — as a ‘procession’ coming from God,

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
33
a ‘multiplication’ of God’s goodness.
At the top of this tree is ousia, and the whole of creation is presented as ‘a
division and multiplication’ of it into genera and species (869A). Any particular of
a natural kind, such as Socrates, is therefore an ousia in the Aristotelian sense of
being a substance that acts as a subject for accidents, but it is also, when stripped
of every addition (accidents and diﬀerentiae), and so when, as Eriugena would see
it, traced back to its origins, ousia in the sense of universal essence. Were Eriugena
presenting a purely logical analysis of generic and speciﬁc relations, designed to
clarify predication, then he would certainly be highly confused to suggest that
ousia could be regarded as a universal in this way. But since he is, rather, using
Porphyry’s tree to describe a process of creative emanation, his way of thinking
makes good sense in its own terms. The existence of things is, for him, a process
of speciﬁcation and particularization. The true reality, God, is, he insists, non-
existent because utterly unbounded and so incomprehensible even to himself. God
makes himself manifest as the universe by undergoing a whole series of restrictions,
into being and then into types of being and ultimately into particulars.
The particulars or ousiai are, however, just universal essence seen from the
perspective of its greatest multiplicity. They are not, Eriugena insists, at all the
same as bodies. The sharp distinction is obvious, he points out (491C-2B), from
the way, that ousia is not divided up into parts but is the same in all humans as in
one, whereas bodies are divisible into parts that are not identical with the whole.
Bodies, he explains (492B–4A), are produced from ousia, which is incorporeal,
and from quantity and quality and other accidents, which are also, themselves,
incorporeal. The visible body which results is not a quantity or a quality but
a quantum and a quale. Eriugena’s idea seems to be that any body is a partic-
ular exempliﬁcation of a set of universal accidents (for instance, in the case of
Socrates, six-foot-tall, ruddy-complexioned, sitting down and wearing a fetching
beret).
Those accidents would not, however, produce a natural body on their
own, though accidents of quantity can produce a geometrical body — the dia-
grammatic, designation of a certain shape; they need to be conjoined with ousia
(493C-4A). Does this mean, then, that bodies are the principle of individuation?
Not exactly, since for Eriugena ousia is never individuated. Rather, it is a feature
of reality, as it comes forth from universal being (which heads the hierarchy not
just of substance but of accidents) that, because of the combination of universal,
incorporeal accidents and ousia that has been speciﬁed into most speciﬁc species,
there come into existence natural bodies, the only particular things in the universe.
[Erismann, forthcoming-a].
The Character of Eriugena’s Logic
There are many other themes related to Eriugena’s view of ousia: for example,
there is the position of ousia as one of the primordial causes, and there is the
long and fascinating discussion of place and time (esp. 474B-89B) in which, turn-
ing to the rhetorical idea of loci [cf. Kavanagh, 2003], he develops the idea of

34
John Marenbon
these Categories as deﬁnitions of things and then elaborates a theory in which, by
knowing things, humans create them [Gregory, 1963; Cristiani, 1973]. Although
it is certainly open to wonder whether the many threads in Eriugena’s discussion
really link together into an entirely coherent theory [for a hyper-critical, and often
ill-judged approach, see Marenbon, 1981, 72-87; Marenbon, 1980 (written later)],
a charitable interpretation reveals a powerful line of thought, given a certain set
of assumptions, especially about the immanence of universals.
In one sense, Eriugena followed an approach to logic that had been pioneered
by Alcuin, who looked back to Augustine and Boethius — one which centred
around the ten Categories and their use as a way of deﬁning the relations be-
tween God and created things. But he developed it to a degree and in a direction
that their work would not have led anyone to anticipate. As Abelard and Gilbert
of Poitiers would do, nearly three hundred years later, he used ideas stemming
from Aristotle’s Categories to construct a metaphysics. But whereas the twelfth-
century writers developed their metaphysical views within Boethius’s Aristotelian
approach to Aristotelian logic, Eriugena, whose knowledge of Boethius’s logic was
slight, elaborated his metaphysics under the predominant inﬂuence of the Greek
Christian Neoplatonic texts he had translated. An intellectual temperament that
valued both paradox and systematic coherence, and did not ﬁnd them incompat-
ible, led him to take this enterprise to an impressive if sometimes bewildering
extreme. His may be perhaps the one example of a ‘Platonic logic’ [Erismann,
2007] in the Middle Ages.
3.3
The Gloss Traditions
([Marenbon, 1981, 116-38; Marenbon, 1997a; Marenbon, 2000b])
As seen above, Eriugena seems to have taught logic using Book IV of Martianus
as his text-book, and his teaching is recorded, at least partially, in glosses. In
the years after Eriugena, there is a Gloss Tradition to Martianus. The concept of
a ‘Gloss Tradition’ needs explanation. Many manuscripts from the ninth to the
eleventh centuries have extensive annotations in the margins and between their
lines. Sometimes text and annotations have been copied together; sometimes the
annotations have been added — and in some cases apparently at diﬀerent stages.
It is rare that the glosses in any one manuscript are exactly the same as those in
another, but it is often possible to distinguish one or more than one tradition of
glosses to a particular work, most of which occur in fairly similar form in a whole
group of manuscripts, although each individual manuscript will have its peculiar
glosses and omissions.
Besides the glosses to Book IV of Martianus, there are two other important early
medieval logical gloss traditions — on the most popular of all the logical texts at
this period, the Ten Categories and also on the Isagoge. The other core logical
texts available — the Categories in Boethius’s translation and On Interpretation
did not generate Gloss Traditions, but isolated glosses in individual manuscripts
provide valuable evidence about logical ideas and study.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
35
A certain counter-balance to the anonymity of glossed manuscripts is provided
by the fact that they can often be localized to a particular monastery. Careful
study could build up a picture of what logical teaching went on in each of the
notable monastic centres. In the case of one monastery, St Gall, there is already
some interesting evidence. Not only does an exceptional glossed manuscript of the
Ten Categories (see below) originate from there; there are also a series of logical
passages [Piper, 1882] that can probably be dated to the ninth century [De Rijk,
1963] which, like the glossed manuscript, combine a straightforward interest in
mastering logical doctrine with an enthusiasm for Eriugenian ideas.
The Gloss Tradition to Martianus Capella, Book IV
Although the early medieval manuscripts and glosses to Martianus have been
scrupulously catalogued [Leonardi, 1959, 1960], the Gloss Tradition has not yet
been fully investigated and disentangled. Remigius of Auxerre’s continuous com-
mentary [Remigius of Auxerre, 1965] draws both on the set of glosses associ-
ated with Eriugena and on another tradition, perhaps linked to Heiric of Auxerre
[Pseudo-Dunchad, 1944 — a partial edition from one MS]. There is little evidence
of independent logical thinking; some of what Eriugena wrote is transmitted, and
some garbled — for example, the gloss on ‘What is substance?’ reads:
He deﬁnes substance not essence, that is not hypostasis but usia, be-
cause hypostasis is beyond all the Categories and receives no accident.
Then he descends to usia, that is to substance, which can receive ac-
cidents and has primacy in the ten Categories.
Substance and the
accident of substance are predicated of this, that is of substance, in as
many ways. [Remigius of Auxerre, 1965, I, 32:12-16]
Glosses to the ‘Ten Categories’
Not surprisingly given its popularity, it is the Ten Categories which oﬀers the
most important of the early medieval Gloss Traditions [Marenbon, 1981, 185-206
— partial edition], found in nearly twenty manuscripts. Two main strands can
be distinguished. There is the Eriugenian strand — glosses which put forward
distinctively Eriugenian ideas or use Eriugenian language.
And there are the
standard glosses, each found in many of the manuscripts. One manuscript, from
the later ninth century, MS Milan Ambrosiana B71 sup., contains almost entirely
Eriugenian glosses.
Two other manuscripts, MS Saint Gall 274, also from the
second half of the ninth century and MS Paris BN 12949 (early tenth century)
mix some of these Eriugenian glosses with the standard (and some other) material.
Among the standard glosses, there are still traces of Eriugenian material.
Many of the Eriugenian glosses seem to be the product of someone whose mind
is well stocked with motifs and phrases from the Periphyseon who has set about
the task of commenting the Ten Categories after a pint too many; marginalia, but
not perhaps to the history of logic. A more sober example of this style is a gloss

36
John Marenbon
entitled ‘On Usia’ [Marenbon, 1981, 196; no. XIII]. We are immediately told that
usia is beyond human understanding and ‘is better placed in nothing, because
it presents itself stretching beyond our usia and makes God himself’. ‘Nothing’
renders us a truer account of it than any predication. Another of these glosses
[Marenbon, 1981, 202; no. XXIII] talks of usiae in the plural, as Eriugena also
does, to mean particular substances. Whereas usiae can be seen and understood
without accidents, accidents can be understood apart from a body only in the mind
— the glossator seems here to have in mind the type of mathematical abstraction
spoken about by Boethius in his second commentary on the Isagoge. The gloss
then goes on to explain, in line with the ideas of the Periphyseon, that accidents
are the cause of bodies. The lack of genuinely logical interest and concern with
metaphysical or theological questions is typical of this strand of glosses.
Looking at the standard glosses, and at how this Gloss Tradition evolves from
the ninth to the eleventh century, the impression is of a gradual turning away from
extrinsic theological and metaphysical concerns and an attempt to understand the
letter of the text, as witnessed by glosses that put the paraphraser’s (already sim-
pliﬁed) points in elementary terms. The more sophisticated questions about the
doctrine of Categories, raised in the Greek commentary tradition and transmitted
by Boethius, do not ﬁgure in the standard Ten Categories glosses. There is one
exception. In MS Saint Gall 274, Eriugenian material and standard glosses are
joined by some glosses peculiar to this manuscript, which show that this glossator
did know Boethius’s commentary on the Categories and was using it to help un-
derstand the pseudo-Augustinian paraphrase. He takes careful note, for instance,
of Boethius’s description of the subject-matter of the treatise as the utterances
that signify things in that they are signiﬁcant [cf. Marenbon, 1997a, 28-9].
The ‘Isagoge’
According to Yukio Iwakuma [his information is presented in Marenbon, 2000b,
99], the early medieval Gloss Tradition on the Isagoge has two strands, each found
in full form in two manuscripts, while one late-ish (11th-12th-century) manuscript
combines the two. The glosses belonging to one strand have been edited in full from
MS Paris BN 12949 [Von Waltersharsen and Baeumker, 1924], under attribution
to a certain ‘Icpa’, because a line in the explicit reads ‘I, Icpa|||| , wrote this
little book, glossing it in some way’. More recent research [Jeauneau, 1985] has
shown that the name is that of ‘Israel’ (written in Greek letters), a tenth-century
grammarian of Irish origin, whose interests can be seen more widely in this richly
annotated manuscript that includes a set of Ten Categories glosses containing
the Eriugenian strand. The Isagoge glosses themselves are simply a patchwork of
quotations, especially from both of Boethius’s commentaries, though Macrobius’s
Commentary on the Somnium Scipionis, Isidore of Seville, Alcuin’s Dialectica and
the Ten Categories glosses are also used. The glosses are well chosen to illustrate
the text, but no individual approach to the material emerges from them.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
37
Glosses to the ‘Categories’ and ‘On Interpretation’
There is no Gloss Tradition for the text of Aristotle’s own Categories, nor for On
Interpretation, but individual manuscripts contain some glosses. For example, MS
Paris BN 2788 (end of tenth century), which contains Boethius’s genuine trans-
lation of the Categories and MS Cologne Dombibliothek 191 (eleventh century),
containing the more widely available composite translation, probably made up
from two versions both by Boethius (cf. above, p. 8), both have glosses which
draw from Boethius’s commentary.
Glosses to On Interpretation are exceedingly rare, but one, in Leiden Voss. lat.
F 70 (tenth century), to Chapter 9, is very interesting:
Whatever exists which is impossible not to exist, always exists. What-
ever is impossible to exist, always does not exist. And whatever exists
that is possible not to exist, does not always exist. Whatever exists
that is possible to exist, does not always not exist. Now two are eternal
and two temporal. For ﬁre, which is never cold, always heats. There-
fore it [heat] is always and eternally in it, but the other [cold] is always
absent. Now, of those that are temporal, some are substantially, some
accidentally. And substantially not always is whatever is corrupted,
and also not always is whatever is generated. What accidentally does
not always exist and does not always not exist is whatever is varied
by the changeability of some accident in such a way that it is changed
from existence into non-existence or from non-existence into existence.
These two therefore are contingents, because they happen one way or
another (utrumlibet). The two above, however, are from simple neces-
sity and can never come about contingently. [Latin text: Marenbon,
1997a, 30, n. 31]
Although the ideas here can be found in Boethius’s commentaries, this comment
is exceptionally clear-minded in its analysis of modality in terms of time — the
statistical view that was one of the dominant models in antiquity and the earlier
Middle Ages [Knuuttila, 1993, 1-62].
Gloss Traditions and logic within medieval education
The existence of logical Gloss Traditions (on De Nuptiis IV, the Ten Categories
and the Isagoge) is important, not for any logical innovations, since they contain
none, but for two other reasons. First, it shows that logic had a full part in the
course of studies followed in this period mainly in monastery schools. Second, the
fullest tradition, that of the glosses to the Ten Categories, shows how scholars
turned away from the Eriugenian interests of the ninth century to concentrate on
trying to assimilate basic Aristotelian logic. This change of direction is born out
by the wider developments, beginning in the year just before 1000, which we shall
now consider.

38
John Marenbon
4
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A BOETHIAN TRADITION
([Minio-Paluello, 1971])
The change in Latin logic shortly before the turn of the millennium can be thought
of as the founding of a Boethian tradition of logic, which was then dominant until at
least the mid-twelfth century. Laurenzio Minio-Paluello (1971) called it, rather ‘the
second phase in the rediscovery of Aristotle and Boethius’, but it is more revealing
to see it both as speciﬁcally Boethian and, in being such, as a new development
rather than merely a ‘second phase’. Certainly, the new tradition is Aristotelian,
in that two books of the Organon, the Categories and On Interpretation, occupy
an important place, and it is Neoplatonic, in that Porphyry’s Isagoge is read,
as in the late ancient schools, as an
introduction to the study of logic; but,
even more strikingly, it reﬂects Boethius’s particular version of logic as practised
by the Neoplatonists, a version heavily indebted to Porphyry and following his
tendency to stick to Aristotelian views within logic.
Not only were the texts
of Aristotle and Porphyry read in Boethius’s translations and studied using his
commentaries; Boethius’s monographs were themselves the authoritative texts for
half the curriculum. And, despite the use to a very small extent of his translations
and commentaries in the previous two centuries, this Boethian tradition came
into being only from the late tenth century: the earliest medieval logic, as the
sections above have shown, was not strongly inﬂuenced by Boethius, but by the
Ten Categories, the encyclopaedic accounts and even Apuleius.
One of the most telling signs of the new approach is the gradual replacement of
the Ten Categories by Boethius’s translation of Aristotle’s text (usually read in
the so-called composite version: see above, p. 8). Whereas half of all the surviving
manuscripts of the Ten Categories date from before c. 1000, only three or four of
the 300 odd medieval copies of Aristotle’s text in translation date from that period.
Copies of the Boethian translation are found at Chartres, Fleury and St Gall
around 1000 and, from the eleventh century there remain 25 manuscripts of the
translation, around 20 of Boethius’ commentary, and just 6 of the Ten Categories
[Minio-Paluello, 1971, 754-5]. In the case of On Interpretation, although there is no
dramatic rise in the number of manuscripts of the text, the eight eleventh-century
manuscripts of the second commentary, as compared to just three from earlier,
indicate that scholars are now studying the work seriously. The letter written by
Gunzo of Novara to the monks of Reichenau in 965 — a letter which is designed
almost entirely to show oﬀGunzo’s erudition — gives a good indication of the
position, in that he comments that his contemporaries ‘have hardly tried out or
have failed to penetrate’ [Gunzo of Novara, 1958, 37:14-15] the obscurity of On
Interpretation, but he makes sure to cite it, and Boethius’s second commentary,
frequently.
The most striking change was the reception of Boethius’s monographs — on
syllogistic, division and topical diﬀerentiae (along with Victorinus’s treatise on
deﬁnition misattributed to Boethius). A Fleury manuscript from the later tenth
century (now split: MS Orleans Bib. mun. 267 and MS Paris BNF n. acq. lat.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
39
1611), containing the whole set of monographs, seems (from a note it contains)
to have this material from a collection of Boethius’s works put together in Con-
stantinople in the 520s [Van de Vyver, 1935, 131-2]. Whether (as most scholars
believe) the exemplar was brought to Europe from Byzantium in the tenth century,
or it was simply studied and copied for the ﬁrst time in this period, this redis-
covery would have an important eﬀect on how logic was studied. With regard to
syllogistic, both surviving manuscripts and library catalogues show that, after the
tenth century, there was a turn from using Apuelian theory (directly from his Peri
Hermeneias, or indirectly from the encyclopaedias) to using Boethius’s treatises
[Sullivan, 1967, 193-203]. The theory of the Topics, now much more conveniently
available in the treatise On Topical diﬀerentiae than before through the commen-
tary on Cicero and the encyclopaedic accounts, would become one of logicians’
main concerns by the twelfth century.
The three outstanding logicians of the period are also those in whom the new
developments can be seen with especial clarity: tentatively in Notker of St Gall,
more deﬁnitely in Gerbert of Aurillac and most obviously in Abbo of Fleury.
4.1
Notker of St Gall
St Gall had been an important centre for logic since the ninth century (see above,
p. 36). Notker Labeo (c. 950–1022) continued this tradition, especially within his
project of translating central school-texts into the vernacular, Old High German.
Of the four works he chose to translate, two were logical — a mark of the promi-
nence of the subject in the curriculum, especially since the other two translations
(Books I and II of Martianus Capella; Boethius’s Consolation) were general philo-
sophical works rather than texts of a particular discipline. Moreover, the two texts
were both Aristotle: the Categories and On Interpretation, and to the German
version some Latin glosses, mainly based on Boethius’s commentaries, are added
[Notker the German, 1972; 1975]. Notker is therefore, in this way, a pioneer of the
new Boethian logic.
Yet the most sophisticated of the writings attributed to him, On Syllogisms
[Piper, 1882, 597-622], is based closely on works known since the ninth century:
Apuleius’s Periermenias for categorical syllogisms, and, for the hypothetical syl-
logisms, Boethius’s commentary on Cicero’s Topics and Martianus Capella. By
basing himself ultimately on Cicero, Notker produces an account a little nearer
the Stoics than he could have found in On Hypothetical Syllogisms, had he known
it — and he even copies [Notker, 1882, 610-11] from Martianus Capella (cf. p. 6)
a presentation of the modes using numbers. But his conception of hypothetical
syllogisms is thoroughly Boethian, as his adopting Boethius’s deviant form of the
third mode indicates. He even elaborates this third mode, because he thinks its
major premiss can be formed by preposing a negation to a contradiction of all four
forms:- (1) ‘If it is day, it is night’; (2) ‘If it is not day, it is not night’; (3) ‘If it is
day, it is not light’; (4) ‘If it is not day, it is light.’ He has given some thought to
how this mode ‘arises from the ﬁrst two’:

40
John Marenbon
For day and light are connected to each other, and for this reason the
true propositions of the ﬁrst and second modes are: ‘If it is day, it
is light’.
Then, if someone wants to destroy the truth by adding a
negation, saying, ‘If it is day, it is not light’, the person who adds a
second negation, saying ‘Not if it is day, it is not light’ returns it again
to truth. The ﬁrst two <modes>, therefore, are through the link of
what naturally cohere together (e.g. ‘if it is day, it is light’). The third
through the negation of opposites: e.g. it cannot be that it is day and
it is not light. [Notker, 1882, 612-3]
And another indication of the place of St Gall in this movement is a commentary
probably from the late tenth century on the Isagoge and Categories [Excerpta
Isagogarum, 1995], which is mostly extracted from Boethius’s commentaries (for
the Isagoge, both the ﬁrst and second are used), but takes the form of a dialogue.
Despite the fact that one of the manuscripts links this commentary with Fleury, in
its earliest form it seems most probably to come from St Gall [Marenbon, 1997a,
26, n. 22]. The commentary also has links with the earlier tradition, though, in
the form of material taken from Alcuin, Boethius’s commentary on Cicero’s Topics
and the Ten Categories [Excerpta Isagogarum, 1995].
4.2
Gerbert of Aurillac
The most famous, by far, of the pioneering logicians of the late tenth century
was Gerbert of Aurillac, who taught at Rheims from 972 until he became the
archbishop there in 991, ending his life as Pope Sylvester (999-1003). There is
an account of his teaching at Rheims by his pupil Richer, which gives some very
precise details:
He ran through dialectic following the order of the books and unravelled
their meaning in clear words. For ﬁrst <he took> the ‘isagoges’, that
is, the Introductions, of Porphyry, using the translation by Victorinus,
the Orator, and then he also explained them according to Boethius.
Following on from this, he expounded Aristotle’s book of the ‘Cate-
gories’, that is, of the predicaments. And he very skilfully showed how
to work at the Periermenias, that is, the book on interpretation. Then
he also made his listeners know about the topics, that is, the seats of
arguments, translated by Cicero from Greek into Latin, and explained
by the Consul Boethius in a commentary of six books. He foresaw
what was useful for the progress of teachers of rhetoric, and he also
usefully lectured on and extracted the meaning from the four books
De topicis diﬀerentiis, the two on categorical syllogisms, the three on
hypothetical <syllogisms>, the one on deﬁnitions and again the one
on divisions. [III, 46-7; Richer, 1877, 101]
Since Richer wrote his account in the years immediately after Gerbert became
archbishop, it should give a faithful account of what Gerbert taught, at least at

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
41
the end of his time as a schoolmaster. If so, then his curriculum seems, then, to
have been a fully Boethian one, close to what would be the norm in the twelfth
century, though with a few peculiarities, such as the use of Victorinus’s translation
of the Isagoge (a sign, perhaps, that it was the ﬁrst of Boethius’s two commen-
taries on the work Gerbert turned to). There is no earlier mention of a medieval
logician teaching using all of Boethius’s monographs (and the treatise on deﬁni-
tion by Victorinus, usually misattributed to Boethius), though it is striking that
Cicero’s Topics with Boethius’s commentary (available since the ninth century) is
mentioned in ﬁrst place, and the De topicis diﬀerentiis, which would become the
main textbook, only afterwards.
No records of Gerbert’s lectures on Porphyry, Aristotle and Boethius survive.
His one logical work is a short treatise called De rationale et ratione uti [Gerbert,
1867, 297-310], that is to say, a discussion of the meaning of the terms ‘rational’
and ‘to use reason’ as used by Porphyry when he discusses what features genera
and diﬀerentiae have in common.
The point at issue was that, when we say
‘What is rational uses reason’, an apparently true proposition, we seem to be
saying something false, since not everything that is rational is actually using its
reason. The basis of the problem is an ambiguity of the kind that could lie at
the basis of the sort of sophisms which twelfth-century and which later logicians
enjoyed unravelling. Gerbert’s approach is less direct, but he succeeds in showing
up the logical inadequacies of those contemporaries who had raised this diﬃculty
and showing oﬀhis own knowledge of Boethius commentaries on the Isagoge and
On Interpretation.
4.3
Abbo of Fleury
([Van de Vyver, 1935; Abbo of Fleury, 1997: Einleitung; Schupp, 2004])
Abbo led a far quieter life than Gerbert, mostly at the monastery of Fleury, which
he entered shortly after his birth in c. 945. He studied in Paris and Rheims, and
spent a short period in England (985-7); in 988 he became Abbot of Fleury. His
logical work was therefore probably done in the 970s and early 980s, at much the
same time as Gerbert’s.
Although there is no explicit record, as in Gerbert’s case, that Abbo taught
the whole Boethian logical curriculum, the manuscript evidence suggests that he
at least knew the range of Boethius’s monographs, since the earliest manuscript
which contains the treatises, mentioned above, also contains Abbo’s works on
categorical and hypothetical syllogisms and was written at Fleury in his lifetime.
These two treatises are themselves the very best illustrations of the change in the
curriculum, since each looks both backwards to the mainly non-Boethian sources
that had been dominant, and forward, by basing itself to a great extent on Boethius
and Aristotle. So, in the treatise on categorical syllogisms [Abbo of Fleury, 1966,
1-64], he uses mainly On Interpretation and Boethius’s commentaries, but he
also draws on Apuleius, and he explicitly compares the two sources, putting their
squares of opposition and their moods of the syllogism side by side.
Abbo is

42
John Marenbon
not, then, just a copier of authoritative logical texts, but someone who regards
them inquisitively.
And he produces some surprises.
One is his view that all
syllogisms, both categorical and hypothetical, are ‘like a lifeless body’ without
the topics [Abbo of Fleury, 1966, 64:14-17]. Another is a discussion of necessity
and possibility in which he ends by saying that, although Aristotle holds that
substances are susceptible to contraries, these contraries are merely what appear
to the senses: understood in themselves, substances are no more susceptible to
one contrary than another, and ‘in its nature ﬁre is no more hot than cold’ [Abbo
of Fleury, 1966, 62:25-35].
The treatise on hypothetical syllogisms [Abbo of Fleury, 1997] similarly com-
bines with other material a newly discovered Boethian source On Hypothetical
Syllogisms, which provides the matter for the ﬁrst eight chapters. In the ninth,
he gives, as ‘seven general rules’ for hypothetical syllogisms, the doctrine of the
seven modes which stems, ultimately, from the Stoic indemonstrables. Although
Boethius, and perhaps Victorinus, had already seen these as modes of hypothetical
syllogisms, Abbo goes further by claiming explicitly that all the diﬀerent types of
hypothetical syllogism discussed, following Boethius’s treatise on them, in the pre-
vious chapters can be reduced to these seven forms [Abbo of Fleury, 1997,102:1-15].
The source for the list of modes itself is not obvious. Cicero’s Topics, Martianus
Capella, Cassiodore and Isidore all provide the basic form of this list. But Abbo’s
list shares with Boethius’s commentary on the Topics, and Notker’s On Syllogisms,
the peculiarity (see above, pp. 17–18, 39–40) of giving the third mode with a con-
ditional ﬁrst premiss — for instance: ‘Not if it is a human, it is not an animal;
but it is a human; therefore it is an animal’ [Abbo of Fleury, 1997, 94:23-5]. And
he explains what Boethius had in mind better than Boethius himself had done:
‘The meaning of these propositions is that if a human exists, it cannot be that he
is not an animal; that is, that if there is a human, it is impossible that there is
not an animal.’ Yet Abbo’s editor, Franz Schupp, who has brought to light the
interesting combination of the two types of doctrine on hypothetical syllogism,
considers that Boethius’s commentary is not the source for this chapter, and that
Abbo probably borrowed it wholesale from some source later than Boethius and,
indeed, than Isidore of Seville. The main reason for thinking so is that, near the
end [Abbo of Fleury, 1997, 100-1], Abbo puts forward a distinction between the
Latin way of regarding the modes — he names Cicero, Victorinus and Isidore —
and the Greek way, as espoused by Eudemus and ‘other Greek authors’: the Latins
consider that modes 4–7 can only be constructed if the terms of the major premiss
are immediate contraries (they are such that everything within their ﬁeld of ap-
plicability is one or the other and not both); the Greeks disagree. Abbo certainly
could not have taken this (very dubious) information from Boethius or any other
source we know, but is that enough to show that this very independently-minded
author was simply copying?

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
43
5
THE ELEVENTH CENTURY: LOGIC AND THEOLOGY
From the evidence of manuscripts copied, and especially from the position that
had been reached by c. 1100, it is clear the eleventh century was a time when the
developments in logic of the later tenth century became widespread and were taken
further. By the end of the century, the thorough study of the core texts of the logica
vetus — Porphyry’s Isagoge, Aristotle’s Categories and On Interpretation, and
Boethius’s text-books on categorical and hypothetical syllogisms, division and the
topics — had become established, at least at the leading schools, and logicians were
launching themselves into the interpretative problems stimulated by Boethius’s
commentaries and by the parallels and discordances with the Stoic semantics found
in Priscian’s Grammatical Institutions (Institutiones grammaticae), a work much
studied in this period. There is, however, a surprising lack of purely logical texts
that can be dated to the eleventh century. Garlandus’s Dialectic, once dated to
before 1050, is now recognized as the work of Garlandus of Besan¸con, and may well
have been written later than 1110 or even than 1120. In cataloguing the continuous
commentaries to the Isagoge, Categories and On Interpretation, I found none for
which there is compelling evidence of its being written before 1100 [Marenbon,
2000b]; Green-Pedersen [1984, 147-53, 418-9] suggests that two or three surviving
commentaries on De topicis diﬀerentiis may be a few years earlier, but without
decisive proof. Since, as the next chapter will explain, these commentaries are
layered compositions, it is extremely probable that the earliest layer or layers go
back to before the time of the earliest manuscripts, but it is impossible to discern
exactly what material belonged to these ﬁrst forms of the commentaries.
For logic in the eleventh century, then, we must look to four thinkers who used
it especially in connection with theology: Lanfranc and Berengar, in their dispute
over the Eucharist; Peter Damian, in discussing whether God can undo the past;
and Anselm, who was also responsible for two ostensibly non-theological logical
discussions.2
5.1
Logic and the Eucharist: Lanfranc and Berengar
([Holopainen, 1996, 44-118; Marenbon, 2005a, 232-7])
In the sacrament of the Eucharist, Christians maintain that the bread and wine
blessed by the priest are the body and blood of Jesus Christ. Berengar of Tours,
writing in the middle of the eleventh century, maintained that this identity must
be understood just in terms of signiﬁcation. The priest’s words of consecration
do indeed bring about a change, but it is to make the bread and wine into signs
for Christ’s body and blood.
But there is no change in the substance of the
bread and wine, and if there were — Berengar maintains — then they could no
2The greater part of Odo of Tournai’s treatise De peccato originali [in Patrologia Latina
160, 1071-1102; trsl. Odo of Tournai, 1994] is concerned with the problem of universals (see
[Erismann, forthcoming-a; forthcoming-b]). Since it was not written until 1095 at the earliest,
and perhaps as late as 1110, and its concerns are intimately linked to the discussions of the early
1100s, it is better discussed in the context of the next chapter.

44
John Marenbon
longer perform their signifying function. In his De corpore et sanguine Domini
[Lanfranc, 1854; written 1061-70], Lanfranc disagreed strongly with this view,
provoking Berengar’s most substantial surviving work, where he defends his theory,
the Rescriptum contra Lanfrannum [Berengar of Tours, 1988]. There is, then, a
semantic, or rather semiotic side to the dispute [Rosier-Catach, 2004, 36-40, 355-
63], but also a more strictly logical side. Contrary to what was once held [Southern,
1948], Lanfranc seems not to have been very fond of the new Aristotelian logic,
and himself avoids the terminology of the Categories and the Isagoge when he
is discussing the Eucharist, although he is willing at times to use ideas from the
theory of topical argument [Holopainen, 1996, 44-76]. It is, rather, Berengar who
uses Porphyry and Aristotle to argue his case, and even translates Lanfranc’s
position into these terms, so as to be able most eﬀectively to criticize it.
According to Berengar, Lanfranc wants to hold that, although the bread used
in the Eucharist is destroyed as a substance and subject for accidents when it
becomes ﬂesh, it also remains, because its accidents remain. He accepts that this
continuity condition is necessary if the process is to fulﬁl its doctrinal role, since
in the Eucharist it is not a matter of one thing being replaced by another, but
of the bread and wine themselves becoming Christ’s body and blood.
But he
argues, putting his opponent’s position into rigorously Aristotelian terms, that
Lanfranc’s theory cannot satisfy it. Lanfranc, he says, has two alternatives. By
the ﬁrst, the substance of the bread is destroyed and in its place there is a diﬀerent
substance, the body of Christ, to which bread-like accidents are attached, ones the
same as those in the original bread, but just in the sense that they are like (qualia)
them; they are not claimed to be numerically the same. This alternative, Berengar
believes, is metaphysically possible and so open to God’s power:
. . .
it would be easy for God to add to the ﬂesh (which you believe
God to make on the altar through the generation of the subject) the
same accidents as those which were formerly in the bread . . .
But the result would merely be that
. . .
it could be said that it is not bread in species, but rather ﬂesh,
made now by God through generation of the subject, which has been
given accidents like those which were in the bread, and that it is bread
because it has the colour and accidents of bread. [Berengar of Tours,
1988, 159:2140-6].
There would be something diﬀerent, the ﬂesh of Christ, replacing the bread and
made to resemble it, and so the continuity condition would not be satisﬁed.
The second alternative is that what replaces the bread as a substance (the body
of Christ) is informed with all or some of the very same accidents numerically as
were in the original bread. Berengar suggests that this alternative might satisfy the
continuity condition, but, as he explains, it is simply impossible metaphysically:
If . . .
it happens that the bread of the altar that was taken away
through the corruption of the subject is after the consecration no longer

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
45
the individual bread that was placed on the altar, it is completely
clear that it is not the bread according to some of its accidents which,
because they were in no other place than in it, when it was taken away
through the removal of the subject, could in no way not be taken away
themselves.
If the bread and wine ceased to exist when they have been removed
from their original essences (a pristinis essentiis), nothing which had
been in them as subjects could have survived.
[Berengar of Tours,
1988, 158:1388-1405; 159:2138-40].
Although Berengar does not explicitly give the reason why it is impossible that
the accidents should be numerically the same between the bread and the body of
Christ, his position suggests that he considers accidents to be individuated by the
substances they inform: they can only persist as those particular accidents so long
as their subject persists.
If so, then Berengar not only shows that he has thoroughly absorbed the main
ideas of the Categories, but also that he has arrived at a view on the relation
between substances and accidents, quite plausible as an interpretation of Aristotle,
but diﬀerent from what Abelard and other twelfth-century thinkers would propose.
5.2
Peter Damian
([Resnick, 1992; Holopainen, 1996, 6-43; Marenbon, 2007, 116-8])
Peter Damian (1007-72) would probably be horriﬁed to ﬁnd himself commemo-
rated in a History of logic.
He was an ascetic, who thought it was wrong for
monks to spend much time studying logic or other secular subjects. But, within
the theological context of his On Divine Omnipotence (De divina omnipotentia)
[Peter Damian, 1972], he provides a more sophisticated discussion of modality
than any previous medieval author and, although he does not make a display of
his knowledge, he seems to have read On Interpretation and probably Boethius’s
second commentary, as well as knowing some of Boethius’s teaching on hypothet-
ical syllogisms and on topical argument. His discussion is provoked by a comment
of Jerome’s that might seem to restrict God’s power. ‘God can do everything’,
said Jerome, ‘But he cannot restore the virginity of a woman who has lost it.’
One way Jerome’s comment might be taken is that it denies God’s capability to
perform a miracle by physically restoring the virginity of a woman who has lost it
by making the ruptured hymeneal tissue whole again. Not surprisingly, Damian
rejects it if it is understood in this way: he has no doubt that God can produce
such miracles [Peter Damian, 1972, 402-6].
Jerome can also be understood, however, as denying, not that God can perform
a physical miracle, but that he can change the past: he cannot make it so that the
woman in question never lost her virginity. Damian wants in some way to reject
Jerome’s comment even on this interpretation and so to claim that, in some sense,
God can change the past. He does not, however, just want to assert this extreme

46
John Marenbon
position, but to argue for it as logically coherent. He begins [Peter Damian, 1972,
412-4] by distinguishing between how the future can be open (ad utrumlibet) so
far as the ‘variable nature of things’ is concerned (I may or may not see my
friend today, for example), and yet according to the consequence of discourse
(consequentiam disserendi) it may be ﬁxed.
He means by the consequence of
discourse, for example, the fact that ‘if it will be that it rains, then it is entirely
necessary that it will rain, and for this reason it is completely impossible that it
will not rain.’ Since he insists that such necessity is not genuine, Damian is not
wrongly concluding from
15. Necessarily, if it will rain it will rain
to
16. If it will rain, necessarily it will rain.
On the contrary, he is recognizing, that (15) does not imply (16). But he does not
have the tools to distinguish the scope of modal operators, and so he concludes that
the sort of necessity in (15) is purely verbal and does not lead to the conclusion
that the rain is inevitable. Although this line of thought is in itself simply an
argument against a mistaken logical argument for determinism, it brings out the
idea that, though the future cannot be changed, in that the future is simply what
will happen, this does not mean that events in the future are not open. Damian
goes on explicitly to draw the parallel with the past: ‘according to the order
of discourse, it is impossible that whatever was, was not’ [Peter Damian, 1972,
414:34-6]. The implicit suggestion, then, is that, just as there is a sense ‘according
to the order of discourse’ in which the future is unchangeable, so too with the past.
And just as being determined ‘according to the order of discourse’ still leaves it
open to change what that future will be, so, although it is impossible that what
was, was not, the past too is open to change.
This implicit argument, however, ignores the fact that the future and the past
are not parallel in respect of determinism. Past events have more than a necessity
‘according to the order of discourse’. To say about something in the future ‘it may
happen or it may not’ involves no incoherence; but to say of an event in the past
‘it may have happened or it may not have happened’ makes sense only if taken
epistemically, as a profession of ignorance or uncertainty: there is a fact of the
matter, and if the event did take place, it cannot now, we feel, not have taken
place. Damian does not air such worries explicitly, but an awareness of them may
explain why he goes on to give a new turn to his discussion [Peter Damian, 1972,
414:34-6]. He explains, in terms that echo Book 5 of Boethius’s Consolation of
Philosophy, that God has a diﬀerent relation to time than ours:
It is clear that omnipotent God holds all the centuries in the treasury of
his eternal wisdom so that nothing can come to him nor can anything
pass from him through the moments of time. Therefore, remaining
constant in that ineﬀable citadel of his majesty, he contemplates all

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
47
things set up in the sight of his presentness with a single, simple gaze,
so that past things never pass from him, nor do future things follow
on. [Peter Damian, 1972, 418:3-10].
Damian does not spell out immediately how this point, which was made orig-
inally in the context of showing that God’s prescience does not determine future
events, relates to the question at issue. But near the end of the treatise [Peter
Damian, 1972, 478:102-3] he observes that God’s ‘ability (posse) is ﬁxed in eter-
nity, so that whatever he could do at some time he can always do’ and he then
states that the debate he had entered into can be brought to a conclusion, because
‘if the ability to do all things is co-eternal with God, God could makes it that
what has been made did not exist.’ The most coherent way to put together these
remarks is to say that Damian’s God has power over all events, but this does not
involve his changing anything that is past to him, since nothing is past to him: all
events are presented to him in his eternal present. But if God were to change a
past event — to make it that that there was some day last August when it didn’t
rain, or that I studied at Oxford — then it is that changed event which would in
fact, at the time, have been the one that happened, as brought about by God in his
eternal present. God can ‘undo’ the past, because, since it is present to him, there
is in fact no undoing to be done, but just the choice of this over that possibility
to actualize. But, living in a temporal frame, we humans cannot change what has
happened. [See Knuuttila, 1993, 63-7 for a discussion of how Damian may have
somewhat unconsciously innovated here in modal theory.]
5.3
Anselm
Anselm (1033–1109), whose surviving writings all probably date from 1075 and
later, when he was a monk and then abbot of Bec, and then, from 1093, Archbishop
of Canterbury, is unquestionably the outstanding philosopher and theologian of
the eleventh century. He was also an accomplished logician, but logic is on the
margins of his life’s work. In his theological treatises and dialogues, there is only
one moment when Aristotelian logic is brought into play explicitly, in order to
consider a problem about foreknowledge and determinism. But Anselm tended
usually not to parade his sources. In his ﬁrst theological work, the Monologion,
he includes a short but innovative discussion of God’s relation to the Categories;
and, elsewhere in his theological writings, logical reading and thinking underlies
many positions in which it is not made explicit, including the famous argument at
the beginning of the Proslogion. He also wrote a dialogue called De Grammatico,
containing no theological discussion, which is entirely logical and semantic in its
concerns.
Logic in Anselm’s Theology: God and the ‘Categories’ ([Marenbon, 2005, 237-9])
In the Monologion (1076) [Anselm, 1946, 1-87; translations of this and the other
works of Anselm in Anselm, 1998] attempts to prove by reasoning that God exists
and is triune. Although Anselm does not give a Category by Category account

48
John Marenbon
of the relationship between God and the Ten Categories, he is clearly following
the tradition of Augustine, Boethius [cf. De Libera, 2005], Alcuin (and Eriugena,
though he probably did not know his work), when he considers how God relates
to the Categories of place and time (Chapters 18-24), and substance and relation
(Chapters 25-7). Augustine had argued that God not only falls into the ﬁrst Cat-
egory, which he calls essence, but that he is alone truly essence. Boethius follows,
unusually for him, the line of Neoplatonic negative theology which Eriugena would
take to its limit, and he declares that God does not really ﬁt into the ﬁrst Cate-
gory at all (Theological Treatise I, 4). Anselm wishes to say, rather, that it is both
true, in one sense, that God is not a substance, since he receives no accidents or
diﬀerentiae, and that he is neither an individual nor a universal substance, since
to be individual would mean that he shared an essence with others, and to be uni-
versal that he is divided into a plurality of substances. Yet, in another sense, God
can rightly be called an individual, spiritual substance. God can be considered,
Anselm thinks, an essence, distinct from all substances, but, since it is usual to
call the essence of a thing its substance, in this sense God is a substance. Since
God has and can have no parts, he cannot be divided up, and so in this sense he
is an individual. And since the most worthy (dignus) substances are body and
spirit, and the spirit is worthier than the body, God can be called a spirit. The
treatment of time and place is highly complex [Leftow, 1991, 183-216], but it fol-
lows the same pattern, declaring that it is true in one way that God is in place
and time, because he is everywhere and there is no time at which he is not, and
also that he is in neither Category and so in a sense is never and nowhere.
Anselm seems, then, to sound a note of scepticism about the Categories as
tools for understanding where God is concerned, by the virtuosity with which he
can argue both for God’s inclusion in and exclusion from them. This marks an
important diﬀerence from his late ancient predecessors. Augustine and Boethius
(followed even more emphatically by Alcuin, though arguably not by Eriugena)
considered Aristotle’s scheme supremely useful in marking the distinction between
God and his creation, even though it produced in the case of most of the Categories
a negative result. But for Anselm the lack of ﬁt between the Categories and God
leads, not to a negative proposition, but to a clash of contradictory propositions,
a breakdown in meaningfulness. Does this scepticism extend even further, to the
very scheme of the Categories? In his discussion of accidents [Anselm, 1946, I,
43] Anselm extends the thinking of Augustine and Boethius about the extrinsic
nature of relations, pointing the example of his relation to a person born next
year. At the moment he has no relations to him, but when the person is born he
will acquire, without any change in himself, relations of being, for example, older
and being similar. Such accidents, says Anselm, are only improperly called such,
since they do not ‘happen to’ (accidunt) the thing of which they are predicated.
Although such an observation may not at have disturbed Aristotle, it does strike
at the way in which medieval authors up until the twelfth century tended to use
the Categories as an overall metaphysical scheme.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
49
Logic in Anselm’s Theology: logic as a tool
The Proslogion (1077-8) [Anselm, 1946, I, 92–122] is Anselm’s best known work,
because of the famous Argument it proposes (especially in Chapters 2 and 3) for the
existence of God. The Argument itself, as well as the Response ) [Anselm, 1946, I,
130-9] written to Gaunilo’s Reply on behalf of the Fool, brings up diﬃcult issues of
modality and logical consequence, which do not show any clear direct relationship
to the tradition of logic Anselm had studied but are certainly informed by it. There
is a vast range of modern discussion of Anselm’s Argument, and here is not the
place to enter into the issues raised by it [for a recent discussion, with bibliography,
see Kapriev, 1998]. It is worth observing, however, that when, in the Proslogion
Chapter 2 argument, Anselm concludes from the fact that the Fool understands
‘that than which nothing greater can be thought’, that it ‘is in his intellect’, he is
drawing on a semantic theory, going back to Augustine and Boethius, and which
he discusses more explicitly in the Monologion (Chapters 10 and 33). According to
this theory, as well as spoken and written words, there are mental words, which are
natural and the same for all people. The process of thinking and understanding
requires the production of a mental word, which bears a close resemblance to
the object of the thought in the external world. Anselm’s claim is that the Fool
produces a mental word to correspond to the phrase ‘that than which nothing
greater can be thought’ which he hears and understands. [King, 2004, 85-8]
In the Proemium to the Proslogion, Anselm contrasts the work with the Monolo-
gion by saying that there he used a combination of many arguments, whereas now
he will establish the existence and main attributes of God by ‘one argument’
(unum argumentum). But what, exactly, is the one argument? Toivo Holopainen
has proposed recently [Holopainen, 1996, 133-45] that this question, which has
divided interpreters, can be understood properly and answered only in the light of
the logical background: in particular, Anselm’s knowledge of the theory of topical
argument, probably through Boethius’s Commentary on Cicero’s Topics. Accord-
ing to Boethius, the middle which is sought in order to give a convincing answer
to a question is an argumentum. In this light, Anselm might well mean by his
‘single argument’ not a chain of reasoning (such as the Chapter 2 ‘argument’) but,
Holopainen suggests, the complex term ‘that than which nothing greater can be
thought’, since it is certainly in every chapter through this term that Anselm is
able to carry through his plan. It is perhaps not so plausible that a term could
be an argumentum, since the aim of an argumentum is carry conviction, and it
is hard to see how that can be achieved by an expression that lacks some kind
of propositional structure. Maybe the argumentum is the claim that God is that
than which nothing greater can be thought.
The one place in his theological writing where Anselm explicitly refers to a
logical writer (Aristotle in On Interpretation, although the name of the treatise
is not actually mentioned) is in Book 2, Chapter 17 [Anselm, 1946, II, 120-6] of
Cur Deus Homo, Anselm’s explanation, as the title indicates, of why God became
incarnate. Anselm has just argued that before Christ was conceived Mary, the

50
John Marenbon
mother of Christ, was puriﬁed of sin by his future death (the so-called ‘Immaculate
Conception’). The objection is then raised that, if so, then Christ must have died of
necessity. The problem, then, is a variant of the problem of prophecy and necessity,
which is itself one version of the problem of prescience. In the problem of prophecy,
A knows at t1 that a proposition p about what happens at some future time t2 is
true, and so it seems that what happens at t2 cannot be contingent, because t2
cannot turn out to be false if A knows it to be true. In the case of the Immaculate
Conception, the truth at t1 of the proposition
17. Mary is puriﬁed of sin by Christ’s death at t2
is incompatible with its turning out to be false that
18. Christ dies at t2.
Anselm tries to solve the diﬃculty by recourse to a line of thought similar
to that Peter Damian had used in his On Devine Omnipotence. He distinguishes
[Anselm, 1946, II, 125] genuine, preceding (praecedens) necessity from what he calls
‘sequent necessity’ (sequens necessitas). Genuine necessity involves constraint. It
is necessary that the sky revolves because ‘the violence of its natural condition
forces’ it. But in a case of sequent necessity, such as the necessity that you are
talking because (quia) you are talking, there is no compulsion.
Although the
matter is not clear (especially since Anselm varies his connectives between ‘if’
(si), ‘because’ (quia) and ‘while’ (dum)), Anselm seems — just like Damian —
not to have the logical equipment to distinguish between
17. Necessarily (if x is what took place/is taking place/will take place, then x is
what took place/is taking place/will take place)
and
18. If x is what took place/is taking place/will take place, then x took place/is
taking place/will take place necessarily.
Since (17) is obviously true, he feels compelled to accept (18), which he does not
discriminate from it, but — like Damian again — describes the necessity involved
as being limited in a way that makes the force of (18) no more than that of
(17). Anselm then says that it is this sort of non-coercive, sequent necessity that
Aristotle talks about in On Interpretation and that it is by this necessity that it is
said that it was necessary for things to be as the ‘faith or prophecy’ about Christ’s
death said. Unfortunately, Anselm has not seen the seriousness of the problem
which faced Aristotle and which, in an even more serious form, faces him. He
is right to try to suggest, although he lacks the equipment to do so clearly, that
from the fact that, necessarily, if I am doing x, then I am doing x, it does not
follow that I am necessarily doing x (except if ‘necessarily’ is drained of its ordinary
meaning). But he is unaware that the argument from prescience or prophecy gains
its force from the temporal element: when gaining knowledge of an event precedes

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
51
that event, and is ﬁxed because it is passed, then it presents a serious obstacle
to maintaining that the events known could be otherwise [see Marenbon, 2005b,
passim]
Elsewhere, Anselm does enter into a far complex discussion of modality, which
has been seen as an early attempt ‘to codify some aspects of the semantics implied
in the Christian use of the notions of necessity and possibility’ [Knuuttila, 1993,
70, and see 70-4]. His longest exploration of these themes is found in a set of
‘Philosophical Fragments’ preserved in a single, Lambeth manuscript [Anselm,
1969, 334-51]. A study of this side of Anselm’s thought would be out of place,
however, in an account of his logic, since he develops it in the course of thinking
about the philosophy of action and of will.
Anyone interested in Anselm as a
logician should, however, examine the ‘Philosophical Fragments’, since they show
Anselm’s logical, and indeed analytical cast of mind, as he ranges widely over
areas of philosophy suggested by his theological interests, but approached in a
thoroughly philosophical spirit.
Anselm’s ‘De Grammatico’: the argument
The only ﬁnished work by Anselm not on a theological subject is a dialogue De
grammatico [Anselm, 1946]. Anselm’s biographer, Eadmer, says that he composed
the work in the same period (1080-5), just after the Proslogion, as he composed
his dialogues on truth and free-will. The dating has been challenged by Richard
Southern, who argues that Eadmer is simply misinterpreting Anselm’s own preface
to On Truth [Southern, 1990, 65]; Southern suggests the work was written twenty
years earlier. Although he is right to point out that Eadmer’s dating is in principle
open to question, there is no good reason to make this work much earlier than
anything else by Anselm. Indeed, as more knowledge is gained of the grammatical
and logical debates around the year 1100, it seems that there is a great deal in
common between its main themes and some of Anselm’s concerns — a point which
should emerge in the course of the next chapter.
The dialogue is about the problem of the place of denominatives, such as gram-
maticus, in the scheme of the Categories. The early medieval notion of denom-
inatives (or ‘paronyms’: Grk.
parˆonuma) comes from a short passage in the
Categories (1a12-5) and Boethius’s commentary on it [Boethius, 1891, 167D-8D].
Aristotle’s example of a denominative is grammatikos: denominatives, he says,
‘get their names from something’ — the grammatikos, for instance, from gram-
mar. The wider theory that emerges from his brief remark and Boethius’s ampli-
ﬁcation is this: - A thing can often be named from one of its accidents, by using
the word for the accident with a change of ending. For instance, the male person
who is informed by the accident of knowledge of grammar (grammatica) can be
called a ‘grammaticus’ (the gender-speciﬁcation is because the ending of the word
indicates masculine sex); the man who is informed by an accident of whiteness
(albedo) can be called ‘albus’, ‘the white man’. ‘Grammaticus’ and ‘albus’ are,
therefore, denominative words. But Aristotle talks of denominative things: in his

52
John Marenbon
and Boethius’s view, the things named by denominatives, the grammaticus and
the albus, for instance, are not simply to be identiﬁed with the substances, the man
or men, who are informed by the accidents of knowledge of grammar or whiteness.
There is, then, an immediate problem for the logician.
Is a grammaticus a
substance or an accident?
Anselm spells out the problem immediately at the
start of his dialogue. There is a simple argument to show that grammaticus is a
substance:
19. Every grammaticus is a man.
20. Every man is a substance.
21. Every grammaticus is a substance.
Yet this conclusion, although supported by the leading grammatical authority,
Priscian, contradicts Aristotle, who in the Categories (2b28) uses grammaticus as
an example of a quality. The dialogue explores the problem raised by this clash,
treating the question as both one about things — is a grammaticus a substance
or a quality? — and about the words (voces) for the things — is ‘grammaticus’ a
word which signiﬁes a substance or a quality? (The awareness of these two levels
of discussion is one of the striking ways in which De grammatico ﬁts the way the
Categories would be discussed up to the 1130s.)
The dialogue goes through many complex twists and turns, but it seems, about
three quarters of the way through [Anselm, 1946, I, 163:23-5; 164:5-7], to reach a
deﬁnitive solution to the problem. This solution has three elements:
22. The word ‘grammaticus’ signiﬁes a quality.
23. The word ‘grammaticus’ appellates a substance.
24. Grammaticus is a quality.
Clearly, this solution is based on the distinction between what it is for a word to
signify something and what it is for it to appellate something. For Anselm, as for
most medieval writers, signifying means causing a certain sort of thought: as Paul
Spade [1975, 213-4] formulates it, ‘a word “w” signiﬁes a thing x if and only if
“w” causes a thought of x in the mind of a competent speaker of the language in
question.’ Anselm adds a reﬁnement to this basic notion, which he brings out with
a thought experiment [Anselm, 1946, I, 160:4-161:4]. Suppose I say, ‘There’s an
albus in the house’ (‘albus’ is the masculine singular nominative adjective, which
can mean any sort of white masculine thing). From what I say, my listener cannot
tell whether I am saying that there is a man in the house, or a horse. But if,
pointing at two horses, I say, ‘Hit the album’ (where album is the accusative form,
as required by the syntax, of albus), my listener does know that a horse is meant.
Anselm would say that per se, albus does not signify a man or a horse, but it can
signify a man or a horse per aliud, when the context provides the information that
it is a white horse (and not a white man or dog) that we are discussing. The per

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
53
se signiﬁcation of a word is, then, that of which it causes a thought irrespective
of context; its per aliud signiﬁcation is that of which it causes a thought in a
particular context.
The reason why Anselm can assert (22) is, therefore, that the thought which the
word ‘grammaticus’ causes is not that of a man, who is a substance, who knows
grammar, since there is nothing in the word to make the listener think of a man,
as opposed to some other sort of being, who knows grammar. Yet this contention
seems mistaken. Whereas an albus might really be a white man, a white horse
or a white snail, who can be a grammaticus but a man? Anselm answers that,
although it cannot be shown that in fact there are any non-human grammatici,
there might in principle be some sort of non-human rational animal that knows
grammar [Anselm, 1946, 1, 157:30-158:5]. A genuinely contextless, and so per se,
account of the signiﬁcation of ‘grammaticus’ must exclude even that very general
context which makes us think that only humans are grammatici.
Most modern analysts of De grammatico roughly equate appellation with refer-
ence. On this reading, (23) makes the obviously true claim that the objects picked
out by the word grammaticus — that is to say, men who know grammar — are
substances. There may, however, be some anachronism in this interpretation of
appellatio. Anselm himself [Anselm, 1946, 1, 157:5-6] deﬁnes appellatio in terms
of ordinary usage: the appellative name ‘is that by which the thing is called ac-
cording to the ordinary use of speech’ (usus loquendi). The way in which we say
‘dog’ is the word in ordinary usage for dogs, ‘white thing’ for things that happen
to be white, does provide a reference-like way of linking words directly to objects
in the world. Anselm seems to be working towards an idea of reference, without
having a completely secure grasp of it. He sometimes treats signiﬁcation per aliud
and appellation as if they were interchangeable [e.g. Anselm, 1946, 1, 157:1-5], a
merging that is understandable, since the per aliud signiﬁcation as given by the
general context will correspond to the usus loquendi. Indeed, according to Adams
[2000, 87], the per aliud signiﬁcation establishes ‘the semantic connections between
terms and things of which they are not per se signiﬁcative’ — a position that does
not seem to correspond to anything that Anselm himself suggests.
Whereas (22) is straightforward, and (23) is certainly true, though a little hard
to interpret, (24) is problematic, since — on the assumption that seems to be being
made that something can belong to only one Category — it directly contradicts the
conclusion to the initial argument, (19-21), that grammaticus is a substance. This
argument is valid, and neither of the two premisses has been refuted. The minor
premiss, (20), that every man is a substance is unquestionable. The major premiss,
(19), that every grammaticus is a man, is not at all incompatible with Anselm’s
assertion that there it is possible for there to be a grammaticus who is not a man.
How, then, can Anselm be entitled to assert (24)? As Adams points out [2000, 88],
Anselm immediately adds, after (24), the point that ‘Aristotle appellates words by
the name of the things of which they are signiﬁcative, and not of those of which
they are merely appellative’ [Anselm, 1946, 1, 163:26 -8]. Aristotle, then, he is
saying, sometimes uses a word ‘w’ that seems on the page to be a word for a thing

54
John Marenbon
(for w) as a word for another word (as a word for ‘w’), but only where ‘w’ signiﬁes
w, not where it merely appellates w. He gives as an example a passage in the
Categories where Aristotle says ‘every substance seems to signify this something’,
where by ‘substance’ Aristotle must have meant ‘substance word’. The implication
is that, for Anselm, on the Aristotelian reading, the question about denominatives
should not really be considered to be one about things at all. The claim that
‘Grammaticus is a quality’ must be taken as ‘The word ‘grammaticus’ signiﬁes a
quality’ (i.e. as 22, which has already been established). Were a similar analysis,
taking the word to refer to another word, applicable to the claim ‘grammaticus is a
substance’, it would come out as ‘The word ‘grammaticus’ appellates a substance’,
that is, as 23). But Aristotle does not accept this analysis for propositions where
the relation is one of appellation, not signiﬁcation, and so there is no acceptable
meaning that can be given to ‘grammaticus is a substance’.
Anselm is, therefore, presenting what he recognizes as a narrowly Aristotelian
solution to his problem, and the student in the dialogue expresses this limitation
when he sums up the reply as being ‘according to Aristotle’s treatise and according
to his followers.’ It is interesting to recognize that, earlier in the treatise, Anselm
had presented a diﬀerent solution to the initial problem, which seems a little more
broadly based:
M.
Tell me, when you speak to me about a grammaticus, what should I under-
stand you to be talking about — the word ‘grammaticus’, or the things it
signiﬁes?
P.
The things.
M.
What things, then, does it signify?
P.
A man and knowledge about grammar
M.
So when I hear the word ‘grammaticus’, I may understand a man or knowl-
edge about grammar, and when I am speaking about a grammaticus, I may
be speaking about a man or knowledge about grammar.
P.
So it must be.
M.
Tell me then, is a man a substance, or is it in a subject?
P.
It’s a substance, not something in a subject.
M.
Is knowledge about grammar a quality and in a subject?
P.
It’s both.
M.
Why then is it strange if someone says that grammaticus is a substance
and not in a subject with respect to a man (secundum hominem) and that
grammaticus is a quality and in a subject with respect to knowledge about
grammar (secundum grammaticam)? [Anselm, 1946, 1, 154:7-21]

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
55
And a little later it is added that there is no contradiction between holding that
grammaticus is a substance and that it is a quality because when we are talking
about or understanding a grammaticus, on some occasions we should speak or
understand with respect to a man (secundum hominem) and on some occasions
with respect to knowledge about grammar (secundum grammaticam). [Anselm,
1946, 1, 156:1-4]
According to this solution, then, certain things, such as denominatives, can be
envisaged under more than one aspect, and they might fall into diﬀerent Cate-
gories, depending on how they are envisaged.
Interpreting the ‘De grammatico’ ([Henry, 1964; 1967; 1974; Adams, 2000; Maren-
bon, 2002; King, 2004; Boschung, 2006])
Until less than ﬁfty years ago, De grammatico was Anselm’s most neglected work,
dismissed even by specialists as triﬂing in its concerns. Then, in a series of studies
and commentaries, D.P. Henry sought to show that this dialogue is a piece of
sophisticated and intelligent logical analysis. No one now who understands the
text would disagree that Henry was right to see great value in it as a work of
logic. He arrived, however, at a very particular interpretation of the dialogue,
according to which one of Anselm’s main aims was to establish the inadequacy
of ordinary logic for discussing logic and to set up a special logical language,
which would at times shock ordinary readers by its apparent ungrammaticality.
He also considered that Lesniewski’s logical system provided the formal tools for
making Anselm’s project fully explicit. Few have fully accepted Henry’s reading
and recently it has been intelligently criticized by Marilyn Adams [2000, 90–105]
(and also in [Boschung, 2006], itself an interesting and careful interpretation).
Adams has her own view of the point of the dialogue [2000, 105-12]. She sees it
as an introduction for students to Aristotle’s Categories, based on ‘concentrated
and sustained attention to a single issue’, which trains them ‘to be meticulous, to
slice the distinctions as thinly as texts and problems require’ [Adams, 2000, 112].
Behind her decision to regard this dialogue as tool for teaching lies a recognition
of its inchoate quality: it is technically ﬁnished, but it is not a neat statement and
resolution of a problem — it seems to say either too little or far too much. Yet the
diﬃculty and tortuousness of the argument tell against her thesis (and especially
the idea that it is intended for students less advanced than those who would study
the other, far more straightforward theological dialogues).
Another reason for the impression of confusion might be that Anselm is at
once outlining an Aristotelian solution to an Aristotelian problem and — as may
also be the case in the Monologion — suggesting that Aristotle’s doctrine of the
Categories may not be as clear or even as reliable as most of his contemporaries
took it to be.
The ‘broader’ solution mentioned above, that Anselm presents
but then drops, breaks with Aristotelian orthodoxy by supposing that one thing
could belong to more than one Category, when seen under diﬀerent aspects. As
one of the very few medieval logicians capable, by his own extraordinary mental
powers, of exploring areas of metaphysico-logical argumentation that Aristotle

56
John Marenbon
and his followers had never touched on (as the Proslogion and the Philosophical
Fragments testify), is it unexpected that he should hint — gently but insistently
— that even after the bravest eﬀorts of interpreters Aristotle’s Categories leave
unsolved almost as many fundamental problems as it raises?
5.4
Epilogue. Anselm on Universals and the New Era
([Iwakuma, 1996; Erismann, forthcoming])
Anselm opened his De incarnatione Verbi (‘On the Incarnation of the Word’; ﬁrst
version 1091-2), an attack on the Trinitarian theology of the logician Roscelin of
Compi`egne, by criticizing his opponent as one of those who
think that universal substances are merely the breath of an utterance
(ﬂatum vocis) and who are not able to understand colour as other than
the body, or a person’s wisdom as other than his soul . . . . [Anselm,
1946, I, 285 (and cf. 289); for revised version: II, 9-10].
Anselm’s own views about universals can be elicited from passing remarks in his
various works, especially the passage from the Monologion, discussed above (5.3.i),
arguing how God is neither an individual nor a universal substance. Like most
medieval writers, he has a place for Platonic-like universals in the Word (or mind)
of God. He is also, however, an immanent realist, who thinks of there being a
common essence for all the particulars of the same genus, and who thinks of species
sharing a common diﬀerentia and individuals being individuated by a collection of
accidental properties peculiar to each one [De processione Spiritus Sancti: Anselm,
1946, II, 217:17-20; cf. Erismann, forthcoming-a].
Historically, Anselm’s not very developed views on this subject are less impor-
tant than the fact that he does not pause to develop them, and that even when he
attacks Roscelin, he states his point without argument, and so brieﬂy that he has
left historians puzzling over what exactly his opponent’s position could have been.
One of the elements which would distinguish the logic of the turn of the twelfth
century and its early decades from that of Anselm and his period was the irruption
of the dispute over universals. True, it has been given a more prominent place his-
toriographically than it deserves — Abelard himself deprecated those who behaved
as if they thought that logic consisted just in this problem — but it is a striking
example of a more general tendency for logic to become a matter for disagreement
and dispute between the advocates of diﬀerent positions. Parallel with this devel-
opment, most evident in the contest between Abelard and William of Champeaux
in the period from 1100 to 1117, was the growth of a far more regular, structured
teaching of the curriculum of the logica vetus (the Isagoge, Categories, On Inter-
pretation and Boethius on categorical and hypothetical syllogisms, division and
topical diﬀerentiae), which gave rise to a profusion of commentaries. Perhaps this
teaching stretched back decades earlier, as the activity of Gerbert or Abbo would
suggest; but it is only from c. 1100 that evidence of it survives. At one stage,
a theory was accepted by insuﬃciently cautious scholars [e.g. Marenbon, 2000b]

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
57
according to which William of Champeaux was responsible for large numbers of
anonymous commentaries in a variety of versions. Now, although William’s im-
portance is acknowledged, it is not generally thought that any single commentary
can reliably be taken as his own direct work [Cameron, 2004]. At the same time,
a re-evaluation is taking place of the so-called ‘vocalist’ logicians, among whom
Roscelin is usually numbered, and whom William of Champeaux is taken to have
opposed. What were their positions? When did they ﬂourish? And did they form
a coherent group at all?
The crowded logical schools of early twelfth-century Paris worked with the
Boethian Tradition of logic that had ﬁrst come into use late in the tenth century.
Their teachers were ultimately informed by the experience of logical discussion
and exegesis of texts that stretched back even earlier in the Middle Ages. Yet,
in the new conditions of teaching and the new contexts of debate, even the old
questions were seen in a diﬀerent perspective. Intellectual life never observes neat
chronological boundaries, but the year 1100 is at least a symbolically good date
to mark the end, and the beginning, of an era.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am very grateful to Margaret Cameron, Christophe Erismann and Chris Martin
for their comments on various drafts of this article.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Abbo of Fleury, 1966] Abbo of Fleury. Opera inedita I. Syllogismorum categoricorum et hypo-
theticorum enodatio, ed. A. Van de Vyver, Bruges; De Tempel, 1966.
[Abbo of Fleury, 1997] Abbo of Fleury. De syllogismis hypotheticis, ed. F. Schupp, Leiden, New
York and Cologne; Brill (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 56), 1997.
[Adams, 2000] M. M. Adams. Re-reading De grammatico, or Anselm’s Introduction to Aristo-
tle’s ‘Categories’, Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale,11, 83-112, 2000.
[Alcuin, 1863] Alcuin. Opera in J.-P. Migne, Patrologia Latina 101, 1863.
[Ammonius, 1897] Ammonius. In Aristotelis de Interpretatione commentarius, ed. A. Busse,
Berlin; Reimer (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 4.5), 1897.
[Ammonius and Boethius, 1998] Ammonius and Boethius. Ammonius ‘On Aristotle On Inter-
pretation 9’; Boethius ‘On Aristotle On Interpretation 9’, trsl. D. Blank and N. Kretzmann,
London; Duckworth, 1998.
[Anselm, 1946] Anselm. Opera omnia I and II, ed. F.S. Schmitt, Edinburgh; Nelson, 1946.
[Anselm, 1998] Anselm. The Major Works, trans. B.J. Davies and G.R. Evans, Oxford; Oxford
University Press, 1998.
[Aristotle, 1961a] Aristotle. Categoriae vel Praedicamenta, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, Bruges and
Paris; Descl´ee de Brouwer (Aristoteles Latinus I, 1-5), 1961.
[Aristotle, 1961b] Aristotle. De Interpretatione vel Periermenias, ed. L. Minio-Paluello and G.
Verbeke, Bruges and Paris; Descl´ee de Brouwer (Aristoteles Latinus II, 1-2), 1961.
[Aristotle, 1962] Aristotle. Analytica Priora, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, Bruges and Paris; Descl´ee
de Brouwer (Aristoteles Latinus III, 1-4), 1962.
[Aristotle, 1966] Aristotle. Porphyrii Isagoge et anonymi fragmentum, ed. L. Minio-Paluello,
Bruges and Paris; Descl´ee de Brouwer (Aristoteles Latinus I, 6-7), 1966.
[Aristotle, 1969] Aristotle. Topica, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, Brussels; Descl´ee de Brouwer (Aris-
toteles Latinus V, 1-3), 1969.

58
John Marenbon
[Aristotle, 1975] Aristotle. De Sophisticis Elenchis, ed. B.G. Dodd, Brussels; Descl´ee de Brouwer
(Aristoteles Latinus VI, 1-3), 1975.
[Asztalos, 1993] M. Asztalos. Boethius as a Transmitter of Greek Logic to the Latin West: the
Categories, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 95, 367-407, 1993.
[Barnes, 1981] J. Barnes. Boethius and the Study of Logic. In Gibson, 1981, 73-89.
[Berengar of Tours, 1988] Berengar of Tours. Rescriptum contra Lanfrannum, ed. R.B.C. Huy-
gens, Turnhout; Brepols (Corpus Christianorum, continuatio mediaeualis 84), 1988.
[Berndt, 1997] R. Berndt, ed. Das Frankfurter Konzil von 794 im Spannungsfeld von Kirche,
Politik und Theologie, Mainz; Gesellschaft f¨ur mittelrheinische Kirchengeschichte (Quellen
und Abhandlungen zur mittelrheinische Kirchengeschichte 80), 1997.
[Bobzien, 2002] S.
Bobzien.
A
Greek
Parallel
to
Boethius.
De
hypotheticis
syllogismis,
Mnemosyne 55, 285-300, 2002.
[Boethius, 1833] Boethius. In Cicero opera omnia, V.1, ed. J.C. Orelli, Turin; Orelli, Fuesslini
& Co, 1833.
[Boethius, 1877] Boethius. Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Peri Hermeneias pars prior, ed.
C. Meiser, Leipzig; Teubner, 1877.
[Boethius, 1880] Boethius. Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Peri Hermeneias pars posterior,
ed. C. Meiser, Leipzig; Teubner, 1880.
[Boethius, 1891] Boethius. Opera in J. P. Migne, Patrologia Latina 64, Paris; Migne, 1891.
[Boethius, 1906] Boethius. In Isagogen Porphyrii Commenta, ed. S. Brandt, Vienna and Leipzig;
Tempsky and Freitag (Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 38), 1906.
[Boethius, 1969] Boethius. De hypotheticis syllogismis, ed. L. Obertello, Brescia; Paideia (Isti-
tuto di Filosoﬁa dell’Universit`a di Parma, Logicalia 1), 1969.
[Boethius, 1978] Boethius. Boethius’s ‘De topicis diﬀerentiis’, trsl. and comm. E. Stump, Ithaca
and London; Cornell University Press, 1978.
[Boethius, 1988] Boethius. Boethius’s ‘In Ciceronis Topica’, trsl. and comm. E. Stump, Ithaca
and London; Cornell University Press, 1988.
[Boethius, 1990] Boethius. Boethius, De topicis diﬀerentiis kai hoi buzantines metafraseis
ton Manouel Holobolou kai Prochorou Kudone, ed. D. Z. Nikitas (Athens/Paris/Brussels;
Academy of Athens/Vrin/Ousia) (Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi. Philosophi Byzantini
5), 1990.
[Boethius, 1998] Boethius. De divisione liber, ed. J. Magee, Leiden, Boston and Cologne; Brill
(Philosophia Antiqua 77), 1998.
[Boethius, 2000] Boethius. De consolatione philosophiae, Opuscula theologica. ed. Claudio
Moreschini. Munich; Saur, 2000.
[Boethius, 2001] Boethius. De syllogismo categorico: critical edition, C. Thomsen Th¨ornqvist,
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Gothenburg, 2001.
[Bohn, 2004] E. Bohn. Candidus and the Continuity of Carolingian Intellectual Life after Al-
cuin, unpublished PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, 2004.
[Boschung, 2006] P. Boschung. From a Topical Point of View. Dialectic in Anslem’ De Gram-
matico, Leiden; Brill (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 90), 2006.
[Bouhot, 1976] J.-P. Bouhot. Ratramne de Corbie. Historie litt´eraire et controverses doctrinales,
Paris; ´Etudes Augustiniennes, 1976.
[Bruun and Corti, 2005] O. Bruun and L. Corti, eds. Les Cat´egories et leur histoire, Paris; Vrin,
2005.
[Bullough, 1991] D. A. Bullough. Alcuin and the Kingdom of Heaven : liturgy, theology and the
Carolingian age. In his Carolingian Renewal: sources and heritage, Manchester; Manchester
University Press, 1991.
[Bullough, 1997] D. A. Bullough. Alcuin before Frankfort. In Berndt, 1997, 571-85.
[Bullough, 2004] D. A. Bullough. Alcuin. Achievement and Reputation, Leiden and Boston;
Brill, 2004.
[Cameron, 2004] M. Cameron. What’s in a Name? Students of William of Champeaux on the
vox signiﬁcativa, Bochumer Philosophisches Jahrbuch 9, 93-114, 2004.
[Cameron, forthcoming] M. Cameron. Philosophy of Language. Boethius’ tradition. In Maren-
bon (forthcoming-a).
[Cassiodorus, 1937] Cassiodorus. Institutiones, ed. R.A.B. Mynors, Oxford; Oxford University
Press, 1937.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
59
[Cassiodorus, 1946] Cassiodorus. An Introduction to Divine and Human Readings, transl. L.W.
Jones, New York; Columbia University Press, 1946
[Chadwick, 1981] H. Chadwick. Boethius. The Consolations of Music, Logic, Theology, and
Philosophy, Oxford; Oxford University Press, 1981.
[Cicero, 1924] Cicero. Divisions de l’Art Oratoire. Topiques, ed. et trad. H. Bornecque, Paris;
Les Belles Lettres, 1924.
[Courcelle, 1941] P. Courcelle. Histoire d’un brouillon cassiodorien, Revu des ´etudes anciennes
44, 65–86, 1942.
[Cristiani, 1973] M. Cristiani. Lo spazio e il tempo nell’opera dell’Eriugena, Studi medievali, 3a
ser., 14, 39-136, 1973.
[De Haas, 2001] F. A. J. De Haas. Did Plotinus and Porphyry disagree on Aristotle’s Categories?
Phronesis, 46, 492-526, 2001.
[Delhaye, 1950] P. Delhaye. Une controverse sur l’ˆame universelle au IXe si`ecle, Louvain ;
Nauwelaerts (Analecta Mediaevalia Namurcensia 1), 1950.
[De Libera, 1999] A. De Libera. L’Art des g´en´eralit´es. Th´eories de l’abstraction, Paris; Aubier,
1999.
[De Libera, 2005] A. De Libera. L’Onto-th´eologique de Bo`ece: doctrine des cat´egories et th´eories
de la pr´edication dans le De trinitate. In Bruun and Corti, 175-222, 2005.
[Delisle, 1896] L. Delisle. Notice sur un manuscrit de l’´eglise de Lyon du temps de Charlemagne,
Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la Biblioth`eque Nationale 35,2, 831-42, 1896.
[De Rijk, 1963] L. M. De Rijk. On the Curriculum of the Arts of the Trivium at St. Gall from
c. 850 — c. 1000, Vivarium 1, 35-86, 1963.
[D’Onofrio, 1986] G. D’Onofrio. Fons scientiae. La dialettica nell’Occidente tardo-antico,
Naples; Liguori (Nuovo medioevo 31), 1986.
[D¨ummler, 1895] E. D¨ummler, ed. Epistolae Karolini Aevi II, Berlin; Weidmann (Monumenta
Germaniae Historica), 1895.
[D¨urr, 1951] K. D¨urr. The Propositional Logic of Boethius, Amsterdam; North Holland, 1951.
[Ebbesen, 1981] S. Ebbesen. Commentators and Commentaries on Aristotle’s Sophistici
Elenchi I, Leiden; Brill (Corpus Latinum Commentariorum in Aristotelem Graecorum 7,1),
1981; pp. 133-70 are reprinted in Sorabji, 1990, 141-71.
[Ebbesen, 1990] S. Ebbesen. Boethius as an Aristotelian Commentator. In [Sorabji, 1990, 373–
92], 1990.
[Ebbesen, forthcoming] S. Ebbesen. Boethius Aristotelicus. In [Marenbon, forthcoming-a].
[Erismann, 2002] C. Erismann. Generalis essentia. La th´eorie ´erig´enienne de l’ousia et le
probl`eme des universaux, Archives d’histoire litt´eraire et doctrinale du moyen ˆage 69, 7-37,
2002.
[Erismann, 2004] C. Erismann. Processio id est multiplicatio. L’inﬂuence latine de l’ontologie
de Porphyrye : le cas de Jean Scot ´Erig`ene, Revue des sciences philosophiques et th´eologiques,
88, 401-59, 2004.
[Erismann, 2007] C. Erismann. Immanent Realism. A Reconstruction of an early medieval so-
lution to the problem of universals, Vivarium, 45, 2007.
[Erismann, forthcoming-a] C. Erismann. La gen`ese du r´ealisme ontologique durant le haut
moyen ˆage, Paris; Vrin, forthcoming.
[Erismann, forthcoming-b] C. Erismann. Immanent Realism. A reconstruction of an early me-
dieval solution to the problem of universals, Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca
medievale 18, 2007.
[Eswein, 1930] K. Eswein. Die Wesenheit bei Johannes Scottus Eriugena, Philosophisches
Jahrbuch 43, 189-206, 1930.
[Evans, 2004] J. Evans. Boethius on Modality and Future Contingents, American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly 78, 247-71, 2004.
[Excerpta Isagogarum, 1995] Excerpta Isagogarum et Categoriarum, ed. G. d’Onofrio, Turn-
hout; Brepols (Corpus Christianorum, continuatio mediaevalis 120), 1995.
[Freeman, 2003] A. Freeman. Theodulf of Orl´eans: Charlemagne’s spokesman against the second
Council of Nicaea, Aldershot and Burlington; Ashgate, 2003.
[Gerbert, 1867] Gerbert.
[Gibson, 1981] M. T. Gibson. Boethius. His life, thought and inﬂuence, Oxford; Blackwell, 1981.
[Gracia and Noone, 2003] J. J. E. Gracia and T. B. Noone, eds. A Companion to Philosophy in
the Middle Ages, Malden, Mass.; Oxford: Blackwell, 2003.

60
John Marenbon
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages.
The Commentaries on Aristotle’s and Boethius’s Topics, Munich; Philosophia Verlag, 1984.
[Gregory, 1963] T. Gregory. Note sulla dottrina delle ‘teofanie’ in Giovanni Scoto Eriugena,
Studi medievali, 3a serie, 4, 75-91, 1963.
[Gunzo of Novara, 1958] Gunzo of Novara. Epistola ad Augienses (with Anselm of Besate,
Rhetorimachia), ed. K. Manitius, Weimar; Hermann B¨ohlaus Nachfolger (Monumenta Ger-
maniae Historica. Die deutschen, Geschichtsquellen des Mittelalters 500-1500. Quellen zur
Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 2), 1958.
[Hadot, 1968] P. Hadot. Porphyre et Victorinus, Paris; ´Etudes Augustiniennes, 1968.
[Hadot, 1971] P. Hadot. Marius Victorinus. Recherches sur sa vie et ses œuvres, Paris; ´Etudes
Augustiniennes, 1971.
[Henry, 1964] D. P. Henry. The ‘De Grammatico’ of St. Anselm. The theory of paronymy,
Indiana; Notre Dame University Press, 1964.
[Henry, 1967] D. P. Henry. The Logic of St Anselm, Oxford; Oxford University Press, 1967.
[Henry, 1974] D. P. Henry. Commentary on ‘De Grammatico’. The historical-logical dimensions
of a dialogue of St. Anselm, Dordrecht; Reidel, 1974.
[Hochschild, 2007] P. E. Hochschild. Ousia in the Categoriae Decem and the Periphyseon of
John Scottus Eriugena. In Divine Creation in Ancient, Medieval, and Early Modern Thought,
ed. M. Treschow, W. Otten and W. Hannam, Leiden; Brill (Brill’s Studies in Intellectual
History 151), 2007.
[Holopainen, 1996] T. Holopainen. Dialectic and Theology in the Eleventh Century, Leiden; Brill
(Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte der Mittelalter 54), 1996.
[Huber, 1976] P. Huber. Die Vereinbarkeit von g¨ottlicher Vorsehung und menschlicher Freiheit
in der Consolatio Philosophiae des Boethius, Zurich; Juris, 1976.
[Huby, 1989] P. M. Huby. Cicero’s Topics and its Peripatetic Sources. In Cicero’s Knowledge
of the Peripatos,
ed. W. W. Fortenbaugh and P. Steinmetz, New Brunswick and London;
Transaction (Rutgers University Studies in Classical Humanities 4), 61-76, 1989.
[Isidore of Seville, 1983] Isidore of Seville. Etymologies
II, ed. P.K. Marshall, Paris; Les Belles
Lettres, 1983.
[Iwakuma, 1996] Y. Iwakuma. The realism of Anselm and his Contemporaries. In Anselm:
Aosta, Bec and Canterbury, D. Luscombe and G.R. Evans, eds., Manchester; Manchester
University Press, 120-135, 1996.
[Jeauneau, 1985] E. Jeauneau. Pour le dossier d’Israel Scot, Archives d’histoire doctrinale et
litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 52, 7-71, 1985; repr. in E. Jeauneau, ´Etudes ´erig´eniennes, Paris;
´Etudes augustiniennes, 1987, 641-706
[John Scottus Eriugena, 1939] John Scottus Eriugena. Annotationes in Marcianum, ed. C.E.
Lutz, Cambridge, Mass.; Mediaeval Academy of America, 1939.
[John Scottus Eriugena, 1987] John Scottus Eriugena. Periphyseon (The Division of Nature),
transl. I.P. Sheldon-Williams, revised J. O’Meara, Montreal and Washington; Bellarmin and
Dumbarton Oaks, 1987.
[John Scottus Eriugena, 1996–2003] John Scottus Eriugena. Periphyseon, ed. E. Jeauneau,
Turnhout; Brepols (Corpus Christianorum, continuatio mediaeualis 161-5), 1996–2003.
[Kapriev, 1998] G. Kapriev. Ipsa Vita et Veritas. Der ‘ontologische Gottesbeweis’ und die Ideen-
welt Anselms von Canterbury, Leiden and Boston; Brill (Studien und Texte zur Geistes-
geschichte des Mittelalters 61), 1998.
[Karamonolis, 2006] G. Karamonolis. Plato and Aristotle in Agreement? Platonists on Aristotle
from Antiochus to Porphyry, Oxford; Oxford University Press, 2006.
[Kavanagh, 2003] C. Kavanagh. Eriugenian Developments of Ciceronian Topical Theory. In Me-
dieval and Renaissance Humanism. Rhetoric, representation and reform, ed. S. Gersh and
B. Roest, Leiden and Boston; Brill (Brill’s Studies in Intellectual History 115), 1-30, 2003.
[Kavanagh, 2005] C. Kavanagh. The Inﬂuence of Maximus the Confessor on Eriugena’s Treat-
ment of Aristotle’s Categories, American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 79, 567-96, 2005.
[Kenny, 2005] A. Kenny. Les Cat´egories chez les P`eres de l’´Eglise latins. In Bruun and Corti
(2005), 121-33.
[King, 2004] P. King. Anselm’s Philosophy of Language. In The Cambridge Companion to
Anselm, ed. B. Davies and B. Leftow, Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic, Oxford; Ox-
ford University Press, 1962.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
61
[Kneepkens, 1998] C. H. Kneepkens. Some Notes on Alcuin’s De perehermeniis with an Edition
of the Text. In Alcuin of York. Scholar at the Carolingian Court, ed. L. A. J. R. Houwen and
A. A. MacDonald, Groningen; Forsten, 81-112, 1998.
[Knuuttila, 1993] S. Knuuttila. Modalities in Medieval Philosophy, London and New York;
Routledge, 1993.
[Kretzmann, 1998] N. Kretzmann. Boethius and the Truth about Tomorrow’s Sea Battle. In
Ammonius and Boethius, 1998, 24-52.
[Lanfranc, 1854] Lanfranc. De corpore et sanguine Domini in J.-P. Migne, Patrologia Latina
150, 407-42, 1854.
[Leftow, 1991] B. Leftow. Time and Eternity, Ithaca and London; Cornell University Press,
1991.
[Lehmann, 1917] P. Lehmann. Cassiodorstudien VIII: Cassiodor-Isidor-Beda-Alchuine, Philolo-
gus 74, 357-83, 1917.
[Leonardi, 1959, 1960] Leonardi. I codici di Marziano Capella, Aevum 33, 443-89; 34, 1-99,
4111-524, 1959, 1960.
[Lewry, 1981] O. Lewry. Boethian Logic in the Medieval West. In Gibson, 1981, 90-134.
[Lloyd, 1990] A. C. Lloyd. The Anatomy of Neoplatonism, Oxford; Oxford University Press,
1990.
[Londey and Johanson, 1987] D. Londey and C. Johanson. The Logic of Apuleius, Leiden, New
York, Copenhagen and Cologne; Brill (Philosophia Antiqua 47), 1987.
[Long, 1995] A. A. Long. Cicero’s Plato and Aristotle. In Cicero the Philosopher, ed. J.G.F.
Powell, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 37-61, 1995.
[Magee, 1989] J. Magee. Boethius on Signiﬁcation and Mind. Leiden: Brill, 1989.
[Magee, 2003] J. Magee. Boethius. In A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages, ed. J. J.
E. Gracia and T. Noone,Oxford; Blackwell, 217–26, 2003.
[Marenbon, 1980] J. Marenbon. John Scottus and the Categoriae Decem. In W. Beierwaltes,
ed., Eriugena: Studien zu seinen Quellen, Heidelberg; Wintger, 116–34, 1980, = Marenbon
(200a), Item V.
[Marenbon, 1981] J. Marenbon. From the Circle of Alcuin to the School of Auxerre, Cambridge;
Cambridge University Press, 1981.
[Marenbon, 1983] J. Marenbon. Gilbert of Poitiers. In A History of Twelfth-Century Western
Philosophy, ed. P. Dronke, Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 328-52, 1983, = Maren-
bon (2000a) Item XIV.
[Marenbon, 1984] J. Marenbon. Carolingian Thought. In Carolingian Culture: Emulation and
Innovation, ed. R. McKitterick, Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 171-92, 1984, =
Marenbon (2000a) Item III.
[Marenbon, 1997a] J. Marenbon. Glosses and Commentaries on the Categories and De interpre-
tatione before Abelard. In Dialektik und Rhetorik im fr¨uheren und hohen Mittelalter, ed. J.
Fried, Munich; Historisches Kolleg (Schriften des historischen Kollegs, Kolloquien 27) 21-49,
1997, = Marenbon (2000a), Item IX
[Marenbon, 1997b] J. Marenbon. Alcuin, the Council of Frankfurt and the Beginnings of Me-
dieval Philosophy. In Berndt (1997) 603-15, 1997, = Marenbon (2000a), Item IV.
[Marenbon, 2000a] J. Marenbon. Aristotelian Logic, Platonism and the Context of Early Me-
dieval Philosophy in the West, Aldershot, Burlington, Singapore and Sydney; Ashgate (Var-
iorum Collected Studies Series 696), 2000.
[Marenbon, 2000b] J. Marenbon. Medieval Latin Commentaries and Glosses on Aristotelian
Logical texts, Before c. 1150 A.D., (= Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical
Texts: the Syriac, Arabic and Medieval Latin Traditions, ed. C. Burnett, London; Warburg
Institute, 1993 (Warburg Institute Surveys and Texts 23), 77-127 and ‘Supplement to the
Working Catalogue and Supplementary Bibliography’ in Marenbon (2000a), item II.
[Marenbon, 2002] J. Marenbon. Some Semantic Problems in Anselm’s De Grammatico. In Latin
Culture in the Eleventh Century, M. W. Herren, C. J. McDonough and R. G. Arthur, eds.,
Turnhout, Brepols, II, 73–8, 2002.
[Marenbon, 2003] J. Marenbon. Boethius, New York; Oxford University Press, 2003.
[Marenbon, 2005a] J. Marenbon. Les Cat´egories au d´ebut du moyen ˆage. In Bruun and Corti
(2005), 223-43, 2005.
[Marenbon, 2005b] J. Marenbon. Le temps, la prescience et les futurs contingents de Bo`ece `a
Thomas d’Aquin, Paris; Vrin, 2005.

62
John Marenbon
[Marenbon, 2007] J. Marenbon. Medieval Philosophy: an historical and philosophical introduc-
tion, London and New York; Routledge, 2007.
[Marenbon, 2008] J. Marenbon. Bo`ece, Porphyre et les vari´et´es de l’abstractionnisme. In La
structure du r´eel. ´Etudes sur la philosophie de Porphyre et sa r´eception, C. Erismann, ed.,
Paris, Vrin, 2008.
[Marenbon, forthcoming-a] J. Marenbon, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Boethius, Cam-
bridge; Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
[Martianus Capella, 1983] Martianus Capella. De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii, ed. J. Willis,
Leipzig; Teubner, 1983.
[Martin, 1991] C. J. Martin. The Logic of Negation in Boethius, Phronesis 36 (1991) 277-304,
1991.
[Martin, 2005] C. J. Martin. Formal Consequences in Scotus and Ockham:
towards an ac-
count of Scotus’ logic. In Duns Scot `a Paris ed. O. Boulnois, E. Karger, J.L. Sol`ere and
G. Sondag,Turnhout ;Brepols (Textes et ´etudes du Moyen ˆAge 26), 117–50, 2005.
[Martin, 2007] C. J. Martin. Denying Conditionals: Abaelard and the Failure of Boethius’ Ac-
count of the Hypothetical Syllogism, Vivarium, 45, 153-68, 2007.
[Martin, forthcoming] C. J. Martin. The Logical Textbooks and their Inﬂuence. In [Marenbon,
forthcoming-a].
[Maximus the Confessor, 1988] Maximus the Confessor. Maximi Confessoris Ambigua ad Io-
hannem iuxta Iohannis Scotti Eriugenae Latinam interpretationem, ed. E. Jeauneau, Turn-
hout; Brepols (Corpus Christianorum, series graeca 18), 1988.
[Meyvaert, 1979] P. Meyvaert. The Authorship of the “Libri Carolini”: observations prompted
by a recent book, Revue B´en´edictine 89, 29-57, 1979.
[Minio-Paluello, 1962] L. Minio-Paluello. Note sull’Aristotele latino medievale: XV — Dalle
Categoriae Decem pseudo-Agostiniane (Temistiane) al testo vulgato aristotelico Boeziano,
Rivista di ﬁlosoﬁa neoscolastica 54, 137-47, 1962. (Repr. in Minio-Paluello, 1972, 448-58.)
[Minio-Paluello, 1971] L. Minio-Paluello. Nuovi impulsi allo studio della logica: la seconda fase
della riscoperta di Aristotele e Boezio. In La scuola nell’occidente latino dell’alto medioevo,
Spoleto; Centro Italiano di studi sull’alto medioevo (Settimane di studio del Centro Italiano
di studi sull’alto medioevo 19), 743-66, 1971.
[Minio-Paluello, 1972] L. Minio-Paluello. Opuscula: the Latin Aristotle, Amsterdam; Hakkert,
1972.
[Moran, 1989] D. Moran. The Philosophy of John Scottus Eriugena. A Study of Idealism in the
Middle Ages, Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1989.
[Notker the German, 1972] Notker the German. Boethius’ Bearbeitung der Categoriae des Aris-
toteles, ed. J.C. King, T¨ubingen; Niemayer (Altdeutsche Textbibliothek 73; Die Werke Notkers
des Deutschen. Neue Ausgabe 5), 1972.
[Notker the German, 1975] Notker the German. Boethius’ Bearbeitung von Aristoteles’ Schrift
De interpretatione, ed. J.C. King, T¨ubingen; Niemayer (Altdeutsche Textbibliothek 81; Die
Werke Notkers des Deutschen. Neue Ausgabe 6), 1975.
[Odo of Tournai, 1994] Odo of Tournai. Two Theological Treatises,
transl. I.M. Resnick,
Philadelphia; University of Pennsylvania Press, 1994.
[Opus Caroli, 1998] Opus Caroli Regis contra Synodum (Libri Carolini), ed. A. Freeman, Han-
nover; Hahnsche Buchhandlung, 1998.
[Patzig, 1968] G. Patzig. Aristotle’s Theory of the Syllogism, transl. J. Barnes, Dordrecht; Rei-
del, 1968.
[Peter Damian, 1972] Peter Damian. Lettre sur la toute puissance divine, ed. A. Cantin, Paris;
´editions du Cerf (Sources chr´etiennes 191), 1972.
[Piper, 1882] P. Piper. Die Schriften Notkers und seiner Schule I, Freiburg, 1882.
[Porphyry, 1887] Porphyry. Porphyrii Isagoge et in Aristotelis Categorias commentarium, ed.
A. Busse, Berlin; Reimer (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 4.1), 1887.
[Porphyry, 1966] Porphyry. Isagoge (with Anonymi fragmentum: liber sex principiorum), ed.
L. Minio-Paluello, Bruges and Paris; Descl´ee de Brouwer (Aristoteles Latinus, I,6-7), 1966.
[Porphyry, 1998] Porphyry. Isagoge, ed. A. de Libera, Paris; Vrin, 1998.
[Porphyry, 2003] Porphyry. Introduction, ed. J. Barnes, Oxford; Oxford University Press [a
translation of the Isagoge and commentary on it], 1998.
[Prantl, 1885] K. von Prantl. Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande II, Leipzig; Hirzel, 2nd edn,
1885.

The Latin Tradition of Logic to 1100
63
[Prior, 1953] A. N. Prior. The Logic of Negative Terms in Boethius, Franciscan Studies, 13, 1-6,
1953.
[Pseudo-Dunchad, 1944] Pseudo-Dunchad. Glossae in Martianum, Lancaster, Pa.; Lancaster
Press, 1944.
[Ratramnus of Corbie, 1952] Ratramnus of Corbie. Liber de anima ad Odonem Bellovacensem,
ed. D. C. Lasmbot, Namur, Lille and Louvain; ´Editions Godenne, Libraire Giard, Nauwelaerts
(Analecta Medievalia Namurcensia 2), 1952.
[Remigius of Auxerre, 1965] Remigius of Auxerre. Commentum in Martianum Capellam, ed.
C.E. Lutz, Leiden; Brill, 1965.
[Resnick, 1992] M. Resnick. Divine power and possibility in St. Peter Damian’s ‘De divina
omnipotentia’, Leiden and New York; Brill, 1992. (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte
des Mittelalters 31), 1992.
[Richer, 1877] Richer. Historiarum libri IV, ed. G. Waitz, Hannover; Hahn (Monumenta Ger-
mania Historica, scriptores rerum germanicarum in usu scholarum), 1877.
[Rosier-Catach, 2004] I. Rosier-Catach. La parole eﬃcace. Signe vituel, sacr´e, Paris, Seuil, 2004.
[Schupp, 2004] F. Schupp. Abbon de Fleury et la logique: quelques questions historiques et
syst´ematiques. In Abbon de Fleury. Philosophie, sciences et comput autour de l’an mil, ed.
B. Obrist (Oriens-Occidens 6), Paris-Villejuif; CNRS, 43-60, 2004.
[Shanzer, 1986] D. Shanzer. A Philological and Literary Commentary on Martianus Capella
‘De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii’ Book I, Berkeley, Los Angeles and London; University
of California Press (University of California Publications: Classical Studies 32), 1986.
[Sharples, forthcoming] R. W. Sharples. Prescience and Future Contingents. In Marenbon,
Forthcoming-A
[Shiel, 1990] J. Shiel. Boethius’ Commentaries on Aristotle. In Sorabji, 1990, 349-72
[Sorabji, 1990] R. Sorabji, ed. Aristotle Transformed. The Ancient Commentators and their
Inﬂuence, London; Duckworth, 1990.
[Sorabji, 2004] R. Sorabji. The Philosophy of the Commentators, 200-600 AD, Vol. 3, Logic
and Metaphysics, London; Duckworth, 2004.
[Southern, 1948] R. W. Southern. Lanfranc of Bec and Berengerof Tours. In Studies in Medieval
History Presented to Frederik Maurice Powicke, Oxford; Oxford University Press, 27-48, 1948.
[Southern, 1990] R. W. Southern. Saint Anselm: a portrait in a landscape. Cambridge; Cam-
bridge University Press, 1990.
[Speca, 2001] A. Speca. Hypothetical Syllogistic and Stoic Logic, Leiden, Boston and Cologne;
Brill (Philosophia Antiqua 87), 2001.
[Stahl, 1971] W. H. Stahl. Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts, New York; Columbia
University Press, 1971.
[Striker, 1973] G. Striker. Zur Frage nach der Quellen von Boethius’ de hypotheticis syllogismis,
Archiv f¨ur Geschichte der Philosophie 55, 70-5, 1973.
[Stump, 1989] E. Stump. Dialectic and its Place in the Development of Medieval Logic, Ithaca
and London; Cornell University Press, 1989.
[Sullivan, 1967] M. W. Sullivan. Apuleian Logic. The Nature, Sources, and Inﬂuences of
Apuleius’s Peri Hermeneias, Amsterdam; North Holland Publishing Co., 1967.
[Van de Vyver, 1929] A. Van de Vyver. Les ´Etapes du d´eveloppement philosophique du haut
moyen ˆage, Revue belge de philologie et de l’histoire 8, 425-52, 1929.
[Van de Vyver, 1935] A. Van de Vyver. Les œuvres in´edites d’Abbon de Fleury,
Revue
b´en´edictine 47, 125-69, 1935.
[Van de Vyver, 1942] A. Van de Vyver. Vroeg-middeleeuwsche Wijsgeerige Verhandelingen, Ti-
jdschrift voor Philosophie, 4, 156-99, 1942.
[Von Perger, 2005] M. Von Perger. Eriugenas Adaption der Aristotelischen Kategorienlehre. In
Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im arabischen und im lateinischen Mittelalter, ed. D.
Perler and U. Rudolph, Leiden; Brill (Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters
84), 239-303, 2005.
[Von Waltershausen and Baeumker, 1924] B. S. F. von Waltershausen and C. Baeumker.
Fr¨uhmittelalterliche Glossen des angeblichen Jepa zur Isagoge des Porphyrius, M¨unster; As-
chendorﬀ(Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 24,1), 1924.
[Zachhuber, 2005] J. Zachhuber. Das Universalienprobleme bei den griechischen Kirchenv¨atern
und im fr¨uhen Mittelalter, Millenium 2, 137-74, 2005.

This page intentionally left blank

LOGIC AT THE TURN OF THE TWELFTH
CENTURY
John Marenbon
This chapter is not, like the others in the book, a survey of the logical doctrines
of a period, because I at least (and perhaps other scholars too) am not yet in
a position to write such a survey. It is simply a guide to the material, to the
technical problems it presents and some of the theories historians have elaborated
about it, along with an indication of a few of the philosophical themes which are
waiting to be explored. ‘The turn of the twelfth century’ is a deliberately vague
title, designed to indicate the hole between where the previous chapter ﬁnished and
Abelard’s work, the subject of the following chapter. But plugging this gap — even
as here, with a sponge and a nailbrush — is not a straightforwardly chronological
matter. Abelard’s Dialectica, the main subject of the next chapter, may have been
being written as early as 1110: a good deal of what is discussed here was probably
written no earlier, and some of the texts may in fact date from the 1120s or 1130s.
But the writings and writers discussed here have at least traditionally been seen
as providing the prelude to Abelard’s work. They form a separate group in their
methods and concerns from the writings of Abelard’s contemporaries and the later
twelfth-century schools considered in the ﬁnal section of the next chapter.1
1
THE CURRICULUM
The study of logic in this period was based around the Boethian curriculum that
had come into general use about a century before. Writing around the year 1110,
Abelard summarizes the situation neatly [Peter Abelard, 1970, 146]:
The Latin treatment of this art is furnished by seven books, the work
of three authors. For so far in the Latin world there are just two of
them by Aristotle, the Categories and On Interpretation, and one by
Porphyry . . .
We generally use four by Boethius: On Division, the
Topics and his Categorical and Hypothetical Syllogisms.
1This chapter was to have been written by Yukio Iwakuma, who more than anyone else has
studied the mostly unpublished material from which an idea of the developments in logic in
the years c.
1100 can be formed.
I have adapted it, at two days’ notice, from a ‘Synth`ese’
written for a Paris conference in February 2007 and made available on the web. I am grateful to
Yukio Iwakuma for letting me read his forthcoming ‘Vocales Revisited’, [Iwakuma, forthcoming-
B]. A revised version of the original, longer synth`ese will be published in the Proceedings of
the conference [Rosier-Catach, Forthcoming-C]. I am very grateful to Ir`ene Rosier-Catach for
allowing me to use this text in this volume.
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

66
John Marenbon
By the Topics (Liber topicorum), On Topical diﬀerentiae is meant.
The com-
mentary on Cicero’s Topics became much less popular once this text was actively
studied and commented on, from c. 1100 onwards. Note the absence of On Def-
inition, known but not a regular feature of the logical curriculum. Note too that
Abelard is here just listing the texts studied; Boethius’s commentaries on Aristotle
and Porphyry continued to be indispensable aids.
It has recently been pointed out that there was even in the late eleventh century
some knowledge of the text of the Prior Analytics [See Iwakuma, Forthcoming-A,
adding to the discussion given by Minio-Paluello in Aristoteles Latinus III,1-4:
ix, 433-6 and in Minio-Paluello, 1954]. But this work had no serious bearing on
how logic was studied in the period around 1100, and most of the logicians have a
rather inaccurate view of the contents of the Prior Analytics. It was when Abelard
came to know the Prior Analytics, at the time he wrote his Logica Ingredientibus,
that the text seems to have had some important inﬂuence [Martin, Forthcoming].
Similarly, the genuine Aristotelian Topics in Boethius’s translation did not start
to be used until the time of John of Salisbury, but there is a surprising citation
from it in a logical text from the early twelfth century [Rosier-Catach, 1986].
2
THE FORM OF COMMENTARIES
The greater part of the evidence for teaching and thought about logic in the period
is in the form of continuous commentaries on the texts of the logical curriculum.
(For the sake of convenience in referring to so many anonymous commentaries,
alphanumeric designations have been assigned to them. In the case of the Isagoge
(I), the Categories(C) and On Interpretation (H), they refer to Marenbon [2000+].
For De topicis diﬀerentiis (B), they refer to the catalogue in Green-Pedersen [1984].
Yukio Iwakuma has also assigned numbers to commentaries on On Division (D),
On Categorical Syllogisms (SC) and On Hypothetical Syllogisms (SH). They all
share the form of being passage by passage treatments of the texts: the ﬁrst few
words of a passage (a lemma) are written out, and there follows a discussion. But
they fall into two main types [Marenbon, 2000+, Introduction]. The model for the
most widespread type, the ‘composite’ commentary, was provided by Boethius’s
commentaries, where each section of the text was discussed discursively, and prob-
lems were raised, explained and resolved. (The way in which Boethius acted as a
model can be seen from how his commentaries were the main source for the early
medieval Isagoge glosses and for P2 and C4.) Boethius, however, did not go in
detail through every word of the text (although the elementary ﬁrst editio on On
Interpretation does from time to time gloss individual sentences). The twelfth-
century logicians added an element of literal, phrase by phrase commentary, quite
often put in the ﬁrst person, so that the commentator is speaking for Aristotle,
Porphyry or Boethius, as if these authors were to have paused to explain their
texts more explicitly and ponderously. In the other, slightly less common type,
‘literal commentary’, this very detailed commentary predominates, and discur-
sive discussion is more limited. Literal commentaries are, then, distant formally

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
67
from the model of Boethius, and they are usually distant in content too, whereas
some composite commentaries contain many passages borrowed from, or closely
based on, Boethius. ‘Literal’ and ‘composite’ should not, however, be thought of
as designating two completely distinct classes: literal commentaries contain some
more discursive comments, and composite commentaries can have sections where
the exegesis is merely literal. There were also ‘problem commentaries’ (the best
known is Abelard’s Logica Nostrorum petitioni sociorum), which concentrated on
discussing the diﬃcult issues, with very little or no literal commentary. None of
these has been dated to before c. 1120, but they should be born in mind, since it
will turn out that the chronology of the commentaries is far less ﬁxable than has
been believed.
All these commentaries belong to the activity of teaching and learning logic in
the cathedral schools, and especially in the schools of Paris, which were beginning
to become important in the early twelfth century. But what exactly is their re-
lation? Were they drawn up to be read out by the master, or are they, rather,
lecture-notes taken by students? A few commentaries — notably one on On Inter-
pretation (H5) — contain passages recording questions, discussion and humorous
(sometimes obscene) asides that appear to be a very direct record of what went
on during a particular set of lectures [Iwakuma, 1999, 94-7]. Other commentaries
give the impression of having been more formally written up. Probably there is
a range of diﬀerent relationships between the various texts that survive and the
lectures with which they are connected, and it goes beyond a simple choice be-
tween teacher’s text or lecture notes, since lecture notes might be presented to a
teacher for correction or they might form the basis of a student’s own lectures,
with passages revised ands his own particular take on controversial issues added.
These are conjectures, but one thing at least is clear: the twelfth-century logical
commentaries were not usually conceived of or created as literary works, produced
by a given, single author. They are, for the most part at least, records of teaching
and learning, in which individual masters’ views on issues may well play an impor-
tant role, but which draw often on many sources. The relations between diﬀerent
versions of the same basic commentary show how freely one master would feel he
could borrow from and adapt the teaching of another: an example is provided
by the ‘C8 complex’ (see [Marenbon, 2000+] in the revised web-based version of
the Categories list). The result is that commentaries have a layered form, with
extra material added, perhaps in a number of stages. Where we have manuscripts
of diﬀerent versions, it is easy to see how the later versions are layered, with a
stratum that follows the earlier commentary, and one or more strata added. For
example, in P3, after a discussion of Porphyry’s questions shared by the three
manuscripts, one of the manuscripts, now in Paris, adds a passage giving an alter-
native discussion of the phrase ‘only in bare, pure thoughts’, in which it is related
to non-existents, such as chimaeras. If we had only the Paris manuscript, it would
not be so clear that this paragraph was an added layer. We should suspect, there-
fore, that there are often layers of this sort within commentaries for which only
one manuscript survives, or in the earliest version we have of a commentary that

68
John Marenbon
went on to be further revised.
A rough modern parallel might make the nature of these twelfth-century
manuscripts more vivid. Imagine someone teaching an elementary logic course
who has produced a detailed handout, using a standard textbook which she feels
free to copy other logicians (she is just using it to teach, as was intended), and free
also to change wherever she can improve on the presentation or disagrees on the
stance the author has taken on a controversial issue, or where she ﬁnds a passage
out of date. Suppose, now, a student downloads the handout, but revises it in
line with extra comments the teacher makes in her lectures, and in the light of a
conversation he has with her about some issues which he found puzzling. Then,
three years later, when he is asked to lecture on the same subject, he turns to his
revised handout and uses it as the basis for his own lecture handout, but adding
some new material, reﬂecting his own views and some very recent controversies.
What results will be a document that, potentially, can tell a good deal about how
logic is taught, and about both teachers’ views — but it will not be easy, without
further information, to extract this information; and the wrong way to go about
it would be to try and ﬁnd who is the document’s author.
3
THE ‘EARLY TWELFTH-CENTURY’ COMMENTARIES
A ‘Working Catalogue’ has been drawn up that aims to list all the commentaries
we know on the Isagoge, Categories and On Interpretation up to the end of the
twelfth century [Marenbon, 2000+], and there is also a (chronologically broader)
catalogue of On Topical diﬀerentiae commentaries and list of commentaries on the
other Boethian textbooks in [Green-Pedersen, 1984]. Although at the end of this
chapter I shall call into question the easy distinction that is often made between
logic from the beginning of the twelfth century and logic from the period 1115-40
(hence my scare quotes), there is certainly a group of commentaries from these
lists which researchers up until now have assigned to the period c. 1100-1115 and
distinguished from other, supposedly later pieces:
Literal commentaries
Commentaries on the Isagoge (P5), On Interpretation (H4), On Division (D7) in
MS Paris BN 13368 (edited in [Peter Abelard, 1969]);
Commentaries on the Isagoge (‘Disputata Porphyrii’ P7) (Edited in [Iwakuma,
1992, 74-100]), On Interpretation (H5) and On Topical diﬀerentiae (B1) in MS
Munich clm 14779;
The commentary on On Interpretation in MS Oxford, Corpus Christi College
233 (H7) (distantly related to H4 and H5);
Commentaries belonging to a collection of material in MS Pommersfelden Schloss-
bibliothek 16/2764, including two fragments of, or notes from, Isagoge commen-
taries (P4a, P4b) (edited in [Iwakuma, 1992, 62-5]), a commentary on On Top-
ical diﬀerentiae (B3) [edited Hansen, 2005] and another fragment of one (B26),

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
69
a commentary on On Cagegorical Syllogisms (SC6), a partial commentary on On
Hypothetical Syllogisms (SH6), and some logical notes.
Almost all of this material, where it has not been published, has been tran-
scribed by Yukio Iwakuma.
(Commentaries in Cambridge MS Fitzwilliam Museum, MacClean 165, P6 and
C6: these may belong to this group in principle, but they have been hardly stud-
ied.)
The commentaries listed here in MS Paris BN 13368 (P5, H4) have been con-
sidered to be Abelard’s early works, but this attribution has now been strongly
questioned [Cameron, Martin and Marenbon, Forthcoming]. They are related to
the commentaries in MS Munich clm 14779, and H5 seems to preserve a fuller
version of the same lectures as H4, including personal references that have been
interpreted, but questionably, as relating to Abelard [Marenbon, 1997a, Appendix;
Iwakuma, 1999, 94-7]. Further, and even more doubtful attributions have been
made. Iwakuma [1992, 58-62] once attributed P7 to Roscelin. Luscombe [1962,
225-34] argued that it was by a pupil of Abelard’s. Iwakuma also [1992, 61] sug-
gested that the other commentaries and logical notes in this section of MS Munich
clm 14779 are probably from the same school and suggests that some might be by
Roscelin. It is these supposed links with Abelard — usually, it has been presumed,
the young Abelard, or his teacher, that have provided the reason for dating the
commentaries in the Paris and Munich manuscripts to the very ﬁrst years on the
twelfth century. Their dating now is uncertain, and C5, at least, could well be
from the 1120s or later. The Pommersfelden material must, however, be this early,
since the manuscript is dated to the end of the eleventh/ beginning of the twelfth
century.
Composite commentaries
There is a group of what might be called ‘standard’ composite commentaries:
commentaries that, unusually, are preserved in more than one manuscript, often
in diﬀerent versions (cf. [Iwakuma, 1999, 101-2; 2004a]):
On the Isagoge: P3 (3 MSS; consisting of an earliest-preserved version and two
independent revisions) [Iwakuma, Forthcoming-C].
On the Categories: C8 complex: C8, C7 and C14 (6 MSS; consisting of an
earliest-preserved version and four revisions falling into two groups). This material
has been transcribed and studied by Yukio Iwakuma.
On On Interpretation: H11 and H9 (3 MSS; H9 is a version of H11, but con-
siderably diﬀerent). (Edition of H9 by Onno Kneepkens in progress; extracts and
information on in [Kneepkens 1994; 2003])
On On Division: D8 (= MS Paris BN 13368, f. 191rb-4vb; MS Assisi 573, f.
68ra-78vb)
On On Topical diﬀerentiae: B8 (3 MSS); B10 (transcribed by Yukio Iwakuma)
On On Hypothetical Syllogisms: SH3 (= MS Munich clm 14458, f. 59-82 ; MS
Orleans 266, pp. 78b-118a; MS Munich clm 14779, f. 66r-7r) (see [Iwakuma, 1999,

70
John Marenbon
101])
Although datings and attributions have been proposed for a number of these
commentaries (see page 77, below), there is little that can be established solidly,
except to place them somewhere in the period c.1090 — c. 1140.
Other composite commentaries that have been considered to belong to the pe-
riod include:
P14, which has some relation to P3.
P16, which is thought to be early because it is heavily dependent on
Boethius.
P15, which is made up of extracts from P3 and P15.
(All three commentaries have been transcribed by Yukio Iwakuma.)
4
THE TREATISES AND THEIR FORM
Two long and important logical treatises survive from the earlier part of the twelfth
century: the ‘Dialectica’ by Gerlandus (probably of Besan¸con) [Gerlandus, 1959],
and the Dialectica of Peter Abelard [Peter Abelard, 1970]. The logical content of
Abelard’s Dialectica is discussed in detail by Ian Wilks in the next chapter. The
comments here are merely about its form and chronology in relation to Gerlandus’s
treatise.
The two Dialecticas do not, as might be expected, make a radical break away
from the commentary form. addressed to his brother Dagobert and said to be
for the education of his nephews [Peter Abelard, 1970,146:23-5], but comparison
with the set of commentaries known as the Logica Ingredientibus (c. 1119) shows
that Abelard is using his lecture material, though perhaps in a considerably ear-
lier form. He deals, usually section by section, with the material of each of the
textbooks in the curriculum, allowing himself some occasional rearrangements.
In general, he seems to have included more of the discussion that took place in
the lectures here than in the overt commentaries which form the Logica Ingre-
dientibus, although he sometimes abbreviates it so severely as to make it nearly
incomprehensible. Gerlandus states explicitly in his prologue that his object is
to introduce beginners to the teachings of Aristotle, who tends to be too concise,
and Boethius, who is prolix and diﬃcult to grasp. In the course of his treatise,
Gerlandus goes through each of the ancient textbooks, except for On Division,
writing terse paraphrases followed by sections full of nit-picking questions (what
he calls sophismata). Formally, his work is closest to the literal commentaries (but
with the added sophismata), whereas Abelard’s Dialectica is close formally to the
composite commentaries.
The dating of the two Dialecticas is diﬃcult. Abelard’s Dialectica used to be
dated towards the end of his life, after 1140, but recent opinion has put its com-
pletion before 1117, and quite possibly rather earlier than that (see [Mews, 1985,
74-104; De Rijk, 1986,103-8]; Mews is now inclined to accept a date even earlier

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
71
than 1117]. If, as has now been argued (see [Cameron, Martin and Marenbon,
Forthcoming]), Abelard did not write the commentaries that have been assigned
to his earliest years as a teacher (c. 1103), a dating of start of work on the Di-
alectica even to before 1110 becomes plausible. The Dialectica of Gerlandus was
thought by its editor to have been written by Gerlandus the Elder, who worked in
the ﬁrst part of the eleventh century. But it has been argued convincingly that the
author of the Dialectica was Gerlandus of Besan¸con [Iwakuma, 1992, 47-54]. This
attribution still leaves room for a wide range of dates. There are parallels between
the treatise and P5 (the literal commentary usually attributed to Abelard) and
Abelard’s Dialectica, but, if there is inﬂuence, it is not clear in which direction
[Iwakuma, 1992, 52-3]. Gerlandus was still alive in 1149, when he travelled to
Frankfurt with Thierry of Chartres [Mews, 1998, 72-3], and the single manuscript
of his Dialectica could be as late as 1130 [Iwakuma, 1992, 48-9]. His knowledge in
this work of a passage from the Aristotle’s own Topics might also point away from
an early dating [Rosier-Catach, 1986]. A date between 1100, at the very earliest,
and any time in the 1120s is possible. A treatise preserved in MS Paris BN, lat
544, 94r-101r (the ‘Limoges Treatise’) is believed by its discoverer to be part of
a Dialectica by Robert of Paris (see pp. 74–75 below) and todate from c. 1100
[Iwakuma, Forthcoming-B].
It may be the case that a diﬀerent form of short logical treatise, called ‘In-
troductiones’, also existed even before the beginning of the twelfth century. A
number of Introductiones from the middle or later part of the twelfth century are
known [cf. De Rijk, 1967]. But some Introductiones must have been written by
c. 1117 or earlier, because Abelard refers in his Dialectica to his Introductiones
parvulorum (which there are no reason to identify, as has often been done, with
his so-called literal commentaries) [Peter Abelard (1970) 174:1, 232:10-12, 269:1,
329:4; cf. Mews (1985) 74-5]. Two sets of Introductiones, rather similar to each
other and attributed, one to a Master G., one to (the same person?) a Master
William Paganellus, have been published [Iwakuma, 1993] and placed by their
editor, who attributes them both to William of Champeaux, slightly before 1080
[De Rijk, 1967, 130-46; Iwakuma, 2003b]; the earlier of the two manuscripts, how-
ever, is mid-twelfth-century. These Introductiones are short works that are not
concerned at all with the matter of the Isagoge or the Categories, but with how
propositions are constructed from words, and how arguments are made up using
propositions; there is a very strong emphasis on topical argument. The ancient
textbooks (On Interpretation, Boethius’s treatises on syllogistic and his De topicis
diﬀerentiis) are ultimately behind the teaching, but often distantly.
Two other logical, or quasi-logical, treatises are known, which were written
by theologians.
One, because it was deﬁnitely written before 1100, is treated
in the previous chapter: Anselm’s De grammatico, a dialogue on the problem
of denominatives that is raised by the Categories. The second treatise does not
sound like a logical work at all: it is the On Original Sin (De peccato originali) by
Odo of Tournai (or Cambrai) [PL 160, 1071-1102; transl. Odo of Tournai, 1994].
Odo was a logician, turned ascetic monk. As a master of logic at Tournai, he

72
John Marenbon
had apparently written a number of logical treatises, none of which survives. But
when, later in life, his monks urged him to write about the problem of Original
Sin, he produced a treatise that contains whole chapters that could come from a
manual of logic. On Original Sin was probably written between 1096 and Odo’s
death in 1113 [cf. Odo of Tournai, 1994, 26; Resnick, the translator, suggests 1105
as the latest date].
5
LOGIC AND THE TRIVIUM
There were close connections between studying logic, and studying the other two
subjects of the trivium: grammar and rhetoric.
The longest and most advanced of the textbooks used in the grammar cur-
riculum, Priscian’s Institutions (Institutiones), had been commented on since the
ninth century. The early twelfth-century commentary on Priscian is known as the
Glosulae. The writers of the Glosulae, both to the main part of the Institutions
(‘Priscian major’), and the concluding books (‘Priscian minor’), knew about the
logicians’ debates and were willing to bring them into their grammatical com-
mentary — not without reason, because Priscian had his own, Stoic philosophical
source, Apollonius Dyscolus. A striking example is the long discussion that begins
the Glosulae on the deﬁnition of ‘utterance’ (vox), which is almost identical, al-
though diﬀerently arranged, to passages in the ‘standard’ Categories commentary
(C8) [edited in edited in Rosier(-Catach), 1993]. There are philosophical elements,
too, in the related Notae Dunelmenses, a series of notes and reports of masters’
views, written by someone who knew the Glosulae [A complete, web-based edition
exists, but is not yet publicly available].
Dating this grammatical material is no less problematic than for the logic.
As with the logical commentaries, the Glosulae is a layered work, and some, at
least, of the layers are discernible through looking at the diﬀerent manuscripts. It
used to be thought that one manuscript of the Glosulae on Priscian major (MS
Cologne, Dombibliothek 201), dated from the late eleventh century, so providing
a relatively early terminus ante quem for the earliest surviving version of the
commentary, but now that manuscript has been re-dated to the twelfth century.
The Notae Dunelmenses report above all, and as if the writer had heard them in
person, the views of a Master G., and they have been found in a number of cases to
correspond with other reports of the teaching of William of Champeaux [Rosier-
Catach, Forthcoming-A]. Since it is sometimes made clear that Master G. disagrees
with what the Glosulae says, some version of the commentary must have been in
existence during William of Champeaux’s teaching career (if the identiﬁcation
of Master G. is correct): therefore in all probability before he became Bishop of
Chˆalons-sur-Marne in 1113. Moreover, Abelard knows the teaching of the Glosulae
by the time he wrote his Dialectica (perhaps even before 1113).
It was neither in his logical nor his grammatical teaching, but in a course of
lectures on rhetoric by William that Abelard, on his own account, made his famous
attack on William of Champeaux’s theory of universals. William was clearly a

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
73
teacher of rhetoric.
Moreover, positions on the theory of universals have been
found by those studying the rhetorical commentaries of the time, especially one
associated with William of Champeaux. [Fredborg, 1986, 13, 29, 30] There is also
a close connection between logic and rhetoric brought about by the fact that the
fourth book of Boethius’s On Topical diﬀerentiae, a central text for the logicians,
is devoted to the rhetorical topics. Most logicians did not comment on it, but
Abelard includes a long digression on rhetoric in his commentary, which is copied
by one commentator to form a commentary on this ﬁnal book [Fredborg, 2003].
6
TESTIMONIES AND KNOWN MASTERS
Faced with this mass of material that is mostly anonymous, and therefore hard to
place or date, it is important to ask what sort of evidence exists about where and
when particular masters taught. The hope might be that the historian of philos-
ophy could act as a matchmaker, happily uniting names with texts. The danger
is that, out of eagerness to earn her keep, she will promote arranged marriages,
yoking together couples that have never met and should never have been united.
The two most important testimonies about logic at the turn of the twelfth
century are the beginning of Anselm’s On the Incarnation of the Word and some
passages in Abelard’s Story of my Disasters (Historia calamitatum). Both have
the advantage of coming from the hands of well-known authors, indeed the two
greatest philosophers of their time, and appearing in texts that can themselves be
securely dated. There are, however, considerations about the authors’ intentions
that make their evidence less than straightforward.
At the opening of On the Incarnation of the Word (ﬁrst version 1091-2), Anselm
addresses Roscelin. He says that logicians like Roscelin
think that universal substances are merely the breath of an utterance
(ﬂatum vocis) and . . . are not able to understand colour as other than
the body, or a person’s wisdom as other than his soul. [Anselm, 1946,
I, 285 (and cf. 289); for revised version: II, 9-10]
The problem in interpreting this passage is to judge how accurately Anselm is
representing his opponent. Given that he believes that Roscelin’s position on the
Trinity is heretical, might he be, not describing his logical views, but caricaturing
them?
In his Story of my Disasters, Abelard tells of how he came to Paris, where the
discipline of logic ﬂourished especially, with William of Champeaux as the teacher
there; and how William turned from favouring, to persecuting him, when he tried
to refute his views and sometimes seemed to have the upper hand in disputations
[Peter Abelard (1978) 64:31-8]. Abelard does not say a word about the content
of his, or William’s, arguments. A few paragraphs later, however, he gives some
more detail when he describes an incident that took place when he returned, c.
1108, to Paris after a period of illness spent in his native Brittany:

74
John Marenbon
Then I returned to him [William] in order to hear his lectures on
rhetoric. We exerted ourselves in disputing with one another, and in
the course of these disputations I forced him through the most clearly
reasoned arguments to change his old view about universals, indeed to
reject it. He held the view about the commonness of universals accord-
ing to which the same thing as a thing (essentialiter) is at one and the
same time whole within its single individuals, which do not diﬀer as
things (in essentia) but only through the variety of their many acci-
dents. He corrected his view by saying from then on that the thing is
the same, not as a thing, but through non-diﬀerence (non essentialiter
sed indiﬀerenter). And, since for logicians the chief question about
universals has always been in this — so much so that even Porphyry,
writing about universals in his Isagoge, does not presume to give a
conclusion, saying ‘To treat of this is extremely profound’ — when
William had no choice but to correct, or rather abandon, this view, his
lectures came to be so badly regarded that they were hardly accepted
on the other parts of logic, as if the whole of this art were contained
in that one view, on universals.[Peter Abelard, 1967, 65:80 – 66:100]
The ﬁrst view held by William is usually labelled ‘Material Essence Realism’; a
fuller account of it, along with his own counter-arguments, can be found in both
of Abelard’s mature Porphyry commentaries (from c. 1119, and c. 1125). But
Abelard may not have developed by 1108 the same arguments that he would later
use. Nor is it clear whether Material Essence Realism was William’s invention,
or merely the theory he happened to have adopted.
Moreover, Abelard wrote
his Story of my Disasters probably c. 1131, nearly a quarter of a century after
this dispute with William, and with the aim of preparing for his re-entry into the
Parisian schools by casting his controversial career and personal life in a favourable
light, under which he was the victim of envy. It would not be surprising if he
had magniﬁed the importance of his diﬀerence with William or the extent of his
intellectual victory.
There are also chronicle sources which provide some names and suggestions
about logic in the late eleventh century. In Hermann of Tournai’s account (writ-
ten 1142 or later) of the restoration of the abbey at Tournai by Odo (who would
go on to write On Original Sin), he describes a certain master Rainbertus of Lille
as reading logic ‘in the same way as certain contemporaries in voce’ [Hermann of
Tournai, 1883, 275]. He contrasts Rainbertus unfavourably with Odo, who ‘read
logic for his pupils in re in the manner of Boethius and the ancient doctors’ (. . .
eandem dialecticam non iuxta quosdam modernos in voce, sed more Boetii antiquo-
rum doctorum in re discipulis legebat). Hermann goes on to apply to logicians like
Rainbertus a comment that Anselm addresses to Roscelin (in the revised version
of his treatise), that they are not ‘dialecticians, but heretics in dialectic’ [Hermann
of Tournai, 1883, 275]. A chronicle from Fleury (c. 1110) records that at the time
when Lanfranc died, that is to say, 1087, the eminent logicians were John, who ar-
gued that the art of logic is ‘concerned with utterances’ (vocalis), and his followers,

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
75
Robert of Paris, Roscelin of Compi`egne and Arnulf of Laon [Bouquet, 1781, 3]. Of
these names, Roscelin is well known through Anselm’s testimony, and it may be
possible to connect Robert and Arnulf with some of the anonymous material. It
is common for twelfth-century authors to use their own names at times in logical
examples [Iwakuma, 1999, 96-7], and to use place names, river names and so on of
their own towns in the same way. The commentaries on On Topical diﬀerentiae
and On Categorical Syllogisms in the Pommersfelden manuscript from the turn of
the twelfth century use the name ‘Arnulfus’ in this way, and there is a mention of
Laon: so there seems reason to think of Arnulf of Laon as the person who gave
these lectures (or, possibly, who wrote them down) [Iwakuma, 1999, 96; Hansen,
2005, 46-7]. The Limoges Treatise uses ‘Robert’ as an example, suggesting that it
might have been written by Robert of Paris [Iwakuma, Forthcoming-B].
7
PHILOSOPHICAL THEMES TO BE EXPLORED
The sections above will have given an idea of the problems that must be tackled
before the philosophical doctrines in these early twelfth-century texts can be in-
terpreted. This chapter will not, for the reasons explained at the outset, oﬀer an
account of these ideas; here, rather, is an indication of what some of the major
themes are, and what has been written about them.
7.1
Universals and . . .
The theme which has dominated — and to say ‘dominated’ is an understatement
— scholarship on logic at the turn of the twelfth century is the Problem of Univer-
sals, with a capital P and a capital U. So much has this theme dominated, that it
was clear to scholars that it was what was at issue, even before they knew of any
of the texts. The dramatis personae — Roscelin, the radical nominalist, who held
that universals are merely puﬀs of air; William of Champeaux, the conservative
realist; and Abelard, the ‘conceptualist’, accredited with genius because he chose
the middle way — were already gathered at the stage door before anyone was in a
position to give them any lines (see e.g. [Michaud, 1867], containing 200 pages on
William of Champeaux’s logic, without the author’s claiming to know the texts of
any of it). Once Abelard’s lengthy discussions of universals in his Logica Ingredien-
tibus (c. 1118) and Logica Nostrorum Petitioni Sociorum (c. 1125) were published
[see next chapter for detailed discussion], most attention naturally shifted to them
and away from conjecture about what was being discussed twenty years before.
Nevertheless, some scholars did begin to try to tell a philosophical story, based
on the scraps of evidence to be garnered and, recently, on some attributions that,
unfortunately, are far from certain.
Nearly a century ago, Fran¸cois Picavet (1911) did an excellent job of demolishing
the various views of Roscelin that had been built up without proper evidence.
More recently, Jean Jolivet (1992) brought together the various diﬀerent reports
of Roscelin’s views, and argued that his nominalism was linked to a semantic

76
John Marenbon
theory that concentrates on the reference of words to things, by contrast with the
usual Boethian semantic triangle of words, thoughts and things; the nominalism
developed by his pupil, Abelard, would be very diﬀerent in its semantics. It is
by no means clear though what sense is made by the views Jolivet attributes to
Roscelin, or whether Roscelin really held them. (See also [Tweedale, 1988, 204-5]).
Another opponent of realism was immediately recognized in Gerlandus (though his
work was wrongly place in the eleventh century: see §4 above). In the preface to
his edition of the Dialectica, perhaps still the best analysis of Gerlandus’s position,
De Rijk notes what he calls his ‘problemless nominalism’ [Gerlandus, 1959, liii-lv;
Tweedale, 1988, 198-204]. Gerlandus clearly hopes to interpret the Isagoge and
Categories as discussions about utterances (voces), and yet there is no explicit sign
of argument for a metaphysical position (such as that there exist only particulars),
and his semantics remains unclear, because some of the most diﬃcult and revealing
passages in the Dialectica have not yet been properly explained.
Recently, an ambitious attempt has been made by Yukio Iwakuma to bring
together what is known about Roscelin and Gerlandus, with some anonymous
material he has discovered and the chronicle accounts (see above, §6) into an
account of ‘vocalism’ or ‘pre-vocalism’ (the term derives from the Latin vocales,
used in the early twelfth century to describe Abelard and those who followed
his position on universals) [Iwakuma, 1992]. The chronicles, he believes, name
the main protagonists: John (otherwise unknown); his pupils – Roscelin, Arnulf
of Laon and Robert of Paris.
To these he adds Gerlandus, now recognized as
Gerlandus of Besan¸con. All the literal commentaries listed in §3 above (except for
P6, C6 and H7, on which he has not written) are linked by him to this movement.
Constant Mews at one stage suggested that the Priscian Glosulae might belong
to it too, and that their original author was the John mentioned in the chronicles;
but his view has not found much support [Mews, 1992, 14, 33; cf. Mews, 1998, 50
— 55, and cf. 68- 73].
I contributed to this discussion [Marenbon, 1997b, 108-113; 2004, 26-34] by
linking the supposed early commentaries by Abelard (P5, H4, D7) with the move-
ment identiﬁed by Iwakuma. I also insisted that this group of early ‘vocalists’
identiﬁed by Iwakuma (including the young Abelard) needed to be distinguished
sharply from Abelard and the vocalists who were his school. The mature Abelard,
I said, had a very deﬁnite metaphysical position: that only particular substances
and accidents exist. The earlier group of logicians, and Abelard c. 1100-5, were,
by contrast just following an exegetical strategy — that of reading the texts of
Aristotle, Porphyry and Boethius in voce, that is to say, taking the words of the
text to refer to other voces, not to things. That they read the texts in this fashion
did not mean that they must have believed that there are no things which corre-
spond to the words; for, as I pointed out, even mentions of individual substances
and accidents in the texts were read as referring to words. Iwakuma now accepts
this qualiﬁcation of his position, and distinguishes between ‘proto-vocalists’ (at
the turn of the twelfth century) and ‘vocalists’ (Peter Abelard and his followers)
[Iwakuma, Forthcoming-B].

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
77
My view, however, obscures as much as it reveals. Although it is true that
explaining the logical texts was the priority for these teachers, and that it is im-
portant not to wish on them a metaphysical position, the idea that they were
engaged in ‘mere’ exegesis is too easy, and it certainly does not explain the com-
plexities of many passages in Gerlandus. If these logicians were making a conscious
decision to treat logic as an art of language, neutral with respect to metaphysical
issues, then they were engaged in a rather sophisticated philosophical task. But
were they?
Yukio Iwakuma has also advanced a theory about the opponents of the pre-
vocalists, the realists. William of Champeaux is known, from the account in the
Story of my Disasters above all (see §6 above) to have advanced a realist theory
of universals which Abelard refuted, and then to have espoused a diﬀerent variety
of realism. Iwakuma believes that he can attribute a corpus of works to William.
Early in his life, Iwakuma contends, William wrote the Introductiones of Master
G. and of Master William Paganellus (see above, § 4). A little later, he went
on to write P3, C8 (in its original version), H11 and P14. B8 and B10 are, he
believes, related to a lost commentary by William, and the revised versions of C8
are the works of William’s students, as it seems in his view is H9. Iwakuma’s
arguments for these attributions are based on shared prologue-patterns and the
fact of being copied in multiple manuscripts, which he considers to show that
they were all written by a single, inﬂuential master [Iwakuma, 1999, 101-22; cf.
Iwakuma, 2003a]. He also ﬁnds parallels between doctrines in these commentaries
and those in the Introductiones, and between doctrines attributed to William of
Champeaux in other sources and some passages in C8 and H11; whilst P14 is
attributed to him because it has passages identical with P3 and it refers in passing
to the ‘indiﬀerence’ theory of universals (particulars belong to the same species in
virtue of being non-diﬀerent from each other; metaphysically speaking, this theory
is not in fact a variety of realism at all), which William adopted, according to
Abelard, after he had been forced to give up Material Essence Realism [Iwakuma,
1999, 114].
Unfortunately, the position is less easy to make out with reasonable probabil-
ity than Iwakuma believes. Although William may have had a part to play in
the composition of some of these commentaries, Iwakuma’s attribution of them to
William of Champeaux and his students is highly questionable [Cameron, 2004].
All of the commentaries are anonymous, and the fact that they have some simi-
larities in form (for instance, in their prologues) need not point to a single author.
Indeed, to look for the author is to misunderstand what sort of compositions these
commentaries are (cf. above, §2). Moreover, it is not yet clear to specialists how to
date the diﬀerent versions of this group of commentaries; there are parallels with
Abelard’s Logica Ingredientibus which very probably result from Abelard’s ideas
— perhaps from lectures — being borrowed. These composite commentaries may,
when studied further, prove a valuable source of information for thinking about
universals in the ﬁrst 30 or so years of the twelfth century. They certainly do not
provide an instant guide to what the position was c. 1100. [Cameron, Forthcom-

78
John Marenbon
ing should clarify the position better than has been done so far, and explore the
philosophical relevance of this material.]
7.2
. . . everything else
When Abelard wrote in his Story of my Disasters that, after his defeat of him over
universals, William’s views came ‘to be so badly regarded that they were hardly
accepted on the other parts of logic, as if the whole of this art were contained in
that one view, on universals’ (above, §6), he was criticizing those contemporaries of
his who let the problem of universals overshadow all the rest of logic. Historians of
philosophy have been even more guilty in this respect. There is much more in logic
at the turn of the twelfth century than discussion about universals, but scholars
are only just beginning to investigate these questions. Here are some indications
of the work that is starting to be done on three of these areas:
Utterances as physical entities
In the Categories commentaries of the C8 complex, and also in the Priscian Glosu-
lae, there is a long, multi-layered discussion of whether utterances (voces) should
be considered as belonging to the Aristotelian Category of substance or that of
quantity (or even perhaps quality). The debate is complicated both because of its
exegetical context — it is not just a matter of providing an internally consistent and
explanatorily satisfying answer, but one which is consistent too with Aristotle’s
text — and because all parties to it know that utterances are not merely physical
entities, but also bearers of meaning; that, indeed, it is only by using utterances
meaningfully that we can talk about what physically they are. [Rosier-Catach,
Forthcoming-C; Cameron, Forthcoming].
Problems in Semantics
Both the Priscian Glosulae (studied especially in [Rosier(-Catach), 1993, 2003a-c,
2004a; b, Forthcoming-A; -B]) and the various commentaries on On Interpretation
(cf. [Kneepkens 1978, 1994, 2003]) are full of material that is rich in ideas about
semantics, though diﬃcult to work with, because of the to-and-fro of debate among
masters and the exegetical setting. For instance, writers ﬁnd themselves having
to introduce a distinction between utterances signifying potentially and signifying
actually, and then having to struggle to maintain a position in which all and only
signiﬁcative utterances have signiﬁcation.
Empty terms, like ‘chimaera’ cause
especial diﬃculties, as the commentators try to work out the three-way relation
between thoughts, words and things [Cameron, 2004; Forthcoming].
Topical Argument
In his Dialectica, Abelard would give more space to the theory of topical argument
than to any other part of logic (see the following chapter). Although Abelard’s

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
79
version of this theory was innovative, his strong interest in the area reﬂects the
mood of the period from c. 1090 onwards. And, in addition to theoretical study, it
became standard to explain arguments (in, for instance, a text being commented)
by citing the topic on which they rested. The basic material for studying this area
of logic at the turn of the twelfth century has been set out by Green-Pedersen
[1984], and he has also provided [Green-Pedersen, 1974] an account of what are
very likely to be the opinions of William of Champeaux on the topics, since they
are explicitly attributed to ‘Master W.’ and they ﬁt Abelard’s account of William’s
views. And a complete commentary on On Topical diﬀerentiae from just before
1100 has now been published [Hansen, 2005]. Green-Pedersen and Hansen have
made a beginning of understanding the material, but this is an area where most
of the important philosophical work is still to be done.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
AHDLMA — Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage CIMAGL — Cahiers de
l’Institut du moyen ˆage grec et latin
[Aristotle, 1961-] Aristotle. Aristoteles Latinus, ed. L. Minio-Paluello and others, Bruges and
Paris ; Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1961–.
[Anselm, 1946] Anselm of Canterbury. Opera omina I and II, F.S.Schmitt, ed., Edinburgh;
Nelson, 1946.
[Biard, 1999] J. Biard, ed. Langage, sciences, philosophie au XIIe si`ecle, Paris; Vrin, 1999.
[Biard and Rosier-Catach, 2003] J. Biard and I. Rosier-Catach, eds. La tradition m´edi´evale des
Cat´egories (XIIe-XVe si`ecles), Louvain and Paris; Peeters, 2003.
[Bouquet, 1781] M. Bouquet. Recueil des Gaules et de la France, Paris; Palaret, 1781.
[Braakhuis and Kneepkens, 2003] H. A. G. Braakhuis and C. H. Kneepkens, eds.
Aristotle’s
Peri Hermeneias in the Latin Middle Ages, Groningen-Haren; Ingenium (Artistarium sup-
plementa 10), 2003.
[Burnett, 1993] C. Burnett, ed. Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical texts. The
Syriac, Arabic and Medieval Latin Traditions, London; Warburg Institute (Warburg Institute
Surveys and texts 23), 1993.
[Cameron, 2004] M. Cameron. ‘What’s in a Name? Students of William of Champeaux on the
vox signiﬁcativa’, Bochumer Philosophisches Jahrbuch 9, 93-114, 2004.
[Cameron, forthcoming] M. Cameron. Beginning Logic. Peter Abelard in Context, forthcoming.
[Cameron and Marenbon, forthcoming] M. Cameron and J. Marenbon, eds. Aristotelian Logic,
East and West, 500–1500. The Prior Analytics, forthcoming.
[Cameron, Martin and Marenbon, forthcoming] M. Cameron. C. J. Martin and J. Marenbon.
Abelard’s Earliest Commentaries? [provisional title]. In [Rosier-Catach,Forthcoming-D].
[De Rijk, 1967] L. M. De Rijk. Logica Modernorum, II, Assen: Van Gorcum, 1967
[De Rijk, 1986] L. M. De Rijk. Peter Abelard’s Semantics and his Doctrine of Being. Vivarium,
24, 85–127, 1986.
[Fredborg, 1986] K. M. Fredborg. ‘The Commentaries on Cicero’s De Inventione and Rhetorica
ad Herennium by William of Champeaux’, CIMAGL 17 (1976) 1-39, 1986.
[Fredborg, 2003] K. M. Fredborg. ‘Abelard on Rhetoric’ in Rhetoric and Renewal in the Latin
West 1100-1540. Essays in Honour of John O. Ward, ed. C.J. Mews, C.J., Nederman and
R.M. Thomson, Leiden; Brill (Disputatio 2), 55-80, 2003.
[Green-Pedersen, 1974] N. J. Green-Pedersen. William of Champeaux on Boethius’ Topics ac-
cording to Orleans Bibl. Mun 266, CIMAGL 13 (= Studia in honorem Henrici Ross)13-30,
1974.
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages,
Munich; Philosophia Verlag, 1984.
[Hansen, 2005] H. Hansen. An Early Commentary on Boethius’ Topics, CIMAGL, 76, 45–130,
2005.

80
John Marenbon
[Hermann of Tournai, 1883] Hermann of Tournai. Liber de restauratione monasterii sancti.
Martini Tornacensis in MGH SS 14:274-317, 1883.
[Iwakuma, 1992] Y. Iwakuma. ‘ “Vocales”, or Early Nominalists’, Traditio 47, 37-111, 1992.
[Iwakuma, 1993] Y. Iwakuma. ‘The Introductiones dialecticae secundum Wilgelmum and secun-
dum G. Paganellum’, CIMAGL, 63, 45–114, 1993.
[Iwakuma, 1999] Y. Iwakuma. ‘Pierre Ab´elard et Guillaume de Champeaux dans les premi`eres
ann´ees du XIIe si`ecle: une ´etude pr´eliminaire’ in Biard (1999), 92-123, 1999.
[Iwakuma, 2003a] Y. Iwakuma. ‘William of Champeaux on Aristotle’s Categories’ in Biard and
Rosier-Catach, 313-328, 2003.
[Iwakuma, 2003b] Y. Iwakuma. ‘William of Champeaux and the Introductiones’ in Aristotle’s
Peri Hermeneias in the Latin Middle Ages. Essays on the commentary tradition, ed. H.A.G.
Braakhuis and C.H. Kneepkens, Groningen-Haren; Ingenium (Aristarium supplementa 10),
1-30, 2003.
[Iwakuma, forthcoming-a] Y. Iwakuma. ‘Addenda to Minio-Paluello’s Testimonia de Analyticis
prioribus’ in Cameron and Marenbon, forthcoming.
[Iwakuma, forthcoming-b] Y. Iwakuma. Vocales revisited. In Proceedings of Kyoto SIEPM Con-
ference, ‘The Word in Medieval Logic, Theology and Psychology’, 2005, C.Burnett, ed. Turn-
hout; Brepols, forthcoming.
[Jaﬀ´e, 1869] P. Jaﬀ´e. Codex Udalrici, Berlin (Bibliotheca rerum germanicarum 5), 1869.
[Jolivet, 1992] J. Jolivet. ‘Trois variations m´edi´evales sur l’universel et l’individu:
Roscelin,
Ab´elard, Gilbert de la Porr´ee’, Revue de la m´etaphysique et morale 1, 115-55, 1992.
[Kneepkens, 1978] C. H. Kneepkens. ‘Master Guido and his View on Government : on twelfth-
century linguistic thought’, Vivarium 16, 108-41, 1978
[Kneepkens, 1994] C. H. Kneepkens. ‘From Eternal to Perpetual Truths: a note on the medieval
history of Aristotle, De interpretatione, Ch. 1, 16a18’, Vivarium 32, 161-85, 1994.
[Kneepkens, 2003] C. H. Kneepkens. ‘Aristotle’s Transposition and the Twelfth-Century Com-
mentaries on De interpretatione, 20b1-12: an exploratory study’ in Braakhuis and Kneepkens,
363-411, 2003.
[Luscombe, 1962] D. Luscombe. Peter Abelard and his School, unpublished King’s College, Cam-
bridge Fellowship dissertation, 1962.
[Marenbon, 1997a] J. Marenbon. ‘Glosses and Commentaries on the Categories and De inter-
pretatione before Abelard’ in Dialektik und Rhetorik im fr¨uheren und hohen Mittelalter, ed.
J. Fried, Munich; Historisches Kolleg (Schriften des historischen Kollegs, Kolloquien 27) 21-49
= Marenbon (2000), Item IX, 1997.
[Marenbon, 1997b] J. Marenbon. The Philosophy of Peter Abelard, Cambridge University Press,
1997.
[Marenbon, 2000] J. Marenbon. Aristotelian Logic, Platonism and the Context of Early Me-
dieval Philosophy in the West, Aldershot, Burlington, Singapore and Sydney; Ashgate (Var-
iorum Collected Studies Series 696), 2000.
[Marenbon, 2000+] J. Marenbon. ‘Medieval Latin Commentaries and Glosses on Aristotelian
logical Texts, before c. 1150 AD’ (originally 1992) as republished and revised with ‘Supplement
to the Working Catalogue and Supplementary Bibliography’ in Marenbon, 2000. For the
Categories, there is also a corrected, revised (December 2006) version on my website.
[Marenbon, 2004] J. Marenbon. ‘Life, Milieu, and Intellectual Contexts’ in The Cambridge Com-
panion to Abelard, ed. J. E. Brower and K. Guilfoy, pp. 13–34, Cambridge; Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2004.
[Martin, forthcoming] C. Martin. “Not a single tiny proposition had they added”: the reception
of the Prior Analytics in the ﬁrst half of the Twelfth Century, in Cameron and Marenbon,
forthcoming.
[Mews, 1985] C. J. Mews. On Dating the Works of Peter Abelard, AHDLMA 52, 73-134, 1985.
Reprinted in Mews, 2001.
[Mews, 1992] C. J. Mews. Nominalism and Theology before Abaelard : new light on Roscelin
of Compi`egne, Vivarium 30, 4-34, 1992. Reprinted in Mews, 2002.
[Mews, 1998] C. J. Mews. St Anselm and Roscelin : some new texts and their implications. 2. A
vocalist essay on the Trinity and intellectual debate c. 1080-1120, AHDLMA 65, 39-90, 1998.
Reprinted in Mews, 2002.
[Mews, 2001] C. J. Mews. Abelard and his Legacy, Aldershot; Burlington, Ver.; Ashgate, 2001.
[Mews, 2002] C. J. Mews. Reason and Belief in the Age of Roscelin and Abelard, Aldershot;
Burlington, Ver.; Ashgate, 2002.

Logic at the Turn of the Twelfth Century
81
[Michaud, 1867] E. Michaud. Guillaume de Champeaux et les ´ecoles de Paris au XIIe si`ecle,
d’apr`es des documents in´edits, Paris; Didier, 1867.
[Minio-Paluello, 1972] L. Minio-Paluello. Opuscula: the Latin Aristotle, Amsterdam; Hakkert,
1972.
[Minio-Paluello, 1954] L. Minio-Paluello. Note sull’Aristotele Latino medievale. VIII. I Primi
Analitici: la redazione carnutense usata da Abelardo e la ‘Vulgata’ con scolii tradotti dal
greco, Rivista di ﬁlosoﬁa neo-scolastica 46, 211-23, 1954. Reprinted in Minio-Paluello, 1972,
229-41.
[Minio-Paluello, 1962] L. Minio-Paluello. Note sull’Aristotele Latino medievale. XV. Dalle ‘Cat-
egoriae Decem’ pseudo-agostiniane (temistiane) al testo vulgato aristotelico boeziano, Rivista
di ﬁlosoﬁa neo-scolastica 54, 137-47, 1962. Reprinted in Minio-Paluello, 1972, 448-58.
[Minio-Paluello, 1972] L. Minio-Paluello. Opuscula: the Latin Aristotle, Amsterdam; Hakkert,
1972.
[Odo of Tournai, 1994] Odo of Tournai. Two Theological Treatises,
trnsl. I. M. Resnick,
Philadelphia; University of Philadelphia Press, 1994.
[Peter Abelard, 1967] Peter Abelard. Historia Calamitatum, ed. J. Monfrin, Paris; Vrin, 1967.
[Peter Abelard, 1969] Peter Abelard. Scritti di logica,
ed. M. dal Pra, Florence; Nuova Italia
(2nd edn), 1969.
[Peter Abelard, 1970] Peter Abelard. Dialectica, ed. L.M. de Rijk, Assen; Van Gorcum, 1970.
[Picavet, 1911] F. Picavet. Roscelin philosophe et th´eologien d’apr`es la l´egende et d’apr`es
l’histoire, Paris; Alcan, 1911.
[Rosier-Catach, 1986] I. Rosier(-Catach). Note sur une surprenante citation des Topiques
d’Aristote au XIe si`ecle, Bulletin de philosophie m´edi´evale 28, 178-84, 1986.
[Rosier-Catach, 1993] I. Rosier(-Catach). Le commentaire des Glosulae et les Glosae de Guil-
laume de Conches sur le chapitre De voce des Institutiones Grammaticae de Priscien,
CIMAGL 63, 115-44, 1993.
[Rosier-Catach, 2003a] I. Rosier-Catach. Ab´elard et les grammairiens : sur la d´eﬁnition du verbe
et la notion d’inh´erence. In La tradition vive, M´elanges d’histoire des textes en l’honneur de
Louis Holtz, ed. P. Lardet, Turnhout; Brepols, 143-159, 2003.
[Rosier-Catach, 2003b] I. Rosier-Catach. Priscien, Bo`ece, les Glosulae in Priscianum, Ab´elard:
les enjeux des discussions autour de la notion de consigniﬁcation, Histoire Epist´emologie
Langage, 25/2, 55-84, 2003.
[Rosier-Catach, 2003c] I. Rosier-Catach. Ab´elard et les grammairiens: sur le verbe substantif et
la pr´edication, Vivarium, 41/2, 176-248, 2003.
[Rosier-Catach, 2004a] I. Rosier-Catach. Les discussions sur le signiﬁ´e des propositions chez
Ab´elard et ses contemporains. In Medieval Theories on Assertive and Non-assertive Language,
ed. A. Maier`u and L. Valente, Rome; Olschki, 1-34, 2004.
[Rosier-Catach, 2004b] I. Rosier-Catach. The Glosulae in Priscianum and its Tradition in Pa-
pers in Memory of Vivien Law, ed. N. McLelland and A., M¨unster Nodus Publikationen,
81-99, 2004.
[Rosier-Catach, forthcoming-a] I. Rosier-Catach. Les Glosulae super Priscianum: s´emantique
et universaux, Documenti e studi per la storia della ﬁlosoﬁa medievale: Gli universali forth-
coming.
[Rosier-Catach, forthcoming-b] I. Rosier-Catach. Priscian on Divine Ideas and Mental Concep-
tions : the discussions in the Glosulae in Priscianum, The Notae Dunelmenses, William of
Champeaux and Abelard. In Vivarium, 45, 219-37, 2007.
[Rosier-Catach, forthcoming-c] I. Rosier-Catach. Vox in 12th Century Logic and Grammar. In
[Rosier-Catach, forthcoming-d].
[Rosier-Catach, forthcoming-d] I. Rosier-Catach, ed. Les Glosulae super Priscinum, Guillaume
de Champeaux, Ab´elard: arts du langage et th´eologie aus conﬁns dex XIe-XIIe, les conditions
enjeux d’une mutation, forthcoming.
[Tweedale, 1983] M. M. Tweedale. ‘Logic (i): from the late eleventh century to the time of
Abelard. In A History of Twelfth-Century Western Philosophy, ed. P. Dronke, Cambridge;
University Press, 196-226, 1983.

This page intentionally left blank

PETER ABELARD
AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES
Ian Wilks
Peter Abelard’s life extended from 1079 to 1142, with his productive involvement
in the philosophical debates of the time beginning in very early adulthood around
the turn of the century.1 He received training in logic and philosophy from ﬁgures
as eminent as Roscelin and William of Champeaux. His early career as a teacher
reached its apogee around 1115, when he became master of the cathedral school of
Notre Dame. Previous to this he had held similar positions in lesser centers (Melun,
Corbeil, Mont Ste. Genevi`eve). In 1117 his life was in crisis following his romance
with Heloise and castration at the instigation of her uncle. He subsequently lived in
monastic circumstances for about 15 years in a variety of locations. This change
of milieu consolidated a shift in interests toward work in biblical exegesis and
theology, and after returning to Paris around 1132 his teaching curriculum had
expanded accordingly. When this second Parisian teaching phase ended is not
clear, but it may have been as early as 1136 or as late as 1141. It was certainly
over by the latter date since this is when an assortment of views ascribed to
him was publicly condemned at the Council of Sens, leading to a sentence of
excommunication. He spent the ﬁnal months of his life near the monastery of
Cluny, receiving there the consolation of having that sentence reversed.
The great recovery of ancient texts which would so shape thirteenth century
thought was only beginning to occur toward the end of Abelard’s life, so his philo-
sophical horizon was comparatively limited. Of absolutely central importance for
his work in logic were Aristotle’s Categories and De interpretatione, Porphyry’s
Isagoge, and a series of works by Boethius: De topicis diﬀerentiis (which concerns
topical theory), De divisione (which concerns deﬁnition), De syllogismis categori-
cis and De syllogismis hypotheticis (treatises on categorical and hypothetical syl-
logisms respectively) and various commentaries, particularly on the above works
of Aristotle and Porphyry [Marenbon, 1997a, p. 37]. Of special importance too
was Priscian’s grammatical treatise Institutiones grammaticae.
Abelard wrote at a time when the commentary was still very much a preferred
authorial format, and most of his work in logic is styled accordingly. Two works
are especially important, both dating around the period from 1115–1120. First,
there is the so-called Logica ingredientibus, a set of four commentaries on Isagoge,
Categories, De interpretatione and De topicis diﬀerentiis. Whether Abelard in-
tended these to be taken in sequence as parts of a single work remains an open
1The following biographical synopsis is based on [Mews, 1995] and [Marenbon, 1997a, pp.
7–35].
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

84
Ian Wilks
question.2 And second, there is the Dialectica, a single work which does not take
the explicit form of a commentary, but nonetheless is closely organized around
the content of several of the above ancient sources.3 My discussion of Abelard’s
logical theory will be based chieﬂy on these two works4. Note that Abelard was a
reasonably proliﬁc author, and produced a wealth of additional material, notably
an early set of commentaries on Isagoge, De interpretatione, and De divisione, an
extremely valuable later commentary on the Isagoge (which goes under the name
Logica nostrorum petitioni sociorum), a brief treatise on abstraction and knowl-
edge (Tractatus de intellectibus), as well as quite a number of works in biblical
exegesis, theology and ethics.5
About halfway through the Dialectica we ﬁnd a passage which explains the orga-
nizing principle behind its presentation of logical theory: “Just as before deﬁning
the categorical syllogisms it was appropriate for their content in categorical propo-
sitions to be treated, in the same way it is necessary that before deﬁning hypothet-
ical syllogisms their hypothetical propositions . . . be treated” [Abelard, 1970, p.
253 (4–7)]. What is suggested here is the appropriateness of presenting logical the-
ory in two sequences, both culminating with discussion of syllogisms. In the ﬁrst
sequence the structure of categorical propositions is discussed to provide insight
into categorical syllogisms. In the second the structure of hypothetical proposi-
tions is discussed to provide insight into hypothetical syllogisms. But of course
what is ideal for both kinds of syllogisms is to have true propositions [Abelard,
1970, p. 253 (7–9)]. So we can take the grounding investigation one step further
in each case. What makes categorical and hypothetical propositions true? For the
truth of categorical propositions we look to their constituent words. And for the
truth of hypotheticals, Abelard says, we look to their corresponding topics.6
It is standard practice to develop an account of categorical logic which starts
with a discussion of words, and moves through categorical propositions to the cat-
egorical syllogisms themselves. Abelard consciously adopts a parallel course for
the logic of hypotheticals by beginning with a treatment of topics and hypothet-
ical propositions. In general we can think of Abelard’s development of material
as falling along these two axes: discussion of words and categorical propositions
leading to categorical syllogisms; and then discussion of topics and hypothetical
2For the view that he did so intend see [Marenbon, 1997a, pp. 47–8].
3The relative dating of these texts has been subject to debate.
I accept the conclusions
drawn in [Mews, 1985, 126–27], which hold the Dialectica to be earlier than the glosses of Logica
ingredientibus. Brief summaries of other positions on this question are available in [de Rijk, 1970,
pp. xxi–xxiii] and [Mews, 1987, p. 16, note 2].
4In particular my discussion will draw heavily from the commentary on De interpretatione
in Logica ingredientibus; this commentary goes by the name Glossae super Periermeneias Aris-
totelis. An overview of current scholarship on the contents of Abelard’s logical works is found in
[Marenbon, 2006, pp. 333–342].
5For a list see [Marenbon, 1997a, pp. xvi–xix]. Certain works of Abelard are lost; see [Van
den Eynde, 1962] and [Mews, 1985].
6What is meant by “topic” in this context is, of course, not self-evident, and will be fully
treated in Part 2 below. Technically speaking, the label “hypothetical” includes disjunctions as
well as conditionals for Abelard, so it is necessary to specify that, in this paragraph and the next,
“hypothetical” is to be taken as meaning “conditional.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
85
propositions leading to hypothetical syllogisms. This way of organizing material is
overtly embraced by Abelard in the Dialectica, in his attempt to depart from the
commentary format. So it can be taken as representing his most basic intuitions
on how the subject matter of logic should be organized.
I will structure my discussion below accordingly.
Part 1 deals with words,
categorical propositions and categorical syllogisms. Part 2 deals with topics, hy-
pothetical propositions and hypothetical syllogisms. These two parts complete the
treatment of Abelard, and Part 3 turns to his contemporaries and their schools.
PART 1: ABELARD ON WORDS, CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS AND
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS
The foundation-laying program for categorical syllogisms undertaken by Aristo-
tle in De interpretatione amounts to this: describe the propositional basis for
those syllogisms, but ﬁrst describe the lexical basis for those propositions. More
than anything else that lexical basis is provided by subject and predicate terms,
which typically are general names. This is indeed the most foundational issue in
Abelardian logic: the semantics of general names, which, in Abelard’s hands, is
inseparable from the metaphysical problem of universals.
It would have been impossible for any logician of this time to do logic without
directly encountering this metaphysical problem.
The very language in which
categorical syllogisms are formulated makes it unavoidable. While it is comfortable
and intuitive to an English speaker to pluralize both subject and predicate terms
in a proposition like “All men are animals,” the practice initiated by Aristotle and
transmitted by Boethius is to formulate the proposition with both terms in the
singular: “All man is animal” (Omnis homo est animal). This way of speaking can
be taken quite literally as representing the content of the proposition. Here, for
instance, is Boethius’ explanation of the example: “Therefore we deﬁne to be in
the whole, or not to be in the whole, thus: to be in the whole, or to be predicated
of all, is said when nothing of the subject is able to be discovered of which what is
predicated is not able to be said. For nothing of man is discovered of which animal
is not able to be said” [Boethius, 1891, 809D–810B]. This description suggests that
a universal proposition expresses a relation between two single and distinct items,
in this case man and animal, one of which (in this case man) is in the whole of the
other (animal). The proposition is then simply telling us how these items relate.
This language is of course used for the other entries in the Aristotelian square
of opposition:
A: All man is animal
E: No man is animal
I: Some man is animal
O: Some man is not animal.
The content of the I-form can then be rendered as “Animal is in part of man,” the
content of the E-form as “Animal is in none of man,” and the content of the O-form
as “Animal is not in the whole of man.” These formulations are understandable
but also questionable. Indeed, the question is unavoidable: what sort of things

86
Ian Wilks
are these items corresponding to the subject and predicate terms? Speaking of
animal instead of animals is to use a mass noun where we would normally use a
count noun. We know what animals are, but what is animal?
Notice how easily a Platonist can give a response. Animal can be taken as the
form of animality which all animals share, and in which they all participate. Man
can be taken as the shared form of humanity (or manness) common to all men.
Animal and man, taken thus, are single, distinct things, and are appropriately
denoted by unpluralized nouns. The above propositions just describe in various
ways, some true, some false, the relationship between these single, distinct things.
So in this way the conventional language of the categorical syllogism fairly
invites some kind of theory of shared forms — forms which exist independently of
the things that nonetheless share in them.7 And this is why Porphyry’s Isagoge,
intended as a propaedutic to the study of logic, begins with these questions about
genera and species: “(1) Whether genera or species exist in themselves or reside in
mere concepts alone; (2) whether, if they exist, they are corporeal or incorporeal;
and (3) whether they exist apart or in sense objects and in dependence on them”
[Porphyry, 1975, pp. 27 (12)–28 (14)]. Aristotle himself did not ultimately accept
the existence of shared forms, but bequeathed a language which made them a live
issue.8 Abelard could not avoid having some position on this issue.
He in fact did not accept the existence of shared forms either. Some people,
he says, “maintain that the same thing is essentially in many, so that the same
thing that is in this is essentially in that, although <the latter> is furnished
with diﬀerent forms. For example animal is in Socrates and in Brunellus and in
others” [Abelard, 1933, p.
515 (17–21)].9
So animal is shared by all animals;
in other words, they are all essentially the same animal because the form that
confers animality upon them is the same form. Accordingly, “Socrates is in no
way essentially diﬀerent from Brunellus” [Abelard, 1933, p. 515 (23–24)]. Abelard
has a number of objections against this view [Abelard, 1933, pp. 515 (32)–518 (8)];
these emphasize the counter-intuitiveness of what it implies about individuality
– such as its implication that Socrates and Brunellus the ass are essentially the
same animal, since they share the same form of animality. Shared forms make
individuality impossible. The fact that individuals do exist entails that shared
forms do not.
Abelard is perfectly willing to speak of forms/genera/species, but not as ac-
companied by anything like a Platonic theory of participation.
While he does
7By contrast, a theory of unshared forms posits distinct forms for distinct things. On this
theory, the animality of one animal is distinct from the animality of another animal. See note
10 below.
8The relationship between Aristotle’s syllogistic and Plato’s method of division (for which,
see [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, pp. 44, 67–68]) would explain how Aristotle came to bequeath
such a language.
9Abelard is describing the position now referred to as “Material Essence Realism.”
This
position is associated with William of Champeaux, and articulates in some detail a metaphysics
of shared forms.
For Material Essence Realism, and Abelard’s critique of the position, see
[Tweedale, 1976, pp. 95–111], [Gracia, 1984, pp. 198–200], and [King, 2004, pp. 66–69]. For
Abelard’s complex relationship to Platonism generally, see [Marenbon, 1997b].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
87
not articulate the point in this way, it seems clear that he accepts the existence
of individual forms: the animality of this animal, the whiteness of this thing.10
These would be diﬀerent from the animality of another animal, the whiteness of
another thing. In any case, what Abelard is opposing here is itself a fairly radical
metaphysical view, and it is far from clear that he himself is being all that radical
in opposing it.
While he does not accept the metaphysical theory which seemingly underlies
the mass noun language of syllogistic theory, he still uses the language itself. But
he insists that it must be taken in a transferred sense:
It should be understood that questions of this sort are posed by those
who have doubts about the designation of things.
They fall into
such doubts through philosophers’ locutions of this sort: “Animal is a
genus,” “Animal is in many,” “Man is a universal,” “Man is a species,”
taking these names “animal” and “man” in their proper and customary
signiﬁcation, but being unaware that philosophers transfer these names
to signify themselves in this sense: “Animal is a genus,” that is, this
word (sermo) “animal,” or the name “animal,” is a genus [Abelard,
1933, p. 525 (15–22)].
This is the key clariﬁcation. When we say that animal is in the whole of man
we are actually just talking about the words of “All man is animal,” and we only
mean that “animal” is predicated universally of “man.” This simplifying approach
is by no means original with Abelard. It is taken up in the late eleventh century by
various philosophical predecessors, most notably his teacher Roscelin. The point
is to produce in voce readings of the logical cannon, as opposed to in re ones
— readings, that is, on which the doctrine treated in those writings is construed
as being about words, not things (and, in particular, not shared forms).11 This
approach avoids metaphysical entanglements, but is not itself without diﬃculties,
and certainly calls for theoretical reﬁnements.
How to account for the semantics of general names emerges as the most promi-
nent diﬃculty. How do we explain their ability to achieve generality of application
to a set of objects which are individual and distinct?
What is it about those
objects which allows them all to correspond to the same name, in spite of their
individuality and distinctness? Note that this problem is readily solved by a the-
ory of shared forms. We can say, if such forms exist, that “animal” is predicable
of both Socrates and Brunellus because they both have the same form of animal-
ity; a word which pertains to the form present in the one will then automatically
10John Marenbon [Marenbon, 1997a, p. 114] says that, with respect to properties and relations,
“Abelard readily accepted the idea that these are particular diﬀerentiae and accidents though
not universal ones . . . , arriving at an ontology similar to that of modern exponents of ‘tropes’
or ‘abstract particulars.’ ” On this point see his reference to an expanded, unpublished version
of [Martin, 1992] in note 44 of that page. Marenbon sums Abelard’s basic metaphysical position
thus: “There is no thing which is not a particular” [Marenbon, 1997a, p. 117].
11Abelard’s attitude toward in re readings is in fact complex and evolving. See [Marenbon,
1997a, pp. 108-116]. The essential point here is that he will always prefer an in voce reading
over an in re reading where the res in question is a shared form.

88
Ian Wilks
pertain to the form present in the other. But if there are no shared forms then
another sort of explanation must be found. If the animality of Socrates is not the
same as the animality of Brunellus then why do we not need diﬀerent names —
such as “animal 1” and “animal 2” — to denote them respectively? Answering
this question is the key labour of the position Abelard adopts. This is why, after
his rejection of a theory of shared forms, Abelard supplies, in way of a positive
account to follow upon the refutation, not a replacement metaphysical theory, but
a semantic theory — a theory about the signiﬁcation of general names.
There are two aspects of signiﬁcation that need to be addressed by this the-
ory. They correspond to the “twofold signiﬁcation” (duplex signiﬁcatio) of names
[Abelard, 1970, p. 154 (20)] which Abelard commonly refers to. First there is
the ad rem or denotative aspect, whereby the name picks out a thing or things.
And second there is the ad intellectum aspect, whereby the name generates an
understanding (intellectus) in the mind of the hearer.12 The technical label for
the denotative aspect of signiﬁcation is “nomination” or “naming” (nominatio),
and the technical label for the ad intellectum aspect is “signiﬁcation by genera-
tion” (signiﬁcatio per generationem) [Abelard, 1970, p. 112 (4)]. When Abelard
uses the word “signiﬁcation” without qualiﬁcation he means signiﬁcation by gen-
eration, so, following him in this usage, we can say that the twofold intent of his
account of general names is to show how, in the absence of shared forms, they can
succeed both in naming and signifying. Failing such explanation, general terms
will seem as if they cannot “name things as agreeing in anything” [Abelard, 1919,
p. 18 (14–15)], or as if they are not able “to establish a sound (sanus) understand-
ing of anything” [Abelard, 1919, p. 18 (8–9)], or both. There are two questions
here, the ﬁrst about naming, the second about generating a understanding — i.e.,
signifying. Both must be answered.
The question about naming is this: what do the things named have in common
that allows them, but not other things, to be picked out by the general name?
As noted, a shared form would make the question easy to answer; if there was
one, the things would have it in common. It would be, in Abelard’s parlance, the
common cause of the name’s being imposed on all of those things, where imposition
is simply the process of establishing the conventional association of symbol with
the thing or things to be named. Having rejected the shared form account of the
common cause, this is Abelard’s substitute: “Single men, which are discrete from
one another because they diﬀer just as much in their essences as in their forms,
agree in this: that they are men” [Abelard, 1919, p. 19 (21–22, 23–24)]. What
12Intellectus is commonly translated “understanding” by Abelard scholars, who therefore speak
of a word as “generating an understanding” in the mind of the hearer. John Marenbon prefers
“thought” as a translation [Marenbon, 2004, p. 61, note 8], and therefore speaks of “generating
a thought.” Marenbon’s practice has merit, since I think intellectus is used in a rather more
general and less technical sense than is conveyed by “understanding.” To have an understanding
of something suggests that one understands it; this is a stronger suggestion than is involved
when Abelard speaks of having an intellectus of something. While I will follow the now standard
translation practice in Abelardian scholarship and use “understanding,” I do so with the caveat
that the word is to be taken as meaning something like “thought.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
89
they agree in is expressed not as a name (“man”) but as a whole clause (“that
they are men”), or, equivalently, as an inﬁnitival construction (esse hominem)
[Abelard, 1919, p.
19 (25)], best rendered in English by a participial phrase:
“being a man.” Socrates and Plato are like each other, and unlike horses and
asses, in being men [Abelard, 1919, p. 19 (31–33)]. What is expressed clausally
and inﬁnitivally here is deﬁnitely not a thing (as the shared form was supposed to
be). And the non-thing so expressed can plausibly be claimed to serve as a cause of
something because causal claims are often true when made of non-things; if we say
“He was beaten because he did not want to be at the forum” we imputing causal
status to the absence of desire, where that absence is clearly not a thing [Abelard,
1919, p. 20 (11–12)]. So, Abelard claims, we can actually talk about a common
cause of imposition, about what things have in common, without having to appeal
to a shared form, or to any other thing at all. A non-thing will suﬃce. Abelard
gives a name to this non-thing: the status, literally the “state” that something is
in.13 He presumably uses the word because it is free from associations with prior
metaphysical theories, and thus has a better chance of serving unambiguously as
the name of a non-thing.
The second key question Abelard must address is how general terms signify —
that is, how they generate an understanding (intellectus) of appropriate generality
in the mind of the hearer. If one accepts shared forms the question becomes trivial;
the understanding achieves the appropriate generality simply by representing such
a form. But if there is no such form then what does the understanding represent?
He starts with the notion of mental imaging.14 The soul produces “a simili-
tude of a thing . . . into which the action of its intelligence is directed” [Abelard,
1919, p. 20 (25, 26–7)]. The image remains in place after the thing is no longer
evident, and serves as stand-in for the now discontinued sensory presentation. He
speaks of this image as a form (forma) [Abelard, 1919, p. 20 (31)], and as “an
imaginary and ﬁctive thing which the soul produces of itself when and how it
wants” [Abelard, 1919, p. 20 (31–32)]. The understanding arises from this im-
age. The understanding is not the same as the image, but relates to it in a way
comparable to the way a sensory experience relates to what is sensed [Abelard,
1919, p. 20 (28–30)]; the understanding is an action of the mind directed to the
image, just as the sensory experience is an action of the mind directed to what
is sensed. So the content of understandings is very much shaped by images, and
Abelard formulates the key distinction accordingly: “Let us distinguish the under-
13As Abelard makes clear in [Abelard, 1919, p. 20 (1-6)], agreeing in being a man, and agreeing
in the status of a man, amount to the same. The latter is an attempt to formulate the former in
a way that avoids the suggestion that there is a single thing man relative to which the agreement
arises. The question of what a status is remains one of the major issues of Abelardian scholarship.
[Tweedale, 1976] represents an extended attempt to explicate the notion. More recent attempts
are found in [Marenbon 1997, pp. 190–95] and [Jacobi, 2004, pp. 135–137]; for further references
see [Jacobi, p. 154, note 38]. It is most common in Abelard scholarship now simply to leave the
word status untranslated; rendering it literally as “state” is not common, but one does ﬁnd this
translation in [Tweedale, 1967].
14The content, and limitations, of this account are laid out in [Guilfoy, 2004a].

90
Ian Wilks
standings of universal and singular <names>. These are diﬀerentiated in that the
understanding pertaining to the universal name grasps a common and confused
image of many, but the understanding which the singular word generates grasps
a form which is proper to one and, as it were, singular — that is, related only to
one object (personam)” [Abelard, 1919, p. 21 (27–32)]. The image arising from
many, to which the understanding of a general term is referenced, is “common
and confused,” while the image arising from only one, to which the understanding
of a singular term is referenced, is not “common and confused.” The diﬀerence
in signiﬁcation between singular and general terms is therefore a matter of the
presence or absence of confusion in imaging.
Confusion in imaging just involves leaving out details of what is imaged. This
omission is a cognitive limitation of sorts, but one which serves a purpose in that
it allows the image to be variously applicable to diﬀering objects — so long as
the details it leaves out are the ones that constitute diﬀerences between them.
Abelard takes for his example the image of the lion, which may be so speciﬁed
as to mark out the fact that it is limping, having been wounded by the spear of
Hercules; or it may lack such distinguishing marks [Abelard, 1919, p. 22 (18–22)].
When lacking such marks, the image is more confused, but capable of conferring
upon a term a more general range of application. When retaining such marks, the
image loses the confusion but also the general range. A general term, then, works
in this way: the understanding associated with it represents no member of the
species with individuating detail, and so achieves representation of all members.
Through this achievement it confers upon the term the ability to apply generally.
Here, then, is Abelard’s way of obviating reference to shared forms in accounting
for the meaningfulness of general terms:
Hence, when I hear “man” a certain ﬁgure (instar) arises in my soul
which is related to single men in such a way as to be common to
all and proper to none. But when I hear “Socrates” a certain form
arises in my soul which expresses a likeness of a certain person. Hence,
through this word “Socrates,” which presses upon the soul the proper
form of one <man>, a certain thing is indicated and determined; but
through “man,” the understanding of which rests on a form common
to all <men>, the commonness itself stems from the confusion <of the
form>, so that we should not understand any one <thing> out of all
of them [Abelard, 1919, pp. 21 (32)–22 (2)].15
“Form” and “ﬁgure” mean the same as “image” in this context. General terms
are thus terms which arise from failure to image completely. This failure, however,
is a matter of being partial as opposed to complete in their representation, and
not a matter of being misleading as opposed to accurate. Neither “Socrates” nor
“man” is a misleading term, but the latter is more partially representative than the
15“Thing” in this citation translates res. For the meaning of this Latin term — so central for
semantic theory at this time — see [Jolivet, 1975, pp. 538–543], [Jolivet, 1982, p. 293, note 248]
and [Kretzmann, 1982, p. 497].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
91
former. Clearly, on Abelard’s account, traditional intuitions about the inherent
prestige of generality are challenged. Instead of generality’s being characteristic
of a higher order of being (the shared form), it is characteristic of a less complete
kind of representation.
Universal names, he says, “signify diverse things by nomination not by con-
stituting an understanding that arises (surgentem) from those <things> but by
<constituting one which> pertains (pertinentem) to those single things” [Abelard,
1919, p. 19 (7–9)]. A general understanding is not read oﬀof things directly, but
is partially the product of human cognitive processing. Its ability to be useful lies
in its ability to pertain to things even while failing to be a copy of them point
for point. This ability to pertain in spite of that failing stems from the fact that
there is something about the things themselves that allows them to be partially
represented in the same way. There is, for example, something about Socrates and
Plato which allows them both to be represented by an image or ﬁgure or form of
humanity. What that is, of course, is their being in the same status. Obviously,
an account of abstraction like Abelard’s could easily evolve into a view about
the non-objectivity of general names, but he will have none of that. The status
is what makes objectivity possible. That is why, when Abelard asks whether a
word is called common “according to the common cause in which things agree
or according to the common understanding” [Abelard, 1919, p. 19 (17–20)], he
gives the nod to the former [Abelard, 1919, p. 24 (35–37)]. The common cause
in which things agree is the status. This common cause is the prior, factual basis
for applicability of general terms; the common understanding — the intellectus
— is the subsequent cognitive response to that fact which actually triggers the
production of that term. The intellectus explains how general terms are formed,
but the status explains how they are possible in the ﬁrst place.
With this semantic account of general terms, a doctrine of shared forms no
longer belongs to the subject matter of logic. The true subject matter emerges:
logic is concerned not with relations of shared forms (man, animal) but with rela-
tions between linguistic items (“man,” “animal”). But this conclusion must itself
be reﬁned to avoid trivializing the discipline. It becomes important to understand
what exactly a word is. If a word is taken just as spoken, and as nothing but an
evanescent sound pattern, then this focus on words means that instead of being
about the perduring realities of shared forms, logic deals only with these transitory
and vanishing sounds. In the derisive phrasing of Anselm [Anselm, 1946, p. 9],
logic devolves into the study of mere ﬂatus vocis, that is, into the study of what
is merely the breath of the word, its physical properties. The need to avoid this
result leads Abelard into one of his subtlest innovations: his distinction between
sermo and vox. Both can be translated as “word,” but the former encourages a
conception of the word as sound invested with meaning, while the latter does not.
The sermo compares to the vox, Abelard argues, as the ﬁnished statue compares
to the stone from which it is carved [Abelard, 1933, p. 522 (22–27)]. The two
are in one sense the same thing, because the statue is materially indistinguishable
from its stone. But in another sense the two are diﬀerent because there is at least

92
Ian Wilks
one characteristic which they fail to have in common: the statue is made by the
sculptor, but the stone is not.16 It is likewise for the sermo and vox: they are
the same thing, the same in essence, but do not have all properties in common
and therefore diﬀer in deﬁnition. The sound taken as meaningful diﬀers just as
much from the sound taken per se as the statue diﬀers from its constituent stone;
the shapeliness of the statue makes it a diﬀerent thing than the constituent stone,
and likewise the meaningfulness of the sermo makes it a diﬀerent thing than the
constituent vox. In advancing this distinction Abelard is able to suggest how, even
though logic does have words for its subject matter, it is not thereby dedicated
to a subject matter which is transitory and vanishing. This is so because it stud-
ies words taken as meaningful, and attends to their general semantic properties,
not their arbitrary physical ones.17 The former constitute worthy and appropri-
ate objects of theoretical investigation. Note that at one stroke Abelard intuits
two signiﬁcant philosophical insights: insight into something like the distinction
between type and token18, and insight into the notion of supervenience. The rela-
tion of supervenience — implicitly appealed to through the statuary example —
explains how type emerges from individual token. This emergence then explains
how logic as a scientia sermocinalis, a science of language, can yield the general
and abstract theoretical results which have always been its aim.
With this understanding of general terms in place, Abelard can proceed to
the details of his treatment of words, propositions and categorical syllogisms. His
handling of the ﬁrst two of these three subjects develops the material bequeathed to
the medieval tradition by Aristotle’s De interpretatione. This treatise is essentially
about propositions: how they are formed from their constituents, and how they
stand to each other in relations of mutual inference and opposition. The issue of
how they stand to each other in relations of inference and opposition is an obvious
preparation for the subsequent treatment of syllogistic inference.
In turn, the
issue of how they are formed from constituents is a preparation for the treatment
of mutual inference and opposition, in that these relations ultimately depend on
the predicative relation between subject and predicate.
In the opening sections of this work Aristotle is examining the characteristic
contents of a proposition — in particular, of the sort of categorical proposition
16This point derives from a classiﬁcation of various kinds of identity which Abelard provides
(with some variation) in his theological writings: [Abelard, 1983a, pp. 142 (745)–150 (959)],
[Abelard, 1969a, pp. 247 (1677)–255 (1970)] and [Abelard, 1983b, pp. 454 (1411)–457 (1490)].
The identity between stone and statue is identity of essence.
The diﬀerence is diﬀerence of
deﬁnition. The key points of this classiﬁcation of kinds of identity and diﬀerence are taken up
by various scholars, such as: [Jolivet, 1982, pp. 285–293], [Gracia, 1984, pp. 226–232], [Brower,
2004, pp. 226–230] and [King, 2004, pp. 85–92].
17The key text for the vox/sermo distinction is [Abelard, 1933, pp. 522 (10)–524 (20)]. Peter
King [King, 2004, p. 120, note 90] ﬁnds evidence of this distinction in earlier Abelardian work.
For discussion of the distinction against the background of Abelard’s account of identity, see
[Tweedale, 1976, pp. 142–157], [Marenbon, 1997a, pp. 176–180] and [Wilks, 1998b, pp. 367–
373].
18[Boler, 1963, p. 43] does not accept an exact equating of the two distinctions: “It should be
mentioned . . . that the ‘vox’-‘sermo’ distinction is not quite the same as what is now referred to
as the token-type distinction.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
93
which ﬁgures in syllogistic reasoning. This is an exercise in studying the com-
positionality of language, from individual letters to words, and from words to
propositions. Three levels of linguistic complexity are implied. (i) At the most
basic level there are simply letters and non-signiﬁcative combinations of letters
into syllables. (ii) At the next level there are words and non-propositional com-
binations of words. (iii) At the ﬁnal level there are propositional combinations of
words, that is, propositions taken as a whole. The essential challenge of this clas-
siﬁcation will be to explain why certain items belong at one level and not another.
It is diﬃcult, for example, to explain what it is about a preposition’s signiﬁcation
that makes it classiﬁable under (ii) and not (i); or what it is about the signiﬁcation
of an expression like “running man” which makes it classiﬁable under (ii) and not
(iii). Part of the challenge is actually maintaining the levels as such, since such ex-
amples might otherwise suggest the existence of intermediate levels between these
three. This is why what initially may seem a simple classiﬁcation in Aristotle’s
hands is able to generate quite a bit of disagreement among commentators.19
In pursuing this material, Abelard continues to employ the simplifying seman-
tic assumption that words have the two basic operations of naming things and
generating understandings about them in the mind of the hearer. They nominate
res (things) and signify understandings (intellectus). As it turns out, it is the
latter operation that plays the larger role in his work. His guiding principle in this
regard is expressed thus: “According to the formation and function of words, the
understanding is the principle signiﬁcation, while the signiﬁcation of the thing is
secondary” [Abelard, 1927, p. 309 (23–24); Abelard, 2008, 00.11].20
By way of justifying this preference, Abelard gives three pretexts [Jacobi et al.,
1996, p. 17]. (i) Names and verbs often denote the same thing, he claims, using
for examples the words “runs” and “running” (currit and cursus; the former is a
verb, the latter a name); one can be pointing to the same thing while correctly
uttering either word. But “runs” and “running” have obvious semantic diﬀerence.
This diﬀerence, which is not captured by what they name, can be captured by
how they generate understandings.
“A diﬀerent mode of conceiving varies the
understanding in the two cases ” [Abelard, 1927, p. 308 (28–29); Abelard, 2008,
00.7]; in the latter we conceive of running directly and in itself (in essentia), and
in the former we conceive of it as a feature of something else (in adiacentia). So
in this sort of case denotation fails to capture a real semantic distinction. (ii) In
another sort of case, denotation actually creates a spurious semantic distinction.
For various contingent reasons names can cease to denote, as “rose” and “lily” do
when, with the change of seasons, there are no such ﬂowers in bloom. But this
does not prevent the continued functionality of the words. They retain the same
signiﬁcation as before, the reason being that their signiﬁcation is based on the
19A discussion this Aristotelian semantic program, and Abelard’s response, is found in [Lenz,
2005].
A survey of some controversies to which this program gives rise is found in [Thorp,
forthcoming].
20All page references to the existing editions of Abelard’s Glossae super Periermeneias Aris-
totelis are supplemented by references to the corresponding section of the Jacobi and Strub
edition [Abelard, 2008]. See the comment with which I preface the bibliography below.

94
Ian Wilks
understandings they generate, not on the things they denote [Abelard, 1927, p.
309 (5–8); Abelard, 2008, 00.9]. (iii) Semantic theory typically attempts to show,
as far as possible, how the meaning of a compound linguistic unit is the product of
the meanings of its components. Understandings are able to do a much better job
of explaining this sort of compositionality than denotations. Abelard makes this
point by reference to the proposition as a whole. The understanding which the
proposition produces is very closely linked to the understandings produced by the
parts. But we cannot plausibly say that the proposition has a denotation which
is similarly linked to the denotations of its parts, since whole propositions do not,
strictly speaking, denote [Abelard, 1927, p. 308 (34–40); Abelard, 2008, 00.8]. So
we cannot appeal to denotations in way of showing how the proposition’s meaning
is the product of the meaning of its parts.
Accordingly, as Abelard proceeds through the levels of letters, words and whole
propositions, his key analyses generally turn on how understandings are signiﬁed,
and the modes of signiﬁcation involved, rather than on how things are denoted.
Since the Dialectica is organized not as a commentary but as an independent,
free-standing work, it is able to give us a good sense of way Abelard organizes this
analysis in his own mind, even if it does not always give us his ﬁnal solutions to the
problems raised therein. The discussion of individual words [Abelard, 1970, pp.
111 (1)–142 (20)] singles out three kinds of words for separate treatment: what
are called “indeﬁnites” (i.e., conjunctions and prepositions), names and verbs.21
This seems intended to be a complete classiﬁcation of the basic kinds of words
there are, because under the heading of names are included pronouns, adverbs
and interjections [Abelard, 1970, p. 121 (8-9)]. The inclusion of pronouns under
this heading is unproblematic, because of their obvious naming function.
The
inclusion of adverbs here is less intuitive, but may follow from regarding them
as having some kind of adjectival function — as “quickly” in “he runs quickly”
can be taken as qualifying the one who is doing the running as opposed to the
running itself.22 Of course Abelard does not even consider adjectives as distinct
kinds of words; they are automatically to be taken as names, and if adverbs are
interpreted adjectivally then they will be taken as names too. Interjections are
names as well, he argues, because they denote feelings such as admiration or fear
on the part of the speaker [Abelard, 1970, p. 121 (14–16)].23 So what a more recent
grammatical tradition has labelled the “seven parts of speech” is thus reduced to
a simpler lexical classiﬁcation: names, verbs and indeﬁnites, where indeﬁnites
comprise prepositions and conjunctions.
Of these three classes, the ﬁrst to be treated in the Dialectica is the class of
indeﬁnites. The main question is how these words signify. They are problematic
21[Abelard, 1970] covers these three topics respectively at pp. 118 (1)–120 (20), 121 (1)–129
(5) and 129 (7)–142 (20).
22In [Abelard, 1970, p. 121 (13–14)] we encounter the view that interjections, like adverbs, are
atttached (supponuntur) to names. Note that in [Abelard, 1927, p. 334 (27-36); Abelard, 2008,
02.3] this view is reﬁned to relegate certain interjections and adverbs to the class of indeﬁnites.
23“Denote” translates designat [Abelard, 1970, p. 121 (15)]. For this translation of designare
see [Nuchelmans, 1973, p. 140].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
95
because there is no straightforward basis for construing them as generating under-
standings and denoting as names and verbs do. And yet they clearly play some
kind of semantic role within the proposition.
One approach is to argue, against intuitions, that indeﬁnites signify just as
names and verbs do, and preserve this signiﬁcation even when taken in isolation
from other words. So what is the isolated meaning of “of”? Since it brings to
mind nothing in particular, some who adopt this approach say that it signiﬁes all
things: “‘Of’ said by itself signiﬁes all things, in that anything is of those things”
[Abelard, 1927, p. 337 (14-15); Abelard, 2008, 02.17]. In other words, anything at
all can be said to be of, because one can always identify a group to which it belongs
and then identify it as being of that group. So the word when taken in isolation
has a speciﬁable, albeit very broad, signiﬁcation. When the word is then taken
in context with other words, this universal signiﬁcation will be limited (reducitur)
and made deﬁnite (certiﬁcatur) through the presence of a name. In the phrase “of
man,” for example, the word “of” would presumably signify only men [Abelard,
1927, p. 337 (15–16); Abelard, 2008, 02.17].
Against this approach Abelard proposes another, which he prefers, and which
indeed seems more intuitive. He simply denies that indeﬁnites preserve signiﬁ-
cation when taken in isolation from other words — and so presumably signify
nothing when said in isolation, as opposed to everything. These words, rather,
are established for the sake of co-signifying alongside other words, and when put
alongside them acquire signiﬁcation, just as consonants by themselves make no
sound, but acquire sound when uttered alongside vowels [Abelard, 1927, p. 337
(37–40); Abelard, 2008, 02.19]. What Abelard means by indeﬁnite signiﬁcation,
therefore, seems to be latent signiﬁcation.
This latent signiﬁcation is realized
by placement of the word in an appropriate context. Now context does not just
render the signiﬁcation of these words more precise; it does that much already
for names and verbs [Abelard, 1927, pp. 337 (41)–338 (3); Abelard, 2008, 02.20;
Nuchelmans, 1973, pp. 140-141], and must do more for indeﬁnites. On the other
hand context does not simply assign the indeﬁnite the same signiﬁcation as some
adjoining deﬁnite, since that would yield two words that signify exactly the same,
producing a semantic redundancy [Abelard, 1970, p. 119 (20–23)]. Abelard gives
several examples of how the real but latent signiﬁcation of indeﬁnites emerges by
their use in context — as when we say that something is “of iron,” and mean that
it is made out of iron; this is to say more of the thing than simply to say it is iron.
The presence of the preposition is what makes this diﬀerence [Abelard, 1927, p.
338 (24–26); Abelard, 2008, 02.24].24
By contrast with these indeﬁnite words, names and verbs are both classiﬁed as
deﬁnites. Their signiﬁcation is more than latent. It is analysable even with the
words taken in separation. Of the two, names are the simpler case. Abelard’s se-
mantic account of names is essentially given already in his discussion of universals,
24Abelard’s account of indeﬁnites is commented on elsewhere: [Nuchelmans, 1973, pp. 140–
142], [D¸ambska, 1977], [Jolivet, 1982, pp. 53–56], [Mews, 1985, pp. 83–84], [de Rijk, 1986, pp.
86-87], [Pinzani, 2003, 65–67], [Rosier-Catach, 2003a, pp. 74–79] and [Wilks, forthcoming].

96
Ian Wilks
and further discussion is limited to using the name as a point of comparison for
the other kinds of words: indeﬁnites are understood as falling short of the deﬁnite
signiﬁcation of names, whereas verbs are understood as adding something extra
to that deﬁnite signiﬁcation.
Aristotle deﬁnes the name as “a spoken sound signiﬁcant by convention, with-
out time, none of whose parts is signiﬁcant in separation” [Aristotle, 1963, p. 43
(16a19)]. The key work of characterization is done here by the word “signiﬁcant.”
The last clause (“none of whose parts is signiﬁcant in separation”) is intended to
distinguish names from phrases (orationes)25; the reference to time is meant to
distinguish them from verbs (although, as we shall see, Abelard questions this);
and the reference to convention is meant to distinguish them from sounds that
are meaningful in a way not established by human convention (such as the angry
baying of a dog) [Abelard, 1927, 340 (19–29); Abelard, 2008, 02.34]. Only the
reference to signiﬁcation tells us positively what sort of spoken sound a name is: it
is one which signiﬁes, where Abelard glosses “signiﬁes” non-denotatively, as “con-
stituting an understanding” [Abelard, 1927, p. 335 (30); Abelard, 2008, 02.10].
It is in fact when discussing universals that he gives us a worked out account of
naming, and most of what he says about the above deﬁnition is focused on how
names diﬀer from verbs, and to a lesser extent how they diﬀer from indeﬁnites
[Abelard, 1970, pp. 121 (4)–129 (5)] and [Abelard, 1927, pp. 334 (18)–344 (33);
Abelard, 2008, 02.1-65]. Abelard’s account is also focused on how names do not
diﬀer from their own inﬂected forms. Some inﬂectional diﬀerences such as case
and gender represent no diﬀerence in signiﬁcation from the uninﬂected form at all.
They are simply to be explained in terms of grammatical construction [Abelard,
1970, pp. 124 (36)–125 (1)]. The inﬂectional diﬀerence marking plural from sin-
gular forms does represent a diﬀerence of signiﬁcation, but only, as Abelard says,
a diﬀerence in the mode of signiﬁcation [Abelard, 1970 p. 124 (14–15)], not the
underlying signiﬁcation itself. We are given no further detail about this diﬀerence
of mode — which presumably involves a diﬀerent way of generating the relevant
understanding; but Abelard’s use of this notion is noteworthy here as instancing
a strategy he often uses in addressing ﬁne semantic distinctions.
This brings us to verbs. What is it about their signiﬁcation which makes them
diﬀerent from names? Ultimately, Abelard argues, they diﬀer only in that particu-
lar mode of signiﬁcation which they bear by virtue of being able to propose. Names
do not of themselves propose, and therefore lack this mode. But besides this ac-
count Abelard actually discusses two other accounts, both of wide acceptance in
his own time, but not acceptable to himself.
The ﬁrst, deriving from grammatical theory, holds that that the distinguishing
feature of verbs is their capacity to express in active or passive voice; what they
25Oratio proves diﬃcult to translate.
It denotes any grammatically well-formed expression
of more than one word, including propositions. Martin Tweedale [Tweedale, 1976, p. 14] uses
“word-string.” Klaus Jacobi, Peter King and Chrisian Strub [Jacobi, King and Strub, 1997, p.
13, note 2] use “expression,” with the qualiﬁcation that single words do not qualify as expressions.
I use “phrase,” but with a diﬀerent qualiﬁcation: whole propositions count as phrases — and
will be referred to as “complete phrases.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
97
signify is an action or its passive counterpart (“passion” or “reception”).26 What
names signify falls into other categories, not these, and what verbs signify falls
into these and not others [Abelard, 1927, p. 346 (1–4); Abelard, 2008, 03.11]. The
idea here is that names and verbs diﬀer in their principle signiﬁcation, not just in
a mode of signiﬁcation, so that they will signify fundamentally diﬀerent kinds of
things. Abelard’s response is to point to a participle like “loving” as an example
to the contrary; it is adjectival in nature, and therefore a name, but what it refers
to is an action [Abelard, 1927, p. 346 (32–34); Abelard, 2008, 03.15]. Obviously,
many such examples are available.
The second account derives from Aristotle. It holds that the distinguishing fea-
ture of verbs is their capacity to convey tense. The relevant Aristotelian deﬁnition,
presented in direct contrast with the above deﬁnition of a name, is this: “A verb
is what additionally signiﬁes time, no part of it being signiﬁcant separately” [Aris-
totle, 1963, p. 44 (16b6)]. So, on this account, a verb diﬀers from a name not in
having a diﬀerent principle signiﬁcation, but in having extra mode of signiﬁcation
above and beyond the signiﬁcation a name possesses; whatever a name can signify
a verb can signify too, but it also signiﬁes tense. Abelard clearly rejects this view
in [Abelard, 1970, p. 123 (15–16)]. A verb, he argues, is not distinguished by
signifying tense, because names signify tense as well: the present tense. The pre-
sumption underlying the use of the name “white” is that its referent is presently
white, not something which used to be white but is no longer so, or which will be
so but is not presently [Abelard, 1970, p. 122 (22–25)]. It is likewise with names
in general. The time at which they apply is assumed to be the present, so there is
in fact a temporal reference built right into their signiﬁcation.27
But the account of nominal/verbal distinction which Abelard consistently ac-
cepts, and which can be taken therefore as his most characteristic view on the
question, derives from the second element of Aristotle’s deﬁnition of the verb: the
verb, he says, is a sign of “something’s being said of something else” [Aristotle,
1963, p. 44 (16b6)]. The mode of signiﬁcation truly distinctive of the verb is its
predicative force, its ability to eﬀect the sort of combination with a name that
yields a proposition. Combining two names alone will not do this. Combining a
name and a verb will. Here is a key text on the matter: “There are three acts
in the understanding of a proposition: the understandings of the parts, and the
conjunction or disjunction of the understood things. For it is not anomalous if
that act which is not an understanding be part of the understanding of the whole
proposition” [Abelard, 1927, p. 339 (29–32); Abelard, 2008, 02.29]. The ﬁrst two
acts are the understandings corresponding to subject and predicate. The third
is the act of combining them in an aﬃrmative or negative proposition. We have
already seen how Abelard bases an account of semantic content on an account of
26This approach, and its grammatical background — the Priscian commentary tradition — is
discussed in [Rosier-Catach, 2003b, pp. 182–186].
27On the temporal co-signiﬁcation of names, see [Tweedale, 1982, p. 146], and, on the other
hand, [Jacobi, 1986, pp. 153-154, and 174, note 44]; for adjudication of these views see [de Rijk,
1986, pp. 88-94].

98
Ian Wilks
mental acts; general terms achieve generality through selective attention of the
soul to some property of a thing and inattention to other properties. But what is
specially associated with the verb in a proposition is another kind of mental act
[Rosier-Catach, 2003a, p. 78]. It is not itself an understanding, and so involves
a diﬀerent sort of act from the one that yields understandings. It is an act of
putting understandings into complete aﬃrmative or negative propositions. The
understandings and the conjoining/disjoining are at root the same kind of item —
they are all mental acts — and ﬁt together quite naturally. That is why the act
of conjoining/disjoining can be part of the understanding of the whole proposition
(another mental act) even though it is not itself an understanding.
Note that the juxtaposition of a name and a participle — which of course is
itself a name — can produce something whose semantic content seems very much
like that of a proposition. “Running man” (homo currens), for instance, seems to
involve same two understandings as “the man runs” (homo currit), and one can be
left wondering why the ﬁrst is not just as much a proposition as the second. But
they are, of course, quite diﬀerent. “Running man” leaves “the soul of the hearer
hanging, and it desires to hear something more” [Abelard, 1970, p. 148 (27–28)].28
But “the man runs” has a completeness about it that does not leave the hearer
hanging. This diﬀerence is due to the presence of a verb “runs,” which actually
predicates the semantic content that “running” only juxtaposes. The participle
does not serve as a sign of something’s being said of something else. The verb
does, and therefore possesses distinctive content not present in a name.
This distinctive content can be rendered explicit by re-writing a ﬁnite verb like
“runs” with a corresponding copula verb phrase: “is running.” To say that the
signiﬁcation of a verb reduces to the signiﬁcation of a name plus some additional
mode of signiﬁcation seems to be conﬁrmed by the fact that “runs” can be rendered
thus. This equivalent form gives us a name (“running”) plus an additional sign
(“is”) not having the signiﬁcation of a name, but having obvious eﬀect on the
overall signiﬁcation of the phrase in which it appears. The copula seems to express
exactly that force of predication which the verb has in addition to its name-like
signiﬁcation. What emerges from Abelard’s account of the verb, therefore, is an
account of the copula. The suggestion is that the copula expresses only a mode of
signiﬁcation inherent in the whole verb phrase “is running,” and must be taken in
some way inseparably from “running” in the context of the whole phrase. Indeed
if it does only supply mode of signiﬁcation — if its only semantic contribution is
indeed just to indicate predicative force — then it may seem appropriate to deny
it the status of an independent word. In that case it would be in eﬀect a syllable-
equivalent which happens by lexical convention to be written as a separated word.
This latter possibility — a minimalist account of the copula — is in fact en-
dorsed by Abelard in the Dialectica, by his construing the whole verb phrase as
28Abelard is, of course, just invoking the psychological criterion employed by Aristotle [Aris-
totle, 1963, p. 45 (16b19)] to demonstrate the non-propositionhood of individual names: “When
uttered just by itself a verb is a name and signiﬁes something — the speaker arrests his thought
and the hearer pauses — but it does not yet signify whether it is or not.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
99
semantically equivalent to a single word, and the copula as semantically equiva-
lent to a syllable within that word: “When ‘is a man’ is said, or ‘is conceivable’ or
‘is white,’ let us understand as one word ‘to be a man’ or ‘to be white’ or ‘to be
thinkable”’ [Abelard, 1970, p. 138 (15–17)].29 This move is in keeping with a more
general tendency of Abelard in the Dialectica to preserve as rigorously as possible
the Aristotelian distinction between syllables, words and phrases: words contain
only non-signiﬁcative elements (syllables) and phrases contain only fully and in-
dependently signiﬁcant words. A word like respublica (treasury) is compounded
from the words res (thing) and publica (public), whose meanings are obviously
relevant to the meaning of the compound, but do not directly determine it; that
is, its meaning is not a direct additive product of theirs. So Abelard stipulates that
its meaning is not a product of theirs at all. The word is taken as a single seman-
tic unit, and its seeming constituent words are accordingly regarded as individual
syllables, and not as retaining any distinct meaning therein [Abelard, 1970, p. 115
(20–23)]. He proceeds to make this sort of stipulation not only for individual words
but whole phrases. A phrase like “dead man” contains an adjectival opposition, in
that men are by deﬁnition alive, and so “dead man” is a contradiction in terms.30
Abelard resolves the contradiction by claiming that the meanings of constituent
words are not preserved in the phrase, stipulating rather that the constituents are
to be taken as meaningless syllables, with meaning conferred only upon the phrase
taken as a whole. A similar analysis is attempted in explaining why “good harpist”
describes a harpist good at harp-playing, as opposed to a harpist good in a more
general — perhaps moral — sense [Abelard, 1970, p. 116 (31)–117 (1)], and also
in explaining the meaning of quantiﬁed subject phrases (“all men,” “some men,”
and “no men”) in syllogistic propositions [Abelard, 1970, p. 188 (26-32)].31
Elsewhere Abelard reverts to a less radical view: that the signiﬁcation of words
is aﬀected by context, and words used in context often have their received signiﬁ-
cation altered by other words in their vicinity. This view is less radical because it
falls well of short of saying that the words actually cease to be word-equivalents,
and play the role of syllable-equivalents instead. It is simply an account of the
transference (translatio) of signiﬁcation, not the outright loss of it.32 This account
proves useful for Abelard outside of his work as a logician. In a theological set-
ting, for example, he can argue that God’s being three persons does not imply that
God is three (i.e., three things), because “three” in “three persons” has diﬀerent
signiﬁcation than when used in isolation [Abelard, 1969a, p. 269 (134–38); Wilks,
29In the translation of [Kretzmann, 1982, p. 509], the phrases are actually rendered as single
words: “to-be-a-man,” “to-be-white” and “to-be-thinkable.”
30An account of the long history of commentary on this example is provided in [Ebbesen, 1979].
31Abelard does not account for prepositions and conjunctions in this way, however. Since the
approach of the Dialectica does not allow for any intermediate stage between meaningless sylla-
bles and independently meaningful words, he is faced with the choice of construing prepositions
in either one way or the other. So he attempts to construe them as independently meaningful.
See [Wilks, 1998a, p. 184] and [Wilks, forthcoming].
32This important notion has been variously treated: [de Rijk, 1962, pp. 51–56, 94–98], [Jolivet,
1982, pp. 279–84], [Mews, 1987, pp. 23–25], [Rosier, 1988], [Wilks, 1998a], [Rosier-Catach, 1999],
and [Wilks, forthcoming].

100
Ian Wilks
1998a, p. 175]; he can argue in this way without actually saying that “three” has
no signiﬁcation at all in that context. Likewise, on this approach, the copula is
taken to undergo a change of signiﬁcation when used in the context of a predicate
phrase, but is not taken to lose its received signiﬁcation entirely. This is a helpful
result since it makes possible a more worked out account of the function of a copula
verb in a predicative structure. Treating the word as a mere syllable-equivalent is
a fairly easy, if implausible, way of dismissing the problem. But discussing what is
actually involved in a relation of predication requires Abelard to meet the problem
head on. This problem, be it noted, is more complex than the issue of what a verb
is. It is the issue of what predication is.
Here is a characteristic text, which analyses the predicative relation involved in
“Socrates is white”:
Two things are therefore conjoined with Socrates through “white”:
whiteness is conjoined in adjacence and a white thing (that is, the
thing itself aﬀected by whiteness) is conjoined in essence. But only
whiteness is predicated, since it alone is what is meant to be conjoined.
For not everything that is conjoined is predicated, but only that which
is meant to be conjoined. For whoever utters the statement “Socrates
is white” only declares that whiteness is in Socrates [Abelard, 1927, p.
360 (23–28); Abelard, 2008, 03.94].33
As a ﬁrst step toward understanding this passage, we must distinguish between the
so-called “inherence” and “identity” interpretations of the predicative relation.34
According to the inherence interpretation, the predicate term signiﬁes a form and
the predication expresses the fact that that form actually inheres in the thing
signiﬁed by the subject term. So “Socrates is white” tells us that whiteness inheres
in Socrates. According to the identity interpretation, the predicate term signiﬁes
a thing, as does the subject term, and the predication expresses the fact that the
two terms signify the same thing. So “Socrates is white” tells us that the white
thing signiﬁed by the predicate term is the same as the Socrates-thing referred to
by the subject term. The semantic account underlying the identity interpretation
is gratifyingly simple. It involves only a relation of naming in both subject and
predicate, and what is named is in neither case a form.
But on the semantic
account underlying the inherence interpretation we have a relation of naming only
in the subject and a more complex signiﬁcative relation in the predicate, one which
involves a form. On the assumption that Abelard dislikes talk of forms, it in the
past seemed plausible that he would ultimately prefer the identity to the inherence
interpretation.35 This assumption is misleading, of course; Abelard only dislikes
33[de Rijk, 1986, pp. 108–113] provides a detailed account of the view inherent in this passage,
on which my own commentary depends.
34The prominence of these labels derives from [Moody, 1953, pp. 36–38].
35The resulting developmental interpretation of Abelard is that he moved from embracing an
inherence theory of predication to an identity theory: [Pinborg, 1972, p. 52], [de Rijk, 1967,
pp. 105–106] and [de Rijk, 1970, pp. xli–xliv]. Correctives are issued in [Tweedale, 1976, pp.
229–231], [Malcolm, 1979, pp. 386-390] and [de Rijk, 1981a, p. 25].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
101
talk of shared forms. So he has no preference as between the two interpretations,
and in fact regularly invokes both. That is what he is doing in the above passage.
Predicating “white” of “Socrates” actually invokes both of the semantic roles that
“white” is able to play: both its ability to name a white thing, and its ability to
signify whiteness. The predication “conjoins” both to Socrates, as Abelard says
above; that is, it construes Socrates as being in a relation to whiteness and as
being in a relation to a white thing. The ﬁrst relation is inherence, the second
identity. The predication expresses both.
On the other hand, it is only the inherence relation that is explicitly expressed,
thus becoming the relation which is explicitly conveyed by the terms of the pred-
ication.
The identity relation is only implicitly expressed, and remains in the
background. So only one of the items Socrates is conjoined with is meant to be
appealed to in the predication. But why is the other unintentionally conveyed?
Abelard explains this result as in eﬀect forced on the speaker by the peculiar char-
acteristics of the copula verb “is.” This word also serves as our way of predicating
existence (as in “Socrates is”), and this alternate, existential meaning is not nor-
mally divorced from the word, even in its usage as a copula. In this he diverges
from the view of the Dialectica, where, as we have seen, he is only too willing
to construe words as losing their received signiﬁcation. But the post-Dialectica
approach requires some notion of existence to be melded with the signiﬁcation of
the predicate name. Accordingly, “white” cannot be used with “is” without some
implication, albeit in the background, that what “white” is being used to signify is
not just a white thing, but an existing white thing. In other words, the predicate
“is white” attributes whiteness, but at the same time unavoidably identiﬁes what
is said to be white with a white thing. Even though one only intends to attribute
the form to what is named by the subject, one cannot help do something else as
well: identify what is implicitly named by the predicate with what is named by the
subject. One act is intended, two completed; Abelard refers to both of the two as
“conjoining.” His account of the copula verb phrase may therefore be summarized
thus: each act of predication involves both kinds of conjunction.36
This grasp of the semantics of verb function gives us entry into the next level of
semantic theory: the proposition.37 One can group words in all sorts of ways that
36Abelard’s treatment of predication and the copula verb remains one of the most extensively
studied aspects of his logical theory. In addition to the works already cited on this issue, the
following should be noted: [Nuchelmans, 1973, pp. 140–141], [de Rijk, 1981b, pp. 33–40], [Jolivet,
1982, pp. 56–62], [Jacobi, 1986], [Mews, 1987, pp. 21–25], [Marenbon, 1999], [Rosier-Catach,
1999, pp. 141–162], [Rosier-Catach, 2003b] and [Jacobi, 2004, pp. 147–150].
37“Proposition” is not an ideal translation for propositio.
For the medievals the propositio
always means a propositional sign, not propositional content [Kretzmann, 1970, p.
767]; for
Abelard in particular it always denotes a sentence-token [Marenbon, 1997a, p. 203, note 2]. Cur-
rent usage tends to associate “proposition” more with content and less with tokens. Accordingly,
John Marenbon has more recently rendered the term as “propositional sentence” [Marenbon,
2004, p. 59, note 2]. One sometimes ﬁnds the phrase “statement-making utterance” [Nuchel-
mans, 1973, p.
146; de Rijk, 1986, p.
95].
Christopher Martin describes the propositio as
“propositional token” [Martin, 2004a, p. 193, note 4]. I nonetheless use “proposition” in trans-
lation to maintain continuity with the standard translation for maxima propositio in topical

102
Ian Wilks
fail to achieve propositionality. If they are grouped in accordance with grammatical
rules of construction they may constitute an appropriate conjunction of words, a
competens dictionum coniunctio [Abelard, 1970, p.
147 (28)].
But this is no
guarantee that they will constitute a proposition. A proposition is a complete
phrase, an oratio perfecta38; what indicates the incompleteness of other phrases
is the disposition of the hearer to pause and “desire to hear something more”
[Abelard, 1970, p. 148 (27-28)]. When words grouped according to grammatical
rules suﬃce to meet this desire, we have a proposition. The key element is of
course the verb. “Without the verb,” says Abelard, “there is no completion of
sense” [Abelard, 1970, p. 148 (29–30)].
Mere combinations of names do not yield this completion. What they yield is
something that, under conditions of grammatical appropriateness, simply remains
at the semantic level of a name. “Rational, mortal animal” functions grammati-
cally just as “man” does, even though the one is a phrase and the other a word.
This naming function is brought about in the former case by a more complex
internal structure of signiﬁcation, involving more mental acts (actus intellectus)
than the latter, but in the end both perform as names, and in fact as names of
the same thing [Abelard, 1927, p. 325 (24–29); Abelard, 2008, 01.94; Nuchelmans,
1973, p. 143]. At this level no considerations of truth or falsity arise. Names and
incomplete phrases may have application to things or fail to do so, but this just
means that they are either sound (sanus) or not [Abelard, 1927, p. 326 (30–36);
Abelard, 2008, 01.97].39 “The running man” signiﬁes in such a way that it is able
to name, and as such is described as being sound. But it is not appropriately said
to be true. It diﬀers from “the man runs” by the fact that in using it we determine
“running . . . as adjacent to man, but we do not also assert the adjacence, which
cannot be done without a verb” [Abelard, 1970, p. 149 (12–14)].
The verb’s special ability to confer completeness of sense resides in its ability to
convey predicative force. The example of predicative force given above is assertive
force, the product of which is a proposition. But Abelard notes that there are
other kinds of predicative force as well, which yield other kinds of complete phrase.
One can predicate interrogatively or imperatively; in uttering a prayer we have a
fourth diﬀerent sort of predication, and in uttering a wish a ﬁfth [Abelard, 1970,
p. 151 (4-14)]. These ﬁve kinds of complete phrase represent ﬁve diﬀerent ways of
joining predicate to subject, and of demonstrating “the inherence of something in
something in accordance with various dispositions (aﬀectus) of the soul” [Abelard,
1970, p. 149 (21–22)].40 What is at issue here is the distinction between sentential
theory: “maximal proposition.” Note that Abelard takes the token quality of the propositio so
seriously that he actually denies what we know as the “Tarski biconditional”; from the fact that
a man exists it does not follow that “A man exists” is true, since “A man exists” might never
have been uttered [Abelard, 1921, p. 291 (26-28)]. See [Guilfoy, 2002, p. 146; Marenbon, 1997a,
p. 205, note 8].
38See note 25 above.
39Sanus is contrasted with cassus, “empty” [Nuchelmans, 1973, p. 144].
40Nuchelmans translates dispositiones animi as “mental attitudes” and notes that Abelard
uses the similar phrase aﬀectus animi to denote the moods of the verb [Nuchelmans, 1973, p.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
103
content and the sort of force with which it is asserted or otherwise put forward.
The content may be contained in an incomplete phrase like “running man” and
put forward with no sort of force at all. But when a verb is in place to mark
the relevant disposition of soul the corresponding force is brought to bear upon
the content. In the case of assertion we have seen that this is a function not of
the mental acts of conception which constitute the basic signiﬁcation of verbs and
names alike, but rather a function of the mental act supplementary to those, which
marks the predicative relation and operates as a mode of that basic signiﬁcation.
Presumably this holds for the other kinds of complete phrase as well; in each
case, it may be supposed, their distinctive force arises from a speciﬁc mode of
signiﬁcation through a speciﬁc way of inﬂecting or otherwise presenting the verb.
So the sentential content of “Socrates is coming” is put here with assertive force,
but could be put otherwise with interrogative, imperative, precative or optative
force (respectively: “Is Socrates coming?”, “Socrates, come!”, “Socrates, please
come,” and “Would that Socrates would come”).41
For the logician, of course, it is only the ﬁrst of these ﬁve kinds of force —
assertive — that constitutes an appropriate object of interest [Abelard, 1970, 152
(27–8)], the others being relegated to non-dialectical subject matters. Abelard
has shed much light on how individual words combine to be productive of the
propositions they compose. He must now turn to the special semantic properties
of propositions themselves. The point of departure is the Boethian deﬁnition of
the proposition as that which “signiﬁes a truth or a falsehood” [Abelard, 1970, p.
153 (33); Boethius, 1990, p. 2]. To grasp the special character of the proposition
as a semantic unit accordingly requires some insight into what is meant by “true”
and “false.”
To this end, Abelard suggests a key distinction: “Just as names and verbs have a
twofold signiﬁcation — of things and understandings — we also grant that propo-
sitions have a twofold signiﬁcation: according to the understandings composed of
the understandings of their parts, and according to their dicta” [Abelard, 1927,
p. 367 (9–12), Abelard, 2008, 04.26]. Individual names generate understandings
and name things, and in some sense the same can be said of propositions. But
what has so far been said about the semantics of stating has focussed on under-
standings only. The key question has been how the combination of words into
phrases is made meaningful by the combination of their associated understandings
into larger conceptual structures. But this cannot be the whole picture. To sat-
isfy their full semantic function, names are normally expected to refer. Likewise,
to satisfy their full semantic function, propositions are normally expected to be
true. Just as there must be something for the name to refer to, there must also
147]. Martin Lenz argues that for Abelard the true criterion of completeness is not the fact that
the listener does not expect to hear more (the “suspense-criterion”), or the fact that the phrase
contains a ﬁnite verb (the “grammatical criterion”), or the fact that it signiﬁes a predication
(the “logical criterion”), but the fact that one of the propositional attitudes is expressed [Lenz,
2005, pp. 381, 383].
41For Abelard’s examples (which do not, as mine do, use the same content throughout) see
[Abelard, 1970, p. 151 (6–15)].

104
Ian Wilks
be something for the proposition to be true of. What it is true of is the dictum.
Abelard has discussed how individual understanding-generating words merge to
make a understanding-generating proposition. Now he must also discuss how this
understanding-generating proposition is able to be true.
The dictum of a proposition is, translated literally, what is said by it. This
translation is not overly helpful, but unfortunately the notion is one which Abelard
is clearly struggling to reﬁne, and providing an exact account of it is as diﬃcult as
providing one for the notion of the status. Abelard does, however, clearly rule out
two hypotheses. (i) What is said by a proposition is not itself an understanding. If
it were, true conditionals would in most cases fail to involve a necessary connection
between antecedent and consequent [Abelard, 1970, p. 154 (30)–155 (5)]. The
conditional “If it is a man it is an animal” is supposed to state some sort of
necessary connection. But if the connection it states is between understandings
then it cannot be a necessary one. After all, it is perfectly possible to have one of
the two understandings without having the other. One can conceive of a man, for
instance, without also conceiving of an animal. There is no necessary connection
between the generation of the one understanding and the generation of the other.
But since there is a necessary connection between what is said by the antecedent
and what is said by the consequent, it follows that what is said by a proposition
cannot be an understanding.
(ii) But what is said by the proposition cannot
just be the thing(s) the proposition is about, either. If it were, Abelard argues,
a proposition like “Socrates is Socrates” — a bit odd, admittedly, but perfectly
well-formed – would be semantically indistinguishable from the name “Socrates.”
This is because the subject and predicate terms in this case refer to the same
thing, and thus to only one thing — Socrates. On the hypothesis, then, that is
all the proposition would say: Socrates. How would it then diﬀer in semantic
content from the name “Socrates”? “Socrates is Socrates” obviously does diﬀer
in semantic content from “Socrates,” and so the hypothesis fails. What is said by
the proposition is not just the thing(s) the proposition is about [Abelard, 1970, p.
157 (14–25)].42
The dictum cannot be understood as a generated understanding or the thing(s)
the proposition is about. What is it then? The best clue is this: not only is the
dictum said by the proposition, but it possesses key features of the proposition
itself, and indeed causes the proposition to have those features: “It is chieﬂy
according to these dicta that propositions are judged to be true or false, or to be
opposites, or to be necessary or possible, since, that is to say, the dicta of those
propositions are true or false or opposite to one another or necessary or possible”
[Abelard, 1927, p. 367 (13–16); Abelard, 2008, 04.26]. Dicta themselves have the
properties of truth, falsity, possibility, necessity, and oppositeness to other dicta,
and then impart them to the propositions by which they are expressed. The fact
42These arguments from the Dialectica are actually applied not to the dictum — which is
not referred to in this work — but the existentia rei. See note 45 below for these two technical
notions. They cannot automatically be presumed to be the same, but nonetheless both represent
what a proposition says, and so the above arguments seem applicable to both.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
105
that they can be opposite to one another means that they can be contradictories
and contraries to one another, and suggests that they likewise can stand in the
other relations of the square of opposition, and so can be sub-alternates and sub-
contraries. This in turn suggests that they can stand in inferential relations to
each other, and accordingly the above puzzle about how inferential relations hold
independently of the understandings of the mind, and the things the propositions
are about, is able to be addressed through this theory of dicta.
So the dicta of propositions — what they say — cause their truth, falsity, etc.
They are also themselves able to be described as true, false, etc.
Above and
beyond these features is another already mentioned. The dictum, as what is said
by the proposition, is its propositional content, and as such subject to the various
propositional attitudes under which it can be expressed: it can be expressed with
assertive force, interrogative force, imperative force, and so on.43
We have, therefore, a variety of features associated with the dictum, and the
question is, then, what sort of item actually possesses them. Abelard leaves us
with no clear response to this question, and indeed seems to struggle with it
himself. On the other hand, it is easy to ﬁnd modern comparisons which answer
to these descriptions — understanding, of course, that the key terms involved are
extensively nuanced, and cannot easily be transferred to a prior century.
(i) What we call a state of aﬀairs can be construed as possessing these features.
We can say that true, possible, necessary states of aﬀairs are ones that do, can
and must obtain, and that false states of aﬀairs are those possible ones that do not
obtain. Two such states can be taken manifesting oppositeness to one another,
and standing in a relation of contrariety or contradictoriness. We can speak of
one state of aﬀairs as implying another. So states of aﬀairs can be, like dicta,
described as true, false, etc. They can also be construed as causing these features
in propositions — as making a proposition true, false, possible, necessary, opposite
to another proposition or such as to imply it. Since states of aﬀairs are closely
associated with how the world is in some respect, it is intuitive to think of them as
actually causing propositions to be true, false, etc. Finally, a state of aﬀairs can
be construed as being what is said by a proposition, that is, its content. As such it
may be regarded as subject to expression via the various propositional attitudes.
One can assert a state of aﬀairs, question it, order it to be brought about, and so
on.
(ii) Parallel construals can be attempted for the notion of a fact. Facts can be
characterized as true, possible and necessary, and then false ones characterized as
those possible ones which do not hold.44 Facts can be mutually exclusive, and
one fact can imply another. Facts can be construed as causing propositions to
be true, false, possible, and necessary, mutually exclusive and implicative of other
propositions.
And they can be construed as propositional contents subject to
assertive, interrogative, imperative, precative and optative force.
43The fact that the dictum must be thought of as susceptible to all of the propositional atti-
tudes, not just the assertive one, is emphasized in [Marenbon, 2004, p. 66].
44This notion of a false fact would clearly be a departure from the received notion of a fact.

106
Ian Wilks
Whatever philosophical problems may beset the propositional semantics arising
from the construals in (i) and (ii) are beside the point. The point is that the notion
Abelard is attempting to articulate the sort of notion that ﬁgures commonly in
contemporary semantic theory, and that the dictum should not be seen, from
our perspective, as an especially exotic notion. It is undoubtedly, however, an
unﬁnished one, and in need of further speciﬁcation.
There is one point about it, however, that Abelard stresses: it is not a thing
(res) [Nuchelmans, 1973, p 153].45 Here his concerns echo those expressed in his
discussion of the status. The status is the cause of the applicability of a general
name to a plurality of objects; but even though it causes this applicability, it
is not a thing. The dictum is likewise a cause — of the truth, falsity, etc. of
propositions — but again Abelard wants to deny that being a cause entails being
a thing. He reverts to the sort of argument, seen earlier in his discussion of the
status, that what serves as a cause does not necessarily have to be identiﬁable as
a thing. The thief is hung for an act of thievery committed in the past, an act
which, at time of hanging, is not a thing. One can starve to death because of the
non-act of failing to eat, or be eternally damned for the non-act of failing to act
well, and these non-acts are likewise not things. So the non-thinghood of dicta
is no bar to their causal abilities [Abelard, 1927, p. 369 (2–6); Abelard, 2008,
04.36], or their ability to explain how propositions can be true, false, etc. In this
way a further portion of Abelard’s semantic theory is set in place without evident
appeal to metaphysically controversial items. Given his initial rejection of shared
forms from his semantic theory to avoid metaphysical controversy, he is naturally
disinclined to re-introduce such controversy elsewhere.
Of course the supposed non-thinghood of the dictum does raise its own puz-
zles.46 Recall the passage quoted above to introduce the notion of the dictum:
“Just as names and verbs have a twofold signiﬁcation — of things and understand-
ings — we also grant that propositions have a twofold signiﬁcation: according to
the understandings composed of the understandings of their parts, and according
to their dicta” [Abelard, 1927, p. 367 (9–12); Abelard, 2008, 04.26]. This compar-
ison should be approached carefully. If we press the analogy with names too far,
45Nonetheless the Dialectica is less explicit on this matter. Abelard’s preferred term in that
work is not the dictum [Marenbon, 1997a, p.
204, note 5] but the existentia rei; translated
literally this means “the existence of a thing.” But it would not have been taken in this way,
however, given the generality of the word res, and is better rendered as “state of aﬀairs” or
“matter of fact.” Abelard might have come to prefer the word dictum because of its non-use
of the word res, and thus its greater ability to convey the non-thinghood of the cause of truth,
falsity, etc. (For comparison, imagine a modern theorist coming to prefer “fact” over “state of
aﬀairs” because of the latter’s sounding too much like a thing, or collection of things, in the
world.) Kevin Guilfoy in fact argues that the Dialectica theory is altogether distinct from the
one given in the Glossae super Periermeneias [Guilfoy, 2004b]. Intriguingly, John Marenbon
argues that having come to employ the word dictum, Abelard may subsequently have abandoned
it [Marenbon, 2004, pp. 76–78].
46These are treated in Martin Tweedale’s extensive discussion of the dictum in [Tweedale,
1976, pp. 216-278]. For other discussions of the dictum not so far mentioned see [de Libera,
1981], [de Rijk, 1975], [Jolivet, 1982, pp 77–85], [Lewis, 1987, pp. 84–88], [Jacobi et al., 1996]
and [Rosier-Catach, 2004].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
107
we may be led to the conclusion that there is a thing named by the proposition as a
whole — its dictum — just as there is a thing named by the individual name. But
this conclusion makes exactly the wrong mistake about the dictum. The dictum
is signiﬁed by a proposition, but is not actually a thing that is named by it. The
signifying that a proposition does is diﬀerent from naming. A proposition does
not name what it says.
This requirement proves troublesome when it comes to the correct interpre-
tation of certain kinds of impersonal construction. Subject and predicate terms
have so-called “personal” signiﬁcation when there is something speciﬁable that
they name.47 Aristotle’s deﬁning characterization of the proposition as “a state-
ment of something about something” [Aristotle, 1963, p. 47 (17a25); Abelard,
1927, p. 389 (32–33); Abelard, 2008, 06.2] seems to require that both subject and
predicate terms have personal signiﬁcation. But in many propositions this prereq-
uisite seems not to be met. “It is raining” appears to have a subject term (“it”)
without personal signiﬁcation — and hence it is called an “impersonal construc-
tion.” One of Abelard’s examples is ventum est ecclesiam [Abelard, 1927, p. 390
(15); Abelard, 2008, 06.5], meaning “It was come to church,” or in slightly better
English, “There was an arrival at church.” This proposition needs to be diﬀerently
expressed to ﬁt under the deﬁnition just given: “There was an arrival at church by
some people” or “by them” [Abelard, 1927, 390 (19-20); Abelard, 2008 06.6]. This
re-formulation suggests that the proposition does have an implicit subject term
(“people,” “them” — i.e., “they”) with personal signiﬁcation; it also suggests that
the explicit, original form of the proposition is misleading. There really are, in
eﬀect, denotative subject and predicate terms.
The question is whether this sort of solution will work in all cases.
Deeper
problems arise for propositions involving sentential operators such as “It is possible
that.” If we say, “It is possible that Socrates runs” we appear to be predicating
possibility of what is said by “Socrates runs.” In other words, we are treating
“Socrates runs” as a subject term, with the accompanying suggestion that it names
something. But, as noted, propositions do not name. If they did name, it would be
their dicta that they named, and Abelard will not accept this result. The dictum
is not a thing, and cannot coherently be treated as if it were personally signiﬁed.48
This result applies to a wide range of impersonal forms: “It is possible that
...”, “It is true that . . . ”, “It is good that . . . ”, and so on, where the omitted
portion is seen as being ﬁlled by some verbal formula expressing a dictum. These
impersonal forms need to be clariﬁed, just as “There was an arrival at church”
needs to be clariﬁed, so as to reveal a personally signifying subject term. This is
done to “It is possible that Socrates runs” by rendering it as “Socrates possibly
runs” — that is, by re-stating it as a predication about Socrates, a personal subject.
47For some of the historical background to this semantic use of the word “personal” (person-
alis), see [Mews, 1992, pp. 14-16]. This word in these contexts must always be understood with
reference to its opposite: “impersonal.”
48On the other hand, Abelard does refer to dicta by the entirely enigmatic phrase quasi res
(literally, “quasi-things”) [Abelard, 1927, p. 367 (12); Abelard, 2008, 04.26]. [Guilfoy, 2004b, p.
42, note 25] discusses the proper translation of this phrase.

108
Ian Wilks
Abelard’s preference for personal over impersonal formulations is supported by the
diﬃculties involved in applying conversion to impersonal ones. Ability to convert
is, of course, taken as a standard property of subject/predicate propositions. A
universal proposition “All S is P” is converted to “Some P is S,” and along these
lines a singular proposition “Socrates is running” becomes “Something which is
running is Socrates.” In general, if a statement “S is P” is true then at least one
of the Ps can be said to be an S, so we can infer that something which is P is
S. But notice that this makes no sense when, as in an impersonal proposition,
the subject term corresponds to the dictum of a proposition.49
If we say “It
is possible that Socrates runs” with impersonal intent, then the predicate term is
“possible,” and the conversion is this: “Something which is possible is that Socrates
runs.” Abelard is not willing to credit a proposition like this with any meaning,
and concludes in general for impersonal propositions that, unless interpretable as
personal constructions, they are “neither universal nor particular nor indeﬁnite
nor singular, and on that account do not permit conversion of the simple forms”
[Abelard, 1958, p. 14 (15-17); Abelard, 2008, 12.20]. This would suggest that they
are not of the subject/predicate structure at all in that event [Tweedale, 1976, p.
259] — and this conclusion challenges the assumption that the subject/predicate
analysis is universally applicable to all propositions.
The above account of propositional contents informs another of Abelard’s inno-
vations: an account of sentential negation which fully grasps the semantic diﬀer-
ence between wide scope and narrow scope negation. Under narrow scope negation
the sign of negation is placed between subject and predicate (“Socrates is not a
man”); under wide scope, it is placed at the front of the proposition (“It is not the
case that Socrates is a man”). Under the latter placement, the sign operates with
the entire proposition-to-be-negated in its scope. This placement, in Abelard’s
view, permits, as the other does not, a complete semantic negation, leaving the
negated form in the expected relation of contradictoriness to the pre-negated form:
“It is clear . . . that to every aﬃrmation, the negation which destroys the entire
sense of that aﬃrmation with preposed negation is correctly opposed as the proper
dividing statement in contradiction” [Abelard, 1970, p. 178 (28-30)]. Abelard
refers to narrow scope negation as “separative,” and wide scope as “extinctive”
[Abelard, 1927, p. 406 (29-31); Abelard, 2008, 07.28]. His thesis, then, is that it is
extinctive negation, not separative, that fully carries out the logical operation of
negation. Note that the extinctive negation is not construed as an impersonal con-
struction. It is rendered by placement of non at the front of the proposition, and
Abelard classiﬁes this sign of negation as an adverb, not as a personal construc-
tion [Abelard, 1927, p. 406 (37); Abelard, 2008, 07.29]. So the use of extinctive
negation does not encounter the problems that impersonal constructions in general
do.
Abelard’s prefers extinctive negation because it better conveys the relation of
49In that case the linguistic item expressing the dictum can be expressed as an accusative and
inﬁnitive construction: “for Socrates to run.” [Guilfoy, 2004b, pp. 44–53] discusses the bearing
of Abelard’s account of the dictum on the semantic function of this construction.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
109
contradictoriness. Contradictories are supposed to divide completely the concep-
tual space that they mutually imply. They can neither be true at the same time
nor false at the same time, so that the truth of one properly implies the falsity of
the other. This relation is formalized in Aristotle’s famous square of opposition,
where the diagonally opposed propositions are the ones that are contradictorily
opposed:
A: All S is P
E: No S is P (= Not some S is P)
I: Some S is P
O: Not all S is P.
The E- and O-propositions here are rendered extinctively, so as to contradict,
respectively, the I- and A-propositions. Say the O-proposition were rendered sep-
aratively: “Some S is not P.”50 This version, Abelard argues, does not contradict
the corresponding A-form, because both could be false together. The reason lies in
the further issue of whether the subject term can be assumed to name something
that really exists — that is, whether it carries existential presupposition. If the
negation comes after the subject term then the proposition as a whole presupposes
that there is something corresponding to the subject term. But if the negation
comes before the subject term then the presupposition disappears. Here is the key
claim:
But it is one matter to disjoin things from each other, another to show
that they do not agree with each other. For one who treats of things
as being disjoined from one another takes them as if they exist; but
one who treats of things as not agreeing with one another does not
suggest their existence any more than their non-existence . . . Hence
the preposed negation has the one import and the interposed negation
the other [Abelard, 1970, p. 177 (12–15, 16–17)].
For P to be disjoined from S suggests removal of P from S, and therefore presents
S as some existing thing from which the removal is made. Existential presupposi-
tion is attached to the subject term (and to the predicate term too, since “Some S
is not P” is equivalent to “Some P is not S”). But when the negation is put at the
front of the proposition, what is suggested is only the disagreement of subject and
predicate terms, not removal of one from the other. Mere disagreement does not
carry with it the suggestion of an existing thing from which removal is made.51
It is this existential presupposition in an O-proposition with separative negation
that makes it fail to contradict its corresponding A-proposition. Say no humans
exist. Then the A-proposition “All humans are mortal” is false, because it presup-
poses that humans do exist. But “Some humans are not mortal” is false too, since
it presupposes that humans do exist. Two propositions capable of being false to-
gether are not contradictories. So the separative version of the O-proposition fails
50Note that separatively negating the A-form to yield “All S is not P” would not express what
is needed, and would, in fact, be a clumsy way of expressing the E-form
51Note that the existential presupposition issue is distinct from the issue of having a subject
term with personal signiﬁcation. “The chimaera is a mythical beast” is a personal proposition,
even though its subject term fails to name an actual thing.

110
Ian Wilks
to represent the content of that form correctly.52 But Abelard’s conclusion is not
that there is anything illegitimate about propositions with interposed negation.
His point is simply that if we start with the proposition “All S is P,” and then
build a square of opposition around it, no proposition in that square will contain a
separative negation. The sort of negation which produces the logical oppositions
is not separative. But this does not mean that separative negations can never
appear in a square of opposition. In fact, to the square beginning with “All S is
P” Abelard constructs corresponding square beginning with “All S is not P”; the
corresponding E-form is “No S is not P,” the I-form is “Some S is not P” and
the O-form is “Not all S is not P” [Abelard, 1927, p. 407 (20–31); Abelard, 2008,
07.34–35]. The point is that “All S is not P” is treated not as negated form of “All
S is P,” but as a distinct predication, itself subject to placement as the A-entry
on a square of opposition. Given the two diﬀerent kinds of negation, therefore,
“All S is P” in fact gives rise to two squares of opposition — or, we might say, a
double square (or, as it has been called, a rectangle of opposition [Martin, 2004a,
p. 168]).
That contrary and contradictory propositions are opposed “not from the nature
of the terms but from the very force of assertion” [Abelard, 1927, p. 410 (3–5);
Abelard, 2008, 07.45] is a basic point about propositional structure which makes
it possible to understand how propositional connectives, like negation, operate.53
This was later to be a key discovery of Gottlob Frege, and the basis for many of
his innovations. But it is already present in the work of Abelard.54 It confers
upon him not only a viable basis for constructing a propositional logic, but gives
him heightened awareness of the importance of scope in understanding the syntax
of propositions under logical analysis — in this case the scope of negation. This
awareness naturally shapes his account of modal theory as well, where issues of
scope are so ubiquitous. In modal theory, however, his preferences attach to a
narrow scope of logical operation, not a wide one, so that he privileges modal
propositions formulated with interposed modal operators (the syntactic counter-
parts of separative negations).
When interposed, modal operators take the form of adverbs. A mode in eﬀect
answers a “how” question; one asks “How did he read?”
and the respondent
formulates the answer by modifying the verb with a word like “well,” “badly” or
“quickly” [Abelard, 1958, p. 3 (16–21); Abelard, 2008, 12.3]. All three adverbs
52Note that the problem of interposed negation is less likely to arise for the E-proposition,
since it is normally expressed with preceding a sign of negation. The standard Latin quantifying
term for the E-proposition is nullus, which is an etymological product of non and ullus, and in
eﬀect means “not some” (more literally: “not any”). Nullus already does, in eﬀect, pre-position
the non [Abelard, 1970, p. 177 (33–34)].
53As we shall see below, Abelard realizes the implications of this analysis for understanding
the proper negated form of a conditional [Abelard, 1927, p. 406 (29–31); Abelard, 2008, 07.28].
54Peter Geach refers to this insight as the “Frege point” [Geach, 1965, p. 449]. Christopher
Martin, who cites Geach on this point [Martin, 1991, p. 281], has stressed the signiﬁcance of
ﬁnding the Frege point already fully articulated by Abelard: “If he was the ﬁrst to achieve
this understanding in the Middle Ages, and there is no evidence to the contrary, he must be
recognized as one of the greatest of all philosophical logicians” [Martin, 2004a, p. 166].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
111
are modes. The modes of modal logic are adverbs too, just very specialized ones.
So “necessarily” just qualiﬁes the assertion that something is thus by the addition
that it cannot be otherwise [Abelard, 1970, p.
194 (7)].
But note that what
are grammatically adverbs do not always, strictly speaking, modify the verb; the
adverb “falsely,” for example, does not say how a verb applies, but in fact says
that the verb does not apply. “Possibly” invokes a similar point. If we say “S is
possibly P” we do not deny the truth of “S is P,” but we deﬁnitely do not aﬃrm
it as a truth either. So “possibly” does not operate in typical adverbial fashion
to indicate mode of inherence [Abelard, 1958, p. 4 (7–10); Abelard, 2008, 12.4].
Is it even an adverb? Abelard still wants to say it is. His view is that “possible”
functions as an adverb syntactically (secundum positionem constructionis) even if
not semantically (secundum sensum); that is, syntax assigns it a modifying role,
even if this role is not forthcoming just from its semantic properties plus those of
the accompanying verb.
So claims of possibility are still explained as claims about the nature of the
subject (i.e., that S is possibly P). These claims, however, are not about what the
nature is, but rather about what it is not repugnant (repugnet) to [Abelard, 1970,
p. 193 (36)]. Something is possible for Socrates when it is not repugnant to his
nature. To use Abelard’s example, the possibility that Socrates is a bishop lies in
the fact that being a bishop is not repugnant to Socrates’ nature [Abelard, 1970,
p. 193 (35–36)].55 This fact alone suﬃces to establish the possibility of Socrates’
being a bishop, even if he has never been one and never will be one. In this way,
“Socrates is possibly a bishop” is construed as being of subject/predicate form,
where a subject is named and a predicate is said of it — with “possibly” modally
qualifying the latter.
Besides this adverbial presentation of modes there is another. Modes can also
be nominal, and can be indicated by names, not adverbs.
When indicated by
names they function as predicates of whole propositions, as in “It is necessary
that Socrates runs.” Here the subject is not a thing but a dictum (“that Socrates
runs”), and the point of the predication is to impute necessity to this dictum:
that Socrates runs is necessary. In other words, what is said by “Socrates runs” is
necessary. Here we have an impersonal construction, where the subject term fails
to denote a thing; this sort of construction characterizes nominal modes generally.
The greater complexity of impersonal propositions, as opposed to personal ones,
has already been noted, and Abelard always sees nominal modes as posing spe-
cial problems that adverbial ones do not. The common syntactic form of modal
propositions in Abelard’s time involves a nominal mode placed with an inﬁnitival
construction, as in “It is necessary for Socrates to run.” This literally involves
a nominal mode — “necessary,” as opposed to “necessarily” — which literally
functions as predicate term. Nonetheless, Abelard claims, a non-literal, adver-
55While Abelard deﬁnes possibility in terms of natures, he elects not to deﬁne necessity in
terms of natures as well (as he could have done by saying that necessity is the incompatibility
of the absence of a form with a nature). Instead he speaks of the necessary as the “inevitable”
(inevitabilis) [Abelard, 1970, p. 194 (8); Abelard, 1958, p. 21 (2); Abelard, 2008, 12.35].

112
Ian Wilks
bial construal of the proposition is available in this context as well, under which
Socrates is taken as the subject, and running is predicated under the mode of
necessity. Perhaps the idea behind this point is that the adverbial interpretation
is the basic one anyway, so it is natural to read it even into contexts where it is
not explicitly invoked.
The result of this interpretative leniency is to provide alternate construals for
standard modal propositions. This ends up being an immensely important point,
since the distinction between these two syntactic construals is suggestive of the
pervasive semantic distinction between de re readings of modals and de sensu
readings, the former associated with an adverbial construal of the mode, the latter
with a nominal construal.56 The distinction is introduced by Abelard through a
familiar Aristotelian example: “It is possible for the standing man to sit” [Abelard,
1958, p. 13 (15–16); Abelard, 2008, 12.18; Aristotle, 1984b, p. 280 (166b24–26)].
The analysis of the example shows that the de re and de sensu readings are so
diﬀerent that the same proposition true on one can be false on the other.
(i) The de sensu reading takes the syntax of the nominal mode as it stands,
and interprets the mode (“possible”) as the predicate. The subject is then the
dictum “for a standing man to sit” or “that a standing man sits” — and this
is what is said to be possible. Note that the resulting syntax puts “standing”
and “sitting” in combination as referring to the same thing. But the combination
is impossible, since nothing can be sitting and standing at once. So on the de
sensu reading the proposition is false. (ii) The de re reading takes the syntax of
the mode non-literally and interprets the mode as adverbial. This reading puts
“standing man” as the subject. “Sits” is what is predicated, with the predication
coming under the adverbial modiﬁcation of “possibly.” The eﬀect of this reading
is to partition “standing” from “sits.” Instead of putting both in the subject term
(“that a standing man sits”), one is put in the subject term (“a standing man”),
and the other, under modal qualiﬁcation, is put in the predicate term (“possibly
sits”). Because of this partition the de re reading avoids referring to its subject
as both standing and sitting; it just refers to it as standing, and says of it that it
is possibly sitting. The resulting predication, far from being self-contradicting, is
perfectly capable of being true. In fact it is capable of being true in more than
one way. It can be true when the mode is interpreted diachronically to mean that
the standing man can sit at some time after the time at which he is standing.
Or it can be true when the mode is interpreted synchronically to mean that the
standing man is now sitting in some possible world co-relative to ours.57 However
56In Abelard’s hands, however, the association is not automatic. Paul Thom notes that “the de
sensu/de rebus distinction has a diﬀerent fundamentum divisionis from the compound/divided
distinction” [Thom, 2003, p. 46] (the latter being equivalent to the nominal mode/adverbial
mode distinction). See also [Knuuttila, 1993, pp. 85-87].
57Whether Abelard’s primary understanding of the modes is diachronic or synchronic has
been a matter of some debate.
We ﬁnd an argument for the former position in [Knuuttila,
1981, pp. 178-87], and for the latter in [Weidemann, 1981]. Simo Knuuttila replies and reﬁnes
his position in [Knuuttila, 1993, pp.
93–94]: “Even though one cannot claim that Abelard’s
modal thinking was systematically based on a model of counterfactual synchronic alternatives,

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
113
the notion of possibility involved here is understood, it is clear that the de re
reading of the example proposition allows it to be true, and the de sensu reading
does not.
This is not an argument for the superiority of de re readings of modal propo-
sitions, since, as Abelard notes, the opposite result holds for “It is necessary for
the standing man not to sit.” This is true taken de sensu (since “The standing
man does not sit” is necessarily true) and false taken de re (since it is false that
the standing man necessarily does not sit) [Abelard, 1958, p. 14 (8–13); Abelard,
2008, 12.19]. Both this example and the previous one simply convey how very dif-
ferent the two readings are. Nevertheless, Abelard does prefer the de re approach.
The problem with the de sensu approach is that it makes modal propositions into
impersonal propositions; these, as we have seen, lack a referring subject term and
as such lack features like universality, particularity, and ability to convert, and
therefore ﬁt poorly into the forms and ﬁgures of syllogistic logic. We can compare
the standing of impersonals in this regard to the standing of relational proposi-
tions. These likewise ﬁt poorly into the forms and ﬁgures, and need to be re-cast
somehow into conventional subject-predicate syntax. As they stand, prior to this
change, they are perfectly coherent propositions, capable of being true or false;
but from a syllogistic perspective, their limitation is that they are not perspic-
uous expressions of their content. This would seem to be Abelard’s view about
impersonals generally and, more speciﬁcally, about de sensu modals.
But there is a more technical limitation to be observed in de sensu modals.
The inﬁnitival propositions in which they are expressed oﬀer two diﬀerent points
at which negations may be inserted. “It is possible for Socrates to run” can be
negated as a whole: “It is not possible for Socrates to run.” But the inﬁnitival
portion, since it involves a verb, can be negated as well: “It is possible for Socrates
not to run.” Abelard notes that this second negation in fact makes sense only on
a de re reading. On a de sensu reading the inﬁnitival phrase “for Socrates to run”
is of course the subject of the proposition. Now one does not negate a proposition
by negating its subject term; for example, one does not regard “Non-Socrates is
running” as being a negated form of “Socrates is running.” So one must likewise
not regard “It is possible for Socrates not to run,” taken de sensu, as being a
negated form of “It is possible for Socrates to run”; again, the subject term on
this de sensu reading is “for Socrates to run,” and that is what the sign of negation
has just been applied to. The conclusion is that the de re reading engenders a
class of negated forms which vanish when the reading is de sensu. In fact there
are three forms of de re negation: the two just mentioned (“It is not possible for
Socrates to run”; “It is possible for Socrates not to run”) and their combination:
“It is not possible for Socrates not to run.” In being able to capture only one of
these three, the de sensu reading must be taken as comparatively less expressive
[Abelard, 1958, p. 21 (22)–22 (15); Abelard, 2008, 12.38–39].
it probably played some role in his thought.”
John Marenbon argues that neither approach
captures Abelard’s understanding of the modal operators [Marenbon, 1991; Marenbon, 1997a,
pp. 221–223].

114
Ian Wilks
When quantiﬁers are attached and varied, these four de re forms (the origi-
nal plus the three negations) proliferate. When parallel listings are compiled for
impossibility and necessity the forms proliferate further. (Note that there is no
separate treatment of contingency, since Abelard erroneously takes this mode as
identical with possibility [Abelard, 1958, p. 24 (2); Abelard, 2008, 12.41]). So,
starting with the simple de re statement “All men can possibly run,” varying it
by quantiﬁcation, negation, and substitution of other modes, we end up with a
twenty-four-entry list which is essentially an expanded square of opposition for
quantiﬁed modal statements [Abelard, 1958, pp. 25 (19) — 26 (7); Abelard, 2008,
12.44].58 Modal statements de dicto do not proliferate quite so generously, given
the restriction just noted, but likwise generate a series of forms. Abelard is con-
tent simply to present these relationships, and has no further theory to build
upon them. This absence of theoretical enhancement is also the case — and more
surprisingly so — for the further relations he observes between the de re and de
sensu modalities themselves. An aﬃrmative possibility de sensu is said to imply
the corresponding aﬃrmative possibility de re, but not vice versa [Abelard, 1958,
p. 29 (14–16); Abelard, 2008, 12.55]. By contrast, an aﬃrmative impossibility
(= a negative possibility) de re is said to imply the corresponding aﬃrmative
impossibility de sensu [Abelard, 1958, pp. 29 (25)–30 (3); Abelard, 2008, 12.56],
presumably again not vice versa. But for necessity the implication goes both ways.
An aﬃrmative necessity de sensu both implies and is implied by the correspond-
ing aﬃrmative necessity de re [Abelard, 1958, pp. 32 (30)–33 (2); Abelard, 2008,
12.64]. These suggestive principles are tested against various examples, but are
not pursued for the fundamental insights they might yield into the nature of the
central modal concepts themselves.
These remarks concern Abelard’s account of simple modality. He also has an
account of determinate modality, which arises from this much-controverted Aris-
totelian principle: “What is necessarily is when it is, and what is not necessarily
is not when it is not” [Aristotle, 1963, p. 52 (19a23)]. Something which was or is
the case can be viewed as an irrevocable historical fact, and in this sense gains a
necessity just by virtue of the passage of time. This is determinate necessity. The
corresponding notion of possibility will be similarly distinct from simple possibility
as deﬁned purely in terms of compatibility with nature.
The phrasing of Aristotle’s principle exhibits the standard way of expressing de-
terminate modal statements: apply an adverbial while-clause (i.e., a dum-clause)
to the modal proposition so as to specify its modal content. The purpose of the
speciﬁcation is to indicate an interval of time, and the modal content of the propo-
sition is then understood with reference to this interval. So Abelard works with
examples like “It is possible for Socrates to read while he sits” and “It is possible
for Socrates to read while he reads” [Abelard, 1958, p. 36 (14–15); Abelard, 2008,
58There is some question as to whether Abelard fully grasped the relationships inherent in a
square of opposition for quantiﬁed modals. See [Knuuttila, 1998, p. 88], [Lagerlund, 2000, p.
37], and [Thom, 2003, p. 55]. On this point, Christopher Martin defends Abelard in [Martin,
2001, pp. 122–123].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
115
12.73].59 The possibility in question (reading) is thus characterized as applying
in the designated interval (sitting in the former case, reading in the latter). So
characterized, it becomes a determinate modality.
Abelard considers the inferential relations between determinate and simple
modalities. First, determinate possibility implies simple; “It is possible for Socrates
to read while he reads” implies “It is possible for Socrates to read.” But in gen-
eral the converse implication, that simple possibility implies determinate, does not
hold. And second, simple necessity implies determinate; “It is necessary for me to
read” implies “It is necessary for me to read while I read.” But again, the converse
does not in general hold [Abelard, 1958, p. 36 (11–21); Abelard, 2008, 12.73]. The
failure of both converses is instructive.
To say it is necessary for me to read while I read is simply to invoke Aristotle’s
principle and note the historical irrevocability of my reading while I am reading;
for the time period designated by the clause “while I read” my reading is an
irrevocable fact. But this says nothing about me and my nature. It does not
say that reading is inevitable for me (or that not reading is incompatible with
my nature), which is what it would need to say in order to establish the simple
necessity of my reading. From this follows the failure of the converse. Determinate
necessity does not imply simple necessity.60
More complex is the failure of the other converse. Why does simple possibility
fail to imply determinate possibility? This failure is masked in the case of internal
determination, where the determining verb is the same as the main one; “It is
possible for Socrates to read” may well seem to imply “It is possible for Socrates
to read while he reads.”
But certain external determinations make the failure
obvious.
“It is possible for Socrates to sit” does not imply “It is possible for
Socrates to sit while he stands” because the determining verb (“stands”) rules
out that the property of sitting, with which the nature of Socrates is admittedly
compatible, can be realized by him at the moment when he is standing.
The
lesson here is that simple possibility is temporally indeﬁnite, and the presence of a
simple possibility is no guarantee that it will be realized at a given time. The fact
that Socrates is sitting at a given time implies the determinate necessity of his
doing so then, and also the determinate impossibility of his not doing so then; this
determinate impossibility holds then even though the simple possibility of sitting
holds for Socrates at all times of his life.
Indeed, as Abelard elsewhere suggests, it is still possible for someone with
maimed hands to box, for an amputee to walk and for a blind person to see.
59Notice the structural diﬀerence between the two forms. In the ﬁrst the determining verb,
“sits,” diﬀers from the main verb, “reads.” In the second the determining and main verb are the
same: “reads.” The former is called an “external” determination, the latter an “internal” one
[Abelard, 1958, p. 34 (9–12); Abelard, 2008, 12.67].
60Note that there is an assumption about the scope of the temporal determining clause in this
argument, that it is to be read in this way: “Socrates possibly (sits while he stands),” not in
this way: “(Socrates possibly sits) while he stands.” The former represents a modal reading of
the determining clause, the latter an associated temporal reading [Abelard, 1958, p. 37 (5–23);
Abelard, 2008, 12.76].

116
Ian Wilks
In each case the possibility is understood abstractly in terms of the nature of
these persons, and not in terms of what their future will hold.61 The determi-
nate/indeterminate distinction is therefore at a considerable theoretical remove
from the necessary/possible one, and is deﬁned in entirely diﬀerent terms [Lewis,
1987, pp. 82–83]. Abelard follows Boethius in construing determinacy epistemi-
cally, as kind of knowability; where Boethius speaks of what is known to nature,
Abelard speaks of what is knowable (cognoscibilis) of itself. What is knowable of
itself is perhaps best understood in contrast with what is knowable to God, who,
because of the atemporality of the divine perspective, is able to view future and
past events alike as completed happenings. What is knowable of itself is what is
knowable only from a temporal perspective. Past and present events are knowable
in this way, as are future events which are guaranteed to unfold in a certain way
due to the natures of the things involved. “Man will die” is an example [Abelard,
1970, p.
211 (11–12)].
This does not mean that all past- and present-tensed
propositions qualify as determinate, of course, because some — like “It is true
that Socrates will eat” depend on future events for their truth; Abelard dwells on
this example at some length, and considers it a case of indeterminacy, the present
tense involved notwithstanding.62
So in the end, the properly modal notions are, for Abelard, tied to the natures
of things, and the properly modal propositions are those which perform the basic
subject/predicate operation of imputing a nature to a thing. With this approach,
an orthodox subject/predicate grammar is preserved as far as possible; this serves
the characteristic structures of syllogistic logic, which absolutely rely on a sub-
ject/predicate grammar. In this Abelard is true to his avowed intention of using
the more basic levels of semantic analysis as a ground and preparation for his
discussion of the categorical syllogism.
This discussion of syllogistic theory, while well-founded in the preceding, is
brief, and innovation is to be found more in the details of doctrine than its core.
Abelard’s handling of the categorical syllogism essentially rehearses the traditional
account of the ﬁgures and moods, and the reduction of the moods of the second
and third ﬁgures to the moods of the ﬁrst. A few salient points can be made here.
(i) A syllogism is deﬁned, following Aristotle, as speech in which “when certain
things are posited, it follows necessarily that something other than what is posited
comes to be from them” [Abelard, 1970, p. 232 (5–6)].63 This deﬁnition is meant to
exclude various other kinds of argument, such as enthymemes and exempliﬁcation,
and is meant to exclude conditional propositions.
It also excludes arguments
like this: “Every man is capable of laughter; but everything capable of laughter
is capable of laughter; therefore every man is capable of laughter,” where the
61This point is extensively discussed in [Martin, 2001, pp. 99–113]. See also [Knuuttila, 1993,
pp. 91–92] and [Thom, 2003, pp. 50–51].
62This argument is covered at great length in [Lewis, 1987], which responds to the briefer
analysis to be found in [Normore, 1982, pp. 361–363].
63This deﬁnition derives directly from the Prior Analytics [Aristotle, 1984a, p. 40 (24b19–20)].
“Speech” translates oratio, which is used here in a more general sense than the technical one
already encountered.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
117
reasoning is overtly circular, on the basis that a syllogistic conclusion must be
“something other than what is posited.”
Abelard refers to such arguments as
“absurd syllogisms” [Abelard, 1970, p.
232 (26)].
This is an ambiguous label
since, strictly speaking, he has just shown that the argument is not a syllogism at
all, and so, by deﬁnition, not an absurd one. The lesson Abelard could have taken
from this point is that the deﬁnition itself is unsatisfactory. What is provided here
is not a fully general account of the syllogism. The interest seems to be to direct
attention as quickly as possible to the traditionally identiﬁed moods of syllogism.
(ii) Aristotle formulates syllogistic propositions in a manner suggestive of con-
tainment relations between shared forms: “Animal is in all of man.” This places
the predicate ﬁrst.
Abelard naturally follows the medieval practice of putting
the subject ﬁrst: “Every man is an animal,” which presents a predicative, not
a containment, relation. This has the eﬀect of changing subject/predicate order
throughout all of the propositions of all of the moods, which changes the formula-
tions somewhat, but not the underlying theory. Abelard is aware of this shift from
containment to predicative formulations, but believes that it makes no diﬀerence
to the underlying theory itself [Abelard, 1970, p. 239 (21–28)].
(iii) In detailing the syllogistic moods, Abelard regularly renders O-propositions
with separative negations, as in this example of a Ferio: “No good thing is evil,
some just thing is good, therefore some just thing is not evil” [Abelard, 1970,
p. 236 (23–25)]. This practice, of course, deviates from his stated preference for
extinctive negation. Given this preference, we would expect the above conclusion
to be rendered thus: “Not every just thing is evil.” One can only speculate on
Abelard’s motives for employing the less favoured formulation. But one should
recall that the basis for favouring the extinctive form in the ﬁrst place is the fact
that the separative form bears existential presupposition, so that if there is no just
thing then “Every just thing is evil” and “Some good thing is not evil” will both
be false. This failure of contradictoriness arises, of course, only if there is no just
thing. So long as there is no failure of existential presupposition in A-propositions,
there will be no failure to achieve contradictoriness with separatively-formulated
O-propositions. Accordingly, so long as the domain of discourse is not lacking in
referents for the subject terms of syllogistic propositions, the omission carries no
disadvantage. And so long as syllogisms are employed with this presumption in
place, there is no actual need to disrupt the traditional language for formulating
the moods to accommodate Abelard’s non-standard, extinctive formulation of O-
propositions.64
(iv) Abelard follows the traditional practice of presenting the categorical syl-
logism in three ﬁgures, not four. The moods of the fourth are, with appropriate
conversions, assigned to the ﬁrst. This gives nine moods for the ﬁrst — the four
assigned “on the authority of Aristotle” [Abelard, 1970, p. 236 (17)], plus ﬁve
additions. (The second and third ﬁgures are numbered at four and six moods
64Incidentally, L.M. de Rijk observes a certain casualness to Abelard’s presentation of the
separative/extinctive distinction in the Dialectica; see [Abelard, 1970, p. lxi, note 6], on Abelard’s
use of the phrase vel potius in presenting the alternatives.

118
Ian Wilks
respectively, as per tradition.) There is nonetheless some kind of partition of con-
tents in the ﬁrst ﬁgure, since only the ﬁrst four moods can qualify as complete
(perfecti) syllogisms, complete syllogisms being ones whose inferential properties
are self-evident [Abelard, 1970, p. 236 (26–29)]. The remaining moods of the ﬁrst
ﬁgure, and the ones of the second and third, are reduced to these.
(v) Almost all reductions can be carried out by converting the premises or the
conclusion in one of three ways (changing “No A is B” to “No B is A”; changing
“Some A is B” to “Some B is A”; or changing “Every A is B” per accidens to
“Some B is A”). For two moods — Baroco in the second ﬁgure, Bocardo in the
third — the process is more involved. Abelard resorts to the traditional method
of indirect proof for such cases. The Baroco syllogism, for instance, is exempliﬁed
thus: “Every just thing is good, some evil thing is not good, therefore some evil
thing is not just” [Abelard, 1970, p. 240 (8–10)]. The indirect proof will proceed
on the principle that if the conclusion does not follow from the premises, then its
contradictory must be consistent with those premises [Abelard, 1970, p. 241 (13–
15)]. The point is to show that this claim of consistency is untenable. Can there be
a situation where the premises are true and the contradictory of the conclusion is
true as well? Can there be a situation in which every just thing is good, some evil
thing is not good and (by hypothesis) every evil thing is just? Assuming that at
least one evil thing exists, the answer is no. (The assumption is needed, remember,
because the conclusion is formulated with a separative negation.) Combining the
ﬁrst premise (“Every just thing is good”) and the contradictory of the conclusion
(“Every evil thing is just”) gives us (by Barbara) “Every evil thing is good”; this is
not consistent with second premise, which claims that some evil thing is not good.
So it must be the case that the contradictory of the conclusion is false; some evil
thing is not just.65 What is interesting in all of this is that Abelard subsequently
rejects this line of indirect argument as a complete justiﬁcation; it establishes its
point with “maximum probability,” he claims, but not with necessity [Abelard,
1970, p. 244 (35–36)]. The argument, as noted, depends on the principle that if
the conclusion does not follow from the premises, then its contradictory must be
consistent with those premises. A reason for thinking the principle not applica-
ble in this instance is that we are not actually dealing with contradictories. We
cannot overlook the fact that the conclusion of the Baroco is given as a separative
negation, not an extinctive one; the corresponding A-proposition is therefore not
a contradictory (given the possibility that no evil thing exists). Similar reasoning
presumably attaches to Bocardo, since it also requires an indirect argument in
order to be reduced to a ﬁrst ﬁgure mood and thereby justiﬁed. The result is to
set both Baroco and Bocardo apart from the other moods as providing a lesser
degree of inferential support for their conclusions.
65Schematically, the reductio proposes these as consistent: “Every A is B,” “Some C is not B”
and “Every C is A.” The ﬁrst and third of these propositions yield, by Barbara, “Every C is B,”
which is not consistent with “Some C is not B.” Therefore “Every C is A” is false, and “Some C
is not A” is true. Since this indirect proof employs Barbara, it is considered a reduction to that
syllogistic mood.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
119
(vi) The syllogistic moods are deductive inference schemes, and it is noteworthy
that in laying down the rules for these schemes, Abelard chooses to express them
as conditionals. Here is the rule for Barbara: “If anything ⟨A⟩is predicated of
something ⟨B⟩universally, and if something else ⟨C⟩is subject to that subject
⟨B⟩universally, that subject ⟨C⟩is also subject to the predicate ⟨A⟩in the same
way, that is universally” [Abelard, 1970, p. 237 (7–9)].66 Parallel formulations
are provided for the other three standard moods of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, though for
none of what Abelard takes to be the next ﬁve. Such formulations are likewise
provided for the ﬁrst two (but not the next two) moods of the second ﬁgure and the
ﬁrst three (but not the next three) of the third. The omissions may simply be an
economy on Abelard’s part, since the omitted rules are readily supplied on analogy
with the ones provided.67 What is intriguing about the procedure here is that
Abelard formulates, in addition to the three conversion rules for reducing moods,
another two which license their use: “Whatever follows from the consequent also
follows from the antecedent”; and “Whatever implies the antecedent also implies
the consequent” [Abelard, 1970, p. 239 (9, 14)]. The care taken to provide these
self-evident principles suggests a desire to display the technical rigour with which
the reductions may be performed.
The fact that the moods are expressed as
propositions, and rules are supplied which formalize the process of reducing less
basic mood-expressing rules to more basic ones, suggests an axiomatic procedure.
Abelard seems to have some insight into how such a procedure is to be carried out
here.
In addition to discussing the standard assertoric syllogisms, Abelard broaches
the subject of syllogisms varied by mode and tense.
The comments on modal syllogisms are briefer then one might expect.
But
here Abelard is not able to rehearse a substantial, traditional account of doctrine,
since none such has come down to him, given the unavailability of Aristotle’s Prior
Analytics.68 His ﬁrst move is simply to provide examples of modal syllogisms from
each of the ﬁgures, such as this modal Barbara: “Everything just is possibly good;
all virtue is just; therefore all virtue is possibly good”; this mood, Abelard notes,
works just as well under necessity (“Everything just is necessarily good”) as it does
under possibility [Abelard, 1970, p. 245 (26-29)].69 It will be noted that the minor
premise in this example (“All virtue is just”) is non-modal. The syllogism will not
work, in Abelard’s view, if the minor premise is modal, because then there will be
no functioning middle term. Say we modalize the minor premise: “All virtue is
possibly just.” An adverbial reading of the mode is required in order to make it ﬁt
into the syllogistic format at all (as we have seen — otherwise the proposition is
66By interpolating letter symbols I follow the practice of [Lagerlund, 2006, p. 8]. Note that
without the interpolations, this rule would be all the more inscrutable; the absence of a special
notation is keenly felt here.
67L. M. De Rijk supplies them in his editorial introduction to the Dialectica [de Rijk, 1970, p.
lxx].
68A discussion of Abelard’s Boethian sources is found in [Thom, 2003, pp. 36–40].
69For diﬀerent but similarly intentioned examples see [Abelard, 1958, pp. 10 (22) — 11 (16);
Abelard, 2008, 12.15].

120
Ian Wilks
unable to convert). But the adverbial reading adds content to the predicate of the
minor which then diﬀerentiates it from the subject of the major.70 “Everything
just is possibly good, all virtue is possibly just, therefore all virtue is possibly good”
does not display the required linkage between premises, because “just” in the major
and “possibly just” in the (altered) minor are not the same term. Third ﬁgure
modal syllogisms must likewise contain an assertoric premise for term-sharing to
occur. Second ﬁgure modals are subject to the same constraint; however, because
the shared term is the predicate in both major and minor premises, it turns out
that the non-modal proposition appears in the conclusion: “No evil is possibly
good; everything just is possibly good; therefore nothing just is evil” [Abelard,
1970, p. 245 (31–34)].71
Abelard’s commentary on modal syllogisms is essentially limitative, in that its
major work is to present many seeming specimens of these as not truly syllogistic.
He repeats this kind of commentary for syllogisms with variation in tense. These
require, as do modal syllogisms, proper care to ensure that proper middle terms
exist, and just as modal variation is supposed to be conﬁned to just two of the three
propositions, so with variation in tense. A syllogism like this is obviously defective:
“No boy was a young man; but every old man was a boy; therefore no old man was
a young man” [Abelard, 1970, p. 249 (3–5)]. The problem apparently lies with the
predicate of the minor premise (“was a boy”), which refers to boys who existed in
the past; but, by contrast, “boy” in the major premise follows the default semantic
presumption that names refer to things existing in the present. So the name bears
a diﬀerent meaning in its two occurrences, referring to present boys in the major
and past ones in the minor. There is accordingly no shared middle term.72 As
before, the remedy is to ensure that ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogisms retain a present-tensed
minor premise. Observing the constraint yields a perfectly acceptable syllogism
like this: “Every man will die; every harpist is a man; therefore every harpist will
die” [Abelard, 1970, p. 248 (10–12)]. This constraint is likewise applicable to third
70Say we modalize the minor premise, and then alter the subject term of the major premise to
duplicate the modal content of the minor’s predicate term: “Everything possibly just is possibly
good.” The minor, “Every virtue is possibly just,” would then seem to give rise to an appropriate
middle term. But (as Abelard appears to argue through another example [Abelard, 1970, pp. 246
(23)–247 (6)]) the subject term of the major must be construed consistently with the distributive
function of the quantiﬁer.
“Possibly just” refers to any individual, possibly just thing, and
therefore means “that which is possibly just.” But if “possibly just” is to be a middle term it
must bear the same meaning in the minor premise, which must then be read as “Every virtue is
that which is possibly just.” This reading, however, has the eﬀect of burying the modal concept
in the predicate term, so that it no longer plays the adverbial role of qualifying “is.” The result
is to leave the minor premise, taken whole, as non-modal again [Abelard, 1970, p. 246 (32–33)].
Thus the attempt to modalize the minor in such a way as to produce a middle term neutralizes
itself, and leaves the minor back where it began, in assertoric form. See L.M. de Rijk’s brief
comment on this argument in [Abelard, 1970, p. lxxii].
71Abelard’s modal syllogistic is treated in [Thom, 2003, pp. 58–63].
72To circumvent this problem Abelard suggests that “was a boy” might be taken as the semantic
equivalent of a single word, meaning “was a past boy”; this suggestion is, however, of no use in
establishing a middle, since the subject term of the major premise still reads “present boy” (i.e.,
“No present boy was a present young man”) [Abelard, 1970, p. 249 (15–21)].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
121
ﬁgure syllogisms, while second ﬁgure ones, as before, will admit of tense variation
in both premises but must have a present tensed conclusion: “Every mortal will
die; every mortal is a living thing; therefore some living thing will die” [Abelard,
1970, p. 248 (26-28)].73
While Abelard’s handling of the standard syllogisms is axiomatic in orientation,
his handling of ones with modal and tense variation is taxonomic rather than
axiomatic; he wishes simply to identify a few kinds of non-standard syllogism,
not to systematize them. And nowhere in his treatment of categorical syllogisms,
standard or non-standard, does Abelard follow the deeper purposes of investigating
the very nature of the inferential link itself, and how propositions come to be so
linked. This project is reserved for his treatment of the hypothetical syllogism,
and can indeed be viewed as his chief objective there.
PART 2: ABELARD ON TOPICS, HYPOTHETICAL PROPOSITIONS AND
HYPOTHETICAL SYLLOGISMS
Just as categorical syllogisms are broached in the Dialectica only after prior
ground-laying discussion, so with hypothetical syllogisms. The ground-laying dis-
cussion for these latter, indeed, constitutes the largest single section of that work.
It is important to grasp the procedure Abelard has in mind. The predicative
relation of terms within categorical syllogisms is what makes those syllogisms work,
and so we gain insight into the working of the syllogisms by means of insight into
that predicative relation. But hypothetical syllogisms have terms too; they are the
antecedents and consequents of the conditionals contained in the syllogisms (or the
disjuncts of the corresponding disjunctions). These clause-length terms are in an
implicative relation which needs to be studied as a preliminary for hypothetical
syllogisms, just as the predicative relation needs to be studied as a preliminary for
categorical ones. Abelard attempts to meet this need, and in so doing gives an
extended account of conditionals (and a corresponding account of disjunctions).
This extended account is meant to establish a process for ascertaining when the
antecedents and consequents of conditionals actually do stand in an implicative
relation. The key notion in this conﬁrmatory process is the notion of the topic.
It is here that Abelard’s expository program takes what is, from a contemporary
perspective, a very unfamiliar turn. Clearly one goes nowhere in this explanatory
sequence without a good sense of what a topic is, and so the ﬁrst step is to explain
it.74
By far the commonest traditional conception of logic is as a tool for assessing
inferences. To judge whether an inference succeeds or fails requires criteria of ade-
73Abelard’s discussion of syllogistic inference under variation of tense is treated in [Tweedale,
1976, pp. 298–302]. See also [Rosier-Catach, 1999, pp. 150–156], [Jacobi, 2004, pp. 148–49] and
[Wilks, forthcoming].
74Otto Bird’s groundbreaking work in topical theory is an especially good point of entry into
this material, even if its basic approach is ﬂawed — as argued in [Stump, 1989, pp. 94–95]. See
[Bird, 1959], [Bird, 1960, pp. 141–145] and especially [Bird, 1961].

122
Ian Wilks
quacy which the inference may be seen either to meet or fail. Logic is supposed to
supply these criteria. As such it serves as an ars iudicandi, a technique for judg-
ing. But it can also be construed as an ars inveniendi, a technique for inventing.
Instead of just providing constraints on what counts as a successful argument, it
may additionally be expected to provide guidance on how to construct a success-
ful argument in the ﬁrst place, given the desired conclusion [Boethius, 1990, p. 1
(4–5)].
The historically seminal text for logic taken in this less common, creative role is
Aristotle’s Topics. Here we ﬁnd, in somewhat loosely gathered form, advice on how
to advance from the yes- or the no-position on a debatable yes-or-no question to an
argument for that position. This advance happens through analysis of the relation
between the subject and predicate terms of the proposition which expresses that
position. Propositions involving diﬀerent kinds of predicative relation and diﬀerent
kinds of subject matter will necessitate diﬀerent kinds of advice; the basic unit
of advice is referred to as a topic, or, in the Latin, a locus. There are, of course,
many topics, and the challenge of the commentators is to impose some order on
this profusion of material.
Topics for Aristotle come in the form of a general instruction for argument
formation, with some kind of accompanying reason for the instruction.75 Or they
come in the form of an instruction alone without the reason, or just as a reason
expressed in such a way as to suggest the instruction which it justiﬁes [Green-
Pedersen, 1984, p.
21].
Boethius tries to standardize this presentation of the
topics by using two key organizing conceptions: the maxima propositio (maximal
proposition), and the diﬀerentia (distinguishing principle). I will consider these
in turn.
The maximal proposition is the principle which shows the arguer how to identify
a salient fact about one of the terms: a fact which reveals how that term may be
put in the desired predicative relation to the other term. Here are some Boethian
examples of maximal propositions.
(i) Say one wishes to show that trees are
not animals. This may be derived by using the following principle, i.e., maximal
proposition: What the deﬁnition of the genus does not belong to is not a species
of the genus deﬁned [Boethius, 1990, pp. 29 (18–19)]. With this principle in view
one may then note that an animal is an animate substance capable of perceiving,
and further that a tree is not an animate substance capable of perceiving. The
conclusion follows from the maximal proposition plus the two ensuing facts. (ii)
Say one wishes to show that justice is natural. This maximal proposition will serve:
Those things whose eﬃcient causes are natural are themselves natural [Boethius,
1990, p.
35 (9–10)].
With this principle in view one may then note that the
society of men is natural, and further that the society of men is the eﬃcient cause
of justice.
The conclusion follows from the maximal proposition plus the two
ensuing facts. (iii) Say one wishes to argue that the rulers of cities should not be
75In [Stump, 1978, p. 167] we ﬁnd a slightly diﬀerent language for expressing this distinction:
she speaks of “a strategy or line of argument or tack to take” as opposed to “a principle or a law
that explains or justiﬁes the strategy.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
123
chosen by lot. This maximal proposition will serve: What occurs in a thing must
occur in what is proportional to that thing [Boethius, 1990, p. 39 (9-10)]. With
this principle in view one may note that a ship’s pilot is not appointed by lot, and
further that the oﬃce of pilot on a ship is proportional to the oﬃce of the ruler of
a city. The conclusion follows from the maximal proposition plus the two ensuing
facts.
The maximal proposition is the ﬁrst basic conception Boethius uses to organize
topical theory; the diﬀerentia is the second.
This latter is simply the feature
which distinguishes one maximal proposition from another, just as a diﬀerentia
in general will distinguish one species from another within a given genus. For (i)
the diﬀerentia is “from deﬁnition”; for (ii) it is “from eﬃcient cause”; and for
(iii) it is “from proportion.” Just as the maximal proposition helps in locating a
salient point about one of the terms out of which the argument may be developed,
the diﬀerentia helps in locating the right maximal proposition.
The maximal
proposition is a principle which distills the essence of the argument; the diﬀerentia
is a label which distills the essence of the principle.76
With these two notions Boethius purports to impose some order upon the variety
of topics. These notions represent the point of departure for Abelard in his own
handling of topical theory, but, as ever, he adapts the inheritance to serve his own
purposes. Two points in particular inform his approach.
(i) Topical theory is ﬁrst and foremost for Abelard an ars iudicandi, a technique
for judging adequacy of reasoning. This is not to say that he rejects the other
orientation of topical theory, as an ars inveniendi; in his initial deﬁnitions, indeed,
Abelard covers both conceptions of a topic. He allows that it can be deﬁned as an
“argument source” (argumenti sedes) and as “that from which a suitable argument
is drawn” [Abelard, 1970, p. 253 (22-23)].77 But he also identiﬁes this deﬁnition
as a narrower one, and adopts what he considers the broader one as his starting
point: a topic is the force of an entailment (vis inferentiae) [Abelard, 1970, p. 253
(16)], or, as we might say, an inferential warrant, a consideration which ensures
that there is entailment. Of course, these narrower and broader deﬁnitions are
not in conﬂict, since what warrants an entailment might very well be helpful for
discovering it in the ﬁrst place. Nonetheless Abelard’s program here focuses on
the topic taken as an inferential warrant. Topical theory is going to be used chieﬂy
for the purposes of assessment, not discovery.
(ii) An interpretative tendency evident in writings from as early as the ninth
century is to regard topical theory as having a special association with hypotheti-
cal syllogisms [Green-Pedersen, 1984, pp. 140–145].78 Abelard is much inﬂuenced
76As Eleonore Stump notes [Stump, 1978, p. 180, note 5] this use of the term “diﬀerentia”
must be distinguished from its use in denoting one of the predicables.
77Abelard associates this approach to topical material with Cicero and Themistius, and treats
it in a later section of the Dialectica [Abelard, 1970, pp. 414 (4) - 466 (25)]. This is briefer
coverage than is given to the other approach, which runs to 261 pages in the de Rijk edition.
From this fact we may infer the greater value he imputes to the broader deﬁnition.
78Niels Jørgen Green-Pedersen believes that “this idea is both un-Aristotelian and un-Boethian
and un-Ciceronian” [Green-Pedersen, 1987, p. 411]. However we ﬁnd in [Martin, 1991, p. 290]

124
Ian Wilks
by this tendency.
He studies this theory as the key element in his account of
conditionals. This account, of course, focuses on the inferential linkage between
antecedent and consequent, and that linkage, in Abelard’s view, should be ex-
plained in terms of the topics. It is thus that we will learn, of a signiﬁcant class of
conditionals, which ones are true and why they are so. We have, then, a marked
re-orientation of the original theory of the topics. Instead of supplying arguments
it is set to the task of conﬁrming conditionals.
Here is how it does so. Consider a very simple conditional like “If it is a man
then it is an animal.” To explain how the antecedent entails the consequent we
look for a logical relationship which a term in the antecedent bears to a term in
the consequent. This is easily done in the example. The term in question from
the antecedent is obviously man. The corresponding term from the consequent
is animal. So what is the logical relationship that man bears to animal? Again
the answer is easy. The relation is that of being a species. With this we now
have enough to identify the topical diﬀerentia.
This diﬀerentia is the term of
the antecedent which has been identiﬁed as key to the entailment — in this case
man. But it is not the term taken per se. It is the term taken as standing in
the logical relationship which has also been identiﬁed as key to the entailment
[Green-Pedersen, 1984, pp. 166–7]. So in this case the diﬀerentia is man taken as
standing in the relationship of species to another term.
That is the ﬁrst step. The second then identiﬁes and invokes a maximal propo-
sition. The identiﬁcation is very much helped by knowing the topical diﬀerentia
but is not made automatic by that knowledge. For every diﬀerentia there is a
multiplicity of maximal propositions, only one of which will be appropriate to the
case at hand. Which one this is must be discerned. In the case of “If it is a man
then it is an animal” the proposition is “Whatever the species is predicated of,
the genus is predicated of too.” With this proposition in hand the entailment is
conﬁrmed, because we know that animal is the genus of man, and so we know
that the conditional in question instantiates the maximal proposition. “Whatever
the species is predicated of, the genus is predicated of too” can be instantiated
to “Whatever man is predicated of, animal is predicated of too,” which is just
another way of saying, “If it is a man it is an animal.” A maximal proposition
has the same self-evident truth as the rule for the Barbara syllogism; a conditional
which instantiates a maximal proposition is likewise demonstrably true, just as
an argument which instantiates the rule for Barbara is demonstrably valid. We
have found a maximal proposition which “If is it is a man then it is an animal”
instantiates, and can therefore consider that conditional to be conﬁrmed.
Thus function all the topics.
At this point one might say, “There are two
things here, the topical diﬀerentia and the maximal proposition. Which one is
actually the topic?” In Abelard’s view, both are, presumably because in the sort
of analysis just conducted the two are used in tandem [Abelard, 1970, p. 263
(35–37)]. Nonetheless he will from time to time refer to the diﬀerentia alone as
an indication of a Boethian source; this lies in the fact that, for Boethius, maximal propositions
“appear as principles which may be cited in support of conditionals.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
125
the topic [Abelard, 1970, p. lxxxii (14.051)].
He supplies explicit deﬁnitions for both. The topical diﬀerentia is deﬁned as
“that thing (res) in whose relation to another thing the strength of the entailment
resides” [Abelard, 1970, p. 263 (7–8)]. Since he speaks of a thing, not a word, we
must understand the diﬀerentia in the above example as man, not “man” — or,
more precisely, as man taken as a species, not “man” taken as a species. Abelard
has presumably resolved to his satisfaction the metaphysical problems lurking in
this use of general terms, so these need not detain us. Considering man’s relation to
animal prompts our taking man as a species, at which point the diﬀerentia is clear
to view, and the maximal proposition on the way. It all starts with the relation
of man to animal, and so it is in this relation that “the strength of entailment
resides.”
The account of the maximal proposition is more involved. Abelard deﬁnes it
as “that proposition which, containing the sense of many entailments, reveals a
common method of proof which the diﬀerentiae of those entailments possess —
owing to their having the force of the same relation” [Abelard, 1970, p. 263 (12–
14)].79 This is a densely packed formulation. The key feature of the above maximal
proposition (“Whatever the species is predicated of the genus is predicated too”)
is its standing as a general expression of a whole series of entailments: “If it is a
man it is an animal,” “If it is a pearl it is a stone,” “If it is a rose it is a ﬂower,”
“If it is red it is a colour,” and so on. These entailments have diﬀerent terms
(man and animal, pearl and stone, and so on), but are alike in that the terms are
all related as species and genus. We can see each entailment as arising through
the substitution of similarly related terms into the maximal proposition, which
in this manner can be seen as “containing” the sense of each. This is why the
maximal proposition plays a role in conﬁrming each through a “common method
of proof.” This, as we have seen, starts by construing terms under the guise of the
appropriate relation: man taken as species, pearl taken as species, rose taken as
species, red taken as species, and so on. So construed they become the diﬀerentiae,
each of which gives rise to a method of proving the conditional from which they
arise — and it is the same method in each case. The maximal proposition reveals
what this shared and common method is.80
This is the sense in which maximal propositions play for conditionals the role
that syllogistic rules play for syllogisms: the role of reliably identifying which forms
mark genuine entailments. The rule for Barbara (“If anything ⟨A⟩is predicated
of something ⟨B⟩universally, and if something else ⟨C⟩is subject to that subject
⟨B⟩universally, that subject ⟨C⟩is also subject to the predicate ⟨A⟩in the same
way, that is universally” [Abelard, 1970, p. 237 (7–9)]) conﬁrms as genuine en-
tailments all of those syllogisms which arise from uniform substitution of terms in
its open places (marked by “A”, “B”, and “C”.) The rule “Whatever the species
79On this passage see [Martin, 2004, pp. 174–175].
80Note that this account of the essentials of Abelard’s topical theory is based on texts from the
Dialectica. Certain aspects of the account change in his Super Topica glossae [Abelard, 1969b].
For a summary of changes see [Green-Pedersen, 1977, pp. 135–137].

126
Ian Wilks
is predicated of the genus is predicated too” works in much the same way to con-
ﬁrm as genuine entailments all of those conditionals which arise from substitution
in its open places — except that the substituting terms must be further delim-
ited as standing in the topical relation of species to genus.81 The topical rule is
more qualiﬁed than the syllogistic, but just as conﬁrmatory. To understand this
is to understand why Abelard regards topical theory as such an important area
of research. Given that the basic rules of form for syllogistic entailments already
appear to be discovered and fully expressed, it is natural to seek next the discovery
and full expression of rules for conditional entailments.
In support of this program, Abelard tightens the analogy between syllogistic
and conditional entailments in two ways.
(i) He distinguishes these entailments as perfectae and imperfectae respectively.
Imperfectae means “imperfect” in the sense of “incomplete,” not in the sense of
“defective.”82 A Barbara syllogism gives us a complete entailment, while “If it is a
man then it is an animal” gives us an incomplete one. The point of the distinction
is not to mark the quality of the entailments, because both involve the closest
possible inferential links. The point is to mark the quality of guarantee for that
link.
The explicitness of a syllogism is such that we do not even have to pay
particular attention to the content of its propositions in order to grasp the fact
that the inference succeeds. We need only note the pattern of the terms. We can,
indeed, make arbitrary substitutions for the terms, but still be assured that that
the resulting entailment succeeds, as in: “If every man is a stone and every stone is
wood then every man is wood” [Abelard, 1970, p. 255 (35)]. “If it is a man then it is
an animal” cannot be so simply conﬁrmed as this, even though, as we have seen, it
can be conﬁrmed. Hence it is an entailment properly speaking, just an incomplete
one. Note that the compete/incomplete distinction is traditionally applied within
the domain of syllogisms themselves [Abelard, 1970, pp. 233 (35)–234 ((8)]. First
ﬁgure syllogisms corresponding to the ﬁrst four moods are complete, in that they
are self-evidently valid; all other moods are incomplete in that, while valid, they
are not self-evidently so. They require reduction to ﬁrst-ﬁgure ones in order to
be shown to be so. This is the sort of distinction being made between syllogistic
and conditional entailments. The latter fail in obviousness, not in strength, and
need additional means to have obviousness conferred upon them. These means are
supplied by topical theory. Calling conditional entailments “incomplete” presents
their diﬀerence from complete ones as a diﬀerence of presentation, not content,
and the label thus suggests the underlying likeness of the two.83
(ii) Further to this suggestion is Abelard’s account of the inferential link itself,
81As Christopher Martin notes [Martin, 1986, p. 566], topical entailments generally will hold for
“uniform substitution of terms standing in an appropriate topical relationship.” These contrast
with syllogistic (i.e., complete) entailments, which hold for “any uniform substitution of terms.”
See also [Martin, 1992, p. 116].
82I will translate perfecta as “complete” consistently with my earlier rendering of oratio perfecta
as “complete phrase.” Imperfecta is accordingly rendered as “incomplete.”
83On this distinction see the discussion in [Martin, 2004a, pp. 169–171], under the heading
“Perfect and Imperfect Entailment.”

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
127
which he applies indiﬀerently to both kinds of entailment. He identiﬁes necessity as
essential to entailment: what follows must do so necessarily, so that what it follows
from simply cannot be the case without it. But for his purposes this is not enough,
and some pages later he adds a further condition on entailment: “There seem to be
two necessities of following (consecutio), one broader, when what the antecedent
says cannot be without what the consequent says, and the other narrower, when
the antecedent not only cannot be true without the consequent but of itself compels
(ex se exigit) the consequent” [Abelard, 1970, pp. 283 (37)–284 (2)]. The verb
exigit does not admit of an automatic translation, and has elsewhere been rendered
as “compels” or “requires.”84 The intended meaning is strongly inﬂuenced by the
associated phrase “of itself” (ex se); the idea is that the content of the consequent
is already internal to the antecedent, and the statement of the whole conditional
merely exposes this relationship by drawing — or, taking exigere literally, driving
or forcing — that content out. Abelard’s example of a conditional which has this
more exacting kind of necessity is “If it is a man it is an animal” [Abelard, 1970,
p. 284 (5)]; the conditional has this necessity, Abelard says, because “animal is
contained in (contineatur in) the substance of man” [Abelard, 1970, p. 284 (7)].
This relationship of nature (being a man, being an animal) creates a semantic
relationship between antecedent and consequent whereby the meaning of the latter
can itself be said to be contained in the meaning of the former.85 This sort of
containment is clearly present in syllogistic entailments, where the relationship
of terms in the conclusion is already present in the relationships stated by the
premises. By locating it in conditional entailments as well, Abelard again suggests
the underlying likeness of the two.
In pursuing his program of identifying maximal propositions which conﬁrm
conditional entailments, Abelard is as uncompromising as Aristotle is in identifying
syllogistic rules. Aristotle ends up with a very reduced classiﬁcation of acceptable
syllogisms, and Abelard likewise ends up with a very reduced classiﬁcation of
acceptable conditionals.
Given that, for his purposes, a true conditional must
express an entailment as strong as the entailment present in a valid syllogistic
mood, it stands to reason that he will identify as false many conditionals which
otherwise seem true.
This indeed happens.
Examples of rejected conditionals
are: “If it is a man it is not a stone,” and “If there is paternity then there is
ﬁliation” [Abelard, 1970, p. 284 (22–23)].86 Being a man and not being a stone
are linked in that something that is a man is necessarily not a stone. But they are
not linked in the stronger sense that specifying the nature of being a man must
involve specifying not being a stone; in general, one does not direct attention at
84We ﬁnd the former translation in [Stump, 1989, p. 91] and the latter in [Martin, 1987a, p.
392; Martin 1987b, p. 430; Martin 1992, p. 115; Martin 2004a, p. 181].
85Christopher Martin discusses this notion of containment in several places, and consistently
emphasizes its importance to Abelard’s theory of entailment: [Martin, 1986, p. 567; Martin,
1987a, pp.
387–388, 392–393; Martin, 1987b, pp.
423–424; Martin 1992, pp.
115–116; and
especially Martin, 2004a, pp. 176, pp. 180–186].
86The second example is somewhat literally translated.
It means, “If something is in the
relation of being a father, then something is in the relation of being a son.”

128
Ian Wilks
what something is by directing attention at what it is not. So there is no relation
of containment between the antecedent, “It is a man,” and the consequent, “It is
not a stone.”87 A similar analysis applies to “If there is paternity then there is
ﬁliation.” Being a father is a relation of having a child but not a relation of being
a child, so we do not direct attention to the state of being a child by considering
the state of being a father. The state of being a child is not internal to the state
of being a father, and so in that sense the latter does not contain the former.88
In both of the above conditionals there is enough linkage to meet the necessity
condition, but not enough to meet the containment one.
This is certainly an uncompromising result. Normally moving in the direction
of relevance implication makes an account of conditionals more intuitive (even
if at the cost of making it also formally more intractable); but Abelard moves
so far in this direction, and is so restrictive in his tolerance for what will count
as an acceptable conditional, that he risks loss of intuitiveness through being
too relevantist.
One must, however, remember the program: to ﬁnd rules for
conditional entailments that are the equal for certitude with the rules for the
syllogistic entailments. In the context of this program Abelard’s restrictions make
sense. The visible result of these restrictions is that his examples of successful
conditional entailments are typically characterized by a shared subject term in
antecedent and consequent, as in “If it is a man it is an animal,” or schematically,
“If x is A then x is B.”89 Whether a conditional of this form turns out to be
an entailment will depend on whether A and B are in the requisite relation of
containment. If they are, the fact will be established through appeal to the relevant
topic.
We can say generally, then, that topics do for incomplete entailments what
logical form does for complete ones. But the fact that maximal propositions are
indexed to things, and the relationships in which they stand, makes it evident that
they are decidedly not formal argument schemata, but semantic principles which
themselves require knowledge of natures in order to be grasped. The logician does
not study physics (i.e., the philosophy of nature) in order to verify the stated
claims of logic, but needs to have some grasp of it nonetheless to understand
what is meant by particular words. For this program to be successfully carried
out “the property of things must ﬁrst be investigated” [Abelard, 1970, p. 286
(37)]. Maximal propositions represent the ﬁnal fruit of this investigation. They
are fundamental principles expressive of how natures are. Our knowledge of them
is without further basis, and no other such principles are to be discovered which
are better known [Abelard, 1970, p. 309 (30–36)].
The many entailments which a maximal proposition yields are themselves ex-
87See [Martin, 2004a, p. 184].
88This analysis is further aﬀected by the way in which Abelard understands the category of
relation, which, we may say very generally, tends to follow Aristotelian tradition by analysing
it more along the lines of a one-place predicate than we are apt to do in modern times. See
[Brower, 1998]. See also [Marenbon, 1997a, pp. 143–146] and [King, 2004, pp. 96–98].
89It is possible, however, for antecedent and consequent to share the predicate term instead.
See note 92 below for an example.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
129
pressive of basic relationships of natures, and in fact hold true even in the absence
of things which manifest those natures. Abelard distinguishes between the import
of a universal aﬃrmative categorical like “All men are mortal” and the corre-
sponding conditional, “If it is a man then it is mortal.” The key linking word in
the former is the copula “is” (est), which “proposes only an act of inherence of
things” [Abelard, 1970, p. 279 (9-10)]; but the key linking word in the latter is
the connective “if” (si), which “proposes necessity of entailment” [Abelard, 1970,
p. 279 (13)]. The categorical asserts inherence, and fails to be true if there is no
inherence — which is what happens if the terms fail to denote any existing thing.
So it is false that all men are mortal if it turns out that there are no men. But
the conditional asserts entailment, not inherence, and this entailment will hold
whether the terms succeed in denoting or not.
“All true conditionals are true
from eternity” [Abelard, 1970, p. 279 (18)], Abelard says. Their truth depends
only upon facts about natures, not facts about the things which instantiate them.
For understanding Abelard’s program in constructing a theory of incomplete en-
tailment, the point is clarifying. Incomplete entailment, as we have seen, is as
grounded in necessity as complete entailment; what confers that necessity is not
a speciﬁc argument form but timeless relationships that hold between natures. In
deﬁning the domain of incomplete entailments, and attempting to provide maxi-
mal propositions as the foundational principles of this domain, Abelard is therefore
undertaking a program of considerable philosophical import.90
In this program he naturally proposes to whittle down the received list of topics
to ones which yield maximal propositions of this sort — ones which imply families
of timelessly true conditionals, marked as such by the fact that in each case the
sense of the consequent is contained in the sense of its antecedent. The strategy for
proceeding with the program is to identify and reject those maximal propositions
which in fact give rise to conditionals lacking the requisite properties. This suﬃces
to demonstrate their inadequacy.
The ﬁrst set of topics he subjects to this scrutiny are the ones listed as topics
“from substance,” under which heading are grouped various principles relating
deﬁnitions to the things they deﬁne. Here is the ﬁrst: “Whatever the deﬁnition
is predicated of, the thing deﬁned is predicated of as well” [Abelard, 1970, p. 331
(23)]. One of the conditionals contained under this would-be maximal proposition
is “If Socrates is a rational, mortal animal then he is a man” [Abelard, 1970, p. 331
(31)]. This conditional seems unobjectionable at ﬁrst sight, but Abelard argues
that it is not necessarily true. More is involved in being a man, he argues, than
simply being rational and mortal; what qualiﬁes as a man is also able to walk, is
two-footed, and shares in learning (perceptibile discipline), and there are, indeed,
many other such properties involved in being a man “for which we do not have
names” [Abelard, 1970, p. 332 (12–13)]. We do not need more than “rational”
90This program is the interpretative key for grasping the considerable material on topical theory
in the Dialectica — material which otherwise can seem disjoint and directionless. Christopher
Martin has been chieﬂy responsible for our knowledge of this interpretative key. See especially
[Martin 1987a], [Martin 1987b], [Martin 1992] and [Martin 2004a].

130
Ian Wilks
and “mortal” for the purposes of deﬁnition because these suﬃce to provide an
(extensionally) “equal deﬁnition” [Abelard, 1970, p. 333 (21)]. But this deﬁnition
has such equality with the thing deﬁned only as a matter of fact (secundum actum
rei), not according to nature (secundum naturam), since although no other rational
and mortal animals are actually to be found except men, “nature does not seem to
require this” [Abelard, 1970, p. 333 (32–33)]. In short, the above conditional (“If
Socrates is a rational, mortal animal then he is a man”) lacks the timeless necessity
needed in order for a conditional to be true. This failing is based on the fact that
the requisite containment relation between consequent and antecedent does not
exist; in particular, the meaning of “rational, mortal animal” does not contain
the meaning of “man.” So the above deﬁnitional principle fails to have a place in
topical theory as a maximal proposition. By parity of reasoning so do a number
of others: “From whatever the deﬁnition is removed, so is the thing deﬁned”;
“Whatever is predicated of the deﬁnition is also predicated of the thing deﬁned”
and “Whatever is removed from the deﬁnition is removed from the thing deﬁned”
[Abelard, 1970, p. 331 (23-29)]. On the other hand, the nature of the thing deﬁned
will be inclusive of whatever properties are appealed to in its deﬁnition; so if we
take the ﬁrst of the above would-be maximal propositions and put “deﬁnition”
for “thing deﬁned,” and vice versa, we will acquire a perfectly good maximal
proposition: “Whatever the thing deﬁned is predicated of, so is the deﬁnition”
[Abelard, 1970, p. 338 (4–5)].91
Abelard works through a traditional list of maximal propositions and in similar
fashion drops many entries from the list, making decisions in this regard which
are often at the outset non-obvious, even counter-intuitive. I append a few addi-
tional examples, which must suﬃce to indicate the character of this very extensive
undertaking. (i) Under the topic “from genus,” Abelard accepts “Whatever the
genus is removed from so is the species” and “Whatever does not agree with the
genus does not agree with the species.” He rejects “Whatever is predicated of the
genus in content (de contento) is also predicated of the species” and “Whatever
the genus taken universally is predicated of, any of its species is predicated of”
[Abelard, 1970, p. 340 (5–19)].92 (ii) Under the topic “from an integral whole”
Abelard rejects inferences from whole to part. The maximal proposition “When
the whole exists it is necessary that any part of it exist” endorses as true the
conditional “If there is a house there is a wall” [Abelard, 1970, p. 343 (34–36)].
But this conditional is false. It is granted that the house as a whole cannot exist
without roof, wall and foundation. But saying that the house as a whole exists is
simply not the same as saying that any one of those three components exists. The
existence claims for the components are not part of the content of the existence
91The topic “from substance” is discussed in [Martin, 2004a, pp. 186–188].
92The reasoning behind these results is given in [Stump, 1989, pp. 98–100]. The ﬁrst (accepted)
maximal proposition is exempliﬁed with this true conditional: “If this rock is not an animal it
is not a man” [Abelard, 1970, p.
340 (11)].
The second (accepted) maximal proposition is
exempliﬁed thus: “If no animal is a stone, no man is a stone” [Abelard, 1970, p. 340 (12)]. For
the idea of predicating a genus de contento, see L.M. de Rijk’s comment in [Abelard, 1970, p.
lxxxiv, note 3].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
131
claim for the whole — which means that “If there is a house there is a wall” fails
the containment condition for entailment, even though it passes the necessity test
[Abelard, 1970, p. 346 (18–28)]. Abelard also argues that attempts to re-formulate
the maximal proposition for this topic in such a way as to make it acceptable fail;
they fail because they yield variants of the proposition which now fall under a
diﬀerent topic.
One such variant is “Whatever wholly agrees with the whole,
that is, according to its individual parts, agrees with each one of those parts”;
but this variant licenses universal-particular inferences, not whole-part ones, and
hence does not qualify as a topic “from an integral whole.” Abelard draws the
same conclusion of “If anything is predicated of the whole it is also predicated to
all the parts of it taken together” [Abelard, 1970, p. 344 (6–24)].93 (iii) Under
the topic “from an equal” Abelard accepts four maximal propositions for what he
calls “equality of predication” (that is, co-extensionality): “Whatever one equal is
predicated of, the other is too”; “From whatever one equal is removed, the other is
too”; “Whatever is predicated of one equal is predicated of the other”; and “What-
ever is removed from one equal is removed from the other” [Abelard, 1970, p. 349
(28–32)]. He also accepts two maximal propositions for what he calls “equality
of inference,” where in this case what are called “equals” are a given conditional
and its contrapositive: “When one equal is posited, the other is too”; “When one
equal is denied the other is too” [Abelard, 1970, p. 351 (31-32)]. These latter
two maximal propositions simply aﬃrm the equivalence of contrapositives.94 (iv)
Under the topic “from antecedent or consequent” Abelard considers the status of
various basic rules of propositional logic, such as “If the antecedent is posited then
the consequent is posited” [Abelard, 1970, p. 365 (18)]. While not denying the
truth of these, he argues that they are not genuine maximal propositions, and so
should be re-expressed in terms of other propositions which are. For example, the
rule just cited has no explanatory power, he argues, because it does not actually
prove the truth of conditional; to apply the rule at all in a given case one already
needs to accept one proposition as antecedent and the other as consequent —
in which case one has already in eﬀect accepted the truth of the conditional the
rule is supposed to be justifying [Abelard, 1970, p. 365 (24–26)]. What actually
demonstrates the relation between antecedent and consequent, he says, is consid-
eration of how species relates to genus; he therefore refers the reader to the topic
“from species” [Abelard, 1970, p. 365 (27–28)]. By this sort of reasoning all of the
principles associated with the topic “from antecedent or consequent” are rejected
as maximal propositions.95
The above gives the barest hint of the intricacy of Abelard’s argumentation in
this section.96 He takes up a long series of what we would call logical and semantic
93The topic “from the integral whole” is discussed in [Martin, 2004a, pp. 188–189] and [Stump,
1989, pp. 100–101].
94The topic “from an equal” is discussed in [Stump, 1989, pp. 103-106].
95The topic “from antecedent or consequent” is discussed in [Stump, 1989, pp. 106–107].
96A summary of maximal principles is provided by L.M. de Rijk in [Abelard, 1970, pp. lxxxiii–
lxxxix]. For a comment on the general organization of topical theory into three divisions (intrinsic,
extrinsic and mediate) see [Martin, 2004a, p. 198, note 65].

132
Ian Wilks
principles and accepts or rejects these, sometimes after painstaking re-formulation,
as appropriate for topical use. Rejection, as noted, can happen because the prin-
ciple, while true, does not play the particular justifying role expected of a given
topic. Or it can happen because the principle gives rise to false conditionals (such
as “If Socrates is a rational, mortal animal then he is a man”). Or it can happen
not by direct reasoning in this way but by indirect reasoning, where Abelard shows
that justiﬁcatory use of a proposed maximal proposition leads to contradiction.
This is the form the argument takes when he rejects all the proposed maximal
propositions for the topics “from opposites” and “from immediates.” And it is
here that we ﬁnd what has so far emerged as perhaps the most interesting of all
the sections in Abelard’s discussion of topical theory.97 Here, in order to derive
the perceived contradiction, he articulates insights that stand at the very heart of
his relevance logic.
Opposites (white, black) are to contraries as immediates (white, non-white) are
to contradictories. If one opposite is present then the other must be absent, and
likewise with immediates. But the absence of one opposite does not imply the
presence of the other since they may both be absent. By contrast, the absence of
one immediate does imply the presence of the other. So a conditional licensed by
the topic “from opposites” is “If it is a man it is not horse” [Abelard, 1970, p. 393
(19)], since nothing can be both at the same time, but something can be neither.98
A conditional licensed by the topic “from immediates” is “If it is not healthy it is
sick,” since, presumably, anything which can meaningfully and truthfully be said
not to be the one must be said to be the other. Abelard’s rejection of both topics
proceeds similarly, so I will focus on the one “from opposites.”
The principle common to the maximal propositions falling under this topic is
that “when the one is posited, the other is removed” [Abelard, 1970, p. 393 (6)].
Consider the conditional, “If Socrates is a man, he is not a stone” [Abelard, 1970,
p. 395 (10)]. Being a man and being a stone are in opposition to each other since
nothing can be both, while many things are neither. So the topic “from opposites”
tells us that the conditional is true; positing man entails removing stone. But note
that the same topic also tells us that this conditional is true: “If Socrates is a stone
he is not a man” [Abelard, 1970, p. 395 (15)], for the same reason as before (i.e.,
nothing can be both a stone and a man). So we have what are presumed to be
two true conditionals: “If Socrates is a man he is not a stone” and “If Socrates is
a stone he is not a man.” Abelard now makes one conditional out of the two by
conjoining their antecedents into one antecedent, and conjoining their consequents
into one consequent: “If Socrates is a man and a stone, Socrates is not a man
and a stone” [Abelard, 1970, p. 395 (17)]. This move is intuitive and logically
unobjectionable. Its product may be formalized thus: ((p&q) ⊃∼(p&q)). But
97The signiﬁcance of Abelard’s treatment of these topics was ﬁrst brought to light by Christo-
pher Martin in [Martin, 1986, pp. 569–570], [Martin, 1987a, pp. 386–392], and [Martin, 1987b,
pp. 432–433]. Further treatments are found in [Martin, 1992, pp. 117–122] and [Martin, 2004a,
pp. 189–191]. My own account here is based on these sources.
98The corresponding maximal proposition is: “If one opposite is predicated of something, then
the other opposite is removed from that same thing” [Abelard, 1970, p. 393 (24–25)].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
133
this represents a logical form which Abelard regards as self-contradicting, so he
concludes that the topic from opposites should be rejected.
Why does he regard that logical form as self-contradicting? ((p&q) ⊃∼(p&q))
is a substitution instance of the simpler formula (p ⊃∼p). Abelard takes it as self-
evident that conditionals of this form are false, because, he believes, no proposition
can imply its own negation. Of course it makes sense that he should think this,
given his understanding of what counts as a true conditional. If the meaning of
the consequent must be contained in the meaning of the antecedent in order for
the conditional to be true, then any case where the consequent simply denies the
antecedent will represent the most obvious case of non-containment, and so the
most obvious case of a false conditional. The form (p ⊃∼p) represents a direct
challenge to Abelard’s way of thinking about the conditional, and he naturally
regards any move in argument which gives rise to a conditional of that form as
fallacious. Rejecting this form (a pre-requisite for giving it the diagnostic role that
Abelard does) is in fact typical of the approach to relevance logic now known as
“connexivism”; a system of connexivist logic is characterized by its not accepting
this formula as true.99 Needless to say, any such system represents a substantial
departure from familiar systems of two-valued propositional logic; these interpret
a case where a proposition implies its own negation as simply deriving from the
fact that it is false.
This connexivist principle is derived from Boethius, who
himself extracts it from Aristotle’s Prior Analytics: “It is impossible that the
same thing should be necessitated by the being and by the not-being of the same
thing” [Aristotle, 1984a, p. 91 (57b3-4)] — in other words, no proposition can be
implied both by another and by the negation of that other.100 The corollary of
this, of course, is that no proposition can be implied by its own negation. It is clear
from contemporary testimony that the acceptance of the connexivist principle was
regarded as an important issue [Martin, 1987a, pp. 378–379], and indeed, as we
shall see in the next section, it was to become a major point of contention between
Abelard and others.
The upshot of the discussion of the topics from opposites and immediates is
that they yield no maximal propositions and serve to conﬁrm no entailments. The
kind of entailments they would conﬁrm if this result were otherwise would be ones
where one of the clauses of the conditional posited its predicate and the other
clause removed its predicate. In other words, they would conﬁrm conditionals of
mixed quality, with an aﬃrmative antecedent and negative consequent, or vice
versa. The implication of Abelard’s result is that no such conditionals will be
conﬁrmed by topical theory, and that the sorts of conditional entailments that
will be conﬁrmed will be jointly composed out of aﬃrmative clauses or jointly
composed out of negative ones.101
Presumably these limitations establish the
99For the notion of connexivism see [McCall, 1966]; this source is cited in [Martin, 1987a, p.
381, note 10].
100The origin of this principle is discussed in [Martin, 1987a, p. 378–379]. See also [McCall,
1966, pp. 415–416].
101Christopher Martin has recently suggested a constraint on Abelard’s rejection of mixed
quality conditionals as successful entailments: that this rejection applies only in cases where the

134
Ian Wilks
conditions under which containment is able to happen: something’s being B is
able to be contained by that same thing’s being A, or its not being B is able to be
contained by its not being A. As established earlier, whether a conditional of this
form turns out to be an entailment will depend on whether A and B are in the
requisite relation of containment. If they are, the fact will be established through
appeal to the relevant topic.
Note that being an entailment in the sense intended here is an exacting status
for a conditional to achieve, and not achieving it does not by itself completely
strip a conditional of cogency. Compare the standing of Baroco and Bocardo syl-
logisms, which, as we have seen, fail to reduce directly to a ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogism,
and therefore attain only “maximum probability” [Abelard, 1970, p. 244 (35–36)].
This assessment obviously lowers their inferential cogency relative to the other
accepted syllogistic moods, but for all that they still retain the capacity to confer
maximum probability upon their conclusions, and still ﬁgure in the list of cate-
gorical syllogisms. Abelard rejects conditionals of mixed quality in the sense that
he refuses to accord them the same inferential cogency as he accords the accepted
syllogistic forms — but this is no bar to his continuing to regard propositional
forms like (p ⊃∼q) and (∼p ⊃q) as worthy objects of study in a propositional
logic. And as we turn to his propositional logic we certainly encounter discussion
of these forms and the equivalences they bear to other propositional forms. There
should be no thought that Abelard is being inconsistent in this.
At the outset of this section on topical theory I cited Abelard’s pretext for dis-
cussing such theory before discussing the hypothetical syllogisms; the point, he
suggests, is to present an account of the meaning of conditionals prior to study-
ing how such propositions are employed in hypothetical syllogisms. He certainly
achieves this goal (while at the same time saying a great deal about topical theory
whose worth exists independently of this purpose). When we turn to the section
on the hypothetical syllogism itself we are confronted with a treatment that is not
extensively elaborated, and indeed not that much longer than what is provided for
the categorical syllogism.
When Abelard speaks of hypotheticals he has a notion in mind more general
than conditionals, since it also includes disjunctives. His way of distinguishing be-
tween conditionals and disjunctives is revealing. Just as a categorical proposition
can be divided in three, so can a hypothetical: in case of the categorical, two terms
and the copula that joins them; in the case of the hypothetical, two propositions
and the conjunction (coniunctio) that joins them [Abelard, 1970, p. 472 (1–6)].
Conditional hypotheticals diﬀer from disjunctive ones by virtue of the nature of
the conjunction; in the former case we have a conjunctive conjunction (coniunc-
tiva coniunctio) and in the latter case a disjunctive one (disiunctiva coniunctio)
[Abelard, 1970, p. 472 (8-14)]. Of course it is tempting to translate coniunctio
as “connective” rather than “conjunction,” and doing so would suggest a way of
speaking more in line with contemporary practice.
But the fact that Abelard
negated clause is subject to extinctive negation, not separative [Martin, 2004a, p. 196, note 48].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
135
speaks of the conditional and disjunctive connectives as two kinds of conjunction
suggests a way of understanding them which poses an impediment to grasping the
truth of the matter — which is, of course, that implication and disjunction are
correlative with conjunction, as opposed to being kinds of conjunction. Abelard’s
work on hypotheticals manifests much nascent insight into propositional logic, but
also some inherited confusion. He is able to make some useful observations about
the conditional and disjunctive connectives, and how they relate to the negative
connective. But for this to be a discussion of propositional logic in the fullest sense
there needs to be some notion of a connective for conjunction as well. What there
is instead is a way of speaking which can only impede the development of such a
notion.
There is to be found here, nonetheless, a rich discussion of the interrelationship
of conditionals, disjunctions and negations, in which Abelard’s sensitivity to the
diﬀerence between wide-scope and narrow-scope negation plays an important role.
Just as a categorical proposition can be negated as a single unit by application
of wide-scope negation, so with a hypothetical, which counts as aﬃrmative even
if one or other of its clauses happens to be negated: “Whatever hypotheticals
are asserted — whether out of two aﬃrmatives, such as this: ‘If it is a man it
is an animal’; or out of two negatives, such as this: ‘If it is not an animal, it is
not a man’; or out of an aﬃrmative and a negative or vice versa, such as this:
‘If it is night it is not day’ — they all seem to assert an aﬃrmative meaning of
entailment” [Abelard, 1970, p. 476 (8–15)]. The narrow-scope negation aﬀecting
only the consequent in “If it is a man it is not an animal” does not negate the
hypothetical as a whole, which still aﬃrmatively expresses a relation of following
between antecedent and consequent. If the narrow-scope negation did do this then
one would not be able to say that a relation of following is being expressed here.
Besides achieving insight into how a conditional is negated, Abelard also dis-
cusses at length how it is related to disjunction. He receives from the Boethian
tradition the foundational insight that (∼p∨q) is equipollent with (p ⊃q): “If the
conjunctive <hypothetical> is composed of two aﬃrmatives, the disjunctive one
will consist of a negative and an aﬃrmative” [Abelard, 1970, p. 488 (29–31)].102
This means that what he says about the disjunctive relation must be carefully
aligned with what he has already said about the conditional relation. This is a
good result to arrive at, of course, but it is complicated by his relevance approach
to understanding implication.
He argues against deﬁning a disjunction truth-functionally, either inclusively as
meaning that at least one of the disjuncts is true, or exclusively as meaning that
only one of them is true.103 The problem with these deﬁnitions is brought out in
the example, “Either I am an animal or I am an ass” [Abelard, 1970, p. 490 (24)].
Note that this proposition is true on both deﬁnitions; one of the disjuncts is true
(“I am an animal”), and in fact only one of them is true (since “I am an ass” is
false). So taken either inclusively or exclusively, the disjunction is true. Now by
102Reading si for is in line 29.
103On this point see the brief commentary in [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, p. 222].

136
Ian Wilks
the above equipollence the disjunction can be re-written as this conditional: “If I
am not an animal, I am an ass” [Abelard, 1970, p. 490 (28)]. But my being an ass
implies my being an animal, so the conditional intuitively implies this one, whose
consequent is changed accordingly: “If I am not an animal then I am an animal”
[Abelard, 1970, p. 490 (30)]. This is the very sort of conditional which Abelard’s
connexivism forbids, so it, and the above deﬁnitions of disjunction which permit,
it must be rejected. So must another deﬁnition, again in terms of truth, which
takes disjunction as meaning that one of its disjuncts is necessarily true. This
analysis may work for “Either I am not an ass or I am a man” [Abelard, 1970, p.
490 (33)], where the disjuncts can be seen as advancing predications necessarily
true of the subject term “I.” But the analysis will obviously fail for “Either I
am sitting or I am not sitting” [Abelard, 1970, p. 490 (35)], since both of the
disjuncts are obviously contingent. Considerations of necessity do arise, however,
in understanding disjunction. The disjuncts need not themselves be necessary, but
they are necessarily connected in a certain way, since the denial of one necessitates
the other — as if, Abelard adds, “they were not able to have a middle” [Abelard,
1970, p. 491 (11–12)].104
To accommodate these results he develops an account of disjunction which de-
ﬁnes it in terms of conditionality. In the fragment of propositional logic he pro-
duces here, the two are not treated as interdeﬁnable, as they typically are now;
rather, conditionality and negation are taken as primitive, and disjunction as de-
rived. So, on his account, the disjunction (p ∨q) simply means that the negation
of p implies q: “If anyone, therefore, wishes to explain the sense of the disjunctive
<hypothetical>, they can only show it through the sense of equipollent conjunctive
hypotheticals” [Abelard, 1970, p. 491 (3-4)].
This account of disjunction, however, creates a problem that other accounts
would avoid.
How do we explain the meaning of the three-part disjunction in
“Either it is hot or it is cold or it is tepid” [Abelard, 1970, p. 492 (8)]? On the
other accounts we could simply say it meant that at least one of the three disjuncts
was true, or only one was true, or one was necessary. But how do we answer the
question in terms of the conditional-based account that Abelard prefers? This
account, unlike the others, forces each disjunction to be seen as applying to two
and only two disjuncts, so (p∨q ∨r) must be subject to some internal association.
We must take it in one of two ways, either as (p ∨(q ∨r)) or as ((p ∨q) ∨r). But
on either approach there is a problem. Say we adopt the second. (The following
line of argument would, if adapted, work just as well if we adopted the ﬁrst.)
“Either it is hot or it is cold or it is tepid” is then expressed thus: “Either this
disjunction is true: ‘either it is hot or it is cold’; or it is tepid” [Abelard, 1970, p.
492 (33–35)]. To grasp the problem, note ﬁrst that the analysis yields two main
disjuncts, the ﬁrst of which is: “This disjunction is true: ‘either it is hot or it is
cold.’ ” In Abelard’s view, this ﬁrst disjunct is clearly false. Even if it is in fact
hot, or in fact cold, the disjunct is still false. Why? Because what “Either it is
hot or it is cold” means is “If it is not hot then it is cold.” This conditional is
104See [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, pp. 222–223].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
137
false because of a failure of implication; since the possibility of being tepid is put
in play by the original three-part disjunction, not being hot does not imply being
cold. And since the conditional is false, it is also false to say, “This disjunction is
true: ‘either it is hot or it is cold.’ ” Now go back to the original rendering of the
whole disjunction: “Either this disjunction is true: ‘either it is hot or it is cold’; or
it is tepid” (where the last “it” still refers to the thing whose temperature is under
question, not to the disjunction105). Shorten it to: “Either this disjunction is true
or it is tepid.” Express this as a conditional: “If this disjunction is not true then
it is tepid” [Abelard, 1970, p. 493 (3)]. What we have been told so far is that the
antecedent of the conditional is true (because the disjunction expressed in it is in
fact not true). So the conditional as a whole is false when said in circumstances
where the consequent is false — in other words, when said of anything which is in
fact not tepid. What this all amounts to is that the original disjunction (“Either
it is hot or it is cold or it is tepid”) is false when said of something not tepid.
This is contrary to our intuitions, which tell us that the disjunction may well be
true under those circumstances. So the analysis which produces this result must
be incorrect.
What, then, is the correct analysis? It is one, Abelard believes, which recognizes
diﬀerent kinds of disjunction as present in this case.
He proposes to interpret
((p∨q)∨r) as involving one kind of disjunctive relation between p and q, and then
another kind between (p∨q) and r. For the nested disjunction Abelard reverts to a
conception of disjunction which diverges from the above conditional-based account.
It is, in fact, a truth-functional account. The nested disjunction is understood to
mean that one of p, q is true; it suﬃces simply that one of the disjuncts be true,
with no additional requirement that the negation of one relevantly imply the other.
The main disjunction, on the other hand, continues to be understood in accordance
with the above conditional-based account. The whole disunctive proposition then
reads “Either it is one of these or it is that”; expressed as a conditional it reads, “If
it is neither of these then it is that” [Abelard, 1970, p. 493 (14, 16)]. Abelard marks
this weakened form of disjunction by writing it as a relation between predicates
[Abelard, 1970, p.
493 (12)], saying “Either this is hot or cold,” as opposed
to “Either this is hot or this is cold.” The nested disjunction, then, is written
as predicative and interpreted as a truth functional.
The main disjunction is
written as sentential and interpreted as above. The initial problem was caused
precisely because there was an implicative link at work within the nested disjuncts.
Now that the link is gone, the problem appears to be solved. “Either this is hot
or cold, or it is tepid” says that either the weaker, truth functional disjunction
holds between hot and cold, or the stronger disjunction holds between that weaker
disjunction and tepid.
Note that in (p∨q∨r) either p and q can be grouped into a nested disjunction, or
q and r. Abelard is committed by his account to accepting either pattern of asso-
ciation as an equally correct reading of the original statement. He indeed accepts
105This disambiguation is eﬀortless in the Latin, where disiuncta has a feminine inﬂection,
tepidum a neuter one.

138
Ian Wilks
this result, taking not only “Either this is hot or cold, or it is tepid” [Abelard,
1970, p. 493 (12)] but also “Either this is hot, or it is cold or tepid” [Abelard,
1970, p. 493 (19)] as allowable readings of the original. Of course on his account
these cannot be viewed as having exactly the same meaning, because in the former
the merely truth functional relation exists between the ﬁrst and second disjuncts
(hot and cold), while in the latter it exists between the second and third (cold and
tepid). However subtle, this must be taken as making a diﬀerence in the meaning
of the whole.
How we group the disjuncts in a proposition of the form (p∨q ∨r) is intuitively
thought not to make a diﬀerence to the meaning of the whole compound disjunc-
tion, but Abelard’s analysis suggests otherwise. So this is itself a counter-intuitive
result. His initial account of stronger, non-truth-functional disjunction makes it
diﬃcult to incorporate that connective into nested contexts. As we shall now see,
he encounters a similarly counter-intuitive result with the conditional, where again
he must have recourse to a secondary and weaker version of the connective in order
to deal with nested propositional structures.
Consider the conditional “If it is not well then it is sick.” This proposition is
false, given that anything, including rocks, can fail to be well; but only living things
(in Abelard’s view) can be sick. So failing to be well does not imply sickness. But
failing to be well among animals does seem to imply sickness, so it seems plausible
that if we write the condition of being an animal into the conditional in question
then the result will be true. It is therefore tempting to apply a qualifying “if”
clause: “If it is an animal, it follows that if it is not well then it is sick.” Abelard
argues, however, that the result of such qualiﬁcation, whether it takes this form
or others, will not be true, given the requirements for implication. He considers
three cases, none of which he ﬁnds satisfactory. (i) “If it is an animal, it follows
that if is not well then it is sick.” This attempt attaches the qualiﬁcation to the
whole conditional, and makes that conditional the consequent in the larger one
that results from the attachment. But we know that the conditional standing as
the consequent taken by itself is false (“If it is not well then it is sick”). So if
the antecedent is true then we have a true antecedent and a false consequent —
rendering false the compound conditional taken as a whole when said of an animal
[Abelard, 1970, p. 402 (14–15)]. (ii) “If it is not well it follows that if it is an
animal it is sick.” Here the qualifying “if” clause is attached to the consequent of
the original. But “If it is an animal, it is sick” cannot be true since there are many
animals that are not sick; animality and sickness are not in the right relation to
make that conditional true. So again here the consequent is false, and so if the
antecedent is true then the compound conditional as a whole is false [Abelard,
1970, p. 402 (21–23)]. (iii) “(If it is an animal then it is not well) <implies> that
it is sick.” This attempt attaches the qualifying “if” clause to the antececent of
the original conditional. But what we have here is the claim that a categorical
proposition follows from a conditional one. This claim cannot be true, [Abelard,
1970, p. 402 (26–27)], presumably because of the existential presupposition ex-
pressed in the categorical, which is absent from the conditional contained in the

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
139
antecedent.106
Abelard’s remedy lies distinguishing a “temporal” meaning of the conditional
connective from the “natural” one already discussed [Abelard, 1970, p. 472 (16–
38)].
The temporal interpretation reads “If it rains, it thunders” as “When it
rains, it thunders.”
On this reading, the truth of antecedent and consequent
are not linked conditionally or causally, but only temporally, in that the two are
simply being said to be true at the same time [Abelard, 1970, p. 472 (26–29)].
They only have societas comitationis, an association of accompaniment [Abelard,
1970, p. 481 (22)], and are rendered in Latin by cum (“when”) as opposed to si
(“if”). This kind of relation is, unlike the one involved in relevance implication,
completely symmetrical, in that if the antecedent holds concurrently with the
consequent then the consequent will hold concurrently with the antecedent. It is
this temporal relation that Abelard appeals to in qualifying the above conditional
“If it is not well then it is sick.” He reads it as undergoing temporal qualiﬁcation;
the extra “if” clause is read as determining the time in which the main conditional
is true, so “if it is an animal” is read as “when it is an animal.” If the temporal
qualiﬁcation is applied to the whole conditional as in (i) above, or applied only to
the consequent as in (ii) above, the result will, he argues, still be false [Abelard,
1970, p. 403 (19-24)]. But if it is applied only to the antecedent we get this: “If
when it is an animal it is not well then it is sick,” that is, “If it is an animal and
not well at the same time then it is sick” [Abelard, 1970, p. 403 (26–28)]. Abelard
is willing to admit that the original conditional under this qualiﬁcation “perhaps
is true” [Abelard, 1970, p. 403 (29)].
This sort of qualiﬁcation is referred to as constantia. Its eﬀect is to make true
what would otherwise be a false conditional by limiting what it claims. While
the example proposition may be successfully dealt with thus, the result is, in a
broader sense, problematic. It reveals the same underlying diﬃculty for Abelard’s
discussion of conditionals as arises for his discussion of disjunctions. Just as his
conception of disjunction ultimately compels him to regard the two disjunctions
in ((p ∨q) ∨r) as operating in a diﬀerent way, so his conception of the conditional
compels him to regard the two conditionals in ((p ⊃q) ⊃r) as operating in a
diﬀerent way. This imposes a deﬁnite constraint on what Abelard can possibly ac-
complish in the area of propositional logic. The fragment of this that he develops,
which treats various relationships between the conditional, disjunctive and nega-
tive connectives, can treat these relationships only as they arise in propositional
forms of lesser complexity. Even though Abelard inherits from Boethius an ability
to identify key connectives, the account he provides of them will not support their
successive combination into the full range — or even a representative small range
— of compound propositional forms.
The fact that he sees the viable number of these propositional forms as relatively
small shapes the way he studies the deductive reasoning patterns to which they give
rise. A limited number of propositional forms will naturally give rise to a limited
number of deductive patterns, and so Abelard runs through a fairly conventional
106This material is discussed in [Martin, 2004a, p. 178].

140
Ian Wilks
catalogue of such patterns, presumed to be comprehensive. The treatment of this
material is — like the treatment of argument forms in modal and tense logic —
taxonomic rather than axiomatic. The intent is a list, not a reduction to principles.
The discussion of deductive patterns arising from the conditional is, naturally,
focused on reasoning “through the positing of the antecedent” and “through the
destruction of the consequent”: modus ponens and modus tollens respectively.
These rules end up being variously speciﬁed, according to the character of the
conditional under question.
Abelard starts with the four simple conditional forms: “If it is A it is B”; “If it
is A it is not B”; “If it is not A it is B” and “If it is not A it is not B” [Abelard,
1970, p. 498 (27–30)].107 From these are generated eight moods of hypothetical
syllogism, four arising from modus ponens, four from modus tollens [Abelard,
1970, pp. 501 (30)–505 (7)]. The ﬁrst mood applies “It is A” to “If it is A it is
B.” The second applies “It is A” to “If it is A it is not B.” The third applies “It
is not A” to “If it is not A it is B.” The fourth applies “It is not A” to “If it is not
A it is not B.” The ﬁfth to eighth proceed in parallel fashion to apply the denial
of the consequent to each of the four forms. One notices the ineﬃciency of this
presentation, since there are, after all, really only two rules at work. The moods
strike one as overly speciﬁed.
But some need to make modus ponens and modus tollens case-speciﬁc emerges
when Abelard considers the compound conditional forms [Abelard, 1970, p. 505
(9)–516 (14)].
Compound conditionals involve nesting a conditional, either in
the consequent, or in the antecedent, or both.
As we have seen, for Abelard
nested conditionals themselves involve a second kind of conditionality — that of
the temporal conditional. The rules of modus ponens and modus tollens are not
quite enough to capture the truth conditions of these compounds, and need to be
adapted to accommodate the presence of two kinds of conditional relation. So a
compound like “If it is A, then when it is B it is C” falls under this version of
modus ponens: “When the antecedent is posited, its consequences will be at the
same time” [Abelard, 1970, p. 506 (4–5)]. A compound like “If, when it is A, it
is B, then it is C” falls under a diﬀerent version: “When the antecedent exists
with whatever is posited, any consequent of it is posited” [Abelard, 1970, p. 509
(8–9)]. Compound conditionals with temporal qualiﬁcation in both antecedent
and consequent will need another version again.
Abelard accordingly tailors modus ponens and modus tollens to handle diﬀer-
ent kinds of content. This is an impediment to recognizing the merits of a very
diﬀerent approach: keep the rules the same for all cases and develop a more so-
phisticated account of propositional substitution. For all his innovations at a more
foundational level of propositional logic, Abelard is evidently not ready to take this
step.
The ﬁnal tally of moods for the hypothetical syllogism gives us one hundred
and twenty-eight. These include two further kinds of case. (i) Besides the simple
107The variables “A” and “B” are present in Abelard, and are derived from Boethius. (Upper
case forms are used here, not the lower case forms in the text, for typographical clarity.)

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
141
and compound conditional forms just considered, Abelard lists the mediate condi-
tional forms [Abelard, 1970, pp. 516 (16)–530 (26)]. These involve conjunctions of
conditionals: “If it is A then it is B; if it is B then it is C.” The inference pattern
arising from these is an amalgam of what now goes by the name of “hypothetical
syllogism” and modus ponens: “If it is A then it is B; if it is B then it is C. It
is A. Therefore it is C.” The work done by (what is now called) hypothetical
syllogism is rather understated in this arrangement, which seems to present the
whole inference as just another version of modus ponens — modus ponens ap-
plied to a conjunction of conditionals, instead of a single one. In that case the
mediate conditional inferences are brought into neat alignment with the others, as
involving their own specialized versions of modus ponens (and, in the other half of
the cases, modus tollens). But this is at the expense of not fully articulating the
distinct presence of (what is now called) hypothetical syllogism. (ii) The list of
hypothetical syllogisms is rounded out by considering what now goes by the name
of “disjunctive syllogism.” The corresponding inference patterns are systemati-
cally generated, as above, by listing a full range of substitutional forms. Start
with “Either it is an A or it is a B,” negate either or both disjuncts to produce an
additional three forms of the disjunction, and thus generate four disjunctive forms.
The denial of either the ﬁrst or the second disjuncts in each of those four disjunc-
tions creates a distinct inference pattern for asserting the truth of the remaining
disjunct. The product of the analysis is of course eight such patterns [Abelard,
1970, pp. 531 (33)–532 (21)]. No compounded disjunctive inference patterns are
considered.
Summing the variant moods arising from conditionals and disjunctions, we get
a substantially sized list, to be sure. But of course very little ground is actually
covered in this exercise, which, because of the proliferation of the forms considered,
falsely conveys the impression that much ground has been covered. The inference
patterns are generated by what are often negligible variations in the ways of ap-
plying negation. And they cannot include larger, more intricately compounded
structures because Abelard’s relevance account of the connectives simply raises
too many diﬃculties for this.
Even one level of nesting between hypotheticals
requires invoking a secondary, temporal conditional; and even one level between
disjunctions requires invoking a secondary, predicate disjunction. The result is a
taxinomically-oriented presentation whose taxonomy leaves something to be de-
sired.
If nothing else, the above account of Abelard’s work on entailment gives the lie
to this pre-scholarly story about medieval logic: that it accomplishes very little
in the area of propositional logic because of a lack of interest in the area, a lack
of interest due to the period’s preoccupation with Aristotle, who had no interest
in propositional logic at all. Abelard has a great deal of interest in the area and
accomplishes much. If we take him at his word and view the discussion of topical
theory as a preparation for the discussion of hypothetical syllogisms, then we can
fairly say that about half of the Dialectica is given over to discussion of propo-
sitional logic. The limitation in Abelard’s accomplishment here is neither one of

142
Ian Wilks
interest nor insight.
It lies in a basic heuristic problem for propositional logic
itself. The relationships between connectives can be very perspicuously expressed
by starting with a material account of the conditional. But this material account
is so counter-intuitive that it is not a natural starting point at all. A natural start-
ing point is some kind of relevance account, but on this the relationships between
connectives are much easier to mis-state and mis-construe.
Philosophers sometimes refer to very basic propositional logic, rather archly,
as “baby logic.” Well, it took philosophers about as long to develop a working
account of baby logic as it took physicists to develop a working account of relativity
theory. The written product of Abelard’s intense labours in the former area are
helpful in showing us why this was so.
PART 3: ABELARD’S CONTEMPORARIES
Among Abelard’s contemporaries, and in the immediate aftermath of his career,
no other ﬁgure emerges as having anything like his stature and inﬂuence within
the ﬁeld of logic. On the other hand he did have rivals during his life, and they,
like he, established schools to continue the rivalry.
Among his rivals four names in particular emerge: Adam of Balsham, Alberic
of Paris, Gilbert of Poitiers and Robert of Melun. These were all younger con-
temporaries, whose teaching careers were all launched before Abelard’s was ended.
According to current scholarly consensus, their adherents were, respectively, known
as the Parvipontani (or Adamitae), the Montani (or Albricani), the Porretani (or
Gilebertini) and the Melidunenses (or Robertini) [Iwakuma and Ebbesen, 1992, p.
174]. The adherents of Abelard were the Nominales. Gilbert is of course famous
in his own right as a philosopher and theologian, and cuts a substantial ﬁgure in
the twelfth century independently of his work in logic. Alberic and Robert, by
contrast, are best known through the literary products of their schools. The most
notable logical text to emerge from any of the schools of Abelard’s rivals is the Ars
Meliduna, a large work which provides a rich and varied conspectus of the views
of the Melidunenses; it has been described as “the climactic achievement of logic
in the second half of the twelfth century” [Jacobi, 1988, p. 245].
The above school classiﬁcation represents the received scholarly view on the
matter. It is the product of extensive eﬀorts over the past decades in assembling
the scattered and often fragmentary literary remains of the schools. Some rather
basic questions have arisen, such as whether the Montani were in fact the same
as the Albricani, and whether the Nominales were in fact the followers of Abelard
[Iwakuma and Ebbesen, 1992, p. 174]. That points as fundamental as these have
been under relatively recent discussion shows how incipient our knowledge of this
era in the history of logic is.
The textual evidence ranges from treatises and fragments of treatises to pass-
ing references made by non-philosophical authors. The treatises themselves pose
substantial interpretative problems, having been composed both by and for those
immersed in the technical controversies of the day. They demand a knowledge of

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
143
context which they do little to provide. A school theorem is often presented via
responses to objections against it, or via objections to competing theorems, the
presupposition being that its content and purpose are already clear. The extreme
case of this is the widespread use of counter-exempliﬁcation as a means of assessing
inferential forms. An example of a form is given, and then juxtaposed with a series
of proposed counter-examples (instantiae), the entire discussion of the form being
essentially this list consisting of example and counter-examples [Iwakuma, 1987, p.
438], with little or no supporting commentary. The late twelfth century logicians
drew on basically the same logical corpus as Abelard, with the exception that in
mid-century Aristotle’s Sophistical Refutations was brought into currency. The
instantiae technique was doubtless encouraged by resulting interest in the theory
behind fallacy identiﬁcation; but relentless use of the technique served to make
the logical literature of this period all the more inaccessible to the uninitiated.
That said, the richness of the resulting debate is undeniable. Its genesis often lies
in the reaction of Abelard’s rivals to controversial elements in his own philosophical
views, the ensuing discussion sharpened by the involvement of the corresponding
schools. An outstanding example is the debate arising from Abelard’s handling
of the topics “from opposites” and “from immediates.” Abelard’s argument for
rejecting these as legitimate topics was adapted by Alberic to pose a problem for
Abelard’s whole approach to the conditional.
Alberic’s argument starts from any obvious and self-evident conditional, such
as “If Socrates is a man, Socrates is an animal.” Here are the steps, as suggested
in a text originating from Alberic’s school [de Rijk, 1967b, pp. 65 (35)–66 (4)],
and reconstructed thus:
(i)
If Socrates is a man and not an animal, Socrates is not an animal
(ii) If Socrates is not an animal, Socrates is not a man
(iii) If Socrates is not a man, it is not the case that (Socrates is a man
and not an animal)
(iv) Therefore, if Socrates is a man and not an animal, it is not the
case that (Socrates is a man and not an animal).108
(iv) follows from the other three propositions by two applications of hypothetical
syllogism. So the logic of this argument is unimpeachable. If the argument is to be
shown unsound, one of its three premises must be shown to be false. But (i) is a
tautology, self-evidently true by simpliﬁcation. (ii) follows from the original, self-
evident conditional by contraposition. And (iii) just contraposes “If Socrates is a
man and an animal, Socrates is a man,” itself a tautology, self-evidently true by
simpliﬁcation. So (iv) evidently follows. One can start from any true conditional
and derive from it, through parallel steps, a proposition having the same logical
form as (iv).
The problem with this result of course is that, as we have seen, (iv) is on
Abelard’s account obviously false. (iv) is of the form ((p&q) ⊃∼(p&q)); this is
108See [Martin, 1986, pp. 570–571], [Martin, 1987a, pp. 394–395], [Martin, 1987b, p. 433],
[Martin, 1992, p. 122] and [Martin, 2004a, pp. 191–192].

144
Ian Wilks
a substitution instance of the simpler formula (p ⊃∼p). According to Abelard’s
theory of conditional entailment, no proposition can entail its own negation (since
no proposition can contain its own negation). So it is important for Abelard that
(iv) be false. Yet it has just been proven true. We have no clear record of his
response to this problem, but the approaches of the above-named rivals are known
in outline.
Alberic considers the content of the premises (i)–(iii) not adequate to motivate
use of hypothetical syllogism. What motivates this argument form, in Alberic’s
view, is not the fact that antecedents and consequents are related in a certain
way (i.e., related so that the consequent of one conditional is the antecedent of
another), but the fact that predicates are related in a certain way. Remember that
the conditionals studied by these logicians typically have a shared subject term
between antecedent and consequent (“If Socrates is a man then Socrates is mor-
tal”); in the above argument, “Socrates” is in all the antecedents and consequents
as subject, and so the inferences made are interpreted by Alberic as depending on
relationships between the predicates. In his view, hypothetical syllogism demands
a sequence of predicates such that the ﬁrst’s being predicated of the subject is
the cause of the second’s being predicated of the subject (as Socrates’ being a
man is the cause of his being mortal), and such that the second’s being predicated
is likewise the cause of the third’s. In Alberic’s view this relationship does not
exist here. The required causal relation between predicates does not hold in the
sequence “being a man and not being an animal,” “not being an animal” and “not
being a man.” In particular, the conjunction of predicates in “being a man and
not being an animal” is self-contradicting, and cannot be represented as a cause
of anything. So the linkage does not exist which would allow the hypothetical syl-
logism to work. Alberic’s conclusion, then, is that the argument is invalid because
the conditions for legitimate use of hypothetical syllogism do not exist [Anony-
mous, 1967, pp. 64 (31)–65 (3, 10-12); Martin, 1987a, p. 396; Iwakuma, 2004, pp.
325–326].
From Gilbert of Poitiers and his school, and Robert of Melun and his, we get an
approach which simply questions the truth of conditionals like (i), not the validity
of the argument as a whole. This is an important distinction, because what Al-
beric’s approach essentially does is cease to view the above argument as an exercise
in propositional logic at all, construing it instead as an exercise in term logic. By
contrast, the approach of these other two schools accepts hypothetical syllogism as
an inferential relation between propositions, not terms. The problem raised by the
Porretani for conditionals like (i) echos Alberic’s concern for causal relevance, but
this time the relevance problem is expressed in terms of the relation of antecedent
to consequent. Their key principle is that the content of the antecedent must have
relevance to the content of the consequent, in that the truth of the predication in
the former can be seen as causing the truth of the predication in the latter. “If
Socrates is a man and an ass, then Socrates is a man” is seen as failing this require-
ment, giving grounds for considering it false [Anonymous, 1983, p. 26; Martin,
1987a, p. 397; Iwakuma, 2004, p. 326]. The Melidunenses, by contrast, emphasize

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
145
the importance of a true antecedent rather than the importance of a relevant one;
their principle is that nothing follows from a falsehood [Martin, 1987a, p. 398;
Iwakuma, 2004, p. 327]. The antecedent of (i), if taken as a free-standing proposi-
tion, asserts that Socrates is a man and not an animal, which cannot be true since
all men are animals. So what the antecedent asserts is false, and the principle
that nothing follows from a falsehood accordingly identiﬁes the whole conditional
as false. Both the Porretani and Melidunenses support their analyses by counter-
examples to suggest how in other instances the practice of allowing irrelevant or
false antecedents will lead to problematic results. In both cases we have genuine
propositional logic being done, the search being for constraints on conditionals —
either involving relevance conditions or truth conditions — suﬃcient to demon-
strate the falsity of (i). The constraints naturally have a very limiting eﬀect on
what is accepted as a true conditional.
The response of the Parvipontani is the most forward-looking. They too deal
in genuine propositional logic, but are not concerned to constrain it in these ways
— because they consider Alberic’s argument acceptable as it stands, and feel no
incentive to demonstrate the falsity of (i) or any other premise; nor do they wish
to question the argument’s soundness.
They in fact accept the principle that
from a contradiction any statement whatsoever follows, so the self-contradicting
conclusion (iv), where a proposition entails its own denial, is simply a routine
product of the initial self-contradicting antecedent of (i): “Socrates is a man and
is not an animal.” One adherent of the school states openly that “If Socrates is a
man and Socrates is not a man, then Socrates is a crab, and so on for single things,
for example a rose, a lily and the rest” [de Rijk, 1967a, p. 290; Martin, 1987a,
p. 398; Iwakuma, 2004, pp. 327–328]. The lesson, in other words, is that any
conclusion follows from a contradiction.109 While the Parvipontani never advance
from this point to constructing a full propositional logic in the modern sense, it is
clear that they preﬁgure in their response to Alberic one of modern propositional
logic’s most suggestive doctrines.
Another Abelardian theme which is subjected to much scrutiny and debate by
the schools is the doctrine of the propositional dictum. The dictum comes to be
referred to subsequently as the enuntiabile, apparently ﬁrst in the work of Adam
109The result is motivated by this sort of argument [de Rijk, 1967a, p. 290; Martin, 1987a, p.
398; Iwakuma, 2004, pp. 327–328]:
(i)
If Socrates is a man and Socrates is not a man, then Socrates is a man.
(ii)
If Socrates is a man, Socrates is a man or a stone.
(iii) Therefore, if Socrates is a man and Socrates is not a man, Socrates is a man or a stone.
(iv) If Socrates is a man and Socrates is not a man, then Socrates is not a man.
(v)
Therefore, if Socrates is a man and Socrates is not a man, then Socrates is a stone.
(iii) follows from (i) and (ii) by hypothetical syllogism. The inference from (iii) and (iv) to (v) is
more abbreviated. “Socrates is a man and Socrates is not a man” implies both “Socrates is a man
or a stone” and “Socrates is not a man”; these two latter propositions together imply “Socrates
is a stone” (by disjunctive syllogism). Therefore “Socrates is a man and Socrates is not a man”
implies “Socrates is a stone” — which is what (v) asserts. With the relevant substitutions, the
above argument can be made to derive any conclusion from any contradiction.

146
Ian Wilks
of Balsham [Nuchelmans, 1973, p. 169; Iwakuma 1997, p. 19]; whatever diﬀering
shades of meaning may initially be imputed to the two terms, they can safely
be used interchangeably. The question arising from Abelard’s work is what sort
of item they are. They are not things, and yet they make propositions true or
false, and therefore seem to have a mind-independent standing very comparable
to things. The notion of the dictum is so important, and yet so enigmatic, that
controversy is inevitable. A passage from Ars Meliduna describes four basic po-
sitions on the issue [Iwakuma, 1997, p. 19; Nuchelmans, 1973, pp. 170–172], and
Iwakuma Yukio has suggested that these are in fact the positions staked out by
the above four non-Abelardian schools [Iwakuma, 1997, pp. 20–21].
(i) On one view the enuntiable is purely conceptual in nature.
The words
“Socrates reads” generate understandings (intellectus) which are conceived by the
soul; these together constitute an understanding corresponding to the accusative-
and-inﬁnitive structure Socratem legere (“that Socrates reads”). The understand-
ing thus constituted is the enuntiabile.
As such it can easily be identiﬁed as
something — speciﬁcally, some sort of property of the soul [Nuchelmans, 1973,
p. 171]. This yields a positive characterization of the enuntiabile, and avoids the
controversial step of claiming it is nothing at all. But the characterization itself
encounters the sorts of problems normally attendant upon this sort of psycholo-
gism, of which Abelard is well aware. Since the enuntiabile is the cause of truth
in propositions, it follows that, on this account, understandings are the cause of
truth in propositions as well. We have already seen evidence of Abelard’s distaste
for this kind of position. Iwakuma suggests that this ﬁrst position is the view of
Alberic and the Montani [Iwakuma 1997, pp. 21, 23–24].
(ii) A second position takes the enuntiabile as composition (or, in the case of
negation, as division) not of understandings but of items outside the mind. The
enuntiabile corresponding to the proposition that Socrates is white is the actual
combination of white with Socrates [Nuchelmans, 1973, p. 171]. Again we have
a view which easily identiﬁes the enuntiabile as something, and does better than
the theory of the Montani in explaining how the enuntiabile can function as a
cause of truth. But these results come at the cost of involving a more involved
metaphysics; what is needed is an account of what this composite item consisting
of Socrates and whiteness actually is. Supplying this is not a trivial task. Iwakuma
identiﬁes this position as arising from the Porretani [Iwakuma, 1997, pp. 21-22],
whose outlook is not at all metaphysically reductionist, and therefore not at all
adverse to taking up this task.110
(iii) A third view expressed in this passage from Ars Meliduna is attributed by
Iwakuma to the Parvipontani [Iwakuma, 1997, p. 21]. This is a metaphysicially
reductionist view, on which enuntiabilia are nothing. The same claim is made of
the true and the false; they are just manners of speaking, whose purpose is no
more than to assert, with respect to a given proposition, that things really are as
it says they are. This view bears obvious similarities to Abelard’s own account
of the dictum. The associated account of the true and the false is comparable to
110See also [Ebbesen, 2004].

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
147
what is now labelled as a “deﬂationary” approach.111
(iv) This brings us to the remaining view, which is likely that of the Melidunenses
themselves, given that it is presented approvingly [Iwakuma, 1997, p. 21]. It has
a great deal more in common with the view of the Porretani, in ascribing to the
enuntiabile a reality outside the mind at the cost of having to articulate a meta-
physically complex view. And like the Porretani, the Melidunenses do not tend
to be metaphysically reductionist. In fact on this matter their proposal is more
metaphysically complex. The Porretani start with familiar items — objects and
properties — and envisage compositions of them to get their enuntiabile.
But
Melidunenses get theirs by envisaging an item entirely distinct from the world
of objects and properties, accessible only to reason, and not to the senses, and
accordingly they confer special metaphysical status upon the enuntiabile. Indeed,
this entity falls right outside of the Aristotelian categories, and tends to be char-
acterizable more in terms of what it is not than what it is. It is, in particular, not
tied to particularities of linguistic formulation, so that the propositions Marcus
est albus and Tullius est candidus both give us the same enuntiabile (that Cicero
is white) [Nuchelmans, 1973, p. 172].112 In the end, this proposal explains how
enuntiabilia can serve as the cause of truth, but is as much in need of additional
clariﬁcation as Abelard’s proposal, and probably more in need of it than that of
the Montani and the Porretani.
However one explains it, having a notion of the dictum/enuntiabile provides
a new avenue for explaining, in the most general sense, what an argument is.
Abelard is inclined to view the argument as being nothing but the meaningful
words of which it is composed — in particular, the words constituting the premise
or premises (the conclusion being that which awaits proof, and the premise or
premises being that which supplies it). But this seemingly uncontroversial view
does actually occasion some controversy, and the dictum/enuntiabile, notwith-
standing its source in Abelard’s own writings, is appealed to on this issue as a
means of staking out diﬀerent positions. All of the schools register dissent from
Abelard’s view. One of the reasons for this dissent, apparently, lies in the conven-
tional status of human language, every sound or written character of which could
have been established in a diﬀerent signiﬁcation than it was [Iwakuma, 2004, p.
319]. How then are propositions able to be stand in a relation of binding inferential
linkage? It is tempting to say that what is binding in an argument’s inferential
linkage is to be found in the dicta/enuntiabilia corresponding to its constituent
propositions.
This indeed is the approach of the Melidunenses, Montani, and Parvipon-
tani alike, although they diﬀer in how this approach is carried through.
The
Melidunenses adapt Abelard’s view more directly, taking the argument to consist
111[Kneepkens, 1997, pp. 85-86] discusses Parvipontanian views about the enuntiabile in con-
nection with a later ﬁgure from this school (Alexander Nequam). [Iwakuma, 1997, p. 21] asso-
ciates this passage from the Ars Meliduna with the Parvipontanian school based on similarities
of content.
112See also [Martin, 1997b].

148
Ian Wilks
of the enuntiabilia corresponding to the premises used in establishing the conclu-
sion; the arbitrariness of the sounds or letter shapes constituting the spoken or
written expressions of those enuntiabilia therefore in no sense imparts arbitrari-
ness to the argument as a whole. The Montani and Parvipontani have a more
complex account. They view the relation of premises to conclusion as implica-
tional rather than inferential, so that “A therefore B” is construed as being at
heart the conditional “If A then B.” For both of these groups the argument is
the enuntiabile expressed by such a conditional. Given an inference like “Socrates
is a man; therefore Socrates is an animal,” the Parvipontani take the argument
as being the enuntiabile corresponding to this conditional: “If Socrates is a man
he is an animal.” The Montani adopt much the same approach, except that the
conditional takes a more general form: “If something is a man it is an animal.”
The enuntiabile corresponding to this conditional form is thus identiﬁed as the ar-
gument of “Socrates is a man; therefore Socrates is a mortal,” of “Plato is a man;
therefore Plato is a mortal,” and of all other possible substitution instances of this
form. Finally, the response of the Porretani lies a little apart from these others in
appealing not to an enuntiabile at all but to a relation of terms, in particular the
relation of the middle term to the others. The argument is simply this relation.
Since the relation is assuredly an objective one, it thus avoids what appears to be
the problem with holding that an argument is nothing but the meaningful words
of which it is composed [Iwakuma, 2004, pp. 318–320].
There is controversy not only about the nature of an argument but about the
very relationship between syllogisms and topical inferences. Recall that Abelard
distinguishes between complete and incomplete entailment, ascribing to syllogisms
the status of being complete by virtue of their syntactic form. The strength of
topical inferences is understood, as we have seen, in a very diﬀerent way [Stump,
1989, pp. 96–97]. This is a unique view at the time Abelard initially propounds
it [Green-Pederson, 1987, p. 198]. His predecessors typically view syllogisms as
deriving their strength in the same way all topical inferences do, and topics are
assigned to them, just as to other inferences. The topics for syllogisms simply tend
to be descriptions of the relevant syllogistic mood, descriptions set in the form of
topical rules. Abelard’s insistence that there is something fundamentally distinct
about the syllogism that sets it apart from other inferences is therefore a novel
view, and is regarded in his own time as a characteristic view, both of himself and
of the Nominales. The view that syllogisms are at heart inferences, best expressed
as conditionals with the conclusion as consequent, naturally encourages the notion
that they, like other conditionals, require topical warrant; but the implicative (as
opposed to inferential) approach to the syllogism taken by other schools therefore
encourages some level of dissent from Abelard’s view. The Montani and Porretani
both maintain that the inferential linkage at work in syllogisms is ultimately a
matter of the topical relations that exist between their terms; logical form then
emerges only an indicator that this linkage is present, not as an explanation of
how it is present. The Melidunenses seem to have a view which simply combines
the Abelardian and conventional approaches; they claim that syllogisms are able

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
149
to draw their strength not only from their formal arrangement but also from top-
ical relations that exist between their terms [Green-Pedersen, 1987, p. 199]. The
view of the Parvipontani on this matter is not presently known [Iwakuma, 2004,
p. 324].
These are a few examples of the school divisions which dominate the study
of logic in the late twelfth century. Notice that these examples have all issued
from the more distinctively non-Aristotelian elements in Abelard’s work. On the
more conventional Arisotelian elements in logical theory at this time that natural
deference to authority might be expected to have produced more nuanced forms
of disagreement, and perhaps more consensus.
In fact scholarship has not yet
uncovered equally compelling examples of four-way (or ﬁve-way, if one includes
the Nominales) division on logical issues distinct from the ones on which Abelard
was most innovative. If this remains the trend then it will be testimony indeed to
the magnitude of Abelard’s inﬂuence upon his contemporaries.
The relationship of the schools is not exclusively one of mutual disagreement.
The earliest systematic study into their relationship — found in L.M. de Rijk’s
Logica modernorum — in fact suggests certain themes in common in their treat-
ment of basic semantic theory. While most recent research into this era has sought
to distinguish the schools by charting opposing positions in debate, de Rijk has
sought to discover how the development of twelfth century theory ultimately leads
to the emergence of the terminist tradition in the thirteenth. His approach empha-
sizes themes held in common by the schools, and the resulting analysis identiﬁes
two key lines of historical development.
(i) First, and perhaps most importantly, there is the increasing tendency to pay
close attention to the role of context in determining meaning.
De Rijk argues
that this change is found in the grammatical theory of the period.
Eleventh
century grammatical approaches are characterized by the belief that what the word
means is what it was initially imposed to mean, not how it is used in particular
contexts [de Rijk, 1967a, pp. 113-114]. Twelfth century approaches, with their
growing interest in syntactic theory, are more open to the idea that placement
in a particular construction can legitimately inﬂuence a word’s meaning in that
context [de Rijk, 1967a, pp. 115-17]. This approach is certainly to be found in
Abelard’s work, and in his later glosses on Aristotle and his theological works the
notion of translatio is regularly employed. By this term is meant some kind of
transferrence of meaning brought about by context, as in “the meadows smile,”
where “smile” is used to mean “are ﬂowering” [Abelard, 1921, p. 121 (29–35)].
This is not an equivocal use, because equivocation involves a word’s having more
than one imposed meaning, and that is not the case with “smile” here; it still has
just one imposed meaning, and simply acquires another temporary meaning when
preceded by “the meadows.”
Use of this notion of translatio as a staple of semantic theory becomes fairly
commonplace in the twelfth century, and is, for example, particularly in evidence
among the Melidunenses [de Rijk, 1967a, pp. 298-299]. They adopt, following
Abelard, an approach to equivocation which limits equivocity to cases where the

150
Ian Wilks
word receives multiple meanings at the time of inception, and carries that multi-
plicity with it for as long as it remains in the language. Other sorts of multiplicity
arise just because of the conditions of use to which the word is subjected: “We
say . . . that nothing prevents the same term from signifying many things in dif-
ferent locutions as a result of diﬀerent associations (ex diversis adiunctis). Nor,
however, will it signify many things, since what it signiﬁes through association it
does not signify” [de Rijk, 1967a, p. 298]. “Dog” is genuinely equivocal because is
imposed on a certain kind of quadruped, and also a certain heavenly constellation.
“Healthy” is not equivocal, even though it can be variously predicated of animals,
food, and urine, since it was not imposed to signify any of these three. It was
imposed to signify health, and is put to these other uses through contextual varia-
tion. The lesson here is that initial signiﬁcation is only part of what is needed by a
semantic theory to explain the semantic behaviour of the word. What is needed in
addition is an account of how context actually works on signiﬁcation to produce a
variety of references. Discussion of this issue ultimately gives rise to the varieties
of supposition articulated by the subsequent terminist tradition.
(ii) The notion of translatio comes to prominence, de Rijk additionally argues,
under the further inﬂuence of fallacy theory.
This is a developing interest of
the later twelfth century, which reﬂects the introduction of Aristotle’s Sophistical
Refutations into Western Europe around the middle of the twelfth century. “The
diﬀerent types of supposition,” de Rijk says, “are not only illustrated by means
of fallacies, but . . . derived from the determinations of those fallacies” [de Rijk,
1962, p. 22]. One of the key fallacies in this regard is what is called the fallacy of
“univocation” [de Rijk, 1967a, pp. 499-504]. Philosophers have typically viewed
univocation in a wholly positive light as representing a general term’s success in
naming things of the same kind. From this perspective univocation is not readily
associated with fallacious reasoning. But there is a specialized tradition in the
use of this word common in early medieval fallacy theory which takes a word as
being used univocally so long as it preserves its original signiﬁcation [de Rijk,
1967a, p. 492]. (Outright equivocation occurs when the term is used in a way
that departs from its original signiﬁcation.) Since it is possible for the same term
to name things of diﬀerent kinds even though it retains its original signiﬁcation,
univocation can end up being less than semantically straightforward, and can bring
with it danger of misleading employment. Hence arises the fallacy designation. For
a representative twelfth century treatment of this issue de Rijk turns to the Fallacie
Parvipontane, a fallacy text emanating from the school of the Parvipontani. Here
we ﬁnd description of several varieties of univocation that could sow confusion
among the inattentive. In one variety, a word stands for itself, as “teacher” does
in “‘Teacher’ is a name.” Or it stands for its logical category, as “man” does in
“Man is a species.” Or it stands for the kind of things it denotes, as “man” does
in “Man is the most worthy of creatures.” Or it stands for past and future things
of the kind it denotes, as opposed to just present ones [de Rijk, 1967a, p. 495]. In
each of these cases translatio takes place (or, as the text puts it, transsumptio),
whereby the reference of the term is deﬂected by the adjoining words, even though

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
151
the term itself sees no change of underlying signiﬁcation. What is described here,
of course, is the very semantic behaviour which later supposition theorists attempt
to chart in their various classiﬁcations. The supposition of a name is what it stands
for in a given context, and the above varieties of univocation just correspond to
diﬀerent things a name can stand for in diﬀerent contexts — i.e., they correspond
to diﬀerent kinds of supposition.
The forward-looking developments in semantic theory described under (i) and
(ii) were not limited to the two schools mentioned. These were very general de-
velopments in this era, and credit for them must be widely apportioned. While
it is useful to grasp the issues on which the schools diﬀerentiated themselves, it
should also be understood that there were issues on which they exerted a produc-
tive consensus. It does remain diﬃcult to chart this mid- and late-twelfth century
period in the history of logic, because essential development occurred through a
larger number of smaller voices, as opposed to a smaller number of larger ones.
The passage from Abelard to the terminists is an inland delta phase of history,
where a distinct channel divides into a network of smaller ones, before these then
gather back into another distinct one.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
“[Abelard, 1927]” denotes Geyer’s incomplete 1927 edition of Abelard’s major commentary on
De interpretatione. “[Abelard, 1958]” denotes Minio-Paluello’s 1958 edition of the portion of
this commentary not edited by Geyer. (For discussion of Geyer’s textual omission see [Abelard,
1958, pp. xii-xxi].) “[Abelard, 2008]” denotes the recent critical edition of the entire commentary,
edited by Jacobi and Strub.
Page references to [Abelard, 1927] and [Abelard, 1958] are always supplemented by references to
the corresponding section number of [Abelard, 2008].
[Abelard, 1919] P. Abelard. Glossae super Porphyrium. Edited by B. Geyer. Vol. 1 of [Geyer,
1919-1933].
[Abelard, 1921] P. Abelard. Glossae super Praedicamenta Aristotelis. Edited by B. Geyer. Vol.
2 of [Geyer, 1919-1933].
[Abelard, 1927] P. Abelard. Glossae super Periermeneias Aristotelis. Edited by B. Geyer. Vol.
3 of [Geyer, 1919-1933].
[Abelard, 1933] P. Abelard. Glossule super Porphyrium. Edited by B. Geyer. Vol. 4 of [Geyer,
1919-1933].
[Abelard, 1958] P. Abelard. Super Periermenias xii-xiv. In L. Minio-Paluello, editor, Abaelar-
diana inedita, pp. 1–108. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1958.
[Abelard, 1969a] P. Abelard. Theologia christiana. Edited by E.M. Buytaert. In Corpus chris-
tianorum continuatio medievalis 12: 69–372. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 1969.
[Abelard, 1969b] P. Abelard. Super Topica Glossae. Edited by M. Dal Pra. In Abelardo: Scritti
di logica, 2nd ed., pp. 205-330. Florence: La nuova Italia, 1969.
[Abelard, 1970] P. Abelard. Dialectica. Edited by L.M. de Rijk (2nd edition). Assen: Van Gor-
cum, 1970.
[Abelard, 1983a] P. Abelard. Theologia ‘summi boni.’ Edited by E.M. Buytaert and C.J. Mews.
In Corpus christianorum continuatio medievalis 13: 83–201. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols,
1983.
[Abelard, 1983b] P. Abelard. Theologia ‘scholarium.’ Edited by E.M. Buytaert and C.J. Mews.
In Corpus christianorum continuatio medievalis 13: 309–549. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols,
1983.

152
Ian Wilks
[Abelard, 2008] P. Abelard. Glossae super Periermeneias. Edited by K. Jacobi and C. Strub.
In Corpus christianorum continuatio medievalis. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, forthcoming,
2008.
[Anonymous, 1967] Anonymous. Introductiones Montane minores. Edited by L.M. de Rijk. In
[de Rijk, 1967b, pp. 7-71].
[Anonymous, 1983] Anonymous. Compendium logicae Porretanum ex codice Oxoniensi Collegii
Corporis Christi 250: A Manual of Porretan Doctrine by a Pupil of Gilbert’s. Edited by S.
Ebbesen, K.M. Fredborg and L.O. Nielsen. Cahiers de l’institut du moyen-ˆage grec et latin
46: iii-xviii and 1-113, 1983.
[Anselm, 1946] St. Anselm. Epistola de Incarnatione Verbi. Edited by Franciscus S. Schmitt.
In vol. 2 of S. Anselmi opera omnia, pp. 3-35. Edinburgh: T. Nelson, 1946.
[Aristotle, 1962] Aristotle. Analytica priora. Translatio Boethii (recensiones duae), transla-
tio anonyma, Pseudo-Philoponi aliorumque scholia, specimina translationum recentiorum.
Edited by L. Minio-Paluello. Bruges/Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1962.
[Aristotle, 1963] Aristotle. De interpretatione. Translated by J.L. Ackrill. In Aristotle’s
Cate-
gories and De interpretatione, pp. 43–68 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1963).
[Aristotle, 1984a] Aristotle. Prior Analytics. Translated by A.J. Jenkinson. In [Barnes, 1984,
vol. 1, pp. 39-113].
[Aristotle, 1984b] Aristotle. Sophistical Refutations. Translated by W.A. Pickard-Cambridge. In
[Barnes, 1984, vol. 1, pp. 278-314].
[Barnes, 1984] J. Barnes, ed. The Complete Works of Aristotle. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1984. In 2 volumes.
[Biard, 1999] J. Biard, ed. Langage, sciences, philosophie au XIIe si`ecle. Acts de la table ronde
internationale organis´ee les 25 et 26 mars 1998 par le Centre d’histoire des sciences et des
philosophies arabes et m´edi´evales et le Programme international de coop´eration scientiﬁque
(France-Japon). Paris: J. Vrin, 1999.
[Bird, 1959] O. Bird. The logical interest of the topics seen in Abelard. The Modern Schoolman
37: 53–57, 1059.
[Bird, 1960] O. Bird. The formalizing of the topics in mediaeval logic. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic 1: 138–149, 1960.
[Bird, 1961] O. Bird. The re-discovery of the Topics. Mind 70: 534–539, 1961.
[Boethius, 1891] Boethius. De syllogismo categorico. Edited by J.P. Migne. In Patrologia latina
64, 793C–832A. Paris: Garnier, 1891.
[Boethius, 1990] Boethius. De topicis diﬀerentiis. Edited by D.Z. Nikitas. Corpus Philosopho-
rum Medii Aevi. Philosophi Byzantini 5. Athens/ Paris/ Brussels: Academy of Athens/ J.
Vrin/ ´Editions Ousia, 1990.
[Boler, 1963] J. F. Boler. Abailard and the Problem of Universals. Journal of the History of
Philosophy 1: 37-51, 1963.
[Brower, 1998] J. E. Brower. Abelard’s Theory of Relations: Reductionism and the Aristotelian
Tradition. Review of Metaphysics 51: 605-631, 1998.
[Brower, 2004] J. E. Brower. Trinity. In [Brower and Guilfoy, 2004, pp. 223–257].
[Brower and Guilfoy, 2004] J. E. Brower and Kevin Guilfoy, editors. The Cambridge Companion
to Abelard. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[D¸ambska, 1977] I. D¸ambska. La s´emiotique des “dictiones indeﬁnitae” dans la dialectique
d’Ab´elard. Cahiers de l’Institute du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin 21: 10-20, 1977.
[de Libera, 1981] A. de Libera. Ab´elard et le dictisme. Cahiers de la Revue de th´eologie et de
philosophie 6: 59-92, 1981.
[de Rijk, 1962] L.M. de Rijk. Logica modernorum:
A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic. I: On the Twelfth Century Theories of Fallacy. Assen: Van Gorcum, 1962.
[de Rijk, 1967a] L.M. de Rijk. Logica modernorum: A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic. II.I: The Origin and Early Development of the Theory of Supposition. Assen:
Van Gorcum, 1967.
[de Rijk, 1967b] L.M. de Rijk. Logica modernorum: A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic. II.II: The Origin and Early Development of the Theory of Supposition.
Texts and Indicies. Assen: Van Gorcum, 1967.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
153
[de Rijk, 1975] L.M. de Rijk. La signiﬁcation de la proposition (dictum propositionis) chez
Ab´elard. In Pierre Ab´elard, Pierre le V´en´erable. Les courants philosophiques, litt´eraires et
artistiques en Occident au milieu du XIIe si`ecle, pp. 547–555. Paris:
´Editions du CNRS,
1975.
[de Rijk, 1981a] L.M. de Rijk. Die Wirkung der neuplatonischen Semantik auf das mittelalter-
liche Denken ¨uber das Sein. In Jan Beckmann, ed., Sprache und Erkenntnis im Mittelalter
(=Miscellanea Mediaevalia 13), pp. 19-35. Akten des 6. internationalen Kongresses f¨ur mit-
telalterliche Philosophie der Soci´et´e internationale pour l’´etude de la philosophie m´edi´evale,
29 August–3 September 1977 im Bonn. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1981.
[de Rijk, 1981b] L.M. de Rijk. Abailard’s Semantic Views in Light of Later Developments. In
H.A.G. Braakhuis, C.H. Kneepkens and L.M. de Rijk, editors, English Logic and Seman-
tics from the End of the Twelfth Century to the Time of Ockham and Burleigh, pp. 1–58.
Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1981.
[de Rijk, 1985] L.M. de Rijk. Martin M. Tweedale on Abailard. Some Criticisms of a Fascinating
Venture. Vivarium 23: 81-97, 1985.
[de Rijk, 1986] L.M. de Rijk. Peter Abelard’s Semantics and His Doctrine of Being. Vivarium
24: 85-127, 1986.
[Ebbesen, 1979] S. Ebbesen. The Dead Man is Alive. Synthese 40: 43-70, 1979.
[Ebbesen, 2004] S. Ebbesen. Porretaneans on Propositions. In [Maire`u and Valente, 2004, pp.
129-139].
[Geach, 1965] P. Geach. Assertion. Philosophical Review 74: 449-465, 1965.
[Geyer, 1919-33] B. Geyer, editor. Peter Abaelards Philosophische Schriften: Die Logica “In-
gredientibus.” Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 21.1-4. M¨unster: As-
chendorﬀ, 1919-1933.
[Gracia, 1984] J. J. E. Gracia. Introduction to the Problem of Individuation in the Early Middle
Ages. Washington D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1984.
[Green-Pedersen, 1977] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Doctrine of Maxima Propositio and Locus
Diﬀerentia in Commentaries from the 12th Century on Boethius’ Topics. Studia Mediewisty-
czne 18: 125-163, 1977.
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages.
The Commentaries on Aristotle’s and Boethius’ ‘Topics.’ Munich and Vienna: Philosophia
Verlag, 1984.
[Green-Pedersen, 1987] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Topics in Medieval Logic. Argumentation 1:
407-417, 1987.
[Guilfoy, 2002] K. Guilfoy. Abelard’s Rejection of the Tarski Biconditional. Logical Analysis and
the History of Philosophy 5: 143-58, 2002.
[Guilfoy, 2004a] K. Guilfoy. Mind and Cognition. In [Brower and Guilfoy, 2004, pp. 200-222].
[Guilfoy, 2004b] K. Guilfoy. Peter Abelard’s Two Theories of the Proposition. In [Maier`u and
Valente, 2004, pp. 35-57].
[Iwakuma, 1987] Y. Iwakuma. Instantiae: An Introduction to a Twelfth Century Technique of
Argumentation. Argumentation 1: 437-453 (1897).
[Iwakuma, 1997] Y. Iwakuma. Enuntiabilia in Twelfth-Century Logic and Theology. In [Marmo,
1997, pp. 19-35].
[Iwakuma, 2004] Y. Iwakuma. Inﬂuence. In [Brower and Guilfoy, 2004, pp. 305-335].
[Iwakuma and Ebbesen, 1992] Y. Iwakuma and S. Ebbesen. Logico-Theological Schools from
the Second Half of the 12th Century: A List of Sources. Vivarium 30: 173-210, 1992.
[King, 2004] P. King. Metaphysics. In [Brower and Guilfoy, 2004, pp. 65-125].
[Jacobi, 1986] K. Jacobi. Peter Abelard’s Investigations into the Meaning and Functions of the
Speech Sign “Est.” In S. Knuuttila and J. Hintikka, editors, The Logic of Being, pp. 145–180.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1986.
[Jacobi, 1988] K. Jacobi. Logic (ii): the later twelfth century. In P. Dronke, editor, A History of
Twelfth-Century Western Philosophy, pp. 227-251. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1988.
[Jacobi, 2004] K. Jacobi. Philosophy of Language. In [Brower and Guilfoy, pp. 126-157].
[Jacobi et al., 1996] K. Jacobi, C. Strub and P. King. From intellectus verus/falsus to the dictum
propositionis: The Semantics of Peter Abelard and his Circle. Vivarium 34: 15-40, 1996.

154
Ian Wilks
[Jolivet, 1975] J. Jolivet. Lexicographie Ab´elardienne. In Pierre Ab´elard, Pierre le V´en´erable:
Les courants philosophiques, litt´eraires et artistiques en Occident au milieu du XIIe si`ecle,
pp. 532–543. Paris: CRNS, 1975.
[Jolivet, 1982] J. Jolivet. Arts du langage et th´eologie chez Ab´elard, 2nd edition. Paris: J. Vrin,
1982.
[Jolivet and de Libera, 1987] J. Jolivet and A. de Libera, editors,
Gilbert de Poitiers et ses
contemporains aux origins de la
logica modernorum. Actes du septi`eme symposium eu-
rop´een d’histoire de la logique et de la s´emantique m´edi´evales. Centre d’´etudes sup´erieures
de civilisation m´edi´evale de Poitiers, Poitiers 17-22 juin 1985. Naples: Bibliopolis, 1987.
[King, 2004] P. King. Metaphysics. In [Brower and Guilfoy, 2004, pp. 65-125].
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W.C. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962.
[Knuuttila, 1981] S. Knuuttila. Time and Modality in Scholasticism. In S. Knuuttila, editor,
Reforging the Great Chain of Being: Studies of the History of Modal Theories, pp. 163-257.
Dordrecht, Boston/London: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1981.
[Knuuttila, 1993] S. Knuuttila. Modalities in Medieval Philosophy. London and New York:
Routledge, 1993.
[Kretzmann, 1970] N. Kretzmann. Medieval Logicians on the Meaning of the Propositio. Journal
of Philosophy 67: 767-787, 1970.
[Kretzmann, 1982] N. Kretzmann. The Culmination if the Old Logic in Peter Abelard. In R.L.
Benson and G. Constable, editors, Renaissance and Renewal in the Twelfth Century, pp.
488–511. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982.
[Kretzmann et al., 1982] N. Kretzman, A. Kenny and J. Pinborg, editors. The Cambridge His-
tory of Later Medieval Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
[Lagerlund, 2000] H. Lagerlund. Modal Syllogistics in the Middle Ages. Leiden/Boston/Cologne:
Brill, 2000.
[Lagerlund, 2006] H. Lagerlund. Medieval Theories of the Syllogism. In E. N. Zalta, editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2006 edition). http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2006/entries/medieval-syllogism/
[Lenz, 2005] M. Lenz. Peculiar Perfection: Peter Abelard on Propositional Attitudes. Journal
of the History of Philosophy 43: 377-386, 2005.
[Lewis, 1987] N. T. Lewis. Determinate Truth in Abelard. Vivarium 25: 81-109, 1987.
[Maier`u and Valente, 2004] A. Maier`u and L. Valente, editors. Medieval Theories on Assertive
and Non-Assertive Language. Acts of the 14th European Symposium on Medieval Logic and
Semantics, Rome, June 11-15, 2002. Florence: Olschki, 2004.
[Malcolm, 1979] J. Malcolm. A Reconsideration of the Identity and Inherence Theories of the
Copula. Journal of the History of Philosophy 17: 383-400, 1979.
[Marenbon, 1991] J. Marenbon. Abelard’s Concept of Possibility. In B. Mojsisch and O. Pluta,
editors, Historia philosophiae medii aevi: Studien zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mitte-
lalters, pp. 595-609. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: B.R. Gr¨uner, 1991.
[Marenbon, 1997a] J. Marenbon. The Philosophy of Peter Abelard. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1997.
[Marenbon, 1997b] J. Marenbon. The Platonisms of Peter Abelard. In L. Benakis, editor,
N´eoplatonisme et philosophie m´edi´evale, pp. 109-129. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 1997.
[Marenbon, 1999] J. Marenbon. Ab´elard, la pr´edication et le verbe “ˆetre.” In [Biard, 1999, pp.
199-215].
[Marenbon, 2004] J. Marenbon. Dicta, Assertion and Speech Acts: Abelard and some Modern
Interpreters. In [Maier`u and Valente, 2004, pp. 59-80].
[Marenbon, 2006] J. Marenbon. The rediscovery of Peter Abelard’s philosophy. Journal of the
History of Philosophy, 44:331–351, 2006.
[Marmo, 1997] C. Marmo, editor. Vestigia, Imagines, Verba: Semiotics and Logic in Medieval
Theological Texts. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 1997.
[Martin, 1986] C. J. Martin. William’s Machine. Journal of Philosophy 83: 564-572, 1986.
[Martin, 1987a] C. J. Martin. Embarassing Arguments and Surprising Conclusions in the De-
velopment of Theories of the Conditional in the Twelfth Century. In [Jolivet and de Libera,
1987, pp. 377-400].
[Martin, 1987b] C. J. Martin. Something Amazing about the Peripatetic of Pallet: Abaelard’s
Development of Boethius’ Account of Conditional Propositions. Argumentation 1: 419-436,
1987.

Peter Abelard and His Contemporaries
155
[Martin, 1991] C. J. Martin. The Logic of Negation in Boethius. Phronesis 36: 277-304, 1991.
[Martin, 1992] C. J. Martin. The Logic of the Nominales, or, the Rise and Fall of the Impossible
Positio. Vivarium 30: 110-126, 1992.
[Martin, 2001] C. J. Martin. Abaelard on Modality: Some Possibilities and Some Puzzles. In T.
Buchheim, C. H. Kneepkens and K. Lorenz, editors, Potentialit¨at und Possibilit¨at: Modalaus-
sagen in der Geschichte der Metaphysik, pp. 97-124. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 2001.
[Martin, 2004a] C. J. Martin. Logic. In [Brower and Guilfoy, 2004, pp. 158-199].
[Martin, 2004b] C. J. Martin. Propositionality and Logic in the Ars Meliduna. In [Maier`u and
Valente, 2004, pp. 111–128].
[McCall, 1966] S. McCall. Connexive Implication. Journal of Symbolic Logic 31: 415-433, 1966.
[Mews, 1985] C. J. Mews. On dating the works of Peter Abelard. Archives de l’histoire doctrinale
et litt´eraire du Moyen ˆAge, 52: 73-134, 1985.
[Mews, 1987] C. J. Mews. Aspects of the Evolution of Peter Abelard’s Thought on Signiﬁcation
and Predication. In [Jolivet and de Libera, 1987, pp. 15-41].
[Mews, 1992] C. J. Mews. Nominalism and Theology before Abaelard: New Light on Roscelin
of Compi`egne. Vivarium 30: 4-33, 1992.
[Mews, 1995] C. J. Mews. Peter Abelard. Authors of the Middle Ages 5. Aldershot, U.K.: Vari-
orum, 1995.
[Normore, 1982] C. Normore. Future Contingents. In [Kretzmann et al., 1982, pp. 358-381].
[Nuchelmans, 1973] G. Nuchelmans. Theories of the Proposition. Ancient and Medieval Con-
ceptions of the Bearers of Truth and Falsity. Amsterdam/London: North-Holland, 1973.
[Pinborg, 1972] J. Pinborg. Logik und Semantik in Mittelalter. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt:
Frommann-Holzboog, 1972.
[Pinzani, 2003] R. Pinzani. The Logical Grammar of Abelard. Dordrecht/Boston/London:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.
[Porphyry, 1975] Porphyry. Isagoge. Translated by E. W. Warren. Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute
of Medieval Studies, 1975.
[Rosier, 1988] I. Rosier. ´Evolution des notions d’equivocatio et univocatio au XIIe si`ecle. In I.
Rosier, editor, L’Ambigu¨ıt´e, cinq ´etudes historiques, pp. 103–166. Lille: Presses universitaires
de Lille, 1988.
[Rosier-Catach, 1999] I. Rosier-Catach. La notion de translatio, le principe de compositionalit´e
et l’analyse de la pr´edication accidentelle chez Ab´elard. In [Biard, 1999, pp. 125-164].
[Rosier-Catach, 2003a] I. Rosier-Catach. Priscien, Bo`ece, les Glosulae in Priscianum, Ab´elard:
Les enjeux des discussions autour de la notion de consigniﬁcation. Histoire, Epistemologie,
Langage 25: 55-84, 2003.
[Rosier-Catach, 2003b] I. Rosier-Catach. Ab´elard et les grammairiens: sur le verbe substantif
et la pr´edication. Vivarium 41: 175-248, 2003.
[Rosier-Catach, 2004] I. Rosier-Catach. Les discussions sur le signiﬁ´e des propositions chez
Ab´elard et ses contemporains. In [Maier`u and Valente, 2004, pp. 1-34].
[Stump, 1978] E. Stump. Boethius’s
De topicis diﬀerentiis. Translated, with notes and essays
on the text. Ithaca/London: Cornell University Press, 1978.
[Stump, 1989] E. Stump. Dialectic and Its Place in the Development of Medieval Logic.
Ithaca/London: Cornell University Press, 1989.
[Thom, 2003] P. Thom. Medieval Modal Systems. Aldershot, England: Ashgate Publishing Lim-
ited, 2003.
[Thorp, forthcoming] J. Thorp. Aristotle on Splitting the Semantic Atom. Forthcoming in Ape-
iron.
[Tweedale, 1967] M. M. Tweedale. Abailard and Non-Things. Journal of the History of Philos-
ophy 5: 329-342, 1967.
[Tweedale, 1976] M. M. Tweedale. Abailard on Universals. Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, 1976.
[Tweedale, 1982] M. M. Tweedale. Abelard and the Culmination of the Old Logic. In [Kretz-
mann et al., pp. 143–157, 1982].
[Van den Eynde, 1962] D. Van den Eynde. Les ´ecrits perdus d’Ab´elard. Antonianum 37: 467-
480, 1962.
[Weidemann, 1981] H. Weidemann. Zur Semantik der Modalbegriﬀe bei Peter Abaelard. Medio-
evo 7: 1-40, 1981.

156
Ian Wilks
[Wilks, 1998a] I. Wilks. Abelard on Figurative Language and Transferred Meaning. In R. Da-
hood, editor, The Future of the Middle Ages and The Renaissance: Problems, Trends, and
Opportunities for Research. Arizona Studies in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance 2, pp.
171–186. Turnhout: Brepols, 1998.
[Wilks, 1998b] I. Wilks. Peter Abelard and the Metaphysics of Essential Predication. Journal
of the History of Philosophy 36: 365-385, 1998.
[Wilks, forthcoming] I. Wilks. Abelard on Context and Signiﬁcation. American Catholic Philo-
sophical Quarterly 81 (2007).

THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUPPOSITION
THEORY IN THE LATER 12th
THROUGH 14th CENTURIES
Terence Parsons
INTRODUCTION
Soon after the time of Anselm (1033–1109) and Peter Abelard (1079-1142), univer-
sities began to be founded. Logic was taught pretty much as it had been before the
year 500; it consisted of work from Aristotle’s Categories and On Interpretation,
and material from the ﬁrst few sections of his Prior Analytics. There was also ma-
terial from the Stoics on propositional logic. In the early 1100’s, western scholars
acquired Latin versions of additional work by Aristotle, including his Sophistical
Refutations, which dealt extensively with fallacies. This inspired original new work
by medieval scholars. Sometime in the 12th century a number of original texts sud-
denly appeared containing a fairly extensive group of interrelated theories, usually
employing the term ‘supposition’, which means pretty much what we mean by
“reference” or “standing for”. The texts were similar, expounding much the same
doctrines, and often employing the same or closely similar examples. Clearly there
was some common source, but the texts themselves contain no indication of the
origin of the doctrines, and the early history of the topic is unknown. This essay is
an account of some of the main theories of this tradition, often called Supposition
Theory. For want of space, the commonest known themes will be treated, without
extensive details of how the theories varied from author to author. The picture
given here is then a kind of ideal framework of a large tradition.
Supposition is a relation between an expression and what that expression stands
for when the expression appears in a proposition. Much of the theory deals in some
way with how changes in what a word supposits for aﬀects the truth value of the
sentence containing it. It often focuses on how changes in supposition can create
divergences in truth conditions, and it is applied in analyzing fallacies of ambiguity;
sometimes it is treated purely on its own, as a study of how language works.
Although the theory is not formulated as a recursive theory of truth conditions,
in many cases such a picture seems to lurk in the background. One central theme
is that authors often allude to structural considerations, such as scope, which we
now see as a byproduct of a recursive semantics.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

158
Terence Parsons
Medieval authors did not develop an artiﬁcial symbolism, as is the custom
today.1 Instead, they used Latin. But this was “regimented” Latin, which made
the language under consideration serve many of the purposes of modern logical
notation.
For example, it was assumed (or perhaps stipulated) that the left-
to-right ordering of signs corresponds to their semantic scope — so that ‘Every
donkey not an animal is’ means that no donkey is an animal, and ‘Every donkey
an animal not is’ means that for every donkey, there is an animal distinct from
it. This was not how ordinary users of Latin understood their language, but it
was very useful for logical theory. Also, because of the presence of inﬂections,
Latin has a fairly free word order, so that the direct object can easily precede the
subject in a sentence, as in ‘Every donkey some man owns’, giving it scope over
the subject. Since English does not allow this, we need an artiﬁcial symbolism to
permit various scope structures; medieval logicians already had this in their own
Latin (properly, and artiﬁcially, understood).
Because this is a work on supposition theory, some important and interesting
parts of medieval logic will not be addressed. Chief among these are the Insolubles
(paradoxes), Obligations (rules for specialized debate), Consequences (general the-
ory of inferences among arbitrary propositions), and Syncategoremata (individual
studies of special words, such as ‘both’, ‘ceases’, ‘only’). These will be touched
upon only as they bear on Supposition theory. Also, important earlier work, such
as that by Abelard, will not be covered.
This essay is based entirely on Latin manuscripts that have been edited and
published, and it is based mostly on those works among them that have been
translated into English. Each reference to a medieval work is to book, volume,
chapter, section, subsection, etc, followed by a page reference to the English trans-
lation. Unless otherwise stated, I use the English translations provided in the texts
cited.
1
CORE ELEMENTS OF MEDIEVAL LOGIC
Medieval Logic is built on a foundation of logical terminology, principles, and
methodology that was contained in the traditional liberal arts, in particular in
that part of the Trivium called Logic or Dialectic. This material is mostly from the
writings of Aristotle, including also the Stoics and Cicero, much of it as interpreted
by Boethius.2
This section is devoted to the fundamental parts of logic that
1However, authors were happy to use schematic letters, as Aristotle did in developing his
theory of the syllogism, with forms like “Some A belongs to every B”. Also, some post-medieval
writers experimented with the introduction of special signs whose function was to force special
scope readings. For example, ‘Every man is b animal’ has the truth conditions ‘For some animal,
every man is it’, because the sign ‘b’ gives the term following it wide scope. See [Ashworth, 1974,
IV.II.1] for a discussion of these special signs.
2The parts of Aristotle’s symbolic logic that were well-known around the year 1000 were his
On Interpretation, Categories, and material (often second-hand) from the ﬁrst several sections
of his Prior Analytics. This subject matter was later called the “Old Logic”, to distinguish it
from the “New Logic” which was based on several additional writings by Aristotle that became

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
159
medieval logicians accepted as the basis of their work.
I begin with an account of the forms of propositions that constitute the subject
matter of Aristotle’s symbolic logic. In keeping with medieval terminology, I use
the term ‘proposition’ to refer to what we today would call a meaningful sentence.
It stands for a sentence, not for an abstract meaning expressed by a sentence which
is named by a that-clause. So ‘Snow is white’ and ‘Schnee ist weiss’ are diﬀerent
propositions.3
1.1
Categorical Propositions
The simplest form of a proposition is a categorical proposition. In fundamental
cases this consists of two nouns (the “subject” and the “predicate”) separated
by the copula (is), with perhaps some other signs (often quantiﬁer words) which
“modify” the nouns. Examples are:
Socrates — is — [an] animal.
Every animal — is — [a] donkey.
Some animal — is — [a] donkey.
in which the subjects and predicates are ‘Socrates’, ‘animal’ and ‘donkey’. The
words ‘every’ and ‘some’ modify the subject and predicate terms, but they are
not parts of the subject or predicate. The indeﬁnite article ‘a/an’ is enclosed in
brackets since both Latin and Greek lack indeﬁnite articles; in the original texts
there is nothing before the noun. The words ‘Socrates’, ‘animal’ and ‘donkey’ are
“categorematic”; these are the words that stand for individual things, ‘Socrates’
for the man Socrates, ‘animal’ for each and every animal, and ‘donkey’ for each
and every donkey. The other words — the quantiﬁer signs and the copula — are
called “syncategorematic” (meaning “with-categorematic”), since they occur with
(and aﬀect) the categorematic terms.
The examples given above are aﬃrmative. If a ‘not’ (which modiﬁes the copula)
or a ‘no’ is added, one gets a negative categorical proposition:
Socrates — is not — [an] animal.
No animal — is — [a] donkey.
Some animal — is not — [a] donkey.
‘Not’ and ‘no’ are syncategorematic signs.
Peter of Spain lays out the kinds of non-modal categorical proposition and their
ingredients [Peter of Spain TI.8-9 (4)]:
available later.
3Opinions diﬀered on whether there are also mind-independent entities corresponding to
propositions.
For many medievals, propositions are tokens, not types, and this is important
in certain cases, such as addressing semantic paradoxes, where two tokens of the same type
might diﬀer in truth value. But for the most part nothing would be changed in the theory if
propositions were types.

160
Terence Parsons
“Some categorical propositions are universal, some particular, some
indeﬁnite, and some singular.
A universal proposition is that in which a common term determined
by a universal sign is subject, as ‘every man runs’; or, a universal
proposition is that in which something is signiﬁed to be in all or none.
A common term is what is apt by nature to be predicated of many,
‘man’ of Socrates and Plato and of each and every other man. These
are universal signs: ‘every’, ‘no’, ‘nothing’, ‘any’, ‘either’, ‘neither’,
and similars.
A particular proposition is that in which a common term deter-
mined by a particular sign is subject, as ‘some man runs’. These are
particular signs: ‘some’, ‘a certain’, ‘the one’, ‘the other’, and simi-
lars.
An indeﬁnite proposition is that in which a common term without
a sign is subject, as ‘[a] man runs’.
A singular proposition is that in which a singular term or a common
term joined with a demonstrative pronoun is subject, as ‘Socrates runs’
or ‘this man runs’; . . .
A singular term is what is apt by nature to be predicated of one
alone.4
Some categorical propositions are aﬃrmative, some negative. An af-
ﬁrmative is that in which the predicate is aﬃrmed of the subject, as
‘A man runs’. A negative is one in which the predicate is removed
from the subject, as ‘A man does not run’.”
The theory is primarily applied to eight forms of propositions, classiﬁed with
respect to Quantity (Universal, Particular, Indeﬁnite, Singular) and Quality (Af-
ﬁrmative, Negative). Some examples are:
AFFIRMATIVE
NEGATIVE
SINGULAR
Socrates is [an] animal
Socrates is not [an] animal
UNIVERSAL
Every animal is [a] donkey
No animal is [a] donkey
PARTICULAR
Some animal is [a] donkey
Some animal is not [a] donkey
INDEFINITE
[An] animal is [a] donkey
[An] animal is not [a] donkey
I call these eight forms “standard” categorical propositions, to distinguish them
from extended forms to be discussed later.
4Medieval authors also call singular terms ‘discrete’ terms.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
161
1.2
Truth conditions for categorical propositions
Singular, Universal, and Particular categorical propositions are interpreted as you
expect from their wording, with a reﬁnement for empty terms.
The following
explanations are meant to be a theory-neutral statement of when certain forms of
propositions are true, and when false.
Singular categorical propositions If Socrates exists now, then the proposition
‘Socrates is an animal’ is true if Socrates is now an animal and false if he is not,
and vice versa for the negative ‘Socrates is not an animal’. Since Socrates does
not exist now, the aﬃrmative form is false and the negative is true.
For the following, assume temporarily that the subject term of the proposition
is not empty. Then:
Universal categorical propositions The universal aﬃrmative ‘Every animal is
a donkey’ is true now if all currently existing animals are now donkeys. Paraphras-
ing Aristotle’s words [Prior Analytics I.1.], the proposition is true when no animal
can be found of which ‘donkey’ cannot be asserted. The universal negative has
the obvious truth conditions; it is true when there is nothing of which the subject
and predicate are both true.
Particular categorical propositions The particular aﬃrmative ‘Some animal
is a donkey’ is true now if there is now at least one animal which is now a donkey;
otherwise false. The particular negative ‘Some animal is not a donkey’ is true now
if there is now at least one animal which is not now a donkey; otherwise it is false.
Indeﬁnite categorical propositions Indeﬁnite propositions are ones that we
would naturally translate using an indeﬁnite article: ‘A donkey is running’, ‘A
donkey is not running’.
These propositions have unclear truth conditions.
It
is usually said that they should be treated as if they are synonymous with the
corresponding particular propositions, and this is the common practice.
As a
result, ‘A donkey is running’ and ‘A donkey is not running’ are not contradictories;
they are related as ‘Some donkey is running’ is to ‘Some donkey is not running’.
I’ll ignore indeﬁnites in all discussion below.
Except for a few theorists who deal with semantic paradoxes, it is assumed that
every well-formed categorical proposition is either true or false (and not both).
1.3
Oppositions
Aristotle devoted considerable study to the four universal and particular forms of
proposition just given. These bear certain logical relations to one another, later
called relations of “opposition”. These relations came to be diagrammed in what is
today called the “Square of Opposition”. A version of the square used in medieval
times is:

162
Terence Parsons
Every A is B
Some A is B
Some A is not B
No A is B
contraries
subcontraries
subalternates
subalternates
The universal aﬃrmative and universal negative proposition at the top are con-
traries:
The law of contraries is such that if one is true, the other is false,
but not conversely; for it is possible for both to be false in contingent
matter5, as ‘every man is white — no man is white’. . . . [Peter of
Spain TI.14 (7)]
The particular aﬃrmative and particular negative propositions at the bottom are
subcontraries:
The law of subcontraries is such that if one is false, the other is true,
but not conversely; for it is possible for both to be true in contingent
matter. . . . [Ibid]
Diagonally opposite propositions are contradictories:
The law of contradictories is such that if one is true, the other is
false, and conversely; for in no matter is it possible for both to be true,
or [both to be] false. [Ibid]
Finally, universal and particular aﬃrmative propositions are related by subalter-
nation, as are the universal and particular negatives:
The law of subalternations is such that if the universal is true, the
particular is true, but not conversely. . . And if the particular is false,
its universal is false, but not conversely. [Ibid]
1.4
Problems with Empty Terms
There are two problems with the relations that Peter gives above. Both have to
do with the truth values of propositions with empty subject terms.
5A proposition is in contingent matter if the terms in the proposition are not modally related
to one another. An example of a proposition in contingent matter is ‘Some donkey is grey’. The
proposition ‘Some equilateral is equiangular’ is a proposition that is not in contingent matter.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
163
1.4.1
Universal Aﬃrmatives
The ﬁrst problem concerns universal aﬃrmative propositions when the subject
term is empty; for example, ‘Every donkey is a mammal’ when there are no don-
keys. Suppose that the term ‘A’ is empty. Then ‘Some A is B’ is clearly false.
So according to the principles embodied in the Square, ‘No A is B’ is its contra-
dictory, and is thus true. So, by the law of contraries, the universal proposition
‘Every A is B’ must be false.
This goes against the modern custom whereby
a universal aﬃrmative proposition with an empty subject term is trivially true.
This is because the canonical translation of ‘Every A is B’ into symbolic logic is
‘∀x(Ax →Bx)’, which is true when ‘A’ is empty.
Modern students often balk at the proposal that universal aﬃrmatives are true
when their subject terms are empty. In response they may be told
This is a convention which is useful in logic — it makes for theoreti-
cal simplicity. Ordinary usage is unclear regarding such propositions
with empty subjects. If you think that universal aﬃrmatives are false
when their subjects are empty, then you may simply represent them
by adding a condition: translate them as ‘∃xAx&∀x(Ax →Bx)’.
It is apparent that one can also adopt the opposite convention that universal
aﬃrmatives are false when their subject term is empty.
This is a convention that is convenient for doing logic — it makes for
theoretical simplicity (see below). If you want to represent ordinary
usage diﬀerently, then just represent ‘Every A is B’ using ‘Every A is
B or no A is A’.
1.4.2
Particular Negatives
The other problem with the traditional Square of Opposition concerns particular
negatives. Suppose that the term ‘A’ is empty. Then ‘Some A is B’ is false. So
according to the principles embodied in the Square, ‘No A is B’ is its contradictory,
and is thus true. So, by the principle of subalternation, ‘Some A is not B’ is also
true. But to modern ears, ‘Some A is not B’ should be false if ‘A’ is empty. After
all, ‘some A’, has scope over the rest of the proposition. What is wrong?
This result is built into the diagram in other ways as well. Again, suppose that
‘A’ is empty, so that ‘Some A is B’ is false. Then its subcontrary, ‘Some A is not
B’ must be true. Or suppose that ‘Some A is B’ is false; then its superalternate
‘Every A is B’ is also false; so its contradictory, ‘Some A is not B’ is again true.
Some authors did not notice this result, but many did. Almost all of them held
that this is the right result:6 if ‘A’ is empty, then ‘Some A is not B’ is indeed
6Abelard thought that this is wrong; he held that the particular negative form should be read
‘Not every A is B’ instead of ‘Some A is not B’. He blamed the latter “misreading” on Boethius,
who wrote the latter form instead of the former, which Aristotle had used. But Aristotle [PA
27a36] uses both forms interchangeably.

164
Terence Parsons
true. This may not accord well with ordinary speakers of Latin, but logicians
insisted that this was the right way to read the proposition. This is part of the
regimentation that was mentioned earlier. It may be defended in the way that any
regimentation is defended, by claiming that it is useful for logical purposes, even
if it does not conform well to ordinary usage.
Of course, this proposal will not work unless other parts of logic are formulated
with this in mind. For example, we do not want to include the validity of ‘Some
A is not B ∴Some A is’. This inference, of course, is not considered valid.
I said that these proposals make for theoretical simplicity, but I didn’t say how.
One simplicity is that it makes it possible to maintain these principles:
Aﬃrmative categorical propositions are false when any of their main
terms are empty.
Negative categorical propositions are true when any of their main terms
are empty.
These principles hold for singular propositions and for the forms of categorical
propositions we have discussed; they will hold without exception, even when cat-
egorical propositions are expanded far beyond the forms that Aristotle discussed.
1.5
Conversions
The square of opposition deals with logical relations among propositions which
have the same subject and same predicate. There are also other relations. If a
proposition is generated from another by interchanging the original subject and
predicate, those propositions are candidates for the logical relation of “conver-
sion”:7
Simple conversion: A proposition is said to convert simply if it entails the result
of interchanging its subject and predicate terms. Universal Negative and Particular
Aﬃrmative propositions convert simply, resulting in equivalent propositions:
‘No A is B’ converts simply to ‘No B is A’
‘Some A is B’ converts simply to ‘Some B is A’.
Conversion per Accidens (Accidental conversion): Whereas simple conversion
produces a proposition equivalent to the original, conversion per accidens is not
symmetric. A universal proposition may be converted per accidens: you inter-
change its subject and predicate terms and change the universal sign to a partic-
ular sign (adding a negation, if necessary, to preserve quality). This inference is
not reversible.
7The conversion laws stated below were proved by Aristotle in Prior Analytics I.2. They
appear (usually without proof) in every major logic text.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
165
‘Every A is B’ converts per accidens to ‘Some B is A’
‘No A is B’ converts per accidens to ‘Some B is not A’.8
Since the universal changes to a particular, this form of conversion is sometimes
called “conversion by limitation”.9
1.6
Syllogisms
Syllogisms form the heart of what is commonly called Aristotelian logic. A syllo-
gism is a special form of argument containing two premises and a conclusion, each
of which is a standard form categorical proposition. There are three terms; one of
them, the “middle” term, occurs once in each premise. Each of the other terms
occurs once in a premise and once in the conclusion. An example of a syllogism is
any argument having the following pattern:
Every M is P
Some M is S
∴
Some S is P
The ﬁrst premise is called the major premise and the second is called the minor.
These individual patterns are called “moods”, and they are classiﬁed into three
“ﬁgures”. (The ﬁrst ﬁgure includes moods in which the middle term occurs as
subject in one premise and predicate in the other; in the second ﬁgure the middle
term is predicate in both, and in the third ﬁgure it is the subject in both.) Aristotle
discusses some of the ﬁrst ﬁgure moods as well as all of the second and third ﬁgure
moods in chapters 4-6 of Prior Analytics I, and he discusses the remaining ﬁrst
ﬁgure moods in chapter 7, for a total of 19 good moods. There are ﬁve additional
valid moods that neither he nor medieval authors mention; these are moods which
conclude with a particular proposition when its super-alternate universal version
is also provable from the same premises.10 An example of such a mood is:
Every A is B
Every C is A
∴
Some C is B
All 24 valid moods are included in the following table.11
8Cf. Peter of Spain, TI.15, (8). Many authors (including Aristotle) did not mention converting
the Universal Negative in this way. This conversion is a consequence of other logical relations
assumed in the square.
9An additional mode of conversion — conversion by contraposition — is discussed in section
2.5.
10Arnauld & Nicole [1662, 142]: “. . . people have been satisﬁed with classifying syllogisms
only in terms of the nobler conclusion, which is the general. Accordingly they have not counted
as a separate type of syllogism the one in which only a particular conclusion is drawn when a
general conclusion is warranted.”
11Some authors say that Aristotle has only 14 valid moods; these are the ones he discussed
explicitly in chapters 4-6 of the Prior Analytics. Five more are sketched in chapter 7. Medieval
authors included all 19.
Aristotle also provides counterexamples for all invalid moods, for a
complete case by case coverage of all possible syllogisms.

166
Terence Parsons
All Valid Categorical Syllogisms
Figure 1 (ch 4)
Fig 1: indirect
(ch 7)
Figure 2 (ch 5)
Figure 3 (ch 6)
Barbara (26a1)
Every M is P
Every S is M
Every S is P
Baralipton
Every M is S
Every P is M
Some S is P
Cesare (27a5)
No P is M
Every S is M
No S is P
Darapti (28a18)
Every M is P
Every M is S
Some S is P
Celantes
(29a26)
Felapto
(28a27∗)
Every M is P
Every S is M
Some S is P
No M is S
Every P is M
No S is P
No P is M
Every S is M
Some S is not P
No M is P
Every M is S
Some S is not P
Celarent (26a3)
Camestres
(27a8)
Disamis (28b7)
No M is P
Every S is M
No S is P
No M is S
Every P is M
Some S is not P
Every P is M
No S is M
No S is P
Some M is P
Every M is S
Some S is P
Dabitis (29a26)
Datisi (28b12∗)
No M is P
Every S is M
Some S is not P
Every M is S
Some P is M
Some S is P
Every P is M
No S is M
Some S is not P
Every M is P
Some M is S
Some S is P
Darii (26a23)
Every M is P
Some S is M
Some S is P
Fapesmo
(29a22)
Every M is S
No P is M
Some S is not P
Festino (27a31)
No P is M
Some S is M
Some S is not P
Bocardo
(28b18∗)
Some M is not P
Every M is S
Some S is not P
Ferio (26a25)
No M is P
Some S is M
Some S is not P
Frisesomorum
(29a22)
Some M is S
No P is M
Some S is not P
Barocho (27a36)
Every P is M
Some S is not M
Some S is not P
Ferison (28b33)
No M is P
Some M is S
Some S is not P
The unmentioned moods lack names. Chapter numbers indicate the chapter of Prior
Analytics I in which Aristotle discusses the ﬁgure.
Speciﬁc reference codes indicate
where in the chapter he discusses the mood. Transposing the premises of the listed forms
also yields good syllogisms; the transposed forms are not treated as independent moods.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
167
The names of the individual moods are from Peter of Spain. [Peter of Spain
TIV.13 (46)] These names are post-Aristotelian inventions; they are cleverly de-
vised so as to encode useful logical information. Medieval students were expected
to memorize a verse consisting of the names:
Barbara Celarent Darii Ferio Baralipton
Celantes Dabitis Fapesmo Frisesomorum.
Cesare Cambestres Festino Barocho Darapti.
Felapto Disamis Datisi Bocardo Ferison.
The names contain codes which show how to mimic Aristotle’s reduction of all
moods to the ﬁrst ﬁgure direct modes.12
12Here are Peter’s instructions for doing this (translation from [Kretzman and Stump, pp.
224–25 and 222]):
“In these four verses there are nineteen words that are associated with the nineteen
moods of the three ﬁgures . . .
“It is important to know that the vowels A, E, I, and O stand for the four types
of propositions. The vowel A stands for a universal aﬃrmative; E for a universal
negative; I for a particular aﬃrmative; and O for a particular negative.
“Again, there are three syllables in each word (if there is any more, it is superﬂuous,
except for M, as will be clear later).
The ﬁrst of these three syllables stands
for the major proposition of the syllogism; the second stands for the minor; the
third for the conclusion.
For example, the ﬁrst word — Barbara — has three
syllables, in each of which A is used; the three occurrences of A signify that the
ﬁrst mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure consists of two universal aﬃrmative premises resulting
in a universal aﬃrmative conclusion. (The vowels used in the other words should
also be understood in this way.)
“Again, it is important to know that the ﬁrst four words of the ﬁrst verse and all
the other subsequent words begin with these consonants: B, C, D, and F. In this
way we are given to understand that all the moods that a word beginning with B
stands for should be reduced to the ﬁrst mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure; all the moods
signiﬁed by a word beginning with C, to the second mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure; D, to
the third mood; F, to the fourth.
“Again, where S is used in these words, it signiﬁes that the proposition that the
immediately preceding vowel stands for requires simple conversion. And P signiﬁes
that the proposition requires conversion per accidens. And where M is used, it sig-
niﬁes that the premises require transposition. (Transposition is making the major
premise the minor premise, and vice versa.) And where C is used [after a vowel]
it signiﬁes that the mood that word stands for should be proved by reduction per
impossibile.
“The fourth mood [of the second ﬁgure] consists of a universal aﬃrmative and
a particular negative premise, resulting in a particular negative conclusion.
For
example [BAROCHO],
Every man is an animal;
some stone is not an animal;
therefore, some stone is not a man.
And this is reduced to the ﬁrst mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure [BARBARA] by a reduction
per impossibile.
[Reduction per impossibile]

168
Terence Parsons
1.7
Quantifying the Predicate Term; Equipollences
The above is mostly Aristotle’s logic with some of its consequences spelled out.
Some medieval authors in the 1200’s expanded the stock of Aristotle’s categorical
propositions by allowing quantiﬁer signs to combine with predicate terms, and
allowing not’s to occur more widely, so as to produce propositions like ‘No A is
not every B’, or ‘Not every A some B is not’. I call Aristotle’s forms ‘standard
Aristotelian categorical propositions’, and I call the expanded forms ‘categorical
propositions’. The forms of categorical propositions will be further extended in
section 3.
Along with these expanded forms, writers added a series of equipollences —
logically equivalent pairs of propositions that diﬀer only in having one part replaced
by an “equivalent” part. These are like contemporary rules of quantiﬁer exchange,
such as the equivalence of ‘∀x’ with ‘∼∃x ∼’.
“To reduce [a syllogism] per impossibile is to infer the opposite of one of the premises
from the opposite of the conclusion together with the other premise. For suppose
we take the opposite of the conclusion of this fourth mood (namely, ‘Every stone
is a man’) together with the major premise and construct a syllogism in the ﬁrst
mood of the ﬁrst ﬁgure in this way:
Every man is an animal;
every stone is a man;
therefore, every stone is an animal.
“This conclusion is the opposite of the minor premise of the fourth mood. And this
is what it is to prove something [by reduction] per impossibile.”
These instructions work perfectly provided that conversion by limitation is used in the correct
order; from particular to universal in premises, and from particular to universal in conclusions.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
169
Sherwood’s Equipollences:13 Replacing a phrase below by another
on the same line yields a logically equivalent proposition:14
every A
no A not
not some A not
no A
not some A
every A not
some A not
no A
not every A not
some A not
not no A not
not every A
An example is the equivalence of the old form ‘No A is B’ with the new form
‘Every A is not B’. It is also assumed that an unquantiﬁed predicate term ‘B’ is
equivalent to the particular ‘some B’, so the old form ‘Some A is B’ is equivalent
to ‘Some A is some B’, which is equipollent to ‘Some A is not no B’. Likewise,
‘No A is every B’ is equivalent to ‘Every A is not every B’ and also to ‘Every A
some B is not’.
Notice that application of any of these equipollences leaves an aﬃrmative propo-
sition aﬃrmative, and a negative proposition negative. (Suppose that ‘no’ and
‘not’ are (the only) negative signs. A proposition is aﬃrmative if it contains no
negative signs or an even number of negative signs; otherwise it is negative.) They
thus preserve the principle that aﬃrmatives with empty main terms are false, and
negatives with empty main terms are true.
Suppose that we take Aristotle’s original list of four (non-singular; non-indeﬁnite)
categorical propositions and add the quantiﬁer sign ‘every’ to the predicate. This
gives us a list of eight forms:
13This little chart is from William Sherwood I.19. In applications to categorical propositions
the actual form would have the normal Latin word order ‘not is’ instead of the English order ‘is
not’. It is possible to be precise about what propositions are included in this stock of what I am
calling basic categorical propositions. First, the following rules produce categorical propositions
whose copula occurs at the end of the proposition. (These are meaningful in Latin.):
1. A denoting phrase consists of a quantiﬁer sign (‘every’, ‘some’, ‘a(n)’ or ‘no’) followed by
a common noun.
2. ‘is’ is a partial categorical proposition
3. If φ is a partial categorical proposition with zero or one denoting phrases in it, and if δ is
a denoting phrase, then δ followed by φ is a partial categorical proposition
4. If φ is a partial categorical proposition, so is ‘not φ’.
5. A categorical proposition is any partial categorical proposition with two denoting phrases.
Examples: ‘is’ ⇒‘no donkey is’ ⇒‘some animal no donkey is’.
‘is’ ⇒‘some donkey is’ ⇒‘not some donkey is’ ⇒‘an animal not some donkey is’
To put the verb in its more natural order in the middle:
If φ is a categorical proposition which ends with ‘is’, if there is a denoting phrase
immediately to its left, then they may be permuted
Example: ‘some animal not no donkey is’ ⇒‘some animal not is no donkey’
(For English readers, change the Latin word order ‘not is’ to ‘isn’t’: ⇒‘some animal isn’t no
donkey.)
14In Latin the negation naturally precedes the verb.
For applying these equipollences the
negation coming before the verb can be treated as if it came after, so that ‘No A not is some
B’ can be treated as ‘No A is-not some B’ ≈‘No A is no B’. A similar provision applies to
English, where negation follows the copula ‘is’.

170
Terence Parsons
Every A is B
Every A is every B
No A is B
No A is every B
Some A is B
Some A is every B
Some A is not B
Some A is not every B
Using William’s equipollences together with double negation, every proposition in
the expanded notation is equivalent to one of these eight forms.
Notice that throughout this extension of the scope of what counts as a categor-
ical proposition the quantiﬁer signs have not been supplemented; they are ‘every’,
‘no’, and ‘some’, with the indeﬁnite construction (which uses the indeﬁnite article
in English, and nothing at all in Latin) treated as if it is equivalent to one with
‘some’.
The semantics of these propositions is straightforward. We can view a categori-
cal proposition in this form as consisting of the copula preceded by some denoting
phrases and some negations, each of which has scope over what follows it. This
can easily be given a logical form that is familiar to us by ﬂanking the verb with
variables, supposing that the preceding denoting phrases bind these variables. Ex-
amples:
Every donkey is an animal ⇒
(Every donkey x) (an animal y) x is y
Some donkey is not an animal ⇒
(Some donkey x) not (an animal y) x is y
Some donkey an animal is not ⇒
(Some donkey x) (an animal y) not x is y
No donkey is not an animal ⇒
(No donkey x) not (an animal y) x is y
No animal is not every donkey ⇒
(No animal x) not (every donkey y) x is y
It is not diﬃcult to formulate a modern semantical theory that would apply to
the forms that occur on the last lines of these examples, provided that we keep
in mind that an aﬃrmative proposition is false when any of its main terms are
empty, and a negative one is true.15
1.8
Molecular Propositions
Certain combinations of categorical propositions are called hypothetical proposi-
tions; these include combinations that we call molecular. Their development came
15It is often suggested that all the Aristotelian forms can be symbolized in the monadic pred-
icate calculus. The expansions mentioned here require the use of monadic predicate logic with
identity, and require using quantiﬁers within the scopes of other quantiﬁers.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
171
from the Stoics, not from Aristotle; Boethius wrote about them, and they formed
a standard part of the curriculum. They typically included six types:
Conjunctions
Disjunctions
Conditionals
Causals
Temporal Propositions
Locational Propositions
Conjunctions and disjunctions are just what one expects; they are combinations of
propositions made with ‘and’ (et) and ‘or’ (vel), or similar words. A conjunction
is true iﬀboth of its conjuncts are true, and false if either or both are false; a
disjunction is true iﬀeither or both of its disjuncts are true, and false if both
disjuncts are false. So they were given modern truth conditions, even including
the fact that ‘or’ was usually treated inclusively.16
Conditionals are made with ‘if’ (si), or equivalent words. A conditional was
usually taken to be true if it is necessary that the antecedent not be true without
the consequent also being true.17 This makes the truth of a conditional equivalent
to the goodness of the related consequence, as some writers observed.18
Some
authors also discuss “ut nunc” (as of now) conditionals, which are equivalent to
our material implication.19 But the default meaning of a conditional is that it is
true if it is impossible for the antecedent to be true and the consequent false.
Causal propositions are those made by linking two propositions with ’because’
(quia) or an equivalent word. Such a causal proposition is true if the one proposi-
tion causes the other. However, ‘cause’ must not be read here as eﬃcient causation;
it is more like a version of ‘because’. An example of such a proposition is ‘Because
Socrates is a man, Socrates is an animal’. [Ockham SL II.34]
A temporal proposition is made from smaller propositions using ‘while’ or ’when’
(dum, quando), and a locational proposition is one using ‘where’ (ubi). The former
is said to be true if both component propositions are true for the same time. The
latter is true if the location of the event mentioned in the one proposition is the
same as that in the other. These, along with causal propositions, employ notions
that are not part of the basic theory discussed here.
16Sherwood SW XXI.1 (141) holds that “. . . ‘or’ is taken sometimes as a disjunctive and
at other times as a subdisjunctive. In the ﬁrst case it indicates that one is true and the other is
false; in the second case it indicates solely that one is true while touching on nothing regarding
the other part.” Later, Paul of Venice LP I.14 (132) clearly gives inclusive truth conditions:
“For the truth of an aﬃrmative disjunctive it is required and it suﬃces that one of the parts is
true; e.g. ‘you are a man or you are a donkey’. For the falsity of an aﬃrmative disjunctive it is
required that both parts be false; e.g., ‘you are running or no stick is standing in the corner’.”
17Ockham SL II.31; Peter of Spain TI.17. Sherwood IL I.18 gives truth conditions that are
not clearly modal: “whenever the antecedent is [true], the consequent is [true].”
18Ockham ibid.
19Cf Buridan TC I.4.7-7.12.
He noted, e.g., that “if the antecedent is false, though not
impossible, the consequence is acceptable ut nunc”.

172
Terence Parsons
In modern logic, molecular propositions are thought of as fundamental, since
they are used to form general statements, such as
Every A is B
∀x[Ax →Bx]
Some A is B
∃x[Ax&Bx]
Since connectives are not used to analyze categorical propositions in this way in
medieval logic, hypothetical propositions usually receive very little discussion after
Abelard.
1.9
Validity and Good Consequences
I have been speaking of “valid” moods of syllogism, whereas Aristotle merely
divided potential syllogisms into syllogisms (or “deductions”) versus patterns that
aren’t syllogisms. His criterion for a pattern being a syllogism is:
a discourse in which, certain things being stated, something other than
what is stated follows of necessity from their being so.
I mean by
the last phrase that it follows because of them, and by this, that no
further term is required from without in order to make the consequence
necessary.20
It is unclear what¸ if anything, the second proposition adds to the ﬁrst.21 Much
medieval logical theory after Abelard seems based on the assumption that the
second proposition is merely explanatory, in that the criterion for a “good conse-
quence” is simply that the conclusion follows of necessity from the premises. This
is a modal notion of goodness of consequence. There are thus good consequences
that are not formal, because of non-formal modality, such as:
Some donkey is grey
∴Some animal is grey
The conclusion follows of necessity since it is necessary that any donkey be an
animal. These examples were taken very seriously.
The word ‘consequence’ was used to cover two diﬀerent notions.
One is an
argument (where a good argument is one in which the conclusion follows necessarily
from the premises). Another is a conditional proposition (which is good iﬀit itself
is necessary).
There is much debate in the secondary literature over whether
Aristotle used arguments or conditionals. I have nothing to say on this. It is
clear however that medieval writers tend to use either notion, usually without
bothering to distinguish them. For example, the following wordings tend to be
used interchangeably:
20Aristotle, Prior Analytics I.1.
21The assumption that something more is needed is crucial to Aristotle’s discussion of the
fallacies of begging the question and of non-cause as cause in his Sophistical Refutations 168b22-
26. But in most cases, such as his reduction of all categorical syllogisms to the ﬁrst ﬁgure, he
ignores this consideration.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
173
If A and B then C
A, B; therefore C
Since the goodness of an argument and the goodness of the related conditional are
equivalent, it doesn’t matter which you mean.
The Aristotelian/Medieval modal notion of goodness of argument is purely
modal, and it does not appeal to the notion of logical form. However, Aristo-
tle’s principles of conversion and his theory of syllogisms look like classiﬁcations
of good and bad arguments in terms of form. Some later medievals (e.g. [Buridan
TC 1.4.1]) introduced the notion of a formally good consequence; this is a good
consequence which remains good no matter how we alter its terms (if we do so
uniformly). In practice, the contemporary non-modal notion of formal validity and
the medieval notion of formal goodness coincide in how they classify arguments
that themselves do not contain modal terms. Because it is cumbersome to speak
of formally modally good arguments instead of valid ones, I’ll just use the modern
term ‘valid’ as if this is what medieval authors are discussing. I think that this
will do no harm, but the reader should be alert for such a possibility.
1.10
Theory of Consequences
The consequence relation itself was well studied in the medieval period. Some
very interesting work was done by Abelard on a kind of relevance logic, but the
period after that was dominated by what we now call classical logic. Principles
are endorsed such as [Buridan TC I]:
From a contradiction anything follows.
A necessary proposition follows from anything.
If A is a consequence of B, and B of C, then A is a consequence of C.
Nothing impossible follows from what is possible.
Nothing false follows from what is true.
If ‘A, B therefore C’ is a good consequence, and if B is necessary, then
‘A therefore C’ is a good consequence.
2
EXTENDING CATEGORICAL PROPOSITIONS
In contemporary logic, if we wish our theory of validity to apply to sentences not
already explicitly treated, we extend the scope of the theory either by showing
how new sentences can be symbolized using the resources of the existing theory,
or we add new forms (such as modal operators) to the logical notation and explain
how their semantics is to work. Since the formal notation of medieval logic is
regimented Latin, the task here is to use regimented Latin as an equivalent to
non-regimented propositions, or to expand the regimented Latin. Works on logic
devote a substantial amount of discussion to this enterprise.
The categorical propositions delimited in section 1 all have the copula ‘is’ as
their verb, and the subject and predicate terms are singular or common nouns.

174
Terence Parsons
The purpose of this section is to say how to expand the class of categorical propo-
sitions. We need to say how to treat verbs other than the copula, and subjects
and predicates that are adjectives, or participles, or that are modiﬁed by relative
clauses, or that are possessives, and so on.
2.1
Adjectives
Aristotelian logic is awkward when applied to terms that are adjectives. If you
apply simple conversion to:
Some donkey is grey
you get
Some grey is [a] donkey
which is ungrammatical; a quantiﬁer word like ‘some’ must combine with a noun,
not with an adjective. This problem has a solution in Latin, in which it is possible
to “substantivate” an adjective — which is to use it as a common noun with a
neuter gender. The sentence:
Every woman is tall
contains the adjective ‘tall’ which, in Latin, would bear a singular nominative
feminine inﬂection to agree with ‘woman’. But in this sentence:
Every tall is grey
(meaning ‘Every tall thing is grey’.)
it is substantivated; it bears a singular nominative neuter inﬂection of its own,
and it is grammatically a noun. So it can be treated as part of the regimented
notation as already understood. (In this example ‘grey’ is still an adjective; it has
an adjectival inﬂection that agrees with the gender and number of ‘tall’.)
What does such a substantivated adjective supposit for? The obvious option is
that substantivated ‘tall’ supposits (with respect to a time) for each thing which
is tall (at that time). This is the common assumption, which is adopted here.22
In ‘ Every tall is grey ‘ the ‘grey’ would not normally be substantivated; it would
remain an adjective with adjectival inﬂections. Presumably, it is here equivalent
to its substantivated version; it supposits (with respect to a time) for each thing
which is grey (at that time).
2.2
Extending the Theory to Intransitive Verbs
Having explained adjectives, there is a sense in which intransitive verbs have al-
ready been accounted for. At least, the contents of these verbs already appear.
22Buridan SD 8.2.4 (648): “‘white [thing]’ [album], amounts to, ‘white thing’ [res alba], or
‘white being’ [ens album].” In this quote ‘album’ is the substantivated version of ‘white’ and ‘res
alba’ means literally ‘white thing’, wherein ‘white’ is an adjective.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
175
Medieval logicians held that the use of an intransitive verb is equivalent to the
use of the copula along with its present participle. For example, they said that
‘Brownie runs’ is equivalent to ‘Brownie is running’. This is not the progressive
form of the verb ‘run’, as it is in English; rather it is the copula followed by the
participle ‘running’, used adjectivally. It is not clear that this is normal Latin,
but it is what they insisted on, and I will go along with this. As a result, if you
want to treat a sentence with an intransitive verb, you can take its form to be
that of the copula followed by the verb’s present participle.23 Further, in Latin
present participles used with ‘is’ are adjectives. So in Latin, ‘Brownie is running’
has the same grammatical analysis as ‘Brownie is grey’; it’s a subject followed by
the copula followed by an adjective. And we saw above how ordinary adjectives
used with the copula are equivalent to common nouns used with the copula. So
we again have a procedure for applying the logical theory to a new class of items.
Intransitive verbs are equivalent to a combination of the copula with a partici-
ple,24 which is equivalent to a combination of the copula with an adjective, which
is equivalent to a combination of the copula with a substantivated adjective, which
is equivalent to a combination of the copula with a common noun. The theory
thus needs no emendation.
When the copula ‘is’ is used with only one term, as in ‘A man is’, it is usually
analyzed as an intransitive verb, so that ‘A man is’ is equivalent to ‘A man is
[a] being’.25 The word ‘being’ here signiﬁes everything that there is; in a present
tense non-modal proposition it supposits for every presently existing thing.
23Paul of Venice LP I.6. “A categorical proposition is one which has a subject, a predicate
and a copula as its principal parts, e.g., ‘a man is an animal’, ’man’ is the subject; ‘animal’ is
the predicate, and the copula is always that verb ‘is’ because it conjoins the subject with the
predicate. And if someone says ‘a man runs’ (homo currit) is a categorical proposition but it
does not have a predicate, it can be replied that it has an implicit predicate, viz., ’running’. This
is clear by analyzing that verb ‘runs’ into ‘I am’, ‘you are’, ‘it is’ and its participle.”
24Buridan 1.3.2 “The third section expounds the above description of categorical proposition,
illustrating it by the proposition: ‘A man runs’, in which the name ‘man’ is the subject, and the
verb ‘runs’ is the predicate. Concerning this point we should note, as [Peter of Spain] immediately
remarks, that the verb is not the predicate, strictly speaking, but it is either the copula joining
the predicate to the subject or implies in itself the copula and the predicate together. For the
verb ‘is’ as the third adjacent [tertium adiacens] is the copula, and what follows is the predicate.”
[The verb is “third adjacent” when it is a third expression combining with two others.] See
the continuation of this quote in the next note.
25The previous quote continues: “But the verb ‘is’ occurs as second adjacent [secundum adia-
cens], when I say ‘A man is’; but then, like any other verb, it implies in itself the copula with the
predicate or with the principal part of the predicate; therefore, to make the subject, predicate
and copula explicit, such a verb has to be analyzed into the verb ‘is’ as third adjacent, provided
that the proposition is assertoric and in the present tense, and into the participle of that verb,
as for example, ‘A man runs’ is to be analyzed into ‘A man is running’, and similarly, ‘A man
is’ into ‘A man is a being’.”
[The verb is “second adjacent” when it is a second expression combining with one other.]
The noun ‘being’ must be understood to be a logically special common term, which signiﬁes
everything.

176
Terence Parsons
2.3
Extending the Theory to Transitive Verbs
Medieval authors often speak as if transitive verbs can be treated exactly as intran-
sitives; just replace the verb with a copula and a participle, treating the participle
as a general term that supposits for whatever it is that the verb applies to. For
example, Buridan uses this example [SD 1.3.3]:
Every horse a man sees ⇒Every horse a man is seeing
If we treat the participles of transitive verbs just like those of intransitives, then,
grammatically, things seem to work OK. But something is missing: the logical
relationship between a seeing-thing and what it sees. Take the sentence ‘Cicero
sees every donkey’. This becomes ‘Cicero is every donkey seeing’, or ’Cicero is
[of] every donkey a seeing-thing’. But what does the general term ’seeing’ (or
‘seeing-thing’) supposit for? The problem is that what this general term supposits
for depends on the previous term ‘donkey’.
The meaning is: ‘Cicero is with-
respect-to-every-donkey seeing it’.
But there is no ‘it’ in the Latin.
Somehow
this dependency on the ‘donkey’ needs to be built into the analysis. Whenever a
transitive verb is analyzed in this way, a dependency on the direct object of the
verb needs to be provided for. But turning ‘sees’ into ‘is seeing’ hides, rather than
revealing, the dependency.
As far as I know, medieval authors did not notice this dependency in the sup-
position of terms from transitive verbs. This is an inadequacy in their theorizing.
It may have passed unnoticed because the oversight had little eﬀect on the logic
that they developed. Mostly, examples were chosen in which no fallacies resulted.
(There is an exception to this; see section 7.6.)
I will call such dependent terms parasitic. It would be easy to accommodate
parasitic terms in a notation with explicit variables. First, a transitive verb may be
moved to the end of the sentence just as we do with the copula. So we ﬁrst convert
‘Every donkey sees no horse’ to ‘Every donkey no horse sees’. The ‘sees’ is then
converted into ‘seeing is’, to get ‘Every donkey no horse seeing is ’. The participle
of the transitive verb must then be completed with an additional variable, which
is to be bound by the denoting phrase that is the direct object. Suppose that for
each such participle there is a parasitic term, in which ‘v’ is a variable:
seeing-v-thing
owning-v-thing
etc
where a ‘seeing-v-thing’ is a thing that sees v. These terms contain variables which
must be bound. As an illustration, the proposition ‘Cicero sees every donkey’ turns
into ‘Cicero every donkey seeing is’, and corresponds to the formal analogue:
(Cicero x) (every donkey y) (some seeing-y-thing z) x is z
Thus, whenever a parasitic term is used, it carries a variable that is to be bound by
some other denoting phrase. (When a parasitic term occurs, a special grammatical

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
177
case shows up on the denoting phrase that binds the variable in it; the parasitic
term itself is not grammatically aﬀected. For example, in the above example, ‘every
donkey’ receives accusative case, while ‘some seeing-y-thing’ is simply nominative.)
Turning ordinary transitive verbs into participles plus copulas maintains the
principle that a categorical proposition consists of terms plus some syncategore-
matic signs plus a copula. In this sense, one can maintain that the copula is the
only true verb. However, it does not maintain the principle that a categorical
proposition contains two terms, the subject and the predicate. For analyzing a
transitive verb produces a new term. For example, in ‘Every horse a man is see-
ing’ there are three terms: ‘horse’, ‘man’ and ‘seeing’. This becomes important
when truth conditions are stated for categorical propositions, since they are almost
always stated for propositions with only a subject and a predicate.26 One might
hope to see truth conditions for a proposition with three terms, or a recursive
speciﬁcation of truth conditions that would extend to more than two terms. So
far as I know, nothing like this appears in any currently edited manuscript.27
2.4
Using unanalyzed verbs
We have seen how a verb other than the copula can be decomposed into a copula
plus a common term used indeﬁnitely. The idea is neat in theory, and it was often
used to illustrate the claim that there is only one real verb, the copula. However, in
practice, authors tended to treat verbs as if they could be taken to form categorical
propositions without being analyzed into a denoting phrase and a copula. I will
often follow this practice in quotes and examples.
2.5
Inﬁnitizing Negation and Conversion
In English we have a preﬁx ‘non’ which goes on the front of a noun to indicate
things that the noun does not apply to, as in ‘Every nonstudent had to pay’. There
is no danger of this preﬁx being confused with the negation ‘not’, because they
are spelled diﬀerently and do not occur in the same places in sentences. In Latin
however (and also in Aristotle’s Greek) these two items were spelled the same:
‘non’. Further, if this particle occurs in front of a noun there is no way to tell
from the spelling whether it is meant to be preﬁxed to that noun or whether it
is merely a preceding word. So some eﬀort had to be put into distinguishing the
readings of a sentence such as
Non homo est animal
which is ambiguous between ‘Not: a man is an animal’ and ‘A non-man is an
animal’. Aristotle called a term preﬁxed with ’non’ an “inﬁnite” term. (He did not
explain the meaning of ‘inﬁnite’.) Medieval authors called this preﬁx “inﬁnitizing
negation” and called the separate word ‘non’ “negating negation”.
26Indeed, they tend to be stated only for the original four Aristotelian forms.
27But much work is still undiscovered and/or unedited.

178
Terence Parsons
Inﬁnitizing negation does not have the eﬀect that negating negation has in
turning aﬃrmative into negative propositions and vice versa; ‘Some donkey is grey’
is aﬃrmative, and so is ‘Some donkey is non-grey’. And although this proposition
is negative: ‘Some donkey is not an animal’, this one is aﬃrmative: ‘Some donkey
is a non-animal’. The eﬀect of the ‘non’ is conﬁned to the complex term that it
occurs in.
Contraposition and Obversion: Recall the theory of conversion inherited from
Aristotle: conversion means the interchange of the subject and predicate terms of
a categorical proposition. Simple conversion was universally recognized as being
valid for the universal negative and particular aﬃrmative forms, and conversion
by limitation valid for universal propositions. Along with simple conversion and
conversion by limitation, many authors discussed conversion by contraposition;
you interchange subject and predicate and preﬁx each with an inﬁnitizing nega-
tion. The conversion by contraposition of the universal aﬃrmative and particular
negative forms would be:
Every A is B
≈
Every non-B is non-A
Some A is not B
≈
Some non-B is not non-A
Several early authors endorse the validity of conversion by contraposition for
universal aﬃrmatives and particular negatives.28
Others point out that this is
not correct, since the aﬃrmative form has existential import for the subject and
predicate terms, and the contrapositives of such forms have existential import for
the negatives of those terms. Buridan [SD 1.6.4] points out:
“We should note that this [type of] conversion is not formal, for al-
though it is valid assuming the constancy of terms, with terms sup-
positing for nothing it need not be valid. For example, ‘Every man is a
being; therefore, every non-being is a non-man’ is not valid, for the ﬁrst
proposition is true, and the second is false, because it is an aﬃrmative
the subject of which, namely the inﬁnite term ‘non-being’, supposits
for nothing. Similarly, ‘Some chimera is not a man; therefore, some
non-man is not a non-chimera’ is not valid, for the ﬁrst proposition
is true and the second is false, since the contradictory of the second,
namely ‘Every non-man is a non-chimera’, is true, for every non-man
is a being and every being is a non-chimera.”
A similar principle is the one that was later called obversion. This is the principle
that states that you can change a proposition to an equivalent form if you change
28Contraposition is discussed in several 12th and early 13th century anonymous texts edited
in [De Rijk, 1967], where it is seen as a type of equipollence. It is endorsed in several of these:
Excerpta Norimbergenses (138-39), Ars Burana (190), Tractatus Anagnini (238), Introductiones
Parisienses (362), Logica: Ut dicit (385), Logica: Cum sit nostra (426), Dialectica Monacensis
(478). Another text, Ars Emmerana (157) endorses contraposition, but then says that it does
not hold for the particular negative unless understood with “constancy,” a term that had to do
with assuming instances of the terms in question. Sherwood IL 3.3 (59) also endorses it.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
179
it from aﬃrmative to negative (or vice versa) and change the predicate term from
ﬁnite to inﬁnite (or inﬁnite to ﬁnite). Some examples are:
Every S is P
⇒
No S is non-P
Every S is non-P
⇒
No S is P
Some S is P
⇒
Some S is not non-P
Some S is non-P
⇒
Some S is not P
This is not a form of conversion because the subject and predicate terms are not
interchanged, but the inferences are similar. It is apparent that these inferences are
valid when moving from aﬃrmative to negative, but not in the reverse direction,
because the terms may be empty (making the negative propositions true and the
aﬃrmative ones false). Buridan [TC I.8.107 (226)] makes this clear, stating:
“From any aﬃrmative there follows a negative by changing the pred-
icate according to ﬁnite and inﬁnite, keeping the rest the same, but
there is no formal consequence from a negative to an aﬃrmative, al-
though there is a consequence under the assumption that all of the
terms supposit for something.”
The good direction he gives as:
Every B is A; therefore no B is non-A.
The fallacious direction is illustrated by
A chimera is not a man; therefore a chimera is a non-man.
(Aristotle discussed some instances of obversion. He endorsed many valid forms
and he did not endorse the invalid ones, but he did not comment on these.29 Some
medieval writers before Buridan accepted the fallacious versions, and some did
not.)
The semantics of ‘non-’. There are various ways to give a semantics for ‘non-’.
Since it precedes a single word, one might expect it to alter the signiﬁcation of
that term, so that ‘non-donkey’ would signify everything that is not a donkey, and
it would behave just like a simple term. However, ‘non’ can precede any common
noun, including nouns that correspond to complex concepts which are themselves
made out of mental words. So inﬁnitizing negation may modify complex terms,
for which signiﬁcation may not be deﬁned.
Peter of Spain [S 2.8-15 (77-87)] argues that an inﬁnitized term is ambiguous, for
‘non’ can either make a term ‘non-man’ that is said of absolutely everything that
is not a man, including non-beings, or it can make the term be said of every being
29In De Interpretatione 10. The interpretation of Aristotle is not uncontroversial. The Ackrill
translation attributes one error to Aristotle:
it translates him as asserting the sameness of
signiﬁcation of ‘Every non-A is non-B’ with ‘No non-A is B’ (20a.38-39). This, however, is a
translator’s option; one can just as adequately translate the former as ‘Every non-A is not B’;
this is a negative form which would lack existential import.

180
Terence Parsons
that is not a man. Because of the restrictions by tenses and modalities (section 5)
this ambiguity is usually cancelled out in actual use. For example, in the sentence
‘Every non-donkey is grey’ the present tense of the sentence (and its lack of a
modal word) restricts the supposition of the subject to presently existing things.
And when you limit all the things that aren’t donkeys, including nonbeings, to the
existing things among them, you get the same class as when you limit the beings
that aren’t donkeys to existing things. It is an interesting question as to whether
Peter’s ambiguity is always cancelled out in this way.
2.6
Complex Terms with Modiﬁers
We have been considering terms consisting of a single word — a noun or something
behaving like one. Some terms are complex. The simplest examples are nouns
modiﬁed by adjectives or participles: ‘grey donkey’ or ‘running donkey’. In simple
cases their semantics is clear: ‘grey donkey’ stands with respect to a time for
whatever ‘grey’ and ‘donkey’ both stand for with respect to that time. (Or perhaps
for whatever the substantivated version of ‘grey’ and ‘donkey’ both stand for with
respect to that time.) The combination of ‘running’ with ‘donkey’ is similar. In
more complicated cases a more roundabout account needs to be given. Probably
the complex term ‘donkey seeing every horse’ needs to be counted as a “reduced
relative clause” — ‘donkey which is seeing every horse’. We turn now to relative
clauses.
2.7
Relative Clauses and their derivatives
2.7.1
Restrictive Relative Clauses
Relative clauses come in two forms: restrictive and nonrestrictive:
The woman who left early was miﬀed.
RESTRICTIVE
The woman, who left early, was miﬀed.
NONRESTRICTIVE
We will only discuss restrictive relative clauses. Restrictive relative clauses make
complex terms. In distinguishing restrictive from nonrestrictive relative clauses
Buridan says:
[In ‘A man who is white is colored’] there is one predicate here, namely,
‘colored’, which by the mediation of the copula is predicated of the
whole of the rest as of its subject, namely, of the whole phrase: ‘man
who is white’; for the whole phrase: ‘who is white’ functions as a
determination of the subject ‘man’. And the case is not similar to ‘A
man is colored, who is white’, for there are two separate predicates
here, which are predicated separately of their two subjects, and there
is not a predicate here which would be predicated by the mediation of
one copula of the whole of the rest. And although these [propositions]
are equivalent, they are not equivalent if we add a universal sign. For

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
181
positing the case that every white man runs and there are many others
who do not run, the proposition ‘Every man who is white runs’ is
true, and is equivalent to: ‘Every white man runs’; but the proposition
‘Every man, who is white, runs’ is false, for it is equivalent to: ‘Every
man runs and he is white’.30
In both English and Latin a restrictive relative clause immediately follows a com-
mon term; the clause itself has the form of a relative pronoun followed by a full
proposition missing a denoting phrase. For example:
woman whom some man sees in the corner
consists of the common term ‘woman’ followed by the relative pronoun ‘whom’
followed by a partial proposition which is missing a denoting phrase:31
some man sees
in the corner.
Some examples of propositions containing complex terms with relative clauses are:
Some donkey which
sees every animal kicks Socrates
Some donkey which every animal sees
kicks Socrates
Socrates kicks some donkey which
sees every animal
Socrates kicks some donkey which every animal sees
Although no detailed theory was given, it is apparent from writers’ usage (and from
inspection of natural language usage itself) that a whole complex phrase stands for
a thing x iﬀthe modiﬁed term stands for it x and x satisﬁes the gappy proposition
that follows the term (with ‘x’ itself occurring in the gap). The complex term
‘woman whom some man sees in the corner’, stands for a thing x with respect to
a time iﬀthe term ‘woman’ stands for x with respect to that time and some man
sees x in the corner with respect to that time.
2.7.2
Whiz deletion
Relative clauses often appear in reduced form; in addition to ‘Some donkey which
is seeing every horse is happy’ we have ‘Some donkey seeing every horse is happy’.
This happens whenever the initial relative pronoun is immediately followed by
the copula. This possibility is neatly captured by an old idea in transformational
grammar called “whiz deletion” (short for ‘wh- + is’ deletion). Speciﬁcally, this
30Buridan SD 1.3.2 The last example he gives is discussed in Sherwood SW I.10, 28-29.
Sherwood explains the diﬀerence between the two types of relative clauses in terms of Aristotle’s
notion of “compounded and divided” in which the restrictive reading is the one in which the
clause is compounded with the modiﬁed noun, and the nonrestrictive reading is the one in which
they are divided.
31The usual explanation for this is that ‘wh-’ originates within the propositional clause, and
moves to the front to become a relative pronoun, leaving a blank where it was. This explains why
relative pronouns get the grammatical case that a denoting phrase would have in the position
from which they move.

182
Terence Parsons
rule says that one may optionally delete any relative pronoun followed immediately
by ‘is’ (or any other form of the copula). It is clear that the examples just given
are related in this way:
Some donkey which is seeing every horse is happy ⇒
Some donkey seeing every horse is happy.
So we add the principle that:
If a relative clause begins with ‘which is’ or ‘which was’ or ‘which will
be’ then that expression may be deleted. The resulting string of words
has the same semantics as the clause without deletion.
There is one additional constraint on reduced relative clauses.
A non-reduced
relative clause has a main verb which has a tense of its own. So the proposition:
Some woman who was seeing a donkey is running
is true with respect to a time t if and only if a woman who saw a donkey before t
is running at t. Alternatively,
Some woman who is seeing a donkey was running
is true with respect to a time t if and only if a woman who sees a donkey at t was
running prior to t. However, this mismatch of times cannot occur with a reduced
relative clause; the proposition
Some woman seeing a donkey is running
cannot mean that a woman who previously saw a donkey is running. Brieﬂy, the
unpronounced tense in a reduced relative must be identiﬁed with the time at which
the reference of the whole phrase is evaluated, not with respect to some other time.
2.8
The Genitive
Many examples discussed by medieval logicians contain genitive (“possessive”)
constructions. The genitive shows up in English in two diﬀerent forms, as a genitive
ending and as a prepositional phrase construction:
This is the woman’s donkey
This is the donkey of the woman.
In Latin there is only one construction: the genitive noun (the one that in English
gets the possessive ending or is the object of the preposition ‘of ’) is inﬂected
for genitive case. The diﬀerence from the English use of “-’s” is that in Latin
the possessive noun needn’t immediately precede what it modiﬁes. The following
word-orders are all OK in Latin:

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
183
Every woman’s donkey is lame..
A donkey every woman’s is lame.
Some woman’s some horse sees every donkey
in which the last proposition is to be read something like: Regarding some woman,
some horse sees every donkey of hers. These forms may be confusing in English; to
increase comprehension I will always use the ‘of ’ form in the English translitera-
tions. Thus, although the following are not standard English, you should easily be
able to ﬁgure out what they mean, so long as you keep in mind that the left-to-right
ordering of the denoting phrases corresponds to their logical scope:
Of-every woman a donkey is lame
A donkey of-every woman is lame
Of some woman some horse sees every donkey
where the last proposition is ambiguous regarding whether it is the horse or the
donkeys that belong to the woman.
2.8.1
What the Genitive means
Some common nouns, such as ‘mother’, ‘owner’, . . . are inherently relational;
others such as ‘woman’, ‘chair’ are not.
Non-relational nouns: Typically the genitive construction used with a non-
relational noun indicates some kind of possession (‘a horse of Fred’s’) or something
analogous to possession (‘Mary’s job’), or almost any other kind of relation that
can be doped out from context (‘Mary’s hill’ = the hill Mary has been assigned to
climb).
Relational nouns: Usually the genitive construction used with a relational noun
indicates the relation conventionally associated with the noun; ‘Mary’s mother’
usually means the female person who gave birth to Mary. Relational nouns also
have nonrelational uses, as in: ‘Four mothers showed up’. I assume that these non-
relational uses are best construed as homonyms; ‘mother’ can be a non-relational
noun meaning e.g. “mother of someone”. These non-relational nouns then also
enter into the ﬁrst kind of genitive construction, so that ‘Mary’s mother’ can mean
the mother (of someone) to whom Mary has been assigned as a case worker.32
For simplicity I’ll concentrate on examples involving non-relational nouns.
When a genitive is used, the “possessed” term is parasitic, just like a participle
of a transitive verb. In ‘Cicero’s donkey is an animal’ the term ‘donkey’ does not
stand for donkeys in general; it is restricted to standing for donkeys owned by
Cicero. So the semantics has to take this into account. Intuitively, it is as if the
denoting phrase containing the possessor term binds a variable in the possessed
term. Like this:
(Cicero x)(a donkey-of-x y)(an animal z) y is z
32Because of this, constructions with relational nouns are ambiguous. A popular illustration
of this was the sophism: “This dog is yours. This dog is a father. So this dog is your father.”

184
Terence Parsons
The parasitic term occurs in the nominative, with the “binding” term in the geni-
tive. This is like the transitive verb case, where the parasitic term (the participle)
is in the nominative case, and the direct object term is in the accusative case.
2.8.2
Additional constructions using the genitive
To generate certain other linguistic forms we need to expand the account. How,
for example, are we to analyze this?
Brownie is Socrates’s.33
I think that this is like the English sentence:
Brownie is mine.
Whereas ‘my’ has to combine grammatically with another term, ‘mine’ is a term
on its own. What does it mean? I think that it means something that is completely
unspeciﬁc with regard to what sort of thing is possessed. Roughly, ‘mine’ means
‘my thing’. In the ﬁrst person singular there is a diﬀerence in spelling between
the ‘my’ in ‘my donkey’ and ‘mine’; but in the third person singular the spelling
is the same: ‘his donkey’ versus ‘his’. And with a noun the spelling is the same:
‘Socrates’s donkey’ versus ‘Socrates’s’. I suppose that the genitive construction
in Latin works pretty much the same (except for the divergence in the spelling of
pronouns). If this is right, the meaning of ‘Brownie is Socrates’s’ is ‘Brownie is
Socrates’s thing’ or ‘Brownie is a thing of Socrates’. I’ll indicate this by writing
in an invisible ‘thing’; so the sentence above will be equivalent to:
Brownie is Socrates’s thing
or
Brownie is of-Socrates a thing
This ellipsis device now allows us to generate another kind of proposition that we
need an account of; propositions in which the possessor follows the possessed, as
in:
Some donkey of-every farmer is brown
meaning that there is a donkey that is owned by every farmer and is brown. We
can generate this from:
Some donkey which is of-every farmer is brown.
using whiz-deletion. The generation route for this sentence is a bit convoluted,
but we also need to generate each of the forms we got along the way anyway, so it
seems unobjectionable. The meaning is:
33Ockham SL I.2 (52): “’Hominis est asinus’ is [well-formed].” That is, ‘A man’s is a donkey’
is well-formed.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
185
Some donkey which is of-every farmer a thing is brown.
or
Some donkey which is every farmer’s thing is brown.
In general then if the possessor term precedes the possessed, the two terms occur
in independent denoting phrases. If the possessed precedes the possessor, then
together they form a complex term with the possessor term occurring in a phrase
that modiﬁes the possessed term.34
2.9
Syncategoremata and Exponibles
It was common for writers to discuss categorical propositions which have additional
syncategorematic signs in them which aﬀect semantic interpretation. One standard
example is ‘only’, as in:
Only a man runs
Such a proposition is exponible, that is, it can be expounded into some other form
of words which display the semantics of the proposition. The usual expounding of
the sentence given is:
A man runs and every running-thing is a man35
or
A man runs and nothing other than a man runs36
Exceptives are usually treated as exponibles:
No man except Socrates is running
is expounded as:
Socrates is running and no man other than Socrates is running
Also popular were categoricals with constructions with certain special verbs, such
as ‘begins’ and ‘ceases’. Sherwood [SW XV.3 (110)] gives a typical analysis:
34These options were studied in some detail by later followers of Buridan. See [Karger, 1997].
35Buridan SD 1.6.3 (54) has “But as far as ‘Only a man runs’ is concerned, it should be
said that it has to be converted into a universal aﬃrmative, namely, ‘Every runner is a man’.”
This omits the ‘A man runs’ part, but the analysis is an aﬃrmative proposition with existential
import, and so it entails ‘A runner is a man’ which converts to ‘A man is a runner’.
36Buridan SD 4.2.4 gives this analysis. The expression ‘other than’ is itself a syncategorematic
sign, and so the second exponent itself needs exponing. Peter of Spain S III.6 (107) gives a similar
analysis: “As to the other problem, what an exclusive word signiﬁes, the answer should be that
it signiﬁes the same as the expression ‘not with another’, or a privation of the connection a whole
has with a part; e.g. ‘Only Socrates is running’, that is Socrates is running and nothing else or
Socrates is running and no other man is running.”

186
Terence Parsons
For example, ‘he begins to be healthy’ — he is [healthy] and he was
not [healthy] earlier; ‘he ceases to be sick’ — he is not sick [and he was
sick earlier].
Appeals to exponibles often turn up when some topic is being discussed where
a certain sentence seems to be a counterexample to a proposal under discussion,
or where it is not clear what a certain proposal would say about the example.
Expounding yields a new form that ﬁts with the proposal. In general it seems to
be the case that the semantics of an exponible proposition is taken to be whatever
is the semantics of its expounded version.37
3
SIGNIFICATION AND SUPPOSITION
3.1
Signiﬁcation
There are diﬀerent theories about how language relates to the world. I concentrate
here on two accounts that were commonly appealed to by semanticists. One is an
older realist account that appeals to real universals. The other appeals instead to
mental concepts.
On the realist account, there are universals existing outside of the mind, with
individual things falling under them. These universals are usually called forms.
A common term gets into the language by being conventionally imposed on a
common form. For example, the term ‘donkey’ is imposed on a certain form (the
species, donkey), which is shared by all donkeys. This imposition is either done
by the will of a speaker, or, more usually, is done by convention (with details not
given). As a result, the word is a sign of, or signiﬁes, that form. Signiﬁcation is the
basic semantic notion; it is a kind of meaning that a word possesses independent
of any particular use of the word. A sign is also said to (indirectly) signify the
things that share in the form, so that ‘donkey’ is also said to (indirectly) signify
each and every individual donkey:
form
indirectly signiﬁes
is shared by
individuals
word
signiﬁes
On a nominalist account, there are no universals existing outside of the mind.
Instead, there are concepts in the mind that naturally are concepts of various
individuals. (This view is often backed up by an epistemological theory about
37But see section 7.8 for an exception to this principle.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
187
the acquisition of concepts.) A common term gets into the language by being
conventionally imposed on such a concept.
For example, the term ‘donkey’ is
imposed on a certain concept, a concept that is of donkeys. This imposition is
either done by the will of a speaker, or, more usually, is done by convention (with
details not given). As a result, the word is a sign of, or signiﬁes, that concept.
Signiﬁcation is the basic semantic notion; it is a kind of meaning that the word
then possesses independently of any particular use of the word. A sign is also
said to (indirectly)38 signify the things that the concept is a concept of, so that
‘donkey’ is also said to signify each and every individual donkey:
indirectly signiﬁes
individuals
word
signiﬁes
concept
is of
The two accounts clearly have the same structure, and if the concept is called a
form, then they even have the same wording. For logical purposes, it often doesn’t
matter which account is being used.
3.2
Supposition
A signiﬁcant word (one which signiﬁes) may be used in a proposition to stand
for something, or for some things. This “standing for” is the medieval relation of
supposition. Supposition is a relation that an already signifying word has within
a proposition. Depending on the proposition, a word can supposit for any one of
the three items in the diagrams above. It may be used to supposit for itself, as in
‘Donkey is a noun’, or for its related form or concept, as in ‘Donkey is a species’,
or for the individual things that fall under the form or concept, as in ‘[A] donkey
is an animal’. When it is used to stand for itself, the type of standing for is called
“material supposition”; when it is used to stand for its related form or concept,
it is called “simple supposition”, and when it is used to stand for (some of) the
items that it indirectly signiﬁes, it is called “personal supposition”.
Material and simple supposition are discussed in section 4. Personal supposition
is the ordinary kind of reference. In ‘Every donkey is an animal’ the word ‘donkey’
supposits for each and every presently existing donkey. This is because the word
’donkey’ is imposed on the form or concept “donkey”, which itself signiﬁes donkeys.
The word thus indirectly signiﬁes individual donkeys. The personal supposition of
38For Ockham [SL 1.1 (49–50)] a spoken word directly (not indirectly) signiﬁes the things that
the associated concept signiﬁes, though it does so “secondarily”. The important point is that
when spoken words signify things in the world they so do because the concept on which they are
imposed does so.

188
Terence Parsons
a term in a proposition is determined by its place in the proposition and what it
signiﬁes. In the simplest case of a present tense nonmodal proposition containing
no special terms (such as ‘believe’), a term personally supposits for all of the
presently existing things that it signiﬁes. So in ‘Every donkey is an animal’ the
term ‘donkey’ supposits for all presently existing donkeys, and the term ‘animal’
supposits for all presently existing animals.
For early writers such as Peter of Spain, predicates do not supposit personally;
they supposit simply, for they directly represent a form.[T VI.10 (72)]. Sherwood
has an in-between view. For him, predicates do not supposit at all; instead they
appellate.[IL 5.15 (122)]. However, appellation for a predicate seems to behave
exactly like supposition for a subject.
Later nominalists hold that predicates
supposit just as subjects do.
3.3
Supposition and Truth Conditions
Supposition is important because it, together with the structure of the proposition,
determines the truth conditions of the proposition. In contemporary semantics we
often characterize the truth conditions for sentences in terms of what their parts
stand for. The same idea is pursued by medieval nominalists using the notion
of supposition. Paraphrasing somewhat, nominalists give the following account
for standard categorical propositions (e.g. in [Ockham SL II.3-4 (92, 96-97)], and
[Buridan SD Sophismata 2 12th-14th conclusions (857-59)]).
An aﬃrmative proposition is true iﬀthe subject and predicate “sup-
posit for the same”. In detail, a particular aﬃrmative proposition is
true iﬀthere is something that the subject and predicate both supposit
for, and a universal aﬃrmative proposition is true iﬀ(the subject sup-
posits for at least one thing and) the predicate supposits for everything
that the subject supposits for.
A negative proposition is true iﬀthe subject and predicate “do not sup-
posit for the same”. In detail, a universal negative proposition is true
iﬀthere is nothing that the subject and predicate both supposit for,
and a particular negative proposition is true iﬀthe predicate does not
supposit for everything that the subject supposits for (or the subject
supposits for nothing).
These accounts do not seem to be given because the authors think that it is a goal
of semantics to provide truth conditions for sentences, but rather they are given
in order to show how to account for the truth of categorical propositions without
appeal to universals. Of course, this will not succeed if supposition is deﬁned in
terms of signifying universals, but the previous section shows how universals can
be avoided by an appeal to naturally signifying concepts.
If we were interested in extending this account to propositions in general, some
impediments would have to be overcome. One is the extension of the above ac-

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
189
counts to nonstandard propositions containing universal predicate terms.
One
would need something like:
A proposition of the form ‘No A is every B’ is true iﬀthere is noth-
ing for which the subject supposits which is everything for which the
predicate supposits.
This looks a bit ad hoc, but as shown in section 1.7 we could account for a wide
class of propositions simply by covering eight basic forms. However, things get
more complicated with the extensions of section 2.
Consider for example the
sentence:
Some A sees every B
There are two options here: to leave the verb unanalyzed, or to replace it with the
copula and a participle. If the verb is left unanalyzed then the truth conditions
using supposition would be something like:
Something for which the subject supposits sees everything for which
the predicate supposits.
This is correct, but not part of a general account of truth conditions, because it
contains the special word ‘sees’. The other option produces a proposition like this:
Some A is of every B a seeing-thing.
That is, the form is:
Some A is of every B a C.
This can be given an analysis using the copula ‘is’, but there are three quantiﬁed
terms, and so we need an additional analysis that is not included in the original
eight forms mentioned above. It also needs something conceptually new, since one
of the terms is parasitic, and so its supposition is characterized relative to another
term.
These issues were not pursued in detail.
3.4
Mental Language
The relation of a form to the individuals falling under it, or of a concept to the indi-
viduals that it is a concept of, is a natural relation, independent of language. The
relation of a word to its form or concept (namely, signiﬁcation) is a conventional
relation. Setting aside material supposition, which may be possessed by a non-
sense word such as ‘bu’, supposition by a written or spoken word is always partly
conventional because it is characterized in terms of direct or indirect signiﬁcation.
Ockham added an innovation to this framework. He held that the mental con-
cepts discussed above are themselves words of a mental language. These words
signify naturally, not by convention. All humans have such concepts, and they

190
Terence Parsons
signify the same from person to person — unlike spoken and written words, which
change signiﬁcation from one spoken language to another. So there is a single
mental language common to everyone. The words and propositions of written and
spoken language get their signiﬁcation by being associated with words and propo-
sitions of mental language. Mental propositions and concepts then play something
like the role played by abstract propositions and meanings today. In particular,
the truth value of a spoken or written proposition is determined by the truth value
of the mental proposition related to it:
Any sentence signifying by convention is true or false precisely because
there corresponds to it a true or false mental [sentence] properly so
called. [Peter of Ailly I II para 148 (46)]
This means that the analysis of truth above in terms of supposition must apply
fundamentally to mental propositions, and indirectly to spoken and written ones.
If mental language provides the fundamental ingredients for truth-bearing propo-
sitions, it must contain the resources necessary for the job. Ockham suggested
that this is all that mental language contains.
In order to discover the ingre-
dients of mental language, one need only determine what ingredients of natural
language can aﬀect the truth of a proposition; mental language contains analogues
of these ingredients and nothing more. He concluded, for example, that in addition
to terms and a copula, mental propositions must also contain something analo-
gous to case and to number. Case is necessary because changing the case of a
word can change truth value: a change of case converts ‘SocratesNominative sees
PlatoAccusative’ to ‘SocratesAccusative sees PlatoNominative’ (meaning that Plato sees
Socrates). Similarly for number: ‘[A] man is [an] animal’ is true, though ‘[A]
man is [the] animals’ is false. So case and number occur in mental language. But
mental language does not contain anything corresponding to the various declen-
sions, because these do not aﬀect truth conditions. Some synonyms diﬀer only in
declension, so it appears that the declension is contributing nothing. It appears,
in fact, that there are to be no pairs of synonyms of any kind in mental language:
The multiplicity of synonymous expressions in no way enhances the
signiﬁcative power of language; whatever is signiﬁed by an expression
is signiﬁed equally by its synonym. The point of the multiplicity at
work in the case of synonyms terms is the embellishment of speech or
something of that nature, so that the relevant multiplicity has no place
at the conceptual level. [Ockham SL 1.3 (52)]
3.5
Connotative Terms
Ockham divides terms into absolute and connotative. He characterizes connotative
terms as follows:
A connotative name, . . , is one that signiﬁes one thing primarily and
another thing secondarily.
Connotative names have what is, in the

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
191
strict sense, called a nominal deﬁnition. In the nominal deﬁnition of a
connotative term it is frequently necessary to put one expression in the
nominative case, and another one in one of the oblique cases. The term
‘white’ provides an example. The term has a nominal deﬁnition, one
expression of which is in the nominative case and another in one of the
oblique cases. Thus, if someone should ask for the nominal deﬁnition
of ‘white’, the answer would be ‘something informed with whiteness’
or ‘something having whiteness’. [Ockham SL 1.10 (70)]
A connotative term has a “nominal deﬁnition”, which is a phrase which expresses
the “what” of a term. [Ibid. Loux translates this as “the meaning of a name”.]
Examples of connotative terms are: ‘just’, ‘white’, ‘animate’, ‘human’, and so
on.
[Ibid] Ockham deﬁnes a connotative term as one that signiﬁes something
primarily and something secondarily. It appears from his examples that a term
signiﬁes a thing secondarily if and only if something in the nominal deﬁnition
of the term signiﬁes the thing primarily.
The adjective ‘white’ signiﬁes white
things primarily, and it signiﬁes whitenesses secondarily — apparently because the
term ‘whiteness’ in its nominal deﬁnition (”something informed with whiteness”)
signiﬁes whitenesses primarily.
Examples of absolute terms are: ‘man’, ‘animal’, ‘goat’, ‘stone’, ‘tree’, ‘ﬁre’,
‘earth’, ‘water’, ‘heaven’, ‘whiteness’, ‘blackness’, ‘heat’, ‘sweetness’, ‘smell’, ‘taste’,
and the like. [Ockham SL 1.10 (69-70)] Absolute terms do not signify one thing
primarily and another thing secondarily. Presumably, this is because they do not
have nominal deﬁnitions. Instead, absolute terms have “quidditative” or “real”
deﬁnitions. The terminology “real deﬁnition” does not mean “genuine deﬁnition”;
rather, it is a characterization of the thing in reality that the term being deﬁned
stands for. For realists, this is typically a form existing outside of the mind. Nom-
inalists don’t say this; instead they take it that a real deﬁnition characterizes all
and only the things that an absolute term supposits for. A real deﬁnition is not
synonymous with the word being deﬁned, since diﬀerent non-synonymous real def-
initions are possible for a term. One can correctly characterize men by saying that
a man is any animal that is rational. This, however, does not give the “what” of
the linguistic term ‘man’.
The fact that all connotative terms have nominal deﬁnitions suggests an anal-
ysis of connotativeness of a term in terms of complexity of the concept that it is
subordinated to. If a connotative spoken or written term directly signiﬁes the same
concept as does its nominal deﬁnition, then since the latter is a complex concept,
connotative terms would all directly signify complex concepts. Buridan [SD Soph
1 ninth conclusion (840)] says: “only a spoken term to which there corresponds
not a simple but a complex concept is one that has a nominal deﬁnition in the
strict sense.
Further, if all nominal deﬁnitions contained only absolute terms, or contained
only absolute terms when all connotative terms were analyzed in terms of their
nominal deﬁnitions, then all terms would either be absolute or would have complex
analyses in terms of absolute terms. Some commentators have speculated that

192
Terence Parsons
this is what Ockham intended (or should have intended). It is not clear, however,
whether a written or spoken connotative term directly signiﬁes the same (complex)
concept as does its nominal deﬁnition. Nor is it clear that all connotative terms can
be ultimately eliminated from all nominal deﬁnitions. Ockham himself suggests
otherwise at SL III.26.39
It is an additional question whether there are simple connotative terms in men-
tal language. If so, they have nominal deﬁnitions in mental language which are
complex terms.
The simple connotative terms must not be synonymous with
their nominal deﬁnitions, because then distinct terms in mental language would
be synonyms, which Ockham rules out. So terms with nominal deﬁnitions are not
synonymous with their deﬁnitions. Commentators disagree about whether this is
the right thing to say about Ockham’s view.
4
TYPES OF SUPPOSITION
4.1
Univocation as the Source of Types of Supposition
Aristotle uses ‘equivocation’ for a case in which things are called by the same name
but the name does not have the same deﬁnition in each case. An example is ‘dog’,
which can apply to one thing because it is a canine, and to another because it is a
certain star. So if you have inferred that something is a dog, and is not a dog, you
haven’t inferred contradictory propositions40 unless ‘dog’ has the same deﬁnition
in each proposition.
According to Boethius,41 there is a similar way in which apparently contradic-
tory propositions are not actually contradictory, even when you use the same word
with the same deﬁnition in each application. His illustration is:
[A] man walks
homo ambulat
Man does not walk
homo non ambulat
(Recall that there are no articles in Latin, so the displayed Latin propositions
are explicitly contradictory in form.) These propositions are not contradictory if
‘homo’ in the ﬁrst proposition stands for an individual man, and in the second
proposition refers to the species man. This is not equivocation, because the word
‘homo’ does not have diﬀerent deﬁnitions in the two propositions. Boethius calls
this phenomenon “univocation”.42 Some medieval treatises were written explicitly
about univocation.
39See [Panaccio, 2004 4.2 (68-69)] for discussion of this point.
40Equivocation is discussed along with other fallacies in Aristotle’s Sophistical Refutations. A
“refutation” is achieved when the respondent admits a proposition that contradicts the proposi-
tion being defended. So the relation of contradictoriness is central to that essay.
41Boethius’s commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation, cited in De Rijk LM II.I.XV.1
(492).
42In essence the proposal is that univocation occurs when a word is used twice with the same
signiﬁcation, but what it stands for (its “supposition” or its “appellation”) changes. This kind
of explanation is given e.g. in the Treatise on Univocation: “Univocation therefore is when the
appellation of a name varies and the signiﬁcation remains the same.”
(Second paragraph of

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
193
One might naturally dispute the claim that the words have the same deﬁnitions
in the two cases, but one might also naturally accept this. After all, in order to
know which species is being referred to, all you need to understand is the word
with its normal deﬁnition. Is this a case in which a word is used in two diﬀerent
ways but with the same deﬁnition in each case, or is it a case in which two diﬀerent
but related deﬁnitions are appealed to? Writers took both sides of this issue.43
Consider the realist picture; a meaningful categorematic word has a form that
it signiﬁes, and it is commonly used to supposit for the things that fall under the
form. There are thus three things prominently associated with a term that it may
be used to supposit for: itself, its signiﬁed form, and the things falling under the
form.
Material supposition is the kind of supposition a word has when it supposits
for itself or for a related piece of language. An example is:
Donkey is bisyllabic
Here on the most natural interpretation ‘donkey’ is used with material supposition,
to supposit for tokens of the word itself.
Simple supposition is the sort appealed to in the proposition:
Donkey is a species
On the most natural interpretation of this proposition, ‘donkey’ is used with simple
supposition, to supposit for the form that it signiﬁes; in this case for a species of
animal.
Personal supposition is the kind of supposition a word has when it is used
normally, for the things falling under the signiﬁed form. An example is:
Every donkey is running
On the most natural interpretation of this sentence, ‘donkey’ is used here with
personal supposition — to supposit for individual donkeys.
Writers point out that the terms ‘simple’, ‘material’ and ‘personal’ are technical
terms, whose meanings cannot be gleaned from their non-technical uses.
For
Elizabeth Karger’s unpublished translation of Tractatus de Univocatione Monacensis, pp. 333-
51 of de Rijk II.2.) In About Univocation we read: “Univocation is [a case of ] the supposition
of a name having varied, the signiﬁcation having remained the same. (Translation of a selection
from Fallacie Parvipontane, pp. 545-609 of De Rijk I. Bottom of second page of translation.)
For discussion of the historical origin of univocation, see De Rijk LM II.I.XV.1 (492).
43The author of About Univocation gives several arguments in favor of the view that univoca-
tion should be grouped with equivocation. The author of the Treatise on Univocation explains
how univocation diﬀers from equivocation: in equivocation there is a change in the signiﬁcation
of a word, whereas in univocation the signiﬁcation does not change; only the appellation (≈
the supposition) changes. Buridan SD 7.3.2 (516) classiﬁes examples of univocation as cases of
equivocation; he deﬁnes equivocation in terms of a word in context having diﬀerent signiﬁca-
tions, and he holds that in ‘homo ambulat’ the word ‘homo’ does have diverse signiﬁcations even
though there is no new deﬁnition. This is because when ‘homo’ is used to stand for the species
it is subordinated to a diﬀerent mental concept than when it is used to stand for persons.

194
Terence Parsons
example, personal supposition is not necessarily supposition for persons, as is
clear in ‘No stone is a crystal’, in which neither ‘stone’ nor ‘crystal’ supposits for
any person.
There are diﬃculties in deﬁning exactly when a certain kind of supposition is
present, even when it is clear in practice what the intended answer is supposed
to be. For example, you cannot deﬁne material supposition as a case in which a
word supposits for itself, because of examples like:
Some words are nouns
Here, ‘word’ is used personally, not materially, even though it supposits for itself
(because it supposits personally for all words, including the word ‘word’). Likewise,
you cannot deﬁne simple supposition in terms of a word’s suppositing for a form,
because in
Every species has a genus over it
the word ‘species’ is used personally, not simply, even though it supposits (per-
sonally) for forms. These were not diﬃculties in practice, and so I won’t dwell on
the problem of deﬁnability.44
4.2
Material Supposition
If you want to say something about a word, you can use the word itself to do so
— this is material supposition. An obvious example is “Homo est nomen” {“Man
is a noun”}. In modern English we usually put a mentioned word in quotation
marks, or in italics, or in another font — or we do nothing at all and just rely on
context to make it clear that we are mentioning the word. In medieval times there
were no italics or quotation marks, and so one needed to rely on context to tell
when a word is being taken to stand for itself, or for other words of the same type,
or for the spoken version of the word (if it is written), or for words with the same
root and a diﬀerent inﬂection. Any of these uses are called material supposition.
In contemporary analytic philosophical writing there is a convention that using
a word to mention itself is a kind of misspelling — for proper spelling, the word
must be lengthened by adding quotation marks to it. This changes it to a diﬀerent
word; for example, these are two completely diﬀerent words:
44See discussions in Buridan SD 4.3.2 (257):
“Another doubt is:
“How does the subject
supposit in the proposition: ‘A noun is a conventionally signiﬁcative utterance’?–it appears that
it supposits materially, as it supposits for itself and for many other terms.” I say that it supposits
personally, for it does not supposit for itself because it is such an utterance, but because the term
‘noun’ along with many other terms are the ultimate signiﬁcata of the utterance ‘noun’. In the
same manner also, in the proposition ‘Every utterance is a sound’ the terms supposit personally,
even if they supposit for themselves, for they supposit for themselves only insofar as they are,
together with other utterances and sounds, the ultimate signiﬁcata of the utterances ‘utterance’
and ‘sound’.”
Ockham SL I.64 Handles cases of the above sort by the addition of the qualiﬁcation at the
end of this account: ”a term supposits personally when it supposits for the thing it signiﬁes and
does so signiﬁcatively.” He does not deﬁne ‘signiﬁcatively’.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
195
donkey
‘donkey’
The former refers to donkeys, whereas the latter refers to a word. If there is no
spelling error, a word is never used to stand for itself. In the medieval account,
however, any word may automatically, as a matter of the ordinary semantics of
natural language, be used to stand for itself.45
The deﬁnition of material supposition has a simple core:
Supposition .
.
.
is called material when a word itself supposits
either for the very utterance itself or for the word itself, composed of
the utterance and the signiﬁcation — as if we were to say ‘man is a
monosyllable’ or ‘man is a name’. [Sherwood IL V.2 (107)]
Most writers gave deﬁnitions similar to this.46 In order to clarify the number of
options for e.g. written words referring to spoken words, some authors reﬂect this
in their account of material supposition. Burley says
“. . . supposition is material when (a) a spoken utterance supposits for
itself spoken, or (b) for itself written, or (c) for another utterance that
is not inferior to the former utterance taken in such a way, or also (d)
when an utterance taken under one kind of supposition supposits for
itself taken under another kind of supposition, or (e) when an utterance
taken in one way supposits for itself taken in such a way that it cannot
supposit or have supposition at all.”47
45In later writing something akin to quotation marks came into use. Greek grammarians had
used a deﬁnite article in front of a word to indicate that it is being mentioned; an example would
be “The and is a conjunction”. Sometimes medieval authors used ‘this’ for this purpose. But
later writers emulated the Greek practice by using the French deﬁnite article, spelled ‘li’ or ‘ly’.
(Since Latin has no deﬁnite article, they had to import a word.) Since ‘li’ is not Latin, its use in
Latin for this purpose is unambiguous. The use of ‘ly’ goes back at least to Sherwood IL V.12
(117).
46William Ockham SL 1.64 (91): “Material supposition occurs when a term does not supposit
signiﬁcatively, but supposits for a spoken word or a written word. A good example is: man is
a name. The word man here supposits for itself but it does not signify itself.” (This is Loux’s
translation with the quotation marks removed.)
John Buridan SD 4.3.2 (253): “. . . supposition is said to be material when an utterance
supposits for itself or for one similar to itself, or for its immediate signiﬁcate, which is the
concept according to which it was imposed to signify, as the term ‘man’ in the proposition ‘Man
is a species’.” (Buridan’s account intentionally includes what some others would call simple
supposition — as he makes clear.)
Albert of Saxony: “Material supposition is the interpretation of a term for itself or for any
sign similar to itself . . . and which it was not instituted to signify.” SL II.3.
Paul of Venice LP II.1 (143): “Material supposition is the acceptance of a term in a proposition
for its material signiﬁcate, e.g., “‘man’ is a noun”. It is clear that “man” does not stand for
[anything] unless for itself or for its like which are the material signiﬁcates of this term “man”.”
47Walter Burley, Longer Treatise, 1.1.2 para14 (82).
His examples (in sections (15)-(21))
include (a) the use of ‘man’ in the spoken sentence ‘Man is spoken’, which is used to describe an
utterance of ‘man’; then a spoken word supposits materially for itself spoken. (b) In the written
sentence ‘Man is spoken’ used to describe a spoken utterance of ‘man’, we have a written word

196
Terence Parsons
He continues with an intricate discussion of various options and examples; this
is where a reader should look for some details.48 Material supposition is of most
importance when an author appeals to it for some ulterior motive — e.g. when
an apparent reference to an extra-mental form is taken to be a reference instead
to a word. Most of these applications are obvious.
4.2.1
Material Supposition and Quotation
Material supposition diﬀers from the use of quotation marks to mention a word,
even though these two uses sometimes satisfy the same purpose. For example, if
you wish to say something about a word, you write either:
Donkey has two syllables
with ‘donkey’ understood materially, or:
‘Donkey’ has two syllables
Some words of English seem to force something like material supposition. Consider
the following apparently bad argument:
I am called Herman. Herman is my name. So I am called my name.
Suppose that we decide that quotation marks should be used to clarify things.
The inference would then have the wording:
I am called ‘Herman’. ‘Herman’ is my name. So I am called my name.
This is a valid inference according to our usual practice of using logic; it is
substitutivity of identity. But the conclusion seems to be ill-formed, or it is well-
formed and the argument is invalid. Quotation marks are not useful in clarifying
this argument. This is because the phenomenon is a case of material supposi-
tion. The passive ‘be called’ in English forces its object (without the addition of
quotation marks) to be taken materially. Let me temporarily use underlining to
indicate words that are forced to be interpreted as being taken materially. Then
the argument is of one of these forms:
I am called Herman. ‘Herman’ is my name. So I am called my name.
I am called Herman. Herman is my name. So I am called my name.
suppositing materially for itself spoken. (c) In the spoken sentence ‘That a man is an animal is
a declarative expression’ there are two interpretations, both material cases of supposition: one
is that the subject of the sentence supposits materially for the sentence ‘A man is an animal’,
in which case the spoken sentence is true; the other is that it supposits for itself, in which case
the spoken sentence is false (because no that-clause is a declarative expression). (d) Call the
proposition ‘Every man runs’ A. Then suppose someone says ‘Man supposits personally in A’.
Here ‘man’ supposits materially for itself suppositing personally. (e) In the utterance ‘White
cannot supposit’ the word ‘white’ supposits substantively (even though it is not a substantive)
and materially for itself suppositing adjectivally.
48In sections (15)-(22), outlined in the last note, and further in sections (23)-(26).

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
197
Read in this way, the sentences are all coherent, and it is easy to spot the fallacy:
in either second premise the ﬁrst word refers to a proper name, and the phrase
following ‘is’ refers to that very same name; thus the identity statement is true.
But in the conclusion, ‘my name’ does not refer to that proper name; it refers to
itself. So there is a kind of equivocation in ‘my name’, which changes reference
(because it changes supposition) from the second premise to the conclusion.
Notice that when an expression is taken in material supposition it only stands
for the words themselves; it does not give any additional information, such as how
those words are used. So given the truth:
a said b said this doctrine
You may only infer that if a is correct then:
b said this doctrine.
You cannot infer from this how b’s words were to be taken. In particular, you do
not know whether b’s words were to be taken in personal supposition, in which case
b stated a certain doctrine, or whether they were taken in material supposition, in
which case b said ‘this doctrine’. This openness of interpretation does not occur
when quotes are used; the original sentence would have to be one or the other:
a said ‘b said this doctrine’
a said ‘b said ‘this doctrine”
This means that quotation marks are useful when you want your sentence to
distinguish these two claims, and material supposition is useful when you don’t
want to make this distinction (e.g. if you know exactly what words a used, but
you don’t know how they were intended). This is not a defect of either convention,
it is just a way in which they diﬀer.
4.3
Simple supposition
When a word stands for its associated form, it has simple supposition. Those who
thought that there are no forms were likely to see these cases as ones in which the
word stands for the mental concept that the word is a sign of. On either option,
this agrees with Frege’s view that in certain contexts a word stands not for its
ordinary referent, but for something like the meaning that the word has. However
the analogy is limited, since simple supposition was not appealed to in order to
handle what we nowadays see as paradigm non-extensional contexts. In particular,
it was not usually appealed to in analyzing modal contexts, or belief contexts —
other analyses were given for such cases.49
William Sherwood explains simple supposition as:
[supposition] is simple when a word supposits what it signiﬁes for what
it signiﬁes [IL V.2 (107)]
49For some of these see sections 5.3 and 6.1.

198
Terence Parsons
Since Sherwood holds that a word directly signiﬁes a form, this seems to mean
that in simple supposition the word supposits for a form.
Lambert gives the condition:
Simple supposition is the kind according to which a term is interpreted
for itself or for its signiﬁed thing, without relation to the supposita
contained under it [PT3g(ii) (110)]
For Lambert a word’s “signiﬁed thing” is a form, so in one version of simple
supposition a word supposits for the form it is a sign of.
Both writers hold that what a term signiﬁes is a form; so a term in simple
supposition stands for a form. Peter of Spain makes this clear, while maintain-
ing his older view that predicates of categorical propositions always have simple
supposition:
Simple suppositions include that of a common subject term, as in ‘man
is a species’ or that of a common term put in an aﬃrmative predicate,
as in ‘every man is an animal’. The predicate term ‘animal’ has simple
supposition, since it only stands for the nature of a genus. [TVI.6 (70)]
On the nominalist semantics of Ockham and Buridan and their followers, there
are no forms.
Instead, apparent references to forms are actually references to
concepts. A word is used materially to supposit for itself or related expressions,
it is used simply to supposit for the concept that it is conventionally imposed on,
and it is used personally to supposit for the things that the concept is naturally
a concept of.
This is how Ockham speaks.
Buridan balks at using the term
‘simple supposition’, which is used by others to classify a relation between words
and forms. Instead, since expressions in simple supposition supposit for concepts,
and since concepts are words of a mental language, he says that what others call
simple supposition is actually reference to words — and thus a kind of material
supposition. In ‘Donkey is a species’ the word ‘donkey’ supposits for the associated
mental concept – i.e. for a mental word. So he uses a two-part classiﬁcation of
uses of terms into material and personal.50
Even ignoring Peter of Spain’s special view that predicates automatically have
simple supposition, the topic is full of controversy. Some will be discussed here.
According to William Sherwood, simple supposition comes in three varieties.
Our discussion will correspondingly have three parts.
50Buridan SD 4.3.2. “some people have posited also a third member, which they called ‘simple
supposition’. For they held that universal natures are distinct from the singulars outside of the
soul.
And so they said that a term supposits personally, when it supposits for the singulars
themselves, that it supposits simply, when it supposits for that universal nature, and materially,
when it supposits for itself. But I hold that Aristotle correctly refuted that opinion in the seventh
book of the Metaphysics, and so this kind of supposition has to be eliminated, at least, according
to this interpretation. In another manner, others call supposition ‘simple’ when an utterance
supposits for the concept according to which it is imposed and material when it supposits for
itself or another similar to itself. And this can be permitted, but I do not care [about this usage],
for I call both ‘material supposition’.”

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
199
Variety 1 of Simple Supposition
The simplest sort of simple supposition is given by the standard example:
Man is a species
As quoted above, Lambert describes this as a case in which a term has no relation
at all to “the supposita”; that is, to the things that fall under the form that is
signiﬁed. William similarly describes this kind of simple supposition as a case in
which
[A] a word is posited “without any connection with things”. [IL V.7
(111)]
In either case this is pretty straightforward: the utterance is treated just as if the
term were a noun standing for the form that it signiﬁes.51
Conceptualist alternatives are predictable: in this variety of simple supposition,
the word stands for the concept it signiﬁes, either because that concept is the form,
or because there are no forms, but only concepts.
Simple supposition occurs when a term supposits for an intention of
the soul and is not functioning signiﬁcatively. For example, in ‘Man is
a species’ the term ‘man’ supposits for an intention of the soul, for it
is that intention that is a species. [SL, 1.64 (190)]
Other varieties of simple supposition are more complex, and require additional
discussion. Lambert describes the other cases as ones in which there is a relation
to the supposita, “not determinately, but indeterminately”[PT3g(ii)].
William
divides these into two types, and I’ll follow his classiﬁcation. The examples that
fall under these two additional types were discussed by several authors.
Variety 2 of Simple Supposition
The second variety of simple supposition occurs when
[a word is posited] for the signiﬁcatum connected with things insofar
as it is actually preserved in every single thing, and is predicable of it
[Sherwood IL V.7.2 (111)]
The standard example which gives rise to this kind of simple supposition is:
Man is the noblest of creatures
51In a very early anonymous writing (Cum sit nostra) the author maintains that in a propo-
sition like ‘Man is a species’ the word ‘man’ is not a common term at all, but rather a discrete
name (like a proper name) of the species; this view is attributed to the grammarian Priscian.
So it is not a common term used simply. This leaves unaddressed the question of what kind of
supposition it has, but it appears that it may have personal supposition here — since the word
apparently supposits for what it names, not for what it signiﬁes.

200
Terence Parsons
William says that here
the predicate is not ascribed to the species itself, but to the species
insofar as it is in things. [Ibid]
This is because from ‘Man is the noblest of creatures’ one can infer:
this man, insofar as he is a man, is the noblest of creatures. [ibid.]
The phrase “noblest of creatures” is predicated of individual men, but reduplica-
tively, that is, using the locution ‘insofar as’ or just ‘as’. So this is true:
Socrates, as [a] man, is the noblest of creatures
while this is not true:
Socrates is the noblest of creatures.
Unfortunately, none of this was worked out in any detail. So articulating a se-
mantics of such constructions would be an invention that goes beyond currently
available theorizing.
Instead of working out details, some other authors rejected the proposal that a
new kind of suppositing is needed here. A clear example is Ockham. He disagrees
with the appeal to simple supposition to handle these examples. He sets up the
issue by reviewing some arguments on the issue:
First, as follows: ‘Man is the worthiest creature among creatures’ is
true. I ask which kind of supposition ‘man’ has [there]. Not personal,
because each singular [of the proposition] is false. Therefore, it has
simple supposition.But if simple supposition were for an intention of
the soul, [the proposition] would be false, because an intention of the
soul is not the most worthy of creatures. Therefore, simple supposition
is not for an intention of the soul. [SL 1.66 (193)]
Ockham’s own view is:
Therefore, it has to be said that ‘man’ [in this proposition] supposits
personally, and [that the proposition] is literally false, because each [of
its] singulars is false. Nevertheless, it is true according to the meaning
of those who maintain [the proposition]. For they do not mean that
a man is nobler than any creature in general, but that he is nobler
than any creature that is not a man. And this is true among corporeal
creatures, although it is not true for intellectual substances.
[ibid.
(194)]
So the answer is that the sentence means that every man is worthier than any
creature other than a man. This is followed by a typical Ockhamian qualiﬁcation:

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
201
So it is often the case that authoritative magisterial propositions are
false literally, and true in the sense in which they were made. That
is, [the speakers] meant true propositions by them. That is so in the
present case. [ibid. (194)]
This is important to him, since so many of the church authorities were realists,
and he wants to agree with them but without a commitment to realism. So he
(mis)interprets them creatively.
In the example just discussed the notion of nobility seems to play a special role,
since there is indeed some intuitive push to hold that no man is simply noble,
but s/he is only noble “as a man”. But it would seem odd to say that ‘A rose is
the reddest of ﬂowers’ means that each rose, insofar as it is a rose, is red. Some
authors saw the problem as one that arises with any comparative or superlative
form, not just with special cases. But again, the details were not worked out. (If
Ockham is right, there are no details to be worked out.)
Variety 3 of Simple Supposition
Sherwood’s third case of simple supposition is:
. . . a word is posited for the signiﬁcatum connected with things
insofar as it is related to anything generally, in an unﬁxed way, and is
not identiﬁed with anything in a determinate way [IL V.7 (111)]
This case is meant to cover these widely discussed examples:
Pepper is sold here and in Rome
This plant grows here and in my garden
Woman who has damned us has saved us.52
The problem is that the particular pepper that is sold here is not sold in Rome;
other pepper is sold there, so the word ‘pepper’ cannot be interpreted as having
personal supposition. And you don’t mean that the species pepper is sold here
and in Rome, because species cannot be sold — which rules out the ﬁrst variety of
simple supposition. Nor are you saying that any pepper insofar as it is pepper is
sold here and in Rome, which rules out the second variety of simple supposition.
So something else is meant — a third variety of simple supposition, which William
calls “unﬁxed supposition”. The term, insofar as it supposits for a species, does
so through undesignated individuals belonging to the species. (This explanation
struck some writers as being obscure and uninformative.)
Ockham also disagrees with this analysis; he says about a similar example:
If it is said that ‘This herb grows in my garden’ is true, and that
nonetheless the subject does not have discrete supposition, the response
is that the proposition, taken literally, is false. [SL I.70 (200)]
52The intent is that the proposition is true because Eve damned us, and Mary, mother of Jesus,
saved us.

202
Terence Parsons
The term ‘this herb’ appears to be a paradigm discrete (singular) term.
The
proposal to assign it simple supposition is a proposal to treat it not as a discrete
term (or at least not as a discrete term suppositing for an herb). Ockham’s view
is that it is indeed a discrete term, and the sentence is literally false. Because the
subject is a discrete term, it has discrete supposition, which is a form of personal
supposition. So the subject stands for a particular herb present to the speaker.
And that herb does not grow in my garden. So the sentence is false.
however, by that proposition one means ‘An herb of that sort grows in
my garden’, where the subject supposits determinately.53
Again Ockham thinks that this is a case where what people mean to say diﬀers
from what they do say. The speaker means something like “Some such herb grows
in my garden”.
5
AMPLIATION AND RESTRICTION
5.1
Overview
In a non-modal present tense categorical proposition, common terms typically do
not supposit for everything that they indirectly (or secondarily) signify. Instead
they supposit only for the presently existing things that they indirectly signify. As
a result, in
Every donkey is running
the subject is restricted to suppositing for presently existing donkeys. If all of
them are now running, then the proposition is true, even though there were or will
be donkeys that are not now running. Similarly, in the proposition:
Socrates is a philosopher
the subject is restricted to presently existing things.
Since Socrates does not
presently exist, the term ‘Socrates’ in this proposition supposits for nothing at all.
Since this is an aﬃrmative proposition with an empty subject term, it is false.
This restriction of supposition in a present tense nonmodal categorical proposi-
tion to presently existing things is the ‘Restriction’ in ‘Ampliation and Restriction’.
Terms may also supposit for things in addition to their presently existing sig-
niﬁcates. In
Some donkey was running
53Ockham S.L.I.70 (200) For Ockham, determinate supposition is a mode of personal sup-
position; see section 7. Burley 1.1.4 para 81 (102) has a similar reply: “Nevertheless, a true
proposition can be understood by means of it, namely ’Such an herb grows here and in my
garden’.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
203
the subject term stands for both present and past donkeys; the proposition is true
if one of them was running sometime in the past. This expansion of what the
terms may supposit for is the ‘Ampliation’ in ‘Ampliation and Restriction’. It
is somewhat arbitrary what is to be called restriction and what is to be called
ampliation. So long as terms supposit only for things that they signify, one may
call any use of a term a restriction if the term does not supposit for everything
that it signiﬁes. And any use of a term to supposit for things outside of some
reference class of things, such as the presently existing things, can be called an
ampliation. The custom is generally to say that terms are restricted when they
supposit exactly for the presently existing things that they presently signify, or for
some subset of these, and to call any extension of this range of things ampliation.54
Some kinds of restriction and ampliation are:
1. Supposition restricted to presently existing things. (All previous sections
have taken this to be the default case.) Examples are:
Every donkey is grey
No donkey is a stone
In these cases the underlined words are “restricted” to the presently existing
things that they signify. This restriction is caused by the present tense on
the verb.
2. Supposition for past things (for formerly existing things) or for future things.
Such supposition is caused by the past and future tenses, as in:
A donkey was grey
A donkey will be grey
In these examples, the underlined words supposit for present or past or
future things (details given below). When these tenses are used, subject and
predicate terms of the tensed verb are ampliated to include supposition for
things outside of the presently existing things. (Ampliation is also caused
by past or future participles with present tense copulas.)
3. Supposition for never-existing but possible things, caused by an alethic
modal word:
A mountain can be golden
Every pink donkey is necessarily an animal.
Since no past, present, or future mountain is golden, ‘mountain’ must be
suppositing for possible mountains in addition to actual ones in the ﬁrst
54Words may also sometimes supposit for things that they do not signify at all. Examples are
the uses of the word ’donkey’ in the propositions:
Donkey is a species
Donkey is a noun
This type of use, which is not called ampliation, was discussed in section 4.

204
Terence Parsons
proposition (for it to be true). Likewise, one must be discussing possible
pink donkeys in the second; otherwise the proposition would be false. This
ampliation is caused by the modal words ‘can’ and ‘necessarily’.
4. Supposition for impossible but conceivable things, caused by words that
“pertain to the soul”:
A chimera is believed to be an animal.
A bishop wants a donkey which is a stone.55
Authors disagree about the truth values of these cases, but they seem to agree
with the semantic mechanism. Certain verbs such as ‘believe’ or ‘want’ are nat-
urally used with terms that appear to supposit for things that are not possible.
Since it is impossible for a chimera to exist, one must take the ﬁrst proposition
to contain supposition for not just actual or possible chimeras, but for impossible
ones (if there are any) too. Some authors reject this ampliation because they hold
that there are no impossible things, and so terms cannot supposit for them. For
simplicity, I will interpret these latter authors as agreeing with the semantic prin-
ciple that in such contexts the correct semantics is to let the terms supposit for
absolutely all things that they signify,56 and this will include impossible things if
there are any. The sentences will then be taken to have diﬀerent truth values for
those who disagree about whether there are any impossible things. For example,
Buridan does not accept impossible beings; so he would consider the ﬁrst propo-
sition above to be false; since chimeras are impossible, there aren’t any chimeras
to have beliefs about. The subject term is ampliated to supposit for impossible
things, but since there aren’t any impossible things, the subject is empty and the
sentence is false.
The following subsections will discuss temporal ampliation by tenses, ampliation
to the merely possible by (alethic) modal words, and ampliation to all things
whatsoever by verbs which indicate an act of the soul. These all have a semantic
account that is uniform across tenses and modals. It has two parts.
One part is how elements of a proposition aﬀect what terms supposit
for: A present tense (on an ordinary verb) restricts the terms to sup-
positing for the presently existing things that they presently signify; a
past tense on an ordinary verb ampliates the subject term to supposit
for both presently and formerly existing things that it signiﬁes or sig-
niﬁed, and ampliates the predicate term to supposit for the things that
it will signify; and similarly for the future tense, and for modal words,
and for verbs pertaining to the soul.
55Note that the subject term is not ampliated in this example, since it occurs with a present
tense non-modal verb. The verb pertains to an act of the soul, and this aﬀects the supposition
of terms that come after it, but the subject of such a verb is not thereby ampliated.
56Not just verbs that pertain to the soul do this; semantic words such as ‘signify’ and ‘supposit’
ampliate terms following them so that they supposit for everything that they signify. See section
5.5.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
205
The second part of the theory states how supposition bears on truth
conditions. As stated in section 3.3, a sentence of the form:
Every A is/was/will be/can be B
is uniformly true iﬀthe subject has supposition, and everything for
which the subject supposits is (tenselessly) something for which the
predicate supposits. Likewise:
Some A is not/was not/will not be/can not be B
is true iﬀeither the subject lacks supposition, or it supposits for some-
thing that the predicate does not supposit for.
Thus, although the past tense shows up on the copula ‘was’ in ‘Every donkey was
running’, it has no eﬀect on the verb at all; the verb represents tenseless identity
in every case. The tense only aﬀects (ampliates or restricts) what the subject and
predicate terms supposit for. Likewise (apparently) for modal propositions: ‘every
donkey possibly runs’ is true iﬀevery possible donkey is (tenselessly) a possible
runner. And ‘every chimera is conceivable’ is true iﬀevery chimera — possible
or not — is (tenselessly) something able-to-be-conceived. (The term ‘conceivable’
does the ampliating here because it pertains to the soul.)
Restriction of a term by other terms
One topic that will not be discussed here is the restriction of a term by another
term or by a relative clause modifying it. All writers agree that in this proposition:
Every grey donkey is running
the complex term ‘grey donkey’ supposits only for donkeys that are grey, not for
donkeys in general, or for grey things in general. Contemporary logicians might
suppose that the simple term ‘donkey’, which is part of the complex subject,
supposits for all presently existing donkeys, and that the supposition of this simple
term is unaﬀected by its being modiﬁed. Some medieval writers however hold that
the modiﬁer ‘grey’ restricts the supposition of the simple term ‘donkey’ so that it
only supposits for donkeys that are grey.57 The complex term thus supposits for
exactly the things that the simple term ‘donkey’ supposits for in this context.
If this is so, it is not relevant to any of the truth conditions of sentences con-
taining such constructions. This is because it is the complex term ‘grey donkey’
that interacts with the rest of the proposition; ‘Some grey donkey is running’ is
true if and only if the subject (’grey donkey’) and predicate have a suppositum in
common. The complex term supposits exactly for donkeys that are grey, whether
‘donkey’ is restricted by ‘grey’ or not. In either case you take the grey things and
then intersect these with the donkeys — or with the donkeys that are grey; it
57See Peter of Spain TXI.4. At XI.5 he also holds e.g. that in ‘grey donkey’ the ‘donkey’
restricts ’grey’ to suppositing only for donkeys.

206
Terence Parsons
makes no diﬀerence — and you end up with a complex term suppositing for grey
donkeys.58 Since the issue of restriction by modiﬁcation has no eﬀect on the truth
conditions of sentences containing modiﬁed terms, I’ll ignore this complexity.
5.2
Ampliation and Restriction by Tenses
5.2.1
A rejected view
Some writers begin their discussion of ampliation caused by tenses by rejecting a
view that must have been widely discussed, if not widely held. This is the view
that:
A past tense proposition is true now iﬀits present tense version was
true sometime in the past.
On this view, ‘A donkey was grey’ is true now iﬀ‘A donkey is grey’ once was true.
This theory is easily shown false by examples like:
A white was black
This is true if something that is now white was black in the past. And this is so
even if the present tense proposition:
A white is black
was never true.59 A similar example for the corresponding modal case is:
A white can be black
which has a true reading, even though
58Some authors said that as a consequence of such restriction, a word like ‘risible’ “alienates”
the supposition of ‘donkey’ in:
Every risible donkey is running.
It makes it supposit for nothing. Again, the important point is that the complex subject ‘risible
donkey’ supposits for nothing, and it doesn’t matter whether this is because the intersection of
risible things with donkeys is empty, or because the intersection of risible things with no things
at all (that is, with risible donkeys) is empty.
59In discussing the future tense Buridan says (SD Sophismata 4 (881): And from these [con-
siderations] there follows an important point: it is not required for the truth of a past or future
tense proposition in which the subject is appellative that the corresponding proposition in the
present tense be true sometime in the future. This is so, even assuming that such a proposi-
tion will always exist in the future. Here by “corresponding proposition”, I mean one that has
the same subject and predicate, for although ‘[A] white [thing] will be black’ is true, because
it is equivalent to the true [proposition] ‘What is or will be white will be black’, nevertheless,
‘[A] white [thing] is black’ will never be true, even if it should be uttered. But in reducing a
future tense proposition to a present tense proposition, it is necessary to remove the appellation
from the subject of the proposition and it is necessary to change the appellative subject into a
non-appellative subject that supposits for what the appellative subject supposited for, and in
respect of which the proposition was true; as when, pointing to [that thing], we were to change
the subject into the pronoun ‘this’, and say ‘This is white’, and then it is necessary that, if
the future tense proposition was true, then a present tense proposition of that sort will be true
sometime.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
207
A white is black
is not possibly true.
5.2.2
A Complexity — ambiguity or disjunction?
A sentence like ‘Some bishop was running’ can be true in two diﬀerent ways. In one
way it is true if something that is a bishop now was running in the past, even if it
was not a bishop then. The other way is that something which may not be a bishop
now (indeed, may not even exist now) was a bishop in the past and ran in the
past. All theorists agree that there are at least these two options. They disagree,
however, about whether this is because the sentence is ambiguous between these
two readings (as Ockham says60), or whether the sentence is unambiguous and it
has disjunctive truth conditions (as Buridan says61), so that it is univocally true
in either of these cases. I don’t know how to choose between these options. For
simplicity, I will discuss the disjunctive truth condition option.
The proposition ‘A bishop was running’ must be made true by something that
ran in the past, not by something that only runs at present, so this dual inter-
pretation is not available for the predicate.
So the subject and predicate of a
past tensed sentence are aﬀected diﬀerently by the tense. The predicate is ampli-
ated/restricted so as to supposit only for things which it formerly signiﬁed. The
subject however is ampliated so as to supposit for things which it signiﬁes now or
which it formerly signiﬁed.
5.2.3
Coordination of Tenses and Complex Terms
How tenses work in natural language is a complex matter, which is made diﬃcult
by unclarity in the data — that is, unclarity due to speakers of the language not
associating clear truth conditions with tensed sentences.
As a result, it is not
easy to assess the ultimate success of the medieval theory. It conﬂicts with some
standard paradigms of late 20th century tense logic, but it is often not completely
clear which view better matches ordinary language usage. Since the intent is to
develop the semantics of a somewhat artiﬁcial regimented use of Latin, I will be
reluctant to draw many ﬁrm conclusions about its adequacy in terms of capturing
Latin usage.
Some complexities in how tenses work are discussed here.
5.2.4
Coordination of times between subject and predicate
I begin with what some may consider the clearest ﬂaw in the simplest applications
of the account. Consider the sentence:
60SL II.22 (158): “. . . every past-tense or future tense proposition in which the subject is a
common term must be distinguished as equivocal . . . For if the proposition is past-tense, then
the subject can supposit for that which is such-and-such or for that which was such-and-such.”
61SD 4.5.2 (293): “. . . a term put before the verb appellates its form in a disjunctive manner,
for the present and for the tense of the verb”

208
Terence Parsons
A bishop was grey
This is true iﬀsomething that is now or was sometime a bishop was sometime
grey. One part of these truth conditions is clearly right: if something which is now
a bishop was grey previously, whether it was then a bishop or not, the sentence
has a true reading. But suppose that something was once a bishop, and was once
grey, although that thing was never a bishop while being grey. In this situation
the medieval reading comes out true. It is unclear to me whether this accords with
how speakers of natural language treat such sentences.62 In any event, these are
the oﬃcial truth conditions given to the sentence by the theory.
A typical 20th century tense logician might treat the sentence as if it is ambigu-
ous and has the following three readings:63
∃x(bishop x & Past{grey x})
∃x(Past{bishop x} & Past{grey x})
Past{∃x(bishop x & grey x)}
The last option is not a reading that the medieval theory attributes to the sentence.
The proposition cannot be read so as to entail that there is a time in the past such
that the subject and predicate both supposit for the same thing then; this is
because the ampliation of the subject and predicate terms are independent of one
another. This is a fundamental theoretical limit on the theory as articulated in
the texts. To many modern philosophical logicians this will seem wrong. Others
will hold that the simultaneity of past times of being a bishop and of being grey
is at most a possible implicature of the sentence, and not a constraint on any of
its readings.64
This lack of coordination of times of subject and predicate was sometimes fea-
tured by “truths” like:
A virgin was pregnant
A boy was an old man
An old man will be a boy65
62I think it is closer to actual current English usage than many present logicians think. Of
course, this may be because speakers tend to speak loosely, and perhaps the meanings of their
sentences should not reﬂect that looseness.
63These would be read: Some present bishop is such that there is a past time at which it was
grey. For some presently existing thing, it was a bishop at some earlier time, and it was grey at
some earlier time. At some earlier time it was the case that something was then a bishop and
was then grey.
64In favor of the latter, one might note that it is quite coherent to say ‘A bishop was grey
until just before he became bishop’. However, when ambiguity is at issue, reasoning of this sort
is usually inconclusive. This is because of the diﬃculty in telling whether the additional clause
cancels an implicature of a non-ambiguous proposition, or merely eliminates one of the readings
of an ambiguous proposition.
65These examples are given e.g. by Paul of Venice LP II.8 (161), who also gives ‘A prostitute
will be a virgin’, ‘A decapitated person will sing’. These examples were staples of the theory, and
they were used in the early 16th century by Juan Luis Vives [Guerlac, 1979] to ridicule scholastic
theorizing.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
209
The ﬁrst is true because someone who was a virgin sometime in the past was
pregnant sometime in the past. Etc.
5.2.5
Tenses with relative clauses
We have not yet said how to handle complex terms with relative clauses occur-
ring in tensed sentences. If we follow our instructions so far, we end up with an
ampliated complex term, but with no account of how the complex term is to be
ampliated in terms of how its parts work. In the case of modiﬁcation by a rela-
tive clause there is a very simple treatment. We just suppose that ampliating a
complex term made with a relative clause ampliates only the simple term that is
modiﬁed by the relative clause. The relative clause itself is already taken care of,
since it has a verb of its own, and the tense on that verb takes care of ampliating
the terms in it. This I think is how the medieval theory was intended to work. An
example is the following sentence. It has a main verb in the past tense, and its
subject term contains a relative clause in the future tense.
A donkey which will be grey was brown
This is true iﬀsome present or past donkey which will be grey in the future was
brown at some time in the past. This seems to me to reﬂect our own usage.
There remains a question about the coordination (or lack thereof) of times
within the complex phrase. Consider:
A bishop which was grey was running
This sentence is true according to the present account iﬀthere is some present
or past time at which someone was a bishop, and some past time at which that
person was grey, and some past time at which that person was running. It is not
required that the times of being a bishop and being grey are the same. This may,
arguably, be one correct reading of the sentence.
5.2.6
Parasitic Terms — Genitives
In section 2, we were able to include transitive verbs and genitive constructions
by introducing parasitic terms — terms that within modern theorizing contain a
variable that may be bound by another denoting phrase with the appropriate case.
The meaning of a term such as ‘donkey-of-x’ is something like ‘donkey possessed
by x’. The time of possession is as relevant to the construction as the time of
being a donkey. I am not aware of discussions of this issue.
5.2.7
Coordination of times among parts of the subject or predicate
In parts of the subject or predicate which are disjoint terms Buridan says they
must all be treated as simultaneous. [SD:Soph 3.1 (887)] An example is I ate an
apple in Paris, where, he says, there must be some time in the past such that I
was in Paris then, and I ate something then, and it was an apple then. This is

210
Terence Parsons
a natural intuition, but it is not clear how this idea can be combined with the
fundamental theory. The problem is that ‘eating-thing’ and ‘in Paris’ and ‘apple’
are all independent terms. The ﬁrst stands for all past eating things, the second for
all things that were in Paris, and the third for all things that were apples. And they
all can be independently quantiﬁed: I ate every apple in Paris, meaning I some-
past-time-ate every some-past-time-apple that was some-past-time-in Paris. The
issue is how to make this turn into At some past time I then-ate every then-apple
that was then-in Paris. This would require some development of the semantics;
whether it would be a revision or a reﬁnement is unclear.
5.2.8
Subclauses and Sequence of Tense
There is another way in which tenses are coordinated in natural language. This
is part of what is informally called “sequence of tense” in grammar. Consider the
sentence:
Socrates complained that Plato hit him.
This seems to have a reading in which the past tense in the subordinate clause (the
tense of ‘hit’) is parasitic on the tense of the main clause (the tense of ‘complained’).
On this reading, the sentence alleges that there was a past time at which Socrates
made a complaint, and the content of the complaint concerns something that took
place prior to the complaining. Not prior to now, but prior to another past time.
The medieval semantic account we have of this is that it is true iﬀSocrates is a
present or past thing who is a past complainer of a certain proposition: one that
existed in the past and was of the form:
Plato hit Socrates
A proposition of that past tense form evaluated at a certain time would say that
Plato hit Socrates at some time before then (before the time at which it was
uttered). So the whole sentence is true iﬀat some past time Socrates complained,
and his complaint was the content of a mental proposition existing then saying in
the past tense that Plato hit him. Thus the sequence of tense seems to work out
exactly right.
The above reading where one takes the past tense in the subordinate clause
to be past relative to the past tense in the main clause is sometimes called the
“past-under-past” reading. Some sentences with the past tense in both clauses
have another reading. For example, this proposition:
Socrates thought that Euthyphro was a fool
has a natural reading according to which at some time in the past Socrates had
a thought whose content was that Euthyphro was then a fool. (The past-under-
past reading would say that the content that Euthyphro was previously a fool.)
This may be taken care of by stipulating that a past tense in a subordinate clause
sometimes behaves semantically as a present tense. That is, the above sentence

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
211
is true iﬀSocrates at some time in the past thought a mental proposition whose
content was that of:
Euthyphro is a fool
The interaction of tenses in main and subordinate clauses is not well understood.
There is some hope of the medieval account doing as well in capturing the semantics
of sentences with embedded subclauses as most modern theories. However, this
topic was not discussed in detail by medieval writers.
5.3
Modal Propositions
5.3.1
What are modal propositions?
Buridan [SD 1.8.2 (67-70)] discusses three kinds of propositions that other writers
call “modal”. He considers only one of them to be genuinely modal.
Kind 1: Non-modal Propositions containing Modal Words
Some ordinary propositions contain modal words as parts of their subjects or
predicates. Some examples are:
A proposition is possible
No proposition is necessary
Some necessary proposition is false
These are not modal propositions, even though they contain modal words.
In
each of these cases, the modal word is all or part of the subject or predicate, and
thus does not aﬀect the copula. A genuinely modal proposition is one in which
the copula changes its mode.
If nothing aﬀects the copula, the proposition is
by deﬁnition not modal. Buridan calls the displayed propositions “assertoric”.
They require nothing special in terms of their syntax or their semantics. They
just happen to quantify over propositions and contain terms that attribute modal
properties.
Kind 2: Composite Modal Propositions
These are cases in which a modal word applies to an entire proposition. There
are two kinds of such cases. In one kind of case, a modal adverb or prepositional
phrase is used with scope over the entire sentence, such as:
Necessarily every donkey is an animal
Possibly, some donkey is grey
In the other kind of case, a modal adjective or related word is applied to a whole
embedded clause, such as
That every donkey is an animal is necessary
For some donkey to be grey is possible

212
Terence Parsons
In both of these cases the modality is predicated of what Buridan and others
called a dictum — roughly, of “what is said”. In the last two propositions this
is clear.
These are the sorts of propositions in which a subject or a predicate
consists of a sub-clause which apparently supposits for a proposition. These are
really assertoric propositions; they predicate a modal predicate of a proposition
or propositions, but their own copula is unaﬀected and so they are not genuinely
modal. It is not clear exactly how to formulate a semantics for the ﬁrst examples
with modal adverbs, but they seem to be exact parallels of the second sort. If you
change the adverb to the corresponding adjective plus copula, and make the rest
of the sentence into a sub-clause, you get propositions of the second sort. The
main clause then contains a newly introduced copula which is itself unaﬀected by
the modal words in the proposition.
We already have a syntax and semantics for the next-to-last proposition. For
example:
That every donkey is an animal is necessary
is true iﬀthere is a mental proposition of the form
every donkey is an animal
which is necessary. (Whether such a proposition is necessary or not depends in
part on one’s metaphysical views. Presumably the proposition just given is not
necessary because it has existential import, and so it is false if no donkeys exist.)
Kind 3: Modal Propositions
A real modal proposition is one in which a modal word applies to the copula.
These come in at least three varieties.
1. Modal adverbs modifying the copula alone
The least-discussed cases are ones in which a modal adverb or prepositional
phrase directly modiﬁes the copula with no other eﬀect on the sentence.
Such cases look just like the ﬁrst class under (2) except they are to be read
with the modal expression applying to the copula instead of applying to the
whole proposition. Examples are:
Some animal possibly-is grey
Every donkey necessarily-is an animal
Every donkey of-necessity-is an animal
He possibly-is grey
2. Combinations with the helping verb ‘can’
The second class uses the verb ‘can’ (’potest’) as a helping verb with the
copula. The copula takes its inﬁnitive form; otherwise there is no eﬀect on
the rest of the expression. Cases of this sort are:

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
213
Some animal can be grey
No donkey can be a stone
He can be grey
3. Combining a modal adjective with the copula
The third sort is more complex, with a syntax diﬀerent from that of English.
Here a modal adjective together with a new copula combines with the existing
copula, which assumes its inﬁnitive form. The subject and predicate terms
also take the objective case. Transliterations of some Latin examples are:
Some animal possible is be grey
No donkey possible is be a stone
Him possible is be a stone
An almost English analogue made by rearranging the words and inserting
‘to’ before the inﬁnitive gives
Some animal is possible to be grey
No donkey is possible to be a stone
Him is possible to be a stone
Klima points out that this is acceptable English if you change ‘possible’ to
‘able’:
Some animal is able to be grey
No donkey is able to be a stone
Him (he) is able to be a stone
The syntax is important, and so I will use a transliteration of the Latin
forms, preserving the Latin word-order.
My own opinion is that examples of type (3) are really accusative-inﬁnitive con-
structions with raised subjects, as evidenced by the accusative case of their sub-
jects, and they should be seen as special cases of type (2) above. But this is not
the way that Buridan (and probably others) viewed them. So I will treat them as
special cases of genuinely modal propositions. These three forms are spelled out
in the next section.
5.3.2
Modal Propositions — Semantics
What are the truth conditions for complex modal (alethic) propositions? Discus-
sion in medieval texts leaves the truth conditions for alethic modal propositions
somewhat unclear. The unclarity that we face here has to do with the logical forms
of such propositions. One option works fairly clearly, and matches most of the dis-
cussion in the texts. This is, roughly, to make modal propositions look as much
like temporal ones as possible. In particular, in modal propositions we assume
that the copula itself is unaﬀected by the modal sign, and the terms themselves
are ampliated to possible things, or to necessary things. In particular:

214
Terence Parsons
The subject is ampliated to possible things (including things that exist
at any time).
The predicate is also ampliated; what it is ampliated to depends on
the mode.
There is no other eﬀect.
Examples:
Every animal possibly-is a donkey ⇒(Every possible animal x)(Some
possible donkey y) x is y
Every animal necessarily-is a donkey ⇒(Every possible animal x)(Some
necessary donkey y) x is y
But which things does a term like ‘possible donkey’ supposit for?
Presumably
a possible donkey is an entity that is possibly a donkey.
This will include all
actual donkeys, past present and future — since modal words are explicitly said
to ampliate their supposition to the past, present, and future. It will probably
not include any other actual things, since e.g. a rock has an essence of its own
which lies outside the category of donkeys. (This depends on what view you have
about necessary properties. I am assuming what I think is the most usual view,
attributed to Aristotle.) Will it include never-existing things that are possible
donkeys? So far as I can see, the semantic theory is neutral on this. If there
are such things, then ’donkey’ signiﬁes them, and it supposits for them in modal
propositions.
What then about necessary donkeys, which are needed for the second sentence.
This will include all actual donkeys if each donkey is necessarily a donkey. (Al-
though there may be none, since something that is necessarily a donkey necessarily
exists.) Again, it will probably not include any other actual things. Again, there
is a question as to whether there are also non-actual necessary donkeys. Perhaps
these coincide with the non-actual possible donkeys (on Aristotle’s view — though
probably not on contemporary views). Again, that is a metaphysical view that
the semantic theory is neutral on.
5.4
Ampliation due to Words which pertain to the soul
This doctrine is simple: the use of words which pertain to the soul ampliate
certain terms so that they may supposit for everything that those words signify.
For example, in ‘The antichrist is opinable’ the adjective permits the subject
to supposit for future things, so the subject is not empty. Since one may have
opinions about the antichrist, the proposition is true. ‘Some person thinks of a
gold mountain’ can be true because the verb ampliates the predicate. However,
‘Socrates thinks of the antichrist’ is not true, since the verb does not ampliate the
subject term, and Socrates does not exist; so the proposition is false.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
215
5.5
Ampliation due to Semantic Words
Semantic terminology ampliates terms, just as do words that pertain to the soul.
For example, ‘signify’ ampliates terms as widely as they can be ampliated. This
is clear from examples like ‘In any proposition, ‘Dodo’ signiﬁes all dodos’, which
is intended to apply to all dodos, not just to presently existing ones.
This is
consistent with no dodo presently existing. Some authors would accept ‘chimera’
signiﬁes chimeras and no chimera is possible’. (Those who oppose this view do so
because they think that there are no chimeras at all to be signiﬁed.) The same
goes for ‘supposit’, as in ‘dodo’ supposits for dodos in past tense sentences’, etc.
One might want to ask about the ontological commitments of such a theory.
The logic and semantics alone don’t commit you to much. Saying that ‘donkey’
signiﬁes all donkeys is, by itself, a truism. Since it is an aﬃrmative sentence it
commits you to there being at least one donkey. But no more. It is possible to
state various commitments within the theory. For example, one might say ‘Some
donkey which will be grey is not [a being]’. This commits you to future donkeys
that do not exist. But only if you endorse it. If you thought that God had just
destroyed all donkeys, and would not permit there to be any more, you wouldn’t
assert that sentence. Likewise ‘Some donkey which was not and which is not and
which will not be is possible’ commits you to possible donkeys that are not actual
at any time; if you don’t believe in them, you needn’t endorse the proposition.
Some tried to argue like this:
Since ‘chimera’ signiﬁes all chimeras, every
chimera is signiﬁed by ‘chimera’. The conclusion is an aﬃrmative sentence, which
seems to commit you to chimeras (perhaps impossible ones, since none are pos-
sible).
Buridan escaped this conclusion by denying that ‘chimera’ signiﬁes all
chimeras. Since there are no chimeras, the word does not signify anything. This
does not make it meaningless, because “chimera” is a complex concept, which is
composed of concepts which are themselves non-empty and meaningful. indexam-
pliation and restriction—)
6
NON-EXTENSIONAL CONTEXTS
In contemporary semantics, non-extensional contexts have received a great deal of
attention. These are contexts in which interchanging expressions with the same
extension can change the truth-value or reference of the whole context. This sec-
tion covers three types of non-extensional constructions that were widely discussed
by medieval logicians.
6.1
Belief Contexts
That-clauses are paradigm non-extensional contexts. Other types of contexts are
equally non-extensional. In English, we have “accusative-inﬁnitive” constructions
that behave somewhat like that-clauses. An example is the clause in the second
of these sentences:

216
Terence Parsons
I believe that he is a cleric
I believe him to be a cleric
An accusative-inﬁnitive construction is so-called because the subject is in the ac-
cusative case (‘him’ instead of ‘he’) and the verb is in the inﬁnitive (‘to be’ instead
of ‘is’). It is apparent that accusative-inﬁnitive constructions behave semantically
much like that-clauses; the major diﬀerence is that the tense of an embedded
accusative-inﬁnitive clause is parasitic on the tense of the main verb, whereas the
main verbs of that-clauses have tenses of their own.66
In medieval Latin, that-clauses are rare, and accusative-inﬁnitives are the norm.
People who translate Latin regularly translate Latin accusative-inﬁnitive construc-
tions into English that-clauses. Scholars who translate semantic essays also gen-
erally do this as well.
This causes trouble only when the author is explicitly
discussing the syntactic form of the accusative-inﬁnitive. I will use the accusative
inﬁnitive form.
Accusative-inﬁnitives occur in sentences in positions where regular terms occur
with personal supposition. For example, in ‘Socrates believes a proposition which
Plato utters’ the complex phrase ‘proposition which Plato utters’ would normally
be taken to supposit personally for propositions that Plato utters. The question
naturally arises, then, of whether accusative-inﬁnitives supposit, and what they
supposit for. I will discuss three positions on this.
6.1.1
Ockham’s view
The most well-known view is that of Ockham. He holds that we tend to inter-
pret accusative-inﬁnitives materially: they supposit not for themselves, but for
the corresponding indicative propositions. So ‘him to be a cleric’ supposits for a
proposition of the form ‘he is a cleric’.67 The objects of belief, then, are these
propositions. If the propositions are the mental ones of this form, then this is
not very diﬀerent from the modern view that propositions are abstract entities
that are expressed by written and spoken propositions. (On the medieval view,
mental propositions are “signiﬁed by” spoken ones, or the spoken propositions are
“subordinated to” the mental ones.) If Ockham meant that accusative-inﬁnitive
constructions materially supposit for spoken or written propositions, then you get
something like the modern view that the objects of belief, etc, are sentences.
66Often the “independent” tense of a that-clause is, semantically, interpreted parasitically. For
example, in ‘She believed that he was mad’ the time of the being mad is usually understood to be
the same as the time of the believing, or understood to be previous to the time of the believing.
It is not usually just any time prior to the utterance of the sentence. The time of the being
mad in accusative-inﬁnitive ‘She believed him to be mad’ must be taken to be the time of the
believing.
67This is part of a general treatment of accusative inﬁnitive clauses: SL I.67 (198) “Likewise
in ‘A man to run is true’ the subject ‘a man to run’ does not supposit for itself but for the
proposition ‘A man runs’, which it does not, nevertheless, signify. [I have changed the translator’s
that-clauses to accusative inﬁnitives and removed interior quotation marks.]

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
217
6.1.2
The non-thing view
In contemporary semantics many people think that a that-clause stands for an
abstract proposition, something like a Fregean thought or perhaps a Russellian
proposition. Abelard has a view something like this. He holds that an accusative-
inﬁnitive construction supposits for “non-things which are not nothing”. A “non-
thing” is something that is neither a substance, nor a quality, nor any other sort
of thing that falls within the Aristotelian categories of what there are. To say
that these things are “not nothing” is to clarify that saying that an accusative-
inﬁnitive supposits for a non-thing is not a roundabout way of saying that it
doesn’t supposit for anything. Granted, it does not supposit for any thing, but
‘thing’ has a restricted use here.
Abelard argues that we should acknowledge such non-things:
We often call by the name ‘cause’ what are not any thing. For example,
when we say “He was ﬂogged because he does not want to go to the
forum.” ‘He does not want to go to the forum’, which occurs as a
“cause” here, is no essence. [Spade 1994, 42]
Although Abelard does not put his view in semantic terms, Adam Wodeham
does. He says that an accusative-inﬁnitive can supposit for itself, or for what the
corresponding proposition signiﬁes:
A distinction must be drawn . . . because man-being-an-animal can
supposit for and be taken for the dictum of a proposition, and in this
sense it is indeed complex or incomplex. Or it can be taken for that
which is signiﬁed by such a dictum, in which case it is neither com-
plex nor incomplex, but is something signiﬁable by the complex — for
example, by the complex Man is an animal.68
The expression ‘man-being-an-animal’ is a translation of a Latin phrase ‘hominem
esse animal’, which also translates as ‘a man to be animal’. This expression can
supposit for what is signiﬁed by the proposition ‘A man is an animal’. It would
also normally be translated by a that-clause, so the view as pertaining to English
would be that the that-clause ‘that a man is an animal’ supposits for what ‘A man
is an animal’ signiﬁes. When pressed to say just what [a] man to be [an] animal
is, he says (again, the accusative-inﬁnitive is translated as a participial phrase):
we should say that man-being-an-animal is not a thing (aliquid) or
a substance, but is instead man-being-something and man-being-a-
substance-or-accident. . . . One sign signiﬁes adequately not substance
but something-being-a-substance and so forth, whereas another sign
signiﬁes something-not-being-a-substance and so forth. . . . You will
say: man-being-an-animal is either something or nothing. I say that
68In Pasnau [2002, 337]. Wodeham speaks of what is signiﬁed by the dictum of a proposition,
which would be the actual accusative-inﬁnitive clause, but his example makes it clear that he is
discussing what is signiﬁed by the proposition itself.

218
Terence Parsons
neither should be maintained, and that it is not something but rather
man-being-something, as was said. [Ibid]
6.1.3
Accusative-inﬁnitives supposit for whatever their subjects supposit for
Several writers held that the object of knowledge or belief is whatever the subject
of the proposition that expresses the belief refers to. This was discussed in non-
semantic terms as the question of what is the object of a mental believing or
knowing.
Buridan held a version of this view, holding that accusative-inﬁnitives supposit
for whatever their subject supposits for, if the accusative-inﬁnitive correctly char-
acterizes the subject; otherwise they supposit for nothing.
Buridan illustrates
this view as follows (where the accusative-inﬁnitives have been translated as that-
clauses):
To the other [argument] I reply that that Socrates loves God is Socrates,
if Socrates loves God; but if he does not love God, then that Socrates
loves God is nothing. In a similar fashion, that Socrates hates God
is Socrates, if Socrates hates God; but if Socrates does not hate God,
then it is nothing; therefore, when you argue thus: ‘That Socrates loves
God is Socrates’, I concede it, assuming it to be the case that Socrates
loves God. And if you say: ‘in the same way, that Socrates hates God
is Socrates’, I deny it, for it is nothing, when Socrates loves God. But,
perhaps, that Socrates hates God was Socrates, if Socrates earlier hated
God. Therefore, when it is further said that that Socrates loves God is
good and commendable, I concede it; for it is a good man who loves
God. And when it is said: that Socrates hates God is damnable, I deny
it, for [that Socrates hates God] is nothing. But that Socrates hates God
was bad, for it was a bad man hating God. And it is not unacceptable
that a good man was a bad man; therefore, neither is it impossible
that to love God was to hate God. [SD: Sophismata 1 (844)]
This seems to be subject to easy refutation. Suppose that God loves all creatures,
and that Socrates hates God. Then, since God loves Socrates, God loves Socrates-
to-hate-God, which seems wrong. Buridan does not discuss this kind of problem.
6.2
Intensional Transitives
A famous problem occurred in Aristotle [Soph. Ref.179a33-b6]. You see someone
approaching, too far away to determine who it is. The facts are supposed to be:
You don’t know the one approaching.
The one approaching is your father.
The apparent conclusion is that you don’t know your father. The goal is to say
how to avoid this absurd conclusion.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
219
Nowadays, our instinct would be to deny the ﬁrst premise. We would be inclined
to say that we do know the one approaching. Granted, we don’t know who the
one approaching is, but this is a diﬀerent claim. Thus the puzzle is easily solved.
However, this was not the medieval approach.69
One solution oﬀered by Buridan and several of his followers was to say that
certain mental verbs relate one thing to another, not absolutely, but in relation
to a ratio. You can be said to know A if you know A under the ratio A. If B is
the same as A, then it does not follow that you know B, for this requires that you
know B under the ratio B. And the identity of A with B does not guarantee that
the ratio A is the same as the ratio B. This solves the puzzle, since:
You know your father under the ratio your father.
Your father is the one approaching.
You can legitimately conclude:
You know the one approaching under the ratio your father.
But you cannot conclude:
You know the one approaching under the ratio the one approaching.
There is thus a kind of de dicto construal of the locution ‘know
’. There is also
a de re wording; it is the one in which the term that supposits for the known thing
precedes the verb. In this case there is the analysis:
X you know = you know X under some ratio
So these are both true:
You know your father
Your father you know
(You know your father under some ratio.)
(The ﬁrst is taken to be data. The ﬁrst entails the second, because it entails
You know your father under the ratio your father.)
And if you know the one approaching, this also is true:
The one approaching you know.
But none of this lets you conclude:
You know the one approaching.
What, then, is a ratio? This is not clear, but it would be natural to take the
ratio associated with a term to be the mental concept that the term is imposed
on. That would legitimate the above solution.
69Nor is it clear whether it avoids the problem.
For we now face a related puzzle: “You
don’t know who the one approaching is. The one approaching is your father. So apparently you
don’t know who your father is.” One can interpret the medieval theorizing as about this latter
formulation.

220
Terence Parsons
6.3
I promise you a penny
This paradox arises with several wordings, including:
I promise(d) you a penny
I promise(d) you a horse
I owe you a penny/horse
For riding is required a horse
I’ll focus on the version “I owe you a horse”. The problem is that if I promise to
give you a horse, though no particular horse, then it seems as if I owe you a horse,
but there is no horse that I owe you.
It seems to be true that
I promised you a horse
doesn’t entail
I promised you this horse
for any given horse. If I promise that I’ll give you a horse, this particular horse
has apparently not been promised, for I can pay oﬀthe promise without giving
you this horse. Some realists explained this by saying that what is owed is the
universal horse.70 This is indeed given when I pay oﬀthe debt; it is given in the
only way a universal can be given, by giving one of its instances.
This needs to be supplemented by an explanation of why ‘I promised you a
horse’ results in your owing the universal horse. Wycliﬀexplains this by holding
[Ibid 2.64] that the verb ‘promise’ causes the terms following it to occur with simple
supposition. So in the ﬁrst proposition the words occur with simple supposition,
and thus supposit for the universal horse. However, singular terms cannot have
simple supposition.
So the words ‘this horse’ in the second proposition occur
personally, and supposit for this particular horse. Wycliﬀgoes on to hold that
the entailment does hold in the other direction: If I promise you this horse, then I
promise you a horse. Given his analysis of the constructions, it is not at all clear
why this should be so. He simply asserts that from ’I promise you this [horse]’ it
follows: ‘I promise you a [horse]’[Ibid 2.64].
A much-discussed issue is how these two propositions are related:
I promised you a horse
A horse I promised you
Everyone seemed convinced that the latter proposition requires for its truth that
there is some particular horse that I promised you. Since the ﬁrst proposition
seems not to require this, one wonders how they are connected. One could just
70WycliﬀT Tract 3, Chapter 3, ed. cit., 2.63, cited in [Read, 1985]. Also Burley PAL 1.1.3
para 59 p. 96.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
221
say that neither entails the other, but one wants an explanation of the semantics
of the former, if it is not the same as the latter.71
Buridan argued that by parity, if I promised you a horse, then either every horse
I promised you, or no horse I promised you. He found the latter counter-intuitive,
and so settled on the former. This view was not widely accepted.
Ockham proposes what seems to me to be the right thing to say. He says that
‘I promise you a horse’ means that this ought to be true: ‘I give you a horse’. He
says:
Thus, ‘I promise you a horse’, given the force of ‘I promise’, asserts
that ‘I give you a horse’ (or something similar) will be or ought to be
true sometime. The assertion is not that a proposition like ‘I give you
this horse’ (where the reference is to some particular horse) will be or
ought to be true. Thus, it does not follow that if I promise you a horse,
I promise you this horse or I promise you that horse. [Ockham SL 1.72
(207-08)]
Buridan dismisses this, saying
We should realize that some people, wanting to evade the diﬃculty
straight away, say that this is not a proper locution: ‘I owe you a
horse’ or ‘A horse is owed by me to you’, but that this locution should
be taken in the sense that ‘I owe or am bound to bring it about that
you have from me a horse’. And so the proposition ‘I owe you a horse’
or ‘A horse is owed by me to you’ is neither true nor false, except in
this sense.72
But this solution seems to me to be superﬁcial, for there are several
ways in which [it can be arranged that] this can be brought about: for
one way to bring this about would be to give you Blackie, and another
way to bring this about would be to give you Tawny. Therefore, the
question would recur whether I would be bound to do so in every such
way or whether I would be bound to do so in no such way. [Buridan
SD 9.4 Fifteenth sophism (912)]
It is diﬃcult to assess Buridan’s criticism, for it seems to miss the mark. His
objection is that the proposal does not settle the question of whether to fulﬁll the
obligation I must give you every horse, or no horse. But the proposal seems to be
that giving a single horse satisﬁes the obligation, and any one will do.
Much intricate discussion of this example continued throughout the 15th century
and beyond. For more information, see Ashworth [1974; 1976].
71Most writers agreed that ‘horse’ in the latter proposition has determinate supposition, since
it is equivalent to ‘This horse I promised you, or that horse I promised you, or . . , and so on
for all horses.” (See chapter 8 for a discussion of determinate supposition.) Many wanted to say
that ‘horse’ in the former proposition has merely confused supposition; this will be discussed in
chapter 8.
72For discussion of this “evasive move” by Ockham, as well as in contemporary logic, see [Read,
1985; Biard, 1988; Klima, 1993].

222
Terence Parsons
7
MODES OF SUPPOSITION: THE EARLY VIEW
7.1
Modes of Personal Supposition
Personal supposition occurs when a term is used to stand for things that it signiﬁes
(according to nominalists) or for things that fall under the form that it signifes.
Terms with personal supposition may be divided into those that have discrete
supposition and those that have common supposition.
Discrete supposition is
possessed by singular terms that are used personally. This includes proper names,
such as ‘Socrates’ or a simple demonstrative such as ‘that’ when it is the whole
term making up a denoting phrase, or a whole complex demonstrative such as
‘that donkey’ when it is the whole term making up a denoting phrase. Common
supposition is the kind of supposition that a common term has when it is the
whole term making up a denoting phrase (usually) with a quantiﬁer word.
A common term which is used personally has what is called a mode of (com-
mon) personal supposition.73 A mode of supposition is something like a kind of
quantiﬁcational status. It is a status that a term has in a proposition based on
where it occurs in the proposition and what quantiﬁer word occurs with it. There
are three modes of common personal supposition:
• Determinate Supposition
• (Confused and) Distributive Supposition74
• Merely Confused Supposition
Determinate supposition has something to do with a term’s being existentially
quantiﬁed; a paradigm example is ‘donkey’ in ‘Some donkey is spotted’. Distribu-
tive supposition has something to do with a term’s being universally quantiﬁed;
a paradigm of distributive supposition is ‘donkey’ in ‘Every donkey is spotted’.
Merely confused supposition is neither of these; it needs to be discussed. (An
example of a term with merely confused supposition is ‘donkey’ in ‘Every animal
is a donkey’.)
Almost all authors agreed on the classiﬁcation of terms of the Aristotelian stan-
dard forms of categorical propositions:75
73Some authors (see Marsilius of Inghen 1 (57-59)) believe that terms used materially can
also be assigned a mode of supposition, since they are common terms. For example, in ‘Every
donkey in that sentence is bisyllabic’ the word ‘donkey’ is a common term that stands for any
word spelled d-o-n-k-e-y. On this analysis, ‘donkey’ has distributive material supposition in that
sentence. Most authors either disagree with this view, or ignore it. According to some, even
discrete terms used materially are common terms, and can have modes of supposition, as in
‘Every this uttered this morning was the subject of the sentence in which it occurred’.
74Some authors use ‘distributed’ and some use ‘distributive’; I use these interchangeably. (The
term ‘distributed’ may presuppose that a term cannot have that mode of supposition unless it
has been distributed by some distributing sign; see section 7.5 below.)
75Exception: Peter of Spain T VI.6 (70-71) held that all predicates have simple supposition,
and do not have any mode of personal supposition. Some authors did not discuss the predicates
of particular negatives.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
223
• The subjects of universals and the predicates of negatives have distributive
supposition.
• The subjects and predicates of particular aﬃrmatives, and the subjects of
particular negatives, have determinate supposition.
• The predicate of a universal aﬃrmative has merely confused supposition.
DISTRIBUTED
MERELY CONFUSED
DETERMINATE
Every S is P
No S is P
Some S is P
Some S is not P
7.1.1
Deriving the Classiﬁcation
Usually the three-part classiﬁcation of terms results from two bifurcations: per-
sonal supposition is divided into determinate versus
confused, and confused is
divided into distributed-and-confused versus merely confused.76
COMMON PERSONAL SUPPOSITION
CONFUSED
DETERMINATE
DISTRIBUTED
MERELY CONFUSED
The issue of how to decide whether a term is determinate or confused, and
distributive versus merely confused, is a central concern of the theories.
7.1.2
What are the Modes of Supposition for?
What is the point of classifying terms into the above categories? The most popular
application of the modes of common personal supposition is to analyze fallacies
76So the ‘merely’ in ‘merely confused’ contrasts with the ‘distributed’ in ‘distributive and
confused’. The term ‘confused’ does not here mean ‘bewildered’; it means something more like
‘taken together’. (The Latin transliterates as ‘fused with’.)

224
Terence Parsons
that result due to a term’s moving from one mode to another, producing a kind
of quantiﬁcational ambiguity. An example is the following inference:
Every man sees a donkey
∴
A donkey every man sees
(= “for some donkey, every man sees it”)
In the premise, the term ‘donkey’ has merely confused supposition, and in the
conclusion it has determinate supposition. The error was identiﬁed as the fallacy
of moving from a term with merely confused supposition to one with determinate
supposition.77
We would identify the error as involving a change in quantiﬁer
scope. Modes of supposition are properties that are aﬀected by the relative scopes
of quantiﬁer words in the proposition. The mode of supposition of a term was as
important to medieval theorists as quantiﬁer scope is to us today.
The modes of common personal supposition are also used in formulating rules
of inference that cover inferences that go beyond those addressed in the theories
inherited from Aristotle. (See sections 7.6 and 8.7.)
Once the importance of modes of supposition for inference was recognized, they
tended to become a topic of independent study.
7.1.3
Terms functioning as Denoting Phrases
One thing common to all parts of the tradition is that the modes are used to classify
terms, as opposed to denoting phrases that contain the terms. For example, in
‘Every donkey is running’ one classiﬁes ‘donkey’ as having distributive supposition,
not ‘every donkey’. But the classiﬁcation of terms is a classiﬁcation of terms as
aﬀected by quantiﬁer signs.
In the proposition ‘Every donkey is running’ the
classiﬁcation of ‘donkey’ is sensitive to the ‘every’ preceding it. In most cases
it turns out that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between classifying denoting
phrases such as ‘every donkey’ or classifying main terms, such as ‘donkey’. So
when we classify ‘animal’ in ‘Every donkey is some animal’ as merely confused,
we can, if we wish, see this as a roundabout way of classifying ‘some donkey’ as
merely confused in that proposition. (The classiﬁcation of terms that are not the
main term of a denoting phrase needs additional discussion.)78
77In many cases, confusing one mode of supposition for another was seen as an instance of the
Aristotelian fallacy of form of expression. Peter of Spain TVI.8 (71) says: “ In the examples
above, ... the term ‘man’ stands for every man, running or not, but it makes the utterance true
for one man running. That each is determinate is clear, because in Socrates is an animal, Plato
is an animal, Cicero is an animal, etc.; therefore every man is an animal, there is a fallacy of
form of expression, shifting from many determinates to a single one.” A change is made in the
mode of supposition, but this is concealed because the words used before and after the change
seem to have the same forms.
(The Latin that is translated here as “form of expression” is
‘ﬁgura dictionis’.
This is often translated as “ﬁgure of speech”, but it does not involve any
ﬁgure of speech as this term is understood today.) The order of the words changes, but there
is no grammatical change, such as switching the subject and direct object, as in the fallacy of
amphiboly, or of grouping, as in the fallacy of composition or division.
78Examples of terms that are not the main term of a denoting phrase are ‘donkey’ in ‘Every
non-donkey is a stone’, and in ‘Every grey donkey is running’. These are cases in which the term
forms only part of a complex term that combines as a whole with a quantiﬁer sign. Although

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
225
7.1.4
Two versions of the theory
Most theorizing about modes of supposition falls under one of two overall versions.
One version, which I will call the early view, is espoused by three 13th century
ﬁgures (among others): William Sherwood, Lambert of Auxerre, and Peter of
Spain.79 On this version, the meanings of the modes are deﬁned quantitatively, in
terms of “how many” of its supposita a term is taken for; this is explained in the
remainder of this section.
The other version — the later view — is developed by some 14th century
ﬁgures, especially Walter Burley, William Ockham, John Buridan, and Buridan’s
followers, Albert of Saxony and Marsilius of Inghen. An eclectic version of the
theory is given by Paul(s) of Venice, and the theory continues to be studied into
the 15th and 16th centuries. For these authors, explanations of the modes are
given in terms of certain types of inferences (ascent and descent) allowed by the
contexts of terms. This view is discussed in the next section.
7.2
The Early View: William Sherwood, Lambert of Auxerre, and
Peter of Spain
In an early version of the study of modes of personal supposition, William Sher-
wood has a charming and provocative quantitative account of the modes of sup-
position:
Personal supposition is determinate when the locution can be expounded
by means of some single thing. . . . [Personal supposition is] confused,
on the other hand, when the word supposits for many, and distribu-
tive when it supposits for many in such a way as to supposit for any.
[Sherwood IL V.2 (108)]
The suggestive terms that need elucidating are:
Determinate
. . . expounded by some single thing
Confused
. . . supposits for many
Distributed
. . . supposits for many, so that it supposits for any
Merely Confused
. . . supposits for many, but not for any
Our goal in this section is to make sense of this. We begin with determinate
supposition.
7.2.1
Determinate Supposition
William gives the following account of determinate supposition :
authors often take the oﬃcial position that their theory does not apply to terms that are parts
of other terms, they frequently discuss and classify such terms anyway.
79Some earlier anonymous works endorse this version as well: the 12th century Dialectica
Monacensis, and the 12th century Properties of Discourse (with some idiosyncrasies) in [De
Rijk, 1967].

226
Terence Parsons
Personal supposition is determinate when the locution can be expounded
by means of some single thing, which is the case when the word sup-
posits for some single thing. Therefore in ‘a man is running’ it can be
true for anyone running. [Ibid]
He soon adds:
The sentence ‘A man is running’ means that the predicate is in some
one individual, not in many, even though the predicate is in many —
for a sentence sometimes permits this but it does not signify it. [Ibid
V.11 (116)]80
I assume that the basic account is in the ﬁrst sentence: supposition is determinate
when the locution “can be expounded by means of some single thing”. This must
not be read as saying that in the sentence the word supposits for only one thing,
as if ‘man’ in ‘a man is running’ supposits only for one particular man among
men.
Apparently such a view was taken seriously, since Peter of Spain takes
pains to reject it, but in any event William’s view is not of that sort. The added
quote makes this clear: The sentence does not mean that the predicate is not in
many individuals. So we should read ‘the predicate is in some one individual’ as
permitting it to be in more than one. That is, we should read it as ‘the predicate
is at least in some individual’.
Generalizing to propositions of various forms, I suggest that we read the condi-
tion as saying:
A term is determinate in a proposition =df the proposition means that
there is at least one thing x that the term supposits for such that the
proposition is true for x.
To say that the proposition is true for x (with respect to a term) is equivalent to
saying that another proposition is true, namely, the one you get by replacing the
term (and its quantiﬁer sign, if any) by ‘x’.
‘. . . QT. . . ’ is true for x = ‘. . . x . . . ’ is true
where ‘Q’ is any quantiﬁer sign directly governing ‘T’. Example: The term ‘don-
key’ is determinate in ‘Some mammal is a donkey’ because
‘Some mammal is a donkey’ means that there is at least one donkey x
such that ‘Some mammal is x’ is true.81
This seems to me to be a possible reading of what he says. It also makes sense of
all of his applications. For example, it is easy to check that this makes both terms
80I interpret the ﬁrst sentence as “The sentence ‘A man is running’ means that the predicate
is in at least some one individual; it does not mean that the predicate is in many, even though .
. .”.
81Granted, this mixes up use and mention, but I think it is clear enough. We must interpret
‘means that’ loosely, as something like ‘necessarily, is true iﬀ’.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
227
of the particular aﬃrmative, as well as the subject term of the particular negative
(ignoring the case where the subject term is empty) determinate, and does not
make any other of the terms of standard categorical propositions determinate. I’ll
assume that this is his view.
Peter of Spain gives a loose characterization,82 which can be interpreted as
equivalent to Sherwood’s. The same is true of Lambert.83
7.2.2
Distributive Supposition
William deﬁnes confused and distributive supposition as follows:
Personal supposition is confused ... when the word supposits for many,
and distributive when it supposits for many in such a way as to supposit
for any. [Sherwood IL V.2 (108)]
To assess this we need to know ﬁrst what it is for a term to “supposit for many”. I
think that this is a very weak claim; it only denies that the term has determinate
supposition, i.e. it only denies that it supposits for (at least) one. That is, it
says that the proposition in question can not be expounded in terms of anything
involving “(at least) some single thing.” It is clear that nothing stronger is intended
than this, or, if something stronger is intended, it is soon retracted. For example,
William says soon after this deﬁnition [IL V.12 (116)] that a word has confused
82Peter of Spain TVI.8 (71): “Determinate supposition labels what a common term has when
taken indeﬁnitely or with a particular marker, as in ‘man runs’ or ‘some man runs’. Each of
these is called determinate, since though in each, the term ‘man’ stands for every man running
or not, they are true if only one man is running. {changing the translator’s ‘only if’ to ‘if only’.}
To stand for is one thing, to make a locution true for something, another. In the examples above,
... the term ‘man’ stands for every man, running or not, but it makes the utterance true for one
man running.”
83Lambert PT 3g(iv) (111): “Determinate supposition is what a common term has when it
can be taken equally well for one or for more than one, as when one says ‘A man is running’. In
that proposition ‘man’ has determinate supposition because it is true if one man is running or if
more than one are running. But it is called determinate because for the truth of a proposition
in which a common term that has that sort of supposition is used, it is enough that the common
term is interpreted necessarily for some suppositum, and it is not required that it be interpreted
necessarily for more than one, although in supposition of this sort it can be interpreted for more
than one.” I take it that the heart of this account is:
A term T has determinate supposition in a proposition when it is suﬃcient for the truth of
that proposition that ‘T’ be interpreted in it for one of its supposita.
When Lambert talks about interpreting a term in a proposition for one, it may be that this is
the same as when William talks about the proposition being true for a single thing (with respect
to that term). On this interpretation Lambert’s remarks yield a slightly diﬀerent account than
William’s, since Lambert’s account only talks about a suﬃcient condition for truth, instead of a
necessary and suﬃcient condition. If we look at the terms of standard form categorical propo-
sitions, this yields the standard results except that it makes predicates of universal aﬃrmatives
have determinate supposition; it does this since ‘Every S is P’ does follow from ‘For some x
that is P, every S is x’. This cannot be what Lambert intended, since he says that these predi-
cates have confused supposition. Probably Lambert was taking for granted that in determinate
supposition it is also necessary for the truth of the proposition that it be true for one of T’s
supposita. If this is added to the above account, it becomes equivalent to William’s.

228
Terence Parsons
supposition whenever it supposits either for many things or for one thing taken
repeatedly. (He is worried about the second ‘man’ in ‘Every man sees a man’
when everyone sees the same man — so that it is false that many men are seen.)
So the ‘many’ is merely a way of denying that we have a case of ‘one’, that
is, of determinate supposition. This reduces the characterization of distributive
supposition to:
A term has distributive supposition when it does not have determinate
supposition and it supposits for any.
It is clear in context that ‘supposits for any’ means that the term supposits for
any of its supposita; I will take this limitation for granted. The trick is to see how
to get this to mean anything other than a tautology. After all, how could a term
not “supposit for any” of its supposita? The answer must be that for a term to
supposit for something in a proposition requires more than just that the thing in
question be among the term’s supposita. I suggest that a term “supposits for any
of its supposita in a proposition” just in case that proposition’s being true entails
that it (that very proposition) is true for any of the supposita of the term (with
respect to the term in question), in the sense of ‘true for’ discussed above. Thus,
a necessary and suﬃcient condition for:
‘T’ supposits for any of its supposita in a proposition ‘. . . T. . . ’
is:
the proposition ‘. . . QT. . . ’ entails that ‘. . . QT. . . ’ is true for any of
T’s supposita.
This can then be further spelled out as follows:
Necessarily, if ‘. . . QT. . . ’, then for any x that is T: ‘. . . x. . . ’ is true
For example, the term ‘dog’ has distributive supposition in ‘every dog is spotted’
because it does not have determinate supposition there, and:
Necessarily: if every dog is spotted, then, for any x that is a dog: x is
spotted.
(Again, this is an explanation of how to understand William’s account, not a
proposal for how to replace his account with something clearer. His account was
already fully stated above, and I have not suggested revising it.)
One can check that this account also gives the intended results for the subject
and predicate terms of universal negatives.
It also classiﬁes the predicates of
particular negatives as distributed, because
Necessarily: if some dog is not spotted, then, for any x that is spotted,
some dog is not x.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
229
One might wonder why I have formulated the condition for distributive supposition
here in terms of a conditional instead of a biconditional.
I am guided by the
intended applications; in order for the predicate of ‘Some S is not P’ to have
distributive supposition (which is required by William’s rule at V.13.1) one needs
a conditional, not a biconditional.
Peter of Spain says:
Distribution is the multiplication of a common term eﬀected by a uni-
versal sign. [T XII.1 (185)]
He doesn’t say much more. Whatever he has in mind, his account is not the same
as William’s, for he insists that a universal sign is needed for distribution, and he
thinks that negation is not a universal sign. (This will be discussed below.) So the
predicate of a particular negative cannot have distributive supposition for Peter;
instead, he says that such predicates have simple supposition. This is no surprise
since he claims this is true for all predicates. [TVI.6 (70-71)]
Ignoring predicates, the best way to read Peter is probably to assume that he
means roughly the same as William except that he states the additional condition
that distribution occurs only in connection with a distributing sign,84 coupled
with the view that ‘every’ and ‘no’ are distributing signs but ‘not’ is not. He thus
agrees with the others for the most part, though he diﬀers regarding some details.
Lambert’s account is close to that of Sherwood.85
7.2.3
Merely Confused Supposition
The deﬁnition of merely confused supposition is the hardest to get clear on. Sher-
wood’s explanation is virtually no explanation at all:
[Personal supposition] is merely confused [when the word supposits as
does] the word ‘animal’ [in ‘every man is an animal’]. [IL V.2 (108)]
There are a number of additional examples, but little in the way of explanation.
However, his initial exposition suggests that merely confused supposition is nothing
other than confused supposition that is not distributive. So we can just understand
merely confused supposition as any personal supposition that is neither determi-
nate nor distributive, and then use the above explanations for determinacy and
distribution. Among standard categorical propositions, this would classify only
the predicate term of a universal aﬃrmative as merely confused, which is what
most people other than Peter of Spain thought.
Peter of Spain does not deﬁne ‘merely confused’.86 His view seems to be that
where others see a need for merely confused supposition (most prominently, in
84This appears to be what Peter argues in TVI (10-12) and in XII (24).
85Lambert PT 3g(v) (112): “[Distributive] ... supposition is what a common term has when it
is interpreted for all of its supposita necessarily...” Above I suggested that Lambert’s ‘the term
is interpreted for’ is the same as William’s ‘the proposition is true for’. If we make this same
equation here, Lambert’s account is the same as William’s.
86At VI.10 (72) it appears that he might consider deﬁning merely confused as immobilely
confused, but this is in the context of a speculation that he goes on to reject.

230
Terence Parsons
the predicates of universal aﬃrmatives) he sees only simple supposition. So Peter
parts company with the others on this category. Lambert gives a somewhat obscure
explanation that can be interpreted as equivalent to Sherwood’s.87
7.2.4
Summary of the early theory
Although all of the texts allow of multiple interpretations, in the light of intended
applications of the accounts, I suggest the following criteria for the modes of
supposition of common terms used personally in simple categorical propositions:
• ‘T’ has determinate supposition in the proposition ‘. . . QT . . . ’ iﬀNec-
essarily: ‘. . . QT . . . ’ is true iﬀfor at least one x that is T, ‘. . . x . . . ’ is
true
• ‘T’ has distributive supposition in the proposition ‘. . . QT . . . ’ iﬀNeces-
sarily: if ‘. . . QT . . . ’ is true then for every thing x that is T, ‘. . . x . . . ’ is
true
• merely confused supposition in the proposition ‘. . . QT . . . ’ iﬀ‘T’ has
neither determinate nor distributive supposition in ‘. . . QT . . . ’
More schematically:
• Determinate: . . . QT . . . ↔for at least one x that is T: . . . x . . .
• Distributive: . . . QT . . . →for every x that is T : . . . x . . .
• Merely Confused: neither Determinate nor Distributive
To have a better feel for what this amounts to, here are how the terms in the
following propositions would be classiﬁed by these criteria:
87The full quote from Lambert PT 3g(v) (112) is: “Weak immobile supposition is what a
common term has when it is interpreted necessarily for more than one suppositum contained
under it but not for all, and a descent cannot be made under it.” He uses ‘weak’ where others
use ‘merely confused’. He is trying to deﬁne both weak and immobile in the same sentence.
(Lambert holds that there is no such thing as mobile weak confusion.)
How this works depends on how it is interpreted. Suppose, for example, that we interpret it
as weakly as possible. Then we construe Lambert’s ‘more than one’ as we did William’s ‘many’,
that is, merely as a way to deny that the term “can be interpreted for (at least) one.” This part
of the clause then simply denies that the term has determinate supposition. Then we interpret
‘but not for all’ as merely denying that the term is “interpreted for all of its supposita,” that
is, as merely denying that the term is used distributively. The overall result is that a term is
deﬁned to have merely confused supposition when it has personal supposition that is neither
determinate nor distributive. This is a satisfactory account that coheres with others (except for
Peter’s). Stronger construals are possible, but I do not see any natural way to produce one that
coheres with the application of the theory to the subjects and predicates of simple categorical
propositions.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
231
Some A is every B
A is determinate
B is distributive
Every A is every B
A is distributive
B is distributive
No A is every B
A is distributive
B is merely confused
Some A is no B
A is determinate
B is distributive
Some A is not every B
A is determinate
B is determinate
Some A is not no B
A is determinate
B is determinate
7.3
Mobility
Some terms in a proposition are mobile and some are immobile. A mobile term is
one that can be instantiated; that is, the proposition containing it entails the result
of replacing the term (along with its quantiﬁer sign, if any)88 with any discrete term
that stands for a suppositum of the original term. For example, ‘donkey’ is mobile
in the proposition ‘Every donkey is running’ because that proposition, together
with the information that Brownie is a donkey, entails ‘Brownie is running’. This
inference is also called a descent, since one moves from a term such as ‘donkey’
to a term ‘Brownie’ that stands for something that falls under ‘donkey’. Terms
that are not mobile are immobile. An example is ‘donkey’ in ‘Every running thing
is a donkey’; from this and that fact that Brownie is a donkey one may not infer
(descend to) ‘Every running thing is Brownie’.
Sherwood, and most others see mobility as limited to distributive terms. Sher-
wood’s deﬁnition of mobility is:
[Distributive confused supposition is] mobile when a descent can be
made, as in the term ‘man’ in [‘every man is an animal’]. It is immobile
when a descent cannot be made, as here: ‘only every man is running’
(for one cannot infer ‘therefore only Socrates is running’) [IL V.2 (108-
09)]
Lambert’s deﬁnition is practically the same (he even illustrates it with the same
examples). [PT 3g(v) (113)]89 The identical examples suggest an identical source
for both passages.
Mobility interacts in complicated ways with other notions, as we will see.
88If the quantiﬁer sign is negative, such as ‘no’, then you need to preserve the negation by
inserting ‘not’ in its place. For example, from ‘No donkey is running’ and ‘Brownie is a donkey’
you infer ‘Not Brownie is running’.
Since discrete terms commute with ‘not’ you can write
instead ‘Brownie is not running’.
89Lambert “Notice that confused supposition is strong (= distributive) whenever it is mobile,
but not conversely — mobile whenever it is strong (= distributive) — for it can indeed be strong
(= distributive) and immobile. When one says ‘Only every man is running’, ‘man’ has strong
(= distributive) but immobile confused supposition; for the exclusive word [‘only’] added to the
distributed term impedes it so that a descent cannot be made under it.” Lambert uses ‘strong’
where others use ‘distributed’.

232
Terence Parsons
7.4
Locality
Sherwood and Lambert (and probably Peter of Spain) hold that modes of suppo-
sition are determined by how they occur in their local context. That is, a term
is classiﬁed in terms of what mode it has in a simple proposition, and that clas-
siﬁcation does not change when the proposition is embedded in more complex
propositions. Recall from the previous section that preﬁxing the word ‘only’ to
‘every man is running’ impedes mobility without changing the fact that the term
to which it is added is distributive. This is implicit in Lambert’s wording: the re-
sult is a term that has “distributive but immobile” supposition. William comments
on this as follows:
But it seems a descent can be made in every case of distributive sup-
position, for a word supposits distributively that supposits for many in
such a way as to supposit for any; therefore a descent can be made to
any. And it must be said that a descent can be made in every case of
distributive supposition considered in itself (quantum est de se); nev-
ertheless, the descent can be impeded by means of an adjunct, as by
means of the word ‘only’ in the example above. [IL V.3 (109)]
Kretzmann explains this (correctly, I think); he says that Sherwood means that
the term, which is originally distributed in ‘every man is running’, is mobile there.
But embedding that proposition in a larger one can impede the mobility without
aﬀecting the distribution of the term.
The test for distributive supposition is
apparently applied before the impeding term is added, and adding it does not
change this. Additional evidence that Sherwood believes this is that he later pairs
the proposition ‘Only every man is running’ with ‘Not every man is running’,
saying that both of them contain immobile distribution. [IL V.13.5 (119]
A consequence of this view is that no term that is not distributed in its smallest
proposition may become distributive upon embedding. Peter of Spain makes this
clear in his discussion of what causes distribution. He notes that from ‘Not [a]
man is just’ one can infer ‘Not Socrates is just’.
That is, ‘man’ is mobile in
that proposition. However, this is not because ‘man’ is distributed there; it is
not. So not only is there distribution without mobility, there is mobility without
distribution.
It appears as if the mode of supposition of a term is deﬁned in terms of that
term’s quantiﬁcational functioning when that term is in its “minimal position”.
This is like our deﬁning quantiﬁers in terms of what they do when they are in
canonical position: on the front of a formula with scope over it. When a uni-
versally quantiﬁed sentence is embedded in something larger, we do not say that
the quantiﬁer is no longer universal, even if it becomes immobile (that is, even
if universal instantiation is no longer valid for it). In the early theory, modes of
supposition work that way. The only diﬀerence is that in the medieval theory
there are two basic minimal positions where a term gets its mode of supposition:
subject position and predicate position in a minimal categorical proposition.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
233
The signiﬁcance of suppositional mode being local will emerge when we discuss
rules of inference below, and when in the next section we contrast the early theory
with the later, in which modes of supposition are global, not local.
7.5
Causes of Distribution and Confusion
All scholars agree that neither confusion nor distribution can occur unless it is
caused to occur. Generally, it was thought that they must be caused to occur by
some sign which has scope over the term in question.90 We look here at some 13th
century accounts.
Confusion and distribution need to be caused, but determinacy does not; this is
because a common term that is unaﬀected by any sign is determinate by default.
It is also immobile by default. Its status can be changed by the addition of some
sign, though not just any old sign; a particular sign such as ‘some’ leaves its
determinate status unchanged.
Signs other than particular ones can aﬀect
Confusion . . . causing it or undoing it,
Distribution . . . causing it or undoing it,
Mobility . . . causing it or undoing it.
For example, ‘every’ in the universal aﬃrmative form confuses and distributes and
makes mobile the subject to which it is adjoined; it confuses the predicate without
distributing it and without making it mobile. The ‘no’ in the universal negative
confuses and distributes both the subject term to which it is adjoined and the
predicate term, and makes them both mobile.
Sherwood gives three rules for confusion and distribution [IL V.13.1 (117).]
(The rules presuppose that a term starts out determinate by default.):
[A] every distributive sign confuses the term immediately adjoining it
confusedly and distributively.
[B] an aﬃrmative [distributive] sign confuses the remote term merely
confusedly.
[C] a negative [distributive] sign confuses the remote term confusedly
and distributively.
Thus this follows: ‘no man is an ass; therefore no man is this ass’. But
this does not follow: ‘every man is an animal; therefore every man is
this animal’.
Sherwood’s rules say nothing about mobility, which is what is at issue in the
examples he gives.
(The question is whether one may descend under ‘ass’ or
‘animal’.) I think that he is presupposing a rule about mobility, which I will call
D:
90The notion of scope here is a modern one; I use it here to sum up what seems to me to be
the medieval practices. Certain writers thought that confusion or distribution could be caused
without a sign, by the will of the speaker (such as giving distributive supposition to the subject
of an indeﬁnite proposition such as ‘A donkey is an animal’). Cf. [Barney et al., 1997].

234
Terence Parsons
[D] a distributed term is mobile if nothing impedes its mobility.
In the ﬁrst example he gives, the ‘no’ distributes the predicate term by rule C, and
thus it is mobile by rule D. That is, you can infer an instance under the term ‘ass’.
In his second example the ‘every’ confuses without distributing the predicate term.
This seems to assume an additional principle for mobility, which is something like:
[E] a term is immobile unless made mobile.
Since there is nothing in the second example to make the predicate term mobile,
the inference fails. (The ‘every’ makes the predicate term merely confused; that
is, it makes it confused without making it distributive.)
How adequate are Sherwood’s rules? They apply fairly well to the terms occur-
ring in standard categoricals.
In a universal aﬃrmative the subject is (confused and) distributed by
rule A, and made mobile by rule D; the predicate is confused without
being distributed (it is merely confused) by rule B, and remains immo-
bile by rule E.
In a universal negative both terms are (confused and) distributed, by
rules A and C, and they are both mobile by rule E.
In a particular aﬃrmative no rules apply, so both terms are determi-
nate by default and immobile by rule E.
In a particular negative the subject is determinate by default, and
immobile by rule E. What about the predicate? The above rules ap-
ply to the predicate if ‘not’ is a negative distributive sign; otherwise
they don’t apply. If they do, the ‘not’ confuses and makes mobile the
predicate by rules C and D.
In all cases but the last, the classiﬁcation of terms as determinate, distributive,
and merely confused agree with the tradition, and the classiﬁcation with respect to
mobility agrees with everyone’s intuitions about what instantiations are possible
under the terms. The only uncertainty is regarding the predicate of the particular
negative predicate. Intuitively, it is mobile because one can descend under it, and
this would follow if ‘not’ distributed it.
William himself seems to be committed to the view that ‘not’ is a distributing
sign when it occurs directly with the copula. This is because he elsewhere classiﬁes
certain terms as distributive which cannot become distributive any other way. For
example, he says that the second ‘man’ is distributed in ‘every man does not see a
man’. The ‘every’ cannot distribute the second ‘man’ because it is a remote term
vis a vis the ‘every’; this leaves only the ‘not’ to do the trick. Likewise, he says that
‘man’ is distributive in ‘Socrates does not see a man’. 91 So ‘not’ is a distributive
sign in this position. This would entail that the predicates of particular negatives
have distributive supposition — a matter that he does not explicitly discuss. This
would also make such predicates mobile (by rule E), which is good, because from
91Kretzmann points this out (right after rule C).

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
235
‘Some animal is not a donkey’ it does follow that ‘Some animal is not Brownie’
given that Brownie is a donkey.
What does ‘not’ do when it is not next to the copula? William does not say,
but he seems to be committed to the view that it is not a distributing sign in
those positions. For example, the following inference is a good one, according to
his previously discussed views on equipollent signs (IL section 1.7):
Some donkey is not running
∴Not every donkey is running
If ‘not’ were a distributing sign, both of the terms in the conclusion would have
distributive supposition by rules A and C, whereas in the premise the subject has
determinate supposition. This would then be an explicit counterexample to his
rule (discussed in section 7.6) that you cannot infer a distributed term from the
same term having determinate supposition.
I suggest that the rules William of Sherwood gives are supposed to apply only
within simple categorical propositions, which is where terms get their modes of
supposition.
When additional signs make propositions more complex, this can
aﬀect the mobility of signs, but once a term is given a mode of supposition, that
does not change.92
Peter of Spain holds a slightly more radical view; he argues that ‘not’ is never
a distributing sign. This is because ‘not’ does not “signify quantity universally”.
His argument is:
wherever distribution takes place, a general term is taken universally.
Therefore, it is ﬁtting that there be a word signifying quantity univer-
92William’s rules on the modes of supposition and on the causes of distribution were shared
by the author of the Dialectica Monacensis [De Rijk, pp. 614-15]:
“A universal aﬃrmative sign confuses a common term immediately adjoined to it mobilely and
distributively.
“A term is said to be confused distributively and mobilely when any inferior contained under it
can be inferred, as is clear in this locution: ‘Every human is an animal’, where the term ‘human’
is confused by the sign ‘every’ mobilely and distributively. Hence it can be inferred: ‘Socrates
[is an animal], and Plato [is an animal], and so of others’.
A universal aﬃrmative sign meagerly confuses a common term following it mediately.
‘A term is called meagerly confused when according to the requirements of the locution it is
able indiﬀerently to be taken for one or for several.
“Such a rule is given concerning a universal negative sign:
A universal negative sign confuses a mediately or immediately following common term dis-
tributively and mobilely.
“For it has two [eﬀects], namely distribution and negation. For ‘no’ is the same as ‘every not’.
By reason of the distribution it confuses the term immediately adjoined to it distributively and
mobilely; by reason of the negation it confuses the term mediately adjoined to it distributively
and mobilely.
For there is a rule concerning negation that a negation confuses any term it
confuses distributively and mobilely.”
See also Cum sit nostra [De Rijk, p. 449].
The writer of Properties of Discourse [Barney et al., 1997] writing at about William’s time,
disagrees with this. He maintains that distribution is always mobile, and he holds that in the
example ‘Not every man runs’ the negation does not remove supposition but it does remove the
distribution. This seems to look forward to the 14th century view.

236
Terence Parsons
sally. But a universal sign signiﬁes quantity universally, while negation
does not. Therefore, negation does not have the ability to distribute.93
This leaves Peter to explain the fact that the subject term of ‘Not some man is
just’ is mobile. His explanation is that this is merely a consequence of the logic
of negation. Since ‘Socrates is just’ entails ‘some man is just’ (on the assumption
that Socrates is a man), the contrapositive inference also holds: ‘Not some man
is just’ entails ‘Socrates is not just’, which is what mobility of ‘man’ amounts to
here. In short, mobility can result from phenomena other than distributing signs.
(Peter can consistently deny that ‘not’ distributes, because, as we have seen, he
thinks that the predicate term of a particular negative does not have distributive
supposition — it has simple supposition. Although his view is consistent, he no
longer has any account of its mobility that would explain why ‘Some animal is not
a donkey’ entails ‘Some animal is not Brownie’, given that Brownie is a donkey.)
When William’s rules for causes of distribution are applied to the examples of
almost-standard form propositions listed earlier, we get:
1
Some A is every B
A is determinate
B is distributive
2
Every A is every B
A is distributive
B is ???
3
No A is every B
A is distributive
B is distributive ???
4
Some A is no B
A is determinate
B is distributive
5
Some A is not every B
A is determinate
B is distributive ???
6
Some A is not no B
A is determinate
B is distributive ???
In all of the cases lacking question marks, the entries agree with the results of
applying the criteria of section 2 to the whole proposition.
About 2: One question about William’s rules regards the interpretation of the
rule for remote terms with aﬃrmative distributing signs:
an aﬃrmative [distributive] sign confuses the remote term merely con-
fusedly.
This may be read as saying that an aﬃrmative distributive sign makes the remote
term merely confused. On this interpretation the rules conﬂict, since the cited rule
makes the predicate merely confused, though the ‘every’ preceding the predicate
term distributes it. However, the rule may also be interpreted as saying that an
aﬃrmative distributive sign merely (= only) confuses the remote term — that is,
it confuses it and does nothing else. On this interpretation the ‘every’ attached
to the subject term confuses the predicate term — which leaves it open as to
whether it is distributive or not — and the ‘every’ attached to the predicate term
distributes the term. If this is so, the result agrees with the criteria from section
93Peter of Spain TXII.24 (198). Peter also has a less compelling argument; he says “If negation
has the ability to distribute, then just as ‘Every Socrates’ is incongruous, so too is ‘Non-Socrates’.
Which is false, since although a distributive sign cannot be added to a singular term, nevertheless
negation can.” This seems to assume that only a quantiﬁer sign can distribute, which is the point
at issue.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
237
2 applied to the whole proposition. Probably the latter is intended, though the
statement of the rule seems to require the former.
About 3: The rules seem to make the predicate term distributive, since both
quantiﬁer signs individually distribute it. This conﬂicts with the application of
the criteria.94
About 5 and 6: The same thing can be said for the predicate terms of examples
5 and 6 if ‘not’ is taken to be a distributing sign when it occurs within a basic
categorical proposition. If on the other hand the ‘not’ has no eﬀect at all, the
predicate term is clearly distributive because of the ’every’ or ‘no’. In either case
the result conﬂicts with the criteria.
So the parts of the theory do not hang together.
If the criteria for modes
of supposition are accurately stated above, then the rules for causes of mode of
supposition do not work for the applications in question. Perhaps that means that
some other criteria are needed, but it is not clear what they might be.
We have been discussing what happens when we look at nonstandard basic
categorical propositions. There are other complications as well. If ‘not’ is not
a distributing sign when it occurs outside of a minimal categorical proposition,
then it is clear that modes of supposition in the 13th century theory are not
invariant under logical equivalence. In particular, William’s rules of equipollence
change modes of distribution. Since ‘no’ is equipollent to ‘not some’, if neither
‘not’ (used outside a basic categorical) nor ‘some’ can distribute, then ‘donkey’
is not distributed in ‘Not some donkey is a stone’, though it is distributed in
the equipollent proposition ‘No donkey is a stone’.
This is not necessarily an
objection — indeed, it seems like a fairly natural consequence of the local nature
of modes in the 13th century theory. This is like saying that the quantiﬁer in
‘¬∀xFx’ is universal, even though the quantiﬁer is not universal in the logically
equivalent ‘∃x¬Px’. So with respect to quantiﬁcational phenomena, classifying
a term as distributed in the early theory is much like classifying a quantiﬁer as
universal. Universal-quantiﬁerhood is not preserved under logical equivalence, nor
is distributive-termhood.
Mobility is diﬀerent, as is the analogue for mobility of quantiﬁers. The universal
quantiﬁer is mobile in ‘∀x¬Fx’ as is the existential quantiﬁer in ‘¬∃xFx’; in both
cases the quantiﬁer may be instantiated; that is, you get a logical consequence by
erasing the quantiﬁer and replacing the variable it was binding with a name.
(The 14th century theory, unlike the 13th century one, makes the modes of
supposition behave logically like mobility.)
94It was common to handle such cases by giving a rule that states: Whatever immobilizes the
mobile, mobilizes the immobile, and vice versa. In that case, one sign mobilizes the word and
the other reverses this. This would make the predicate immobile — which is clearly the right
result. But the rules we are examining are about modes of supposition, not about mobility, and
William has no “reversal” principles for those.

238
Terence Parsons
7.6
Rules of Inference and Fallacies
It is clear that the modes of supposition of terms can inﬂuence what inferences
propositions containing them enter into. Attempts were made to catalogue some
principles governing these. A classic sample of these are Sherwood’s “rules” in
his chapter on kinds and modes of supposition. We have already seen his Rule
I, which gave the three principles (A-C) governing the causes of confusion and
distribution. His Rules II-V describe some consequences of relations among the
modes. I’ll ﬁrst go over them to see how they are supposed to work, and then I’ll
consider some problems with them.
Rule II An argument from merely confused supposition to distributive
confused supposition does not follow.
Thus when every man sees only himself this does not follow: ‘every
man a man does not see; therefore every man does not see a man’. [IL
V.13.2 (118)]
The point here seems straightforward: the second ‘man’ in the premise is merely
confused (by the ‘every’, according to rule A) but it is distributed in the conclusion
(presumably by rule C, assuming that ‘not’ is a distributing sign here). Since it is
distributed in the conclusion, it is mobile (by rule D), and so the conclusion entails
e.g. ‘every man does not see Socrates’. But that clearly does not follow from the
premise. So the inference is clearly invalid. Sherwood sees this as an instance of a
general pattern involving a term’s changing its mode of supposition from merely
confused to distributive.
Rule III An argument from many cases of determinate supposition to
one of determinate supposition does not follow, but [only] to one of
confused supposition.
Thus when every man sees only himself this does not follow: ‘a man is
seen by Socrates, and [a man is seen] by Plato (and so on with respect
to [all] individual [men]); therefore a man is seen by every man’. But
this does follow: ‘. . . therefore by every man a man is seen’, for a
distribution has force in a succeeding phrase but not in a preceding
phrase.[Ibid]
The inference resembles what was elsewhere called “induction”: concluding that
a universal generalization is true because each of its instances are. For example, if
m1, m2, . . . are all the men, then from ‘m1is mortal’ and ‘m2is mortal’ and . . . , you
can infer ‘every man is mortal’. Abstractly put, from ‘φ(m1)’, ‘φ(m2)’, etc, infer
‘φ(every M)’. But this principle holds only when the ‘every man’ ends up with
wide scope, and this is not the case in the bad example that Sherwood discusses.
The good example, the one that does follow, diﬀers exactly in that ‘every man’
ends up with wide scope. But this talk of “wide scope” uses modern terminology,
and the example was not discussed in these terms. Instead, what is discussed is
an eﬀect of scope. For the shift of scope of ‘every man’ also alters the scope —

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
239
and the mode of supposition — of ‘a man’; in the good example it has merely
confused supposition, and in the bad one it has determinate supposition. So the
rule is formulated in terms of whether you move from many cases of determinate
supposition to determinate supposition, or to merely confused supposition.
Rule IV An argument from determinate supposition to distributive con-
fused supposition does not follow, but only to merely confused supposi-
tion.
Thus this does not follow: ‘a man is not seen by Socrates; therefore
Socrates does not see a man’ — e.g. if Socrates sees one man only. But
this follows correctly: ‘a man is seen by every man; therefore every man
sees a man’. [Ibid]95
The badness of the ﬁrst inference and goodness of the second are obvious; the rule
identiﬁes the diﬀerence in terms of a principle about modes of supposition.
Rule V An argument from distributive confused supposition to determi-
nate supposition does follow, but not from merely confused supposition.
Thus this follows: ‘Socrates does not see a man; therefore a man is
not seen by Socrates’. But this does not: ‘every man sees a man (e.g.,
every man sees only himself); therefore a man is seen by every man’.
[Ibid (119)]
In the ﬁrst inference ‘man’ goes from distributive supposition to determinate sup-
position, and in the second it goes from merely confused to determinate. The rule
blames the goodness/badness of these inferences on the pattern of the modes of
supposition.
These rules all seem to have insight behind them, and they look promising as
part of an overall theory of inference in terms of modes of supposition. But there
are some problems with them.
Problem 1: Embedded propositions
The rules are all illustrated by fairly simple categorical propositions, but they are
supposed to hold in general. However, the rules are stated in terms of modes of
supposition, which do not change when a proposition is embedded in something
more complex — yet the goodness of the inferences can be aﬀected by this. A
simple example of an application of Rule IV is this inference:
If a man is seen by every man, then a man is seen by every man;
therefore,
If every man sees a man, then a man is seen by every man.
95The translation quoted here has been altered in conformity with discussion in the Preface to
[Kretzmann, 1968].

240
Terence Parsons
The premise is tautological, but the conclusion would usually be considered to
be false. However, the conclusion results from the premise only by changing a
determinate ‘man’ to a merely confused one.
Rule IV says that the inference
should be good, but it isn’t. The problem arises because putting a term in the
antecedent of a conditional can aﬀect its mobility, and thus the inferences that
can be drawn using it. If there is no eﬀect on its mode of supposition, then it is
not trustworthy to state principles of inference in terms of modes of supposition
as in Rule IV.
A parallel example can be constructed for Rule V.
(The 14th century view discussed in the next section holds that the modes of
supposition are aﬀected by context in the way that mobility is aﬀected in this
theory.)
Problem 2: What stays the same?
Here is an easy counterexample to Rule V, which says that an inference from
distributive supposition to determinate is valid:
Every donkey is an animal.
Some donkey is every animal.
The reason for the fallacy is blatant: we did not just change the subject from
distributive to determinate, we also changed the predicate from merely confused
to distributive. Apparently, the rule should specify that nothing else can change
in the proposition when the rule is applied. But something else often changes; for
example, some word switches position with another, and this may aﬀect both of
their modes. Perhaps what is meant then is that except for the quantifying sign
of the term under discussion, the same words must be used in the premise and
conclusion, and their grammatical relations must not change, and the modes of
supposition of the other terms must remain the same. William’s examples of good
inferences obey these constraints. But there are comparable simple cases which
are not addressed. Consider the inference:
Every girl gives every present to some boy
so
Every girl gives some boy every present
The constraints are obeyed by that inference (since nothing changes mode of sup-
position), but it is invalid, indicating that one cannot infer a distributed subject
from a distributed subject. In other words, this is an invalid inference in which no
term changes mode of supposition.
The following restricted rules seem to be valid:96
96Karger [1984, pp. 100–102] states some more general circumstances in which versions of rules
II, IV and V all hold. She also adds a rule stating circumstances under which two propositions
are equivalent when their corresponding terms have the same modes of supposition.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
241
If a term has distributive supposition in a proposition, then if you
change its quantiﬁer sign so as to give it determinate supposition (in-
serting a negation after the denoting phrase containing the term if it
changes from aﬃrmative to negative, or vice versa) then the resulting
proposition is entailed by the original.
If a term has determinate supposition in a proposition, then if you
change its quantiﬁer sign so as to give it merely confused supposition
(inserting a negation after the denoting phrase containing the term if it
changes from aﬃrmative to negative, or vice versa) then the resulting
proposition is entailed by the original.97
The ideas behind these rules are neat, but a great deal of work remains to be done.
When it was done it was within a somewhat diﬀerent framework — roughly that
of the next section.
8
MODES OF SUPPOSITION: THE LATER VIEW
8.1
The Fourteenth Century Deﬁnitions of the Modes
In the 14th century, Walter Burley, William Ockham, and John Buridan developed
a new approach to the analysis of the modes of common personal supposition. It
is not clear whether, or how, they saw their accounts as being diﬀerent from those
given by earlier authors, but the accounts did diﬀer in three important ways. (1)
The modes are deﬁned in terms of valid inferences, not in terms of quantities such
as ‘many’ or ‘any’. (2) The modes of supposition of terms are deﬁned globally
instead of locally, so that embedding a proposition in a larger one can alter not
just mobility but also mode of supposition. (3) In earlier accounts some good
inferences depend on whether the term in question has or lacks mobility, but rules
for these inferences are phrased in terms not of mobility but in terms of modes of
supposition. When a term has distributive but immobile supposition, rules based
on distributivity tend to fail. Conversely, a term without distributive supposition
might have the mobility needed to yield an inference that the rules deny to terms
that are not distributive. In the later theory, as a result of (1) and (2) the modes
of supposition are brought into conformity with kinds of mobility.
The new accounts deﬁne the mode of supposition of a term in a proposition98
in terms of conditions on ascent and descent under that term in the proposition.
(A descent is similar to a quantiﬁer instantiation step in modern logic; an ascent
97When the only quantiﬁer signs are ‘some’, ‘every’ and ’no’, it is not possible to give an
example of this second rule.
The possibility of giving such an example arises in some post-
medieval theories; see Ashworth 1974 IV.II.1 on special invented signs governing supposition.
98Some authors held that only main terms have personal supposition in a proposition (where
a main term is one that is not part of another term). Burley DS para 5-15 argues this. But the
deﬁnitions to be given of modes of supposition apply meaningfully to any term in a proposition.
In practice, authors sometimes applied the deﬁnitions to parts of terms, even when denying that
this is possible.

242
Terence Parsons
is similar to a quantiﬁer generalization step.)
Each of the three modes has a
distinctive pattern of allowable ascents and descents.
What follows is an account that takes what is most common to the views of
Burley, Ockham, and Buridan. The theory consists of three deﬁnitions; they give
necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a term’s having determinate, distributive,
or merely confused supposition. Begin with determinate supposition:
Determinate supposition99
A term F has determinate supposition in a proposition P if and only
if
[Descent]: you may descend under F to a disjunction of
propositional instances of all the Fs, and
[Ascent]: from any such instance you may ascend back to
the original proposition P
A propositional instance of a proposition with respect to F is the proposition you
get by replacing the quantiﬁer word of the denoting phrase containing F by ‘this’
or ‘that’, and adding a ‘not’ if the quantiﬁer word is negative. Descent and ascent
are inferences, picturesquely expressed in terms of the directions in which the
inferences go. As an example, we validate the claim that ‘donkey’ has determinate
supposition in ‘Some donkey is spotted’ by establishing these two claims:
Descent: You may descend under ‘donkey’ in ‘Some donkey is spotted’
to a disjunction of instances of all donkeys. That is, from:
Some donkey is spotted
you may infer:
This donkey is spotted or that donkey is spotted or . . . and
so on for all the donkeys.
99This account is common to both Ockham and Buridan. Burley omits the ascent clause.
Buridan SD 4.3.5 (262-63) says “. . . there are two conditions for the determinate supposition
of some common term. The ﬁrst is that from any suppositum of that term it is possible to infer
the common term, the other parts of the proposition remaining unchanged. For example, since,
in ‘A man runs’, the term ‘man’ supposits determinately, it follows that ‘Socrates runs; therefore,
a man runs’, ‘Plato runs; therefore, a man runs’, and so on for any singular contained under the
term ‘man’. The second condition is that from a common term suppositing in this manner all
singulars can be inferred disjunctively, by a disjunctive proposition. For example, ‘A man runs;
therefore, Socrates runs, or Plato runs or John runs ...’ and so on for the rest.”
Ockham SL I.70 (200) says: “. . . whenever it is possible to descend to the particulars under
a general term by way of a disjunctive proposition and whenever it is possible to infer such a
proposition from a particular, the term in question has personal determinate supposition.”
Burley PAL 1.1.3 para.82 (102) says: ‘Supposition is determinate when a common term sup-
posits disjunctively for its supposita in such a way that one can descend to all of its supposita
under a disjunction, as is plain with ‘Some man runs’. For it follows: ‘Some man runs; therefore,
Socrates runs, or Plato runs, and so on’.”

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
243
Ascent: You may ascend back to the original proposition, because
from any instance of the form:
This donkey is spotted
you may infer the original proposition:
Some donkey is spotted.
Distributive supposition has a parallel explanation:
Distributive Supposition100A term F has distributive supposition
in a proposition P if and only if
[Descent]: you may descend under F to a conjunction of
propositional instances about all the Fs, and
[Ascent]: from any one instance you may not ascend back
to the original proposition P.
So ‘donkey’ has distributive supposition in ‘Every donkey is spotted’ because
Descent: You may descend under ‘donkey’ in ‘Every donkey is spot-
ted’ to a conjunction of instances about all donkeys. That is, from:
Every donkey is spotted
you may infer:
This donkey is spotted and that donkey is spotted and . . . and
so on for all the donkeys.
Ascent: You may not ascend back to the original proposition. From
an instance of the form:
This donkey is spotted
you may not infer the original proposition:
100Buridan’s account omits the ascent condition. Ockham includes additional provisions for
immobile distribution. Burley does not deﬁne distributive supposition; instead he deﬁnes two
kinds of distributive supposition. This will be discussed below.
Buridan SD 4.3.6 (264) says: “Distributive supposition is that in accordance with which from
a common term any of its supposita can be inferred separately, or even all of them at once
conjunctively, in terms of a conjunctive proposition.
For example, from ‘Every man runs’ it
follows that therefore ‘Socrates runs’, [therefore ‘Plato runs’, or even that] therefore ‘Socrates
runs and Plato runs ...’ and so on for the rest.”
Ockham SL I.70 (201) says: “Confused and distributive supposition occurs when, assuming
that the relevant term has many items contained under it, it is possible in some way to descend
by a conjunctive proposition and impossible to infer the original proposition from any of the
elements in the conjunction. . . .” (The “in some way” clause is to allow for immobile distributive
supposition; it will be discussed in section 8.3.)

244
Terence Parsons
Every donkey is spotted.
Finally, merely confused supposition:
Merely Confused Supposition101
A term F has merely confused supposition in a proposition P if and
only if
[Descent]: you may not descend under F to either a con-
junction or a disjunction of propositional instances about
all the Fs, and
[Ascent]: from any instance you may ascend back to the
original proposition P.
The term ‘mammal’ has merely confused supposition in ‘Every donkey is a
mammal’ because:
Descent: You may not descend under ‘mammal’ in ‘Every donkey is
a mammal’ to either:
Every donkey is this mammal and every donkey is that mam-
mal and . . . , and so on for all the donkeys
or to:
Every donkey is this mammal or every donkey is that mam-
mal or . . . , and so on for all the donkeys.
Ascent: You may ascend back to the original proposition from any
instance. From:
101The account given is that of Burley. Burley 1.1.4 para 85 (103): “Supposition is merely con-
fused when a common term supposits (a) for several things in such a way that (b) the proposition
is inferred from any one of them and (c) one cannot descend to any of them either copulatively
or disjunctively. The predicate supposits in this way in ‘Every man is an animal’, because: (a)
the term ‘animal’ supposits for several things. For if it supposited for some determinate one,
the proposition would be false. (b) The proposition is inferred from any of its singulars. For
it follows: ‘Every man is this animal; therefore, every man is an animal’. And (c) one cannot
descend under ‘animal’ either disjunctively or copulatively. For it does not follow: ‘Every man
is an animal’ therefore, every man is this animal or every man is that animal’. Neither does
it follow: ‘Every man is an animal; therefore, every man is this animal and every man is that
animal’, and so on.
Buridan agrees, but omits the ascent condition. Buridan 4.3.6 (264): “But merely confused
supposition is that in accordance with which none of the singulars follows separately while retain-
ing the other parts of the proposition, and neither do the singulars follow disjunctively, in terms
of a disjunctive proposition, although perhaps they do follow by a proposition with a disjunct
term.”
Ockham adds a condition on descent which will be discussed in section 8.9.3. Ockham I.70
(201): “Merely confused supposition occurs when a common term supposits personally and it is
not possible, without a change in either extreme, to descend to particulars by way of a disjunctive
proposition, but it is possible to descend by way of a proposition with a disjunctive predicate
and it is possible to infer the original proposition from any particular.”

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
245
Every donkey is this mammal
you may infer the original proposition:
Every donkey is a mammal.
In illustrating the deﬁnitions above we showed that the subjects of aﬃrmative
propositions and the predicate of the universal aﬃrmative have the modes that
they were assigned throughout the tradition. All of the other terms in the standard
categorical propositions are like this. For example, we can show that by these
deﬁnitions the predicate term of a particular negative proposition has distributive
supposition:
The term ‘donkey’ has distributive supposition in ‘Some stone is not a donkey’
because
Descent: You may descend under ‘donkey’ to a conjunction of in-
stances of all donkeys. That is, from:
Some stone is not a donkey
you may infer:
Some stone is not this donkey and some stone is not that
donkey and . . . and so on for all the donkeys.
Ascent: You may not ascend back to the original proposition; from
an instance of the form:
Some stone is not this donkey
you may not infer the original proposition:
Some stone is not a donkey.
The earlier and later theories agree on the terms of the standard Aristotelian
categorical propositions, but they disagree in many other cases.
Consider the
proposition
Not every man is running
The subject of this proposition was taken to have distributive supposition by
Sherwood. This is presumably because the proposition is got by putting ‘not’ in
front of a universal aﬃrmative proposition, in which ‘man’ is already distributed.
But on the later theory the mode of supposition changes when the ‘not’ is put
on. It is easy to check that according to the later theory of ascent and descent
the term ‘man’ in ‘not every man is running’ has determinate supposition. This
is because from
Not every man is running

246
Terence Parsons
one may descend to
Not this man is running or not that man is running, etc, for all the
men.
and the original proposition is entailed by any disjunct.
8.2
Clariﬁcation of the Deﬁnitions
Some clariﬁcations of the deﬁnitions are necessary.
8.2.1
The nature of ascent and descent
The ﬁrst point has to do with the nature of the inferences involved in ascent
and descent. Consider the following explanation of why ‘donkey’ is distributed in
‘Every donkey is an animal’. From:
Every donkey is an animal
one may infer
This donkey is an animal and that donkey is an animal and. . . for all
the donkeys.
This does not mean that if the displayed conjunction contains a term for every
donkey then ‘Every donkey is an animal’ entails ‘This donkey is an animal and
that donkey is an animal and. . .’, for the former sentence does not entail the
latter.
What is meant instead is that from the truth of ‘ Every donkey is an
animal’, together with the information that ‘This donkey is an animal and that
donkey is an animal and . . . ’ contains a term for each donkey, one may infer
that the disjunction is true.
The inference is from the generalization plus the
information about the exhaustiveness of the disjunction to the disjunction. This
is how the test should be understood.
8.2.2
Occurrences of terms have modes of supposition
Second, the classiﬁcation into modes of suppositions is a classiﬁcation of occur-
rences of terms, not of their types. In particular, in the proposition
Every donkey is a donkey
there are two terms, each of which has its own mode of supposition: the sub-
ject term has distributed supposition and the predicate term has merely confused
supposition. You can’t just ask for the mode of supposition of ’donkey’ in the
proposition without specifying which occurrence is meant.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
247
8.2.3
Repeated occurrences must be ignored
Third, the classiﬁcation is meant to be a classiﬁcation of an occurrence of a term
independent of the particular nature of any other terms in the sentence. In partic-
ular, if the same term is repeated, as in the example just discussed, you don’t just
apply the test for modes of supposition to an occurrence of the term in that very
sentence. For if you do, the results may depend on the very same term occurring
elsewhere, and that may give unintended results. For example, the following is an
incorrect way to try to show that the subject term of ‘Every donkey is a donkey’
has determinate supposition:
The subject term of ‘Every donkey is a donkey’ seems to have deter-
minate supposition, because that proposition does indeed entail ‘This
donkey is a donkey or that donkey is a donkey or. . .’, and any one of
these disjuncts alone entails the original proposition.
But the subject term is supposed to have distributive, not determinate, supposi-
tion. To avoid the bad consequence one must ignore the fact that a repeated term
is the same term. To test the subject term of
Every donkey is a donkey
you should apply the test to
Every donkey is a blah
And although that proposition does indeed entail
This donkey is a blah or that donkey is a blah or. . .
the ascent condition fails; the original proposition is not entailed by any of the
disjuncts alone. So the subject term does not have determinate supposition. It is
straightforward to show that it has distributive supposition.
A similar provision is needed regarding complex terms that contain repeated
terms within themselves. Consider what kind of supposition is possessed by the
subject term of:
Every donkey which is not a donkey is running
The sentence is logically false, and each instance (‘this donkey which is not a
donkey is running’) is also logically false. Logically false propositions entail any-
thing.102 So if the term is left unchanged, it is possible to descend to a conjunction
of instances, and it is also possible to ascend back from any instance. This does
not conform to any of the deﬁned modes of supposition, so such a term has no
102This was a common view.
For example, Buridan TC I.8.3 (196): “From any impossible
sentence any other follows, . . . ” Paul of Venice LP III.1 (167) “From the impossible follows
anything, i.e. from any impossible proposition any other proposition follows.”

248
Terence Parsons
mode of supposition. On the other hand, the proposition is a universal aﬃrma-
tive proposition, and we said that the subject term of a universal aﬃrmative has
distributive supposition. Which is right?
It is not clear from the texts what to say about this. The issue is similar to the
modern question of whether one may instantiate ‘∃x(Fx&¬Fx)’ to get ‘Fa&¬Fa’,
where a = Socrates. Certainly one may infer the latter from the former, since the
ﬁrst is logically false. But can one infer the latter by instantiating? Either answer
is possible. My intuition is that we should say that the inference, though valid, is
not a case of instantiation. The analogue for the medieval example above is to say
that the subject term has distributive supposition, and that the ascent condition
is not met because although the original proposition may be inferred from the
instance, this is not a proper case of ascent. However, it is not clear how to deﬁne
ascent so as to rule out this inference. Probably the best approach is to extend
the prohibition on repeated terms to include terms that occur within a complex
term. For the example above, one would then test:
Every donkey which is not a blah is running
This does indeed entail the conjunction of all instances of the form:
This donkey which is not a blah is running and . . . and so on for all
donkeys
and the original proposition may not be inferred from any instance. So the condi-
tions for distributive supposition are met.
8.2.4
Empty terms
There is a problem about how to apply the tests for ascent and descent when the
term under which one is ascending or descending is empty. If the tests are taken
literally, this seems to require a conjunction or disjunction with no conjuncts or
disjuncts. But there is no such thing. For example, one cannot make a conjunction
or disjunction of the instances of ‘No donkey which is not an animal is living’,
because there are no instances.
I am not aware of any discussion of this problem in medieval texts, except
possibly for Ockham’s wording of his account of distributive supposition:
Confused and distributive supposition occurs when, assuming that the
relevant term has many items contained under it [my italics], it is
possible in some way to descend by a conjunctive proposition and im-
possible to infer the original proposition from any of the elements in
the conjunction. . . . [SL I.70 (201)]
This appears to say that the test is to be applied on the assumption that the term
is not empty. Just suppose that there are some donkeys that are not animals, and
make a conjunction of instances of these:

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
249
This donkey which is not an animal is not living and that donkey which
is not an animal is not living, and . . . and so on for all the donkeys
that are not animals.
Then if the original were true, the conjunction would be true (and no ascent would
be possible). So this device seems to work ﬁne (though it is not completely clear
how to spell it out).
8.3
Mobility
In the earlier theory some distribution was mobile, and some immobile. Mobility
most often referred to the possibility of inferring from a proposition the result of
replacing a common term with any singular term that supposits for one of the
things the common term supposits for.
On the new theory, this describes the
descent condition that is part of the deﬁnition of distributive supposition. As a
result, mobility collapses into distribution, and there is no room for an immobile
distributed term.
This seems to be how Buridan viewed the matter. He does not talk about a
distributed term not being mobile. And in at least one place he seems to equate
the two notions. For example, in discussion of the eﬀect of inﬁnitizing negation
on a term, he says that a term is not distributed because it is not mobile:103
Marsilius of Ingham also rejects immobile distributive supposition:
I answer that each term standing confusedly distributively has mobile
supposition.
And I do not think the term man in this proposition
every man runs except Sortes to have immobile supposition, because,
in my opinion, this term stands for all men other than Sortes because
of restriction.104
However, the notion of immobile distributive supposition was ﬁrmly established in
the tradition, and others sought to preserve it. Ockham, as quoted two sections
103Buridan SD 4.3.7.3 (271): “ But concerning ‘Every non-man runs’ we should say similarly
that the term ‘non-man’ is distributed, while ‘man’ is no longer distributed, for reason of the
traditionally posited rule: ‘whatever mobilizes the immobilized immobilizes the mobilized, that
is, that which has the power to distribute an undistributed term removes the distribution of a
distributed one.”
The point here is that the preﬁx ‘non-’ by itself would distribute ‘man’, but so would the sign
‘every’. The second distribution removes the ﬁrst, since the ﬁrst mobilizes the supposition of
‘man’ and the second then immobilizes it. (Distribution of terms modiﬁed by ‘non-’ is discussed
later in this section.)
Paul of Venice LP II.5 (153) makes a similar equation: “. . . according
to one rule pertinent to this matter, viz., whatever mobilizes the immobile, immobilizes the
mobile. That is: If any sign having the power to distribute some term ﬁnds again the same term
undistributed, the sign makes the term stand distributively; and if the sign ﬁnds again the same
term distributed, the sign makes the term stand without distribution, . . . ”
104Marsilius (63) in [Bos, 1983]. The point seems to be that descent is possible under the term
‘man . . . except Sortes’ to every one of the things that it supposits for, namely, for every man
other than Sortes. (’Sortes’ is a common abbreviation of ‘Socrates’.) Also Marsilius TPT 1 (63)
“each term standing confusedly distributively has mobile supposition.”

250
Terence Parsons
above, allowed for immobile distributive supposition by including a provision in
the descent condition for distributive supposition for altering the wording during
descent. If no alteration is necessary, the supposition is mobile; if some is necessary
the supposition is immobile. Unfortunately, he did not specify which rewordings
preserve distribution, and which do not. For this reason, I have not tried to capture
his form of immobile distribution.
Burley also allows for immobile distribution; he says:
But confused and distributive supposition is immobile when a com-
mon term is distributed for its supposita and one cannot descend to
those supposita with respect to that with respect to which the distri-
bution is made. For instance, in ‘Every man besides Socrates runs’, the
term ‘man’ is distributed with respect to an exception, and one cannot
descend with respect to the same exception. For it does not follow:
‘Every man besides Socrates runs; therefore, Plato besides Socrates
runs’. [PAL 1.1.4 para 101 (107)]
This seems to deﬁne distributive supposition in terms of whether the common term
is distributed; the supposition is then mobile if descent is possible. Since Burley
oﬀers no account of what makes a term distributed, there is no clear doctrine here.
(But the next section may oﬀer an answer in terms of the causes of distribution.)
Paul of Venice perhaps comes closest to capturing the spirit of immobile distri-
bution:
Immobile distributive personal supposition is the acceptance of a com-
mon term standing personally beneath which one does not descend;
but if one should descend, he must do so conjunctively. For example
from ‘necessarily every man is animal’, it does not follow with the due
mean, ‘therefore, necessarily, this man is animal and thus of singulars’,
because the antecedent is true, and the consequent is false. [LP II.5
(152).]
Unfortunately, Paul does not say how to tell how one should descend when “one
does not descend”.
I will continue to work with Buridan’s simpler assumption that no real distri-
bution is immobile; that is, I will assume that all distribution is mobile by def-
inition. Immobile distribution will continue to be a not-very-well-deﬁned special
case, which is not actually a subclass of distributive supposition.
8.4
Causes of the Modes
The later theory continues the tradition of the earlier theory that modes of suppo-
sition (other than determinate) must be caused. Since the later theory disagrees
with the earlier regarding which modes of supposition some terms have, the rules
for the causes of modes must be diﬀerent. And since according to the later theory

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
251
embedding a proposition within a larger context can change the modes of supposi-
tion possessed by its terms, the rules must allow for a sign to change the mode of
supposition that is assigned by another sign. The key to the latter is to formulate
rules that can be applied recursively. For example, the ‘every’ in ‘Every donkey is
running’ assigns distributed status to the subject term ‘donkey’; embedding this
within a ‘not’ allows for the ‘not’ to reclassify the mode of supposition of ‘donkey’
as determinate in ‘Not every donkey is running’.
Here are some rules that are common to several authors:105
DEFAULT: A main term of a proposition has determinate supposi-
tion unless something causes it not to.106 A particular aﬃrmative sign
adjoined to a term makes it have determinate supposition (or, equiva-
lently, has no eﬀect).
UA:107 A universal aﬃrmative sign distributes the term it is adjoined
to and confuses any other main term following it in its scope if that
term is not already confused.
UN:108 A universal negative sign distributes the term it is adjoined to,
and also distributes any other main term following it and in its scope:
105Paul of Venice LP II.5 (152-56) has similar rules plus a host of others. For example, the
superlative and comparative constructions distribute their terms; an exceptive expression (as
in ‘every man except Socrates’) makes its term be merely confused, as does a reduplicative
expression (as in ‘Every man as a man’), and terms concerning an act of the mind, such as
‘know’, ‘believe’.
Paul speaks here of signs “confounding” terms, and thereby aﬀecting their
mode of supposition. Marsilius TPT 1 (65-71) gives nineteen rules.
106Buridan SD 4.3.5 (263): “If you ask ‘How do I know when the supposition is determinate?.
I say . . . you will know if you see that there is no cause for confusion.”
Ockham SL I.71 (202): “when in a categorical proposition no universal sign distributing the
whole extreme is added to a term, either mediately, or immediately, . . , and when no negation
or any expression equivalent to a negative or a universal sign is added to a common term, that
common term supposits determinately.”
107Buridan SD 4.3.7.1 (265) says: “a universal aﬃrmative sign distributes the term immediately
following and construed with it.”, and 4.3.8.1 (273): “there are many causes of nondistributive
confusion. The ﬁrst obtains when the universal aﬃrmative sign confuses a common term following
upon it, but not immediately, as when in the proposition ‘Every man is an animal’ the term
‘animal’ supposits by nondistributive confused supposition.”
Ockham SL I.74 (213) says: “in every universal aﬃrmative and universal negative proposition
that is neither exclusive nor exceptive, the subject has confused and distributive mobile suppo-
sition.” I.73 (211): “where a common term mediately follows an aﬃrmative sign of universality,
it has merely confused supposition.”
108Buridan SD 4.3.7.2 (269-70) says: “. . . a negative universal sign is nothing else but a word
that implies in itself a negation with a particular aﬃrmative sign. For ‘no-one’ is equivalent to
‘not one’, ‘nothing’ to ‘not something’, . . . ”. Since Buridan takes the universal negative sign to
be equivalent to negations plus the particular aﬃrmative sign, his views must follow in part from
his view about these two items. These provisions seem to yield the right answers.
Ockham SL 1.74 (213) says: “The ﬁrst rule is that in every universal aﬃrmative and universal
negative proposition that is neither exclusive nor exceptive, the subject has confused and dis-
tributive mobile supposition.” For the predicate term, Ockham only mentions the ﬁrst subcase:
“The second rule is that in every such universal negative proposition the predicate stands con-
fusedly and distributively.” However he probably intends his treatment of negation to apply to
the universal negative sign; see below.

252
Terence Parsons
if the term is determinate or merely confused, the negative
sign confuses and distributes it.
if the term is distributed, the negation sign makes it merely
confused
NEG:109 A negating negation has the following eﬀect on any main term
following it and in its scope:
if the term is determinate or merely confused, the negation
confuses and distributes it.
if the term is distributed, the negation makes it merely con-
fused (according to Buridan)110 or determinate (according
to Ockham)111
The standard categorical propositions are correctly classiﬁed by these rules:
Every A is B
A is distributed and B is merely confused by UA
No A is B
A and B are both distributed by UN
Some A is B
A and B are both determinate by DEFAULT
Some A is not B
A is determinate by DEFAULT; B is distributed by
NEG
Applied to some formulations of nonstandard categorical propositions, almost
all classiﬁcations agree with the deﬁnitions of the modes in terms of ascent and
descent:
109Buridan 4.3.7.2 (269): “a negating negation distributes every common term following it that
without it would not be distributed and does not distribute anything that precedes it.” This
applies to the ﬁrst two subcases. For the third case, see the next note.
110Buridan 4.3.8.2 (275): “a common term is confused nondistributively by two distributive
[parts of speech] preceding it, either of which would distribute it without the other.” Examples
include the predicate terms of ‘No man is no man’ and ‘No man is every man’. He also (277) cites
the predicate of ‘No man sees every donkey’ as an example, and notes that the predicate term
of ‘Every man is every donkey’ is not an application of the rule, since the ﬁrst ‘every’ by itself
would not distribute the predicate term. He adds that the rule must have an exception for “two
negations taken together, relating in the same way to what follows upon them. For these only
cancel each other out, and so the supposition remains the same, as it would be if the negations
were removed. Thus, in ’Not: no man runs’ or in ‘Socrates does not see no man’, ‘man’ supposits
determinately”.
111Ockham SL I.74 (214): “if the term were to stand confusedly and distributively when one of
these expressions were taken away, then with the addition of such an expression it would stand
determinately.” His example is ‘Socrates is not every man’, wherein ‘man’ stands determinately.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
253
Every A is every B
A and B are both distributed by UA. (The ﬁrst ‘every’
has no eﬀect on B because B is already confused by
the second ‘every’.)
No A is every B
A is distributed by NEG; B is distributed by UA but
then made merely confused by NEG.
Some A is every B
A is determinate by default and B is distributed by
UA
Some A is not every B
A is determinate by DEFAULT; B is distributed by UA
but this is then made to be merely confused according
to Buridan, or determinate according to Ockham.
The question remains how to resolve the diﬀerence between Buridan and Ock-
ham concerning the mode of supposition of a term that is apparently distributed
by two signs. Buridan says that it ends up merely confused, and Ockham says
that it ends up determinate. In the example just given, the right answer in terms
of ascent and descent is that it should be determinate. This is also the case for
another example that Ockham gives: ‘Socrates is not every man’. Unfortunately
the only examples that Buridan gives using ‘not’ are examples that he sees as
special exceptions of his own rule; the result should be determinate when there
are “two negations taken together, relating in the same way to what follows upon
them.” Examples are
Not: no man runs
Socrates does not see no man
The answer he gives here — that the predicate terms have determinate supposition
— agrees with Ockham. So perhaps Ockham is right, and Buridan wrong? No, for
there are other examples mentioned by neither author where a negating negation
applies to a distributed term and makes it merely confused, just as Buridan says;
an example is ‘donkey’ in
Not: some farmer sees every donkey
Both the ‘every’ and the ‘not’ would distribute ‘donkey’ on their own; together
they make it merely confused. (Descent is not possible, but ascent is possible from
‘Not: some farmer sees this donkey’.)
So the rules are not adequately formulated, and it is not at all obvious how to
make them adequate within the theoretical framework given here. I will discuss
this further in the next section, where we consider a revision of the theory in
which distribution comes in two sorts. (Negating one sort produces determinate
supposition, while negating the other sort produces merely confused supposition).
But that is a revision that goes beyond medieval theorizing, and so I will not
consider the issue of causes of modes of supposition further here, except to note
that the rules that were given correctly classify a wide range of cases.

254
Terence Parsons
8.5
Modes caused by inﬁnitizing negation
Inﬁnitizing negation was sometimes held to be a cause of distribution.112 Buridan
claims that in ‘[A] non-man runs’ the term ‘man’ is distributed by the inﬁnitizing
negation, but this distribution is cancelled out by the ‘every’ in ‘Every non-man
runs’. This would ﬁt in with the above rules for the causes of modes of supposition:
INF-NEG: An inﬁnitizing negation distributes the term to which it is
adjoined if that term is not distributed; if it is distributed, it makes
the term determinate. It has no eﬀect at all on any other term in the
proposition.
This rule predicts the examples given by Buridan. In the case of ‘[A] non-man
runs’ the term ’man’ is distributed by the ‘non’, and no further rules apply to
it, so it is distributed. In the case of ‘Every non-man runs’ the ‘every’ changes
the distribution back to determinacy, provided that the rule UA is expanded to
say that if it is adjoined to a distributed term it makes it determinate. Since at
present rule UA is silent about such a case, this does not alter its other applications.
Buridan actually argues for this by appeal to “the traditionally posited rule . . . ,
i.e. that which has the power to distribute an undistributed term removes the
distribution of a distributed one.” [SD 4.3.7.3 (271)]
The rule also insures that iterated inﬁnitizing negations cancel one another, so
that the mode of supposition of ‘non-non-man’ in any given occurrence would be
the same as it would be if the two negations were absent.
There is however something odd about this view. Buridan defends the view
by appeal to the deﬁnitions of the modes, arguing implicitly that the term ’man’
is distributed in ‘[A] non-man runs’ because one may descend to ‘Non-Socrates
runs’. The descent is valid, but the application of the deﬁnition to this case is quite
diﬀerent from other cases. Typically you produce a descended form by erasing the
term in question along with its quantiﬁer sign and inserting a singular term. But in
the descent above the term is erased and no other changes are made. In particular,
the ‘non’ is retained, as is any quantiﬁer sign preceding the ‘non’. The context
of the term is thus diﬀerent from that of other terms that we have considered.
One might then suppose that the deﬁnition of the modes does not apply to a term
preﬁxed by ‘non’. Or one may take the deﬁnition to be broader than what was
proposed above. The latter view is probably better, not just because some logicians
did indeed take this application to be a case of distribution, but also because if
we count negated terms as having modes of supposition, then the principles of
inference discussed in the section after next appear to apply correctly to these
terms. So it is logically useful.
112Peter of Spain SL XII.24 (198) discusses this as if it were a well-known view, and he rejects it.
However, Buridan SD 4.3.7.3 (271) writes as if Peter holds the view. This may not be important
since Buridan elsewhere says that some of the views he attributes to Peter’s work he is actually
making up for his own convenience. In any event, Buridan himself holds the view.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
255
8.6
Restricted descent and parasitic terms
Recall that in order to handle transitive verbs and genitive constructions we needed
to use parasitic terms; intuitively, terms that contain a free variable to be bound
by another term. An example is ‘Some farmer’s every donkey is running’.
Of-some farmer every donkey is running
≈
(Of-some farmer x)(every donkey-of-x y) y is running
So far in this section we have not looked at propositions with such terms. When we
do, we ﬁnd they are problematic. For, some of them have distributive supposition
according to the rules for causes of the modes of supposition, but they do not sat-
isfy the descent/ascent conditions for distributed supposition. The example given
above is of this sort. The term ‘donkey’ is distributed by its ‘every’ (according to
rule UA). However, its mode of supposition is not well deﬁned. The problem is
apparent even with the informal statement of the conditions for descent. The test
requires that one can descend from the original proposition to:
Of some farmer this donkey is running and of some farmer that donkey
is running and . . . , and so on for all the donkeys113.
So stated, the descent fails, for there may be donkeys that are not owned by any
farmer, and that are not running, even though all of the donkeys of some speciﬁc
farmer are running.
In this case it appears as if we should not descend to all of the donkeys that
there are, but to only those that are owned by . . . ? By what? By any farmer?
This would make the descent fail, since there may be donkeys that are owned by a
farmer and are not running, even though all of some farmer’s donkeys are running.
The term would then not have distributive supposition.
Buridan discusses an example just like this, and he says:
“But concerning the third proposition, ‘A man’s any donkey runs’, I
say that the word ‘man’s’ is not distributed at all, and remains in its
determinate acceptation.
But the word ‘donkey’ is distributed, not
absolutely, however, but restricted by the word ‘man’s’ taken determi-
nately. And so if we need to make a subsumption under this distribu-
tion in a syllogism, then we have to syllogize as follows: ‘A man’s any
donkey runs, Brownie is that man’s donkey; therefore Brownie runs’.”
[SD 4.3.7.1 (266)]
There are two problems with his remarks. One problem is that it is not clear
how to construe the syllogism as Buridan words it. This question concerns how to
113This assumes that when one makes a descent under ‘donkey-of-x’ we end up with another
‘donkey-of-x’ in which the ‘x’ is bound by the original ‘of-some farmer’. I can’t think of any
other form that would make sense.

256
Terence Parsons
understand ‘that man’s donkey’. The intent seems to be that the second premise
must be something like ‘Brownie is a donkey of a man whose every donkey runs’.
But this is not what is proposed. The example is frustrating because what Buridan
actually says (‘Brownie is that man’s donkey’) looks pretty straightforward, it just
happens to be a form of words for which we have no clear logical form. The second
problem is that however plausible his remarks, they do not justify the claim that
the descent condition is satisﬁed in a modiﬁed way. For example, the following
construal of the conjunction is clearly wrong:
Of some man this donkey is running and of some man that donkey is
running and . . . , and so on for all the donkeys of that man.
For here there is clearly no possible antecedent for the anaphoric ‘that man’.
When Buridan says that ‘donkey’ is not distributed “absolutely” we must admit
that it is not distributed at all, according to the deﬁnition of distribution given
above.
In fact, it has no mode of supposition at all.
We can say that it has
restricted supposition, but this stands for an idea that we have not spelled out,
and that perhaps cannot be spelled out.
In general, any parasitic term will have no usual mode of supposition at all.
This will not prevent other terms from having modes of supposition; for example,
in Buridan’s sample sentence ‘man’ is indeed determinate, as Buridan says, and
‘running’ is merely confused; both of these are predicted by the rules for causes
of supposition. But parasitic terms do not have these modes according to their
deﬁnitions in terms of ascent and descent.
A special case: There is one kind of case in which an indexed term might be
said to have a mode of supposition, and this is when its free variable is bound by
a singular term. So in the sentence ‘Socrates’s every donkey is running’ we can
say that ‘donkey’ is distributed because one can descend to:
Of Socrates this donkey is running and of Socrates that donkey is run-
ning and . . . , and so on for every donkey of Socrates
Strictly, this is an extension of our account of supposition, for we had to specify
that one is to consider all donkeys of Socrates, but it is a natural extension.
As for the rules for causes of modes of supposition, we should conﬁne such rules
to non-parasitic terms, or at least to terms that are indexed with a variable that
is bound by a DP with a singular main term. Then, as noted at the end of the
last section, they are mostly correct.
8.7
Inferences
When the notions of modes of supposition were introduced, they brought along
with them new and useful ways to assess inferences. This already occurred with
the earlier theory, as discussed above. Many proposals made with the new termi-
nology were vague, and of limited usefulness. But some applications were clear

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
257
and compelling. One is the case of inference “from a superior to an inferior” with
a distributed term.
From a superior to an inferior: If a (non-parasitic) term T is dis-
tributed in a proposition P, then from P together with a proposition
indicating that T∗is inferior to T, the proposition that results by
replacing T by T∗in P follows.114
A common term T∗is inferior to a term T iﬀ‘every T∗is T” is true; this is
also the condition for T being superior to T∗. And a singular term t is inferior to
a common term T iﬀ‘t is T” is true; again, in this case T is superior to t.
The simplest illustration of this is Aristotle’s syllogism BARBARA:
Every M is P
Every S is M
∴Every S is P
The term M is distributed in the ﬁrst premise. The second premise states that S is
inferior to M. The conclusion follows by replacing M with S in the ﬁrst premise.
The same principle also validates CELARENT:
No M is P
Every S is M
No S is P
Again, M is distributed in the ﬁrst premise, and the second states that S is inferior
to M. The conclusion follows by replacing M with S in the ﬁrst premise.115
This principle goes beyond Aristotle’s syllogistic. Buridan points out that this
inference is a good one [SD 4.2.6 (244)]:
Socrates is seeing every horse
Brownie is a horse
∴Socrates is seeing Brownie.
114Buridan TC 3.7.8 (283): “For any given proposition with a distributed term, whether nom-
inative or oblique, an acceptable syllogism can be constructed by taking another term under the
given term as the minor proposition . . . ” Paul of Venice LP III.3 (172) “From a higher-level term
to its corresponding lower-level term distributed aﬃrmatively the argument is not solid unless
with the due mean, because it does not follow: ‘every animal runs; therefore, every man runs’. . . .
But with the due mean, the argument is solid, . . . ” [The “due mean” would be ‘Every man is an
animal’.]
Parasitic terms are not subject to the rule.
Here are two counterexamples (assuming that
‘animal’ is superior to ‘donkey’):
Of some farmer every animal is running
∴Of some farmer every donkey is running
Of every farmer every animal is running
∴Of every farmer every donkey is running
115BARBARA and CELARENT are especially important since Aristotle reduced all of the
other moods of syllogisms to them.

258
Terence Parsons
The reverse principle also holds for determinate or merely confused supposition:116
From an inferior to a superior: If a (non-parasitic) term T has
determinate or merely confused supposition in a proposition P, then
from P together with a proposition stating that T∗is superior to T,
the proposition that results by replacing T by T∗in P follows.
For example, another of Aristotle’s ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogisms follows by this princi-
ple:
Darii
Every M is P
Some S is M
∴Some S is P
Burley’s version of “from a superior to an inferior” is slightly more comprehensive
than the version stated above:117
A consequence from a distributed superior to its inferior taken with
distribution and without distribution holds good . . .
I think that what he means by “and without distribution” is that if the quanti-
ﬁer sign preceding the distributed superior is changed so as to change the term
from having distributive supposition to having determinate or merely confused
supposition, then the inference is still good. For example, not only is this a good
consequence:
Every A is B
B is superior to A
Every B is C
B is distributed
∴
Every A is C
A replaces B in the second premise
so is this:
Every A is B
B is superior to A
Every B is C
B is distributed
∴
Some A is C
A replaces B in the second premise, with ‘ev-
ery’ changed to ‘some’
Another example would be:
116Paul of Venice LP III.3 (171): from a lower-level term to its corresponding higher-level term
aﬃrmatively and without a sign of distribution and without any confounding signs impeding
there is a solid inference. E.g., ‘man runs; therefore, animal runs’.” [I don’t know why Paul
does not require a “due mean” here, as he does for the inference from a higher-level term to its
corresponding lower-level term.] Ockham SL III.3-6 (600) cites this rule: “ab inferiori ad superius
sine distributione et aﬃrmative est bona consequentia et simplex.” He then gives a number of
counterexamples to it, such as examples in which terms do not have personal supposition. He
then qualiﬁes the rule (page 601): “ab inferiori ad superius sine distributione et aﬃrmative est
bona consequentia si termini supponant personaliter et signiﬁcative.” (cited in [Moody, 1965 p.
288, note 1]). “From a superior to an inferior without distribution and aﬃrmative is a good
consequence if the terms supposit personally and signiﬁcatively.”
117Burley Consequences in [Kretzmann & Stump, 1988 page 300].

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
259
Not some D is E
E is distributed
Every F is E
E is superior to F
∴
Not some D is every F
F replaces E in the ﬁrst premise, adding ‘ev-
ery’
8.8
Exponibles
We saw earlier that it is a general principle that an exponible proposition bears the
same logical relations to other propositions as do its exponents. This principle also
extends to modes of supposition. Buridan brings up this issue in connection with
“words that imply negations in themselves or in their exponents”. Examples are
“the verbs ‘begin’ and ‘cease’, or the words ’without’, ‘besides’, ‘only’, and several
others.” He says that such words can bring about distribution. He explains:
“. . . if the proposition in which such distributives occur needs to be
expounded by other propositions or by another proposition because of
its obscurity, a term can be said to have such supposition or supposi-
tions that it is found to have in its exponent or exponents.” [SD 4.3.7.5
(273)]118
In some cases Ockham seems to agree with this. For example, in discussing the
proposition ‘Socrates begins to be literate’, he claims that the subject ‘Socrates’
has none of the three modes of common personal supposition; this is because it
meets none of the descent/ascent conditions.119 He goes on to explain:
The reason why such terms have none of the aforesaid forms of supposi-
tion is as follows: the propositions containing such terms are equivalent
to conjunctive propositions each composed of two or more propositions.
These propositions have the same subject; nevertheless, at least one of
them is aﬃrmative and one negative so that one and the same term
has diﬀerent forms of supposition in these propositions. Consequently,
these terms do not have any one of the normal forms of supposition in
the proposition whose parts are the various exponential propositions.
For example, ‘Socrates begins to be white’ is equivalent to the conjunc-
tion ‘Socrates was previously not white and now for the ﬁrst time is
white’. In ‘Socrates is white’ the word ‘white’ supposits determinately;
whereas, in ‘Socrates was not white’ it has, because of the preceding
negation, confused and distributive supposition. [SL I.75 (216).]
The idea is a natural one: In the exposition of the original proposition the word in
question occurs twice, with diﬀerent modes of supposition; thus there is no single
118As an example of an exponible Buridan (SD 4.2.4) gives: “ ‘Only a man runs’ is analyzed
as ‘A man runs and nothing other than a man runs’”.
119Actually, his argument at this point rests on his own deﬁnition of merely confused supposi-
tion, which is slightly diﬀerent from the one discussed in this chapter. This does not aﬀect the
point made here.

260
Terence Parsons
mode of supposition that it has in the original proposition. However, Ockham
limits this principle. In the paragraph following the cited one he says:
One might claim that a consequence of this analysis is that the subject
in ‘Only what is an animal is a man’ would not have merely confused
supposition. The point would be that since the proposition is equiva-
lent to a conjunction of propositions, one of which is aﬃrmative and the
other negative, the subject would have a diﬀerent form of supposition
in each of the elements of the conjunction. The response is that in the
exclusive aﬃrmative proposition the subject has merely confused sup-
position, for although the exponents of that proposition have subjects
with diﬀerent forms of supposition, those subjects are not identical
with the subject in the original exclusive proposition; and because the
subjects of the aﬃrmative and negative exponents diﬀer from the sub-
ject of the exclusive proposition, that subject can have one of the three
forms of proposition.
Probably Ockham has in mind expounding ‘Only an animal is a man’ as ‘An
animal is a man and every man is an animal’. Here the subjects are clearly not
the same, but it is not clear why that should yield any answer at all. I speculate
that Ockham’s policy is to try to apply the tests for supposition to the original
proposition, and if one of them works, then that settles the matter. If none of
them work, then the term has no mode of supposition. It is only in the latter
case that one looks for an explanation in terms of the term’s occurring twice in
the exponents of the proposition with diﬀerent modes of supposition. What is
puzzling is why, if this is a good explanation, the same sort of explanation should
not be good in other cases.
8.9
Variant Interpretations of the Modes
I have been discussing certain deﬁnitions of the modes of personal supposition. No
one author used exactly these three deﬁnitions. Instead I chose them to represent
the “best of Burley-Ockham-Buridan”. In this section I discuss variant deﬁnitions.
8.9.1
Determinate supposition
We have used this version of determinate supposition:
A term F has determinate supposition in a proposition P if and only
if
[Descent]: you may descend under F to a disjunction of
propositional instances of all the Fs, and
[Ascent]: from any such instance you may ascend back to
the original proposition P.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
261
Ockham and Buridan agree on this deﬁnition.120 Burley gives the same account
but omits the ascent condition.121
I assume that this is an oversight — if the
ascent condition were omitted then the deﬁnition would not cohere with many
paradigm cases. For example, ‘donkey’ in ‘Every donkey is running’ would be
determinate because one can descend to a disjunction. The notion of determinate
supposition was quite stable from author to author.
8.9.2
Distributive Supposition122
Our deﬁnition of distributive supposition has been:
A term F has distributive supposition in a proposition P if and only if
[Descent]:
you may descend under Fto a conjunction of
propositional instances of all the Fs, and
[Ascent]: from any one instance you may not ascend back to
the original proposition P.
This is essentially Ockham’s deﬁnition.123 Buridan and others omit the condition
that prohibits ascent from an instance.124 I am not certain how important this is.
That is because the prohibition of ascent may be redundant. For there to be a case
in which one can descend to a conjunction, and then ascend from any instance,
one would need a proposition and a common term in it such that the proposition
is logically equivalent to any of its descended forms. I suspect that it is impossible
120Albert of Saxony (SL II.4) gives an equivalent account: “Determinate supposition is the
use of a general term for each of the things it signiﬁes by its imposition, or which it signiﬁes
naturally (if it is a mental term), in such manner that a descent to its singulars can be eﬀected
by a disjunctive proposition. In this sentence, ‘A man runs’, the term ‘man’ has determinate
supposition, because the term ‘man’ in this sentence stands, disjunctively, for everything which
it signiﬁes by its imposition. For it is suﬃcient, for the truth of the proposition ‘A man runs’,
that this disjunctive proposition be true: ‘This man runs, or that man runs’, and so on for all
singulars.” Since any disjunct entails the disjunction, this last sentence gives the ascent condition.
Paul of Venice LM 3.8 (89) gives a vaguer account that is the same if one takes for granted that
he is discussing disjunctions: “Determinate supposition is the meaning of a term in a proposition
beneath which one can infer all of its referents and conversely on the condition of a proper
middle.”
121Paul of Venice LP 2.4 (149) gives the same account as Burley.
122Buridan’s account omits the non-ascent condition. Ockham includes additional provisions
for immobile distribution. Burley does not deﬁne distributive supposition; instead he deﬁnes two
kinds of distributive supposition. This is discussed below.
123See note 101
124See note 101 for Buridan’s view. Other authors than Buridan gave equivalent deﬁnitions.
Albert of Saxony SL II.4 states: “Confused and distributive supposition is the interpretation of
a spoken or written term, in conjunctive manner, for each thing which it is instituted to signify;
or it is the interpretation of a mental term for each thing which it signiﬁes naturally—-such that
a descent to the singulars, for which it stands, can be made in conjunctive manner, by reason of
that supposition.” This account was also given by at least two anonymous early authors (in [De
Rijk, 1967]): [UD] “Confused and distributive is when of necessity a descent is made to every
inferior.” and [CSN] “Confused and distributive supposition is when a common term supposits
for its inferiors and it is possible to make a descent under it to any appellated content under the
distributive term.”.

262
Terence Parsons
to formulate a proposition containing a term that works this way, using only the
terminology we have at our disposal.125
Paul of Venice in LM divides distributive supposition into mobile and immobile.
His account of mobile supposition is interestingly diﬀerent from earlier accounts.
He says that a term has mobile distributive supposition in a proposition if one may
descend under a term to a conjunction of instances of that proposition, and one
may also ascend — not from a single instance – but from the whole conjunction.126
It is easy to check that the subjects of the standard universal propositions have this
kind of supposition, as well as the predicate of a universal negative proposition.
But the predicate of a particular negative proposition does not have this kind of
supposition, since you cannot go from
Some A is not this B and some A is not that B and . . . and so on for
all the Bs.
to
Some A is not a B.
It is odd for him to call this “immobile” supposition, because one can descend
under the predicate term of a particular negative to any instance. Perhaps he sees
mobility as requiring a valid inference in both directions. We will return to his
particular kind of supposition in a later section. Meanwhile it appears that there
was a practical consensus on the account of distributive supposition simpliciter.
8.9.3
Merely Confused Supposition
We have been using this deﬁnition:
A term F has merely confused supposition in a proposition P if and
only if
[Descent]: you may not descend under F to either a conjunc-
tion or a disjunction of propositional instances of all the Fs,
and
[Ascent]: from any instance you may ascend back to the
original proposition P.
This mode shows the most variation in how it is characterized. I’ll look at two
options. The ﬁrst is the most famous one, devised by Ockham, which invokes
125Spade [1988] argues this, giving a clear explanation of what is at issue. (Trivial counter-
examples to the claim are ruled out by the policy of ignoring the eﬀect of repeated terms in
testing for mode of supposition.)
126Paul of Venice LM 3.11a (89-121): “Distributive general reference is twofold because some is
mobile, some immobile. Distributive mobile general reference is the meaning of a common term
beneath which one can infer to all of its singulars conjunctively on the condition of a proper
middle and, conversely, with the same middle.”

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
263
a constraint involving descent to a disjunctive term. The other is the option of
removing the ascent condition.
Descent to a Disjunctive Term The displayed deﬁnition is due to Burley.127
Ockham added to Burley’s conditions a clause which states that although it is not
possible to descend to a disjunction of instances of the proposition under the term,
one can descend to a disjunctive term.128
A term F has merely confused supposition in a proposition P if and
only if
[Descent]: you may not descend under F to either a conjunc-
tion or a disjunction of propositional instances of all the Fs,
but you may descend to a proposition with a term in place
of F that enumerates all of the Fs disjunctively, and
[Ascent]: from any instance you may ascend back to the
original proposition P.
For example, in ‘Every horse is an animal’ one may not descend either to a dis-
junction or conjunction of instances of the form ‘Every horse is this animal’. But
one may descend to:
Every horse is (this animal or that animal or . . . for all the animals).
Buridan mentions this option but does not endorse it as a requirement.129
Ockham’s proposal was very popular, and several other writers adopted it.130 I
think that this was not a fruitful development. The reason is that the possibility
of descent to a disjunctive term is a grammatical issue, not a logical one. This is
because:
every P
can always be paraphrased as
this P and that P and . . .
but not as ‘this P or that P or . . . ’.131
Further,
127See note 102.
128See note 102.
129See note 102.
130For example, Albert II.4 says: “Merely confused personal supposition is the interpretation of
a term for each thing it signiﬁes by its imposition, or which it signiﬁes naturally (if it is a mental
term), in such manner that a descent to its singulars can be made by a proposition of disjunct
predicate, but not by a disjunctive or conjunctive proposition. And Paul of Venice LP 2.4 (150)
gives: “Common mobile personal supposition which is merely confused is the acceptance of a
common term standing personally beneath which one descends to all of its referents in disjuncts,
as in ‘every man is [an] animal and these are all animals; therefore, every man is this animal or
that animal and thus of singulars’.”
131Likewise, ‘no P’ can always be paraphrased as
this P and that P and . . . not
but not as ‘this P or that P or . . . not’.

264
Terence Parsons
some P
can always be paraphrased as
this P or that P or . . .
but not as ‘this P and that P and . . . ’. (Likewise for ‘a P’ and so on.)
The paraphraseability of a DP using a disjunctive term is a matter of which
quantiﬁer word grammatically accompanies it.132 But it was generally presumed
that the quantiﬁer can be changed (if additional changes are made) so as to pre-
serve mode of supposition. Several of William’s equipollences do this. For example,
‘donkey’ has determinate supposition in
Some donkey is not spotted
and also in the logically equivalent
Not every donkey is spotted
The former can be paraphrased as
This donkey or that donkey or . . . is not spotted
but the latter certainly cannot be paraphrased as
Not (this donkey or that donkey or . . . ) is spotted.
This might not be important when the term already has determinate or distribu-
tive supposition, for paraphrasing a common term into a disjunctive term is not
relevant to these classiﬁcations. But consider the following example. This infer-
ence is a case of a descent under Q to a disjunctive term:
Not some donkey every animal isn’t
∴Not some donkey (this animal or that animal . . . ) isn’t
The inference fails,133 thus establishing that ‘animal’ does not have merely con-
fused supposition in the premise according to Ockham’s account. But it should
have merely confused supposition. The premise is the result of applying equipol-
lences to a universal aﬃrmative proposition:
132This does not contradict [Priest & Read, 1980], who claim that in the notation of the ﬁrst-
order predicate calculus you can always replace a one-place predicate by a new predicate which
is deﬁned in terms of a disjunction of its instances. They are right, but this is a completely
diﬀerent idea. A “predicate” in the medieval theory, when it comes to modes of supposition,
behaves as a denoting phrase. When you write in Latin (or English) ‘this F or that F or . . . ’
you have produced a full-ﬂedged denoting phrase (one that cannot have a quantiﬁer word such
as ‘every’ or ‘some’ or ‘no’ put on front). But a predicate in the predicate calculus does not
have the status of a denoting phrase.
133In assessing the inference it is essential to keep the scopes straight in the conclusion. The
‘not’ in ‘isn’t’ does not have scope over any DP in the proposition.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
265
every donkey an animal is ⇒
not some donkey not an animal is ⇒
not some donkey every animal isn’t
The other modes of supposition are preserved through these equipollences, and
merely confused supposition is also preserved on all accounts other than Ockham’s.
A related example concerns the predicate term in ‘No animal is every man’. Mar-
ilyn Adams134 points out that it does not have either determinate or distributive
supposition, and on Ockham’s account it does not have merely confused supposi-
tion either, because one cannot descend to a proposition with a disjunctive term.
From:
No animal is every man
we may not infer
No animal is this man or that man or . . . 135
John Dorp136 proposes that in order to tell what mode of supposition a term has
we should ﬁrst move the verb to the end, and then move any negation to the
right of all of the verbs. (Applications of Sherwood’s equipollences given in 1.7
will do this.) This needs to be done before applying Ockham’s test. Then, every
term in the categorical will end up with ‘every’ or ‘some’ as its quantiﬁer sign.
If it is preceded by ‘every it has distributive supposition.
If it is preceded by
’some’, then either it will satisfy the conditions for determinate supposition, or
not. If it does not, it may be paraphrased by a disjunctive term. This renders
Ockham’s test for merely confused supposition accurate. However, it may also
render it redundant, for it is not clear that there are any occurrences of terms that
are neither determinate nor distributed, and that satisfy the ascent condition for
merely confused supposition, but that are prohibited from having merely confused
supposition because of failure of the disjunct predicate option.
Some authors137 proposed a fourth mode, which is possessed by any term which
is not determinate or distributive or merely confused. A term has this mode of
supposition if one may descend to a conjunctive term. In the example just given,
this is possible; from:
No animal is every man
we may infer
No animal is this man and that man and . . .
134Adams 1987, 366-67.
135Buridan SD 4.3.8.2 (277) says that ‘donkey’ is merely confused in ‘No man sees every
donkey’. But ‘every donkey’ cannot be paraphrased here as ‘this donkey or that donkey or . . . ’.
136Cited in [Karger, 1993, pp. 418–20].
137Cf. [Read, 1991, 77-82].

266
Terence Parsons
Still other authors138 deﬁned merely confused supposition in terms of descent to
either a disjunctive or a conjunctive term. Since one or the other of these descents
is always possible, this is a redundant provision.
Of course, we are arguing about deﬁnitions, and Ockham may have intended
to let grammar decide what mode of supposition a term has. But he never says
anything like this.
I doubt that he noticed this — and likewise for the other
authors who followed him in this.
Omitting the Ascent Condition As we have seen, Buridan did not go along
with Ockham in requiring descent to a disjunctive term.
However, he did not
have anything to replace this condition by; in particular, he did not give an ascent
condition. This makes his merely confused supposition include every term that is
not determinate or distributive. This is a coherent way to deﬁne the modes, but
it seems to lump together quite diﬀerent phenomena. On this account, all of the
underlined terms below have merely confused supposition:
Every donkey is an animal
Maria believes that every animal runs
Every man who sees every animal runs
On the account introduced in section 8.1, the ﬁrst would be merely confused and
the others would lack a mode of supposition.
9
ISSUES ABOUT MODES OF SUPPOSITION
9.1
Reﬁned Modes of Supposition
Various writers, focusing on Ockham’s account of merely confused supposition,
have noticed that there seems to be a gap in the deﬁnitions of the modes. On his
account we have:
Descent to a disjunctive proposition
Descent to a conjunctive proposition
Descent to a disjunctive term
But what about
Descent to a conjunctive term?
This possibility has been considered by both medieval139 and contemporary logi-
cians. In modern times, Paul V. Spade [Spade, 2000] has argued that there aren’t
any examples of main terms with a mode of supposition outside of the traditionally
given ones. Given the modes as described in section 7.1, I agree (assuming that
the notation does not include non-extensional contexts).
138Maulfelt; see [Read, 1991 77-82].
139See discussion in [Read, 1991].

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
267
I have argued above that whether one descends to a disjunctive or conjunctive
term is a matter of grammar, not of logic. That may be why the addition of a
fourth mode in terms of descent to a conjunctive term has not yielded an interesting
theory. However, there is a way to add a fourth mode that yields an improved
account. This is achieved not by adding a new mode that classiﬁes terms which
satisfy none of the conditions for the traditional modes, but rather by subdividing
the category of distributive supposition. For reasons to be given later, I will call the
one sort of distribution “wide distribution” and the other “narrow distribution”.
Wide distributive supposition is traditional distributive supposition in cases in
which one can ascend back to the original proposition from the whole conjunction
of propositional instances under the term. (Not from a single instance, but from
the whole conjunction.) Narrow distributive supposition is distribution where one
cannot make this ascent. The four modes would then be:
Determinate:
Descent to a disjunction of propositions, and ascent back
from the whole disjunction.
Merely confused:
No descent to a disjunction of propositions but ascent back
from the disjunction.
Wide distributive:
Descent to a conjunction of propositions and ascent back
from the conjunction.
Narrow Distributive
Descent to a conjunction of propositions and no ascent back
from the conjunction.
There is precedent for the category of wide distribution; it is what Paul of Venice
[LM:TS 3.11a (95)]140 proposes for mobile distribution. So far as I know, narrow
distribution has not been proposed.
(Immobile distribution generally refers to
cases in which no descent is possible.)
If we think of denoting phrases as restricted quantiﬁers, then this is equivalent
to saying:141
140“Distributive general reference is twofold because some is mobile, some immobile. Distribu-
tive mobile general reference is the meaning of a common term beneath which one can infer to
all of its singulars conjunctively on the condition of a proper middle and, conversely, with the
same middle. Thus this follows: ‘This animal runs and this animal runs and thus of each indi-
vidual and these are all animals; therefore, every animal runs’.” He correctly includes subjects
of universal aﬃrmatives, and both subjects and predicates of universal negatives as having this
mode of supposition.
141I am speaking loosely here when I refer to quantiﬁer rules such as “Existential Instantiation”.
Such rules can indeed be invoked, but only if the syntax of the language is enhanced with
variables, etc.

268
Terence Parsons
Determinate:
Existential Instantiation holds, and so does Existential Gen-
eralization.
Merely confused:
Existential Instantiation does not hold, but Existential Gen-
eralization does.
Wide distributive:
Universal Instantiation holds, and so does Universal Gener-
alization.
Narrow Distributive
Universal Instantiation holds, but Universal Generalization
does not hold.
9.2
Symmetry
The new classiﬁcation of terms yields more symmetrical patterns. Let us call Wide
Distribution and Determinate supposition opposites, and likewise Narrow Distri-
bution and Merely Confused supposition. Then when a proposition is negated,
each term has its mode of supposition reversed. Since diagonally opposite propo-
sitions in the Square of Opposition are (logically equivalent to) negations of one
another, the modes of supposition of the terms in any proposition mirror (in re-
verse) those in its opposite. The modes of supposition in the traditional square
are now:
Every A is B
Some A is B
No A is B
Some A is not B
Wdist
MC
Wdist
Wdist
Det
Det
Det
NDist

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
269
These deﬁnitions call for a new classiﬁcation of the modes. The standard me-
dieval classiﬁcation, with our new distinction between kinds of supposition, would
look like this:
PERSONAL COMMON SUPPOSITION
MERELY CONFUSED
DISTRIBUTIVE
CONFUSED
DETERMINATE
NARROW DISTRIBUTIVE
WIDE DISTRIBUTIVE
But a more natural classiﬁcation would be this:
PERSONAL COMMON SUPPOSITION
EXISTENTIAL
DISTRIBUTIVE
NARROW
WIDE
WIDE
NARROW
DETERMINATE
MERELY
CONFUSED
This omits the general notion of Confused Supposition as the complement to
Determinate. Whether this is a good or bad thing is not clear to me. Certainly
medieval authors saw something in common to the various sorts of confusion;
whether it is merely the absence of determinacy is not clear.
9.3
Causes of the modes
With these new distinctions we can reﬁne the theory of the causes of the modes
of personal supposition developed in the last chapter. The principles used there
yielded mostly intended results, except for the problem about what mode a term
has if it is acted upon by two distributing signs. Ockham and Buridan disagreed
about this, and neither of their views are correct. Their theory lacked the resources
for getting a correct answer, since it does not subdivide the category of Distributive
Supposition.
The revised theory makes a new set of rules possible. The reﬁned rules below
are to be applied recursively to the signs of a sentence that have scope over the
copula; as before, they apply ﬁrst to the sign that is rightmost and has scope over
the copula. We suppose as usual that verbs have been analyzed in terms of the
copula and a participle.

270
Terence Parsons
DEFAULT: A main term of a proposition has determinate supposition
unless something causes it not to. A particular aﬃrmative sign ad-
joined to a term gives it determinate supposition (or, equivalently, has
no eﬀect). In either case, any terms to the right and within the scope
of the denoting phrase containing the term retain the mode of suppo-
sition they already have, except that a wide distributed term becomes
narrow distributive.
UA: A universal aﬃrmative sign widely distributes the term it is ad-
joined to and makes any other term to its right merely confused if it is
determinate, leaving terms with the other modes unchanged.
UN: A universal negative sign widely distributes the term it is adjoined
to; if a term following the universal negative sign has determinate sup-
position it, becomes wide distributed; if the term has wide distribution
it becomes merely confused; if the term has merely confused supposi-
tion it becomes narrowly distributed, and if it has narrow distribution
it becomes merely confused.
NEG: A negating negation has the following eﬀect on any main term
following it and in its scope:
if the term is determinate it becomes wide distributed, and
vice versa;
if the term is merely confused it becomes narrowly distributed,
and vice versa
All provisions except for the ﬁrst and last are consistent with the earlier rules,
though they provide more detailed information. The previous version of the last
rule said that if a term has distributed supposition then the negation makes it
merely confused (according to Buridan) or determinate (according to Ockham).
On the new account if the term has narrow distribution it becomes merely con-
fused, as Buridan said, and if it has wide distribution it becomes determinate, as
Ockham said. Two examples we looked at earlier were these:
Not: no man runs
Not: some farmer sees every donkey
The new rules correctly classify ‘man’ as having determinate supposition in the
ﬁrst proposition, and they correctly classify ‘donkey’ as having merely confused
supposition in the second proposition.
9.4
Global Quantiﬁcational Import
9.4.1
What are the modes of common personal supposition?
This is a long-standing problem in the secondary literature: We have deﬁnitions
of the modes, but what are we deﬁning?

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
271
What we have is a theory of what I call global quantiﬁcational import. This is
the import a quantiﬁed DP actually has, described in terms of the import it would
have if it had scope over the whole global context (or almost the whole context).
This idea can be made precise within the theory of “prenex forms”. In con-
temporary symbolic logic, if no biconditional sign appears in a formula of quan-
tiﬁcation theory then you can take any quantiﬁer in that formula and move it in
stages toward the front of the formula, each stage being equivalent to the original
formula, provided that you switch the quantiﬁer from universal to existential (or
vice versa) whenever you move it past a negation sign or out of the antecedent of
a conditional, and provided that you do not move it past a quantiﬁer of opposite
quantity (i.e. you don’t move a universal past an existential, or vice versa). For
example, you can take the universal quantiﬁer in:
¬(Gy →∀xPx)
and move it onto the front of the conditional to get:
¬∀x(Gy →Px),
and then the resulting universal sign can be moved further front, turning into an
existential:
∃x¬(Gy →Px).
This chain of equivalences can be interpreted as the movement of a quantiﬁer to
the front, retaining its identity while sometimes changing its quantity. If you do
this systematically to all the quantiﬁers in a formula, the result is a formula in
“prenex normal form,” in which the quantiﬁers are all on the front in a row, each
of them having scope over the rest of the formula to its right. In terms of these
prenex forms you can deﬁne the global quantiﬁcational import of any quantiﬁer
in a main term in any categorical formula. Let us take this idea and use it to
analyze the terminology of supposition theory. The subject matter here is terms,
not quantiﬁers, but each main term comes with its own quantiﬁer, so we can treat
the theory as if it is a theory of restricted quantiﬁcation (with denoting phrases
being the restricted quantiﬁers). We then give this account:
A prenex string for φ is a string of aﬃrmative denoting phrases on the
very front of φ, with no other signs between them.
[That is, each is of the form ‘Every T’ or ‘Some T’ or ‘D’, and there
are no negations, and each denoting phrase has scope over the rest of
φ].
An example with the prenex string underlined:
Every dog some donkey not is
There is a systematic way to convert any categorical proposition into another one
in which all of the main terms in the original one are in prenex position in the new
one, and the converted proposition is logically equivalent to the original. Here is
the process:

272
Terence Parsons
Change every main denoting phrase of the form ‘No T’ into ‘every T
not’, and every main denoting phrase of the form ‘a T’ into ‘some T’,.
This leaves ‘every’ and ‘some’ as the only quantiﬁer signs on main
terms.
Remove any double not’s anywhere in the formula whenever they ap-
pear.
Starting at the left, replace each ‘not every T’ by ‘some T not’, and
each ‘not some T’ by ‘every T not’, and each ’not D’ by ‘D not’.
Remove double not’s whenever they appear.
Every categorical proposition has a unique prenex-convert produced by these rules.
Call the quantiﬁer signs ‘every’ and ‘some’ opposites. We can then deﬁne:
a main term has (wide)/(narrow) quantiﬁcational import in a propo-
sition iﬀwhen the proposition is converted into prenex form the term
(is not)/(is) preceded by a main term with the opposite quantiﬁer sign
a main term has (universal)/(existential) global quantiﬁcational im-
port in a proposition iﬀwhen the proposition is converted into prenex
form the term ends up with (’every’)/(’some’) as its quantiﬁer sign
This deﬁnes global quantiﬁcational import for all main terms in any categorical
proposition.
9.4.2
Causes of the Modes
One can now establish the following equivalence between the classiﬁcations above
in terms of global quantiﬁcational import and the reﬁned modes of supposition
that are yielded by the rules governing causes of the modes in the last section. If
these rules are applied to the forms we have been discussing:
A term has Determinate supposition according to the rules iﬀit has
wide existential quantiﬁcational import
A term has Merely Confused supposition according to the rules iﬀit
has narrow existential quantiﬁcational import
A term has Wide Distributive supposition according to the rules iﬀit
has wide universal quantiﬁcational import
A term has Narrow Distributive supposition according to the rules iﬀ
it has narrow universal quantiﬁcational import
Illustration: Let us test ‘donkey’ for its mode of supposition in ‘Some donkey is
a predator’. ‘Donkey’ has determinate supposition here, because it is already in
prenex form, existentially quantiﬁed:
Some donkey is a predator
It has wide distributive supposition here, for the same reason:

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
273
Every donkey is a predator
The term ‘predator’ in the sentence just displayed has merely confused supposition
because it is existentially quantiﬁed with scope inside that of ‘every donkey’.
Now consider:
Some predator is not a donkey
in its equivalent form
Some predator not a donkey is
Here the ‘not a donkey’ is equivalent to ‘every donkey not’, yielding:
Some predator every donkey not is
The original ‘some donkey’ has now become universal, thus classifying it as hav-
ing distributive supposition. This illustrates the importance of looking at things
globally; although ‘donkey’ is not preceded by any universal quantifying sign here,
it has universal import. You could universally instantiate it. This is why it is
classiﬁed in this theory as (narrow) distributive.
9.4.3
Parasitic Terms
We have just established that a main term in a categorical proposition has a certain
mode of supposition according to the rules for the causes of supposition iﬀit has a
corresponding quantiﬁcational import. But, as we have noted above, both of these
disagree with the modes of supposition as deﬁned in terms of ascent and descent
in the case of parasitic terms. Such terms do not admit of either ascent or descent,
and so they have no mode of supposition at all. The situation is summed up by:
A main term that is not parasitic has the mode of supposition that is
attributed to it by the reﬁned rules for the causes of modes of supposi-
tion — equivalently, if it has the corresponding global quantiﬁcational
import.
Parasitic main terms have no modes of supposition, though they are
classiﬁed as having modes by the rules from causes of modes, and they
have global quantiﬁcational import.
As noted earlier, the useful rules “From a superior to an inferior” and “From an
inferior to a superior” do not apply to parasitic terms.
9.5
Other possible modes of supposition
The fact that all non-parasitic main terms of a categorical proposition have one of
the three deﬁned modes of supposition holds in part because of the limited array of
quantiﬁer signs that are available: ‘every’, ‘some’, ‘no’ and indeﬁnite. In theory,

274
Terence Parsons
other modes can be deﬁned in terms of ascent and descent. Here is a chart laying
out the options. The notation in the chart means:
D&:
descent is possible to a conjunction of propositional in-
stances
D∨:
descent is possible to a disjunction of instances, though
not to a conjunction of propositional instances;
D-:
neither kind of descent is possible
A&:
ascent is possible from a conjunction of propositional
instances, though not from a disjunction of propositional
instances
A∨:
ascent is possible from a disjunction of propositional in-
stances
A-:
neither kind of ascent is possible
The deﬁnitions of the modes can then be displayed as:
D&
D∨
D-
A-
A&
A∨
Determinate
X
X
Wide Distribution
X
X
Merely Confused
X
X
Narrow Distribution
X
X
[5]
X
X
[6]
X
X
[7]
X
X
[8]
X
X
[9]
X
X
It is debatable whether any term could have mode [5]. The remaining modes
are possessed by terms coupled with the following invented quantiﬁer signs:
[6]
Many-or-all donkeys are spotted.
[7]
Some-but-not-all donkeys are spotted.
[8]
Every-or-no donkey is spotted.
[9]
Maria said that some donkey is spotted.
Cases [7] and [8] each have two variants, depending on whether you decide that
the term is aﬃrmative, or negative. (If a denoting phrase is negative, then when
you erase it for descent you need to insert a negation sign.)
I am not aware of any writer who discussed modes of this sort.
9.6
Modes of supposition for non-main terms
Our discussion so far has been conﬁned to main terms of categorical propositions.
There are non-main terms that have modes of common personal supposition ac-
cording to the deﬁnitions in terms of ascent and descent. These are not speciﬁed

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
275
by the rules from causes, and they do not correspond to any kind of global quan-
tiﬁcational import. They are non-parasitic terms that occur inside of complex
clauses, or inside of complex terms derived from relative clauses. We focus here
on terms that occur within relative clauses.
Can we extend our rules for the causes of modes of supposition? The rules do not
presently address non-main terms. They do, however, assign modes of supposition
to non-main terms which are main terms of their local clauses, relative to the local
clauses, and they classify the complex terms containing them, relative to the main
clause. One might hope that these pieces of information would combine to tell
us the mode of supposition of the non-main term in the whole proposition. For
example, we can indeed predict that if a complex term C which consists of a term
modiﬁed by a relative clause has determinate supposition in a proposition P, and
if a term E has determinate supposition within the clause that forms the relative
clause, then E has determinate supposition in P. For example, the complex term
‘horse which some donkey sees’ has determinate supposition in:
Some man sees a horse which some donkey sees
And ‘donkey’ has determinate supposition in:
some donkey sees
Therefore, ‘donkey’ has determinate supposition in the whole proposition. (It is
easy to check that one may descend to a disjunction, and ascend back from any
disjunct.)
This fact has more application than might be thought.
For this result also
applies to constructions generated from relative clauses, constructions such as
adjectives or participles in attributive position. So we can tell instantly e.g. that
‘spotted’ and ‘running’ have the same modes as that of the complex term containing
them in:
Some spotted donkey is running
Some running donkey sees a horse
Anything to which our Fronting rule applies automatically falls into this category,
as ‘king’ in ‘Some king’s donkey is running’.
An additional rule is this: if a complex term C which consists of a term modiﬁed
by a relative clause has merely confused supposition in a proposition P, and if
a term E has determinate supposition within the clause that forms the relative
clause, then E has merely confused supposition in P. For example, the complex
term ‘horse which some donkey sees’ has merely confused supposition in:
Every man sees a horse which some donkey sees
And ‘donkey’ has determinate supposition in:
some donkey sees

276
Terence Parsons
Therefore, ‘donkey’ has merely confused supposition in the whole proposition. (It
is easy to check that one may not descend to a disjunction, and one may ascend
back from any disjunct.)
Are there more rules of this sort? If so, they are few. In a large number of cases
the mode of supposition of a complex term in a proposition together with the mode
of supposition of a term T in the clause of that complex term do not determine
a mode of supposition of T in the whole proposition. In particular, if a term has
wide distributive supposition in a clause within a complex term that has narrow
distributive supposition in a whole proposition, then the mode of supposition of
the simple term is not determined. Consider the following propositions in which
‘donkey’ has wide distributive supposition within a clause making up the relative
clause portion of a term with narrow distributive supposition. Then:
‘Donkey’ has determinate supposition in:
Some horse isn’t an animal that sees every donkey
And it has merely confused supposition in:
Some horse is an animal that sees every donkey
And it has narrow distributive supposition in:
Some horse sees every animal that is every donkey
And it has no mode of supposition at all in:
Some horse sees every animal that sees every donkey
Perhaps there are some subtle rules that will constitute an algorithm for determin-
ing the mode of supposition of a non-main term from some information about it
that is evident from inspection (which is how the rules for the modes of supposition
of main terms work), but I don’t know how to construct them.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am indebted most of all to Calvin Normore from whom I have learned the most,
and received the most support. In addition I am indebted to Elizabeth Karger,
Gyula Klima, Gareth Matthews, Paul Spade, my colleagues at UCLA, especially
John Carriero, Brian Copenhaver and David Kaplan, the repeating participants in
the annual Moody Conference, and the many students, especially Timothy Doyle,
who have kept me on my toes in many ways.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adams, 1976] M. M. Adams. What Does Ockham Mean by Supposition? Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic 17: 375-91, 1976.
[Adams, 1987] M. M. Adams. William Ockham. U. of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1987.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
277
[Albert of Saxony, unpublished] Albert of Saxony. Summa Logicae. Portions are translated by
Moody. (Unpublished.)
[Ammonius, 1991] Ammonius. On Aristotle’s Categories. [Translated in Cohen & Matthews
1991.
[Ammonius, 1996] Ammonius. On Aristotle’s On Interpretation. [Translated in Blank 1996]
[Aristotle, 1995] Aristotle. Trans by Gail Fine. On Ideas: Aristotle’s Criticism of Plato’s Theory
of Forms. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1995.
[Arnauld and Nicole, 1662] A. Arnauld and P. Nicole. La logique ou l’art de penser. Charles
Savreux, Paris, 1662. Translated in Buroker 1996.
[Ashworth, 1974] E. J. Ashworth. Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period. Dordrecht:
D. Reidel, 1974.
[Ashworth, 1974a] E. J. Ashworth. ‘For Riding is Required a Horse’ A Problem of Meaning and
Reference in Late Fifteenth and Early Sixteenth Century Logic, Vivarium 12: 146-172, 1974.
[Ashworth, 1976] E. J. Ashworth. ‘I Promise You a Horse’: A Second Problem of Meaning and
Reference in Late Fifteenth and Early Sixteenth Century Logic (I), Vivarium XIV,1, 1976.
[Augustine, 1938] A. Augustine. Concerning the Teacher and On the Immortality of the Soul.
Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1938.
[Averroes, 1998] Averroes. Averroes Middle Commentaries on Aristotle’s Categories and de
Interpretatione. trans by Butterworth, Charles E. Princeton University Press, 1998.
[Barney et al., 1997] S. Barney, W. Lewis, C. Normore, and T. Parsons, trans. On the Properties
of Discourse. Translation of the ﬁrst two-thirds of Tractatus de Proprietatibus Sermonum,
Topoi, 16, 1997.
[Biard, 1988] J. Biard. Le cheval de Buridan. Logique et philosophie du langage dans l’analyse
d’un verbe intentionnel, Die Philosophie im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert, ed. O. Pluta (Amster-
dam: B.R. Gr¨uner), pp. 119-137, 1988
[Blank, 1996] D. Blank, trans. Ammonius: On Aristotle’s On Interpretation. Ithaca, Cornell
University Press, 1996.
[Boche´nski, 1947] I. M. Boche´nski. Peter of Spain: Summulae logicales. Turin: Marietti, 1947.
[Boehner, 1959] P. Boehner. Medieval Logic. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1959.
[Boehner and Brown, 1990] P. Boehner and S. Brown, eds, trans. Ockham: Philosophical Writ-
ings. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1990.
[Bos, 1983] E. P. Bos. Marsilius of Inghen: Treatises on the Properties of Terms. Dordrecht,
Reidel, 1983.
[Buridan, 14th century] J. Buridan. Tractatus de Suppositionibus, 14th century. In Reina, Maria
Elena, “Giovanni Buridano: Tractatus de Suppositionibus,” Rivista critica di storia della
ﬁlosoﬁa (1957), 175-208. Translated in King 1985.
[Buridan, 14th century a] J. Buridan. Tractatus de Consequentiis, 14th century. In Hubien,
Hubert, Iohannis Buridani tractatus de consequentiis:
´Edition critique, Volume XVI of
Philosophes m´edi´evaux, Universit´e de Louvain, 1976. Translated in King 1985.
[Buridan, 14th century b] J. Buridan. Summulae de Dialectica, 14th century. [Translated in
Klima 2001.]
[Burley, 14th century] W. Burley. De Suppositionibus, 14th century. In Brown, Stephen, Walter
Burleigh’s Treatise De Suppositionibus and its Inﬂuence on William of Ockham, Franciscan
Studies 32, 1972, 15-64. Translated in Spade 1997.
[Burley, 14th century a] W. Burley. Walter Burleigh: De puritate artis logicae tractatus longior,
with a Revised Edition of the Tractatus brevior, Philotheus Boehner (ed), The Franciscan
Institute, St Bonaventure, NY, 1955. [Translated in Spade 2000].
[Buroker, 1996] J. V. Buroker, trans. and ed. Logic or the Art of Thinking. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1996. Translation of Arnauld & Nicole 1662.
[Capella, 1977] M. Capella. Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts. New York, Columbia
University Press, 1977. Translated by Stahl, William Harris, and Johnson, Richard.
[Cohen and Matthews, 1991] S. M. Cohen and G. B. Matthews. Ammonius On Aristotle’s Cat-
egories. Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1991.
[Conti, 1990] A. Conti. Ontology in Walter Burley’s Late Commentary on the Ars Vetus. Fran-
ciscan Studies vol 50. 121-76, 1990.
[Corcoran and Swiniarski, 1978] J. Corcoran and J. Swiniarski. Logical Structures of Ockham’s
Theory of Supposition. Franciscan Studies 38: 161-83, 1978.

278
Terence Parsons
[Dineen, 1990] F. P. Dinneen. Peter of Spain: Language in Dispute. John Benjamins Publishing
Company, Amsterdam/Philadelphia, 1990. (Translation of the Summae Logicales.)
[De Rijk, 1962 and 1967] L. M. De Rijk. Logica Modernorum, Volumes I (1962) and II (1967).
Koninklijke Van Gorcum & Company N.V.; Assen, The Netherlands.
[Freddoso, 1980] A. J. Freddoso. Ockham’s Theory of Truth Conditions, in William Ockham,
Summa Logicae, Part II, trans Alfred J. Freddoso and Henry Schuurman (Notre Dame, U. of
Notre Dame Press), 1980.
[Freddoso and Schuurman, 1980] A. J. Freddoso and H. Schuurman, trans. William Ockham,
Summa Logicae, Part II, Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1980.
[Geach, 1956] P. Geach. The Doctrine of Distribution, Mind 67-74, 1956.
[Geach, 1962] P. Geach. Reference and Generality. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York,
1962.
[Geach, 1972] P. Geach. History of a Fallacy, in Logic Matters, Oxford, Blackwell, 1-13, 1972.
[Geach, 1976] P. Geach. Distribution and Suppositio, Mind 85, 432-35, 1976.
[Guerlac, 1979] R. Guerlac. Juan Luis Vives: Against the Pseudodialecticians. D. Reidel, Dor-
drecht, 1979.
[Henninger, 1989] M. G. Henninger. Relations: Medieval Theories 1250-1325. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1989.
[Henry, 1972] D. P. Henry. Medieval Logic and Metaphysics (Hutchinson U. London), 1972.
[Hughes, 1982] G. E. Hughes. John Buridan on Self-Reference. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1982.
[Karger, 1984] E. Karger. Modes of Personal Supposition: The Purpose and Usefulness of the
Doctrine within Ockham’s Logic, Franciscan Studies 44: 87-106, 1984.
[Karger, 1993] E. Karger. A Theory of Immediate Inferences Contained in Buridan’s Logic,
in Klaus Jacobi (ed.) Argumentationstheorie: Scholastic Forschungen zu den logischen une
semantischen Regeln korrekten Folgerns. E.J. Brill, Leiden-New York-K¨oln, 407-29, 1993.
[Karger, 1997] E. Karger. The 15th and Early 16th Century Logicians on the Quantiﬁcation of
Categorical Sentences. Topoi 16.1, 65-76, 1997.
[Karger, 1999] E. Karger. Treatise on Univocation. A translation of pages 333-51 of De Rijk
1967. Unpublished.
[Keynes, 1906] J. N. Keynes. Studies and Exercises in Formal Logic. Macmillan, London, 1906.
[King, 1985] P. King. Jean Buridan’s Logic: The Treatise on Supposition, The Treatise on
Consequences. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1985.
[Klima, 1988] G. Klima. Ars Artium: Essays in Philosophical Semantics, Mediaeval and Mod-
ern. Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 1988.
[Klima, 1993] G. Klima. Debeo tibi equum: a Reconstruction of the Theoretical Framework of
Buridan’s Treatment of the Sophisma, in Read 1990.
[Klima, 2001] G. Klima, trans and ed with introduction. John Buridan: Summulae de Dialec-
tica. Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 2001.
[Kneale and Keale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962.
[Kretzmann, 1996] N. Kretzmann. William of Sherwood’s Introduction to Logic. University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1996.
[Kretzmann, 1968] N. Kretzmann. William of Sherwood’s Treatise on Syncategorematic Words.
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1968.
[Kretzmann, 1979] N. Kretzmann. Pauli Veneti: Logica Magna: Prima Pars: Tractatus de
Terminis. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1979. (Contains a translation of the Tractatus on
Terms from the Great Logic, by Paul of Venice.)
[Kretzmann and Stump, 1988] N. Kretzmann and E. Stump. The Cambridge Translations of
Medieval Philosophical Texts Volume 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1988.
[Kretzmann and Kretzmann, 1990] N. Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzman. The Sophismata of
Richard Kilvington. Oxford University Press, New York, 1990.
[Lambert of Auxerre, 14th century] Lambert of Auxerre. 14th century. Properties of Terms.
Logica (Summa Lamberti), ed. Franco Alessio; VIII: De suppositionibus et de signiﬁcationibus,
pp. 205-45. Florence: Le Nuova Italia, 1971. Translated in Kretzmann & Stump 1988.
[Loux, 1974] M. J. Loux. Ockham’s Theory of Terms: Part I of the Summa Logicae. University
of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1974.
[Markosian, 1988] N. Markosian. On Ockham’s Supposition Theory and Karger’s Rule of Infer-
ence, Franciscan Studies X: 40-52, 1988.

The Development of Supposition Theory in the Later 12th through 14th Centuries
279
[Marsilius of Inghen, 1983] Marsilius of Inghen. Translated in Bos 1983.
[Mates, 1961] B. Mates. Stoic Logic. Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press,
1961.
[Mates, 1972] B. Mates. Elementary Logic. Oxford University Press, N.Y, 1972.
[Matthews, 1964] G. B. Matthews. Ockham’s Supposition Theory and Modern Logic, Philo-
sophical Review 73: 91-99, 1964.
[Matthews, 1973] G. B. Matthews. Suppositio and Quantiﬁcation in Ockham. Nous VII: 13-24,
1973.
[Matthews, 1984] G. B. Matthews. A Note on Ockham’s Theory of the Modes of Common
Personal Supposition, Franciscan Studies 44: 81-86, 1984.
[Matthews, 1997] G. B. Matthews. Two Theories of Supposition? Topoi 16.1, 1997.
[Moody, 1955] E. Moody. The Logic of William of Ockham (New York, Russell and Russell,
1955reissued 1965).
[Mullally, 1945] J. P. Mullally. The Summae Logicales of Peter of Spain. Notre Dame, 1945.
(Contains a translation of the tract on supposition.)
[Ockham, 14th century] W. Ockham. Summa Logicae, 14th century. (See below for transla-
tions.)
[Ockham, 1974] W. Ockham. M. J. Loux, trans. Ockham’s Theory of Terms: Part I of the
Summa Logicae. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1974.
[Ockham, 1980] W. Ockham. A. J. Freddoso and H. Schuurman, trans. William Ockham,
Summa Logicae, Part II, Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame, 1980.
[Panaccio, 2004] C. Panaccio. Ockham on Concepts. Ashgate; Hampshire, England; Burlington,
Vermont, 2004.
[Parsons, 2006] T. Parsons. The Doctrine of Distribution, Journal of History and Philosophy of
Logic, 2006.
[Pasnau, 2002] R. Pasnau. The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical Texts: Vol-
ume 3, Mind and Knowledge. Cambridge University Press; Cambridge, 2002.
[Paul of Venice, 14th century] Paul of Venice. Logica Parva (1472 edition), Venice, 14th century.
Reprinted by Georg Olms Verlag, Hildesheim/New York, 1970. Translated in Perreiah 1984.
[Paul of Venice, 14th century] Paul of Venice. Logica Magna, 14th century. Translations of some
parts are in Kretzmann 1979 and Perreiah 1971.
[Perreiah, 1971] A. Perreiah. Logica Magna: Tractatus de Suppositionibus. Franciscan Institute,
St. Bonaventure, N.Y, 1971.
[Perreiah, 1984] A. Perreiah. Logica Parva: Translation of the 1472 Edition. Philosophia Verlag,
M¨unchen. (Translation of Paul of Venice’s Short Logic, 1984.)
[Peter of Spain, 13th century] Peter of Spain, 13th century. Tractatus (or Summule Logicales).
Ed. by L. M. De Rijk, Van Gorcum & Co, Assen, 1972.
[Price, 1970] R. Price. William of Ockham and Suppositio Personalis, Franciscan Studies 30:
131-140, 1970.
[Priest and Read, 1977] G. Priest and S. Read. The Formalization of Ockham’s Theory of Sup-
position, Mind 86: 109-113, 1977.
[Priest and Read, 1980] G. Priest and S. Read. Merely Confused Supposition: A Theoretical
Advance or a Mere Confusion?, Franciscan Studies 40: 265-97, 1980.
[Read, 1985] S. Read. ‘I promise a penny that I do not promise’: The Realist/Nominalist De-
bate over Intensional Propositions in Fourteenth-Century British Logic and its Contemporary
Relevance, in The Rise of British Logic, ed. P. Osmund Lewry, O.P. Papers in Mediaeval
Studies 7, (Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1985), pp. 335-359, 1985
[Read, 1990] S. Read, ed. Sophisms in Medieval Logic and Grammar. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 19990.
[Read, 1991] S. Read. Thomas Cleves and Collective Supposition, Vivarium XXIX, 5084, 1991.
[Sanderson, 1589] J.
Sanderson.
Institutionum
dialecticarum
libri
quatuor.
Ex
oﬃcina
Christophori Plantini, Antwerpiae, 1589.
[Sanderson, 1664] R. Sanderson. Logicae artis compendium. Ric. & Nic. Dais, Oxoniae, 1664.
[Scott, 1966] T. K. Scott. John Buridan: Sophisms on Meaning and Truth. Appleton-Century-
Crofts, New York, 1966.
[Seton, 1574] J. Seton. Dialectica Thomam Marsh, Londini, 1574, ﬁrst published 1545.
[Smith, 1982] R. Smith. What is Aristotelian Ecthesis? in History and Philosophy of Logic 3,
113-127, 1982.
[Spade, 1976] P. V. Spade. Priority of Analysis and the Predicates of ‘O’-Form Sentences. Fran-
ciscan Studies 36: 263-270, 1976.

280
Terence Parsons
[Spade, 1988] P. V. Spade. The Logic of the Categorical: The Medieval Theory of Descent and
Ascent, in Norman Kretzmann (ed.) Meaning and Inference in Medieval Philosophy, Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 187-224, 1988.
[Spade, 1994] P. V. Spade. Five Texts on the Mediaeval Problem of Universals. Hackett; Indi-
anapolis, 1994.
[Spade, 1997] P. V. Spade. Translation of the beginning of Walter Burley’s Treatise on the Kinds
of Supposition (De Suppositionibus), 1997, from Brown, Stephen, “Walter Burleigh’s Treatise
De Suppositionibus and Its Inﬂuence on William of Ockham”, Franciscan Studies 32, 1972,
15-64.
[Spade, 2000] P. V. Spade. Translation of Walter Burley’s On the Purity of the Art of Logic,
Yale University Press; New Haven, 2000.
[Swiniarski, 1970] J. J. Swiniarski. A New Presentation of Ockham’s Theory of Supposition
with an Evaluation of Some Contemporary Criticisms. Franciscan Studies N.S. XXX: 181-
217, 1970.
[Vives, 16th century] J. L. Vives. Adversus pseudodialecticos, 16th century. Translated in Guer-
lac 1979.
[Whately, 1975] R. Whately. Elements of Logic. Scholar’s Facsimiles & Reprints, Delmar, N.Y.,
1975. (Reprint of the 1827 edition.)
[Whitaker, 1996] C. W. A. Whitaker. Aristotle’s De Interpretatione: contradiction and dialec-
tic. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1996.
[William of Sherwood, 13th century] William of Sherwood. Introductiones in logicam, 13th
century. Grabman, Martin (ed.). Sitzungsberichte der Bayersichen Akademie der Wis-
senschaften, Philosophisch-historische Abteilung, Jahrgang 1937, H. 10. Munich, 1937. Trans-
lated in Kretzmann 1966.
[William of Sherwood, 13th century a] William of Sherwood. Syncategoremata, 13th century.
O’Donnell, J. R. (ed.). Mediaeval Studies III, 46-93. Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, 1941. Translated in Kretzmann 1968.
[Weidemann, 1979] H. Weidemann. William of Ockham on Particular Negative Propositions,
Mind 88: 270-275, 1979.
[Wodeham, 2002] A. Wodeham. The Objects of Knowledge. Translated in Pasnau 2002.

THE ASSIMILATION OF ARISTOTELIAN
AND ARABIC LOGIC UP TO THE LATER
THIRTEENTH CENTURY
Henrik Lagerlund
1
INTRODUCTION
The development of logic from the rediscovery of the complete corpus of Aristotle
in the early twelfth century through the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries cannot
be characterised as anything else than remarkable. No other time in history, except
the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, has seen such a development of logic.
In this chapter, I will try to give an account of some of the problems and
developments from the late twelfth century into the mid-thirteenth century. My
focus will primarily be on the commentary tradition of Aristotle’s logical works,
that is, the Categories, De intrpretatione, Prior Analytics, Posterior Analytics,
Topics, and Sophistici Elenchi.1 Running parallel to the commentary tradition is
a less known and much less studied tradition, namely the history of the Arabic
logical works available in Latin at this time. Most scholars are of the opinion that
Arabic logic had very little if any inﬂuence on Western logic, but, although Arabic
logic did not revolutionise western logic as was once thought, it certainly is part
of the Western logical tradition and as such it had a not insigniﬁcant inﬂuence;
although not in the way previously thought. I will here highlight some of the more
interesting things I have noticed about these works.2
Alongside the commentaries on Aristotle’s works medieval logicians also wrote
treatises, summaries, and textbooks of logic.
As part of this overview, I will
try to say something about this development as well. A large part of this will
be a detailed look at what the content of some of the more famous thirteenth
century works was. I will for example look closer at Peter of Spain’s Tractatus
and William of Sherwood’s Introduction to Logic. I will supplement this with notes
1I will not say anything about the commentaries on the Posterior Analytics. This tradition
is hardly studied and its development seems to be a little bit diﬀerent than the other works.
Although it is a work on method it is unclear whether thirteenth century logicians saw it as a
work in logic. For an overview of this tradition see [Longeway, 2007, 3–79].
2For a more detailed study of this tradition and its inﬂuence on Western logic I will have to
refer the reader to a forthcoming monograph of mine with the title Latin Arabic Logic in the
Middle Ages: The Doctrines and Inﬂuences of Arabic Works on Logic Translated into Latin in
the 12th and 13th Centuries.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝200
Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.
8

282
Henrik Lagerlund
and references to Roger Bacon’s Summulae dialectices and Lambert of Auxerre’s
Logica. This will give the reader a good sense of what logic was thought to be in
the mid-thirteenth century.
At the beginning of the thirteenth century there were two theories that logicians
thought about as not deriving from Aristotle.
The ﬁrst was what came to be
called the properties of terms and the other was the discussion of syncategorematic
terms. Under the heading ‘properties of terms’ the logicians of the time dealt with
signiﬁcation and supposition of so called categorematic terms. This theory worked
its way into the textbooks very early. The treatment of syncategorematic terms
developed into a separate literary genre and both Peter of Spain and William of
Sherwood wrote treatises on Syncategoreumata. I have included a discussion of
the content of these works as well.
I have naturally included references to the works I discuss and also to the most
important secondary literature, but I have not quoted in original language and I
have tried to explain as many technical terms as possible. I have also not used any
notation from contemporary symbolic logic, since I do not think it is helpful for
understanding medieval logic. In my view it raises more questions than it answers.
The organisation of the sections in this chapter is chronological, which means
that I will begin with Arabic logic, since most of it was translated in the mid-
twelfth century, and then move on to my treatment of the commentary tradition.
I will end with the discussion of the so called textbook authors, which might seem a
little backwards since they are usually much less advanced than the commentaries.
If someone only wants a quick introduction to thirteenth century logic, he or she
can jump directly to that section below, since I am not presupposing the previous
discussion.
Even though this chapter is fairly long, I have only been able to scratch the
surface of the rich debates about logic and language in the late twelfth and early
thirteenth centuries. I hope this can serve as an introduction and appetiser to
more independent and deep studies of the primary texts themselves.
2
BACKGROUND
Medieval logicians divided logic into: the old logic (logica vetus), the new logic
(logica nova), ancient logic (logica antiqua), and modern logic (logica moderna).3
(2.1)
Logica vetus:
Before the ﬁrst decades of the twelfth century medieval
thinkers in the Western tradition only had access to the Categores and De
interpretatione. These works together with Porphyry’s Isagoge, which is an
introduction to the Categories, and Boethius’ commentaries on these three
works as well as his logical monographs4 were called logica vetus (or ars
3For an outline of this see also [de Rijk, 1962, 14–5].
4Boethius’ logical monographs are: De syllogismis categoricis, De syllogismis hypoteticis, De
divisione, and De topicis diﬀerentiis. See [Jacobi, 1988].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
283
vetus). From 1200 a work attributed to Gilbert de la Porr´ee (c. 1075-1154)
called De sex principiis also belonged to this group.
(2.2)
Logica nova: Around the 1120’s the Prior Analytics, Topics, and Sophistici
Elenchi in Boethius’ translations became readily available. Later in the
twelfth century the Posterior Analytics was translated and added to the
group of works called the logica nova (or ars nova).
(2.3)
Logica antiqua (or antiquorum): This is the generic name for all the works
included in logica vetus and logica nova.
(2.4)
Logica moderna (or modernorum): This name covers the part of medieval
logic that cannot be traced back to any of the writings of the logica an-
tiquorum.
As a rough guide one can say that the commentary tradition expands the logica
antiquorum, while it is in the more independent treatise and summary writings
that the logica modernorum is developed; of course, the treatises and summaries
will also include discussions of the logica antiquorum. In the later parts of the
thirteenth century the logical theories of the logica modernorum had worked its
way into the commentaries and was used as tools to expand Aristotle’s text, and
if one looks into the fourteenth century the commentaries become more and more
detached from Aristotle’s original text and is more an excuse for writing about a
particular topic.
Later medieval logicians considered Peter of Spain (c. 1205-77) to be the founder
of the logica modernorum. As de Rijk has shown this is quite wrong, but, as we will
see below, he gives a very authoritative and extremely inﬂuential outline of this
part of medieval logic. According to him, logica modernorum contains supposition,
relatives, ampliation, appellation, restriction, and distribution (see section 5.2 (On
Supposition) below for an explanation of these terms). If we add the discussion
of syncategorematic (or logical) terms to these, then we get what was, at least at
Peter’s time, considered to be the parts of the logica modernorum. Those pursuing
this branch of logic were called the Moderni or Terministae (hence the popular
name terministic logic).5
All of the logical works of Aristotle that was included in the logica antiquorum,
except the Posterior Analytics, were translated by Boethius.6 Although the Cate-
gories and De interpretatione were commented on at least since the ninth century,
the others were not studied before 1120, but it was not until the late twelfth cen-
tury that commentaries on these works started to appear, and in some cases the
ﬁrst commentaries are from the early thirteenth century.7
In the early thirteenth century, Aristotle very fast formed the foundation of the
teaching in the arts faculty at the newly established university in Paris. Logic was
5See [de Rijk, 1962, 15–6].
6See Aristotelis Latinus I-VI.
7See [Ebbesen, 1976; 1979; 1981a], and also [Green-Pedersen, 1984]. The ﬁrst commentary
on the Topics listed by Green-Pedersen is from the 1230’s.

284
Henrik Lagerlund
never very controversial and was largely unaﬀected by the teaching ban on Aristotle
in the 1210-30’s. It was the Physics and the Metaphysics that the authorities of the
time found objectionable, but it was only after these controversies were resolved
that the commentary tradition really took of, and eventually became the main
literary form of writing philosophy in the thirteenth century.
During the time of the controversy most of Averroes’ commentaries on Aristo-
tle’s works had been translated. They were very helpful for a general understanding
of Aristotle’s logical works. An important line of interpretation in mid-thirteenth
century commentaries is to read in the metaphysics into the logic and this seems
to me to be mainly due to inﬂuence from Averroes.
With the expansion of commentaries and the growing importance of Aristotle’s
texts for university teaching the need for new or refreched translations soon be-
came apparent. In the 1260’s, William of Moerbeke translates or revises Boethius
translations. At the same time he also translates several of the Greek commen-
tators.
The most important Latin commentators of the logic works from the
mid-thirteenth century that are known by name are Thomas Aquinas (d.1274),
Robert Kilwardby (d. 1279), Albert the Great (d. 1280), Boethius of Dacia (d. c.
1280), Simon of Faversham (d. 1306) and Radolphus Brito (d. 1320). The most
productive author from this time is, however, the one called Anonymous, since the
vast majority of commentaries from this time are anonymous.
It was generally accepted before de Rijk published his groundbreaking study on
the logica modernorum that this part of medieval logic was primarily an inﬂuence
from Byzantine and Arabic logic.8 This was as de Rijk shows completely wrong.
He argues convincingly that it is partly due to Aristotle’s Sophistici Elenchi but
foremost it was due to the creative minds of late twelfth century logicians. His
judgement of earlier views was so harsh that Arabic logic in the Latin tradition
has hardly been studied at all. I will below give a sketch of what was translated
and what these works contain.
3
ARABIC LOGIC IN LATIN
The Latin logicians of the thirteenth century had quite a good grasp of Arabic logic.
The major source for this knowledge was the Maq¯asid al-fal¯asifa (‘The Meaning
of the Philosophers’) by Ab¯u H¯amid Muhammad Al-Ghaz¯al¯i (1058-1111). It was
supposed to be a preparatory work for his later much more well known work
Tah¯afut al-fal¯asifa (‘The Incoherence of the Philosophers’).
The whole of the
Maq¯asid contains a presentation of logic, physics, metaphysics and theology, and
has been claimed to be an intelligent reworking of foremost Avicenna’s D¯anesh-
name (‘Book of Science’), which is a compendium of his doctrines written in
Persian. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s work was translated in full into Latin early in the second
half of the twelfth century, which is not more than 50 or 75 years after it was
written. In one of the manuscripts the title is Liber Algazelis de summa theoricae
8See [Prantl, 1867, III, 263–4].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
285
philosophiae, but it was also printed in Venice in 1506 under the title Logica
et philosophia Algazelis arabis. The twelfth century translation is by Dominicus
Gundissalinus and was commissioned by John Archbishop of Toledo (1151-66).9
The Latin translation of the Maq¯asid was very much read and became, at least
in the thirteenth century, the basic text from which the Latin authors gained their
knowledge of Arabic philosophy. The reason it became so much read was because
it mentions some of the ‘hot’ topics of the period, for example the divisions of the
sciences, the distinction between essence and existence, the eternity of the world,
the number of souls etc.10
It was also a very controversial work. In his work
the Tractatus de erroribus philosophorum, Giles of Rome lists 18 errors of Al-
Ghaz¯al¯i taken from the Maq¯asid. They later found their way into the Directorium
Inquisitorum from 1376 by Nicholas Eymerich.11
The logic became very well
known as well.
Albert the Great uses it quite extensively and it was used or
copied by Ram´on Lull.12
Althought the Maq¯asid was a summary of Al-Farabi’s and Avicenna’s doctrine,
the Latin thirteenth century also had some knowledge of Al-Farabi’s and Avi-
cenna’s logics directly. A twelfth century translation of the beginning, namely the
part on Porphyry’s Isagoge, of Avicenna’s encyclopedic worked called in Arabic
Kitab al-Shifa (‘The Book of Healing’) was circulating.13 And also a fragment of
the part on the Posterior Analytics from the same book existed in Latin.14 Small
fragments of some of Al-Farabi’s logic works have also been discovered in Latin.15
In the early thirteenth century, some of Averroes’ commentaries on the Organon
were translated in to Latin. William of Luna translated the middle commentary
on Porphyry’s Isagoge and the middle commentaries on Aristotle’s Categories, De
interpretatione, Prior Analytics, and Posterior Analytics between the 1220’s and
30’s16, but Latin writers seem to have had knowledge of other logic works by
Averroes than these.
Averroes’ commentaries were important for a general understanding of Aris-
totle’s very diﬃcult texts. They are generally, as mentioned already, helpful in
expounding the text and clearing up mistakes otherwise easily made, but the mid-
dle commentaries do not really go beyond Aristotle’s own text. If you read them
carefully, however, an interpretation is usually indicated, but what inﬂuence, if
any, they had in the subsequent thirteenth century commentary tradition has not
been carefully studied. It seems clear that the strong connection between logic
and metaphysics emphasised in these commentaries had some inﬂuence, though.
In what follows, I will outline the view on the matter and form of a syllogism
9See the introduction to Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 229.
10See [Alonso, 1958].
11See Giles of Rome, Errores philosophorum.
12See [Johnston, 1997].
13See Avicenna, Avicenne perypatetici philosophi.
14See D. Gundissalinus, De divisione philosophiae, 124-33.
15See [Salman, 1948]. In [Salman, 1939] it is argued that there was knowledge of a commentary
of the Posterior Analytics by Al-Farabi in the thirteenth century.
16See [Wolfson, 1963] and [Hissette, 1997]

286
Henrik Lagerlund
present in Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s Maq¯asid,17 and some interesting views on diﬀerentia and
modal propositions found in Averroes that seems to have had some inﬂuence.18
3.1
The Logic of Al-Ghaz¯al¯i
Al-Ghaz¯al¯i begins the Maq¯asid with a distinction between imagination (imagina-
tio) and belief (credulitas). An imagination is an apprehension of a thing, he tells
us, which is signiﬁed by a single mental utterance (dictio) in the intellect. Names
like ‘stone’ or ‘tree’ etc. signify these apprehensions or imaginations. A belief is
on the other hand a sentence or a complex utterance, that is, that which says or
expresses something, like ‘the world begins’. A belief is always a composition of at
least two imaginations. The kind of knowledge, which is mediated by imagination,
is arrived at through deﬁnitions and descriptions, and the kind of knowledge, which
is mediated by belief, is arrived at through arguments. It is logic that give the
rules by which we are able to give good and true deﬁnitions and arguments. Hence
logic is the very foundation of knowledge and all science, argues Al-Ghaz¯al¯i.19
The division of logic is done to show the aim or intention of logic.20 The aim is
to deﬁne and to prove. He gives the following fourfold division:
(3.1.1) On terms and how they signify understandings (intellectiones).
(3.1.2) On concepts (terms) and their divisions.
(3.1.3) On propositions and their composition.
(3.1.4) On proofs, which are subdivided into material and formal.21
The major thing to note about this division is the close connection between mind
and logic. The view of logic as being about intentions is derived from Avicenna
and it was very inﬂuential.
It gave rise to a major controversy between those
that argued that logic was a science of discourse (scientia sermocinalis) and those
that argued that is was a science of reason (scientia rationalis). Albert the Great
argues following Avicenna, for example, that logic is a science of mental intentions.
The ﬁrst part of logic is, according to the division above, about words and
concepts. He divides his discussion about these terms into ﬁve subparts, namely:
(3:1.5) On terms signiﬁcation of understandings (concepts).
(3:1.6) On terms division into simple and complex.
(3:1.7) On term division into singular and universal.
(3:1.8) On term division into verbs, names and particles.
(3:1.9) On the intention of terms.
Words signify understandings (or concepts; ‘intellectus’ in Latin) in three diﬀerent
ways, argues Al-Ghaz¯al¯i. First of all, a word can signify a concept directly as for
17Parts of this has been published in Lagerlund [forthcoming].
18I have written about the modal part previously in Lagerlund [2000].
19See Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 239, 6-13.
20Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 242, 100-102.
21Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 243, 115-120.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
287
example ‘house’ signiﬁes houses.
He calls this kind of signiﬁcation ‘secundum
parilitatem’. Secondly, a word can signify more indirectly as a consequence like
for example ‘house’ also signiﬁes the walls of a house.
He calls it ‘secundum
consequentiam’.
Thirdly, an even more indirect signiﬁcation as in the case of
‘roof’ which signify the walls holding it up. This he calls ‘secundum comitantiam’.
Al-Ghaz¯al¯i mentions that the ﬁrst two are the most useful and the third much
less so.
If one were to group these three into distinct kinds of signiﬁcation I
think one would have to say that the ﬁrst one is primary while the other two are
secondary or derivative kinds of signiﬁcation. The word ‘house’ is what later Latin
logicians (for example William Ockham) would call a connotative term, which then
has both a primary signiﬁcation and a secondary, that is, it signiﬁes both the thing
and the persons living in the house, since this is what makes the house into a house.
According to Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, ‘house’ has both kinds of signiﬁcation and probably
the word ‘house’ would not mean what it means for us if it did not have both these
signiﬁcations. He does not use other examples, but it seems natural that he would
think that ‘human’ only has the ﬁrst kind of signiﬁcation. Given this reasoning
there seems not to be much of a distinction to be made between the second and
the third kinds of signiﬁcation.
In Latin medieval logic, the signiﬁcation of a word is taken to be that which
it makes us think of.
Such a characteristic of signiﬁcation seems particularly
appropriate for Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s use of the term. Many logicians also, as Al-Ghaz¯al¯i,
held that words or terms signify thoughts primarily, but I have not been able to
ﬁnd any evidence that they got this doctrine from Al-Ghaz¯al¯i. It seems more likely
that the source for this doctrine is instead Aristotle. This is clear if one has a look
at Lambert of Auxerre’s Logica, which was written in the 1250’s and became an
authoritative textbook on logic in the Western tradition.
He begins his very short discussion of signiﬁcation, which in the thirteenth cen-
tury textbooks was only a small, but important, step towards explaining supposi-
tion theory, with the explanation that “signiﬁcation of a term is the understanding
of a thing”.22 He then continues to say that a sound is imposed by the will on
this understanding of the thing. All this is explained by a reference to the famous
passage in the beginning of Aristotle’s De interpretatione. Lambert continues to
note that according to this view, which he adheres to, sounds (words) signify the
passions of the soul (or concepts) which are in the understanding, and it is then
the understanding (concept) that signify the thing. The doctrine is then clear,
namely that words primarily signify concepts or something in the intellect. This
seems also to be Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s view of signiﬁcation.
The diﬀerence between simple and complex words or terms is also explained in
terms of what the terms signify in the intellect. A term is simple if its parts do
not signify anything in the intellect. To explain what he means he uses the term
‘homo’ (‘human being’). If one breaks it apart into ‘ho’ and ‘mo’ then those parts
do not signify any concept or understanding in the intellect, and hence they are
not simple term, but ‘homo’ of course does and is hence a simple term. A complex
22In Latin: “signiﬁcatio termini est intellectus rei”, Lambert of Auxerre, Logica, 205.

288
Henrik Lagerlund
term is hence a term that signiﬁes two or more concepts or understandings in the
intellect. This goes together with his view that signiﬁcation is additive, that is,
the signiﬁcation of the complex term is a sum of the signiﬁcation of its simple
parts.
The third division of terms (dictionis) is into singular and universal terms. A
term is singular if its signiﬁcation prohibits it to stand for more than one particular
thing or limits it to only one. His examples are ‘this Peter’, ‘this horse’ or ‘this
tree’. A term is on the other hand universal if its signiﬁcation does not prohibit
it to stand for more than one thing, like ‘horse’, ‘tree’ or ‘human being’.
He
seems not to distinguish between proper names and singular terms, and given his
example of ‘this Peter’ he seems not to think that proper names like ‘Peter’ are
what is nowadays often called rigid designators. ‘Peter’ is just a universal term
like ‘horse’, which can apply to many.
The fourth division (3.1.8) is between verbs, names and particles. He notes ﬁrst
that particles do not appear by themselves in the intellect only in connection with
other terms. A verb is diﬀerent from a name in that it signiﬁes an intention and
a time at which it is done. His example is ‘He struck’, which signiﬁes a striking
of something by someone and a past time when this was done. A name does not
signify a time. The last division is between diﬀerent intentions or meanings of
terms. He lists ﬁve, namely univocal terms, divers terms, that is, many terms for
the same thing, multivocal terms, that is, many terms for many things, equivocal
terms, and something he calls convenient (conveniantia) terms. The last is, he
says, something between univocal and equivocal and an example is ‘being’, which
is said of both substances and accidents.
The title of the part of Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s logic that deals with universal terms is “on
the intention of universal terms”. In the sentence: ‘This human being is white
and an animal’, the predication of ‘white’ and ‘animal’ of ‘human being’ is quite
diﬀerent. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i calls the ﬁrst accidental and the second essential. To explain
this diﬀerence he ﬁrst explains what essential and accidental mean in these cases.
There are three conditions for essentiality:
(3.1.10) A is essential to B, if B cannot be understood or thought
without A;
(3.1.11) A is essential to B, if A is necessarily prior to B;
(3.1.12) A is essential to B, if B cannot be posited to be without A.
It seems that all of these, (3.1.10)-(3.1.12), must be fulﬁlled for something to be
essentially something else. The ﬁrst condition says simply that if we cannot think
about one thing without also necessarily thinking about something else, like in
the case of human being and animal. Thinking about a human or a horse brings
also the concept of an animal into the mind. This means that these concepts or
terms are essentially tied. The second condition is a little bit less straightforward,
but he seems to mean, as Aristotle indeed thought, that what is essentially tied
to each other is also ordered in a special way, namely in the sense that animal is
prior to human being and horse. In the third condition, the idea seems to be that

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
289
if something A is essential to something else B, then this means that B cannot be
posited to exist without also A being posited to exist. If a human is posited to
exist, then an animal is also posited to exist.
Accidents are separated in the standard way into two diﬀerent kinds, namely
separable accidents and inseparable accidents. The examples he gives of separa-
ble and inseparable accidents are youth of a human being and blackness of an
Ethiopian (a very common example found in Porphyry’s Isagoge). In one case the
accident is separable from the substance, but in the other it is not.
Genus, species and diﬀerence (diﬀerentia) are crucial for deﬁnitions, Al-Ghaz¯al¯i
explains, and it is only these three that can be said to fulﬁll the three criterion
above of essential relations or essential predication. A property (proprium) is not
essential, according to Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, since ‘A human being is able to laugh’ is not
an essential predication according to (3.1.10)-(3.1.12). It is hence an accidental
predication.
The longest part of the Maq¯asid is on argumentation and it is divided into a
discussion of formal and material argumentation (or syllogisms). This distinction
is not entirely clear, although directly taken from Avicenna, and I will discuss it in
some detail below. I will ﬁrst shortly deal with formal arguments, which is much
more straight-forward.
The part dealing with formal arguments is divided into syllogisms, induction,
and arguments by example. The part dealing with the syllogisms is divided into
categorical syllogisms and hypothetical syllogisms. Echoing Aristotle in the Prior
Analytics, he deﬁnes a syllogism in the following way:
A syllogism is a discourse in which statements are posited and granted,
and from which a statement other than those previously granted nec-
essarily follows.23
This deﬁnition applies to both categorical and hypothetical syllogisms, and indeed
to all arguments.
The categorical syllogisms are at least initially given a standard presentation.
He mentions that it contains two propositions as premises and that the middle
term, which connects the two premises, are crucial for the production of a conclu-
sion. The middle term connects the major and minor terms, which are respectively
the predicate and subject of the conclusion. It is the order of these terms that
give the diﬀerent syllogistic ﬁgures. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i mentions three ﬁgures:
(Figure 1): The medium term is the predicate of one premise and
subject of the other.
(Figure 2): The medium term is the predicate of both premises.
(Figure 3): The medium term is the subject of both premises.
23Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 259, 18-9. Compare Aristotle’s deﬁnition in the Prior Ana-
lytics: “A deduction (syllogism) is a discourse in which, certain things being stated, something
other than what is stated follows of necessity from their being so.” (24b19-20) The translation
is by Robin Smith.

290
Henrik Lagerlund
He notes further that in none of these ﬁgures does a conclusion follow from only
negative premises, from only particular premises, and from a combination of the
major negative and the minor particular.24 The ﬁrst ﬁgure is diﬀerent from the
other two in primarily two ways: ﬁrst of all, the syllogisms in it are not reduced to
any other syllogisms, and the conclusions in it are of four diﬀerent kinds, namely
universal aﬃrmative, universal negative, particular aﬃrmative, and particular neg-
ative. In the second ﬁgure there are no aﬃrmative conclusions and in the third
ﬁgure there are no universal conclusions.25
As Aristotle himself had maintained the ﬁrst ﬁgure is perfect. He, however, says
very little about why it is perfect. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i want to explain this by showing why
the ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogisms are “certain”, as he says. He says that “when you posit
a true aﬃrmative proposition, then whatever is said about all of its predicate the
same thing is said about its subject.”26 In a true proposition like ‘A human being
is an animal’ one must think that the subject includes all of the predicate. He
thus assumes some kind of inclusive relation between the subject and the predicate
and this accounts for the certainty of the ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogisms.27 This becomes
more clear when one has a look at how he presents the four valid syllogisms. He
namely presents them with the minor premise ﬁrst, since he wants to highlight the
inclusion relation between the terms. The examples he gives of the four syllogisms
are:
(3.1.13) ‘Every body is a composite, but every composite began, there-
fore every body began.’
(3.1.14) ‘Every body is a composite, but no composite is eternal, there-
fore no body is eternal.’
(3.1.15) ‘Some thing is a composite, but every composite began, there-
fore some thing began.’
(3.1.16) ‘Some thing is a composite, but no composite is eternal, there-
fore some thing is not eternal.’28
The ﬁrst thing to notice is of course that each syllogism is lined up as a conditional
with the minor premise ﬁrst.
Putting the premises in this order lines up the
terms nicely as minor, middle and major.
In the ﬁrst ﬁgure, ‘body’ includes
‘composite’ and ‘composite’ in turn includes ‘began’, which makes it obvious that
‘body’ includes ‘began’ as well.
The quantiﬁcation of the propositions is just
expressing how many of the subjects have the predicates. In (3.1.13), all have.
In the second ﬁgure, Al-Ghaz¯al¯i presents the following valid syllogisms:
(3.1.17) ‘Every body is divisible, but no animal is divisible, therefore
no body is an animal.’
24Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 260, 61-3.
25Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 260, 64-70.
26Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 260, 76-8.
27This was called taking the terms universally in Latin logic. See the discussion about this
below.
28Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 261, 88-110.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
291
(3.1.18) ‘No eternal thing is a composite, but every body is a composite,
therefore no eternal thing is a body.’
(3.1.19) ‘Something is that which is divisible, but no soul is divisible,
therefore something is that which is not a soul.’
(3.1.20) ‘Some thing is not a composite, but every body is a composite,
therefore some thing is not a body.’
(3.1.17) is reduced to (3.1.14) by converting the major premise. He proves (3.1.18)
by converting the minor premise and then the conclusion of the resulting syllogism
to get (3.1.14).29
In (3.1.19), the major premise is converted to get (3.1.16).
The last syllogism in this ﬁgure cannot be proved by conversion to a ﬁrst ﬁgure
syllogism, and must hence be proved in some other way. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i gives two
diﬀerent proofs of this syllogism. The second proof he gives is the traditional or
Aristotelian one. It is an indirect proof from the contradictory of the conclusion,
namely ‘every thing is a body’, which together with the major premise and (3.1.13)
gives ‘every thing is a composite’. This, however, contradicts the minor premise,
which we have assumed to be true.30
The ﬁrst proof he gives is less straight-forward and not at all traditional. In
translation, this is what he says:
It is posited that: ‘Some thing is not a composite’. This ‘some thing’
is in itself some whole. We therefore posit that this is some whole and
give it some name. It is therefore constructed as in the second mood
of this ﬁgure.31
This is rather cryptic, one must admit, but a better explication of what he means
can be found if one looks at Avicenna’s Danesh-name. From what he says one can
conclude that the proof goes something like this:
Take the thing under the subject term in the premise ‘Some thing is
not a composite’ that is not a composite and call it T. Knowing that
T is not a composite, then ‘No T is a composite’ is true. We now
also know from the major premise in (3.1.20) that ‘Every body is a
composite’, and from these two it follows by (3.1.18) that ‘No T is a
body’. Given that T is a thing that is not a composite ‘Some thing is
T’ is obviously true. Now, from ‘No T is a body’ and ‘Some thing is
T’ it follows by (3.1.16) that ‘Some thing is not a body’. Q.E.D.
It is a valid proof, if my reconstruction is correct, but it is not clear from what
Al-Ghaz¯al¯i actually says that this is the way he thinks the proof is supposed to
go.
In the third ﬁgure, he states the following six valid syllogisms:
29Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 263-4, 165-221.
30Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 264, 213-221.
31I have included the Latin so you can read it for yourselves. “Positio est cum dicis: ‘Aliqua res
est non composita’. Haec autem ‘aliqua res’ in se quoddam totum est. Ponamus ergo illud esse
quoddam totum, et appelletur quomodolibet. Fiet ergo quasi secundus modus huius ﬁgurae.”
(Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 209-12.)

292
Henrik Lagerlund
(3.1.21) ‘Every human being is an animal, and every human being is
rational, therefore some animal is rational.’
(3.1.22) ‘Every human being is an animal, and no human being is a
horse, therefore some animal is not a horse.’
(3.1.23) ‘Some human being is white, and ever human being is an
animal, therefore some white thing is a human being.’
(3.1.24) ‘Every human being is an animal, and some human being is a
writer, therefore some animal is a writer.’
(3.1.25) ‘Every human being is rational, and some human being is not
a writer, therefore some rational thing is not a writer.’
(3.1.26) ‘Some animal is white, no animal is snow, therefore some white
thing is not snow.’
(3.1.21) is proved by conversion of the minor premise to get (3.1.15). The next
is proved in the same way by this time to get (3.1.16), and also (3.1.23) to get
(3.1.15). (3.1.24) is proved by conversion of the major premise and conversion
of the conclusion. He does not mention that he must transpose the premises as
well, but perhaps he takes this to be obvious given his conditional reading of the
syllogisms. The last syllogism in this ﬁgure is proved by converting the minor
premise to get (3.1.16).
(3.1.25) is claimed to be proven by supposition again, but no proof is this time
given. A proof in the line of the one given above might look like this:
Take a human being that is not a writer in ‘Some human being is not a
writer’ and call it H. Hence ‘No H is a writer’ is true. We have posited
that ‘Every human being is rational’ and since H is a human being,
it follows that ‘Some H is a human being’, which together by (3.1.15)
becomes ‘Some H is rational’. Given this and ‘No H is a writer’ it
follows by (3.1.26) that ‘Some rational thing is not a writer’. Q.E.D.
This proof method is very powerful and in fact Al-Ghaz¯al¯i would need no other
to prove the valid syllogisms. It is somewhat reminiscent of Aristotle’s proof by
echtesis.
Al-Ghaz¯al¯i ends his discussion of the categorical syllogisms at this point and
it is quite strange that he does not mention the other ten valid syllogisms of
the Aristotelian system.
Avicenna’s discussion in the Danesh-name is equally
incomplete so Al-Ghaz¯al¯i seems here only to follow his lead.
He then eventually turns the discussion towards the doctrine of the matter of
the syllogism. The matter of a syllogism is its propositions or premises. If they
are credible and true, then the conclusion will be credible and true, but if the
premises are false, then the conclusion will not be credible.32 He tries to explain
what he means by the distinction between the matter and form of a syllogism by
an analogy with a coin. The matter of the coin is the gold it is made of and its
form is its roundness. If the form is destroyed or falsiﬁed in some way, we will
32Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 273, 495-8.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
293
not call it a coin anymore. Sometimes the matter of the coin is also changed, that
is, a coin, he notes, might be made from iron or silver. It is then not worth as
much, but it is still a coin. In the same way the form and matter of a syllogism can
change. If the form is change so that it is not in accordance with any of the ﬁgures,
then it is no longer a syllogism and presumably not an argument any more, but
sometimes the form is the correct one, but the matter is diﬀerent and the premises
are only opinions or even sometimes false.33
Al-Ghaz¯al¯i seems to think that syllogistics provide the form of all argumen-
tations.
In a sense one can thus say that the three syllogistic ﬁgures give the
deﬁnition of what an argumentative form is. Given this his analogy with the coin
outlined above seems not very well chosen since the roundness of a coin is quite
arbitrary, that is, a coin can look in all sorts of ways and still be a coin. The form
of a syllogism is, however, necessarily given by the ﬁrst, second or third ﬁgures.
The form is, however, even more restricted than this, since all syllogisms in the
second and third ﬁgure are reducible to the ﬁrst ﬁgure. The form of all arguments
is thus given by the ﬁrst ﬁgure and the valid syllogisms in that ﬁgure. This is a
very restricted view of the form of an argument, that is, to deﬁne the form as the
ﬁrst ﬁgure and the four moods in that ﬁgure. But as we saw above he used the
same deﬁnition of a syllogism as Aristotle in the Prior Analytics. This is on the
other hand a very general deﬁnition and if it is something like this he has in mind
for the form of an argument then he has a rather lose sense of what form is.34
He continues his analogy with the gold coin mentioned above to outline ﬁve
levels of propositions. He says that in the same sense as there are ﬁve kinds of
purity of gold there are ﬁve levels of propositions. These levels are distinguished
by the truth or certainty of the kinds of propositions in them. On the ﬁrst level the
propositions are true and believable (assented to) without doubt and deception.
These are the propositions used in demonstration. On the second level are the
propositions in proximity of truth and of which it can be diﬃcult to judge whether
they are false or not, or as he says to spot the fallacy in them, but if scrutinized
they might turn out to be false or fallacious. These are the propositions used in
dialectics. On the third level we ﬁnd propositions that can be labeled opinions
but which are nevertheless convincing. It is easier to see their possible fallacies
though. These are the propositions used in rhetoric and law. On the fourth level
the propositions are such that they look like they are true, that is, they imitate
truth by being similar to true propositions, but they are really further from the
truth than any of the propositions on the levels above, that is, they are neither true,
probable or a genuine opinion about something. These are the propositions used
in sophistical arguments. At the ﬁfth level we ﬁnd propositions which we know are
false, but which nonetheless move the soul in some way to form opinions. These
are propositions used in poetical arguments.35
33Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 237, 499-505.
34I have argued in Lagerlund [forthcoming] that it must be the stricter he is actually committed
to.
35Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 273, 507-29.

294
Henrik Lagerlund
These ﬁve diﬀerent levels of propositions are then further subdivided into all in
all thirteen diﬀerent kinds of propositions. The division is the following:
(3.1.27) Demonstrative propositions;
(i) Per se necessary propositions (primae);
(ii) Propositions about sense perceptions (sensibiles);
(iii) Experimental propositions (experimentales);
(iv) Reputable propositions (famosae);
(v) Intuitive propositions.
(3.1.28) Topical propositions;
(i) Maximal propositions (maximae);
(ii) Granted propositions (concessae).
(3.1.29) Rhetorical and legal propositions;
(i) Propositions reporting received opinions (receptibiles);
(ii) Apparent maximal propositions (maximae in apparentia);
(iii) Believable propositions (putabiles).
(3.1.30) Sophistical propositions;
(i) Believable propositions;
(ii) Deceptive propositions (simulatoriae).
(3.1.31) Poetical propositions;
(i) Imaginative or transformative propositions (imaginative sive trans-
formativae).
The thirteenth kind of proposition which does not ﬁt into the classiﬁcation above,
but which he nonetheless outlines is called estimative propositions. He explains
that these are false propositions which somehow have been ﬁxed in our souls and
which we cannot doubt. Some of the examples he gives are: ‘That which has no
parts cannot be anything’, ‘Nothing is that which is not in the world and not
outside it’, or ‘The totality of the world terminates in a void or in a plenary’.
The ﬁrst ﬁve under (3.1.27) are all true propositions and as such they are all
the subject of demonstrative syllogisms or demonstrative science. The ﬁrst kinds
are per se necessary and naturally believed by the intellect. An example he gives
is: ‘Two are more than one’.
These are truths of reason, that is, truths the
intellect realizes without any training and education. The second kinds are simple
truths based on perception, like ‘the sun is shining’. Next are the experimental
propositions. While the ﬁrst was purely based on the intellect and the second only
on the senses, these propositions are based on both. An example would be ‘Fire
ignites’. Reputable (famosae) propositions are such propositions which nobody
doubt, but where the foundation for their truth is now known. His example is:
‘Egypt exists’, although no one has actually been there to look. The last kinds
of propositions usable in demonstration according to this classiﬁcation at least

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
295
are what I have called intuitive propositions. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i calls them propositions
that include their own proofs. The arguments in them need to be brought out by
ﬁnding the middle term. He gives the example: ‘Two is the middle of four’. The
argument for this can be drawn out of the proposition itself to get the following
argument:
’A middle is a part of a whole equal to the other part, but two is one
of two equal parts of four, therefore two is the middle of four’.36
The idea seems to be that given propositions like the one discussed here one can
just by looking at them see that one can easily formulate an argument for them –
one simply has to add a middle term. Interestingly, the argument he himself ends
up giving is not a syllogism, but one could easily make a syllogistic argument with
the conclusion ‘two is the middle of four’.
The doctrine pretty much explicit in the ﬁst book of Aristotle’s Topics is that the
only diﬀerence between demonstration and dialectics is the nature of the premises
involved. The Arabic or Avicennan doctrine of the matter of the syllogisms seems
to take this view to heart. The two kinds of dialectical or topical premises Al-
Ghaz¯al¯i outlines are above called maximal and granted. The maximal propositions
are as close to truths or as close to propositions used in demonstrations as one
could get. It is quite natural for our minds to accept them, he argues. Among
his examples are: ‘Lying is shameful’, ‘Innocent [people] should not be punished’,
‘Justice is necessary’, etc.37 He also mentions that since these kinds of propositions
are not absolute truths their contradictories will not be false, but they will be
considered absurd by everybody, he thinks. Granted propositions are not ﬁrmly
believed or held to be true as maximal propositions. Some accept them and some
do not. Otherwise they do not diﬀer much from maximal propositions.38
When these two kinds of propositions are used in syllogistic arguments, the
argument is called dialectical. He foremost outlines four conceptions of the use-
fulness of such arguments. First of all dialectics is useful since it will help us to
know things we presume to know but does not really know. Secondly, it is useful
if we want to learn some true proposition, although we do not want to go into
the intricate details of a demonstrative argument and we are not content with a
rhetorical argument. The topical argument for the proposition then constitutes
a good middle alternative. Thirdly it is useful as an introduction to an art or
science, like medicine or geometry. By starting from the topical propositions we
can get to know the demonstrative propositions of any given science. Finally, he
notes that it is the nature of dialectical arguments that they in the same question
can conclude two contradictory extremes. But this is very useful since by making
such arguments and then locating the errors made one can often establish what is
the truth in the particular question discussed.39
36Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 274, 577-81.
37Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 276, 617-21.
38Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 277, 641-55.
39Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 278-9, 688-707.

296
Henrik Lagerlund
There are three kinds of propositions that determine whether an argument
is rhetorical, namely propositions reporting received opinions, apparent maximal
propositions and believable propositions. The ﬁrst kinds of propositions are propo-
sitions held to be true because some authority, written or oral, has uttered it. Many
people therefore hold them true. An apparent maximal proposition is a proposi-
tion that when we hear it sounds very credible, but which on closer inspection is
false. Believable propositions are propositions one can believe, although it is often
the opposite that one actually believes, like for example the proposition ‘Whoever
moves around at night, is up to no good’ whose opposite is what is more often
believed, namely ‘A good person does not move abound at night’.40 The argu-
ments done in the rhetorical and legal arts are not meant to certify anything only
to persuade. Its main usefulness is to turn the soul to pursuing truth and avoiding
falsity, but also it is very useful in law.
Sophistical propositions are ﬁrst of all believable propositions, but most impor-
tantly deceptive propositions. The deceptive propositions are propositions that
simulate ﬁrst (or per se), experimental, or maximal proposition, and seem to be
such propositions but are not. He has a longer discussion about sophistical syllo-
gisms and gives a list of ten things to look out for when compiling a syllogistic ar-
gument. This list is taken almost word for word from Avicenna’s Danesh-name.41
The last category of propositions is the imaginative propositions. They are used
in poetical argumentations. These propositions are known to be false, or we know
that they are false as soon as we hear them. His example is: ‘The honey looks like
dung’.42
It is obvious that the ﬁvefold division of the matter of a syllogism is also a
division of ﬁve kinds of logical arts. In this respect there is a demonstrative logic,
a topical logic, a rhetorical logic, a sophistical logic and a poetical logic. These
kinds of divisions into diﬀerent kinds of logic which are formally identical but
distinguished by their material diversity was characteristic of the Arabic logical
tradition and particularly of Avicenna.
Early in the part of the Shif¯a dealing
with logic he writes that: “all of these [logical arts] are like participants, either
actually or potentially, in the structure and the form of the syllogism. And the
majority of their diﬀerence are in their matters.”43 The doctrine of the matter of
the syllogisms had some inﬂuence on Latin medieval logic, for example, Aquinas
takes it over and it can also be seen in the logic textbooks discussed below.44
3.2
Averroes’ Commentaries on the Organon
The middle commentaries of Averroes were never really written to fully explain
or go beyond the thought of Porphyry or Aristotle. Averroes therefore sticks very
40Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 277, 646-67.
41Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 280-1, 743-807. See also Avicenna, Avicenna’s Treatise on
Logic: Part one of Danesh-Name Alai, 46-7.
42Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, 278, 670-3.
43Quoted from [Black, 1990, 84].
44See Lagerlund [forthcoming] for a discussion of its inﬂuence on Western logic.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
297
close to the original text and only on occasion deviate in order to explain further
or to rule out misunderstandings. He also sometimes says that some argument or
view is wrong, but he does not bother to explain why or give the counter argument.
As an interpreter one therefore must really drag his view out from the text since
the text itself gives us very little help.
Averroes’ commentary on the part of Isagoge contains an interesting discussion
of diﬀerentiae. It starts by dividing up diﬀerentia into diﬀerent senses. He begins
by saying that there are three senses of diﬀerentiae, namely a general, a proper
and a most proper. A general diﬀerentia is when one thing diﬀers from another
as Socrates is another substance than Plato and when the same thing diﬀers from
itself by a state or a disposition as, for example, the young Socrates diﬀer from the
old. A proper diﬀerentia is when one thing diﬀers from another by an inseparable
accident. The most proper diﬀerentia is a diﬀerentia that produces a diﬀerence
in species. Averroes calls the latter a species-producing diﬀerentia and the two
former diﬀerentiae without any qualiﬁcation. According to standard terminology
what Averroes’s calls species-producing diﬀerentia is speciﬁc diﬀerentia.
As he explains, species-producing diﬀerentiae produce another being while the
other only produce diversity and ‘it is through those that produce another being
that genera are divided into species and that deﬁnitions are completed. The other
kind of diﬀerentiae produces diversity only in respect to the states of things, not
in respect to their essence.’
There is also another division among diﬀerentiae, namely they are either sepa-
rable or inseparable and the inseparable are divided into substantial (per se) and
accidental (per accidens). This division is supposed to map onto the division above
so that we get:
General diﬀerentia = Separable diﬀerentia.
Proper diﬀerentia = Inseparable accidental diﬀerentia.
Most proper diﬀerentia = Inseparable substantial diﬀerentia.
This means of course that the inseparable but accidental diﬀerentiae, like snubness
of nose, are not species-producing (speciﬁc) diﬀerentiae and hence not employed
in the deﬁnition of the essence of a thing. He explains:
The inseparable, in turn, are of two sorts, substantial (per se) and acci-
dental (per accidens). An example of the accidental sort is snubness of
nose, and examples of the substantial sort are rationality and capacity
for science in man. It is the substantial diﬀerentiae that are employed
in the deﬁnition of the essence of the thing to which they belong, and,
as we have said, it is they that produce another being by the side of the
genus to which they are joined. Diﬀerentiae that are accidental are not
employed in the deﬁnition of the essence of the thing of which they are
predicated, and do not produce another species, but only diversity.45
45Averroes, Middle Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, 14.

298
Henrik Lagerlund
There is also a further division of substantial diﬀerentiae, namely into those that
divide the genus and those that are constitutive of it. A diﬀerentia like rational is
both divisive and constitutive, since it divides the genus animal, but is constitutive
of the species human being. Hence some diﬀerentiae can be constitutive and not
divisive, which means that they are part of the essence but does not divide up the
genera. He writes:
Some substantial diﬀerentiae constitute intermediate genera, and some
divide them. Animal may serve as an example. As an intermediate
genus, it has diﬀerentiae that constitute it, that is, complete its deﬁni-
tion and produce it, as, for example, food consumption and sensation;
for food consumption and sensation complete the essence of animal,
animal being a food-consuming, sensitive body. But animal has other
diﬀerentiae that divide it, such as rational and irrational, since ani-
mal is either rational or irrational. The diﬀerentiae that divide the
intermediate genus also constitute the species that are beneath that
genus.46
All this is, of course, completely standard. Having made these divisions he goes on
to discuss some deﬁnitions of substantial diﬀerentia that Porhyry gives. The ﬁrst
deﬁnition he examines states that a diﬀerentia is that whereby species exceeds
genus. With this he seems to mean that the diﬀerentia is that which is present
in the species in addition to that which is present in the genus. The diﬀerentia
rational is not actually present in the genus, since it then would also have to
contain its opposite irrational, and hence two opposed things would be present in
the same thing. Rather the diﬀerentia is only potentially present in the genus and
actually present in the species. In Averroes explanation it goes like this:
[Substantial] diﬀerentia has been deﬁned in several ways. According to
one deﬁnition, diﬀerentia is that whereby species exceeds genus. For by
virtue of its diﬀerentia, rationality, [the species] man exceeds animal,
its genus, since this diﬀerentia is not actually present in animal. Were
it actually present, its opposite would also have to be present, that
is, the absence of rationality, which completes the division of animal
as when we say that animal is either rational or irrational. Only in
the species below animal are these diﬀerentiae present. This argument
contains a fallacy.47
Porphyry himself explicitly says that the diﬀerentia is potentially present in the
genus, but Averroes does not because he thinks that the argument contains a
fallacy. He does not say which fallacy, but it seems clear that the problem is that
diﬀerentiae cannot even be potentially present in the genus. This is brought out by
Gersonides in his commentary on Averroes’ commentary on Isagoge. Gersonides
explains that what is potential is possible and by positing a possibility nothing
46Averroes, Middle Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, 14-5.
47Averroes, Middle Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, 15.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
299
impossible should follow, as Aristotle says in the Prior Analytics (32a18-20). If
one were to assume that every animal is rational then something impossible would
follow, since horse and ass would be rational. A consequence of this is hence that
an essential diﬀerentia is never present in the genus, but it is instead what is added
to the genus from outside. How this is supposed to be understood becomes clearer
in Averroes’ discussion of the next deﬁnition proposed by Porphyry. Let me quote
this passage in whole before I expand on it. He writes:
[Substantial] diﬀerentia has also been deﬁned as that which is predi-
cated of a number of things diﬀering in respect to species, by way of
stating which thing it is, not what it is. For when asked what man
is, we ﬁrst reply by giving his genus, saying that he is animal, and
then when asked which animal he is, we reply that he is rational. The
deﬁnition of man is completed only through the whole of this. The
reason is that everything is composed either of matter and form, or
things analogous to matter and form. Genus is analogous to matter,
and diﬀerentia is analogous to form, and consequently the unity formed
by genus and diﬀerentia is the substance of the thing insofar as it is
in the mind, just as its matter and form are its substance insofar as it
exists outside the mind.48
Diﬀerentiae are predicated of a number of things by way of stating which thing
it is and not what it is. So, the diﬀerentia does not tell us what the thing it is
predicated of is; it instead gives us the answer to the question: ‘What’s it like?’,
and the answer is: ‘It is rational!’ It thus gives you the essence of the thing. The
question: ‘What is it?’ refers back to the genus, and the answer to that question
is: ‘It is an animal!’ It is only when we combine the answers to these two question
that we get the deﬁnition of the thing, that is, rational animal. The reason this
is the case, he explains, is because everything is composed of matter and form.
In the deﬁnition of a species both matter and form are needed. The genus brings
the matter and the diﬀerentia brings the form and together you get the species.
This is the Aristotelian arithmetic of natural things, that is, ‘Genus + Diﬀerentia
= Species’ or Matter + Form = Substance’.
As can be noted at the end of the quote above, Averroes implies a distinction
between the concepts in the mind and the things in the world they signify. In the
mind, we form the deﬁnition ‘Human Being is a Rational Animal’ and in the extra
mental world we have particular humans, which are composites of matter and
form. The complex term ‘rational animal’ signiﬁes together the composite, but
separately each part of the composite. The diﬀerentia hence signiﬁes the rational
soul, which is the substantial form of the human being. The essence of a human
is, of course, its rational soul.
Averroes does not say much about diﬀerentia in his commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories, which, of course, is because Aristotle himself does not say a whole lot
48Averroes, Middle Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, 15-6.

300
Henrik Lagerlund
about diﬀerentia in the Categories. In Part II, Chapter 9, he, however, notes the
following:
We must not let anyone confound us by saying that rationality and
diﬀerentiae in general are present in a subject just as accidents are
present in a subject, their subjects being the things whose diﬀerentiae
they are; the analogy would be between the presence of rationality in
man and the presence of whiteness in body. For rationality is present
in a subject, that is, man, as part of it, while the relation of whiteness
to body is diﬀerent. For this reason our description of accidents as
what are predicated in a subject should not be understood as meaning
that they are in a subject as a part of it, but rather that the subject
can exist without the accident.49
Here he speciﬁcally takes up problem of whether the diﬀerentia is a substance or
a quality and he answers clearly that it is not a quality. Diﬀerentiae are not in
a subject, that is, the species, since they are part of the subject. A quality like
whiteness is in a subject and it is also something that the subject can lose without
ceasing to exist, but a diﬀerentia which is an essential part of it as a substance, it
cannot exist without.
The substantial form as the diﬀerentia is constitutive of the species and the
essence of it; something it naturally cannot exist without. One could then say
that the substantial form on Averroes view is a complement of the species as an
essential part of it. The distinction between divisive and constitutive diﬀerentiae
is going to be very important to understand Averroes’ view. The substantial form
is the thing in human beings that makes it onto what it is and to what the concept
‘diﬀerentia’ refers to in the deﬁnition of the species human being. In this respect it
is in the classiﬁcation what divides the genus animal and also what constitute the
species human being. All other constitutive diﬀerentiae are going to be derivative
upon it as essential characteristics or complements of human beings. The view
expressed here can be found in Robert Kilwardby’s commentaries on the Isagoge
and the Categories (see below).
It can also be read into Aquinas’ De ente et
essentia.
Averroes’ treatment of modal syllogistics is very interesting and strengthens his
general metaphysical interpretation of Aristotle’s logic. It seemed also to have
had some inﬂuence on the thirteenth century.50 In his minor and very compact
Quaesita of the Prior Analytics, Averroes focuses his discussion mainly on the
modal syllogistic. In its interpretation of the modal syllogistic, this minor work
diﬀers from the middle commentary, the Expositio. While the Expositio gives a
straight-forward temporal interpretation of the modalities, the Quaesita presents
a somewhat diﬀerent view, one which is more ontological, and based on the nature
of the terms involved in the diﬀerent syllogisms.
49Averroes, Middle commentary on Aristotle’s Categories, II, 9, 41-2.
50See Lagerlund [2000, Chapter 2], where the relation between Kilwardby and Averroes is
explained.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
301
Chapter 3 of Quaesitum IV deals with the mixed necessity and assertoric syllo-
gisms. Averroes ﬁrst states that the terms of necessity propositions in Aristotle’s
modal syllogistic are themselves necessary and that such a term is one by virtue
of itself (unus per se). What does this mean? A necessary term always stands for
its subject. It is a name of a thing which is continuously actualised in the world,
such as eternal individual beings, or natural species of substances and their es-
sential properties. Averroes also states that there are terms which are accidental.
An accidental term does not always stand for the same subject, that is, the term
sometimes stands for a certain subject and sometimes not.
Given this, Averroes explains what constitutes a necessity proposition and what
in general constitutes a assertoric proposition and a assertoric simpliciter proposi-
tion, which he thinks is the right type of assertoric premise in a mixed Aristotelian
syllogism with necessity and assertoric premises. It is clear that if both terms in a
proposition are necessary and an essential predicate is predicated of a (necessary)
subject, then the proposition is necessary. According to Averroes, a proposition
can be considered necessary if it consists of a necessary subject and a necessary
predicate inhering in it ‘connexo ipsi subiecto’. This probably means that even if
the property is not essential, but an inseparable accident (accidens inseparabile),
such as the whiteness of swans, then the proposition is necessary.
If, on the other hand, both terms are accidental, and refer to properties which
are not always actual, then the proposition is an assertoric proposition. Averroes
is here interested in a special class of assertoric propositions, namely, in those
which are assertoric simpliciter.
If they are true, they are true independently
of temporal restrictions whenever the subject is actual. His example of such an
assertoric proposition is ‘Every walking being is moving’.
He adds that if the
subject is walking it is necessarily moving. One could say that such propositions
are conditionally necessary.51
The third suggestion discussed by Averroes is the combination of necessary and
accidental terms. He ﬁrst discusses the case in which the subject term is accidental
and the predicate term is necessary. His example is ‘Every walking being is an
animal’. This proposition can be understood in two ways: either the subject term
‘walking being’ is understood to stand for its supposita as walking, or it is taken
to stand for them as those which are walking. In the former case, the proposition
is assertoric, and in the latter case, it is necessary. Because the latter reading is
indirect, it can be said that the proposition is a assertoric proposition per se and a
necessity proposition per accidens. According to Averroes, in a mixed ﬁrst ﬁgure
syllogism with necessity and assertoric premises, the assertoric premise should be
assertoric per se and necessary per accidens. One can ask, of course, why the minor
premise is called an assertoric premise and the conclusion necessary. Both are
assertoric per se and necessary per accidens. The second case with necessary and
accidental terms is that the subject term is necessary and the predicate accidental.
51It was standard practice in Arabic logic after Avicenna to elaborate modal propositions
with all kinds of restrictions placed on the terms involved. See [Street, 2004] and [Lagerlund,
forthcoming b].

302
Henrik Lagerlund
Such propositions are assertoric simpliciter, but never necessary per accidens.
According to Averroes, the propositions which are necessary per se have neces-
sary terms. There are no problems involved in converting such propositions into
necessity propositions. Propositions which are accidentally necessary are not con-
vertible into necessity propositions. Averroes’ example of a propositions of this
kind is: ‘Every writer is a human being’.
Averroes’ discussion about syllogistic propositions which are necessary per se or
necessary per accidens is much more detailed than what one ﬁnds in for example
Robert Kilwardby’s short remarks about the conversion of the necessity premises
(see below). One striking similarity though is that both claim that the subject
term of a necessary proposition per se must not stand for its supposita accidentally.
A proposition is called necessary per se only if both terms are necessary, and it is
called per accidens only if one term is necessary and the other accidental. There
may be necessary connections between the terms of a proposition which do not
fulﬁl these conditions. The proposition is then not necessary. Accidental necessity
propositions have an accidental term as a subject term and, therefore, there is no
essential connection between the terms as such.
Much more should be said about the logical theories in Arabic logic works
accessible to Latin logicians, but this will have to do for now. These doctrines
were never as inﬂuential as Prantl assumed, but neither did they exert no inﬂuence
what so ever.
4
THE COMMENTARIES ON ARISTOTLE’S ORGANON
There is an unfortunate lack of edited texts from the early commentaries on Aris-
totle’s logic.52
Albert the Great wrote commentaries on all logic works in the
logica antiquorum and his are the only ones that have been or are being critically
edited. Thomas Aquinas’ logic works has also of course been edited. He only wrote
commentaries on De interpretatione and the Posterior Analytics. One of the most
inﬂuential thinkers from this period was, however, Robert Kilwardby. Between
1235 and 1245, he lectured on most of the logica antiquotum and although he was
inﬂuenced by Averroes he stands out as a very original thinker. Unfortunately,
none of his commentaries on Aristotle’s logical works have been edited. Albert the
52There is no chronological catalogue of all the Latin commentaries on the logical works of
Aristotle, but there numerous lists of commentaries available.
In [Marenbon, 2000, II, 77–
127], all commentaries before 1150 has been listed, and, in [Marenbon, 2000, VIII, 21–49], all
commentaries on the Categories and De interpretatione before Abelard are listed. In Green-
Pedersen [1984], all commentaries on the Topics are listed. In [de Rijk, 1962] and [Ebbesen,
1981b] many of the early commentaries on Sophistici Elenchi are listed. In [Lohr, 1967; 1968;
1970; 1971; 1972; 1973] and [1974] an alphabetical list of all medieval commentaries on Aristotle’s
logical works can be found. A project in Cambridge run by John Marenbon and Tony Street will
substantially enhance our knowledge of the medieval commentary tradition. In the near future
M. Cameron and J. Marenbon will publish four edited volumes called Aristotelian Logic, East
and West, 500–1500 and with the respective subtitles, the Prior Analytics, the Peri Hermeneias,
the Topics and Methods and Metodolology.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
303
Great seems to a large extent to have copied many of Kilwardby’s ideas.53
4.1
Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories
Porphyry’s Isagoge was written as an introduction to the Categories and it was
treated as such in the Middle Ages. It was usually the ﬁrst logic text university
students met in the thirteenth century.
It was also important because it gave
medieval authors an opportunity to comment on universals. This is not because
there is an account of universals in Isagoge, since there is none, but because the
three “hard questions” that Porphyry states in the beginning. He writes:
For example, I shall beg oﬀsaying anything about (a) whether genera
and species are real or are situated in bare thoughts alone, (b) whether
as real they are bodies or incorporeals, and (c) whether they are sep-
arated or in sensibles and have their reality in connection with them.
Such business is profound, and requires another, greater investigation.
Instead I shall now try to show how the ancients, the Peripatetics
among them most of all, interpreted genus and species and the other
matters before us in a more logical fashion.54
The way one answers these questions will determine what view of universals one
ends up with, and just by stating these questions Porphyry had a profound in-
ﬂuence on medieval philosophy and logic. It was, however, Boethius that ﬁrst
attempted an answer.55
To many scholars disappointment Averroes chose to ignore these questions in
his middle commentary on Isagoge, and one of the ﬁrst that commented on the
work in the thirteenth century was Robert Kilwardby. Among his teachings is a
course on the logica vetus, which contains lectures on the Isagoge, Categories and
De interpretatione.56
Kilwardby addresses Porphyry’s questions in the introduction to his commen-
tary. He thinks universals have an existence as forms in singulars, and have a
unity based on agreement in essence. He also argues that the ideas in the mind of
God are formal causes and exemplars of the universals. In human cognition, the
universals (the forms) are abstracted from then individuals they exist in. Univer-
sals must be in singulars he argues, since the singulars would otherwise not make
any contribution to the signiﬁcation of a universal.
Following Avicenna, Kilwardby contrasts the metaphysicians approach to uni-
versals and the logicians. In metaphysics, universals are studied in abstraction
from language, while in logic they are studied as having a nature connected with
language. Universals are names that can be predicated for the logician, but their
existence is prior to language, and the signiﬁcation is derived from the real form.
53See [Ebbesen, 1981b; Lagerlund, 2000, Chapter 2; Thom, 2007].
54Spade [1994, 1].
55See [Klima, 2004] for a outline of the history of universals in medieval philosophy.
56See [Lewry, 1981] for a discussion of the content of this course.

304
Henrik Lagerlund
He says that a universal is a disposition of a reality, and hence it is also a disposi-
tion of a name. He expands on this relation by expanding on the relation between
thought and reality. Language is a representation of thought, he argues.
Albert the Great deﬁnes a universals in his commentary on the Isagoge as
“that which, although it exists in one, is apt by nature to exist in many.” He
then also gives the famous division into three kinds of universals, namely those
pre-existing the thing (universale ante rem), those existing in things (universale
in re), and those existing in mind (universale post rem). He seems to model this
on Kilwardby’s distinctions and in an Avicennan fashion both of them can be
said to unite a Platonic and an Aristotelian account of universals. All these three
aspects of universals need to be taken into account when one gives a theory of
universals, according to Albert and Kilwardby. In a sense, they seem to be saying
that Porphyry’s questions cannot be answered with a simple ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. It is
much more complicated than he lets on.
The close connection between logic and metaphysics visible in Kilwardby’s lec-
tures on Porphyry is further emphasised in his lectures on the Categories.57 He
naturally excludes a linguistic interpretations of the categories. The logician is
concerned with reality, but not in the same way as the metaphysician. The ten
categories or the ten kinds of utterances (voces) signify the ten classes of reality,
so while the metaphysician studies the ten classes of reality as species of being,
the logician studies them as subjects and predicates.
His discussion of equivocation follows along in the same vain. It is not primarily
an equivocation of terms but of reality. As part of his treatment of equivocation he
outlines a threefold division of signiﬁcation. First the act and form of signiﬁcation,
secondly, the thing signiﬁed, and thirdly, the comparison of the sign with what
is signiﬁed. The ﬁrst is the perfection of the word and every word has only one
perfection or form. In the second and third sense of signiﬁcation an utterance
might have several signiﬁcations. As a meaningful utterance, a name is one in the
ﬁrst sense with one perfection, but it may have several meanings in the sense of
what is signiﬁed and in the relation of sign to signiﬁed.
Kilwardby’s whole treatment of signiﬁcation and deﬁnition in terms of perfec-
tions or forms and matter is strikingly metaphysical. It reminds very much of the
discussion above about Averroes’ view of deﬁnition (see below for further discus-
sions about this). Both are part of the thirteenth century trend to enforce the
strict connections between logic and metaphysics and natural philosophy more or
less explicit in Aristotle’s own works. This strong relationship was the main target
of criticism for later preferably fourteenth century logicians.58
57This connection is expressed in his commentary on the Prior Analytics as well. See section
4.3 below and [Lagerlund, 2000, Chapter 2].
58For a more careful outline of the tradition of the Categories in the Middle Ages see the
articles in [Biard and Rosier-Catach, 2003].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
305
4.2
The De interpretatione
The De interpretatione commentary of Kilwardby in the same series of lectures as
mentioned above is also very interesting. Aristotle begins his work by saying that
“spoken words are signs of mental aﬀections and written words are signs of spoken
words.” These lines were very inﬂuential and Kilwardby starts his commentary by
expanding on them. Thought are likenesses of reality, he claims, and he identiﬁes
the meaning (signiﬁcation) of an utterance with the intelligible species (form) in
the intellective soul. It is hence the form in singulars or the essence in reality that
correspond to the meaning of words.
In his comments on predication in the De interpretatione commentary, he ex-
plicitly compares predication, that is, the relation between the subject and the
predicate, with the relation between form and matter. He uses the terminology
‘forma predicati’ or ‘the form of the predicate’ to explicate how the predicate in-
heres in the subject. The proposition ‘Socrates in white’ is true because whiteness
inheres in Socrates, and in the linguistic expression the ontological relation is mir-
rored. As the form of white informs a substance or matter the predicate informs
the subject. The whiteness in Socrates is an accidental form, since he in only
contingently white, so the predication expressing this truth is only an accidental
predication, but supposedly in regards to essential or substantial forms the corre-
sponding predication is essential or substantial, as in ‘A human being is rational’,
since ‘rational’ is in this case a reference to the human soul. Kilwardby brings
these thoughts into his analysis of Aristotle’s modal syllogistics as well (see the
discussion below).
One of the most interesting and also one of the most discussed parts of Aristo-
tle’s De interpretatione is, of course, Chapter 9. Albert the Great’s and Thomas
Aquinas’ treatments of this chapter in their respective commentaries are very sim-
ilar and obviously inﬂuenced by Averroes discussion in his middle commentary
on De interpretatione.59 I will here present some of the most interesting parts of
Aquinas’ discussion.
In Lectio 13, Aquinas begins by dividing propositions (enuntiationes). The ﬁrst
division is according to unity, that is, into simple and conjunctive propositions;
the second division is according to quantity, that is, into aﬃrmative and negative
propositions; the third division is into quality, that is, into universal, particular,
indeﬁnite and singular propositions. The forth division is according to time and
then propositions divide into propositions about the past, present and the future.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal division is in regards to matter. The matter of a proposition is
taken from the relationship of the predicate to the subject. If the predicate is per
se in the subject, then the proposition is said to be in necessary or natural matter.
The examples he gives are ‘A human being is an animal’ and ‘A human being is
risible’. The the ﬁrst case the relation is a genus to a species and in the second it
is a property (proprium) to a species. If the predicate is repugnant of the subject
as in ‘A human being is an ass’, then the proposition is in impossible or remote
59See [Knuuttila, 2006].

306
Henrik Lagerlund
matter. If the relation is neither of these, then the proposition is in possible or
contingent matter. The way Aquinas outlines the modal propositions is very close
to the way Robert Kilwardby did it (see the discussion in the next section).60
In necessary matter, universal propositions are determinately true, claims Aquinas,
and their negations are determinately false, since they are in impossible matter.
This holds for past, present as well as future tensed propositions. He then turns to
contingent matter and notes that all universal propositions are false in contingent
matter while particular and indeﬁnite propositions are true for past, present and
future tensed propositions. The reason for this is reviled by the square of opposi-
tion, since in a contingent proposition both the aﬃrmation and negation are true
and that is impossible for universal propositions.
The problem for Aquinas is where to locate singular propositions in this division.
He writes:
In singular future propositions, however, there is a diﬀerence. In past
and present singular propositions, one of the opposites must be de-
terminately true and the other false in any matter whatsoever, but
in singulars that are about the future, it is not necessary that one
be determinately true and the other false.
This holds with respect
to contingent matter; with respect to necessary and impossible mat-
ter the rule is the same as in propositions about the present and the
past. Aristotle has not mentioned contingent matter until now because
those things that take place contingently pertain exclusively to singu-
lars, whereas those that per se belong or are repugnant are attributed
so singulars according to the notions of their universals. Aristotle is
therefore wholly concerned here with this question: whether in singular
propositions about the future in contingent matter it is necessary that
one of the opposites be determinately true and the other determinately
false.61
For Aquinas this is the problem Aristotle addresses in Chapter 9. The rest of
Aquinas’ discussion is about whether singular contingent propositions about the
future are determinately true or false, or not. He explains the problem like this:
If it is necessary that every aﬃrmation or negation about future sin-
gulars is true or false, it is necessary that everyone who aﬃrms or
denies, determinately says what is true and false. From this it follows
that it is necessary that everything be or not be. Therefore, if every
aﬃrmation or negation is determinately true, it is necessary that ev-
erything determinately be or not be. From this he concludes further
that all things are of necessity. That would exclude the three kinds of
60See also [Knuuttila, 1981, 208-17; 1993, 129-32].
61See Thomas Aquinas, Expositio peryermeneias, I.13, n. 6, for the Latin, and see [Oesterle,
1962, 103-4], for the translation. I have slightly modiﬁed it, though.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
307
contingent things.62
The three kinds of contingent things mentioned in the last sentence is a reference
to a doctrine about contingency that became standard in the thirteenth century.
According to this doctrine, there are three ways something can be contingent,
namely that which happens infrequently (ut in paucioribus), that which is inde-
terminate (ad utrumlibet), that is, that which is not inclined to one part more
than the other, and that which happens for the most part (ut in pluribus).63 The
two extremes drops out of the discussion and the problem of future contingents
becomes a problem foremost about the middle, indeterminate, propositions.
It is obvious that future singular contingent propositions are not determinately
true or false, since this implies that whatever they are about will determinately
be or not be. Such consequences are absurd, Aquinas thinks, and hence these
propositions are dissimilar to all other propositions, by not being determinately
true or false.
It is now determinately true that ‘This cup is white’, and if truth and falsity
are related in like manner in present and future propositions, then ‘This cup will
be black’ is also determinately true or false. When basis for the truth or falsity
of this future proposition is in the causal relations among things in the world.
The something is in the present, it exists in a determinate way and can hence
be said to be truly this or that. If it is in the future, it does not yet exist in a
certain way, since it only exists in its cause. It may exist in its cause in three
ways, Aquinas thinks. It might exist in its cause by necessity, and as such it has
being determinately in its cause, but in another way it might exist in its cause
with an inclination to be caused yet it might still be impeded. It is determined
by its cause, but not with complete certainty.
In a third way something may
exist in its cause only as a potency. In this case, the cause is not yet determined
more to one way than to another, and consequently it cannot be said of these
that it is going to be, but only that it is or is not going to be. Proper singular
future, indeterminate, contingent propositions are hence indeterminately true or
false, according to Aquinas.64
4.3
The Prior Analytics
The ﬁrst known commentary on the Prior Analytics in the Latin West can be
found in an anonymous work, which has not yet been edited and thus not prop-
erly studied. The author has been called Anonymous Aurelianensis III by Sten
Ebbesen, who has studied parts of the work.65 He dates it to c. 1160-80. The the-
ory of assertoric syllogism was repeated and summarized in almost all logic works
62See Thomas Aquinas, Expositio peryermeneias, I.13, n. 8, for the Latin, and see [Oesterle,
1962, 105], for the translation.
63See [Lagerlund, 2000, 44-6], for a discussion of this division in Kilwardby.
64See also [Normore, 1982, 366-7], for an outline of Aquinas view about God’s knowledge of
future contingents.
65See [Ebbesen, 1981a].

308
Henrik Lagerlund
from the early thirteenth century, but there are no major commentaries until the
1240’s when Kilwardby writes a commentary called, in Latin, In libros Priorum
Analyticorum expositio.
Kilwardby has nothing of substance to add to the theory of assertoric syllogism66
(see my outline below of the textbook presentations of logic for a description
of the theory of the assertoric syllogisms), but his interpretation of the modal
syllogistic is quite remarkable and highly interesting. It was also very inﬂuential
in the thirteenth century, for example, Albert the Great, Simon of Faversham
and Radulphus Brito all follow him in their interpretations, which means that all
the major commentators of the Prior Analytics in the thirteenth century followed
Kilwardby.
He assumes from the beginning that Aristotle’s theory is correct and makes it
his project to ﬁnd the interpretation that shows this. He begins by considering a
counter-example to the accidental conversion of necessity propositions, namely:
(4.3.1) ‘Every literate being is necessarily a human being’.
According to the conversion rules accepted by Kilwardby and Aristotle (1) should
convert to:
(4.3.2) ‘Some human being is necessarily literate’,
(4.3.1) is obviously true while (4.3.2) is false.
Kilwardby seems to assumes that Aristotle’s modal syllogistics is a logic for de
re propositions.67 He proceeds, however, and gives two separate solutions to this
puzzle. The ﬁrst is based on a distinction between diﬀerent readings of (4.3.1).
Kilwardby explains, that the subject term of a sentence can stand for the subject of
the inherence (the suppositum), or for the qualiﬁcation through which the subject
is speciﬁed (qualitas/forma). If the term ‘white’ stands for suppositum, it refers to
a thing that is white, or to ‘that which is white’, but if it stands for the quality (or
form), it refers to the whiteness that inheres in that which is white and not to the
thing in which it inheres. Kilwardby says that in (4.3.1), ‘literate being’ stands
66See [Thom, 2007] for a diﬀerent view.
67Kilwardby here falls back on a distinction introduced by Peter Abelard (1079-1142). Ac-
cording to Abelard, modal terms are, properly speaking, adverbs, expressing the way in which
the decisive thing said of the subject is actual, for example, ‘well’ or ‘quickly’ or ‘necessarily’.
Adverbs which do not modify an actual inherence, such as ‘possibly’, are secondary modal terms,
due to their position in a proposition. Abelard also noticed that in De interpretatione 12-13,
Aristotle does not operate with adverbial modes, but with nominal modes, such as ‘it is necessary
that’ or ‘it is possible that’. He seems to have assumed that Aristotle did this because the nomi-
nal modes involve many more problems than simple adverbial modes. According to Abelard, this
is more clearly seen from the fact that propositions including nominal modes, such as ‘Necesse
est Socratem currere’, can be understood either adverbially, ‘Socrates runs necessarily’, or, as
suggested by the grammar, ‘That Socrates runs is necessary’. He calls these two alternatives de
re necessity propositions and de sensu (or de dicto) necessity propositions, respectively. Abelard
seems to be the ﬁrst to employ this terminology. A de re modal proposition expresses the mode
in which a predicate belongs to a subject. The mode is, therefore, associated with a thing, while
the mode in the de dicto or de sensu case, as he also calls it, is said of that which is expressed
by a non-modal proposition. See further [Knuuttila, 1993, 82-96], and [Lagerlund, 2000, 35-39].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
309
for suppositum, and this is why (4.3.1) is true, while in (4.3.2) the term is taken
diﬀerently and now it stands for the quality or form. According to Kilwardby, the
meaning of the original subject term is changed when it no longer stands for the
suppositum (the literate being), but for some abstract quality of being literate, and
it is this change that prevents the conversion. If (4.3.2) is read in the following
way then the converted proposition is true:
(4.3.3) ‘Something which is a human being is necessarily that which is
literate’.
Kilwardby, however, preferred another solution to the alleged counter-examples
to the conversion rules of necessity propositions. The second solution is based on
a distinction between propositions that are necessary per se and those that are
necessary per accidens. He writes (I, fol. 7rb):
When it is said: ‘Every literate being is necessarily a human being’,
this subject is not something which can be said per se of this predicate,
but since ‘literate being’ is not separated from that which belongs
to a human being itself, the proposition is conceded to be necessary,
but when a proposition is necessary in this way it is necessary per
accidens. Therefore, when Aristotle says that necessity propositions
are convertible, he means that only the propositions that are necessary
per se are convertible.
The idea is here that since ‘human being’ is not predicated per se of its subject
‘literate being’, the proposition (4.3.1) is not a per se necessity proposition and,
therefore, not convertible. (4.3.1) is a necessity proposition, not of the per se type,
only of the per accidens type, since it is necessarily true only in the sense that
being a human being and being literate are not separable. Kilwardby implies that
the relation between subject and predicate term must be of a special kind if a
proposition is to be called necessary per se. In (4.3.1), ‘literate being’ and ‘human
being’ do not have the close per se relation Kilwardby demands of a convertible
proposition.
Kilwardby thinks that propositions per se should be understood in the way
Aristotle explains them in Posterior Analytics I, 4-6. Aristotle discusses four dif-
ferent notions of per se (kath’ hauto) predication, but Kilwardby seems only to
have the two ﬁrst in mind when referring to per se. Aristotle says that the ﬁrst
type of per se predication (per se primo modo) occurs when the deﬁnition of the
subject includes the predicate. The second type of per se predication (per se se-
cundo modo) occurs when the deﬁnition of the predicate includes the subject. The
best characterization of the ﬁrst relation is the genus-species relation, that is, that
the deﬁnition of a species includes its genus. The second relation is often charac-
terized by a proprium (property), since a proprium is included in the deﬁnition
of a subject; for example, in ‘a human being is able to laugh’. The term ‘human
being’ is included in the deﬁnition of the predicate ‘being able to laugh’. A propo-
sition is per se necessary if it includes any of these two predications, according to

310
Henrik Lagerlund
Kilwardby. Necessity per accidens belongs to all other necessity proposition that
do not have the intrinsic relation between subject and predicate.
He also stresses that in a per se necessity proposition, the subject must be ‘per se
aliquod ipsius predicati’. He seems to mean that in such a proposition, the subject
has the predicate as an essential property; in other words, the subject has the
predicate as a necessary property through itself and not through something else.
A syllogistic necessity proposition is then understood as a proposition expressing
essential properties of things located in a genus-species structure. He seems to
assume that in a necessity proposition per se, the subject term is not an accidental
term, but an essential or a necessary term, and that the subject is essentially (per
se), and not only through inseparability, linked to the predicate. Consequently, if
the subject term is necessary and the link is necessary, it follows that the predicate
term cannot be a contingent (accidental) term.
It must be necessary as well.
The Aristotelian theory of necessity syllogistic is thus limited to a special class
of terms, which all stand for substances. The same terminology is also used to
explain the syllogistic for contingency propositions, which means that Kilwardby
is trying to develop a uniform and highly original interpretation. There are several
contemporary scholars that have developed a similar interpretation of Aristotle.68
In interpreting Aristotle’s modal syllogistics, most medievals saw the need to
introduce a distinction between diﬀerent kinds of assertoric proposition. In the
mixed syllogism L–L, the assertoric minor premise cannot be any kind of asser-
toric sentence, since the terms could just be accidentally connected. Kilwardby
therefore introduces a distinction between simply (simpliciter) and as of now (ut
nunc) assertoric propositions. The seed of this distinction can already be found
in Aristotle (Prior Analytics I, 15, 34b7-18), but Kilwardby of course uses his
per se/per accidens distinction to spell out the diﬀerence. A simply assertoric
proposition involves a per se predication while an as of now assertoric proposition
involves a per accidens predication. In such a way he can ensure that an essen-
tial connection between the terms in the valid L–L syllogisms are preserved to
the conclusion. This is not unproblematic,69 but the distinction between diﬀerent
assertoric propositions needed somehow to be made and it remained a problem all
the way through the Middle Ages.
In the end, however, Kilwardby does not quite succeed in getting just the moods
accepted by Aristotle. He for example accepts –LL for the ﬁrst ﬁgure, which is not
accepted by Aristotle, and does not manage to get –CC and LCC for Disamis in
the third ﬁgure.70 There are also some other moods that he does not succeed in
validating and some others which he get but which are not accepted by Aristotle,
but perhaps he gets as close as one possible can get to making Aristotle’s system
consistent.71
68[van Rijen, 1989; Patterson, 1995; Thom, 1996; Nortmann, 1996].
69See [Lagerlund, 2000, 39-42].
70For the explanation of these names see below.
71See [Knuuttila, 1996; Lagerlund, 2000; Thom, 2004].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
311
4.4
The Topics
Before the thirteenth century the discussion of Aristotle’s Topics was completely
dominated by Boethius’ De diﬀerentiis topicis, which is not really a commentary
of Aristotle’s work, but a mix of Aristotle and Cicero.
The ﬁrst extant Latin
commentary on Aristotle’s Topics is from c. 1235. Naturally, Boethius remained
inﬂuential well into the thirteenth century; although they gradually stopped com-
menting on his work.
In the ﬁrst chapter of the ﬁrst book of the Topics, Aristotle writes (100a10-20):
The goal of this study is to ﬁnd a method with which we shall be able to
construct deductions (syllogisms) from acceptable premises concerning
any problem that is proposed and – when submitted to arguments
ourselves – will not say anything inconsistent.
This is the method of dialectics. It is an argumentative method in dialogue form
between a questioner and an answerer. These two ﬁrst agree upon a problem (a
question), which usually is a proposition expressing a well accepted opinion. Next
the questioner puts forward questions to the answerer, which he/she answers with
‘Yes’ or ‘No’, that is, he/she accepts the propositions proposed or denies them.
The accepted question or proposition then becomes premises in the argument. The
purpose of this exercise is to examine the agreed upon problem and show that it
leads to inconsistencies or at least to opinions not acceptable to the answerer.
Aristotle never tells the reader what a topic (topos) is, but he gives examples
in Books II-VII of the Topics, but as many commentators have observed it is not
always helpful to have lots of examples. The problem has been to understand
what they are examples of. In the Rhetorics, Aristotle gives us some help. There
he notes that the topoi are “that under which many arguments fall” (1403a17-
8). This suggests that the topoi are classiﬁcations of arguments, that is, they are
argumentative forms.
The Latin name for a topic is a locus.
Boethius deﬁnes a locus as: “that
by which the argument is settled, or that by which from a proposed question
the argument is drawn out.”72 According to Boethius, it is hence about ﬁnding
arguments from particular questions (or premises) to conclusions, which means
that it is by ﬁnding the locus or the middle term that we can ﬁnd the argument
that gets us from question to conclusion.
Strictly speaking a question is of the form ‘Either A is B or A is not-B’, and
the problem is which disjunct should be accepted? The question is answered by
an argument, and Boethius understands it as being syllogistically structured, but
what he presents are not valid syllogisms. In syllogistics, the problem is, once
one knows the system, ﬁnding the middle term, and the theory of the topics
systematises the process of ﬁnding the middle term. There is no standard way
of doing this though, since they will always depend on the particular argument.
72Boethius, De diﬀerentiis topicis in [Stump, 1978, 30]. The translation is here slightly modi-
ﬁed.

312
Henrik Lagerlund
Instead Boethius provides us with a systematic way of searching for the middle
term.
A syllogism contains three terms called a major extreme, a middle and a minor
extreme, and for the syllogism to be valid the two extremes need to bare the right
relation to the middle term. The topical diﬀerentiae provide a classiﬁcation of
these relations. The diﬀerentiae are the distinguishing features of these relations.
For example, species of such relations are ‘is the deﬁnition of’ and ‘is the meaning
of’, and their diﬀernetiae are ‘from a whole’ and ‘from a sign’.
An example that Boethius has is the following: I want to answer the question:
Are trees animals? I run through the diﬀerent sorts of relations in the list of topics
or loci for one suitable for relating the extremes ‘tree’ and ‘animal’. Once I come
to the relation of deﬁnition I ﬁnd that the deﬁnition of animal is ‘living substance
with sense perception’ and I immediately see that I can deny this of trees, which
means that I have shown that trees are not animals.
The practical question for a theorist of the topics is of course how to organise
the list of diﬀerentiae and there are various lists in the commentary tradition.
Boethius’ list is based on Cicero’s and the tradition after Boethius follow him
closely. The character of the discussion did not chance when one started to com-
ment on Aristotle’s original book in the thirteenth century instead of commenting
on his.
The status of the loci, however, gradually became the overarching problem, and
it is also in that discussion that some new problems and developments can be seen
in the thirteenth century.73 Most authors from this period described the locus as
a relation, but what is it a relation between? It is not a relation between terms
taken as term, but between the things that the terms stand for. This, of course,
touches upon a much larger question, namely what is logic about? The discussion
we ﬁnd in thirteenth century commentaries on the Topics is highly interesting.
In 1240 to 1250, in Paris a consensus about the status on the loci start to
emerge. These authors, one of which is Robert Kilwardby, deﬁne a locus as a
relation of one thing to another (habitudo rei ad rem). The logician here meets
the metaphysician, which so often is the case in thirteenth century logic as we have
seen, that is, logic is about things and their relations.
The loci are not just any relation between things, but they are of a general
character and could hence equally well apply to various things. This means that
they are external and accidental in comparison to any particular thing to which
they apply. They do not belong essentially to any kind of species of a thing. This
explains the diﬀerence between dialectics and demonstrative science. Demonstra-
tive science regard the thing which is the cause or is deﬁned as the thing which
it actually is. Dialectics only applies to the general concept without specifying
which cause, but concerns causes in general.
73The discussion in the rest of this section is foremost based on [Green-Pedersen, 1984, 223-40].
See also [Stump, 1982] for a careful overview of the tradition of the Topics.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
313
4.5
The Sophistici Elenchi
The Latin version of Sophistici elenchi by Boethius began to circulate in the
1120s.74
It was retranslated from the Greek a little later by James of Venice
and later in the thirteenth century a third Latin translation appeared in 1269 by
William of Moerbeke. It relatively quickly became a central part of the new logic
developing in the late twelfth century. As with the other logic works of Aristotle
the earliest commentaries were literal commentaries, that is, they proceed by ﬁrst
quoting the text from Aristotle and then expanding on it before turning to the
next bit of text. Towards the end of the thirteenth century so-called question com-
mentaries started to appear. These were more problametising by asking speciﬁc
problematic questions based on Aristotle’s text.
Although the Sophistici Elenchi belongs to the logica nova parts of it was well
known before the 1120’s. The reason for this is a line in Chapter 6 of De inter-
pretatione. In his discussion of contradictions, Aristotle notes that the subject
and the predicate of the contradictory propositions must be identical, and then he
adds that “the identity of subject and predicate of the contradictory propositions
must not be ‘equivocal’. Indeed there are deﬁnite qualiﬁers besides this, which we
make to meet the cauistries of the sophists” (17a35-7). This note makes Boethius
outline parts of Aristotle’s doctrine in the Sophistici Elenchi in his second, more
detailed, commentary on the De interpretatione. Boethius mentions six cases in
which the contradictions of propositions are frustrated by fallacies, namely in the
fallacies of (i) equivocation, (ii) univocation, (iii) diverse parts, (iv) relatives, (v)
diverse times, and (vi) diverse modes.
The fact that this discussion is included in a commentary on De interpretatione
is historically very important. De interpretatione is about terms in propositions
and the discussion of fallacies forces twelfth century logicians to think about ways
in which terms can be taken in a proposition. Very early in the twelfth century
one can therefore ﬁnd formulations like the following in commentaries on De in-
terpretatione, namely that “the interpretation of a term is determine by its use in
a proposition.”75 This is the fundamental idea behind supposition theory and the
logica modernorum.
The discussion of the fallacies did not single handily generate the doctrine of
supposition, since, as de Rijk shows76, the development of grammar in the twelfth
century was also essential to this development. It is clear though that early com-
mentaries on the Sophistici Elenchi in the later twelfth century played a very
important part in formulating supposition theory. I will not go in to this further
since this falls outside of the scope of the present chapter.
It is towards the latter half of the twelfth century that one can ﬁnd the ﬁrst
Latin commentaries on the Sophistici Elenchi that are based on Aristotle’s original
text. It is also then that the discussion of fallacies are formed and divided in the
74See Aristotle, De sophisticis elenchis, xi-xv.
75See [de Rijk, 1962, 48].
76See [de Rijk, 1967, I, 95–125].

314
Henrik Lagerlund
way that one later ﬁnds in the thirteenth century textbooks on logic. The division
between the linguistic and non-linquistic fallacies is expressed and also the number
of fallacies are settled, that is, six linguistic and seven non-linguistic (see below
for a discussion about some of these).
The Sophistici Elenchi has been the inspiration of much original work in logic.
For example, a section of Aristotle’s work was throughout the Middle Ages very
important for discussing so called insolubles or paradoxes. One of the most famous
insoluble is the Liar-paradox: ‘This proposition is false’. In Sophistici Elenchi 25
(180a27-b7), Aristotle discusses the fallacy of confusing things said “in a certain
respect” (secundum quid) and things said ‘simply’ or ‘absolutely’ (simpliciter).
Aristotle discusses an example of a man that takes an oath to become an oath-
breaker and then breaks his oath.
Such a man is on the whole or simply an
oath breaker, but in the particular case he is in a certain respect an oath-keeper.
Having said this Aristotle adds that “the argument is similar too concerning the
same man’s lying and speaking the truth at the same time”. This was taken as a
reference to the Liar-paradox and hence it was seen at least in the beginning of the
thirteenth century as an instance of the fallacy of secundum quid et simpliciter.
All early attempts to solve the Liar-paradox in this way were completely mistaken
and it was soon realised that Aristotle’s discussion was really about something
else. Perhaps this is the reason the textbook authors dealt with below did not at
all treat insolubles.77
Disputing so-called de sophismatibus or sophisms was a standard part of mid-
thirteenth century logic teaching. An example of a sophistical proposition that
was disputed is ‘Every human being in necessarily an animal’. This is an example
of an ambiguous proposition, which is true or false depending on the interpretation
given to it. It is for example false when no humans exist, but if there are humans
it is true. Some dealt with such propositions by simply outlining under which
conditions they are true, while others felt that a proposition like this one must
always be true. Kilwardby, for example, argued that one can truly say that ‘Every
human being is necessarily an animal’ even when there are no humas, because the
species or intelligible form of human still remains and it is that which the utterance
‘human being’ signiﬁes.78
5
TREATISES ON LOGIC
5.1
The Tractates and Summaries
Special textbooks on logic began to be widely used already in the early twelfth
century.79
Garlandus Compotista’s (d.
early twelfth century) Dialectica and
Abelard’s Dialectica are two of the more famous ones. Towards the end of the
77See [Spade, 1973] for a history of the Insolubilia-literature, and see [Spade, 2005] for a clear
exposition of the medieval discussion in general.
78See [Lewry, 1981, 382].
79See [de Rijk, 1967, I, Chapter 3].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
315
twelfth century and the early thirteenth century some substantial and very im-
portant anonymous treatises on logic appeared. One of these is the so called Ars
Meliduna, which contain very detailed discussions of terms and propositions.80
Another interesting book is the Dialectica Monacensis, which is interesting since
the author obviously had access to all of Aristotle’s writings on logic. de Rijk
dates this work to the early years of the thirteenth century. The layout of Ars
Meliduna is very diﬀerent from for example Peter of Spain’s famous Tractatus,
which later were called Summule Logicales, but around the turn of the century
logical treatises with the same structure and content as Peter’s work started to
appear. In the anonymous Summa Metenses all the parts of logic discussed by
Peter is present.
Gradually the logica nova worked its way into the the treatises and summaries of
logic in the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth century. Before 1200 the textbooks foremost
included discussions of the logica vetus and some discussion of fallacies apart from
the new developments in the logica modernorum, but in the early decades of the
thirteenth century a standard format and some canonical topics had been settled
on, which included both the logica antiquorum and the logica modernorum. It is
these themes one can ﬁnd in the famous mid-thirteenth century textbooks.
The most famous logic treatises and summaries from the thirteenth century
was written by William of Sherwood (d. 1272), Peter of Spain (d. 1277), Roger
Bacon (d. 1294) and Lambert of Auxerre (ﬂ. 1250). Peter’s Tractatus is by far
the most famous and inﬂuential; fourteenth century as well as later logicians wrote
commentaries on it. William’s work, which is called Introduction to Logic, was also
very much read. Roger Bacon’s Summulae Dialectices and Lambert of Auxerre’s
Logica were not as inﬂuential, but they were also wildly read. All of them contain
the same material, but they diﬀer slightly in how they treat this material. Their
terminology also diﬀers. See the subsequent discussion below for more details.
On Propositions
The Tractatus is divided into twelve treatises.81 The ﬁrst is an introduction dealing
with the subject matter of dialectics (or logic) and the diﬀerent kinds of proposi-
tions. He deﬁnes dialectics in the following way:
Dialectics is the art that holds the road to the principles of all methods,
and therefore dialectics should be ﬁrst in the acquisition of all the
sciences.82
80See [de Rijk, 1967, I, Chapters 7–10].
81These twelve are: (I) On propositions (or statements); (II) On predicables; (III) On cate-
gories; (IV) On syllogisms; (V) On topics or loci; (VI) On supposition; (VII) On fallacies; (VIII)
On relatives; (IX) On ampliation; (X) On appelation; (XI) On restriction; (XII) On distribution.
My treatment below will also be divided into these paragraphs; except towards the end where I
will treat (IX), (X), (XI) and (XII) under the heading of ‘supposition’. William of Sherwood’s
Introduction of Logic is divided into six chapters, namely (1) On statements; (2) On predicables;
(3) On syllogisms; (4) On topics; (5) On properties of terms; (6) On sophistical reasoning. Most
of the same material is, however, dealt with in these two books.
82Peter of Spain, Tractatus, I.1, 4-6.

316
Henrik Lagerlund
This deﬁnition reﬂects the absolute fundamental aspect of logic for the scholastics.
Logic is a tool or an art for them presupposed in all science. All study must start
with logic.83
Dialectics or argumentation presupposes discourse (sermone), and discourse
presupposes utterance (vox), which in turn is sound (sono) of a special kind. A
sound is either an utterance or not. If it is not an utterance, then it is not of
interest to logic. An utterance is either signiﬁcative or not. An utterance which
is signiﬁcative is a sound which represents something, like for example ‘human
being’.
A non-signiﬁcative utterance does not represent anything, like ‘buba’.
A signiﬁcative utterance is either a name (nomine) or a verb (verbo).
It is a
name if it signiﬁes conventionally something without a time, while a verb signiﬁes
conventionally (ad placitum) something with a time. The diﬀerence is simply that
since a verb signiﬁes a doing of something, it requires time in which the doing takes
place, but a name is atemporal; it does not require time for naming something.
An expression (oratio) is a complex signiﬁcative utterance, that is, it is a sen-
tence like ‘The human being is white’. There are also two kinds of expressions,
namely perfect or proper expressions and imperfect or improper expressions. An
improper expression is, for example, ‘white human being’. It is improper since it
does not contain both a name and a verb. There are, of course, diﬀerent kinds of
expressions according to the diﬀerent grammatical modes, like indicative, impera-
tive, imperative, perfect etc., but only indicative expressions are called proposition
and hence only they are important for logic.
A proposition is hence a perfect or proper expression in the indicative mode,
which is either true or false. There are furthermore two kinds of propositions,
namely categorical and hypothetical. The two kinds of propositions also divide
into two kinds of logics; one for categorical propositions and the other for hypo-
thetical. Let us ﬁrst deal with the categorical propositions, since they are the most
important ones.
A categorical proposition is a proposition that has a subject and a predicate
as its principle parts. In the proposition ‘A human being runs’ (‘homo currit’),
‘human being’ and ‘runs’ are respectively the subject and the predicate.
The
logical form of this proposition is not ‘A human being runs’, however, since there
is a copula or something binding the subject and predicate (or verb) assumed in
between them. The logical form is therefore ‘A human being is running’.
Categorical propositions are divided into universal, particular, indeﬁnite, and
singular. The most familiar ones are the following:
Universal: ‘Every human being is running’
Particular: ‘Some human being is running’
Indeﬁnite: ‘A human being is running’
Singular: ‘Socrates is running’ or ‘That human is running’
83Logic is part of the science of discourse (scientia sermocinalis), which has three parts, namely
grammar, rhetoric and logic. This view was defended by both Peter and William.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
317
Categorical propositions are furthermore either aﬃrmative or negative.
Given this we are now in a position to outline the basic relationship between
these propositions. This is done by stating the traditional square of opposition,
which include the four basic relations; contrary, subcontrary, contradiction and
subalternation.
Figure 1. The Square of Opposition
William also presents a hexagon of opposition.
Figure 2. The Hexagon of Opposition
Having presented the fundamentals all textbooks introduce the doctrine of the
matter of propositions. This is a theory that has Ancient sources, but was very
typical for thirteenth century logic, as noted several times already, and assumes
a close relation between logic and metaphysics. The three kinds of matter are

318
Henrik Lagerlund
natural (or necessary), contingent, and remote (or impossible).
A proposition
is in natural matter when the predicate is in the subject or it is a proprium of
the subject. The examples Peter gives are propositions like ‘A human being is
an animal’ or ‘A human being is rational’. In both these cases there is a strong
essential connection between the subject and the predicate. A proposition is in
contingent matter when the predicate can both be in and not in the subject like
in ‘A human being is white’ or ‘A human being is not white’. Obviously, if a
proposition is in remote matter then the predicate cannot be said truthfully of the
subject like in ‘A human being is a donkey’.
As we have seen earlier in this overview the doctrine of the matter of the propo-
sition was connected with modal propositions and modal logic, but this is not
explicitly done by any of the textbook authors. They treat modal propositions
quite independently. This particular doctrine seems more connected with truth
conditions for modal propositions than with modal propositions in themselves,
which might reﬂect an attempt to loosen the connection between logic and meta-
physics. They immediately go onto present equipollence rules and later embark
on a discussion of modal propositions.
Hypothetical propositions need to be dealt with before the basic rules of equipol-
lence can be stated, however. There are three kinds of hypothetical propositions,
namely conditional, copulative and disjunctive. A conditional proposition is made
up of categorical propositions conjoined with the words ‘If...then’. A conjunctive
proposition conjoins two categorical propositions with ‘and’, and a disjunctive
proposition does the same thing with ‘or’. It is the also common to state the
conditions under which these hypothetical propositions are true. A conditional
proposition is true, if, given the truth of the antecedent, the consequent is also
true. A copulative proposition is true if both conjuncts are true, and a disjunctive
proposition is true, if at least on of the disjuncts are true.
The part on equipollence usually begins by stating the conversion of categorical
propositions. There are three kinds of conversion, namely simple, accidental and
contra position. A simple conversion occurs when the subject and the predicate
changes place, but the quantity and the quality of the proposition are the same.
For example, the proposition ‘No human being is a stone’ converts truthfully to
‘No stone is a human being’. An accidental conversion is then when the subject
and predicate changes place, but the quantity and not the quality is changed. As
in the conversion of ‘Every human being is an animal’ to ‘Some animal is a human
being’. A contra position is when the subject and predicate change place and the
quantity and quality are the same, but the terms are changed from ﬁnite to inﬁnite
ones. An example would be the conversion of ‘Every human being is an animal’
into ‘Every non-animal is a non-human being’.
Before turning to modal proposition some further rules of equipollence are pre-
sented. Peter presents these:
E-rule 1: If a negation precedes a proposition (P), then it is equivalent
with P’s contradiction.
Example: ‘Not Every human being is running’ is equivalent to ‘Some

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
319
human being is not running’.
E-rule 2: If ‘Every’ or ‘Some’ are preceded and followed by a nega-
tion in some proposition, then it is equivalent with its subalternate
proposition.
Example: ‘Not Every human being is not running’ is equivalent to
‘Some human being is running’.
E-rule 3: If two universal negative signs are posited in the same proposi-
tion, and one is in the subject’s position and the other in the predicate’s
position, then, ﬁrstly, the proposition is equivalent to its contrary, and,
secondly, to its contradictory.
Example: First of all, ‘Nothing is nothing’ is equivalent to ‘Something
is something’, and, secondly, ‘Something not’ is equivalent to ‘Nothing’,
and ‘Every not’ to ‘No’.
The last rule looks a little bit strange, but it is only meant to express for example
how the quantity of the proposition is changed by adding a negation in front of
it or after it. As is clear all tree of these rules are about the way negation eﬀect
propositions.
After these simple equipollence rules the ﬁrst treatise ends with a discussion of
modal propositions. The mode is treated by these authors as adjectives and as such
they aﬀect the way or the manner in which the proposition are taken. Adjectives
might be taken nominally or adverbially and hence modes are explained in that
way as well. They explain this in some detail, but ﬁrst they note that the four
modes are necessity, possibility, contingency and impossibility. They usually add
also truth and falsity, but note that they do not change the truth value of a
proposition as the others do.84
The mode of a proposition is either taken nominally as in ‘It is necessary that
Socrates is an animal’, or it is taken adverbially as in ‘Socrates runs contingently’.
This is the same division as Abelard had made a century earlier.85 Peter stresses
that only the adverbial reading makes the proposition into a proper modal propo-
sition, since only on such a reading is the composition of the subject term and the
predicate term modiﬁed. The proper way to write a modal proposition is thus:
‘Socrates is contingently running’, and hence it is the copula that is modiﬁed in
such propositions, which means that it is really the relation between the term that
is qualiﬁed. Somewhat confusingly he insists on writing the modal propositions
like this: ‘Socrates runs is possible’. On such a reading, it looks as if the mode
‘possible’ is taken nominally and hence function as an ordinary predicate, which
84William notes that ‘necessarily’ and ‘impossibly’ are used in two ways.
Somethings are
‘necessary per se’, which cannot be false now or in the future or past, like ‘God is’, and other
propositions are ‘necessary per accidens’, which cannot be false now or in the future, but might
have been in the past, like ‘I have walked’. This distinction seems inspired by Averroes mentioned
above in section 3.2, but less ontological.
85See above and also [Lagerlund, 2000, 35-9].

320
Henrik Lagerlund
would make the proposition non-modal. He has, however, made it clear that it is
the Abelardian reading he adheres to (without mentioning Abelard, of course).
Having presented the form of a modal proposition, Peter states some initial
rules of equipollence.
ME-Rule 1: ‘If an aﬃrmative proposition is possible or contingent and
not impossible, then its contradictory is not necessary’.
Example: ‘A is possible B’ contradicts ‘A is necessarily not B’.
ME-Rule 2: ‘If a negative proposition is possible and contingent and
not impossible, then its contradictory is not necessary’.
Example: ‘A is not possibly B’ contradicts
ME-Rule 3: ‘If an aﬃrmative proposition is not possible, not con-
tingent, and impossible, then its contradictory is necessary’.
Example:
ME-Rule 4: ‘If a negative proposition is not possible, not contingent,
and impossible, then its contradictory is necessary’.
Example:
Given the modalities and negation it is possible to state some equivalences between
the modalities. It was common to present four groups and say that within each
group the modalities are all equivalent.
I.
Possibly
Contingently
Not-impossibly
Not-necessary not
II.
Possibly not
Contingently not
Not-impossibly not
Not-necessary
III.
Not-possibly
Not-contingently
Impossibly
Necessarily not
IV.
Not-possibly not
Not-contingently not

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
321
Impossibly not
Necessary
Given these it is not diﬃcult to present the square of opposition for singular modal
propositions. It is the following:
Figure 3. The Modal Square
Notice that the modal square is only for singular propositions. No one at this
time presented a square of opposition for quantiﬁed modal propositions, which, of
course, made is completely useless for modal syllogistics.86 A theory for quantiﬁed
modal propositions was not developed until the mid-fourteenth century.87
86None of the textbooks contain any discussion of modal syllgistics; except a discussion of
the modal conversion rules in Roger Bacon and Lambert of Auxerre’s books. They, however,
closely follow Kilwardby’s treatment discussed above (section 4.3).
Roger Bacon follows the
ﬁrst of Kilwardby’s solutions to the conversion of necessity propositions, while Lambeert of
Auxerre presents both solutions.
Bacon’s continued discussion of contingency propositions is
rather confusing, since he uses contingency for what is usually calls possibility.
He therefore
divides contingency into that which is necessary, possible and non-necessary. It is contingency
in the last sense that is usually calls contingency. He then proceeds to make a two fold division
of contingeency in this sense into contingency ad utrumlibet and contingency natum (compare
Aquinas threefold distinction above). Propositions taken in none of these senses of contingency
convert as necessity or possibility propositions. See Roger Bacon, Summulae Dialectices, III,
199-200.
87See [Lagerlund, 2000, Chapter 5 and Appendix IX.3].

322
Henrik Lagerlund
On Predicables
After having outlined the diﬀerent distinctions between various propositions, the
textbooks return to the traditional order, which means that the next part of these
books deal with the predicables, that is, the topic of Porphyry’s Isagoge. The
predicable are universals, which means that they are what can be predicated in
the most general sense. The division is the traditional one, namely between genus,
diﬀerentia, species, property (proprium) and accident.
A genus, in the relevant sense here discussed, is what is predicated of several
diﬀerent species, such as animal is predicated of horses, humans and lions as diﬀer-
ent species. There are three ways things can be similar and hence also three ways
that they can be diﬀerent. Things can be the same in genus, species and number.
For two things to be the same in genus means that they are truly predicated of the
same genus, like ‘human’ and ‘donkey’. Hence two things are the same in species
if they are truly predicated of the same species, like ‘Socrates’ and ‘Plato’. Things
are the same in number in four ways, namely in name, deﬁnition, property, or
accident.
All of these are strightforward.
Two persons can have the same name and
one person can have several names. Some things are the same by deﬁnition, like
‘mortal rational animal’ and ‘human being’. ‘Human being’ and ‘able to laugh’ are
the same in property, since only humans are able to laugh, according to Aristotle.
‘Socrates’ and ‘white’ are the same in accident, since white inheres in Socrates.
Building on this it is clear how things may diﬀer; for example, things are diﬀerent
in genus if they fall under diﬀerent genera, like humans and trees, and consequently
things are diﬀerent in species if they fall under diﬀerent species, like Socrates and
Brunellus the donkey. Lastly things are diﬀerent in number if they are in fact
distinct, like Socrates and Plato.
A genus can be characterised in two ways. First of all, a genus is an answer
to a ‘What is’ question; for example, ‘What is a human being?’ The answer is
the genus ‘ animal’.
Secondly, a genus can also be speciﬁed as that of which
a species supposits.
Genus is also divided into the most general genus (genus
generalissimum) and subalternate genera. The most general genus is the genera
above all other genera, that is, substance, while a subalternate genus is a genus
below the most general, and they can also be species. These are ten in number.
A species can also be predicated of several things which are below it. ‘Human
being’ is predicated of Socrates and Plato. A species is also an answer to a ‘What
is it’ question, namely for example the question: ‘What is Socrates?’ The answer is
the species a ‘human being’. Species are also divided into the most special species
and subalternate species. A most special species is a species that cannot also be
a genus, like ‘human being’ and ‘horse’ Consequently, a subalternate species is a
species that can be a genus, like ‘body’ or ‘animal’. This is explained further in
the so-called Porphyrian tree.
There are three kinds of diﬀerentiae outlined in these textbooks, namely com-
mon, proper and more proper. A common diﬀerence is when something diﬀers

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
323
Figure 4. The Porphyrian Tree
from something else by an separable accident, like Socrates sitting diﬀers from
Socrates standing. A proper diﬀerence is the diﬀerence between things through an
inseparable accident, like ‘snub nosed’. Finally, a most proper diﬀerence is when
something diﬀers from something else by a speciﬁc diﬀerence, like humans diﬀer
from horses by rationality. This is of course the most important notion if diﬀer-
ence. A diﬀerence of this kind is, furthermore, both dividing and constitutive,
since it divides the genus and is the constitutive part of the species. The genus
‘animal’ is divided by ‘rational’ and ‘rational’ is what constitutes the species ‘hu-
man being’. This is an identical treatment to what we saw above in Averroes’
commentaries (section 3.2).
A property (proprium) is always associated with every individual belonging to a
given species, as for example ‘being able to laugh’ is always associated with every
human being. Although a human being does not always laugh, it will always be
able to. If there are humans then there will also be the property, ‘able to laugh’.
An accident is something which can be in a subject and missing from a subject
without its corruption, like white, black, and sitting.
Accidents can, however,
be separable and inseparable. An inseparable accident is an accident which as a
matter of fact is never separated from its subject, like the blackness of an Etiopian
(the example stems from Porphyry himself).
Based on these some similarities and diﬀerences between the predicables are
usually observed. One major diﬀerence between the ﬁrst four and accidents is
that genus, species, diﬀerentia and property all are either in the thing they are
predicated of or not, that is, they either participate fully or not at all in the subject

324
Henrik Lagerlund
of their predication, while this is not true of accidents, since they can begin or stop
being part of a subject. There is hence a question, which caused lots of debate in
later medieval philosophy, of the intension and remission of accidents, which does
not occur for the other four. They are predicated univocally, while accidents are
predicated denominatively.
On Categories
According to the textbooks88 the Categories is about that which can be predicated
and that which something can be predicated of. They begin, however, by outlining
ways of predication. Peter of Spain explains that categorical propositions express
something of something else, and there are several ways that something can be in
something else as a predicate is in a subject, that it, there are several modes of
being in something. He distinguishes eight such modes. Something is in something
else:
1. As a part is in a whole.
Example: The ﬁngers of the hand.
2. As a whole is integrated with its parts.
Example: The house with its walls, roof and foundation.
3. As a species is in its genus.
Example: Human being in animal.
4. As a genus is in its species.
Example: Animal in human.
5. As form in matter.
Subdivided into:
5’. As a substantial form in matter.
Example: The human soul in its body.
5”. As an accidental form in matter.
Example: White in human beings.
6. As its ﬁrst eﬃcient cause.
Example: Reign in ruling.
7. As its ﬁnal cause.
Example: Virtue in beatitude.
8. As in a vessel.
Example: A thing located in place.
These are taken from Aristotle’s Physics IV.3 and they are also repeated and
elaborated in Boethius’ commentary on the Categories. These divisions are used
to explain in what way something is ‘said of a subject’ and ‘in a subject’. According
to Peter, on must understand ‘said of a subject’ as something said of an inferior,
that is, it is used as in 3 above, and being ‘in a subject’ is taken as in 5”, as a
accident is in a subject.
88William does not deal with the categories in his book, but both Roger Bacon and Lambert
of Auxerre do.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
325
Things said of a subject, but which are not in a subject are thing like substantial
genera and species, and substantial diﬀerentiae, that is, human being, animal and
rational. Things like substantial individuals, like Socrates, are neither said of a
subject nor are they in a subject.
Things said of a subject that are also in a
subject are the genera and species of the other nine categories. They are said of
inferiors and they are in a subject as accidents are in a subject, for example, as
colour is said of whiteness as of an inferior and it is also in a body as in a subject.
Finally there are also things which are in a subject, but not said of any subject,
like a particular piece of knowledge is in the soul, or this individual colour of the
wall, for example, is in a subject.
After this Peter turns to a discussion of the individual categories and ﬁrst
is, of course, substance. Traditionally, it is divided into primary and secondary
substance. Primary substance is what is most properly called substance, and as
mentioned above it is neither said of a subject not in a subject, like individual
humans (Socrates, Plato etc.) and horses. Secondary substances are species and
genera, since they have primary substances under them. A secondary substance
can be used as a predicate, but a primary cannot, like ‘Socrates is a human being’,
but one cannot say ‘A human being is Socrates’. A primary substance is also a
hoc aliquid, that is a thing or an individual of which there is only one.
A quantity, which is the second category, is either discrete or continued. Number
or discourse are discrete quantities. There is no common terms to which either
numbers or discourse can be linked. They are separate and a multitude brought
together into a unit. Lines, body, time and place are continuous quantities. A line
is joined to a common term, namely a point, and hence continuous.
Relation is the next category treated. Contrariety is a relation, and more or
less as well as equal and unequal. Every relation is convertible like father and son
are convertible, that is, if A is the father of B, then B is the son of A. This means
that in a relation like father to son, which is asymmetrical, then one can always
ﬁnd another asymmetrical relation that together makes up a symmetrical relation.
The fourth category discussed by Peter is quality. There are four subdivisions
of quality, namely, (i) habits and dispositions, (ii) capacity, (iii) passion, and (iv)
form. A habit diﬀers from a disposition by being more permanent. Knowledge is a
habit while virtue is a disposition. Some have a natural capacity for health while
others have a natural capacity for sickness; some can play the piano while others
cannot. (iii) is a passivity or a quality of being aﬀected, like sensations. The fourth
kind of quality is the form or shape of something stable, like the triangularity of
a body. The other categories are only mentioned by Peter.
On Syllogisms
After their treatment of the categories comes a discussion of syllogisms (William
jumps from the discussion of predicables to the syllogisms). The theory of the
syllogisms is the main part of logic for a thirteenth century logician and it is what
comes closest to what we now call logic. The other parts of medieval logic would

326
Henrik Lagerlund
nowadays sort under semantics, linguistics, or philosophy of language.
In Peter’s case the discussion starts with an outline of two rules of class inclusion
called ‘dictum de omni’ and ‘dictum de nullo’.
Dictum de omni: Nothing is subsumed under the subject term which
is not also said of the predicate term.
(In contemporary logical terms: A ⊇B)
Dictum de nullo: Nothing is subsumed under the subject term which
is not also removed from the predicate term.
(In contemporary logical terms: A ̸⊆B)
These rules are taken to be absolutely fundamental in determining the validity of
the ﬁrst ﬁgure moods and they are said to explain the perfection of the ﬁrst ﬁgure
moods. It is only after having clariﬁed them that they go on to deﬁne syllogisms.
The two mentioned deﬁnitions are:
A part of discourse in which it is the case that from somethings posited
something else necessarily follows,
and:
From two posited premises another necessarily follows, which is the
conclusion.
The two premises, that is, the major and the minor premise, talked about in the
second deﬁnition include three terms, which are the logical subjects and predicates
of the two premises.
The terms are called middle, major extreme and minor
extreme. The major premise include the middle and the major extreme terms,
while the minor premise include the middle and the minor extreme. The conclusion
contains the two extreme terms.
The syllogisms are divided into three ﬁgures based on the organisation of the
terms involved in the premises.
First ﬁgure: Middle and major extreme
Minor extreme and Middle
Example: Every animal is a substance
Every human being is an animal
Second ﬁgure: Major extreme and middle
Minor extreme and middle
Example: Every human being is an animal
No Stone is an animal
Third ﬁgure: Middle and major extreme
Middle and minor extreme
Example: Every human being is an animal
Every human being is rational

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
327
Given these combinations they present some general rules for the theory. First of
all there are ﬁve rules:
1. There are no syllogisms from only particular, indeﬁnite or singular premises.
2. There are no syllogisms from only negative premises.
3. If one of the premises is particular then a particular conclusion follows, but
not its converse.
4. If one of the premises is negative then a negative conclusion follows, and also
its converse follows.
5. The middle term must not be part of the conclusion.
The ﬁrst ﬁgure has nine valid moods or forms of syllogisms. Four of these have
direct conclusions and ﬁve are indirect. In a direct conclusion the major extreme is
predicated of the minor extreme and in an indirect conclusion the converse holds.
It became standard in the thirteenth century to treat the fourth ﬁgure introduced
by Galen as an indirect form of the ﬁrst. The reason for this was to give a more
faithful interpretation of Aristotle who does not mention the fourth ﬁgure.
There are two rules that govern the ﬁrst ﬁgure:
6. If the minor premise is negative, then no conclusion follows.
7. If the major premise is particular, then no conclusion follows.
The four ﬁrst syllogisms with direct conclusions are not given proofs, since they
are perfect. Their validity is shown by reference to the dici de omni et nullo rules
mentioned above. Dictum de omni governs the ﬁrst mood (Barbara):89
I.
Every B is A
Every C is B
Every C is A
Dictum de nullo governs the second mood (Celarent):
II.
No B is A
Every C is B
No C is A
The two other moods (Darii and Ferio) are reduced to these two by the square of
opposition:
89For an explantion of the names of the valid syllogisms see below in this section.

328
Henrik Lagerlund
III.
Every B is A
Some C is B
Some C is A
IV.
No B is A
Some C is B
Some C is not A
The ﬁve syllogisms with indirect conclusions are in various ways reduced to the
ﬁrst four by using the conversion rules stated above. The ﬁve syllogism are:
V.
Every B is A
Every C is B
Some A is C
VI.
No B is A
Every C is B
No A is C
VII.
Every B is A
Some C is B
Some A is C
VIII.
Every B is A
No C is B
Some A is not C
IX.
Some B is A
No C is B
Some A is not C
(V) is reduced to (I) by simple conversion of the conclusion, since by the square
of opposition the universal conclusion in (I) implies a particular. (VI) is reduced
to (II) by simple conversion of the conclusion, and (VII) is reduced to (III) is the
same way. (VIII) is reduced to (IV) by accidental conversion of the major premise,
simple conversion of the minor premise, transposing the premises and renaming
the terms. (IX) is reduced to (IV) in the same way.
The second ﬁgure is governed by three rules added to the ones above, namely:

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
329
8. If the major premise in a second ﬁgure mood is particular, then no conclusion
follows.
9. If the premises are both aﬃrmative in a second ﬁgure mood then no conclu-
sion follows.
10. In the second ﬁgure only negative conclusions follow.
There are only four valid moods in this ﬁgure.
X.
No A is B
Every C is B
No C is A
XI.
Every A is B
No C is B
No C is A
XII.
No A is B
Some C is B
Some C is not A
XIII.
Every A is B
Some C is not B
Some C is not A
(X) is reduced to (II) by simple conversion of the major premise. (XI) is also
reduced to (II) but this time by simple conversion of the minor premise and the
conclusion, by transposing the premises and renaming the terms. (XII) is reduced
to (IV) by simple conversion of the major premise. (XIII) cannot b reduced and
is hence proved through impossibility.
The proof through impossibility is very simple and proceeds from positing the
negation of the conclusion and deriving a contradiction.
The negation of the
conclusion is: ‘Every C is A’, and together with the major premise ‘Every C is B’
follows, which is the negation of the minor premise.
The third ﬁgure is also governed by two rules, namely:
11. If the major premise is negative in a third ﬁgure syllogism, then no conclusion
follows.
12. Only particular conclusions follow in the third ﬁgure.
There are six valid moods in this ﬁgure.

330
Henrik Lagerlund
XIV.
Every B is A
Every B is C
Some C is A
XV.
No B is A
Every B is C
Some C is not A
XVI.
Some B is A
Every B is C
Some C is A
XVII.
Every B is A
Some B is C
Some C is A
XVIII.
Some B is not A
Every B is C
Some C is not A
XIX.
No B is A
Some B is C
Some C is not A
(XIV) is reduced to (III) by accidental conversion of the minor premise, and (XV)
is reduced to (IV) in the same way. (XVI) is reduced to (III) by simple conversion
of the major premise and transposing the premises. (XVII) is reduced to (III) by
simple conversion of the minor premise, and (XIX) is reduced to (IV) in the same
way. (XVIII) is proved by impossibility again. The negation of the conclusion is:
‘Every C is A’, and together with the minor premise through (I), ‘Every B is A’
is derived, which contradicts the major premise.
There are two more rules that govern the theory of the syllogisms. They are:
13. In no syllogism with a particular negative indirect conclusion does also a
direct conclusion follow, and vice versa.
14. From a universal conclusion there also follows a particular.
From the second rule ﬁve additional moods can be inferred bringing the total
number of valid syllogisms up to 24.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
331
A well known part of the theory of the syllogism in the Middle Ages was the
mnemonic names of the valid moods. These were created so that it would be easier
for students in the early universities to learn the valid moods.90 The 19 moods
presented above was summarised in the following way:
BARBARA, CELARENT, DARII, FERIO, BARALIPTON,
CELANTES, DABITIS, FAPESMO, FRISESOMORUM,
CESARE, CAMBESTRES, FESTINO, BAROCHO, DARAPTI,
FELAPTO, DISAMIS, DATISI, BOCARDO, FERISON.
The ﬁrst one needs to know to decipher them is that A stands for a universal
aﬃrmative proposition, E for a universal negative proposition, I for a particular
aﬃrmative proposition, and O for a particular negative proposition. In Celarent,
the three letters e, a, and e indicate the the two premises and the conclusion. They
also tell us that the major premise is a universal negative proposition, that the
minor premise is a universal aﬃrmative proposition and that the conclusion of this
syllogism is a universal negative proposition. The identiﬁcation of the propositions
involved in each valid syllogism is, however, not the only use of these names. For
example, the ﬁrst ﬁgure direct syllogisms begin with the letters B, C, D, and F,
and by looking at the beginning letters of the names of the other syllogisms one
can know which of the ﬁrst ﬁgure syllogisms the others are reduced to. Datisi in
the third ﬁgure is reduced to Darii and Cesare in the second ﬁgure is reduced to
Celarent etc.
These names also include information about how the syllogisms are reduced. If
an S follows one of the letters indicating a premise, then that premise converts
simply as part of the reduction. In Cesare in the second ﬁgure, the S before the
E indicates that the major premise is simply converted to get Celarent. If the
letter following is a P, however, then the premise converts accidentally, like is
Felapton where the minor premise converts accidentally to reduce the syllogism
to Ferio. An M in the name indicated that the premises should be transposed,
like in Cambestres, which reduces to Celarent by a simple conversion of the minor
premise and a transposition of the premises. If there is a C in the name, like in
Bocardo, then that syllogism is proved through impossibility.
On the Topics or On Loci
The text book authors do not deal with demonstrative arguments at all. In fact
they skip the whole of the Posterior Analytics. I do not know the reason for this.
They seem not to think it belongs to logic. William mentions that syllogisms must
be divided into demonstrative, dialectical and sophistical. He writes:
A demonstrative syllogism is one that produces scientiﬁc knowledge
on the basis of necessary [premises] and the most certain reasons for
90These names were ﬁrst introduced in logic textbooks in the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth century.
See de Rijk [1967, I, 401].

332
Henrik Lagerlund
the conclusion. A dialectical syllogism, however, is one that produces
opinion on the basis of probable [premises]. Finally, a sophistical syl-
logism is one that either syllogizes on the basis of seemingly probable
[premises] or seemingly syllogizes on the basis of probable [premises];
in either case it is strictly aimed at glory and victory.91
This division is very similar to Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s discussed above. William never deals
with demonstrative syllogisms, however, but, as Peter, turns to the dialectical ones
after having outlined the theory of the syllogisms.
The treatment of the loci (or topoi) in thirteenth century textbooks deals with
the same issues as Aristotle dealt with in the Topics, but the medieval discussions
of the Topics had changed quite a lot, however, and it was Boethius that set the
subject matter of this part of logic for the Middle Ages. The textbooks author’s
discussion of loci is hence based on Boethius’ discussion in De diﬀerentiis topicis.
Peter of Spain deﬁnes an argument in the following way:
An argument is the ratio that makes a doubtable thing credible.
The ratio, or the reason’, is the medium for deriving or reaching the conclusion of
the argument. The notion of a medium or a middle is brought out most explicitly
in the theory of the syllogisms where the middle term is the link between the
extreme terms. The conclusion of an argument is an approved proposition and
before it was proved it was doubtable. This way of describing arguments from
premise to conclusion is explicit in Aristotle’s Topics where the starting point is
a question that is tested by the argument.
An argumentation is an argument made explicit by a discourse, that is, the
discourse that explicates the argument. An argument diﬀers from both a medium
and an argumentation, Peter explains. A medium is called a medium because it
has two extremes, while an argument adds to the medium the power of proving
the conclusion. In order for there to be an argument there must be a medium
able to prove the conclusion. The argumentation, however, is the whole discourse
composed of premises and conclusion, and in an argumentation the power of an
argument is manifested. The argumentation is thus the whole uttered discourse
of premises and conclusion. It is an argument, which is proved by a medium from
the two extremes in the premises.
There are four kinds of arguments, according to Peter, namely syllogisms, in-
duction, enthymems, and examples.
He does not discuss syllogisms, but gives
short examples of the other three. An induction is an argument from a particular
proposition to a universal. An enthymem is an imperfect syllogism, like:
91William of Sherwood, Introduction to Logic, 69.
This division is also explicit in Roger
Bacon’s textbook.
He also has a long discussion of demonstrative syllogisms, which is very
interesting and seems inﬂuenced by Al-Ghaz¯al¯i. He also discusses something he calls syllogismus
falsigraphicus and also dialectical and sophistical syllogisms. All these are, according to him,
divisions according to the matter of the syllogism. See Roger Bacon, Summulae Dialectices, III,
207-20.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
333
Socrates is a human being
Therefore: Socrates is an animal
It can be made into a syllogism by adding the major premise: “Every human being
is an animal”. An enthymem can always be reduced to a syllogism by adding or
making explicit the missing premise. An argument by example is based on the
similarity between things expressed by the terms. The argument:
It is not good to drink too much wine
Therefore: It is not good to drink too much whiskey
This is a valid argument because wine and whiskey are both alcoholic beverages.
An argument is conﬁrmed by a locus, which is deﬁned in the following way:
A locus settles an argument or it draws out the argument from the
proposed question.
A locus is hence what makes something into an argument.
The loci are divided into maximal loci and maximal diﬀerent loci. The ﬁrst
is identical to the maximal propositions. They are the most prior propositions
and the best known, since given the terms included in them they are necessar-
ily true.
Peter gives the following examples: “Every whole is greater than its
parts”, “Whatever the deﬁnition is predicated of, the deﬁned thing is as well”,
and “Whatever a species is predicated of, its genus is as well”.
The maximal diﬀerent loci are that by which one maximal proposition diﬀer
from another. In the examples: ‘whatever a deﬁnition is predicated of the thing
deﬁned is as well’ and ‘whatever a species is predicated of, the genus is as well’,
the components that diﬀer in these are ‘deﬁnition’, ‘deﬁned’, ‘species’, and ‘genus’.
These terms are the maximal diﬀerent loci. These are further divided into intrinsic,
extrinsic, and middle.
The intrinsic loci are the ones involving arguments that are substantive of a
thing, like a deﬁnition. The extrinsic loci are the ones involving arguments com-
pletely separated from a thing’s essence, like arguments from opposites. The ex-
ample Peter gives is if we question whether Socrates is white and conclude that
‘Socrates is black, hence he is not white’. The maximal proposition in this case
is: ‘If one contrary is posited, then the other is excluded’. A middle locus is taken
from things partly agreeing with the terms posited and partly diﬀering. An exam-
ple would be querying whether justice is good and concluding that ‘a just thing is
a good thing, hence justice is good’. The maximal proposition is ‘what inheres is
one conjugate is in the other thing as well’. The discussion of the division of loci
is ended by a list of loci and maximal propositions, which does not diﬀer from the
list Boethius gives in De diﬀerentiis topicis.
This is Peter’s list of diﬀerent loci:
I. Intrinsic loci from the substance of a thing:

334
Henrik Lagerlund
(1) Diﬀerentia: From the deﬁnition.
Maximal proposition: About whether the deﬁnition is de-
nied of the thing.
(2) Diﬀernetia: From the description.
Maximal proposition: About whether the description is de-
nied of the thing.
(3) Diﬀerentia: From the explanation of the name.
Maximal proposition: From whatever the explanation is re-
moved, also the thing explained is removed.
II. Intrinsic loci from things which accompany the substance of the
thing.
(4) Diﬀerentia: From the universal whole (from the genus).
Maximal proposition: If the genus or universal whole is de-
nied of something, the species or the subjective part is de-
nied.
(5) Diﬀerentia: From integral whole.
Maximal proposition: If the integral whole is posited, each
of its parts is posited.
(6) Diﬀerentia: From a species (or a subjective part).
Maximal proposition: Whatever is predicated of a species, is
predicated of a genus.
(7) Diﬀerentia: From an integral part.
Maximal proposition: If an integral part is destroyed, its
whole is destroyed.
(8) Diﬀerentia: From an eﬃcient cause.
Maximal proposition: If an eﬃcient cause is posited, its ef-
fect is immediately posited.
(9) Diﬀerentia: From a material cause.
Maximal proposition: If the material and permanent cause
is removed, its eﬀect is removed.
(10) Diﬀerentia: From a ﬁnal cause.
Maximal proposition: That whose end is good, is itself good.
(11) Diﬀerentia: From a formal cause.
Maximal proposition: If the formal cause is posited, its eﬀect
is posited.
(12) Diﬀerentia: From generation.
Maximal proposition: That whose generation is good, is it-
self also good.
(13) Diﬀerentia: From corruption.
Maximal proposition: That whose corruption is bad, is itself
good.
(8-13 also have counterparts.)
(14) Diﬀerentia: From uses.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
335
Maximal proposition: That whose use is good, is itself also
good.
(15) Diﬀerentia: From associated accidents.
Maximal proposition: If the secondary of associated acci-
dents inheres, so does the primary.
III. Extrinsic loci.
(16) Diﬀerentia: From an authoritative statement.
Maximal proposition: Any expert ought to be believed within
his science.
(17) Diﬀerentia: From a similar thing.
Maximal proposition: The same estimation obtains about
similar things.
(18) Diﬀerentia: From the more.
Maximal proposition: If what seems the more to inhere does
not inhere, neither will that which seems the less.
(19) Diﬀerentia: From the less.
Maximal proposition: If what seems the less to inhere in-
heres, then will also that which seems the more.
(20) Diﬀerentia: From proportion.
Maximal proposition: The same estimation obtains about
proportional things.
(21) Diﬀerentia: From contraries.
Maximal proposition: If one of the contraries is ascribed to
something, the other is denied of the same thing.
(22) Diﬀerentia: From privative opposites.
Maximal proposition: If one of the privative opposites is as-
cribed to something, the other is denied of the same thing.
(23) Diﬀerentia: From relative opposites.
Maximal proposition: If one of correlated things is posited,
the other is posited.
(24) Diﬀerentia: From contradictory opposites.
Maximal proposition: If one of the contradictory opposites
is true, the other is false, and vice versa.
(25) Diﬀerentia: From transumption.
Maximal proposition: What belongs to something under a
more well-known name, also belongs to it under a less well-
known name.
IV. Intermediate loci.
(26) Diﬀerentia: From inﬂection.
Maximal proposition: What belongs to one inﬂected form,
also belongs to the other.
(27) Diﬀerentia: From coordinates.

336
Henrik Lagerlund
Maximal proposition: What belongs to one of the coordi-
nates, also belongs to the other.
(28) Diﬀerentia: From division.
Maximal proposition: If two things divide something be-
tween them, then if one is posited, the other is denied.
On Supposition
The properties of terms, as this part of logic was called, contains discussion about
signiﬁcation, supposition, copulation, appellation, ampliation, restriction and dis-
tribution. To draw the distinction between signiﬁcation and supposition, Peter
notes that some things are said with construction, like ‘A human being runs’ or
‘a white human being’, and things said without construction, like ‘animal’. Un-
constructed terms have signiﬁcation and they signify something in one of the ten
categories.
A terms signiﬁcation is, in Peter’s words, the conventional representation of
some thing by a vocal expression. Sherwood writes that signiﬁcation is a presen-
tation of the form of something to the intellect. Signiﬁcation is hence when we take
something, typically a word (a sound or an inscription), to stand in for something
else. That word will then conventionally represent the thing or it will function as
a presentation of that thing to a mind. It will convey meaning by being taken as
a sign for something else.92 Things in the world are either singular or universal,
according to Peter, and hence a term that does not signify a particular or universal
thing does not signify at all. These are terms like ‘every’, ‘not’ etc.
There are two sorts of signiﬁcation either of a substantive thing or by an ad-
jective or verb. Terms like ‘human being’ that signify a substantive thing have
supposition while terms like ‘white’ or ‘run’, that is, adjectives or verbs, are said
to couple. Copulation plays no role at all in their discussions.
Supposition is deﬁned by Peter as the acceptance of a substantive term for
something. Signiﬁcation is prior to supposition in the sense that signiﬁcation is
what a term has all by itself, while supposition is what a term has in a composi-
tion. The division of supposition diﬀers a little bit between the textbook authors,
but it is foremost only a diﬀerence in terminology. I will follow Peter of Spain’s
terminology.
Supposition is either common or discrete, according to Peter. Common suppo-
sition is what common terms like ‘human being’ have, while discrete supposition is
what discrete terms like ‘Socrates’ and ‘this human being’ have. Common suppo-
sition is divided into natural and accidental supposition. The natural supposition
of ‘human being’ includes all it is naturally apt to stand for, that is, all humans
that has been, are and will be. Accidental supposition is the supposition a term
like ‘human being’ has in conjunction with something else like ‘a human being
92This is the origin of the contemporary notion of a mental representation, which can be traced
from the twelfth century logical tradition, into early modern philosophy. See [Lagerlund, 2007].

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
337
exists’. In that case ‘human being’ stands for presently existing humans.93
Accidental supposition is divided into simple and personal supposition. A com-
mon term has simple supposition when it stands for a universal, like in ‘human
being is a species’. Personal supposition is the acceptance of a common term for
its inferiors. It is divided into determinate and confused supposition. A common
term has determinate supposition if it is taken indeﬁnitely or with a particular
sign; as for example in ‘a human being runs’ or’ Some human being is running’.
Confused supposition is the acceptance of a common term for several things by
means of a universal sign. In ‘Every human being is running’, ‘human being’ has
confused supposition.
Peter, and William in more familiar terms, makes a further division of confused
supposition. There is confused supposition by the necessity of the mode or sign
(“necessitate signi vel modi”) and confused supposition by necessity of the thing
(“necessitate rei”). In ‘Every human being is an animal’, ‘human being’ is by
the necessity of the mode taken confusedly and distributively for all its supposita.
Given that all humans have their own essence, the copula ‘is’ is taken by the ne-
cessity of the thing for all essences that ‘human being’ supposits for, and therefore
‘animal’ is taken by the necessity of the thing for all animality in each human
being. By this reasoning ‘human being’ is said to supposit confusedly. mobilely,
and distributively. It supposits confusedly and distributively, because it holds for
all humans, and it supposits mobilely because descent can be made from it to
any of its supposita. ‘Animal’ is said to supposit confusedly and immobilely, since
descent is not allowed.
In relation to supposition Peter also discussed notions like ampliation, appel-
lation, restriction and distribution.
Ampliation and restriction is a division of
personal supposition.
Restriction is the narrowing of a common term from a
larger to a smaller supposition. In ‘A white human being is running’, ‘white’ has a
narrowing eﬀect on the supposition of ‘human being’. Ampliation is the opposite,
that is, the broadening of the supposition of a common term. In the proposition ‘A
human being can be the Antichrist’, the term ‘can’ extends the supposition of ‘hu-
man being’ to future things. Tensed or modal proposition tend to have ampliated
supposition.
Appellation is related to these two notions. Appellation is the acceptance of a
term for an existing thing. It is distinct from signiﬁcation and supposition, since it
only concerns existing things while signiﬁcation and supposition is wider than that
and includes also non-existence. The appellata of a term are the existing things it
stands for. Distribution, which has already been mentioned, is the multiplication
of a common term by a universal sign. In ‘Every human being’, ‘human being’ is
distributed for all humans.
93William of Sherwood starts his division by a distinction between formal and material suppo-
sition. Material supposition is “when a word itself supposits either for the very utterance itself
or for the word itself, composed of the utterance and the signiﬁcation — as if we were to say
‘man is a monosyllable’ or ‘man is a name’. It is formal when a word supposits what it signiﬁes.”
(William of Sherwood, Introduction to Logic, 107.) William’s division is the one that is more
known, but he mentions Peter’s division as an alternative.

338
Henrik Lagerlund
On Fallacies
The discussion of fallacies is by far the largest part of both Peter’s and William’s
logic books. Their discussion begin by a treatment of disputations. A disputa-
tion is an activity of one person “syllogising” with another to reach a conclusion.
Peter explains, that ﬁve things are needed for a disputation, the originator or
the opponent, a respondent, a disputed proposition, the act of disputing and the
instruments of the disputation.
There are four kinds of disputations, namely didactic (doctrinal), dialectical,
probative (temptative) and sophistical.
The didactic disputation comes to its
conclusions from premises peculiar to each discipline and not from what seems
true to the respondent. The instruments of such a disputation is demonstrative
syllogisms. A dialectical disputation draws contradictions from probable premises.
Its instruments are the dialectical syllogisms. Probative disputations argue from
what seems true to the respondent.
Sophistical disputations argue from what
seems probable but is not. The diﬀerence between the last two is that the ﬁrst
disputation from what seems true or probable to what is true, but the latter from
what seems true or probable but is not.
There are ﬁve kinds of sophistical disputations, which derive from the ﬁve goals
of such disputations, namely refutation (redargutio), falsity (falsum), paradox (in-
opinabile), babbling (nugatio), and solecism (soloecismus). Refutation is the deny-
ing of what was previously granted or granting what was previously denied. Falsity
occurs in the case when a proposition does not conform to reality. A paradoxical
disputation is when the conclusion is contrary to the opinion of the many or the
wise. Babbeling is simply the repetition of the same thing, and ﬁnally solecism is
a disputation developing a discourse contrary to grammar.
Peter divides the diﬀerent fallacies into two major groups and calls the ﬁrst
group linguistic fallacies and the second group non-linguistic fallacies. The subdi-
vision is the following:
Linguistic fallacies of:
Equivocation,
Amphibology,
Composition,
Division,
Accent,
Figura dictionis (Figure of speech).
Non-linguistic fallacies of:
Accident,
Secundum quid et simpliciter,
Ignorantia elenchi,
Begging the question,

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
339
Consequence,
Non causa ut causa,
Many qustions as one.
Many of these are further subdivided into diﬀerent cases. Most of the fallacies
in this list are well known and I will not go through them all here. Peter’s and
William’s discussions are very detailed. The fallacy of equivocation occurs when
a word (name) has diverse signiﬁcation and this is not realised, as for example
in: ‘Every dog runs, one of the heavenly constellations is a dog; therefore one
of the heavenly constellations runs’. Amphibology is the diversity of judgement
based on the unity of expression, as when one argues that: ‘Whoever ploughs the
seashore moves sand, this man is ploughing the seashore (that is, indicating that
he is working in vain); therefore this man moves sand’.
The non-linguistic fallacy of accident is said to occur when something is at-
tributed to a thing as a subject and subsequently also attributed to an accident.
An example would be when it is argued that: ‘Socrates is esteemed by you, but
Socrates is your father’s murderer; therefore your father’s murderer is esteemed by
you’. The fallacy of begging the question (“petitio principii”) occurs for example
when the thing to be proved is assumed as a premise. The fallacy of treating what
is not a cause as a cause occurs when in some cases when a syllogism leads to an
impossibility, because something impossible follows one of the premises is rejected
on the grounds that it was the cause of the impossibility (although it was not).
Much more could be said about these fallacies, but I will leave it at this.94
5.2
The Syncategoremata
Among the textbook authors there seem to be a general agreement that there are
two branches of the logica moderna, namely the properties of terms (‘propreitates
terminorum’) and an account of the function of syncategorematic terms (‘syncate-
goremata’). These two branches are supposed to be theoretically exhaustive of the
kinds of terms occurring in various roles in propositions. The ﬁrst part was dealt
with in the textbooks of logic we have seen above, but the second part was usually
given a separate treatment in books devoted to the syncategorematic terms. Both
Peter of Spain and William of Sherwood wrote such treatises.95 I will here give
an outline of the content of these works.
The division and content of the chapters of William’s work is the following:
(1) ‘Every’ or ‘All’ (Omnis)
(2) ‘Whole’ (totum)
(3) Number words (Dictiones numerales)
(4) ‘Inﬁnitely many’ (Inﬁnita in plurali)
94See [Ebbesen, 1981b] for the history of the discussions of fallacies. See also [Grabman, 1940]
and [Pironet, 2005].
95The discussion of syncategorematic terms was absorbed into the Sophismata treatises in later
medieval logic. See [Pironet, 2005].

340
Henrik Lagerlund
(5) ‘Both’ (Uterque)
(6) ‘Of every sort’ (Qualelibet)
(7) ‘No’ (Nullus)
(8) ‘Nothing’ (Nihil)
(9) ‘Neither’ (Neutrum)
(10) ‘But’ (Praeter)
(11) ‘Alone’ (Solus)
(12) ‘Only’ (Tantum)
(13) ‘Is’ (est)
(14) ‘Not’ (Non)
(15) ‘Necessary’ (Necessario) and ‘Contingently’ (Contingenter)
(16) ‘Begins’ (Incipit) and ‘Ceases’ (Desinit)
(17) ‘If’ (Si)
(18) ‘Unless’ (Nisi)
(19) ‘But that’ (Quin)
(20) ‘And’ (Et)
(21) ‘Or’ (Vel)
(22) ‘Whether’ or ‘Or’ (An)
(23) The particle ‘Ne’
(24) ‘Whether ... or ...’ (Sive)
William begins his discussion of the syncategorematic terms by stating that if
one is to understand anything one must understand its parts and this goes for
statements (enuntiationes) as well. The approach to language is thus intrinsically
compositional. He continues by pointing out that there are two parts, namely
principal and secondary. The principal parts are the substantive terms and verbs,
that is, the part that has supposition. The other part includes adjectival names,
adverbs, conjugations and prepositions. Some secondary parts of language is de-
terminations of principal parts in respect of the things belonging to them, like
‘white’ in ‘a white man’, and such parts are not syncategorematic terms. Other
secondary parts are determinations of principal parts insofar as they are subjects
or predicates, like ‘every’ in ‘every human being is running’. ‘Every’ does not
signify that something belonging to ‘human being’ is universal, but rather that
‘human being’ is a universal subject. The secondary parts of this kind are syn-
categormatic terms. I will present some of William’s discussion of these terms
below.
The ﬁrst syncategorematic term treated by William is ‘Every’ or ‘All’.
He
divides his discussion of this term respectively with regard to its signiﬁcation and
to its function. ‘Every’ or ‘All’ signiﬁes universally either as a disposition of a
thing, as in ‘the world is all’, in which case it is not a syncategorematic term, or
as a disposition of a subject in which case it is a syncategorematic term. In ‘Every
human being is running’, ‘every’ signiﬁes that the term ‘human being’ is universal
with respect of serving as a subject and standing in a relation to a predicate.
The function of the term ‘Every’ or ‘All’ is to divide the subject in respect of
the predicate. This means that the term gives the condition for attaching the

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
341
predicate to either (i) at least one thing of each kind under the subject, or (ii)
to each individual thing belonging to the subject. William is not explicit as to
which of (i) and (ii) he prefers. The example ‘Every dog is an animal’ is analyzed
in (i) into a conjunction of ‘A collie is an animal’, and ‘A puddle is an animal’,
etc. In (ii), it is analyzed into ‘Fido is an animal’, and ‘Spot is an animal’, etc.
William’s discussion of ‘Every’ or ‘All’ is very detailed and goes through all cases
and examples in which this term functions as a syncategorematic term.
William seems to be one of the ﬁrst logicians to treat ‘is’ as a syncategorematic
term. The ﬁrst question he addresses is whether ‘is’ pertains to the composition of
the subject and the predicate or if it pertains to the predicate. To explain this he
recalls the distinction between ‘signiﬁcation’ and ‘consigniﬁcation’, and explains
that ‘is’ is not really a third part of the proposition, that is, a composition, since it
signiﬁes that which is said of something other than itself and this is the predicate,
but it does consignify the composition, which is the function of the copula.
‘Is’ is also equivocal for sometimes it indicates actual being (esse actuale) and
at other times conditional being (esse habituale), which is something with some
nature, but which does not actually exist although it could. If in ‘Every human
being is an animal’ ‘is’ is taken in the ﬁrst way, then it is false when no humans
exist. If it is taken in the second way, then it is true no matter whether there
are any human or not. In this way, William commits himself to possibilia or to
things that could exist but does not. He notes himself that this amounts to saying
that things that do not exist but could have a diminished kind of being (esse
diminutum).
I will end by noting some interesting things said by William about modal terms
like ‘necessarily’ and ‘contingently’. These can be taken both as categorematic and
syncategorematic terms. If they are taken in the ﬁrst sense, then they determine
the predicate and if they are taken in the second sense then they determine the
composition of the subject and the predicate, but as we just saw, if something
determines the composition then it also determines the predicate. He writes further
that:
If necessarily’ is an adverb, then it determines something that is an
act and is in the manner of an act. But the composition belonging
to the verb in a sentence is not consigniﬁed in the manner of an act;
therefore an adverb does not determine it. The assumption is clear, for
the thing belonging to the verb to which the composition belongs per
se is signiﬁed not in the manner of a substance but in the manner of an
act proceeding from the subject, while that to which the act belongs is
always signiﬁed in the manner of a substance. And thus it seems that
‘necessarily’ determines the predicate in the second case just as in the
ﬁrst.96
The argument is really interesting. In the proposition ‘Socrates runs’, ‘runs’ sig-
niﬁes the act of running, but it consigniﬁes the composition of the act with the
96See William of Sherwood, Introduction to Logic, 100-1.

342
Henrik Lagerlund
substance ‘Socrates’. If ‘necessarily’ is to function like other adverbs, it will not
determine the composition, but only the act. The adverbial analysis of modal
terms was standard, as noted above, and argues here that such an analysis actu-
ally implies that the modality determines the predicate and not the composition.
The reason this is important is that it seems to imply that modal propositions are
reducible to non-modal propositions with funny predicates. If the modality is not
a syncategorematic part of a proposition, then it must be a categorematic part
and as a consequence we do not really have any modal propositions.
William will next try to preserve the distinction by saying that a modal term
taken syncategorematically determines the predicate, but in a diﬀerent way than
the same term taken categorematically. He writes that “in the ﬁrst case [taken
categorematically] it determines the verb in respect of the thing belonging to it, in
the second case [taken syncategorematically] in respect of the composition belong-
ing to it, or insofar as it is a predicate.”97 He then proceeds to indicate what this
means by solving the sophisma that ‘The soul of the Antichrist will be necessarily’.
The soul of the Antichrist will have necessary being because when it exists it will
have unceasing and incorruptible being, but the soul of the Antichrist is contin-
gent, since it is possible that it will not exist. If the term ‘necessarily’ is taken
categorematically, the sentence is true, but if it is taken syncategorematically, then
it is false. If the term determines the predicate in respect of the composition, then
‘The soul of Antichrist contingently will be’ is true.
6
CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, I have tried to give an overview of the development of and doctrines
present in Western logic from 1150 to 1250. I have focused on how Arabic and
Aristotelian logic was incorporated into an existing tradition, how this changed the
tradition and led to new developments in the logica modernorum. The chapter ends
with an outline of the logic of the thirteenth century as present in some inﬂuential
textbooks. I am here not going to summarise what has been said above. Instead
I want to highlight a few common themes and important developments.
The ﬁrst and most important thing to note is the development of the logica
modernorum from the intensive discussions of fallacies and grammar in the late
twelfth century. This new branch of logic feeds into the thirteenth century and
forms a central part of the most important textbooks of the time. It involves two
parts, namely the properties of terms, which is foremost constituted by supposition
theory, and the theory of syncategorematic terms. I also noted that this part of
logic played an insigniﬁcant role in the commentary tradition in the thirteenth
century.
The second thing to highlight is the growing commentary tradition on the logica
antiquorum. It is in the early thirteenth century that this tradition really gets
going as part of the teaching practice in the newly established universities.
I
97See William of Sherwood, Introduction to Logic, 101.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
343
also emphasised that there is a tendency in the early commentaries to interpret
Aristotle’s logic in a strongly metaphysical way.
This made modal logic very
important and fused logic and science/metaphysics. I also suggest that this way
of understanding Aristotle was at least partly inﬂuenced by Arabic thinkers.
The third main aspect of this overview has been an outline of some of the logical
theories present in Latin translations of Arabic logical texts. I spent some time
outlining the logic of Al-Ghaz¯al¯i and the Aristotelian commentaries of Averroes.
I noted that both these seem to have been inﬂuential, but also said that it is
diﬃcult to judge exactly to what extent. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i’s division of the matter of
the syllogism can be found in several logic texts from the thirteenth century. His
and Avicenna’s view that logic is about intentions in the intellectual soul and hence
a science of reason was also inﬂuential. A third aspect is the heavy metaphysical
understanding of Aristotle already mentioned.
Overviews like the present one are diﬃcult to write and there are many things I
have missed and also consciously skipped. I have said nothing about the works on
Insolubilia and Obligationes that began to appear at this time. I have also skipped
the commentary tradition on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics. Although scholars
of medieval logic have come a long way towards understanding the development
of logic in the thirteenth century there are still lots of things left to do. None
of the hugely inﬂuential commentaries on Aristotle by Robert Kilwardby have
been edited, and most of the early commentaries on the logica nova have not
been studied. I hope this overview will work as an inspiration to know more about
thirteenth century logic. It holds lots of riches for anyone interested in Aristotelian
logic and also anyone interested in the philosophy of language and logic in general.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary Sources
[Albert the Great, 1890a] Albert the Great, De praedicabilibus, in Opera omnia, ed. A. Borgnet,
vol. I, Paris: Viv´es, 1890.
[Albert the Great, 1890b] Albert the Great, Liber I Priorum Analyticorum, in Opera omnia,
ed. A. Borgnet, vol. I, Paris: Viv´es, 1890.
[Albert the Great, 1504] Albert the Great, Logica Opera, Venice, 1504.
[Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, 1506] Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Logica et philosophia, Venice, 1506. Reprinted Minerva G.M.B.H:
Frankfurt, 1969.
[Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, 1965] Al-Ghaz¯al¯i, Tractatus de logica, ed. C. Lohr in ‘Logica Algazelis: Introduc-
tion and Critical Text’, Traditio 21 (1965): 223-290.
[Aristotle, 1961] Aristotle, Categoriae, ed. L. Minio-Paluello (Aristotelis Latinus I.1-5), Brus-
sels: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1961.
[Aristotle, 1962] Aristotle, Analytica Priora, ed. L. Minio-Paluello (Aristoteles Latinus III.1-4),
Brussels: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1962.
[Aristotle, 1965] Aristotle. De interpretatione, eds. L. Minio-Paluello and G. Verbeke (Aris-
totelis Latinus II.1-2), Brussels: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1965.
[Aristotle, 1969] Aristotle, Topica, ed. L. Minio-Paluello (Aristotelia Latinus V.1-3), Brussels:
Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1969.
[Aristotle, 1975] Aristotle, De sophisticis elenchis, ed. B.G. Dod (Aristotelis Latinus VI.1-3),
Brussels: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1975.

344
Henrik Lagerlund
[Averroes, 1962] Averroes, Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis, Venice 1562-74,
reprint Frankfurt: Minerva 1962.
[Avicenna, 1508] Avicenna, Avicenne perypatetici philosophi ac medicorum facile primi opera
in lucem redacta, Venice 1508. Reprint Mineerva G.M.B.H: Frankfurt, 1961.
[Avicenna, 1971] Avicenna, Avicenna’s Treatise on Logic:
Part one of Danesh-Name Alai,
edited and translated from Persian by F. Zabeeh, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1971.
[Dominicus Gundissalinus, 1903] Dominicus Gundissalinus, De divisione philosophiae, ed. L.
Baur (Beitrge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 4: 2-3), M¨unster, 1903.
[Lambert of Auxerre, 1971] Lambert of Auxerre, Logica (Summa Lamberti), ed. F. Alessio, Flo-
rence: La Nuova Italia Editrice 1971.
[Peter of Spain, 1972] Peter of Spain, Tractatus called afterwards Summule Logicales, ed. L.M.
de Rijk, Assen: Van Gorcum and Comp. B. V., 1972.
[Peter of Spain, 1992] Peter of Spain, Syncategoreumata, ed. L.M. de Rijk and trans. J. Spruyt,
Leiden: Brill, 1992.
[Porphyry, 1966] Porphyry, Isagoge, ed. L. Minio-Paluello (Aristotelis Latinus I.6-7), Brussels:
Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1966.
[Kilwardby, 1968] Robert Kilwardby, In libros Priorum Analyticorum expositio, printed under
the name Aegidius Romanus, Venice, 1516. Reprinted Reprinted Minerva G.M.B.H: Frankfurt,
1968.
[Bacon, 1986] Roger Bacon, ‘Summulae dialectices: I. De termino, II. De enuntiatione’, ed. A.
de Libera, Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 53 (1986): 139-289.
[Aquinas, 1989] Thomas Aquinas, Expositio Peryermeneias, vol. 1.1, Opera omnia iussu Leonis
XIII P. M. edita, Rome-Paris: J. Vrin, 1989.
[Aquinas, 1989] Thomas Aquinas, Expositio libri Posteriorum, vol. 1.2, Opera omnia iussu Leo-
nis XIII P. M. edita, Rome-Paris: J. Vrin, 1989.
[William of Sherwood, 1966] William of Sherwood, Introduction to Logic, trans. N. Kretzmann,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1966.
[William of Sherwood, 1968] William of Sherwood, Treatise on Syncategorematic Words, trans.
N. Kretzmann, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1968.
Secondary Sources
[Alonso, 1958] M. A. Alonso. Inﬂuencia de Algazel en el mundo latino, Al-Andalus 13: 371-380,
1958.
[Biard and Rosier-Catach, 2003] J. Biard and I. Rosier-Catach, eds. La tradition m´edi´evale des
cat´egories, XIIe-XVe si´ecles, Louvain: Peeters, 2003.
[Black, 1990] D. Black. Logic and Aristotle’s Rethoric and Poetics in Medieval Arabic Philoso-
phy, Leiden: Brill, 1990.
[Ebbesen, 1976] S. Ebbesen. Anonymus Aurelianensis II, Aristotle, Alexander, Porphyry, and
Boethius. Ancient Scholasticism and 12th Century Western Europe, Cahiers de l’Institut du
Moyen ˆAge Grec et Latin, 16, 1976.
[Ebbesen, 1979] S. Ebbesen. Anonymi Aurelianensis I Commentarium in Sophisticos Elenchos,
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen ˆAge Grec et Latin, 34, 1979.
[Ebbesen, 1981a] S. Ebbesen. Analyzing Syllogisms or Anonymous Aurelianensis III: The (Pre-
sumably) Earliest Extant Latin Commentary on the Prior Analytics, and Its Greek Model,
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge Grec et Latin 37: 1-20, 1981.
[Ebbesen, 1981b] S. Ebbesen. Commentators and Commentaries on Aristotle’s Sophistici
Elenchi: A Study of Post-Aristotelian Ancient and Medieval Writings on Fallacies, vols.
I-III, Leiden: Brill, 1981.
[Ebbesen, 1981c] S. Ebbesen. Albert (the Great?)’s Companion to the Organon, in J.P. Beck-
mann et al. (eds.) Sprache und Erkenntnis im Mittelalters, Berlin-New York:
Walter de
Gruyter, 89-103, 1981.
[Grabmann, 1940] M. Grabmann. Die Sophismatenliteratur des 12. und 13. Jahrhunderts mit
Textausgabe eines Sophisma des Boetius von Dacien, (Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philoso-
phie une Theologie des Mittelalters: Texte und Untersuchungen, Band 36, Heft 1), M¨unster:
Aschendorﬀ, 1940.

The Assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic Logic up to the Later Thirteenth Century
345
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages:
The commentaries on Aristotle’s and Boethius’ ‘Topics’, Munchen-Wien: Philosophia Verlag,
1984.
[Hissette, 1997] R. Hissette. Les ditions anciennes de la traduction attribue Guillaume de Luna
du commentaire moyen d’Averroes sur les Cat´egories, Bulletin de philosophie m´edi´evale 39:
163-173, 1997.
[Jacobi, 1988] K. Jacobi. Logic (ii): The Later Twelfth Century, in P. Dronke (ed.) A History
of Twelfth-Century Western Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 227-51,
1988.
[Johnston, 1987] M. D. Johnston. The Spiritual Logic of Ramond Llull, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1987.
[Klima, 2004] G. Klima. The Medieval Problem of Universals, in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2004 Edition), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2004/entries/universals-medieval/
[Knuuttila, 1981] S. Knuuttila. Time and Modality in Scholasticism in S. Knuuttila (ed.) Reforg-
ing the Great Chain of Being: Studies in the History of Modal Theories, Dordrecht: Reidel,
163-257, 1981.
[Knuuttila, 1983] S. Knuuttila. Modalities in Medieval Philosophy, London-New York: Rout-
ledge, 1983.
[Knuutila, 1996] S. Knuuttila. Early English discussions of Aristotle’s modal syllogistic, in J.
Marenbon (ed.) Aristotle in Britain During the Middle Ages, Belgium: Brepols, 1996.
[Knuuttila, 2006] S. Knuuttila. Medieval Theories of Future Contingents, Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2006 Edition), http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/sum2006/entries/medieval-futcont/
[Kretzmann et al., 1982] N. Kretzmann, et al., eds. The Cambridge History of Later Medieval
Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
[Lagerlund, 2000] H. Lagerlund. Modal Syllogistics in the Middle Ages, Leiden: Brill, 2000.
[Lagerlund, 2007] H. Lagerlund. The Terminological and Conceptual Roots of Representations
in the Soul in Late Ancient and Medieval Philosophy, in H. Lagerlund (ed.) Mental Repre-
sentation and Objects of Thought in Medieval Philosophy, Aldershot: Ashgate, 11-32, 2007.
[Lagerlund, forthcoming a] H. Lagerlund. Al-Ghaz¯al¯i on the Form and Matter of the Syllogism,
in M. Cameron and J. Marenbon Aristotelian Logic, East and West, 500-1500: the Topics,
forthcoming.
[Lagerlund, forthcoming b] H. Lagerlund. Avicenna and T. ¯us¯i on Modal Logic, in M. Cameron
and J. Marenbon Aristotelian Logic, East and West, 500-1500: the Prior Analytics, forth-
coming.
[Lawn, 1993] B. Lawn. The Rise and Decline of the Scholastic ‘Quaestio Disputata’: With a
Special Emphasis on its Use in the Teaching of Medicine and Science, Leiden: Brill, 1993.
[Lewry, 1981] O. Lewry. Robert Kilwardby on Meaning: A Parisian Course on the Logica Vetus,
in J.P. Beckmann et al. (eds.) Sprache und Erkenntnis im Mittelalters, Berlin-New York:
Walter de Gruyter, 376-84, 1981.
[Lohr, 1967] C. Lohr. Medieval Latin Aristotle Commentaries: Authors A–F, Traditio 23: 313-
413, 1967.
[Lohr, 1968] C. Lohr. Authors G–I, Traditio 24: 149-245, 1968.
[Lohr, 1970] C. Lohr. Authors Jacobus–Johannes Juﬀ, Traditio 26: 135-216, 1970.
[Lohr, 1971] C. Lohr. Authors Johannes de Kanthi–Myngodus, Traditio 27: 251-351, 1971.
[Lohr, 1972] C. Lohr. Authors Narcissus–Richardus, Traditio 28: 281-396, 1972.
[Lohr, 1973] C. Lohr. Robertus–Wilgelmus, Traditio 29: 93-197, 1973.
[Lohr, 1974] C. Lohr. Supplementary Authors, Traditio 30: 119-144, 1974.
[Longeway, 2007] J. Longeway. Demonstration and Scientiﬁc Knowledge in William Ockham:
A Translation of Summa Logicae III-II: De syllogismo demonstrativo, and selections from
the Prologue to the Ordinatio, Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press, 2007.
[Marenbon, 2000] J. Marenbon. Aristotelian Logic, Platonism and the Context of Early Me-
dieval Philosophy in the West, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000.
[Normore, 1982] C. Normore. Future Contingents, in Kretzmann et al., 358-81, 1982.
[Nortmann, 1996] U. Nortmann. Modale Syllogismen, mgliche Welten, Essentialismus: Eine
Analyse der aristotelischen Modallogik, Berlin-New York: Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
[Oesterle, 1962] J. T. Oesterle, trans. Aristotle: On Interpretation. Commentary by St. Thomas
and Cajetan, Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Marquette University Press, 1962.

346
Henrik Lagerlund
[Patterson, 1995] R. Patterson. Aristotle’s Modal Logic:
Essence and Entailment in the
Organon, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[Pironet, 2006] F. Pironet. Sophismata, Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Spring 2006 Edition), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2006/entries/
sophismata/
[Prantl, 1867] C. Prantl. Geschichte der Logic im Abendlande, 3 vols., Leipzig, 1867.
[de Rijk, 1962] L. M. de Rijk. Logica Modernorum. A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic: vol. I; On the Twelfth Century Theories of Fallacy (Wijsgerige teksten en
studies 6), Assen: Van Gorcum, 1962.
[van Rijen, 1989] J. van Rijen. Aspects of Aristotle’s Logic of Modalities (Synthese Historical
Library 35), Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989.
[de Rijk, 1967] L. M. de Rijk. Logica Modernorum. A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic: vol. II, 1-2, The Origin and Early Development of the Theory of Supposition
(Wijsgerige teksten en studies 16), Assen: Van Gorcum, 1967.
[de Rijk, 1982] L. M. de Rijk. The Origins of the Theory of the Properties of Terms, in Kretz-
mann et al. (1982), 161-173, 1982.
[Salmon, 1939] D. Salmon. The Medieval Latin Translations of Alfarabi’s Works, The New
Scholasticism 13: 245-261, 1939.
[Salmon, 1948] D.
Salmon.
Fragments
indits
de
la
logique
d’Alfarabi,
Revue
Sciences
Philosophiques et Theologiques 32: 222-225, 1948.
[Spade, 1973] P. V. Spade. The Origins of the Medieval Insolubilia-Literature, Franciscan Stud-
ies 33: 292-309, 1973.
[Spade, 1994] P. V. Spade, tr. Five Texts on the Mediaeval Problem of Universals: Porphyry,
Boethius, Abelard, Duns Scotus, Ockham, Hackett: Indianapolis/Cambridge, 1994.
[Street, 2004] T. Street. Arabic Logic, in D.M. Gabbay and J. Woods (eds.), Handbook of the
History of Logic, vol. 1, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004.
[Stump, 1978] E. Stump, trans. Boethius De topicis diﬀerentiis, Ithaca:
Cornell University
Press, 1978.
[Stump, 1982] E. Stump. Topics: Their Development and Absorption into Consequences, in
Kretzmann et al. (1982), 273-99, 1982.
[Stump, 1989] E. Stump. Dialectic and Its Place in the Development of Medieval Logic, Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1989.
[Thom, 1996] P. Thom. The Logic of Essentialism: An Interpretation of Aristotle’s Modal Syl-
logistic (Synthese Historical Library 43), Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996.
[Thom, 2004] P. Thom. Medieval Modal Systems, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
[Thom, 2007] P. Thom. Logic and Ontology in the Syllogistic of Robert Kilwardby, Leiden: Brill,
2007.
[Wolfson, 1963] H. Wolfson. Revised Plan for the Publication of a Corpus commentariorum
Averrois in Aristotelem, Speculum 38: 88-104, 1963.

LOGIC AND THEORIES OF MEANING IN
THE LATE 13th AND EARLY 14th CENTURY
INCLUDING THE MODISTAE
Ria van der Lecq
INTRODUCTION
The scope of this chapter is the period between 1270 and 1320, of which Gordon
Leﬀmade the following observation:
“No phase of Scholasticism, certainly in terms of our present knowl-
edge, remains more confused than the events in the decades immedi-
ately each side of the year 1300.”
[Leﬀ, 1976, p. 32]
Obviously, a considerable amount of research has been done since Leﬀwrote these
lines, but it is still not so easy to draw a clear picture of this period. At ﬁrst sight,
the image of what happened just before and after the year 1300 looks more like
a battleﬁeld of competing metaphysical theories than like an orderly development
of the ideas of earlier logicians. The contextual approach of logic seems to be
abandonned and the discussions are dominated by epistemological and ontological
questions. Nevertheless, as I hope to make clear, some of the 14th century inno-
vations cannot be appreciated without the knowledge of the work of the late 13th
and early 14th century philosophers.
Late 13th and early 14th century logic may be characterized by its interest
for grammatical and metalogical problems. Grammar and logic were two of the
traditional seven liberal arts, but the works of the logicians and grammarians in
this period reﬂect an interest in grammar and logic as sciences, rather than as
arts. There was a common opinion that every science has to have an immutable
object, but the texts show a considerable disagreement about the origin, status
and ontological foundation of this object in the science of logic.
In the debates about the meaning of words we see that referential problems were
solved in terms of signiﬁcation rather than supposition. Beside ‘signiﬁcation’ the
key notion was ‘imposition’. The basic function of language is to signify things,
and imposition is the way words acquire their meanings.
This is supposed to
work as follows: a ﬁrst impositor investigates things and their properties and then
decides which sound (vox) should be used to signify that object. When this sound
has been imponed to signify some thing, it becomes a sign and it has acquired
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

348
Ria van der Lecq
signiﬁcation. In principle a word cannot loose its signiﬁcation. However, by the
same imposition it has acquired certain properties (modes of signifying), by which
it can fulﬁll diﬀerent functions in diﬀerent contexts.1
The approaches of logic and semantics in this period are further characterized
by a close connection with epistemology and ontology, to such an extent that some
scholars speak of an ‘epistemological turn’ around 1270.2 The developments were
determined by the growing inﬂuence of the ‘new’ Aristotelian works: Posterior
analytics, Metaphysics and De anima, and also the Arabian philosophers had
their inﬂuence on the philosophical discussions in the 13th century.
In Paris the grammarians of the modistic school (modistae) dominated the
discussions, but many of them also wrote works on logic. Logicians as well as
grammarians were interested in language and meaning, but from a diﬀerent point
of view, as shall be explained below. Their common object was the so-called second
intention. For that reason, the authors that will pass by in this chapter are called
intentionalists as opposed to the terminists of the previous and following periods.
The intentionalists include well-known philosophers as Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274)
and Duns Scotus (d. 1308), but also less known authors as Radulphus Brito (d.
1300), Simon of Faversham (d.
1307), Hervaeus Natalis (d.
1320) and Peter
Aureol (d. 1322). Some of them wrote logical treatises, such as commentaries on
the Organon, logical questions and sophisms, but more often we have to extract
their opinions from theological and epistemological works.
The most striking characteristic of this period is perhaps the fact that the lan-
guage of supposition is virtually absent.3 The focus was on signiﬁcation and modes
of signifying rather than on supposition. When terms of terminist logic appear,
they appear in the framework of the modes of signifying, modes of understanding
and modes of being. There was a terminist tradition at Paris from 1250 up to
1270-54 and a continuous tradition of terminist logic in Oxford,5 but as far as I
can see there were no new developments until the beginning of the 14th century
when Walter Burley wrote his De suppositione. His work will be discussed in one
of the next chapters.
Therefore, I shall leave terminism aside. What I would like to show, however,
is how the discussions about the foundations of logic and semantics paved the way
for the important innovations of the 14th century. In this context, I shall also pay
attention to Roger Bacon’s theory of signs.
I have tried to capture the most important developments by dividing this chap-
ter in two main parts: (1) theories of meaning and (2) the logic of intentions.
The ﬁrst part concentrates on theories concerning the relations between language,
thought and reality; in the second part I shall focus on discussions about the
proper subject of logic.
1Ebbesen [1979, p. 46].
2E.g. De Rijk [2005, 79 ﬀ].
3Pinborg [1979, p. 21].
4De Libera [1968]. Braakhuis [1997, p. 138] argues that the handbooks of the Logica moderna
were being used in preparatory teaching in schools other than universities.
5See Pinborg [1979].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
349
PART I: THEORIES OF MEANING
Names, concepts and things: the semantic triangle
The question ’what does a word signify?’ has puzzled philosophers throughout the
ages. It had been a subject of discussion in the Latin west ever since Boethius
gave his interpretation of the famous passage of Peri hermeneias chapter 1, where
Aristotle gives his view on the relation between language, thought and reality, or
so it seems:
Now spoken sounds are symbols of aﬀections in the soul, and written
marks symbols of spoken sounds. And just as written marks are not
the same for all men, neither are spoken sounds. But what these are
in the ﬁrst place signs of – aﬀections of the soul – are the same for all;
and what these aﬀections are likenesses of – actual things – are also
the same.6
Thus, Aristotle sees written words as signs of spoken words and spoken words as
signs of ‘aﬀections of the soul’. These aﬀections or passions of the soul are the
same for every human being, because they are likenesses of extra-mental things,
which are also the same for everybody. This passage of Aristotle’s has been the
subject of numerous commentaries, ancient as well as modern, and may well be
considered as one of the basic texts in the history of semantics.
Boethius’ ﬁrst important remark concerns the interpretation of the term ‘af-
fections of the soul’.7 Boethius makes it very clear that what Aristotle meant by
an ‘aﬀection of the soul’ is a concept or understanding (intellectus)8. The rela-
tions between word (vox), thing (res) and concept (intellectus) are formulated as
follows: the thing is conceived by the intellectus, the spoken word signiﬁes the con-
ceptions of the soul.9 Thus the relation between concept and thing is a relation of
conceiving, whereas the relation between spoken word and concept is characterized
with the term ‘signify’ (signiﬁcare or elsewhere: designare). The concept seems to
be the only thing that is signiﬁed,10 although this exclusive position of the concept
is moderated by the statement that the intellectus is the primary signiﬁcate of the
noun, the thing (res) being the secondary signiﬁcate. The relationships between
word, thought and object, according to Boethius, can be visualized in a triangle,
the so-called semantic triangle:
6Aristotle, Peri hermeneias, 16a3-8. Transl. Ackrill, in [Ackrill, 1963, p. 43].
7Anicii Manlii Severini Boetii Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Peri Hermeneias, rec. C.
Meiser, pars posterior, secunda editio [Leipzig, 1880].
8Boethius, op.cit., p. 12, line 28. Intellectus is an ambiguous term, like the German term
’Begriﬀ’ or the Dutch ’begrip’. It signiﬁes the act of conceiving as well as the product of that
act.
9Boethius, op.cit., p. 20, lines 17-20.
10Boethius, op.cit. p. 21, lines 4-5.

350
Ria van der Lecq
intellectus (concept/understanding)
res (extra-mental object)
vox (spoken word)
signiﬁcation
conception/likeness
Now, why is it that Aristotle speaks about the aﬀections of the soul as likenesses
of things? Boethius’ answer is that the mind, when it understands, grasps not the
object itself, but an image, i.e.
a likeness of the object.11
The conception is,
as it were, aﬀected by its object, the image of the thing, whereby it becomes
itself a likeness of the thing that is represented by the image.12 In other words,
the intellectus is called an aﬀection of the soul because it is aﬀected, or rather
impressed,13 by the image, so that eventually it bears a resemblance with the
thing in reality.
So far the most important points from Boethius’ commentary. His inﬂuence is
clear in Peter Abelard’s earlier works, but, more than Boethius, Abelard makes his
readers aware of the fact that, beside the concept, there is another candidate for
the role of primary signiﬁcate of a spoken word: it is the extra-mental object itself.
In his view words signify things (res) as well as acts of the intellect (intellectus).
The intellectus is the primary signiﬁcate of the spoken word, whereas the thing
in reality is the secondary signiﬁcate. In reality, however, since something has to
exist before it can be known, the thing is prior to the concept, so that naturally
speaking the signiﬁcation of the thing comes ﬁrst.14 The signiﬁcation of things is
the subject of the Categoriae, whereas the signiﬁcation of concepts is discussed in
the Peri hermeneias.
Abelard gives three reasons why the Peri hermeneias is about the relationship
between words and concepts rather than about the relationship between words
and things. First, in the Peri hermeneias Aristotle makes a distinction between
the parts of a proposition: the noun and the verb. Well, the diﬀerence between a
noun and a verb does not correspond with a distinction between diﬀerent things in
reality. For example, the words ‘driver’ and ‘driving’ signify the same object under
diﬀerent modes of conceiving (modi concipiendi). The second reason why the Peri
hermeneias is about the signiﬁcation of concepts rather than about the signiﬁca-
tion of things is that there are no things signiﬁed by a proposition. A proposition
consists of a noun and a verb, and in the understanding of this proposition the
understandings of the parts are united. Finally, things are transitory, whereas
concepts are permanent, in the sense that the constitution of a concept does not
depend upon the actual existence of the object. Thus, in forming a proposition
11E.g. Boethius, op.cit., p. 35, lines 3-6.
12Boethius, op.cit., p. 35, 6-8.
13Boethius, op.cit., p. 34, 13-4.
14Peter Abelard, Logica ingredientibus, 112,31 - 113,3.

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
351
the mental act is important, not the naming of things.15
Thus, for Abelard the semantic triangle could be drawn as follows:
signiﬁcation1
likeness
thing
intellection
word
signiﬁcation2
Now, Boethius had said that an understanding is empty if there is no thing in
reality of which it is a likeness. In other words, if we are thinking, there must be
something to think about. Our naming and thinking have to have a foundation in
reality. This is no problem with individual names, but the question is: what is the
extra-mental ‘thing’ when a word is a common name, since there are no common
‘things’ in reality. This is the well-known problem of universals, for which Abelard
had an original solution.16
Until the end of the 13th century signiﬁcation is considered to be primarily a
relation between word and concept/species or between spoken word and extra-
mental thing. The common opinion was that words primarily signify concepts and
only secondarily, through the conception of the mind, extra-mental objects, but
the question ‘what does a term signify?’ was always about the spoken word. In
the 14th century, however, the situation seems to have changed. For example,
in Ockham’s opinion the concept (mental term) itself is considered a sign, the
extra-mental thing being its signiﬁcate. The relation between word and thing is
dependent upon the relation between concept and thing: whenever the signiﬁcation
of the mental term changes, the signiﬁcation of the vocal name changes as well.17
This important change (from vocal to mental term as point of departure) has
been prepared by the 13th century Oxford philosophers and grammarians, who
were the ﬁrst to develop an original theory of signs.18 Among these authors the
most important one is Roger Bacon (d. ±1294), an Englishman, but working for
an important part of his life in Paris as an arts teacher.
We shall pay ample
attention to his theory of signs, but ﬁrst we shall have to look at other important
developments in this period.
The younger Thomas Aquinas: Primary signiﬁcation of the species
In his younger years Thomas Aquinas was an advocate of the common opinion, i.e.
words primarily signify concepts and only secondarily, through the conception of
15 op.cit., 308-9.
16See chapter 3, pp. 83–155.
17Ockham, Summa logicae, Opera Philosophica I, p. 8, line 30-35.
18Joel Biard [1989].

352
Ria van der Lecq
the mind, extra-mental objects. In fact, he held this position all his life. But before
the 1260s he seems to identify concept and intelligible species (mental image).
In his commentary on the Sentences Aquinas distinguishes between three kinds
of names.
First, there are names for extra-mental things.
When the intellect
conceives a likeness of an extra-mental thing, for example a stone, the word ‘stone’
signiﬁes that mental image, which is elsewhere called ‘intelligible species’. This
image is not simply a picture of the extra-mental object, but an abstraction: it does
not contain individual features. Second, there are names that signify intentions
like ‘genus’ or ‘species’, with only a remote foundation in reality. Finally, there
are names that signify concepts without foundation in reality, like the concept of
‘chimera’. In the ﬁrst and the third case names signify concepts in their function of
images of existing or non-existing things; in the second case they signify concepts
of concepts.19
The older Thomas Aquinas: Primary signiﬁcation of the concept
In his more mature writings20 Aquinas does not identify intelligible species and
concept any more.21 The concept — or ‘the thing conceived’, also called intentio
intellecta22 — is the essence of the extra-mental object as it is abstracted by our
intellect from the object’s being. For example, the concept ‘man’ is the result
of an abstraction of the essence of a man, leaving his particular existence out
of consideration.23
This concept is signiﬁed by the spoken word ‘man’.
It is
also that which is understood. Individuals cannot be primarily signiﬁed, because
they cannot be primarily understood. Unlike the sensitive faculty of the soul, the
intellective faculty does not have a direct cognition of extra-mental objects: it
understands by virtue of an intelligible species and its object is the concept or
mental word (verbum mentis).
In the scholarly literature there is a discussion about the interpretation of
Aquinas’s mature theory. Some authors state that the mental word (also called
‘intention’) should be identiﬁed with the extra-mental thing insofar as it is un-
derstood; others say that it is a product of the intellect completely distinct from
the extra-mental thing.24 As we shall see below, Duns Scotus seems to refer to
the ﬁrst interpretation: words signify things insofar as they are understood, but
both interpretations have their advocates.25 It should be noted, however, that in
medieval philosophical writings the terms ‘concept’ and ‘intention’ are semanti-
cally ambivalent in the sense that a concept always includes what it intends to
signify.26 Concepts always have a foundation in reality, directly or indirectly. The
19See the paragraph on second intentions in this chapter.
20Especially his commentary on Peri hermeneias, the Summa theologiae and De potentia
21E.g. Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae I.82.2.
22See below, p. 372.
23This is the so-called ‘non-precisive abstraction’. Precisive abstraction is the abstraction of
the form; the result would be the concept ‘humanity’.
24Cf. Pini [1999, p. 49], who speaks of a ‘realistic’ vs. a ‘mentalistic’ interpretation.
25See Pini [1999, pp.49–50] for examples.
26De Rijk [2005, pp. 24-5] and passim.

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
353
intellect grasps extra-mental things through concepts that designate these things,
including their being taken qua conceived of. The thing understood is the thing
understood as well as the thing understood. Thus, concepts have a mental side and
a ‘thing’ side, so that it is not meaningful to speak of a ‘realistic’ vs. a ‘mentalistic’
interpretation in this context.
Grammatica speculativa: the Modists on modes of signiﬁcation
Medieval speculative grammar has its origin in ancient Latin grammar as it has
been transmitted in the works of Donatus (4th century) and Priscian (6th century).
In the early Middle Ages grammar was one of the seven liberal arts, in which the
arts that were organised in the so-called trivium (grammar, logic, rhetoric) took
an important place. Grammatical discussions were inﬂuenced by the logicians,
and in their turn the grammarians played an important role in the emergence of
terminist logic, e.g. in the development of the theory of supposition.
The grammarian of the 12th century was an artist and grammar was an art, but
the situation changed under the inﬂuence of the recovery of the Aristotelian corpus,
especially the Posterior Analytics, with its emphasis on universal and immutable
entities as objects of science. For the grammarians, who wanted to give grammar
the status of a science, it meant that vocal expressions, which diﬀer from one
language to another, could no longer constitute the true objects of grammar. Thus,
grammarians became philosophers speculating about meaning, not the meaning
of individual words, but meaning in general, the semantic component of language,
which was considered a universal feature of language. The scientiﬁc approach to
grammar was accordingly called ‘speculative grammar’.
Around 1270 a new theoretical framework was established, based on the concept
of meaning (signiﬁcatio), or rather the concept of ‘mode of signifying’ (modus
signiﬁcandi); the grammarians who wrote within this theory were accordingly
called ‘Modists’ (modistae). The Modists were mostly Parisian masters, who wrote
not only on grammar, but also on logic and metaphysics. The ﬁrst representatives
are Martin and Boethius of Dacia and their Danish compatriots John and Simon
(all between 1255 and 1270).27 The most important author is perhaps Radulphus
Brito (± 1290), who provided the most comprehensive discussion of speculative
grammar after Boethius of Dacia.28 The last signiﬁcant member of the group was
Thomas of Erfurt (shortly after 1300), whose work is considered the most complete
modistic treatment of grammatical theory available.29
Representing the “second generation of speculative grammar”30, the Modists
codiﬁed and reﬁned the pioneer work of scholars such as Peter Helias, Robert Kil-
wardy and the early Roger Bacon. As a result of their philosophical background,
they believed that there is a structural parallel (although not a one-to-one corre-
spondence) between language, thought and reality. Since reality is the same for
27For more information about these modists and their works, see Rosier, [1983, pp. 18–21].
28Pinborg [1982, p. 256].
29Thomas of Erfurt, Grammatica speculativa, in: Bursill-Hall [1971].
30Bursill-Hall [1972, p. 21].

354
Ria van der Lecq
everyone, they claimed that there has to be one universal grammar with rules that
are independent of any language in which they might be expressed. Not surpris-
ingly, their work has often been compared with Chomsky’s generative grammar.31
Thus, at the end of the 13th century the goal of grammar was no longer to
describe how to write and speak well, but to explain the conditions for correct
discourse in an idealised, perfect language. The Modists stressed the universal deep
structure as opposed to the surface diﬀerences between languages. In their view
grammarians study linguistic expressions, but not in the same way as logicians.
Logicians study propositions as the bearers of truth and falsity. They are interested
in the logical form of sentences and argumentations. Medieval grammarians are
not interested in truth conditions, and not at all in argumentation, but in the
linguistic form (congruitas) of sentences. Grammarians analyse the structure of
language, not its content, although the relation between language, thought and
reality has to be taken into account. The proper object of modistic grammar is
the construction (constructio) of linguistic expressions.32
Modus signiﬁcandi, modus intelligendi, modus essendi
A construction in grammar is a union of two parts of speech33 (e.g. a noun and
a verb, or a noun and an adjective), each of which has its own mode of signifying
(modus signiﬁcandi). Modes of signifying (modi signiﬁcandi) are the principles
of grammar.
According to modistic analysis a word consists of a phonological
component (vox, an articulated sound) and two levels of semantic components.
On the ﬁrst level a vox has a semantic meaning (ratio signiﬁcandi) by which it is
associated with an object or content, and on the second level it has a grammatical
meaning on which the syntactical component depends. This grammatical meaning
is called ratio consigniﬁcandi or modus signiﬁcandi. The semantic meaning turns
a vox into a dictio and is responsible for the relation between a vox and something
outside the mind (res). This ‘object’ outside the mind is not a particular thing,
but a so-called essentia,34 a content not yet determined in a category. It could
be a substance, but also an accident. So, a dictio is not a term in the logical
sense, but something more abstract. Let us take as an example the English word
‘drive’. In modistic terms this would be a manifestation of the dictio driv*, which
includes all occurrences of the words ‘drive’, ‘driver’, ‘driving’, ‘driven’, and their
derivations. And since the Modists use Latin as their model language, it includes
also ﬂexional forms.The dictio is the highest common factor of these words and
word forms.35
For a dictio to become a linguistic expression and a particular
31See e.g. Enders & Pinborg, Introduction to Radulphus Brito, Quaestiones super Priscianum
minorem, [1980, p. 49].
32Rosier [1984, p. 30].
33Radulphus Brito, Quaestiones super Priscianum minorem, qu. 8, 1980.
34Pinborg [1972, p. 113].
35Pinborg [1972, p. 115] proposed to use the term ‘lexeme’ for dictio, in the sense given to
the term by John Lyons. For a discussion on the applicability of this term, see: Marmo [1994,
p. 127].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
355
part of speech, one or more modi signiﬁcandi are necessary, e.g. the modes of
noun, nominative case, singular. The dictio itself does not appear in linguistic
expressions, only its realisation as a particular part of speech. Thus, when the
dictio driv* possesses the modi signiﬁcandi of noun, nominative case and singular,
the word ‘driver’ appears as a part of speech. The process can be stated in the
following manner:
sound (vox) + semantic meaning (ratio signiﬁcandi) > dictio
dictio + grammatical meaning (ratio consigniﬁcandi, modus signiﬁcandi) > part of speech
part of speech + other part of speech > construction
For a construction to be well formed (congruous) it is necessary that the mode of
signifying of one part of speech is compatible with the mode of signifying of the
other part.36 The following example from the English language may help to make
this clearer. For the expression ‘playing children’ to be well-formed, it is necessary
that ‘playing’ possesses the mode of signifying of a participle and ‘children’ the
mode of signifying of a noun (substantive), of number (plural) and of case (nomina-
tive). In the expression ‘playing games’, on the other hand, the mode of signifying
of an accusative case is required. However, for the expression ‘logic matters’ to be
well-formed, there are two possibilities: either ‘logic’ possesses the mode of signi-
fying of a noun and ‘matters’ the mode of signifying of a verb, or ‘logic’ possesses
the mode of signifying of an adjective and ‘matters’ that of a noun. The diﬀerence
between the two interpretations can be visualized as follows: ‘logic <- matters’ and
‘logic -> matters’ respectively, the arrows denoting the so-called dependency. A
grammatical construction will only be perfect, if its parts match not only syntac-
tically, but also semantically. The expression ‘crying toothbrushes’, for example,
would be syntactically well-formed (congruous) according to the grammar check of
my computer, but in most cases we would agree that it is not well-formed semanti-
cally,37 because the expression doesn’t make sense, except perhaps metaphorically
or in sentences like ‘I was dreaming of crying toothbrushes’. Nevertheless, the
grammarians were primarily concerned with congruity of speech, not with truth.
What mattered was the way reality was described, not reality itself,38 but they
needed to take the structure of reality into account, if only as a warrant for the
scientiﬁc and universal status of their doctrine. Therefore, the modes of signify-
ing (modi signiﬁcandi) had to have an ontological counterpart, which the Modists
called: the modes of being (modi essendi). Furthermore, since the modes of being
cannot be signiﬁed without being understood, the Modists also needed a mental
counterpart: the modes of understanding or conceiving (modi intelligendi).
The modes of being were considered accidental properties of the objects outside
the mind. The intellect knows the objects through these accidental properties. In
36Radulphus Brito [op.cit., qu. 12] speaks of “proportion and similitude” being required for a
construction.
37According to Thomas of Erfurt [c. 53, Bursill-Hall, 1972, p. 309], the expression cappa nigra
(white hood) is congruous and proper, and a construction such as cappa categorica (categorical
hood) is improper but congruous.
38Pinborg [1982, p. 261].

356
Ria van der Lecq
other words, the accidental properties give rise to our concepts: the modi intelli-
gendi (modes of understanding). Thus, the modi signiﬁcandi correspond with the
modi intelligendi and through these they ﬁnd their foundation in the reality of the
modi essendi, according to the following triangle,39 which, of course, mirrors the
semantic triangle on p. 351 above:
modus intelligendi
modus signiﬁcandi
modus essendi
(accidental property)
The triangle reﬂects a parallel between semantics and epistemology: the ac-
cidental properties (as distinct from the substantial form) of an object are the
basis of our knowledge of the essence of that object, and words (co)signify objects
through concepts.
The mode of being (modus essendi) is the property of the thing considered
absolutely, i.e. without any consideration of the way it is signiﬁed or understood.
However, because objects can be understood and signiﬁed, the mode of being
is materially the same as the passive mode of understanding (modus intelligendi
passivus) and the passive mode of signifying (modus signiﬁcandi passivus).40 There
is, of course, a formal diﬀerence: the passive mode of understanding (the mode
of being understood) is that same accidental property as understood by the mind
and the passive mode of signifying (the mode of being signiﬁed) is that property
as signiﬁed by the vox.41
It is the same accidental property, in three diﬀerent
forms. On the active level, the modes diﬀer also materially.42 The active mode
of understanding (modus intelligendi activus) is a property of the intellect, the
ability to understand; the active mode of signifying (modus signiﬁcandi activus)
is a property of the vox, the ability to signify.
The active mode of signifying is the fundamental element in grammar.43 Every
part of speech has its own modes of signifying, which are derived eventually from
the modes of being of the object. The noun ‘man’, for example, has a mode of
signifying corresponding to the mode of being human, as well as modes of signifying
derived from the mode of being an autonomous entity and the mode of being
predicable of diﬀerent individuals.44 The modes of being (the accidental properties
of the object) give rise to concepts such as ‘man’, ‘substance’ and ‘species’. So,
39Marmo [1994, p. 144].
40Radulphus Brito, [op.cit., qu. 18].
41Bursill-Hall [1971, p. 91].
42Radulphus Brito, [op.cit., qu. 19].
43Thomas of Erfurt, Grammatica speculativa, c. vii [Bursill-Hall, 1972, p. 148].
44Pinborg [1982, p. 263].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
357
the modes of signifying are derived from the modes of being in their function of
passive modes of understanding, i.e. as they have been understood by the mind.45
As soon as a concept (i.e. an active mode of understanding) has been formed, it
can be expressed by a articulated sound (vox) in the form of an active mode of
signifying. As a result, the grammatical signiﬁcation takes place and the part of
speech is produced.46
Notwithstanding their close relationship to the objects in reality, the modes
of signifying only reﬂect our way of imagining such objects, so that they may
denote non-existent objects, like blindness or darkness,47 as well.
A mode of
signifying need not have an ontological counterpart, as long as the object is not
inconceivable.48
Now we need to explain how the Modists take account of semantic signiﬁcation.
A word like ‘woman’, for example, not only has various modes of signifying, like
the mode of having a stable disposition (modus habitus, which makes it a noun),
the mode of independence (which makes it a substantive noun) and the mode of
singularity (which makes it a singular substantive noun), it also has a semantic
content. Modes of signifying are derived from the accidental properties of the ob-
ject, but the semantic content of the word is derived from the object itself. Thus,
we have two parallel operations: one starting from an accidental property of an
object and the sound (vox), resulting in a part of speech with an active mode of
signifying, and another starting from the object itself and the sound, resulting in
a vocal sign or dictio with signiﬁcation in the classical, Aristotelian sense. Gram-
matical and semantic signiﬁcation is united in a linguistic unity, e.g. ‘woman’.
Co-signifying the properties of rest, independence and singularity, ‘woman’ signi-
ﬁes an extra-mental woman, or in other words, ‘woman’ signiﬁes its extra-mental
object under the mode of rest, independence and singularity.49
The question remains how words acquire the meaning they have. According
to the Parisian masters of the end of the 13th century the meaning of a word
depends on the imposition. When a word has been imposed to signify something
– some masters think that this has been done by a person: the impositor – it
cannot stop to signify that particular object, since the imposition concerns the
common nature of the object, which was thought to be eternal. This becomes
a problem in expressions like ‘dead man’, since ‘man’ signiﬁes a living being.
Consequently, the expression would contain a contradiction.
In order to avoid
this consequence, a distinction between primary and secondary signiﬁcation was
introduced. The distinction concerns so called ‘analogical’ terms, one of which is
‘man’. The primary signiﬁcate of this term is man; the secondary signiﬁcate is
corpse. When it stands in isolation, ‘man’ signiﬁes just one signiﬁcate, but when
an adjunct is added whose sense is incompatible with the primary signiﬁcate, the
45Bursill-Hall [1971, p. 92[.
46Bursill-Hall [1971, p. 103].
47These terms denote a so-called privation. See: Radulphus Brito, op.cit., qu. 21, 165.
48Pinborg [1982, p. 263].
49Rosier [1983, pp. 53–5].

358
Ria van der Lecq
term represents the secondary signiﬁcate only. In this way the theory of imposition
was saved.50
It should be noted that earlier and later philosophers found the solution of
problems like this in the theory of supposition. The Modists, however, neglected
the terminist approach, probably because their main interest was in statements
about eternal entities and their essential properties, whereas supposition theory
was useful and interesting for the analysis of propositions about contingent objects
and states of aﬀairs.51
Modistic grammatical theory results from a complete interdependence between
the structure of reality and the operations of the mind. The Modists, as mod-
erate realists, assumed that reality had a deﬁnite structure that was mirrored
in cognition and in language. Nominalists like Ockham and Buridan rejected the
framework of the theory because it confuses linguistic distinctions with real ones.52
Nevertheless, the importance of the modistic approach has often been recognised,53
if only because of the fact that modistic grammar was the ﬁrst serious attempt to
treat linguistics as a science. The foundation of grammar in reality was one of the
consequences of their Aristotelian concept of science. As such it is “an expression
of the intellectual climate which produced it.”54
Primary signiﬁcation of the thing: Roger Bacon on signs
The life of Roger Bacon (ca. 1214–1292) covered a large part of the 13th century.
Born in England and having studied in Oxford, he began his career as an arts
teacher at the University of Paris in the early 1240s. In this period he wrote works
on metaphysics, natural philosophy and grammar.
In one of these works, the
Sumule dialectices (ca. 1250), Bacon proposes that as such names are names only
of presently existing entities, a claim which is not considered a common opinion.55
Although Roger Bacon shows some familiarity with modistic grammatical theories,
he does not apply the concept of modus signiﬁcandi in the same way, not even in
his grammatical work. He also seems to be acquainted with terminist logic, but
the terminist notions do not have a central place in his work.56
In 1262 he wrote a remarkable piece of work: De multiplicatione specierum,
and in the years 1267-1270 he developed a theoretical framework for language
studies, a theory of signs, partly adapted from Augustine’s doctrine in De doctrina
christiana, but nevertheless original in its presentation. This theory appears for
the ﬁrst time in the treatise De signis57 (ca. 1267) and is best known from his
50For a full account of this problem, see Ebbesen (1979), 43–70.
51Ebbesen [1983, pp. 73–4].
52Pinborg [1982, p. 257].
53See e.g.: [Bursill-Hall, 1972, p. 26; Rosier, 1983, pp. 202–3; Covington, 1984, pp. 126–32].
54Bursill-Hall [1971, p. 36].
55Maloney [1988, p. 3].
56Biard [1989, pp. 29–30].
57Edited by Fredborg et al., [1978].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
359
Compendium studii theologiae (1292),58 his last, uncompleted, work. Especially
the last two treatises justify a treatment of Roger Bacon’s semantics in a chapter
on logic and theories of meaning in the late 13th century.
Signiﬁcation is usually treated as a property of words or concepts.
Bacon,
however, places the signiﬁcation of words in a broader context of a theory of
signs. In De signis as well as in the Compendium59 Bacon gives a classiﬁcation of
signs. In the Compendium he claims that it is original, although he admits that
Augustine has a similar classiﬁcation in De doctrina christiana.60 A sign, he says
in De signis, is “that which once presented to a sense faculty or intellect designates
something to that intellect.”61 This deﬁnition is similar to Augustine’s except for
the fact that Bacon’s deﬁnition allows for the case where something imperceptible
by a sensory faculty is a sign, whereas Augustine’s deﬁnition refers to sensible
signs only: “For a sign is a thing which of itself makes something other come into
thought beside the impression it makes upon the senses.” Bacon defends his choice
for a broader notion by referring to Aristotle who says that passions of the soul
(mental presentations) are signs of the things outside the mind.62
According to Bacon, a sign is either (1) natural or (2) given by a living being
(data ab anima). (1) Natural signs occur in various modes, depending on the kind
of relationship between sign and signiﬁcate. For example, in the (1.1) inference
‘she has milk; therefore she has given birth’, there is a (1.1.1) necessary relationship
between sign (having milk) and signiﬁcate (having given birth). Likewise, dawn is
a natural sign of imminent sunrise through necessary inference. In other cases, for
example in ‘the ground is wet; therefore it has rained’ there is a (1.1.2) probable
relationship between sign and signiﬁcate. In yet another sense, a footprint in the
snow is also a natural sign: it signiﬁes the person whose it is.63 This kind of sign
is (1.2) an expression of likeness. In this mode all artefacts are signs of art in the
mind of the artist.
(2) Signs that are given by living creatures (data ab anima) are divided into
two sub-modes: they can signify (2.1) naturally, e.g. in the sense that crying is a
sign of grief, but they can also signify (2.2) conventionally (ad placitum, litt.: at
pleasure), as is the case with spoken and written words, gestures of the deaf and
signs of monks. Other examples we could think of are traﬃc signs and the signs
of the conductor of an orchestra. This completes Bacon’s division of signs in the
ﬁrst chapter of the Compendium.
Bacon is aware of the equivocity of the term ‘natural’ in his classiﬁcation. The
ﬁrst sense is related to ‘nature’ as opposed to ‘intellect’. Bacon refers to Aristotle’s
Physics for this distinction.64 In the second sense, ‘natural’ means ‘arising from the
58Edited and translated by Thomas Maloney [1988]. See for more information about Roger
Bacon’s life and works Maloney’s introduction to this work.
59Compendium [25].
60Rosier [1997, p. 94] argues that this originality claim is improbable.
61De signis (2), ed. Fredborg et al., p. 82
62Peri hermeneias, 16a3-8.
63See for the sources of these examples: Marmo [1997, p. 145 ﬀ].
64De signis (12).

360
Ria van der Lecq
nature of a species’. Natural signs in this sense come from living creatures (men
and animals) but “without purposeful deliberation.”65 No inference is required
to see the relation between sign and signiﬁcate. Bacon argues that non-human
animals may well act by intent in making certain vocal sounds that are signs,
but they do this from a kind of natural instinct. Only the human intellect can
employ signs intentionally with deliberation. The rational soul itself establishes a
relation between a sign and what is signiﬁed. In this way, language becomes a set
of arbitrary symbols.66
But now the question arises: what exactly does a word signify?
According
to Boethius and other commentators on Aristotle’s Peri hermeneias, a spoken
word signiﬁes primarily a concept in the mind and secondarily the corresponding
object in reality.67 The signiﬁcation of words is conventional (ad placitum) and
established by imposition, i.e. an act by which a name is applied to an object for
the ﬁrst time and by intent. Concepts, according to this interpretation of Aristotle,
are natural signs or likenesses of things in reality. Names signify things only by
way of the concepts of the things. The process of naming parallels the process
of intellection. This was the dominant view on the relation between language,
thought and reality in Bacon’s time. Bacon, however, rejects this idea without
hesitation.
According to him “. . .
a vocal sound imposed to signify a thing
outside a mind signiﬁes only that thing by reason of the imposition.”68 In other
words, names are invented to signify extra-mental things and for that reason they
primarily signify those things. They do also signify species and cognitive habits,
but only as a natural consequence of their being imposed to signify the extra-
mental object, inasmuch as a thing cannot be understood without them.69 When
we use a word to (conventionally) signify a mental species (concept), there must
be a second imposition, this time on the species, and the new word will signify
only equivocally.70
Therefore, words are natural signs of species according to
the ﬁrst mode of natural signs mentioned above, because there is a necessary
relationship between sign (word) and signiﬁcate (species): whenever there is a
word, there is also a species. Words are conventional signs of extra-mental things
and occasionally and equivocally of mental species, if the names are chosen by
intent to signify those objects.
In the foregoing account of spoken words as natural signs, the word ‘species’
occurred several times, but with diﬀerent meanings. In Bacon’s view a spoken word
necessarily generates a kind of image (species vocis) in the mind of the speaker.71
But at the same time the extra-mental object to which the word refers generates a
species of itself (species rei) in the mind of the speaker. Both species are natural
signiﬁcates of the same spoken word, but as a sound it naturally signiﬁes the
65Compendium [35].
66Maloney [1983, p. 190].
67See above, p. 349.
68Compendium [59], transl. Maloney.
69Compendium [60].
70Compendium [62].
71De signis II.1 (18).

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
361
species vocis and as a name it naturally signiﬁes the species rei. It conventionally
signiﬁes the extra-mental thing.
Thus, in Bacon’s view, the relationship between a name and what it names
exists as a result of the deliberating free choice of the name giver.
When we
give the name ‘man’ to an existing man, this name can be univocally used for all
existing men, but not for the concept or species ‘man’ in our mind. The main
reason Bacon gives for this opinion is that a word’s signiﬁcation of the concept
is not a question of free choice.
The relation between name and concept is a
necessary one, since we cannot name an object before we know it.72 However,
there may be another reason why Bacon so clearly deviates from the common
opinion, although he never expressly makes the point in either the Compendium
or De signis. He could have drawn an argument from his Neo-Platonist theory of
the multiplication of species. According to that theory all objects produce species
(images, likenesses) of themselves in the air. When such a species reaches the eye
it has been multiplied several times and with every multiplication it has lost some
of its intensity, as is the case with the light that comes from the sun. As a result,
the species in our intellect is an incomplete image of the object of which it is a
likeness. Consequently, it has incomplete being, according to Bacon. Since names
are imposed upon objects in complete being (in esse completo), the species of
man cannot be named ‘man’ in the same sense as the object in complete being is
a man, and the same account holds for an embryo in the mother’s womb. In fact,
Bacon argues, the nobler the things are, the more incomplete are their species.73
The reason that, nonetheless, we have a rather accurate knowledge of things is
that our knowledge is mainly knowledge of universals. Now, in Bacon’s realistic
ontology universals are real parts of the nature of individuals. Thus, when we see
an individual, “the universal species is repeated in the medium and sense and the
intellect when it comes with the species of each singular; and thus it is ﬁxed in
the soul more powerfully than is the species of any singular.”74 Therefore, the
universal species, which is the concept, of man is a reliable medium of knowledge,
but not the right candidate for the name ‘man’ that has been imposed on the
individual man in complete being.
When a name has been imposed upon a being, it signiﬁes that being by con-
vention, but it also signiﬁes things that ‘follow’ from it, but this is an implied
or secondary meaning that naturally and necessarily accompanies the conven-
tional meaning.75 In the Compendium (chapter III) Bacon speaks about things
co-understood or connoted in this context. The number of things connoted is inﬁ-
nite and in De signis he shows his enthusiasm about this phenomenon by saying:
“And to consider this is of wondrous usefulness and beauty.”76
Thus, according to Bacon, the name ‘man’ signiﬁes existing men only, but what
72Cf. Maloney [1983, p. 210].
73De multiplicatione specierum, Pars I, cap. 1, ed. Lindberg, p. 10.
74De multiplicatione specierum, Pars I, cap. 2, transl. Lindberg, p. 43.
75De signis [102–104].
76De signis [103].

362
Ria van der Lecq
about men in the past and future? Terminist logicians introduced the concept of
ampliation and restriction (of supposition) to account for this phenomenon, but
Bacon rejects this approach.77 Ampliation and restriction are caused by the human
intellect and, therefore, the result is equivocation. He argues that a name cannot
signify anything univocally common to an entity and a nonentity, whether present,
past, or future.78 Likewise, the name ‘man’ does not signify univocally a living
man and a dead man. When we talk about a dead man, we are in fact renewing
the imposition of the name ‘man’ during use, perhaps even without noticing it.
If the object signiﬁed perishes, the word looses its original meaning and a new
imposition is required.
By this secondary imposition the word acquires a new
meaning.79
The works of Roger Bacon contain a remarkable theory of signs and an original
view on the relation between language, thought and reality. Central in his theory
is the role of the speaker, who freely has words at his disposal and is constantly
renewing the signiﬁcation of the words he uses. He does not use the methods and
concepts of the terminist logicians of the earlier part of the thirteenth century, who
take signiﬁcation for granted. On the contrary, Roger Bacon takes signiﬁcation
of words as an object of reﬂection, embedded in a larger theory of signs.
His
theory of signiﬁcation shows that signiﬁcation and supposition cannot “walk hand
in hand”.80
Although Roger Bacon was quite unique in defending existing objects as the
only signiﬁcates of spoken words, his reﬂection on the role of words as signs ﬁts
very well in a tendency towards analysing the concept of signiﬁcation. This ten-
dency is dominant in Paris, but can also be seen in the work of two of Bacon’s
English contemporaries: Ps.-Kilwardby and John Duns Scotus. Both authors did
not conﬁne themselves to explaining the relations between language, thought and
reality; they also reﬂected on the various ways in which words signify.
In a work entitled “The Commentary on Priscianus Maior”, that was tradi-
tionally but unjustly ascribed to Robert Kilwardby, the author gives a general
deﬁnition of a sign, inspired by Augustin, underlining its sensible aspect, but at
the same time he adheres to Aristotle’s deﬁnition of words in Peri hermeneias:
words are conventional signs of passions in the soul, representing those passions.
According to the author, words are objects of a science insofar as they imply
an intellection. The intellection is the form of the signiﬁcation, the word is its
matter.81 This approach makes it possible to give the study of signs a scientiﬁc
character, since now signiﬁcation is studied as a property of signs in general, not
of a particular sign.
77De signis [89–99].
78Compendium [88].
79For the Bacon’s primary interest in imposition rather than in supposition, see: Fredborg
[1981, pp. 172–3]. Cf. also Biard [1989, p. 41], and Ebbesen [1979, p. 53].
80Ebbesen [1979, p. 47].
81Biard [1979, pp. 44–5].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
363
Duns Scotus on signiﬁcation and understanding
John Duns Scotus (1266–1308) never wrote a handbook on logic or grammar.
Nevertheless, he played an important role in the debates about the semantic issues
of his time.82 The modes of signifying play an important role in his semantics, but
he cannot be considered a Modist himself, because he does not defend the modistic
thesis that there is a strict correspondence between the modes of signifying, modes
of being and modes of understanding.83
In his Peri hermeneias commentary, probably written in Paris in the 1290s,
Scotus gives an overview of the competing opinions regarding the relationships
between the three angular points of the semantic triangle. He distinguishes two
opinions:84 one opinion holds that a (spoken) name signiﬁes an intelligible species
primarily and an extra-mental thing secondarily; the other opinion holds that a
name primarily signiﬁes a thing as understood.85 Both opinions hold that we need
an intelligible species in understanding extra-mental things, but only in the ﬁrst
opinion the species also plays a role in the signiﬁcation of names. But how should
this role be described in the ﬁrst opinion? Scotus explains that the intelligible
species is not in itself, as mental entity, the object of signiﬁcation. It is in its role
of representation or mental sign of the extra-mental object (signum rei) that the
species is primarily signiﬁed, in the same way as a photograph of my grandmother
represents my grandmother and is signiﬁed by the name ‘grandmother’ when I
show someone this picture and say: “this is my grandmother”. The primary signi-
ﬁcate would be my grandmother as she appears on the photograph; the secondary
signiﬁcate would my grandmother herself, but since she died long ago, there is no
secondary signiﬁcate in this case. This example shows that in this opinion the
signiﬁcation of names like ‘chimera’ (the so-called empty names) is no problem.
The name simply signiﬁes the content of the intelligible species. It is not necessary
for a thing to exist in order to be signiﬁed. This opinion can be regarded as the
dominant position until the 1260’s and can be found in the work of Albert the
Great and the younger Thomas Aquinas, be it in a less elaborated form.86 Roger
Bacon opposes this view in his works on signs.
Scotus mentions an interesting objection the supporters of the theory of the
primary signiﬁcation of the species have to face. If names primarily signify species,
a proposition like ‘man is an animal’ is always false, for the intelligible species of
man is not the same as the intelligible species of animal. Now, Scotus makes clear
that the notions ‘truth’ and ‘falsity’ imply a reference to the extra-mental world.
The subject and predicate term of a proposition do not signify the corresponding
intelligible species in itself as signs, but that of which the species are signs.87
82The question of his originality has been the subject of debate among scholars. See esp. Pini
[1999] and [2001] and Perler [1993] and [2003].
83Perler [2003, p. 173].
84For a detailed account of the two positions, see: Pini [1999].
85See also Vos [2006, pp. 159–160].
86See: Pini [1999, pp. 35–9].
87Super Peri herm. 1.2, n. 2-6.

364
Ria van der Lecq
The second opinion mentioned by Scotus holds that a name signiﬁes the thing
insofar as it is understood, i.e.
the thing itself insofar as it is present to our
intellect, as a concept produced by our intellect.88 In this view the intelligible
species is not that which is understood, but that in virtue of which the extra-
mental thing is known to the intellect. The concept signiﬁed is not the intelligible
species, but the essence of the extra-mental thing. This is the object as stripped
from its individual features. The thing as individual cannot be primarily signiﬁed,
because it cannot be primarily understood by the intellect.89 As we have seen, the
later Aquinas defended this position. It has no problems with non-existing objects
either. When a thing ceases to exist, there is still its essence: the thing as far as
it is understood. The signiﬁcation of a word remains the same, no matter what
happens to the extra-mental object.90
At ﬁrst sight the diﬀerence between the two opinions is not very big. In the
ﬁrst opinion names signify species in their representational function and the second
opinion holds that names signify concepts produced by the intellect. Neither of
the two implies that names signify species as mental entities or things as they
are something in itself.
There is, however, an important ontological diﬀerence
between the two opinions. An intelligible species, whether it is considered as a
mental entity or as a representation of an extra-mental object, is a real quality of
the soul caused by the object, whereas the thing insofar as it is understood, at
least in the opinion of Scotus and the later Aquinas, is an intention, which has, in
Scotus’ view, diminished (i.e. not real) and objective being.91 Thus, in the second
opinion understanding as well as signifying is an intentional act of the intellect.
This opinion would correspond very well with the epistemology of Duns Scotus.
Nevertheless, Scotus does not commit himself to the theory of the primary
signiﬁcation of things understood.92 In his commentary on the Sentences he even
objects to the identiﬁcation of concepts with things as understood, on which that
theory is based. In this work, which is of a later date than the Peri hermenieas
commentary, he proposes a new version of the theory, according to which concepts
are acts of the intellect and not to be identiﬁed with things signiﬁed.93 Spoken
words signify extra-mental things immediately, as do written signs and concepts.
So, spoken words, written words and concepts are all directly related to signiﬁed
reality. This is a rather remarkable opinion, because it implies that the parallelism
between signifying and understanding, an essential feature of the theory of the
primary signiﬁcation of the thing as understood, does not hold. This is indeed
what Scotus concludes:
88Elsewhere Scotus calls this concept a ﬁrst intention (see below, p. 381).
89In an act of intuition the intellect can only know the existence of an individual, not its
essence.
90All the relevant texts can be found in Scotus’ commentary on the Peri hermeneias and
quoted in Pini [1999] and [2001].
91See below, p. 380.
92This paragraph is based on Pini’s interpretation in Pini [2001]. Cf. also Perler [2003, pp.
178–182]. For other interpretations, see Vos [2006, pp. 157–168].
93Ordinatio I 27, 83. See Vos [2006, p. 164].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
365
It can be brieﬂy said to the question that the contention common to
many opinions, i.e.
that ‘as something is understood, so it is also
named’, is false if this is understood precisely, because something can
be signiﬁed more distinctively than it is understood.94
From this passage it is clear that, according to Scotus, naming and understanding
do not always correspond to each other. We can name an object without having
a precise understanding of it. What a name signiﬁes is to a considerable extent
dependent upon the intention of the speaker.
It does not mean that speaking
occurs without understanding, but a speaker may successfully refer to an object,
even if his understanding of this object is incorrect or vague.
With his theory of immediate signiﬁcation of the thing Scotus was the ﬁrst to
reject the parallelism between understanding and signifying, which makes the con-
clusion justiﬁed that he made an original contribution in the history of semantics.95
In fact, he can be seen to have found a way to account for the distinction between
meaning and reference, in the sense that meaning has to do with understanding
and reference with naming. Shortly after he died, philosophers like Ockham and
Buridan showed that supposition taken as a property of mental terms is a much
better tool to solve referential problems.96
Concrete and abstract terms
In the previous paragraphs I have examined the various answers to the question
‘what does a name signify’?, where the names considered were concrete general
terms, like ‘man’ and ‘animal’. But in the late 13th century many authors had a
particular interest in the semantic function of other terms, such as abstract essen-
tial terms (for example ‘humanity’), and abstract accidental terms (for example
‘whiteness’). I shall discuss the headlines of the modistic approach to this subject
in the second part of this chapter when we speak about terms of second intention,
but here I shall pay attention to Scotus’ view.97 Scotus’ rejection of the paral-
lel between signifying and understanding and the acceptance of signiﬁcation as a
direct relation between word and thing could easily lead to a theory of strict cor-
respondence between language and reality, so that for example the concrete term
‘white’ and the abstract term ‘whiteness’ signify numerically diﬀerent things. Sco-
tus’ account of concrete and abstract terms shows that this can be avoided. In
short, his opinion is that the concrete term ‘white’ and the abstract term ‘white-
ness’ signify the same white thing, but in diﬀerent ways (modes of signifying).98
94Duns Scotus, Ordinatio I, d. 22, q. un., n. 4. Cited from Pini [2001, p. 39] in his translation.
95Pini [2001, p. 51].
96Marmo [1983, pp. 170–4] shows that there are some aﬃnities between Scotus’ terminology
and that of the Oxford tradition of the theory of supposition.
97For a thorough discussion of the modistic approach, see: Ebbesen [1988].
98Rep. Par. IV, d. 12, q.1, n. 10, In Praed., q. 8. Marmo [1983, n. 47], notices that Scotus’
deﬁnition of modi signiﬁcandi is diﬀerent from the Modists’s. For Scotus their only function is
the regulation of the well-formation (congruitas) of propositions. I can add that this use of modi
signiﬁcandi is common even in the fourteenth century, e.g. in the work of John Buridan.

366
Ria van der Lecq
Both refer to the same form, nature or essence of the colour white under diﬀerent
aspects. The abstract term ‘whiteness’ signiﬁes the nature on its own (sub propria
ratione i.e. qua colour) and the concrete term ‘white’ signiﬁes the nature insofar
as it ‘informs’ the subject, but at the same time it connotes (or co-signiﬁes) the
object in which whiteness inheres. In the same way, ‘humanity’ signiﬁes human
nature qua human nature, and ‘man’ signiﬁes human nature in its contraction to
an individual and at the same time it connotes that individual.99
Because of the diﬀerent ways of signifying of concrete and abstract terms one
cannot simply substitute one term for the other in a proposition. The proposition
‘Socrates is white’ is well formed and possibly true, but the proposition ‘Socrates
is whiteness’ is not. ‘Whiteness is a colour’, on the other hand, would be perfectly
well formed and true, even if no white object would exist.
Since ‘white’ in ‘Socrates is white’ signiﬁes the nature whiteness as it inheres in
the subject, Scotus has to defend an inherence theory of predication, which means
that a proposition is true if and only if the accident (such as whiteness) signiﬁed
by the predicate term (such as ‘white’) inheres in the object referred to by the
subject term (substratum).100
Scotus’ semantic distinction between a concrete term and its abstract counter-
part reﬂects an ontological distinction between a formality in its absoluteness and
its accidental or essential inherence. This theory of concrete and abstract names
shows that Scotus did not reject the parallel between language and reality.
Equivocation and analogy
A special problem in medieval semantics was the signiﬁcation of equivocal terms,101
but in order to make this clear we have to start at the beginning. Medieval dis-
cussions on analogy and equivocation go back to Boethius’ translation and in-
terpretation of the opening words of Aristotle’s Categories, where Aristotle had
made a distinction between equivocal terms and univocal terms. An equivocal
term is a name like ‘man’ referring to both a man and a picture of that man; an
example of a univocal term is ‘animal’ as a name for both a man and an ox.102
An equivocal term signiﬁes two concepts, whereas a univocal term is associated
with one concept or nature. Boethius subdivided equivocals into two main groups:
chance equivocals (aequivoca a casu) and deliberate equivocals (aequivoca a con-
silio). Chance equivocals are not interesting or problematic from a semantic point
of view: the concepts signiﬁed are totally unrelated. The debates concern the de-
liberate equivocals. Boethius divides these in four groups, according to the cause of
99 In Praed. q. 8. See also: Marmo [1983, pp. 165–8].
100Perler [2003, p. 173].
101There is an enormous amount of literature on this topic. For this paragraph I rely mainly
upon Ashworth [1991; 1992; 1996]. Other important publications on the theme can be found in
her footnotes.
102Aristotle, Categories, 1a1-8: “When things have a name in common but are diﬀerent beings
(ousiai), they are called equivocals. Thus, for example, both a man and a picture are animals
[. . . ] When things have a name in common and their being is the same, they are called univocals.
Thus, for example, both a man and an ox are animals.”

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
367
the equivocation: (1) resemblance (similitudo), (2) proportion (proportio, Greek:
analogia), (3) “of one origin” (ab uno) and (4) “in relation to one <term>” (ad
unum). Boethius’ example of a term that falls within the second group is ‘princi-
ple’ (principium), which designates unity in relation to number or point in relation
to line.103 This example shows that analogia in the Aristotelian sense refers to a
similarity of two proportions involving at least four items. In the thirteenth cen-
tury, however, what came to be called analogia (Latin: proportio) covered what
Aristotle called pros hen equivocation, which corresponds to the last two items in
Boethius’ division, with the result that the term ‘analogia’ became ambiguous.104
In the ﬁrst sense the analogy consists in a comparison of two proportions (as in:
A is to B as C is to D). Late 13th-century logicians do not seem to be interested in
this kind of analogy, also called ‘analogy of proportionality’.105 The focus is solely
on the second kind of analogy, or ‘analogy of proportion’, that occurs when one
term signiﬁes two or more objects in a prior and a posterior way (secundum prius
et posterius) and according to attribution (secundum attributionem), because of a
relationship between the primary and secondary signiﬁcate.106
Another framework for discussion was Aristotle’s De sophisticis elenchis, espe-
cially the passage where he distinguishes between three modes of equivocation and
amphiboly: “(1) When either the expression or the name has strictly more than
one meaning (. . . ); (2) when by custom we use them so; (3) when words that have
a simple sense taken alone have more than one meaning in combination.”107 In
one of the logical handbooks that were used in the thirteenth century, Peter of
Spain’s Tractatus,108 Aristotle’s division is interpreted as follows:
1. the ﬁrst mode of equivocation occurs when one word signiﬁes several things,
for example ‘dog’ signifying a barking animal, a marine animal and a con-
stellation of stars,
2. the second mode occurs when one word signiﬁes one thing primarily and
another secondarily (secundum prius et posterius), for example ‘healthy’ can
be said of a person and in a derivative way of urine,
3. the third mode occurs when a word has several consigniﬁcations. In this case,
the noun or expression signiﬁes several things in a context, isolated however,
only one. The standard example of the third mode of equivocation is that of
laborans, as it appears in the syllogism: “Whoever was being cured is healthy,
the suﬀerer (laborans) was being cured; therefore the suﬀerer is healthy.” A
standard example of the third mode of amphiboly is: “The bishops (episcopi)
are priests, these asses are the bishop’s (episcopi); therefore these asses are
priests.” In Peter’s view the deﬁnition of equivocation applies more in the
103For references, see Ashworth [1996, pp. 234–6].
104Ashworth [1991, p. 41] and [1996, p. 236].
105Thomas Aquinas, De veritate, qu. 2, a. 11.
106Ashworth [1996, p. 237].
107166a15-20.
108Peter of Spain, Tractatus VII, De fallaciis, [ed. De Rijk, pp. 99–104].

368
Ria van der Lecq
ﬁrst mode than in the second, and more in the ﬁrst two modes than in the
third, because in the third mode the diversity concerns the consigniﬁcations
or modes of signifying (modi signiﬁcandi) of one signiﬁcate, whereas in the
ﬁrst two modes there are several signiﬁcates involved.109
Now, it should be noted that the notion of consigniﬁcation (consigniﬁcatio) was
used in at least three contexts.110 First, it was said that syncategorematic terms,
like ‘every’, ‘all’, ‘both’, ‘only’ and many others,111 don’t have signiﬁcation, but
only consigniﬁcation. Second, verbs were said to consignify time. Third, in gram-
matical discussions (see above, p.
355) ‘consigniﬁcation’ was another term for
mode of signifying. Essential modes of signifying included noun, verb or adjective;
accidental modes were such features as case, number, and gender. The laborans
syllogism is an example of equivocation caused by consigniﬁcation of time, and
in the episcopi syllogism the cause of equivocation is consigniﬁcation of case. An
important distinction between the two is that, according to many authors, con-
signiﬁcation of time could not be inﬂuenced by context, whereas consigniﬁcation
of case could. Many 13th-century logicians believed that the signiﬁcation of words
and many of its modes of signifying were ﬁxed by imposition, which means that
they cannot be altered by context or speaker intention.112
From the discussion in a treatise called Summe metenses, ascribed to Nicholas
of Paris and dated around 1250, it becomes clear that analogical terms are said
to be equivocal in the second sense of equivocation mentioned by Peter of Spain.
For example, being (ens) is ﬁrst (per prius) said of substance, and afterwards (per
posterius) of accidents, and ‘healthy’ is ﬁrst said of an animal, in which health
inheres, and afterwards of urine, which is a sign of health.113
In his work on
fallacies Thomas Aquinas also reduces analogical terms to the second mode of
equivocation.114 Late 13th-century authors usually adopt the standard division of
equivocation, as given by Peter of Spain. The ﬁrst mode involves a plurality of
signiﬁcates that are equally represented. In the second mode these signiﬁcates are
unequally represented; the secondary signiﬁcation takes place through attribution
or transference (transumptio). The third mode involves a plurality of modes of
signifying.115 Some others give a somewhat diﬀerent account.116
The discussions on analogy were inﬂuenced by the recovery and translation of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics and by Arabic sources. In these works analogy was related
to the question how being (ens) could be predicated of both substance and acci-
dents. The answer was that ‘being’ was neither a univocal nor an equivocal term,
109ibid., p. 105.
110For details see: Ashworth [1991, pp. 53–61].
111The standard textbook for this topic was William of Sherwood’s Treatise on Syncategore-
matic Words.
112Ashworth [1992, pp. 106–7].
113For references, see Ashworth [1992, p. 112].
114De fallaciis, p. 406.
115E.g. the commentaries in Incerti auctores, ed. Ebbesen.
116See for instance the Elenchi commentaries of Simon of Faversham and Duns Scotus, referred
to in Ashworth [1992, p. 118].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
369
but something in between univocal and equivocal: being was said to belong to
accidents secundum prius et posterius.117 The discussion was further complicated
by a passage in Aristotle’s Physics where he says that “equivocations are hidden
in genera”.118
The result is that we ﬁnd a threefold division of analogy in the late 13th century
Elenchi commentaries.119 In all three types speaking according to priority and
posteriority is involved:
1. The ﬁrst type of analogy occurs in the relation of a genus to its species. For
example, ‘animal’ is an analogical term that can be predicated of rational and
non-rational animals alike. The two species participate equally in the ratio
of genus (i.e. ‘animal’ means the same in both cases), but since one species
is more noble than the other (rationality is a habit and non-rationality the
absence of a habit), one species is said to fall under the genus primarily (per
prius) and the other secondarily (per posterius). This type of analogy is
called univocation, because both analogates participate equally in the same
characteristic.
2. The second type of analogy occurs when the analogates participate in the
same characteristic (ratio), but not equally. This is the case with being (ens)
in relation to substance and accident. Substances participate directly and
primarily (per prius) in being, whereas accidents do so only immediately and
secondarily (per posterius), i.e. by means of substances, since accidents do
not exist separately from the substance in which they inhere. This type of
analogy is neither strictly univocal, nor strictly equivocal, but something in
between, because they share more than just a name.
3. The third type of analogy is identical to deliberate equivocation. It occurs
when the analogates share only a name, as is the case with ‘healthy’ said of
an animal, urine, a diet and a medicine. ‘Healthy’ signiﬁes primarily (primo
et simpliciter) a healthy animal and it signiﬁes the other things secondarily
through attribution (per attributionem) to the ﬁrst thing.
This threefold division of analogy and the language in which it is put suggests that
the authors were interested in an ontologically based division. In their view, the
hierarchy of analogical terms is related to types of participation. Also Aquinas held
that analogical predication depends on natures being shared in prior and posterior
ways.120 Duns Scotus criticizes this view in his commentaries on the Categories
and the Sophistici Elenchi. Scotus argued that analogy is possible in the order
of things, but that words signify according to their imposition. The process of
imposition is voluntary and does not allow for an ordering among signiﬁcations
117See e.g. Algazel’s logic, as cited in Ashworth [1992, p. 108].
118Aristotle, Physics 7 (249a22-5).
119The division presented here comes from Incerti auctores, qu. 823, [ed. Ebbesen, pp. 314–
317]. The examples are mine. See also: Ashworth [1992, pp. 119–120].
120Ashworth [1992, p. 127].

370
Ria van der Lecq
that is not the result of this imposition. Furthermore, he rejected the notion of
a common ratio, with the result that there is, in his view, no room for analogical
predication of the ﬁrst and second type. The ﬁrst type of analogy –Scotus uses
‘cause, ‘end’ and ‘principle’ as examples – really involves univocal predication.
Terms like ‘being’, as applied to substance and accident, are really equivocal.
Terms belonging to the third type are really univocal. For example, ‘healthy’ is
a univocal term, because it only signiﬁes health: in the animal as in a subject, in
urine as in a sign and in diet as in a conserving agent.121 Thus, from a logical
point of view there is no need for something in between univocal and equivocal
predication. In one of the previous paragraphs we saw that Scotus rejected the
parallel between understanding and signifying. Now it is clear that he also rejected
the strict correspondence between language and reality.
PART II: THE LOGIC OF INTENTIONS
Second intentions: the primary subject of logic
The second half of the 13th century is characterized by the rise of the theory of
second intentions as the primary subject of logic. Second intentions are concepts
of a certain kind, which give logic its status as a science, because they are supposed
to be universal and objective, as will be explained below. All the authors writing
in this period regard second intentions as mental entities, which somehow have a
foundation in reality (fundamentum in re), but the way they see this foundation
diﬀers.
They agree, however, that one should distinguish between the mental
existence of a concept, which is studied by psychology, and its content, which is
the proper subject of logic.122
Examples of terms signifying second intentions are ‘universal’, ‘genus’, ‘species’,
‘proposition’, and ‘syllogism’. Some authors, Thomas Aquinas for example, con-
sider second intentions as second order concepts, representing not things but other
concepts, but other authors, e.g. Simon of Faversham and Radulphus Brito, as-
sume that second intentions are representations of things as related to other things
and that they are founded upon special properties of extra-mental objects. Finally,
Duns Scotus, Hervaeus Natalis and Peter Aureol ascribe to second intentions a spe-
cial kind of being: objective being, to be distinguished from material being on the
one hand and purely mental being on the other. As we shall see below, the answer
to the question: what do second intentions represent, is related to epistemological
and ontological issues. But ﬁrst we need to understand what an intention is.
When I think, I think about something: a book, a child, my holidays last
summer, my future plans etc. Sometimes it is clear what the thing is I am thinking
about, sometimes it is not, but in any case my intellectual act is intentional, i.e. it
is directed to something. One might even say that there is a relationship between
121For references and more details especially concerning Aquinas, see: Ashworth [1992, pp.
121–131].
122Pini [2002, p. 13].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
371
my act and the object intended. But what and where is this object exactly and
how is the cognitive relationship established between this object and me? These
are the questions that arise in discussions about intentionality. The intentionality
debate is mainly an ontological and epistemological debate about the relation
between our thoughts and the things we think of.
Discussions on the nature of intentions arise around the middle of the 13th-
century in connection with the inﬂuence of Avicenna.123
The Latin term ‘inten-
tio’ has two Arabic counterparts: ma’qul and ma’na, which makes it semantically
ambivalent. Ma’qul means concept or thought. Thoughts are related to extra-
mental things as well as to words. Not surprisingly, the term ma’qul occurs in
Alfarabi’s commentary on Aristotle’s De interpretatione, where the relation be-
tween thought, language and reality is discussed, as a translation of the Greek
noˆema. Ma’na, at the other hand, seems to be an epistemological term; it refers
to the intelligible species that is present in the mind when an extra-mental thing
is known. According to De Rijk the semantic ambivalence of the term ‘intentio’
is at the basis of the distinction between ﬁrst and second intention: the notion of
ﬁrst intention has to do with the thing apprehended, whereas second intentions
arise from the object’s being apprehended.124 Generally speaking, when the object
of an intention is an extra-mental thing, the intention is a ﬁrst intention and when
the object is itself an intention, the intention is a second intention. Second inten-
tions are the subject of logic, according to Avicenna. We call this kind of logic
‘intentionalistic’, as opposed to terminist logic, which was primarily concerned
with language, not with concepts. For intentionalists logic is a scientia rationalis,
whereas for the terminist logicians it is an ars or scientia sermocinalis.
Thus, an intention is a concept as well as the foundation of its content.125
This ambivalence reﬂects the medieval conviction that it is possible for the human
intellect to discover the truth about the extra-mental reality, because of the fun-
damental parallelism existing between the structure of the outside world on the
one hand and the ways in which we understand things on the other hand. For the
Medieval mind, however, there is no ‘on the one hand’ and ‘on the other hand’:
the human intellect grasps the extra-mental things through concepts that desig-
nate these things including their being conceived of.126 This is the reason why in
intentionalist logic questions about logic and meaning are frequently interwoven
with epistemological questions. A good example of this interconnectedness can be
found in the logic and epistemology of Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274). His ideas about
the representativeness and reliability of our thinking about reality can be seen as
the foundation on which later thinkers build their theories.127 Although his direct
inﬂuence is diﬃcult to assess and although there is no speciﬁc work on intentions
from his hand, he seems to have set the philosophical agenda for the authors of
123For the Arabic sources of the concept of intention, see Knudsen [1982, pp. 479–80]. For the
Aristotelian and Augustinian roots, see De Rijk [2005, p. 30 ﬀ].
124De Rijk [2005, p. 23].
125See also: Knudsen [1982, p. 480].
126De Rijk [2005, p. 24].
127De Rijk [2005, p. 348].

372
Ria van der Lecq
the second half of the 13th-century in Paris. Therefore, his ideas deserve ample
attention.
Thomas Aquinas on the subject of logic
Logic, according to Aquinas, can be considered in two ways: as an art and as a
science.128 An art, in the Aristotelian sense, is an act of reason, which produces
something new, something that didn’t exist before; it is a creative act. But in
order to proceed methodically and without error, reason needs guidance. This
is the business of logic, which is a kind of super-art (ars artium). Arts usually
produce something: an instrument or a work of art (in the modern sense). Logic,
however, is distinguished from other arts insofar as its production (deﬁnitions,
propositions, syllogism) is immaterial. It is, therefore, not a mechanical art, but
a liberal art. Liberal arts are ordained to the intellectual act of the (free) soul,
whereas mechanical arts belong to man as a result of bodily activity. Since the
body is subordinated to the soul, mechanical arts are called servilis, i.e.
not
free.129
Logic is also a science. But whereas other sciences are directed to the knowledge
of certain things, logic is concerned with knowledge itself. As a science it must
have some deﬁnite subject,130 it must proceed by demonstration from ﬁrst princi-
ples and it must yield certain knowledge of necessary conclusions. In relation to
the other sciences logic is instrumental, because it provides the instruments (syl-
logisms, deﬁnitions etc.) with which they work, and it is methodological, since it
teaches the methods of other sciences.131 All the other sciences are about things,
whereas logic is about science itself, i.e. about intellectual intentions. Logic is a
methodological, rational science.
The guidance of logic is needed for three diﬀerent acts of the intellect: simple
apprehension, judgment and reasoning. For each of them there is a distinct part
of logic. The logic of reasoning is divided as follows: demonstrative, analytical or
judicative logic leads to certitude; dialectical or inventive logic leads to probability,
and sophistical logic leads to the mere appearance of truth.132
Dialectics and
demonstrative logic are said to be distinct (rational) sciences. Demonstrative logic
is the logic of presentation: it establishes a truth already discovered, by reducing
it to its principles. Dialectics is the logic of discovery: it searches for a particular
truth, which it does not yet possess; it argues from general or common principles.
Aquinas makes a distinction between pure logic (logica docens) and applied
logic (logica utens). Demonstrative logic, being pure logic, studies the instruments
and procedures of thought and the norms for their application theoretically, but
128The following remarks concerning Aquinas derive mainly from Schmidt [1966].
129Aquinas, Summa theologiae, Ia-IIae, 57, 3 ad 3; Schmidt [1966, p. 8].
130Aquinas calls it a subject, because it is subjected to investigation. See: Schmidt [1966, p.
11].
131Schmidt [1966, p. 26].
132In I Post. Anal., 1, n.6, as in: Schmidt [1966, p. 32].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
373
the application of demonstrative logic belongs to the particular science, not to
logic itself. With dialectics things are diﬀerent: dialectics does participate in the
investigations in the other sciences.133 Therefore, dialectics is theoretical as well
as applied. Theoretical dialectics is a science, but applied dialectics is rather an
art: the art of reasoning or what we would nowadays call ‘critical thinking’.
In determining what the domain of logic is, we have to distinguish between
its matter and its subject.
Logic is concerned with the operations of reason:
simple apprehension, judgment and reasoning. These three operations of reason
constitute the proper matter of logic. In the ﬁrst operation the intellect grasps
simple things such as a man or a stone; in the second operation the objects thus
grasped are combined or divided, so that a proposition can be formed, in this
case: ‘a man is not a stone’. The third operation is the process from the known
to the unknown. The result or product of the operations of reason is intentions.
Intentions are the subject of logic and should not be identiﬁed with the acts of
reason, which produce them.
Logic is concerned with acts of reason, but has
intentions as its subject.134
Now we have to return to the question what an intention is. The word ‘intention’
basically means a tendency to something else. If we leave the intentions of the will
out of consideration, Aquinas uses the word ‘intention’ sometimes to designate the
intelligible species by which the intellect is informed in the act of cognition. Thus
informed, the knower expresses an internal word, the so called ‘intellected intention
(intentio intellecta).135 This intention expresses the essence of the thing known,
which then exists not only in reality in the object, but also in the intellect of the
knower. It has a relation of likeness to the thing known. Intentions, according
to Aquinas, exist only in the intellect - Aquinas calls them “beings of reason”
(entia rationis)136 – but it is important to see that the intentio intellecta has a
foundation in reality (fundamentum in re) and that it has a semantic as well as
an epistemological function.137
An intention is ﬁrst and foremost a likeness of an external object by which
that object is known. The intellect needs the external object to initiate its act of
knowing. Thus, this ﬁrst intention has an immediate foundation in extra-mental
reality. In a second moment the intellect can also reﬂect upon its operation and
the media involved. As a result of the ﬁrst act of knowing the nature of an extra-
mental object exists in the intellect. When the intellect is aware of how that nature
exists in the intellect, a logical intention is formed. For example, when the intellect
knows that a man and a horse are animals, it knows the nature of ‘animal’ as a
genus. This is the way in which the intention of genus is formed. Because this
logical intention can only be formed after the thing itself is known, later authors
call it a second intention.
Aquinas himself does not use the terms ‘ﬁrst’ and
133Schmidt [1966, p. 41].
134Schmidt [1966, p. 40 ﬀ].
135For the relation between intelligible species and mental word, see Pasnau [1997, p. 256 ﬀ].
136Translated by Schmidt as ‘rationate beings’, see Schmidt [1966, p. 52, n. 15].
137De Rijk [2005, p. 120 ﬀ].

374
Ria van der Lecq
‘second intention’ but speaks of immediately and mediately founded concepts,138
or of ‘ﬁrst things understood’ and ‘second things understood’, which “are called
intentions consequent to the mode of understanding.”139 Second intentions are not
directly founded on reality, but on the concepts of the things as they are in the
mind, the things as understood. Therefore, the foundation of second intentions is
called ‘remote’.140 Only second intentions are the subject of logic.
The intellect attributes second intentions to the nature of an object, as it exists
in the soul. For example, the intellect attributes the property of being a genus
or species to the thing understood.
Thus, second intentions are accidents (or
properties) of beings or natures as they are known. In the extra-mental world
nothing corresponds to these properties, “for in the things that are outside the
mind there is nothing that is a similitude of the notion of genus or species.”141
Therefore, their only mode of being is ‘rationate being’. Nevertheless, they can
only be considered with reference to their real subject.142
The foregoing remarks about the object of logic according to Aquinas were
meant to show how logic and epistemology are interconnected in the 13th century.
Aquinas was neither a nominalist, nor an extreme realist. He shared the common
view that there is an extra-mental reality that can be known in a natural way. In
his view, intellectual knowledge is directed to the natures of those extra-mental
objects. The forms of the things known, the so-called ﬁrst intentions, have ratio-
nate being. Logic too, is intentional. Its objects are the relations between ﬁrst
intentions in thought. Those relations are called second intentions. Through the
ﬁrst intentions second intentions are directed to the extra-mental reality, upon
which they remotely depend. Ultimately, all intentions are ways of knowing real
things.
In Aquinas’ account of intentions, (second) intentions are produced by the re-
ﬂection of the intellect on its operation, for example when it compares the concepts
man and animal. By comparing those concepts, the intellect forms the intention of
a species correlated to a genus. The relation between those concepts is a rational
relation, i.e. a relation caused by reason.143 Other authors maintain that the rela-
tion holding between a species and a genus is founded on the nature of the things
themselves and that the intellect is not the cause of intentions, properly speak-
ing.144 As examples of this more realistic approach I shall take into account the
positions of Robert Kilwardby, Simon of Faversham, the Modists and Radulphus
Brito.
138Thomas Aquinas, De potentia, q. 1, a. 1 ad 10, as in: Schmidt [1966, pp. 118–9].
139Thomas Aquinas, De potentia, q. 7, a. 9.
140Schmidt [1966, p. 118].
141Thomas Aquinas, De potentia, q. 7, a. 6, as in Pini [2002, p. 56].
142Schmidt [1966, p. 129].
143Pini [2002, p. 60].
144See Pini [2002, pp. 64–7] for Peter of Auvergne’s criticism on Aquinas.

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
375
Intentions as (founded upon) real properties of things.
In De ortu scientiarum (ca. 1250) Robert Kilwardby explicitly distinguishes ﬁrst
and second intentions. Things by themselves are ﬁrst intentions, and the nouns sig-
nifying those things, e.g. ‘substance’ or ‘quantity’, are nouns of ﬁrst intention.145
Now, the focus of logic, being a scientia rationalis, is not on things by themselves,
but on what Kilwardby calls rationes rerum, i.e. aspects of things that make us
think about them in a certain way, and on the nouns referring to those aspects, e.g.
‘universal’, ‘particular’, ‘antecedent’, ‘consequent’ (the last two, when the ‘thing’
considered is a composition). Those aspects (or properties) are second intentions
and the nouns referring to them are nouns of second intention. Things by them-
selves are called ‘ﬁrst intentions’, because they are primarily comprehended, while
second intentions come to the fore when things are not regarded by themselves,
but according to their mutual relationships.146
With Kilwardby second intentions, even abstract second intentions like ‘univer-
sality’, ‘particularity’ and so on, are regarded real properties of things, which they
possess as soon as they are considered by our intellect according to certain logical
relationships.147 Logicians study those properties because they play a role in the
process of reasoning, which is the proper subject of logic, according to Kilwardby.
Simon of Faversham also discussed second intentions and their foundation in
reality. At the end of his life (1306) Simon was chancellor of the University of
Oxford, but it is considered most likely that his logical writings derive from his
arts teaching at Paris around 1280.148 He wrote various logical commentaries, but
not on the logic of terms. He also can be considered an intentionalist. He held the
common opinion of his time that second intentions are the proper subject of logic.
First and second intentions are diﬀerent ways to understand extra-mental things.
When an object is conceived in its own right, leaving aside its individuating con-
ditions, a ﬁrst intention is produced. When the object is considered according to
the logical relationships it has to other things of the same kind, a second intention
is produced.149 In causing second intentions the intellect is moved by the so-called
‘appearances’ of the extra-mental objects. These appearances represent the ob-
ject’s real properties.150 The question is whether Simon of Faversham’s view is in
line with the common, i.e. Aquinas’, doctrine of the foundation of second inten-
tions. To my mind, he deviates from this doctrine in a more realist direction.151
According to Aquinas second intentions are remotely, i.e. not directly, depending
upon real objects; they are founded on the concepts of things in the mind (ﬁrst
intentions). In Simon’s view logical intentions seem to be attributed by the intel-
lect to things, not to concepts, for he maintains that the relation established by
145Knudsen [1982, p. 484].
146De ortu scientiarum, cap. XLVIII, [ed. Judy, p. 459].
147De Rijk [2005, p. 20].
148For more information about Simon of Faversham, see: Ebbesen et al. [1984, Introd. pp.
3–6].
149De Rijk [2005, p. 189].
150Simon of Faversham, Quaestions on Porphyry, q. 2, cited by De Rijk [2005, p. 178].
151See, however, De Rijk [2005, p. 180] for another evaluation.

376
Ria van der Lecq
the intellect is founded on real properties of things, that move the intellect to form
intentions. Thus, when the intellect judges that a man is an animal, it does so
on the basis of a relationship between a real essence and the things sharing in it.
The predication itself is an act of the intellect, but a man is also an animal when
the intellect is not in act. Therefore, the rational relationship between man and
animal is founded upon real properties of extra-mental essences.152
The role of intentions in speculative grammar
The special ontological interpretation of the modi signiﬁcandi also determined the
modistic interpretation of logic. Unlike the terminist logicians, the Modists were
mainly interested in metalogical questions about the status of logical laws and
concepts. This approach of logic is so diﬀerent from the terminist one, that one
could easily speak of an interruption in the history of logic.153 As has been said
above, the Modists seldom applied the key concept of terminist logic, supposition.
It may be that terminist logic, with its contextual approach and its role in argu-
mentation, was too much an art instead of a science. In the Modists’s view, what
holds for grammar also holds for logic: if it has to be a science, it has to fulﬁl
the Aristotelian requirement that its formal object is eternal. This eternal object
appeared to be the second intentions.
Partly in connection with grammatical analysis the Modists developed their
theory of intentions. Every object in its being known can be a ﬁrst intention.
The proper objects of logic, however, are not the ﬁrst but the second intentions
(intentiones secundae), i.e. special logical concepts resulting from the three op-
erations of the intellect: apprehension (apprehensio), judgement (compositio) and
reasoning (ratiocinatio). To the act of apprehension belong concepts (intentions)
like genus, species, predicate and subject; to the act of judgement belong concepts
like per se and per accidens (kinds of predication), and to the act of reasoning
belong intentions referring to a set of propositions, for example syllogism.154
According to the Modists, ﬁrst as well as second intentions are caused by the
active intellect together with the properties (modes of being) of the object known
and signiﬁed. First intentions are drawn from a proper mode of being, second in-
tentions from a common mode of being, or rather from the object under a common
mode of being.155 Second intentions are secondary in so far as they presuppose
ﬁrst intentions, not in the sense that they are concepts of concepts. They are
concepts of extra-mental objects, conceived and signiﬁed under a common mode
of being.
Grammarians as well as logicians have a professional interest in the common
properties (modi essendi communes: common modes of being), from which second
intentions and modes of signifying are drawn. Thus, not man or animal as such is
object of study, but the logical and grammatical relations that are connected with
152Pini [2002, pp. 77–]9.
153Pinborg [1975a, p. 40].
154Pinborg [1975a, p. 45].
155Radulphus Brito, soph. ‘Aliquis homo est species’, 52, ed. Pinborg [1975b, p. 144].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
377
these objects, i.e. second intentions for the logician and modes of signifying for
the grammarian.156 There is, however, not a complete analogy between logic and
grammar. For the grammarian, the congruity of a linguistic construction depends
upon the modes of signifying of the elements of the construction (see above, p.
356). If the modes of signifying are combined in the right way, the construction
is congruous, although it may not be perfect. For the logician, however, second
intentions being combined in the right way do not make a proposition true. For a
proposition to be true there has to be a correspondence with reality.157 Therefore,
for further analysis of a proposition, the logician has to go back to the primary
meaning of the words, i.e. the concepts and their reference.
It may be clear now that in the Modists’s view every intention draws on some
property of an object. At the same time it signiﬁes that object. Every ﬁrst inten-
tion signiﬁes and corresponds with a proper mode of being of an object (proprius
modus essendi rei); every second intention and mode of signifying corresponds
with a common mode of being of an object (modus essendi communis rei).158
First as well as second intentions have their direct foundation in reality.
Radulphus Brito on second intentions
An application of modistic analyses can be found in the work of Radulphus Brito,
who taught at the Sorbonne during the years 1295-1305.159 His works contain the
ﬁrst extended and systematic treatment of intentions. His views on intentionality
had a great inﬂuence upon the intentionality debate in the early fourteenth century.
According to Radulphus and the common opinion, an intention is that by which
the intellect directs itself to an object.160
Unlike Thomas Aquinas, Radulphus
does not distinguish between intention, act of the intellect, intelligible species and
cognition; in his view they are identical. Intentions are the result of abstraction.
So far his system seems rather straightforward, at least from an ontological point
of view.
This is, however, only one side of the story, because objects can be
known in two ways and therefore there is also a twofold abstraction at the level of
apprehension.
1. In the ﬁrst place objects are known (and signiﬁed) according to a proper
mode of being. In this way we conceive, on the level of apprehension, of
man, horse etc. The act of the intellect (the cognition) itself is called ‘ﬁrst
abstract intention’ (prima intentio in abstracto), whereas the object that is
known is called ‘ﬁrst concrete intention’ (prima intentio in concreto). The
name corresponding with the ﬁrst concrete intention is ‘man’ or ‘horse’,
and the name corresponding with the ﬁrst abstract intention is ‘humanity’
156Pinborg [1975a, p. 47].
157Radulphus Brito, cited by Pinborg, [1975a, p. 49]. For an extensive account of Radulphus
Brito on intentionality, see De Rijk [2005, chapter VI].
158Pinborg [1975a, p. 49].
159Pinborg [1975b, pp. 119–120].
160Radulphus Brito, soph. ‘Aliquis homo est species’, paragraph 49 [Pinborg, 1975b; 1974, p.
51].

378
Ria van der Lecq
or ‘horseness’. Concrete and abstract intentions are formally identical, but
they diﬀer materially.161
2. Secondly, whenever an object is known under the aspect of a common mode
of being, i.e. something which the thing has in common with other things,
this cognition is called a ‘second abstract intention’ (secunda intentio in
abstracto). The object itself is called ‘second concrete intention’ (secunda
intentio in concreto).
Examples of second concrete intentions are genus,
species, diﬀerence, universal; examples of second abstract intentions are uni-
versality, speciality etc., i.e. terms that indicate what it is that makes a
universal a universal, or a species a species etc.
The same account holds for the other acts of the intellect: composition and
reasoning. Some examples: a ﬁrst concrete intention on the level of composition
is ‘man is an animal’ or any other composition. The composition is the object of
knowledge on this level. The reﬂection on that particular composition is the ﬁrst
abstract intention on the level of composition. Names of second concrete inten-
tions are ‘conclusion’, ‘proposition’, ‘question’; an example of a second abstract
intention would be the knowledge of a composition as far as it is ‘doubted’ (in
case of a question), or ‘aﬃrmed’ (in case of a proposition) or ‘concluded’ (in case
of a conclusion of an inference).162 A ﬁrst concrete intention on the level of rea-
soning would be ‘every man runs, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates runs’; a
corresponding ﬁrst abstract intention would be my cognition of the diﬀerence be-
tween this syllogism and the syllogism ‘every donkey runs, Brunellus is a donkey,
therefore Brunellus runs.’ A name of a second concrete intention would be ‘syl-
logism’ or ‘deduction’; but when I consider e.g. the diﬀerence between inductive
and deductive reasoning, this act of my intellect is a second abstract intention.
The diagram below may help to make this complicated theory more clear.
Thus, every object can be known in two ways: either according to its proper
mode of being or under its common mode of being. In the ﬁrst case we have an
absolute or primary cognition, in the second case a relative or secondary cogni-
tion. The second intention is called ‘relative’ because there is always a relation
with other objects, and it is called ‘secondary’ because an absolute cognition is
presupposed.163
First as well as second intentions are caused by a mode of being of the object
in co-operation with the intellect.
On the level of apprehension the object is
an extra-mental thing, for example a person named John. John is known in a
ﬁrst cognition as a man.
The concept and ﬁrst concrete intention man is not
generated by the intellect, but abstracted from the extra-mental object.
This
kind of abstraction could be compared with what Thomas Aquinas calls total or
non-precisive abstraction,164 allowing one to say ‘John is a man’. A second kind
161The distinction between concrete and abstract intentions had been introduced by Henry of
Ghent (d. 1293). See for an account of his theory: Pini [2002, pp. 68–72].
162Radulphus Brito, op.cit., paragraph 50.
163Pinborg [1974, p. 53].
164Thomas Aquinas, De ente et essentia, 3. 68–70.

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
379
level of cognition
intention
concrete
abstract
apprehension
ﬁrst
man
(according
to
his
proper mode of be-
ing)
humanity
second
universal,
genus,
species, diﬀerentia
universality, general-
ity etc.
composition
ﬁrst
man is an animal
reﬂection
on
this
composition
second
conclusion,
propo-
sition, question
this composition as
far as it is concluded,
aﬃrmed/denied
or
doubted
reasoning
ﬁrst
every
man
runs,
Socrates is a man,
therefore
Socrates
runs
reﬂection on this rea-
soning, e.g. that it is
deductive reasoning
second
syllogism,
en-
thymeme,
infer-
ence, deduction
of abstraction results in the concept and ﬁrst abstract intention humanity.
In
Aquinas’ terms this would be called formal or precisive abstraction. It is obvious
that ‘humanity’ cannot be predicated of John. Only concrete intentions can be
predicated, but it is not the intention man that is predicated, because John is not a
concept, but the real man under the aspect of humanity (sub ratione humanitatis).
The predication implies a description that corresponds with the mode of being of
the object.165
Radulphus pays ample attention to the question of the origin and foundation of
second intentions.166 On the level of apprehension the foundation of a cognition of
second intention (e.g. when species is predicated of man) is the same as that of a
cognition of ﬁrst intention (e.g. when animal is predicated of man), namely a real
man; only the mode of being under which the object is known is diﬀerent.167 Thus,
second intentions on the level of apprehension are caused by a real object under a
common mode of being (sub modo essendi communi). Radulphus concludes that
these second intentions are real (but of course not extra-mental) habits of the
intellect.168 Logic considers things according to their (common) modes of being
165Pinborg [1974, p. 53].
166Radulphus Brito, soph. ‘Aliquis homo est species’, paragraph 52–59. See also Pinborg [1974,
pp. 53–4].
167Pinborg [1974, p. 53].
168paragraph 56, [ed. Pinborg, p. 146].

380
Ria van der Lecq
that are real and not caused by the intellect.
Predicates of second intentions
(genus, species, universal) are the object of study of logicians, not, however, in
their role of real habits, but in their function of concept and likeness.
On the level of the second and third mental operations (composition and rea-
soning) it is less obvious how the connection between thought and reality can be
preserved, since syllogisms and propositions etc. seem to be mental constructions.
Nevertheless, Radulphus argues that all second intentions have a relation to the
real world, because ultimately “all logical operations have to be interpreted and
veriﬁed of the things.”169 In another version of his theory, however, Radulphus
admits that second intentions of the second and third kind are entirely caused by
the intellect. Thus, these second intentions seem to be less real than the second
intentions belonging to the level of apprehension. Since logic is mainly about this
kind of intentions, it is called a rational science rather than a real science.170
Radulphus’ opinions were criticized and modiﬁed by Hervaeus Natalis and Peter
Aureol, but ﬁrst we will turn our attention to his contemporary Duns Scotus.
Duns Scotus on intentional being
Duns Scotus (1266–1308) is the ﬁrst to extend the realm of being to intentional
being (esse intentionale, esse diminutum). Because even something that does not
exist can be the object of our cognition, he concludes that that object cannot
be a real extra-mental entity. Therefore, it is a concept or intention, not to be
confused with the object of intention in reality (ratio formalis in re), upon which
it is founded when the object exists.
In the cognitive process Duns Scotus distinguishes between two acts: the sen-
sitive act of perceiving the extra-mental object, and the intellective act of rep-
resenting it. This intellective act produces an intelligible species. By producing
an intelligible species one is able to abstract from the particular circumstances
in which the perception occurs. The species, however, is not the object of the
intellect. It is merely an instrument, a device we need in the cognitive process. It
cannot be the object of knowledge, because it is private to one’s individual intel-
lect, whereas an object of knowledge is common to several people.171 The primary
object of knowledge is the intention, or in Scotus’ words: intelligible being (esse
intelligibele). The species has real being (existence) as a quality in the intellect,
but the intelligible being has only diminished or obiective being, i.e. as an object
of knowledge. It is not only the object of a human intellect, but also of the divine
intellect.172
This guarantees the reliability of our intellectual knowledge of the
world. In producing the intelligible species, the human intellect has access to the
realm of intelligible being. In the species the intellect sees the object with intelligi-
169Knudsen [1982, p. 489].
170paragraph 58-59, [ed. Pinborg, p. 147].
171Perler [2001, p. 208].
172Opus Oxoniense, I dist. III, q. iv. For the complex problem of the ontological status of the
intelligible being, see Perler [2002, pp. 217–230].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
381
ble being: the (ﬁrst) intention, which is its primary object.173 Thus, the intellect
does not produce the intention; it ﬁnds it by way of an intelligible species.
Although the intelligible species is not the primary object of knowledge, it can
become the secondary object when someone reﬂects upon the way he cognizes a
thing. The result is a second intention. According to Scotus, second intentions are
notions caused by the intellect, when it considers properties pertaining to things
insofar as they are understood, the so-called intentional properties, for example
‘being predicable of many’.
Like Aquinas and unlike Radulphus Brito, Scotus
maintains that second intentions are created by the intellect as tools for grasping
ﬁrst intentional objects. The intellect is moved to cause a second intention when
it considers an essence as a universal. An essence is in itself neither individual
nor universal. It is the intellect that gives universality to that essence. Universals
(ﬁrst intentions) are produced by the intellect as rationate relations, but they have
their genetic occasion in the essence of the object of which they are predicated.
Thus, intellect and object work together in producing ﬁrst intentions: the intellect
as the primary cause and the extra-mental object as the occasion. Although there
has to be an extra-mental object for the intellect to cause a second intention,
this object plays no role in producing the second intention; the intention itself is
founded on a property of an object as understood by the intellect, i.e. a mental
entity. For example, the intellect considers an essence man as universal and is
moved by its property of being predicable of many, so that the second intention
species is formed. The result is not that the extra-mental object itself becomes
universal but that the intellect attributes universality to the way it understands
the extra-mental object. First intentions represent extra-mental objects, whereas
second intentions represent ﬁrst intentions.174
Like Radulphus Brito, Scotus distinguishes between concrete and abstract in-
tentions, but he gives a diﬀerent interpretation to the terms. For Radulphus a
concrete intention is caused by an object under its proper mode of being and an
abstract intention is caused by that same object under its common mode of being.
In other words: an abstract intention is a concept, whereas a concrete intention is
an aggregate of thing and concept. For Scotus all intentions are concepts. Con-
crete and abstract intentions are just diﬀerent modes of signifying the same thing,
in the same way as ‘white’ and ‘whiteness’ both signify the form whiteness: ‘white’
signiﬁes the form as attributed to a white thing and ‘whiteness’ signiﬁes the form
itself.175
Unlike his intentionalistic predecessors, Scotus does not hold that second inten-
tions are the subject of logic. Logic deals with second intentions, but its subject
is syllogism. Only syllogism satisﬁes all three conditions that should be met for
something to be the subject of a science: (1) its nature and existence must be
known, (2) its properties (e.g. validity) are demonstrated in the science of which
it is the object, and (3) everything considered in that science can be reduced to
173This is Scotus’ implementation of the Augustinian concept of illumination.
174Pini [2002, pp. 107–112]. See also Pini [2002] for the relevant texts.
175Pini [2002, p. 128]. For Duns Scotus on concrete and abstract names, see above p. 365.

382
Ria van der Lecq
it.176
And what about the other possible subjects of logic: second intentions,
rationate being and the acts of the intellect? The nature and existence of second
intentions are not known in logic, so second intentions cannot be its subject. The
same account holds for rationate being and the acts of the intellect. Scotus also
rejects the old opinion according to which logic is a scientia sermocinalis, which
means that it is concerned with speech. Demonstrations are not concerned with
speech, according to Scotus, and what is studied in logic cannot be reduced to
speech. Finally, Scotus denies that reasoning is the subject of logic, since it does
not satisfy any of the three conditions.177 Second intentions do satisfy the third
condition: everything considered in logic can be reduced to it, and therefore logic
can be said to deal with second intentions.
Reactions to Radulphus Brito: Hervaeus Natalis and Peter Aureol
In the writings of Hervaeus Natalis and Peter Aureol the theory of Radulphus
Brito was criticized and modiﬁed. The distinction between proper and common
modes of being of an object seems to be abandoned. Instead, they introduce a
new mode of being of the object, the esse obiective.
Hervaeus’ views can be found in his treatise De secundis intentionibus, dated
ca. 1313,178 which was in fact the ﬁrst ‘stand alone’ treatise about this subject.
Like many others before him Hervaeus deﬁnes an intention as a tendency to some-
thing.179 The word ‘intention’ has two senses, he says. Taken from the viewpoint
of the intellect it means: that which, by way of representation, leads the intellect
to the cognition of something, whether it is an act of the intellect, a species or
a concept. In this sense an intention is always a real entity, because species or
acts of the intellect are real (be it not extra-mental) entities.180 Taken, on the
other hand, from the viewpoint of the object known, ‘intention’ means: that to
which the tendency is directed, the intellective content.181 It is in this last sense
that Hervaeus speaks about intentions. Like Radulphus, he distinguishes between
‘concrete’ and ‘abstract’ intentions, but in his application of this distinction he de-
viates from Radulphus. According to Hervaeus, concrete ﬁrst intentions are real
(extra-mental) entities taken as formal objects of the intellect, whereas for Radul-
phus concrete ﬁrst intentions were extra-mental objects taken absolutely, i.e. not
related to an act of the intellect. For Hervaeus there is no intention without an
act of knowing, because ‘intention’ is not part of the deﬁnition of extra-mental
objects like ‘man’ or ‘stone’ (57). Abstract ﬁrst intentions are merely rationate
entities (entia rationis), since an abstract ﬁrst intention is a relation between the
176Duns Scotus Super Porph., 3, n. 20 (Oph, I, 17), as in: Pini [2002, p. 35].
177Pini [2002, p. 35].
178De Rijk [2005, p. 252].
179Hervaeus Natalis, De secundis intentionibus, qu. 1, 14. (prel. ed. Judith Dijs. The numbers
refer to the paragraph numbers in this edition.) See for an extensive treatment of this treatise:
De Rijk [2005, chapter VII].
180Qualities and relations were considered real entities by many medieval thinkers.
181De Rijk [2005, p. 295].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
383
object known and the act of knowing (habitudo rei intellectae ad actum intelli-
gendi). Second intentions are always rationate entities, because concrete second
intentions are things that are secondarily known, and abstract second intentions
are relations between the objects known and the act of knowing (18).
According to Hervaeus, ﬁrst as well as second intentions, whether concrete or
abstract, exist obiective (i.e.
as objective contents) in the intellect (17), since
everything that is known exists as an object in the intellect.
Thus, when the
intellect knows a man or a horse, man or horse is said to exist objectively in
the intellect as ﬁrst concrete intentions. Second intentions are founded upon ﬁrst
intentions and therefore, they exist objectively in the intellect as well (23).
Intentionality exists on two levels, according to Hervaeus.182
First concrete
intentions are founded upon the objects intellected that possess real being outside
the mind. The intentionality itself, i.e. the relationship between object intellected
and the intellect, is a ﬁrst abstract intention or primary intentionality. If this
primary intentionality is itself the object intellected, it is the foundation of another
relationship to the intellect: a secondary intentionality.
In this case the ﬁrst
abstract intention is at the same time a second concrete intention.183 So, either
mediately or immediately, all second intentions are founded upon a ﬁrst one, which
in its turn is founded upon extra mental reality.
Hervaeus deviates from Radulphus on several points. I mention the most im-
portant ones:
1. A ﬁrst intention is not identical with the act of intellection. This is only
the case from the viewpoint of the intellect, which is not of interest for the
logician.
2. A concrete ﬁrst intention is not an extra mental object taken absolutely, but
rather that object as known by the intellect.
3. First and second intentions are not founded upon diﬀerent modes of being
(properties) of the object known. First intentions have their foundation in
reality, and second intentions are founded upon ﬁrst intentions.
4. All intentions exist objectively in the intellect.
Thus, like Radulphus, Hervaeus turns out to be aware that our intellect makes
distinctions that are ultimately founded upon reality, but, unlike Radulphus, he
does not think that every abstract intention corresponds with a (common) mode
of being in reality.
Although the French Franciscan Peter Aureol (working in Paris ca. 1320) was a
theologian and not a logician, he nevertheless deserves a place in these paragraphs
on the intentionality debate, because he opposed the views of Radulphus Brito
and Hervaeus Natalis and is primarily known as one of Ockham’s forerunners as
a conceptualist, although recent studies have shown his originality and historical
182De secundis intentionibus, dist. III, q. 3c, quoted by De Rijk [2005, p. 282].
183De Rijk [2005, p. 280].

384
Ria van der Lecq
signiﬁcance.184 In Peter Aureol’s theory the distinction between concrete and ab-
stract intentions has been abandoned. In Peter’s view, intentions are rationate
entities (entia rationis), to be distinguished from the act of the intellect and ex-
isting in the intellect as objective contents of thought (obiective). A ﬁrst intention
arises when the object of the intellect is a real being; when the object is itself
a rationate being, a second intention is formed. First intentions are products of
the intellect (concepts) in which a real being has obtained a new mode of being,
i.e. intentional (objective) being. Second intentions are formed by reﬂection on
ﬁrst intentions. Peter Aureol himself gives the following account of his theory of
intentions:
An intention is the objective concept formed by the intellect contain-
ing in itself indistinguishably the passive conception and the thing
conceived.
‘Intention’ is the same as ‘concept’, and ‘ﬁrst intention’
the same as ‘concept of the ﬁrst order’, which the intellect forms of
the things without reﬂecting on its own concepts. Second intentions
are concepts of the second order, which the intellect constructs by re-
ﬂection on the ﬁrst concepts: universality, predicability, and the like
concerning the simple mental operation of apprehension; aﬃrmation or
negation concerning the second mental operation of judgement; and the
connection of the extremes of a syllogism concerning the third mental
operation, the discursive and ratiocinative act.185
Peter disagrees with Radulphus who identiﬁed intentions with acts of the intellect,
and he rejects Hervaeus’ distinction between the object intended (concrete inten-
tion) and the relation (habitudo) between the intended object and the intellect
(abstract intentionality). In Peter’s view object and relation are the same. An
intention is just an obiective concept, an intentional being, formed by the intellect
and to be distinguished from the act itself. It is the mode of being of the object as
it appears in the intellect. Object and relation are comprehended in the concept.
The intellect can conceive existing and non-existing objects alike.
Logic is concerned with second intentions, but, unlike his intentionalist prede-
cessors, Aureol does not think that second intentions are its proper subject. The
logician studies second intentions not as rationate entities – that aspect belongs to
the domain of metaphysics – but as far as they are reduced to terms, propositions
and syllogisms. Thus, what Aquinas had called the proper matter of logic is for
Aureol the proper subject of logic.
The new ontological status of concepts gave rise to severe criticism by Walter
Chatton, a contemporary of Aureol and Ockham. Although Ockham defended the
objective status of concepts himself in his so-called ﬁctum-theory, he abandoned
this theory on grounds of parsimony. Like Chatton he saw the esse obiectivum as
184Russell L. Friedman & Lauge O. Nielsen [2000], Peter Auriol: Introduction, in: Vivarium
XXXVIII, 1, 1.
185Translation Knudson [op.cit., p. 491]. The corresponding Latin text can be found in De Rijk
[2005, pp. 738–9].

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
385
an unnecessary mediator between object and cognition. As a terminist logician he
was more interested in the question if intentions are to be identiﬁed with mental
terms, a question which will be discussed in one of the next chapters.
Conclusion
The foregoing pages were devoted to a period of only ﬁfty years, which in the course
of the history of logic could be considered as an intermezzo. The developments
in terminist logic seem to be interrupted by a period of metalogical concerns,
as if the authors needed a moment of reﬂection, concentrating for a while on
the scientiﬁc foundations of the art of logic.
In my view, the most important
results of these reﬂections were Roger Bacon’s formation of a theory of signs,
Duns Scotus’ rejection of the parallelism between signifying and understanding
and Peter Aureol’s clean way of applying the parallelism between thought and
reality.
These philosophers paved the way for the innovations of 14th century
logic.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary literature
[Aristotle, 1963] Aristotle’s Categories and De Interpretatione. Translated with Notes and Glos-
sary by J.L. Ackrill, Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
[Boethius, 1880] Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus. Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Peri
Hermeneias, rec. C. Meiser, pars posterior, secunda editio (Leipzig, 1880).
[Incertorum auctorum, 1977] Incertorum auctorum Quaestiones super Sophisticos Elenchos, ed.
S. Ebbesen, (Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi 7). Copenhagen, 1977.
[John Duns Scotus, 2004a] John Duns Scotus, Quaestiones in libros Perihermenias Aristotelis.
R. Andrews, G. Etzkorn, G. G´al, R. Green, T. Noone, R. Plevano, A. Traven, R. Wood
ed. Washington DC (The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University and The Catholic
University of America), 2004.
[John Duns Scotus, 2004b] John Duns Scotus, Quaestiones in libros Elencorum Aristotelis. R.
Andrews, O. Bychkov, S. Ebbesen, G. Etzkorn, G. G´al, R. Green, T. Noone, R. Plevano, A.
Traven, ed. Washington DC: The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University and The
Catholic University of America, 2004.
[Johannes Duns Scotus, 1999] Johannes Duns Scotus, Quaestiones in librum Porphyrii Isagoge
et Quaestiones super Praedicamenta. R. Andrews, G. Etzkorn, G. G´al, R. Green, T. Noone,
R. Wood ed. St. Bonaventure N.Y.: The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University,
1999.
[Peter Abelard, 1921] Peter Abaelards philosophische Schriften. 1. Die Logica ingredientibus,
ed. Dr. Bernard Geyer (in: Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, Band
XXI, Heft 1, M¨unster 1921).
[Peter of Spain, 1972] Peter of Spain, Tractatus, called afterwards Summule logicales, ed. L.M.
de Rijk. Assen: Van Gorcum, 1972.
[Radulphus Brito, 1980] Radulphus Brito, Quaestiones super Priscianum minorem, ed. Heinz
W. Enders & Jan Pinborg. Stuttgart – Bad Cannstatt, 1980.
[Kilwardby, 1976] Robert Kilwardby, De ortu scientiarum, ed. A.G. Judy. Auctores Britannici
Medii Aevi IV. London-Toronto, 1976.
[Bacon, 1983] Roger Bacon, De multiplicatione specierum and De speculis comburentibus, in:
David Lindberg, Roger Bacon’s Philosophy of Nature: A Critical Edition, with English Trans-
lation, Introduction and Notes, of De multiplicatione specierum and De speculis comburen-
tibus, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983.

386
Ria van der Lecq
[Bacon, 1988] Roger Bacon, Compendium to the Study of Theology. Edition and Translation
with Introduction and Notes by Thomas Maloney. Leiden: Brill, 1988.
[Thomas ofErfurt, 1972] Thomas of Erfurt, Grammatica speculativa. An edition with translation
and commentary by G.L. Bursill-Hall. London: Longman, 1972.
[Thomas Aquinas, 1976] Thomas Aquinas, De fallaciis, in: Sancti Thomae Aquinatis doctoris
angelici Opera omnia / iussu impensaque Leonis XIII. P.M. edita, T. 43. Roma: San Tom-
maso, 1976.
[Thomas Aquinas, 1950-56] Thomas
Aquinas,
Summa
theologiae,
cura
et
studio
Petri
Caramello; cum textu ex recensione Leonina, Taurini [etc.]: Marietti, 1950-1956.
[William of Ockham, 1974] William of Ockham, Summa logicae, ed. Ph. Boehner, G. G´al, S.
Brown, in Guillelmi de Ockham Opera philosophica et theologica ad ﬁdem codicum manuscrip-
torum edita. Opera Philosophica I. St. Bonaventure, N.Y., 1974.
Secondary literature
[Ashworth, 1991] E. J. Ashworth. . Signiﬁcation and Modes of Signifying in Thirteenth-Century
Logic: A Preface to Aquinas on Analogy, in: Medieval Philosophy & Theology, vol. 1, 39-67,
1991.
[Ashworth, 1992] E. J. Ashworth. . Analogy and equivocation in thirteenth-century logic:
Aquinas in context, in: Mediaeval Studies, vol. 54, 1992.
[Ashworth, 1996] E. J. Ashworth. Analogy,
univocation and equivocation in some early
fourteenth-century authors, in: John Marenbon (ed.), Aristotle in Britain during the Middle
Ages. Turnhout: Brepols, 1996.
[Biard, 1989] J. Biard. Logique et th´eorie du signe au XIVe si`ecle. Paris: Vrin, 1989.
[Braakhuis et al., 1981] H. A. G. Braakhuis, C. H. Kneepkens, and L.M. de Rijk, eds. En-
glish Logic and Semantics from the end of the Twelfth Century to the Time of Ockham and
Burleigh. Nijmegen: Ingenium, 1981.
[Braakhuis, 1997] H. A. G. Braakhuis. Logica Modernorum as a Discipline at the Faculty of Arts
of Paris in the Thirteenth Century, in: Olga Weijers & Louis Holtz (eds.), L’enseignement
des disciplines `a la Facult´e des arts (Paris et Oxford, XIIIe-XVe si`ecles). Turnhout: Brepols,
129-145, 1997.
[Bursill-Hall, 1971] G. L. Bursill-Hall. Speculative Grammar in the Middle Ages. The Doctrine
of Partes orationis of the Modistae. The Hague-Paris: Mouton, 1971.
[Bursill-Hall, 1972] G. L. Bursill-Hall. Grammatica Speculativa of Thomas of Erfurt. London:
Longman, 1972.
[Covington, 1984] M. A. Covington. Syntactic Theory in the High Middle Ages. Modistic mod-
els of sentence structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
[Ebbesen, 1979] S. Ebbesen. The dead man is alive, Synthese 40, 43-70, 1979.
[Ebbesen, 1983] S. Ebbesen. The Odyssey of Semantics from the Stoa to Buridan, in: History of
Semiotics, Volume 7. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 67-81,
1983.
[Ebbesen et al., 1984] S. Ebbesen, et al. Simon of Faversham, Quaestiones super libro elencho-
rum, ed. Sten Ebbesen, Thomas Izbicki, John Longeway, Francesco del Punta, Eileen Serene,
Eleonore Stump eds. Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, 1984.
[Ebbesen, 1988] S. Ebbesen. Concrete Accidental Terms. Late Thirteenth-Century Debates
about Problems Relating to such Terms as ‘album’, in: Norman Kretzmann (ed.), Mean-
ing and Reference in Medieval Philosophy. Studies in Memory of Jan Pinborg. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 107-74, 1988.
[Fredborg et al., 1978] K. M. Fredborg, L. Nielsen, and J. Pinborg. An Unedited Part of Roger
Bacon’s ‘Opus Maius’: ‘De signis”, in: Traditio, 34, 75-136, 1978.
[Fredborg, 1981] K. M. Fredborg. Roger Bacon on “Impositio vocis ad signiﬁcandum”. In
Braakhuis, Kneepkens & De Rijk (eds.), English Logic and Semantics from the End of the
Twelfth Century to the Time of Ockham and Burleigh. Nijmegen: Ingenium, 107-191, 1981.
[Friedman and Nielsen, 2000] R. L. Friedman and L. O. Nielsen. Peter Auriol: Introduction, in:
Vivarium XXXVIII, 1, 2000.
[Knudsen, 1982] C. Knudsen. Intentions and impositions., in: Norman Kretzmann, Anthony
Kenny and Jan Pinborg (eds.), The Cambridge history of Later Medieval Philosophy. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 479-95, 1982.

Logic and Theories of Meaning . . .
387
[Leﬀ, 1976] G. Leﬀ. The Dissolution of the Medieval Outlook. An Essay on Intellectual and
Spiritual Change in the Fourteenth Century. New York: Harper & Row, 1976.
[Libera, 1981] A. de Libera. Roger Bacon et le probl`eme de l’appelatio univoca, in: Braakhuis,
Kneepkens en De Rijk (eds.), English Logic and Semantics from the End of the Twelfth
Century to the Time of Ockham and Burleigh. Nijmegen: Ingenium, 193-234, 1981.
[Libera, 1986] A. de Libera. La litt´erature des Sophismata dans la tradition terministe parisienne
de la seconde moiti´e du XIIIe si`ecle, in: The Editing of Theological and Philosophical Texts
from the Middle Ages. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell International, 213-238, 1986.
[Maloney, 1983] T. S. Maloney. Roger Bacon on the Signiﬁcatum
of Words,
in:
Lucie
Brind’Amour, Eugene Vance (eds.), Arch´eologie du Signe. Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of
Medieval Studies,187-211, 1983.
[Maloney, 1984] T. S. Maloney. Roger Bacon on Equivocation, in: Vivarium XXII, 2, 85-112,
1984.
[Marmo, 1983] C. Marmo. Ontology and Semantics in the Logic of Duns Scotus, in: Umberto
Eco & Costantino Marmo (eds.), On the Medieval Theory of Signs, Amsterdam/Philadelphia
(John Benjamins Publishing Company), 143-193, 1983.
[Marmo, 1994] C. Marmo. Semiotica e Linguaggio nella Scolastica: Parigi, Bologna, Erfurt
1270-1330. La Semiotica dei Modisti. Roma (nella sede dell’ istituto Palazzo Boromini), 1994.
[Marmo, 1997] C. Marmo. Bacon, Aristotle (and all the others) on Natural Inferential Signs, in:
Vivarium XXXV, 2 136-154, 1997.
[Pasnau, 1997] R. Pasnau. Theories of cognition in the late Middle Ages. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1997.
[Perler, 1994] D. Perler. What Am I Thinking About? John Duns Scotus and Peter Aureol on
Intentional Objects, in: Vivarium XXXIII, 1, 72-89, 1994.
[Perler, 2001] D. Perler. What are intentional objects? A controversy among early Scotists, in:
Dominik Perler (ed.), Ancient and Medieval Theories of Intentionality. Leiden: Brill, 203-226,
2001.
[Perler, 2002] D. Perler. Theorien der Intentionalit¨at im Mittelalter. Frankfurt am Main: Vit-
torio Klostermann, 2002.
[Perler, 2003] D. Perler. Duns Scotus’s Philosopy of Language, in: The Cambridge Companion
to Duns Scotus, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 161-192, 2003.
[Pinborg, 1967] J. Pinborg. Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter. Kopenhagen-
M¨unster: Aschendorﬀsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1967.
[Pinborg, 1972] J. Pinborg. Logik un Semantik im Mittelalter. Ein ¨Uberblick. Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1972.
[Pinborg, 1974] J. Pinborg. Zum Begriﬀder Intentio Secunda. Radulphus Brito, Hervaeus Na-
talis und Petrus Aureoli in Diskussion, in: CIMAGL 13, 49-59, 1974.
[Pinborg, 1975a] J. Pinborg. Die Logik der Modistae, in: Studia Mediewistyczne 16, 39-97, 1975.
[Pinborg, 1975b] J. Pinborg. Radulphus Brito’s Sophism on Second Intentions, in: Vivarium
XIII, 2, 119-152, 1975.
[Pinborg, 1979] J. Pinborg. The English Contribution to Logic before Ockham, in: Synthese 40,
19-42, 1979.
[Pinborg, 1981] J. Pinborg. Roger Bacon on Signs: A newly recovered part of the Opus maius,
in: W. Kluxen ed., Sprache und Erkenntnis im Mittelalter, Berlin, 403-412, 1981.
[Pinborg, 1982] J. Pinborg. Speculative grammar, in: The Cambridge history of Later Medieval
Philosophy, Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny and Jan Pinborg (eds.). Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 254-69, 1982.
[Pini, 1999] G. Pini. Species, Concept and Thing: Theories of Signiﬁcation in the Second Half
of the Thirteenth Century, in: Medieval Philosophy and Theology 8, 21-52, 1999.
[Pini, 2001] G. Pini. Signiﬁcation of Names in Duns Scotus and Some of His Contemporaries,
in: Vivarium 39,1, 20-51, 2001.
[Pini, 2002] G. Pini. Categories and Logic in Duns Scotus. An Interpretation of Aristotle’s
Categories in the Late Thirteenth Century. Leiden: Brill, 2002.
[Rijk, 2005] L. M. de Rijk. Giraldus Odonis O.F.M., Opera philosophica, vol.II: De intention-
ibus. Critical edition with a study on the medieval intentionality debate up to ca. 1350. Leiden:
Brill, 2005.
[Roos, 1959] H. Roos. Die Stellung der Grammatik im 13. Jahrhunderts, in: J. Koch, Artes
liberales. Von der Antiken bildung zur Wissenschaft des Mittelalters. Leiden-K¨oln: Brill, 94-
106, 1959.

388
Ria van der Lecq
[Rosier, 1983] I. Rosier. La grammaire sp´eculative des Modistes. Lille (Presses Universitaires de
Lille), 1983.
[Rosier, 1994] I. Rosier. La parole comme acte. sur la grammaire et la s´emantique au XIIIe
si`ecle. Paris (Vrin), 1994.
[Schmidt, 1966] R. W. Schmidt.
The Domain of Logic according to Saint Thomas Aquinas.
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1966.
[Vos, 2006] A. Vos. The Philosophy of John Duns Scotus, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 2006.

THE NOMINALIST SEMANTICS OF
OCKHAM AND BURIDAN:
A “RATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION”
Gyula Klima
SOME HISTORICAL-PHILOSOPHICAL PRELIMINARIES
This paper is going to outline the innovative semantic theories of the two great
14th-century nominalist thinkers whose work eventually gave rise to the quasi-
institutional separation of the nominalist via moderna, the “modern way”, from
the realist via antiqua, “the old way” of doing logic, science, philosophy, and
theology in the late Middle Ages.1 The person who initiated these changes was
the English Franciscan theologian, William Ockham. However, the person who was
primarily responsible for establishing Ockham’s nominalism as a genuinely viable
theoretical alternative was the French secular Master of Arts, John Buridan.
The historical signiﬁcance of Ockham’s innovations is that they were the ﬁrst to
introduce a radically new type of theoretical disagreement into scholastic discourse,
a type of disagreement with which we, as heirs to these historical developments,
are all too familiar, namely, the conﬂict between proponents of paradigmatically
diﬀerent conceptual schemes. In the case of conﬂicts of this type, the disagreement
is not merely over diﬀerent possible answers to the same questions answerable
within the same conceptual framework. For in a conﬂict of this type there is no
uniformly shared conceptual framework that would ﬁx the commonly recognized
rules of the “language games” to be played by the disputants in discussing their
disagreements. Therefore, what becomes at stake in these conﬂicts is rather the
very legitimacy of some of the questions and rules of the opposing camp. For
example, after Ockham, the old metaphysical question “What are the common
natures signiﬁed by our common terms and how are they related to the singulars?”
has to yield to the new semantic question “Do our common terms signify some
common natures in the ﬁrst place?” Ockham’s and Buridan’s resounding ‘no’ to
this new question and their relentless pursuit of the implications of this answer
radically transformed late-medieval theoretical discourse.
The importance of Ockham’s and especially Buridan’s work consists in their
presenting a consistent, alternative way of construing the fundamental semantic
1For a detailed historical discussion of the late-medieval separation of the via antiqua and the
via moderna see: Moore, W. L. 1989 “Via Moderna”, in: J. R. Strayer: Dictionary of Middle
Ages, New York: Scribner, 1989, vol.12. pp. 406-409.
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝200
Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.
8

390
Gyula Klima
relations between language, thought and reality. Indeed, the real strength of their
nominalism is not so much their criticism of the older, realist way of construing
these relationships as their detailed, systematic account of how a philosophy of
language based on a strictly nominalist ontology (denying any form of extramental
universals and keeping the number of distinct ontological categories at a “bare
minimum” of two or three)2 is possible.
SOME METHODOLOGICAL PROVISOS
Since this paper is going to focus exclusively on Ockham’s and Buridan’s seman-
tic ideas, it will not provide a comprehensive discussion of their logic. Logic in
the Middle Ages was a much more comprehensive subject than we conceive of
it nowadays, for both theoretical and historical reasons. The primary theoretical
reason why medieval logic comprised subjects that we would recognize as falling
under such varied subjects as metaphysics, cognitive psychology, linguistics, the
philosophy of science, and epistemology is the medieval conception of logic as a
universal theoretical tool (organon) of reason in its pursuit of truth and avoid-
ance of error. The main historical reason is the development of medieval logic as
a largely conservative enhancement and systematization of Aristotelian logic, in
combination with available elements of Stoic logic.
Accordingly, even if the medieval logical output is recognizably about logic
even to the modern reader, it would appear to be mingled with considerations
pertaining to various, sometimes from our perspective somewhat loosely related
subjects. But even within what we would recognize as strictly pertaining to logical
theory itself, we would ﬁnd an interesting mixture of what we would regard as
syntactic and semantic considerations, forming only partial theories of various
types of natural language reasonings. The theory of syllogistic, for instance, is a
syntactical “validity-checker” for a certain limited type of two-premise inferences,
2The denial of the existence of real universals is one of the fundamental theses of nominalism.
However, we should keep in mind that medieval moderate realists, which means practically ev-
erybody after Abelard or maybe even after Boethius, also denied separate Platonic Forms, just as
they would deny most modern analytic metaphysicians’ abstract properties. Medieval nominal-
ists after Ockham would therefore distinguish themselves from moderate realists by denying the
existence of inherent common natures distinct from their particulars posited by moderate realists
(such as Aquinas or especially Scotus), as well as by reducing the number of distinct ontological
categories to two, namely, substance and quality (Ockham and his followers) or three, namely,
substance, quantity and quality (Buridan and his followers). However, quite interestingly, the
same sort of ontology was also accessible in the older framework, and was in fact proposed by
later moderate realists, such as the 15th-century Dominican, Domingo Soto. So the fundamental
diﬀerence between medieval nominalists and moderate realists lies not so much in their respective
ontologies, but rather in their diﬀerent semantics, in the diﬀerent ways in which they explain
the relationships between language, thought, and reality. For further details of this sort of com-
parison, see Klima, G. (1999) “Ockham’s Semantics and Ontology of the Categories”, Spade,
P. V. (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Ockham, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 118-142; Klima, G. (1999) “Buridan’s Logic and the Ontology of Modes”, in: Ebbesen, S. –
Friedman, R. L. (eds.), Medieval Analyses in Language and Cognition, Copenhagen: The Royal
Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, 1999, pp. 473-495.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
391
whereas the theory of supposition (together with the theories of ampliation and
appellation and other properties of terms)3 is a philosophical-semantic theory of
reference, occasionally used to justify certain rules of inference and falsify some
apparent, fallacious rules of inference, as part of the theory of fallacies.
Therefore, when we are discussing characteristic semantic ideas of our medieval
colleagues as part of their logical theory, we should be constantly aware of the
rather diﬀerent theoretical context in which these semantic ideas functioned. Thus,
for example, even if the idea of semantic compositionality was deﬁnitely present
in medieval authors in some form,4 we should not expect them to provide recur-
sive deﬁnitions allowing the eﬀective computation of semantic values of complex
expressions as functions of the semantic values of their components in the way we
would construct a semantic theory. Nevertheless, this fact does not exclude the
possibility of a rational reconstruction of their ideas in the sense that following
their intuitive clues, we may still provide such deﬁnitions that could constitute
what we would recognize as a full-ﬂedged semantic theory for a certain class of
expressions, culminating in a semantic deﬁnition of logical validity. At any rate,
the subsequent discussion will provide the outlines of a rational reconstruction
of this sort, in the hopes that this approach will not only shed some light on
certain intriguing features of medieval semantics, but that it will also facilitate
comparisons between medieval and modern ideas, pointing to such features of the
medieval ideas that we also can (and should) take seriously in our own thinking
about the semantics of natural languages.
But apart from the potential fruitfulness of this approach from a contemporary
perspective, there is another consideration that necessitates it in this discussion,
namely, the immense variety of the relevant semantic ideas in the medieval out-
put. In order to understand the importance and character of Ockham’s semantic
innovations and their further development by Buridan, we have to contrast their
ideas with “the former paradigm”. But in order to do so, we have to reconstruct
that “paradigm” as such, i.e., we have to provide a certain schematic summation
of those common features of the semantic ideas of earlier authors that Ockham
and Buridan abandoned in their paradigmatically diﬀerent semantic construction.
The rational reconstructions sketched in this paper, therefore, ought not to be
regarded as attempted answers to the factual, historical question: what was the
logical semantic theory of this or that medieval author like? Rather, they should be
3Cf.
Read, Stephen, ”Medieval Theories: Properties of Terms”, The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (Spring 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/spr2006/entries/medieval-terms/
4See the following interesting remark by G. Nuchelmans: “... the signiﬁcation of the whole
complex was commonly held to be of a compositional nature and to be determined by the signi-
ﬁcation of its parts. As Pardo put it, only incomplex expressions have been given conventional
meanings in a primary and immediate way; a propositional complex, such as Homo est animal,
on the other hand, has been destined to signify its meaning only in a mediate, consequential and
secondary manner, since its signiﬁcation can be derived from the signiﬁcations of the incomplex
parts.” Late-Scholastic and Humanist Theories of the Proposition, North Holland Publishing
Company, Amsterdam-Oxford-New York, 1980. p.45. Cf. Hieronymus Pardus: Medulla Dialec-
tices, Parisiis 1500 (1505), fol.1.V.

392
Gyula Klima
regarded as attempted answers to the counter-factual, theoretical question: what
would a semantic theory be like if we constructed it on the basis of the semantic
intuitions of such and such medieval authors (rather than on the basis of our own
post-Fregean/Tarskian intuitions)?
Thus, the discussion will begin with a rational reconstruction of what, for want
of a better phrase, I will somewhat anachronistically call via antiqua semantics,
to provide the theoretical contrast for the reconstruction of Ockham’s and Buri-
dan’s semantic ideas, as they were responsible for the emergence of what might
be termed via moderna semantics. Next, I will proceed to a brief discussion of
what appear to be the main motives and reasons for Ockham’s abandonment of
the via antiqua semantics, and an outline of his alternative semantics, devised to
achieve his program of “ontological reduction”, to remedy what he perceived as the
unjustiﬁable ontological “excesses” of the older theory. The discussion will then
move on to a reconstruction of Buridan’s ideas, consciously framed by Buridan
in a token-based, nominalist semantics, under the conditions of semantic closure
characteristic of natural languages.5 The concluding section will consider in some
detail what sort of modiﬁcations the standard semantic construction of modern
quantiﬁcation theory would have to undergo in order to faithfully reﬂect the two
competing medieval conceptions.
VIA ANTIQUA SEMANTICS
Signiﬁcation
The common starting point for all medieval semantics is the Aristotelian “semantic
triangle”, the idea based on Aristotle’s remarks in his On Interpretation to the
eﬀect that words signify things not immediately, but with the mediation of the
concepts of the mind. There was some disagreement among authors as to whether
words signiﬁed primarily concepts and only secondarily the things conceived by
means of these concepts or vice versa,6 but since words in themselves were regarded
as mere articulate utterances or strings of letters corresponding to such utterances,
it was generally agreed that these utterances and strings are signiﬁcative only in
virtue of being subordinated to some acts of understanding. Clearly, if I utter the
5A token-, as opposed to type-, based semantics is a semantic system in which each symbol
is regarded as a single, individual occurrence to be evaluated as such, as opposed to standing in
for any similar token of the same type. To a consistent nominalist, only a token-based semantics
is ontologically acceptable. Semantic closure according to Tarski is the condition of a language
that contains its own semantic predicates and means of referring to its own items. For further
discussion, see Klima, G. (2004) “Consequences of a Closed, Token-Based Semantics: The Case
of John Buridan”, History and Philosophy of Logic, 25(2004), pp. 95-110; Priest, G. “Semantic
Closure”, Studia Logica 43(1984), pp. 117-129.
6On what Scotus calls a “magna altercatio” over this issue, see Pini, G. “Signiﬁcation of
Names in Duns Scotus and Some of His Contemporaries.” Vivarium 39 (2001), pp. 20-51, Pini,
G. “Species, Concept, and Thing: Theories of Signiﬁcation in the Second Half of the Thirteenth
Century”, Medieval Philosophy and Theology 8, 2 (1999), pp. 21-52, and Perler, D. “Duns Scotus
on Signiﬁcation”, Medieval Philosophy and Theology, 3 (1993), 97-120.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
393
articulate sound ‘biltrix’ or write down the corresponding string of letters as I just
did, anyone who hears or reads it literally has no idea what it means. By contrast,
if I utter the sound ‘man’ in English or the corresponding term ‘homo’ in Latin,
anybody who understands these languages will have an understanding of human
beings in general, i.e., the word will activate a concept in his or her mind whereby
they conceive of human beings in a universal fashion. At any rate, after Boethius,
this is the common medieval idea behind any explanation of why Aristotle said
that words signify things with the mediation of concepts.
But among “via antiqua authors” there was also a further important consid-
eration to motivate the same point concerning common categorematic terms in
particular. Commenting on Aristotle’s relevant remarks, Thomas Aquinas wrote
the following:
. . . names, verbs and speech signify [. . . ] conceptions of the intellect
immediately according to the teaching of Aristotle. They cannot im-
mediately signify things, as is clear from their mode of signifying, for
the name ‘man’ signiﬁes human nature in abstraction from singulars;
hence it is impossible that it immediately signify a singular man. The
Platonists for this reason held that it signiﬁed the separated idea of
man. But because in Aristotle’s teaching man in the abstract does
not really subsist, but is only in the mind, it was necessary for Aris-
totle to say that ‘vocal sounds signify the conceptions of the intellect
immediately and things by means of them.’7
According to this explanation, one can ﬁnd a proof for Aristotle’s claim in the
mode of signiﬁcation of common terms. These terms cannot function in the same
way as singular terms naming a certain thing, for there is no such a thing that
they could plausibly be taken to name.
In accordance with the abstractionist
cognitive psychology of medieval Aristotelians, a common concept is formed by
abstracting the natures of individual things from their individualizing conditions,
by thinking of the natures informing these individuals not insofar as they inform
these individuals.8 Thus, what a common concept obtained by abstraction directly
represents is the nature of any thing informed by this nature, whereas the things
themselves, the bearers of this nature, each having an individualized instance of it,
are represented only indirectly. Therefore, what the corresponding term directly
signiﬁes is also this nature itself, whereas the thing bearing this nature is signiﬁed
only indirectly. But the nature represented by the concept is signiﬁed by the term
only through the mediation of the concept, immediately signiﬁed by the term.
This semantic idea is spelled out even more explicitly in a 13th-century logic text,
the so-called Summa Lamberti, in the following fashion:
7Aristotle: On Interpretation: Commentary by St. Thomas and Cajetan, trans. J. T. Oesterle
(Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1962), p. 25.
8For a more detailed discussion of the medieval Aristotelian conception of abstraction in this
connection, see Klima, G., “The Medieval Problem of Universals”, The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (Winter 2004 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2004/entries/universals-medieval/.

394
Gyula Klima
. . . it is essential to know that four things are required for an utterance
to be signiﬁcant: a thing, a concept [or some understanding, intellectus]
of the thing, an utterance, and the union of the utterance with the
concept of the thing.
What we are calling the thing is something
existing outside the soul, which is apprehended by the soul by means
of an idea of it — e.g., a man, or a stone. What we call the concept of
the thing is the idea [species] or likeness of the thing, which exists in the
soul; for according to Aristotle in the third book of De anima (III, 8,
431b30-432a1), not the stone but rather an appearance [species] of the
stone is in the soul; and it is by means of the appearance that the soul
grasps the thing. The utterance is that which is put forward along with
the concept [or understanding] of the thing; in that case [i.e., when the
utterance is made with some understanding of a thing] a signiﬁcation
is united to the utterance and the utterance is made signiﬁcant. And
although both the concept of the thing and the utterance are natural in
the same way (since they are formed by natural sources), the utterance
is nevertheless said to signify by the will of the person instituting it,
because the union of the concept of the thing with the utterance is
eﬀected by the will, and it is in that [action] that the imposition of
the utterance consists. In this way, therefore, an utterance is primarily
— in itself — and directly the sign of a concept of the thing; but in
addition it is indirectly the sign of the thing. For just as we say that
whatever is a cause of the cause is a cause of the thing caused, so we
can say that in its own way whatever is a sign of the sign is a sign of
the thing signiﬁed. Thus, since an utterance is a sign of a concept, and
a concept is a sign of a thing, in this way [the utterance] is a sign of the
thing as well. An utterance that is a sign of a sign —- of the concept
—- will be a sign of the signiﬁed — i.e., of the thing; it is, however, a
sign of the concept directly but a sign of the thing indirectly.9
It is important to note here, as this is going to be one of the sticking points for
Ockham, that the term signiﬁes the thing it signiﬁes only by virtue of signifying the
concept; still this does not mean that the word is imposed to signify the concept
only, because the concept naturally signiﬁes the thing conceived by it. The other
important point, again, sternly opposed by Ockham, is that the “thing” signiﬁed
by a common term is not any of the singular things one can ultimately conceive of
by means of the corresponding concept. For the concept directly represents in an
abstract universal fashion the nature existing individualized in its particulars. The
particulars themselves will therefore not be strictly speaking the signiﬁcata of the
9“The Summa Lamberti on the properties of terms”, The Cambridge Translations of Medieval
Philosophical Texts, ed.
N. Kretzmann-E. Stump, tr.
N. Kretzmann, Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, 1988, pp. 104-110. For the same type of reasoning concerning the signiﬁcation
of common terms used by Burley against Ockham, see his On the Purity of the Art of Logic, tr.
P. V. Spade, Yale University Press: New Haven, 2000, pp. 87-88 (33). For further references to
other via antiqua authors, see Spade’s note 32 on p. 87.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
395
term, but rather its supposita, i.e., the things the term can be used to stand for in
a proposition. Lambert makes this clear in the immediately following paragraph:
Now signiﬁcation diﬀers from supposition in that signiﬁcation is prior
to supposition. For the signiﬁcation is the concept of the thing repre-
sented by means of the utterance, and before the union of it with the
utterance there is no term; rather, a term is constituted in the union
of that concept of a thing with an utterance. Supposition, on the other
hand, is a certain property of a term that has been constituted in that
way. There is another diﬀerence, because signiﬁcation extends only to
the thing the term is imposed to signify; supposition, however, extends
not only to the thing signiﬁed by means of the term but can extend
to supposita contained under that thing. For example, the signiﬁca-
tion of ‘man’ extends only to man, not to the things contained under
man; for ‘man’ signiﬁes man, not Socrates and not Plato. ‘Man’ can,
nevertheless, supposit for Socrates, and for Plato, and for man.10
The “thing”, therefore, that a term on this conception signiﬁes is not any of the
ordinary things we would normally use the term to stand for in the context of
a proposition. For the thing in question is what the concept directly represents,
namely, the nature of the individuals abstracted from its individuating conditions
in the formation of the concept. Thus, on this conception, what the term ultimately
signiﬁes is determined by the representational content of the concept immediately
signiﬁed by the term in the mind.
That representational content, in turn, is
determined by the process of concept-formation, namely, abstraction.
This description of what determines the ultimate signiﬁcation of a term, how-
ever, renders the issue somewhat murky, insofar as it is not exactly clear what we
are talking about when were are referring to what a term ultimately signiﬁes. To
be sure, it is clear enough what it is not supposed to be. It is not supposed to
be either the concept that the term immediately signiﬁes or any of the individual
things whose nature the concept represents, which are the supposita of the term
according to Lambert’s description. What the term ultimately signiﬁes therefore
is either some intermediary representation “between” the concept and the individ-
uals universally represented by the concept or it is the nature of the individuals
as represented by such an intermediary representation. But even this description
of the situation needs some further sorting out. Because we also have to clarify
what we are supposed to be referring to when we are talking about “the concept”
or understanding that the term immediately signiﬁes “in the mind”, and what we
10Ibid. Clearly, man here is the universal nature signiﬁed by the term ‘man’ and represented
by the concept that this term directly signiﬁes, as opposed to the individual humans, such as
Socrates or Plato. So, the signiﬁcation of this term extends only to this universal nature, the
direct object of the concept of humans, although, on account of this signiﬁcation, the term can
be used in a sentence to stand for the individual humans who have this nature. The function of
the term of standing for these individuals in a sentence is its property that is called ‘supposition’
(which is why this property is often compared to the modern notion of reference, as it is contrasted
with meaning).

396
Gyula Klima
are supposed to be referring to when we are talking about “the nature” of the
individuals represented by the concept.
To cut a long story short, by the 13th century there was general agreement that
there are no universal things in reality in the sense of some numerically one entity
common to many numerically distinct particular things constituting the substance
of each and all at the same time, for the assumption of the existence of such a
thing would lead to numerous inconsistencies.11 To be sure, this did not prevent
various authors from talking about common natures or even universal things, but
with the understanding that the “things” talked about in this way are not to be
understood to be things of nature existing in their universality apart from any
consideration of the intellect, rather, they should be regarded as objects of our
understanding owing their universality to the abstractive activity of our minds,
and having as their foundation in reality their individualized instances constituting
the individuals in their speciﬁc and generic kinds.
Thus, we should say that what common categorematic terms ultimately signify
are these ultimate objects of the intellect, namely, the individualized natures of
individual things, the actual presence of which veriﬁes these terms of these in-
dividuals. Such an individualized nature, however, is conceived by an act of our
understanding in abstraction from its individuating conditions: not qua the nature
of this or that, but qua that nature, regardless of whether it is of this or of that
individual; although everyone agreed that it could not exist without being of some
individual or another. The act of understanding whereby this ultimate object is
conceived is an individual concept of this individual mind, and the ultimate ob-
ject is an individualized nature of that individual thing. However, since the act of
the mind represents this individualized nature in a universal manner, on account
of which it can equally represent any other individualized instance of the same
nature, the representative content of this act was characterized as the direct and
immediate object of the act, a universal object of the mind, by means of which the
mind conceives not only of individuals from which it obtained its concept, but also
of ones it has never encountered. In late-scholastic terminology, therefore, authors
distinguished the formal or subjective concepts, the individual mental acts of in-
dividual minds, from their objective concepts, the universal, immediate objects of
the formal concepts, whereby the mind conceives of the individualized natures of
individuals, its ultimate objects. Some authors even distinguished the objective
concept from the common nature itself, i.e., the nature considered in abstraction
not only from its existence in individuals, but also from its existence as the object
of any intellect.12
But we need not go into further details of this rather complicated and diﬃcult
psychological as well as ontological doctrine in order to understand its semantic
import. The upshot of all these considerations, despite variations in ﬁner details
in various authors, is that our common categorematic terms ultimately signify
11For a discussion of some of these inconsistencies, see again Klima, G., “The Medieval Problem
of Universals”.
12See Klima, G., “The Medieval Problem of Universals”, sect. 7.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
397
the ultimate, direct objects of our individual (formal) concepts, namely, the in-
dividualized natures of individual things, whereas they immediately signify the
immediate objects of these formal concepts (through signifying these formal con-
cepts as well),13 namely, the objective concepts, and through these, the common
natures themselves.
What renders the doctrine diﬃcult to swallow is not only the dubious ontolog-
ical status of these quasi-entities, these objects-of-the-mind (which are not to be
regarded as full-ﬂedged objects in their own right),14 but also the relative obscu-
rity of their conditions of distinction and identity. In fact, as we shall see, this was
precisely one of the main motivations for Ockham to break with this doctrine.
But before dealing with its genuine or perceived problems, we should round out
the doctrine insofar as it can serve as the starting point for a full-ﬂedged semantic
construction. (Not surprisingly, though, in a proper set theoretical reconstruction,
in which these obscure entities are represented by well-behaved set theoretical
objects, many of the perceived obscurities of the doctrine almost “miraculously”
disappear.) Taking our cue from the foregoing discussion as well as from Peter
Geach’s seminal paper “Form and Existence”,15 in a formal semantic construction
we may represent the signiﬁcation of a common categorematic term by means
of a semantic function that assigns individualized natures, forms or “property-
instances” (the terminology is of no importance) to individuals at diﬀerent times.
Accordingly, if F is a common term, u is an individual element of the universe
of discourse U, and t is a time-point or interval (we do not have to determine that
in advance), then let SGT(F)(u)(t) be an element of U, representing the ultimate
signiﬁcate of F in u at t, the individualized F-ness of u at time t. The signiﬁcation
of F itself, SGT(F), on the other hand, is the function itself assigning these
ultimate signiﬁcata to F in respect of u and t.16 The function itself, therefore, can
also be regarded as a representation of the objective concept, or the common nature
itself, what is immediately signiﬁed by F in abstraction from the individualizing
conditions of the nature ultimately signiﬁed by F. In fact, if we distinguish a
special subclass of individuals in U, namely, individual minds designated by m,
then we can take SGT(F)(m)(t) to represent what F signiﬁes immediately in mind
13See Cajetan: Commentary on Being and Essence, tr. by F. C. Wade, SJ, L. H. Kendzierski,
Marquette University Press: Milwaukee, 1965, pp. 67-68.
14For a more detailed discussion of the ontological issues involved, see Klima, G. (1993) “The
Changing Role of Entia Rationis in Medieval Philosophy: A Comparative Study with a Recon-
struction”, Synthese 96(1993), pp. 25-59.
15P. T. Geach, “Form and Existence,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 55(1955), pp.
251-272, reprinted in his God and the Soul (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969), pp.
42−−64.
16To be sure, technically speaking, SGT(F) is a function from individuals to functions from
times to individualized forms.
There are certain technical advantages to working with com-
pounded monadic functions instead of polyadic functions in the semantic construction, but we
need not get into those here. These advantages should be obvious in the semantics presented
in Klima, G. “Aquinas’ Theory of the Copula and the Analogy of Being”, Logical Analysis and
History of Philosophy, 5(2002), pp. 159-176.

398
Gyula Klima
m at t, namely, the formal or subjective concept m has of the nature objectively
signiﬁed by F in abstraction from any mind or any thing that is or can be F.17
Furthermore, distinguishing subjective concepts as the immediate signiﬁcata of
F in individual minds may give us the opportunity to make better sense of the
distinction between objective concept and common nature made by later Thomists
such as Cajetan, taking his cue from Aquinas’ remarks in his De Ente et Essen-
tia.18 For if the common nature is the object of the abstractive mind considered
in abstraction from both its individuating conditions in extramental things and
from its being the object of any mind, whereas the objective concept is the same
nature considered insofar as it is the object of some mind or another, then we may
say that the common nature is best represented by the signiﬁcation function, ab-
stracting both from external individuals and minds, whereas the objective concept
is best represented by the same function restricted to extramental objects, i.e., the
ultimate objects of the formal concepts of individual minds.
But regardless of these somewhat obscure details, the emerging semantic concep-
tion is clear enough, and relatively easy to approach from a modern, post-Fregean
angle. The ultimate signiﬁcata of common terms are “trope-like” forms or proper-
ties individualized by the subject they inform and by time. What veriﬁes the term
of an individual at a given time in a simple predication is, therefore, the actuality,
i.e., actual existence of this signiﬁcatum. Thus, for example, ‘Socrates is wise’ is
true because of the actual existence of Socrates’ wisdom, namely, Socrates’ actual,
individualized quality, signiﬁed by the predicate ‘wise’. Correspondingly, ‘Meletus
is wise’ is false, because of the non-actuality of Meletus’ wisdom, provided these
sentences are uttered, say, during Socrates’s trial. To be sure, if Meletus still can
be wise at that time, the term ‘wise’ can be taken to signify his potential wisdom.
But in regard of a thing that simply cannot have wisdom, such as a rock or a color,
the term ‘wise’ just signiﬁes nothing. So, the signiﬁcation of a concrete common
term is best represented by a semantic function that takes individuals and times
as its arguments, and yields actual or potential individualized properties for these
arguments or nothing, in case it is undeﬁned for those arguments.19
A simple predication, therefore, in general, yields the combination of the signiﬁ-
cation of the predicate with its appropriate arguments, provided by those semantic
values of the other syntactic components of the predication that determine the in-
dividualized signiﬁcata of the predicate. These “individualizing factors” are the
individual thing provided by the suppositum (i.e., referent) of the subject, and
17This suggestion is worked out in some detail in a formal semantics presented in Essay V of
Klima, G. Ars Artium: Essays in Philosophical Semantics, Medieval and Modern, Budapest:
Institute of Philosophy of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1988.
18See n. 13.
19These remarks also indicate how we should treat the semantics of the corresponding abstract
terms. They signify the same as their concrete counterparts; however, because of their diﬀerent
mode of signiﬁcation, when they are made the subject of a proposition, they stand for their
signiﬁcata, and not for the things bearing their signiﬁcata in the way the concrete terms do.
Again, the formal semantics for these is worked out in my Ars Artium.
See also Klima, G.
“The Semantic Principles Underlying Saint Thomas Aquinas’s Metaphysics of Being”, Medieval
Philosophy and Theology, 5(1996), pp. 87-141.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
399
the time provided by the tense of the verb and the context (of the utterance or,
for example, the actual interpretation of a written predication). This last remark,
however, introduces two other essential elements into the picture, namely, the verb
needed for the predication, i.e., the copula, along with the time it co-signiﬁes, and
the supposition (reference) of the subject.
Supposition
As we have seen, the via antiqua analysis of signiﬁcation provides a number of dif-
ferent semantic values for any common term: their immediate signiﬁcata (whether
those should be identiﬁed as the formal concept, objective concept, or the common
nature represented by these concepts, or all these in a sequence), their ultimate
signiﬁcata (the individualized natures, forms or “property instances” of individu-
als), and the merely indirectly signiﬁed individuals themselves. Ordinarily, we use
concrete common terms to talk about these last-mentioned items. When we in fact
use a term in a proposition to talk about these, namely, about the individuals in
which the ultimate signiﬁcata of the term are actual, then the term is said to be in
personal supposition, standing (or to use the common neologism, suppositing) for
its personal supposita. When it stands for its (various) immediate signiﬁcata (or
even perhaps its ultimate signiﬁcata or its signiﬁcata in relation to its supposita,
etc.),20 then it stands in simple supposition. And when it is used to stand for
itself (or similar tokens of the same type), then it is said to be in material suppo-
sition. For example, ‘man’ in ‘Man is a species’ stands for the objective concept
of humans, i.e., it has simple supposition, but in ‘A man is a rational animal’
it has personal supposition, and in ‘Man is a noun in English’, it has material
supposition.
Attributing supposition, i.e., a context-dependent referring function to common
terms stands in stark contrast with the Fregean conception, on the basis of which
Peter Geach has repeatedly criticized the medieval idea of common personal sup-
position.21 However, one can clearly reconstruct this semantic function of common
terms by using restricted variables, i.e., variables that are exactly like the variables
of standard quantiﬁcation theory, except they range not over the entire universe
of discourse but only over the extension of their matrix. For instance, the sentence
‘A man is a rational animal’ in this reconstruction would not have to be formalized
by using an unrestricted variable bound by an existential quantiﬁer, forcing us to
introduce a conjunction to provide the correct truth conditions of the original. In-
20Walter Burley, for example, presents an elaborate system of distinctions for various sorts of
simple supposition in his Tractatus de suppositionibus, in S.F. Brown, “Walter Burleigh’s Treatise
De suppositionibus and its Inﬂuence on William of Ockham”, Franciscan Studies, 32 (1972), pp.
15-64. he also changed his mind about parts of his doctrine in his On the Purity of the Art
of Logic. For details, see Spade, P.V., “Walter Burley on the Kinds of Simple Supposition”,
Vivarium, 37(1999), pp. 41-59. But we ﬁnd similar distinctions in other “older” authors as well.
21See Geach, P. T., Reference and Generality, Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY, 1962, c.
2, sect. 28, pp, 34-36; Peter Geach, “Nominalism,” Sophia 3(1964), pp. 3-14, reprinted in his
Logic Matters, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1980, pp. 298-301.

400
Gyula Klima
stead, representing the subject term by the quantiﬁable restricted variable ‘x.Mx’,
we get a formula that need not contain a conjunction: ‘(∃x.Mx)(Ax.)’.22
In fact, since the syntax of this formula is much closer to the original in this
regard than formulae of standard quantiﬁcation theory, it should be clear that
just as changing the determiner in the English sentence (using ‘every’, ‘the’, ‘this’,
‘no’, or, switching to the plural, ‘two’, ‘ﬁve’, ‘most’, ‘twenty percent of’, in the
place of the indeﬁnite article, etc.) does not introduce new conjunctives into the
sentence, so the addition of the corresponding (non-standard, numerical, and even
“pleonotetic” quantiﬁers) to this sort of formula need not introduce diﬀerent log-
ical connectives into the syntax of this formula, as it does in the case of standard
quantiﬁcational formulae (as when we have to switch from conjunction to implica-
tion when replacing the existential quantiﬁer with the universal quantiﬁer — but
we cannot do that with the pleonotetic quantiﬁers).23
Thus, using restricted variables to represent common terms in personal suppo-
sition clearly has the advantage of providing a better “match” with the syntax of
natural languages than the formulae of standard quantiﬁcation theory can provide.
However, with the appropriate semantic interpretation restricted variables can do
even more.
If restricted variables are used to represent common terms in their referring
function, then the supposition of these terms can best be interpreted as the value-
assignment of such variables. For example, in accordance with the doctrine of
personal supposition, ‘Every man is an animal’ was analyzed by the medievals in
terms of the conjunction ‘This man is an animal and that man is an animal . . . ’,
where the demonstrative pronouns pick out all individuals falling under ‘man’. But
if we represent this sentence as ‘(∀x.Mx)(Ax.)’, then the restricted variable in this
formula, ‘x.Mx’, does exactly the same thing, namely, it takes its values from the
extension of its matrix. Thus, we can justiﬁably deﬁne a supposition function for
this variable analogously to the value assignment function of ordinary variables
of standard quantiﬁcation theory, with the only diﬀerence that whereas ordinary
variables range over the entire universe of discourse, restricted variables range only
over the extension of their matrix.
However, there can obviously be cases when the extension of the matrix of a
restricted variable is empty, namely, when the common term represented by the
variable is true of nothing. In such a case we may assign the variable some artiﬁcial
value, whatever that may be, of which no simple predication is true.24 This move at
22This is the approach to the reconstruction of certain features of medieval supposition theory
I ﬁrst presented in my Ars Artium.
But there are a number of other, basically equivalent
approaches in the literature e.g. by G. Englebretsen, D. P. Henry, A. Orenstein and T. Parsons.
23For a discussion of this observation see essay III of my Ars Artium. The impossibility of
representing pleonotetic quantiﬁers in standard quantiﬁcation theory was ﬁrst proven (for ‘most’
interpreted as ‘more than half the’) in J. Barwise and R. Cooper, “Generalized Quantiﬁers and
Natural Language”, Linguistics and Philosophy, 4(1981), pp.159-219, pp.214-215. (C13), setting
oﬀa whole cottage industry of generalized quantiﬁcation theory in the eighties.
24Again, I took this approach in Essay II of my Ars Artium as well as in “Existence and
Reference in Medieval Logic”, in: A. Hieke — E. Morscher (eds.): New Essays in Free Logic,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001, pp. 197-226.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
401
once yields the result that universal aﬃrmative propositions will have existential
import, which in turn restores both the traditional Square of Opposition and
traditional, Aristotelian syllogistic invalidated by the conditional interpretation of
universal aﬃrmatives necessitated by standard quantiﬁcation theory.25
Such results are interesting and may be regarded as forming a certain conceptual
bridge between modern and medieval theories. But we must not forget that the
medievals themselves did not analyze sentences in terms of a quantiﬁer-analysis,
not even in terms of restricted variables. Rather, they made distinctions equivalent
to distinctions we would draw in terms of quantiﬁer scopes, using their own the-
oretical devices to distinguish diﬀerent modes of personal supposition, namely the
so-called suppositional descents. Since these are discussed elsewhere in this vol-
ume, and they are not directly relevant to the contrast between the two viae I am
dealing with here, I will not go into the details of this theory. All that is relevant
from our present point of view is that according to the via antiqua conception, the
two terms of a categorical proposition have radically diﬀerent semantic functions.
The subject term supplies its supposita to ﬁll in the argument places of the ab-
stract signiﬁcation-function of the predicate, thereby determining which ultimate
signiﬁcata of the predicate need to be actual to render the proposition true. The
signum quantitatis (the “quantiﬁer word”) of the subject term will determine how
many of these signiﬁcata will have to be actual, whereas the tense of the copula
will determine when these signiﬁcata will have to be actual. But the copula on
this conception will do actually much more, namely, it will signify the actuality
of these ultimate signiﬁcata, eﬀect the combination of subject and predicate, and
signify the existence of the resulting propositional complex, while co-signifying the
time when this complex needs to be actual for the truth of the proposition.
The copula and the signiﬁcata of propositions
If we look at the foregoing suggestions for reconstructing the semantic functions
of subject and predicate, it will be obvious that the function of the copula is not
represented in these suggestions at all. However, if we want to take the reﬂections
of medieval authors on the issue seriously, we have to acknowledge that the copula
in their analysis is not just a mere syntactical marker of the application of predicate
to subject (to distinguish a predication from a mere list), but it actually has the
genuine semantic function of predicating existence. As Aquinas explains:
The reason why [Aristotle] says that the verb ‘is’ co-signiﬁes composi-
tion is that it does not principally signify composition, but secondarily;
for it primarily signiﬁes what occurs to the mind in the way of actu-
ality absolutely: for ‘is’, uttered absolutely, signiﬁes being in act, and
hence it signiﬁes as a verb. But since actuality, which the verb ‘is’
principally signiﬁes, is in general the actuality of every form, whether
25Cf.
Parsons, Terence, ”The Traditional Square of Opposition”, The Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy (Winter 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2006/entries/square/.

402
Gyula Klima
it is a substantial or an accidental actuality, this is why when we want
to signify any form or act to actually inhere [inesse] in a subject, we
signify this by means of the verb ‘is’, either absolutely [simpliciter] or
with some qualiﬁcation [secundum quid] ...26
That is to say, according to Aquinas, the reason why we use the verb signifying
existence to indicate the application of the predicate to the subject is precisely
that in any act of predication we actually predicate existence: either the existence
of the thing supposited for by the subject absolutely, or the existence of the form
signiﬁed by the predicate in the subject.
Thus, the copula with respect to a suppositum of the subject and with respect to
the ultimate signiﬁcatum of the predicate in that suppositum signiﬁes the existence
of this ultimate signiﬁcatum, which can be compositionally determined as the value
of the signiﬁcation of the verb ‘is’ and its equivalents. However, depending on the
nature of the ultimate signiﬁcata of the predicate, the existence of these ultimate
signiﬁcata may be radically diﬀerent. This is the clearest in the case of the ultimate
signiﬁcata of a privative predicate, such as ‘blind’, and the corresponding positive
predicate, such as ‘sighted’. Clearly, for the ultimate signiﬁcata of ‘blind’ to exist
is for the ultimate signiﬁcata of ‘sighted’ not to exist. Therefore, since nothing can
be existence and non-existence in the same sense, we cannot say that in ‘Homer
is blind’ and ‘Socrates is sighted’ the copula would signify existence in the same
sense. So, the signiﬁcata of the copula in respect of the ultimate signiﬁcata of the
predicates of these sentences in the supposita of the subjects cannot be said to be
acts of existence in the same sense.
However, at the same time, with regard to the immediate signiﬁcatum of the
predicate (the common nature signiﬁed by the predicate) the copula also signiﬁes
the existence of some other type of entity uniformly, in the same sense, according
to Aquinas, namely, of the entity signiﬁed by the proposition as a whole, the
so-called enuntiabile.27
The conception of propositional signiﬁcation involving such entities crops up
quite early in the history of medieval logic, and recurs in diﬀerent guises time and
again.28 It is present in Abelard’s theory of dicta, and it is worked out in greater
detail by the anonymous author of the 12th-century tract Ars Burana as follows:
Note that whether we speak about the dictum of a proposition or of the
signiﬁcate of a proposition or of an enuntiabile it is the same. For an
enuntiabile is what is signiﬁed by a proposition. For example: ‘A man
is an animal’, this proposition is true, because what it signiﬁes is true;
26In Perihermeneias lb. 1, lc. 5, n.22
27For a detailed reconstruction of Aquinas’ ideas on the signiﬁcation of the copula along these
lines, see Klima, G. “Aquinas’ Theory of the Copula and the Analogy of Being”, Logical Analysis
and History of Philosophy, 5(2002), pp. 159-176.
28Cf. Nuchelmans, G. Late Scholastic and Humanist Theories of the Proposition, Amsterdam:
North Holland Publishing Co., 1980, and Theories of the Proposition: Ancient and Medieval
Conceptions of the Bearers of Truth and Falsity. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Co.,
1973. Perler, D. “Late Medieval Ontologies of Facts”, The Monist 77(1994), pp. 149-169.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
403
and that true thing that you in this way understand is the enuntiabile,
whatever it is. Similarly, when I say: ‘Socrates is an ass’, this proposi-
tion is false, because what it signiﬁes is false, and the false thing that
you conceive in this way is the enuntiabile. And this cannot be seen,
nor heard or sensed, but it is only perceivable by the intellect. If you
ask in which category of things it belongs, whether it is a substance
or an accident, of the enuntiabile we have to say that it is neither a
substance nor an accident nor does it belong to any of the categories.
For it has its own peculiar type of existence. And it is said to be ex-
trapredicamental, not because it does not belong to any category, but
because it does not belong to any of the categories distinguished by
Aristotle. Therefore it belongs to some category that can be called the
category of enuntiabilia. And in this category the most general item
will be that consigniﬁed by the term ‘enuntiabile’. And this can be
divided further as follows. Some enuntiabilia are of the present, some
are of the past and some are of the future. Furthermore, some enuntia-
bilia are true and some are false. And further: of the true ones some
are necessary and some are not necessary, and of the false ones some
are possible and some are impossible. So it is to be understood what
an enuntiabile is.29
“At the other end of the story”, we have, for example, Aquinas’ famous 16th-
century commentator, Thomas de Vio Cajetan declaring the following:
And note that Aristotle’s maxim posited here: ‘a sentence is true ac-
cording as the thing is or is not’ is to be understood not of the thing
which is the subject or the predicate of this sentence, but of the thing
which is signiﬁed by the whole sentence, e.g., when it is said ‘a man is
white’, this is not true because a man or a white thing is, but because
a man’s being white is, for this is what is signiﬁed by this sentence.30
And of course we must not forget various “major players” in the meantime, such
as Walter Burley, proposing real propositions corresponding to ordinary written or
spoken propositions, or Adam Wodeham and Gregory of Rimini positing complexe
signiﬁcabilia in the same role, evoking the relentless criticism of John Buridan.31
What all these in their details rather disparate views seem to boil down to is
that these authors, having already been committed to a wealth of semantic values
29De Rijk, L. M. (ed.), Logica Modernorum, Vol. II, Part II, Van Gorcum: Assen, 1967, pp.
357-359.
30Cajetan, Thomas de Vio, Scripta Philosophica: Commentaria in Praedicamenta Aristotelis,
ed. M. H. Laurent, Angelicum, Romae, 1939, p. 87.
31Cf. Zupko, J. “How it Played in the rue de Fouarre: Reception of Adam Wodeham’s Theory
of the Complexe Signiﬁcabile in the Arts Faculty at Paris in the Mid-fourteenth Century”,
Franciscan Studies 54(1994), pp. 211-25. A good collection of relevant 14th-century texts can
be found in Perler, D. Satztheorien. Texte zur Sprachphilosophie und Wissenschaftstheorie im
14. Jahrhundert, (Texte zur Forschung Bd. 57), Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft
1990.

404
Gyula Klima
of various ontological statuses on the level of the semantics of terms, apparently
had no trouble with adding “another layer” of semantic values on the level of the
signiﬁcation of propositions. Thus, on top of the supposita as well as the immediate
and ultimate signiﬁcata of categorematic terms, they would have the signiﬁcata
of the copula, signifying the existence of the ultimate signiﬁcata of the predicate
in the supposita of the subject, as well as the existence of the signiﬁcatum of the
proposition as a whole. In a compositional semantics reconstructing these ideas,
therefore, the copula would have to be assigned a semantic function taking the
various semantic values of the categorematic terms as its arguments, and yielding
the existence of the semantic values resulting from the combination of the values
of these terms.32
A survey of “via antiqua semantics”
The resulting semantic theory is complicated and unwieldy, but one that is not
necessarily inconsistent and has a number of advantages in logic itself as well as in
metaphysics. In the ﬁrst place, it is clear that the apparently boundless prolifer-
ation of various semantic values assigned to both categorematic and syncategore-
matic terms33 yields a very ﬁne-grained semantics, capable of making distinctions
that more coarse-grained theories cannot make. For example, it is well-known that
modern intensional logics, deﬁning intensions in terms of functions from possible
worlds to extensions or truth-values, cannot distinguish necessarily co-extensional
predicates or propositions, such as the predicates ‘trilateral’ and ‘triangular’, or
two tautologies. But on the via antiqua conception, as sketched here, it is easy
to see that the two predicates can have distinct signiﬁcations, yielding distinct
ultimate signiﬁcata for the same individuals, even if those signiﬁcata are neces-
sarily co-actual in any possible situation. In the same way, the signiﬁcata of two
non-synonymous tautologies can be two distinct, yet always necessarily co-actual
enuntiabilia or complexe signiﬁcabilia determined compositionally in terms of the
distinct semantic values of the components of these distinct propositions.
Another logical advantage of this sort of construction is a simple, uniform theory
of truth, consonant with Aristotle’s simple deﬁnition cited by Cajetan: a propo-
sition is true just in case its signiﬁcatum exists, which in turn is conditioned on
both the way things are and on the way the compositional structure of the propo-
sition determines the existence-conditions for the propositional signiﬁcatum. For
example, the proposition ‘Homer is blind’ on this conception is true, provided the
enuntiabile or complexe signiﬁcabile it signiﬁes, namely, that Homer is blind, ex-
ists. But this entity, which is the value of the application of the semantic function
signiﬁed by the copula to its arguments, namely, the suppositum of the subject
32For technical details, see Klima, G. “Aquinas’ Theory of the Copula and the Analogy of
Being”, Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy, 5(2002), pp. 159-176.
33For a discussion of this medieval distinction and its relation to the modern distinction be-
tween logical connectives and non-logical terms, see Klima, G. “Syncategoremata”, in: Elsevier’s
Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd Ed. Edited by Keith Brown, Elsevier: Oxford,
2006, vol. 12, pp. 353-356.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
405
and the signiﬁcation of the predicate, exists just in case the ultimate signiﬁcate
of the predicate in the suppositum of the subject, i.e., Homer’s blindness exists.
The existence of this, however, is conditioned on the non-actuality of the ultimate
signiﬁcatum of the corresponding positive predicate, namely, the non-existence
of Homer’s sight. Thus, the simple fact of the truth of the proposition ‘Homer
is blind’ will consist in the simple fact of the existence of the signiﬁcatum of this
proposition. However, the existence of the signiﬁcatum of this proposition is condi-
tioned on the existence or non-existence of several “layers” of other items, assigned
as the various semantic values of the syntactic components of the proposition.
And herein reside both the strength and the diﬃculty of this semantic construc-
tion. The primary strength of this construction consists in the expressive power
of the system, which renders it capable of making the most reﬁned distinctions,
and thus allowing the formulation of the most abstruse metaphysical questions
concerning the various semantic values of any phrases in any syntactical category.
On the other hand, this is also the diﬃculty with this construction. It not only al-
lows the formulation of abstruse metaphysical questions: it makes them inevitable,
especially concerning the identity and distinction of these semantic values and the
determination of their nature, their precise ontological status.
OCKHAM’S COMPLAINTS
In fact, the apparently inevitable obscurity of the issues concerning the multitude
and distinctions of these semantic values was the best motivation for Ockham to get
rid of them in one fell swoop, by discarding the semantics that engendered them in
the ﬁrst place. Ockham’s main complaints against the semantics of “the moderns”
as he rather tendentiously refers to the representatives of the older theory34 fall
precisely into these two categories: those concerning the sheer multitude of entities
(or quasi-entities) implied by this construction, clearly oﬀending a nominalist’s
“taste for desert landscapes” (as Quine famously put it), and those concerning
the obscurity of the nature and distinctions of these entities.
The arguments
supporting these complaints are also of two main sorts: there are those that argue
for the absurdity of the ontological commitments of his opponents, and those that
argue for the eliminability of those commitments.
The ﬁrst strategy points to a number of logical and physical absurdities that
seem to follow if we allow “multiplying entities with the multiplication of terms”,
as Ockham claims the “moderns” do.35 To be sure, as we have seen, Ockham’s
characterization of his opponents’ position is not entirely fair, for they are not
34In the medieval intellectual context, to be “modern” is to carry lesser weight than the estab-
lished older authorities. Thus, by referring to his opponents as “moderns” Ockham was trying
to “sell” his innovations as being just an attempt to restore a simpler, original Aristotelianism
distorted by the unnecessary additions of the “moderns”.
35Ockham, W. Summa logicae (SL), Philotheus Boehner, Gedeon G´al and Stephen F. Brown,
ed., (“Opera philosophica,” vol. 1), St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute, 1974, p.
171.

406
Gyula Klima
committed to positing distinct entities in distinct logical categories. However, it
is true that since their semantics left the question of the distinctness or identity
of these items open, the semantic framework inevitably leads to a number of
apparently intractable metaphysical problems. For instance, if Socrates is similar
to Plato in wisdom, and he is similar to Plato in wisdom if and only if his similarity
to Plato in wisdom exists, then it seems that he may be similar to Plato in wisdom
even if one (or each) of them is not wise, provided this similarity is distinct from
Plato’s and Socrates’s wisdom. For if they are distinct, then God can create any
one or two of these things without the others.
So, Plato and Socrates can be
similar in wisdom without being wise, if God sustains their similarity in wisdom
while annihilates their wisdom; and they can both be wise without being similar,
if God sustains their wisdom, but annihilates their similarity, which is certainly
absurd.
Ockham actually uses somewhat more complicated arguments against distinct
“relation-things”,36 but the point is the same in all these, namely, that these dis-
tinct relation-things can exist logically independently from their foundations, and
so their presence or absence may verify or falsify relational predications logically
independently from the existence of those foundations, which is patently absurd.
To be sure, “via antiqua authors” were quite aware of these diﬃculties and they
had their own metaphysical solutions to them.37 However, Ockham’s logical “so-
lution” will simply eliminate these “apparent” metaphysical problems.
But besides logical absurdities of this sort, Ockham also considers certain physi-
cal absurdities derivable from positing such distinct entities, such as the generation
of an inﬁnity of distance-things in the ﬁxed stars by a ﬂy, as its distance from them
changes by its ﬂight here on earth.
Finally, Ockham also points to the absurdities deriving from attempts to over-
come such and similar diﬃculties by tweaking the notion of the very distinction of
such items, such as Scotus’ formal distinction. For instance, in attacking Scotus’
claim that the common nature of any individual is merely formally (and not re-
ally) distinct from the individual diﬀerence that individualizes it, he argues that
if there is any distinction between two things, then it must be a real distinction,
whence Scotus’s notion of a mere formal distinction is vacuous. For, he argues, this
individual diﬀerence is not formally distinct from this (very same) individual dif-
ference (for nothing is formally distinct from itself), and this individual diﬀerence
is formally distinct from this common nature; therefore this common nature is not
this individual diﬀerence, that is to say, they are really and not merely formally
distinct, despite Scotus’ claim.38
To be sure, as I have indicated, Ockham’s arguments are nothing his opponents
36Cf. Klima, G. “Ockham’s Semantics and Ontology of the Categories”, Spade, P. V. (ed.),
The Cambridge Companion to Ockham, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 118-142.
37For excellent recent discussions in English, see Henninger, M., SJ. Relations:
Medieval
Theories 1250-1325, Clarendon Press:
Oxford, 1989; Brower, J. ‘Medieval Theories of Re-
lations’, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2005 Edition), ed.
E. N. Zalta,
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2005/entries/relations-medieval/.
38SL, I, 16, p. 54.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
407
could not handle; in fact most of these were raised and solved by themselves,
although at the expense of introducing further reﬁnements and complications into
their own framework.
Ockham’s second strategy, however, undermines precisely this tactic of “adding
epicycles” by showing an alternative way of constructing semantic theory in
which such complications need not emerge at all.
OCKHAM’S ALTERNATIVE
Ockham was thinking of semantic relations in terms of the Aristotelian semantic
triangle, just as much as his predecessors were.
However, he radically reinter-
preted the idea of what concepts are and how they represent their objects.39 Con-
sequently, since in his view the semantic properties of written a spoken terms are
inherited from the concepts to which they are subordinated, no wonder Ockham’s
semantics of terms will be radically diﬀerent as well.
But, apparently, even apart from the diﬀerences in his conception of concepts,
he has a more directly semantic bone to pick with his predecessors. For in an
apparent stark contrast to what we have seen in Lambert and Aquinas, Ockham
insists that what is primarily signiﬁed by a term is not a concept, but the thing
conceived by the concept. He argues for this claim as follows:
. . .
an utterance primarily signiﬁes that for which on account of its
institution it primarily supposits. However, names of ﬁrst intention
supposit for things, and names of second intention for concepts, and
names of second imposition for nouns or [other] utterances, as is clear
by induction. The major premise is obvious, because that is primarily
signiﬁed by the utterance, for which the person imposing the name uses
it. But it is clear that this is what the utterance primarily supposits
for. Thus, we use the term ‘man’ principally for men.40
To be sure, Ockham’s “via antiqua opponents” would not deny that an utterance
(ultimately) signiﬁes not the concept, but the object of the concept which it imme-
diately signiﬁes, i.e., to which it is subordinated. But they would not agree with
Ockham on what that object is and they would not identify that object in the way
Ockham does here, with reference to (personal) supposition and use. Walter Bur-
ley explicitly attacked Ockham’s position on the apparently purely semantic issue,
trying to separate it from the connected ontological and cognitive psychological
issues. To see the real contrast between their views, it is worth quoting Burley’s
argumentation at some length:
Again, the name ‘man’ signiﬁes something ﬁrst. And it does not ﬁrst
signify Socrates or Plato, because in that case someone hearing the ut-
39For an excellent, detailed discussion of Ockham’s doctrine, see Panaccio, C. Ockham on
Concepts, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004.
40Ockham, Ordinatio, Opera Theologica, vol. IV, lb. 1, q. 22, pp. 48.18 - 49.4.

408
Gyula Klima
terance and knowing what was signiﬁed by the utterance would deter-
minately and distinctly understand Socrates, which is false. Therefore,
the name ‘man’ does not ﬁrst signify something singular. Therefore, it
ﬁrst signiﬁes a common entity. And that common entity is a species.
Therefore, what is ﬁrst signiﬁed by the name ‘man’ is a species. (34) I
do not care at present whether that common entity is a thing outside
the soul or a concept in the soul. Rather it suﬃces merely that what
the name ﬁrst signiﬁes is a species. Thus ‘man is a species’ will be true
insofar as ‘man’ is taken for its signiﬁcate. This is conﬁrmed, because a
name is not imposed except on the known, according to the Commen-
tator, Metaphysics VII, 36 and also according to Boethius, who says,
‘One imposes names on the things one sees’. But he who imposed the
name ‘man’ to signify did not know me or John who is now present.
Therefore, the name ‘man’ does not signify me or John who is now
present. Consequently, the name ‘man’ does not signify me or John,
etc., and yet supposits for me and for John when it supposits person-
ally. Therefore, it is not true that a term supposits for its signiﬁcate
or signiﬁcates whenever it supposits personally.41
As can be seen, the main diﬀerence from Ockham’s position here is not that for
Burley a term would signify a concept and not the thing conceived by means of the
concept. When he says, “I do not care at present whether that common entity is a
thing outside the soul or a concept in the soul”, he is obviously trying to separate
the semantic issue from the related ontological issue of what sort of entity it is that
the term primarily signiﬁes. The point for him is that it cannot be any individual,
but has to be something common, whether in reality or merely “in the mind” (as its
object), to those individuals which the term, on account of this signiﬁcation, can
be used to stand for. But that “common entity” (whether it is some common thing
existing in reality regardless of any mental activity, or an “objective concept”, i.e.,
the direct object of an abstractive mental act, representing something individual
in abstraction from its individuating conditions) is obviously the direct, immediate
object of a mental act. So, for Burley, what the term ﬁrst, primarily signiﬁes is
also the object of some concept, but that object is not any individual thing as
such, but rather something that any individual falling under the concept has to
“match” by being informed precisely by the form that is abstracted in the concept.
For Ockham, on the other hand, especially after abandoning his earlier ﬁctum-
theory, and adopting his mature, mental-act theory of concepts, what is conceived
by a concept is just any individual thing indiﬀerently represented by the concept.
Therefore, if a term is supposed to signify what is conceived by the corresponding
concept, then it has to signify the individuals themselves, which of course are the
personal supposita of the term in a propositional context. So it seems that even
what appears to be a purely semantic diﬀerence between Ockham and Burley
(and “the via antiqua view” in general) ultimately boils down to a fundamental
41Burley, Purity, pp. 87-88. (33)-(34)

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
409
diﬀerence in their cognitive psychology, a diﬀerence in their theory of concept-
formation.
Thus, anyone trying to evaluate the position of each author would
have to deal with the details of their cognitive psychology.
But regardless of
those foundational issues in their respective cognitive theories, it is easy to see the
resulting diﬀerences in their semantic theory.
For Ockham, the signiﬁcata of a common categorematic term are the individuals
represented by the corresponding concept indiﬀerently, regardless of their existence
and non-existence. Thus, a term such as ‘man’ will signify all men, not only those
who exist, but those as well who existed, will exist, or can (or could or would)
exist. Thus, in a formal reconstruction of Ockham’s semantics the signiﬁcation
of the term ‘man’ would not be a function assigning individualized humanities to
individuals (as it would be in the via antiqua), but rather a subset of the domain
of discourse, comprising both actual and non-actual elements. Correspondingly, a
signiﬁcate of this term would be just an element of this signiﬁcation, and thus a
personal suppositum of the same term would be any such signiﬁcatum, provided
it is actual relative to the time connoted by the copula of the proposition in which
the term is suppositing.
By this move, Ockham could at once get rid of a number of unwieldy problems
of the via antiqua semantic construction.
In the ﬁrst place, the entire “shady
business” of the ontological status of a “common nature” is gone, along with the
problems of its distinction from its individuating conditions as it exists in the sin-
gulars. Indeed, the entire multitude of the instances of all these “common natures”
and the problems of the identity and distinctness of these instances are gone as
well. Furthermore, the multitude of these instances in several distinct ontological
categories may be eliminated, provided Ockham can plausibly apply his semantic
model in all the Aristotelian logical categories he is still committed to. Showing
he can do so is what we usually refer to as Ockham’s program of “ontological
reduction”, namely, the project of showing how all the distinct logical categories
distinguished by Aristotle can be mapped onto a parsimonious nominalist ontol-
ogy, having only two distinct ontological categories, namely, those of substance
and quality.
Ockham’s program has been much discussed in the literature, so here I only
want to focus on what is semantically relevant from it. To see a typical case of
Ockham’s “ontological reduction”, let us consider the issue of distinct qualities in
the species of shape, which Ockham would want to eliminate. Take for instance,
a straight piece of wire.
On the via antiqua conception, this wire is straight
on account of being informed by an inherent shape-thing, named “straightness”.
When the wire is bent, this straightness perishes and gives way to another shape-
thing, which may be called “curvedness”. Apparently, the only way to account
for this change is precisely by means of assuming the existence of distinct shape-
things, which may come and go, while their subject, the wire, remains in existence.
Ockham, however can provide us with a way of accounting for this change without
assuming the existence of such distinct shape-things in terms of his theory of
connotation. For according to Ockham, when the piece of wire is straight, this

410
Gyula Klima
does not have to mean that the wire is informed by a “straightness-thing”. All
this means is that the ends of the wire are maximally distant, that is to say, the
term “straight” does not signify a straightness distinct from the straight thing;
rather, it signiﬁes the straight thing itself, while connotes the maximal distance
between its ends. The term is true of this wire, just in case its ends are maximally
distant, and becomes false of it, when they are not.
Thus, on account of the
meaning of the term “straight”, which can properly be expressed by means of a
nominal deﬁnition, Ockham can eliminate the apparent need for a “shape-thing”,
which was demanded only by what he takes to be a mistaken semantic conception.
For, as the nominal deﬁnition makes explicit, the term “straight” simply signiﬁes
elongated substances (i.e., ones whose length is considerably greater than their
width and depth) connoting the maximal distance of their extremes along their
length. But the things signiﬁed and connoted in this way are only substances and
quantities, (which Ockham identiﬁes with substances or qualities as measurable in
certain ways).
However, regardless of the details of the ontological project it intends to realize,
Ockham’s semantic idea is clear. In order to have a nominalist semantics that
admits in its domain of interpretation only entities of a certain limited number of
categories, one needs to do the following:
1. Take simple absolute terms in the “permitted” categories to be “primitive”,
in the sense that they are semantically simple, undeﬁned, and they deﬁne
others.
2. Take other syntactically simple terms that appear to involve commitment
to entities in other than the permitted ontological categories to be compo-
sitionally dependent for their semantic evaluation on their nominal deﬁni-
tions, which in the last analysis will only contain “primitive” (undeﬁned)
terms and syncategoremata (i.e., terms that signify only syncategorematic
concepts, which in turn are entities in the “permitted” ontological category
of quality).
Thus, Ockham’s semantic idea in connection with his program of ontological re-
duction boils down to the strategy of using “eliminative deﬁnitions” to show that
ontological commitment to entities in the “non-permitted” categories is merely
apparent, and can be avoided in terms of providing the right sort of semantic
analysis.
There are two logical problems with this idea. The ﬁrst might be termed “the
problem of the primitive vocabulary” of Ockham’s semantics, and the second “the
problem of a merely programmatic semantics”
The ﬁrst problem generated much controversy in the recent literature after the
appearance of Claude Panaccio’s important study challenging “the received view”

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
411
on Ockham’s ontological program.42
According to “the received view”,43 Ock-
ham’s primitive vocabulary would contain only syncategorematic terms (roughly,
logical connectives) and absolute terms, i.e., terms subordinated to absolute con-
cepts, whereby individuals are conceived absolutely (though in the case of uni-
versal concepts, indiﬀerently), not in relation to anything else. Accordingly, on
this view, Ockham is committed to holding that all connotative terms (i.e., terms
subordinated to connotative concepts whereby we conceive of individuals in rela-
tion to other things, the connotata of the term) are semantically compositional;
their semantic values are functionally determined by the semantic values of the
components of their nominal deﬁnitions.
Equivalently, the view holds that all
connotative concepts are complex, i.e., there are no simple connotative concepts.
The rationale for the view is Ockham’s repeated claim that all connotative terms
have nominal deﬁnitions, which coupled with the idea that nominal deﬁnitions are
synonymous with their deﬁnita because they are subordinated to the same con-
cept, directly yields the above theses. Panaccio’s meticulous analysis of Ockham’s
texts, however, cast serious doubt on the assumption that nominal deﬁnitions for
Ockham always have to be strictly synonymous with their deﬁnita on account of
being subordinated to the same concept, and, correspondingly, that there are no
simple connotative concepts for Ockham.
But even without trying to settle this issue of Ockham scholarship, one can note
that what is problematic with a severely limited primitive vocabulary is the feasi-
bility of providing plausible analyses in all cases when needed. However, the prim-
itive vocabulary may be enhanced not only by means of the addition of primitive
connotative terms (ones subordinated to simple connotative concepts), but also by
means of enhancing the class of syncategoremata, and construe apparently prim-
itive connotative terms as complexes of absolute terms and some “non-standard”
syncategoremata. Take for instance the Latin phrase ‘hominis asinus’ (‘donkey
of a man’). This is clearly a complex term, consisting of a simple absolute term
‘asinus’ (‘donkey’) and an apparently simple connotative term, ‘hominis’ (‘of a
man’), signifying things in relation to men as their possession. However, if we
look at the corresponding English term, the appearance of the simplicity of the
Latin connotative term ‘hominis’ is dissolved in the syntactical structure of the
phrase ‘of a man’, which seems to indicate that in the formation of the concept ex-
pressed both by ‘hominis’ and by ‘of a man’ actually several concepts are involved,
42See
Panaccio,
C.
“Connotative
Terms
in
Ockham’s
Mental
Language”,
Cahiers
d’´epist´emologie 9016(1990), pp. 1-22. For more recent treatments of the issue see Chalmers,
D. “Is There Synonymy in Ockham’s Mental Language?” in The Cambridge Companion to Ock-
ham, ed. P. V. Spade, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999, pp. 76-99; and Panaccio,
C. “Semantics and Mental Language,” ibid., pp. 53-75. Panaccio’s most recent summary account
of the debate can be found in his Ockham on Concepts.
43Cf., e.g., Spade, P. V. “Ockham’s Distinctions between Absolute and Connotative Terms,”
Vivarium 13 (1975), pp. 55–76; Spade, P. V. “Synonymy and Equivocation in Ockham’s Mental
Language”, Journal of the History of Philosophy 18(1980), pp. 9-22. For Spade’s most recent
discussion of the issue, see Spade, Paul Vincent, ”William of Ockham”, The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy (Fall 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2006/entries/ockham/

412
Gyula Klima
namely, those to which the English particles ‘a’ and ‘of’, and the term ‘man’ are
subordinated.
Thus, if the primitive vocabulary turns out to be too limited, it can be enhanced
in two diﬀerent ways. Either (1) by adding primitive polyadic categorematic terms,
i.e., acknowledging that there are connotative terms subordinated to simple con-
notative concepts, which therefore cannot have strictly synonymous nominal deﬁ-
nitions (this is going to be “Buridan’s way”, and this is also the way for Ockham
suggested by Panaccio’s interpretation), or (2) by acknowledging term-forming
syncategorematic terms, subordinated to (polyadic) categorematic concepts. So,
using the previously introduced restricted variables as representations of common
categorematic terms having personal supposition, we might illustrate the diﬀerence
in the following way:
1. x.Dx.(y.H(y)(x.)) — [an-x-that-is-a-donkey-that-is] [of-a-y-that-is-a-man];
2. x.Dx.(℘(x.)(y.Hy)) — [an-x-that-is-a-donkey] [that-is-of] [a-y-that-is-a-man].
In (2), ℘would be a distinguished logical predicate (pretty much like identity in
standard quantiﬁcation theory) with two arguments, the ﬁrst of which is to be the
possession of the second.
But no matter which way is taken, they both point to the same limitation of this
approach to natural language semantics. For if whole classes of syntactically simple
categorematic terms are semantically complex, in the sense that their semantic
evaluation is a function of the evaluation of their nominal deﬁnition, then it would
appear that the whole enterprise of Ockhamist semantics is doomed to remain
programmatic until the semantic analyses of all these terms are actually carried
out by providing their nominal deﬁnitions.
However, one may say that this situation need not pose a serious threat to
the Ockhamist approach, especially, if one takes Buridan’s (and “Panaccio’s Ock-
ham’s” path). For in that case one may treat any syntactically simple term as
semantically primitive as well, which is ﬁne for most logical purposes, unless the
term’s meaning is relevant to a particular problem, in which case one may just
provide the relevant analysis.
In any case, with this treatment of categorematic terms, the semantic construc-
tion is easy, and is obviously not committed to the vast and obscure ontology the
via antiqua construction is apparently committed to. For on this approach any
categorematic term will merely have the function of signifying individuals in the
permitted categories, all of them in the same way, if the term is absolute, or some
of them primarily and others secondarily, if the term is connotative, and in per-
sonal supposition will supposit for some or all of its ultimate (primary) signiﬁcata.
Accordingly, the terms of a proposition in personal supposition will have the
same sort of semantic function: subject and predicate will both supposit for their
ultimate signiﬁcata, whence the aﬃrmative copula will have to express the iden-
tity of these supposita. For example, in the proposition ‘Every man is an animal’,

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
413
the terms supposit for those of their ultimate signiﬁcata (all men and all animals,
respectively, past, present, future and merely possible), which actually exist at the
present time of the utterance of the proposition, connoted by the present tense of
the copula. The copula, in turn, has to express the identity of these supposita,
which is why the via moderna subscribes exclusively to the identity theory of pred-
ication, as opposed to the inherence theory of the via moderna (which, neverthe-
less, also allowed, non-exclusively, the identity theory).44 Thus, the quantiﬁer, the
signum quantitatis, has the function of denoting how many of the subject’s sup-
posita have to be identical with the supposita of the predicate, if the proposition
is to be true.
Therefore, the explicit via moderna reading of this sentence would be ‘Every
thing that is a man is identical with some animal’, which is appropriately repre-
sented by the corresponding quantiﬁcational formula using restricted variables:
(∀x.Mx)(∃y.Ay)(x. = y.)
Accordingly, in this reconstruction, the four types of categorical propositions would
be formalized as follows:
A:
(∀x.Mx)(∃y.Ay)(x. = y.)
I:
(∃x.Mx)(∃y.Ay)(x. = y.)
E:
∼(∃x.Mx)(∃y.Ay)(x. = y.)
O:
(∃x.Mx) ∼(∃y.Ay)(x. = y.)
Indeed, given the existential import of A, these formulae would form a perfect
traditional Square of Opposition.
So far, so good. But what about the signiﬁcata of these propositions? Apart
from stating the truth-conditions of various types of propositions in terms of his
identity-theory of predication and insisting that a proposition signiﬁes nothing
over and above what its categorematic terms signify, Ockham is mostly silent on
this subject, just as on many further details of his semantic theory, such as the
issue of the apparent ontological commitment to non-existents (mere possibilia) in
his semantics, or a general account of truth and semantic validity in a semantically
closed, token-based semantics.45 Such and similar details were, however, worked
out very carefully by John Buridan.
44Aquinas, for instance, allows both analyses, although he regards the inherence-analysis the
“more appropriate” [magis propria], and in the case of adjectival predicates the only acceptable
one, e.g., in Super Sent., lib. 3 d. 5 q. 3 a. 3, expos.; Summa Theologiae I, q. 39 a. 6 ad 2.
45Most of these issues are taken up and discussed detail by Marilyn McCord Adams in her
William Ockham, University of Notre Dame Press: Notre Dame, 1987, Vol. I, c. 11, although
she also remarks on p. 394: “Ockham does not anticipate his successors’ interest in reﬁning this
formulation of the correspondence theory of truth [‘an expression is said to be true because it
signiﬁes things to be as they are in reality’] in the face of various objections, whether pedantic
or formidable, the most notable of the latter being the semantic paradoxes”.

414
Gyula Klima
BURIDAN’S SEMANTICS
Concepts and mental language
Buridan’s semantics starts out in the same way as Ockham’s. Acknowledging the
subordination of written to spoken, and spoken to mental terms (i.e., concepts),
establishes for him a “semantic triangle”, in which concepts are natural signs of
whatever we conceive by means of them, whereas the utterances and inscriptions
subordinated to them are the conventional signs of the same, in virtue of their
conventional subordination to concepts. Not all concepts have, however, the func-
tion of conceiving something; some concepts merely serve to determine how we
conceive of things conceived by other concepts. This is the basis of Buridan’s pri-
mary distinction between categorematic and syncategorematic concepts, and the
corresponding spoken and written terms. For example, the concept of negation
operating on the categorematic concept whereby we conceive indiﬀerently of all
humans (past, present, future, and merely possible ones as well) yields a complex
concept whereby we conceive of all humans negatively, on account of which the con-
cept applies to all non-humans. Again, the concept of the aﬃrmative, assertoric,
present tense copula operating on two categorematic concepts yields a complex
concept, a mental proposition, whereby we conceive of all things conceived by the
categorematic concepts in such a way as to conceive the identity of those signiﬁcata
of the categorematic concepts that are actual at the time connoted by the copula,
i.e., the identity of the actual supposita of these mental terms. As these examples
clearly illustrate, following Ockham’s lead, Buridan wholeheartedly subscribes to
the idea of a mental language, in which simple, naturally signiﬁcative units of our
thought, our simple concepts, are combined in their operation to yield complex
representational units of our thought, our complex concepts, the representative (or
“naturally signiﬁcative”) function of which is compositionally dependent on the
functions of the simple concepts. To be sure, according to Buridan, our complex
concepts are complex only in this sense, namely, in the compositionality of their
representative function; otherwise, ontologically, they are just as simple qualities
of the mind as are our simple concepts. However, since their formation and repre-
sentative function is conditioned on the operation of the relevant simple concepts,
it makes good sense to call them semantically complex.46
The second example also clearly illustrates another logically important feature
of Buridan’s distinction between categorematic and syncategorematic concepts and
the corresponding terms. The concept of the copula, connoting time, does conceive
of something external to the mind,47 besides eﬀecting the combination (complexio
46For a discussion of semantic complexity (compositionality) without syntactic or ontological
complexity see my Introduction to John Buridan: Summulae de Dialectica (SD), an annotated
translation with a philosophical introduction by Gyula Klima; New Haven: Yale University Press,
2001.
47Buridan identiﬁes time with the motion of the sphere of the ﬁxed stars, as conceived by
means of a concept counting its revolutions.
For discussion and references see Dekker, D-J.
“Buridan’s Concept of Time. Time, Motion and the Soul in John Buridan’s Questions on Aris-

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
415
— as Buridan calls it) of categorematic concepts. Thus, Buridan classiﬁes the
copula as a “mixed” syncategorema, which besides its syncategorematic function
also has some representative, signiﬁcative function, unless we form in our minds
the concept of an atemporal copula, which is purely syncategorematic.48
Buridan’s mental language, therefore, contains in its “primitive vocabulary”
simple concepts, some of which are syncategorematic, others are categorematic,
and yet others are mixed. Purely categorematic concepts have the function of
representing or naturally signifying the objects we conceive by means of them, in
the way we conceive of them. Purely syncategorematic (or complexive) concepts
do not represent anything in and of themselves, their function merely consists in
modifying the representative function of other, representative concepts, by com-
bining with them semantically complex concepts. These concepts are semantically
complex, because their representative function is compositionally dependent on
the semantic values of the concepts “making it up”. Finally, mixed concepts ob-
viously exercise both categorematic and syncategorematic functions, as we could
see in the case of the tensed copula (as opposed to the purely syncategorematic,
atemporal or tenseless copula). It is the semantic features of the resulting men-
tal language that are inherited, through conventional acts of imposition, by the
elements and syntactical structures of conventional spoken and written languages.
The semantics of terms
Written and spoken terms are classiﬁed as categorematic, syncategorematic or
mixed, depending on the kind of concept they are subordinated to. To be sure,
since imposition is conventional and as such arbitrary, this classiﬁcation may
change as established usage changes. And of course there are a number of prag-
matic factors determining what counts as established usage, but if these pragmatic
factors are (reasonably) ﬁxed, then we can have a ﬁxed interpretation of these con-
ventional signs.
Given such an interpretation, some categorematic terms are simple, others are
complex. However, some of those that are syntactically simple (i.e., they have no
parts that are signiﬁcative in themselves and contribute their semantic values in
determining the semantic values of the whole) may still be semantically complex
in virtue of being subordinated to a complex concept, the compositional character
of which can be expressed by means of the syntactical structure of the appropriate
nominal deﬁnition. Again, some categorematic terms are absolute and others are
connotative (be they simple or complex) in virtue of being subordinated to absolute
or connotative concepts (i.e., to concepts whereby conceive of things absolutely,
not in relation to others, or in relation to others, respectively). Finally, some cate-
gorematic terms are singular and others are common, again depending on whether
they are subordinated to singular or common concepts. Common absolute terms
totle’s Physics”, in: Thijssen, J. M. - Zupko, J. (eds.): The Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy
of John Buridan, Leiden-Boston-K¨oln: Brill Academic Publishers, 2000, pp. 151-164.
48Cf. SD 4.2.3 and 4.3.4

416
Gyula Klima
signify all their signiﬁcata indiﬀerently in the same way, just as these signiﬁcata are
conceived by means of the corresponding concepts. Common connotative terms
signify their signiﬁcata in relation to other things, called their connotata, again,
in the same way as they are conceived by means of the corresponding connotative
concepts.
When categorematic terms are joined by a copula to form a proposition, they
take on the function of supposition, i.e., standing for some or all of their ultimate
signiﬁcata in personal (or signiﬁcative) supposition, or for their immediate signiﬁ-
cata (the token-concepts to which they are subordinated) or for themselves or other
tokens of the same kind, in material (or non-signiﬁcative) supposition. (Buridan
drops simple supposition as a separate division of supposition, and simply lumps
it together with material supposition under the heading of non-signiﬁcative or
material supposition.)
In personal supposition, and in a non-ampliative context,49 absolute terms sup-
posit for those of their ultimate signiﬁcata that are actual at the time connoted
by the present-tense assertoric copula, whereas connotative terms, or as Buridan
more often calls them, appellative terms, supposit for those of their ultimate sig-
niﬁcata that are both actual at the time connoted by the present-tense assertoric
copula and are actually related to the term’s appellata in the way demanded by
the term’s connotation. For example, in the sentence ‘A man is an animal’, the
absolute subject and predicate terms supposit for actual men and actual animals,
as opposed to the non-actual ones still signiﬁed by these terms. In the sentence ‘A
man is wise, the absolute term ‘man’ supposits for actually existing men, whereas
the connotative term ‘wise’ supposits for actual persons actually having wisdom,
assuming the correct nominal deﬁnition of ‘wise’ is ‘person having wisdom’, where
the absolute term ‘wisdom’ signiﬁes individual wisdoms (given Buridan’s nomi-
nalist ontology, one cannot say ‘individual instances of wisdom’), which are the
individual qualities informing the souls of wise persons. The wisdoms of wise per-
sons are the connotata of the term ‘wise’, connoted by it whether they are actual
or not, and appellated (obliquely referred to) by it in this sentence, provided they
are actual. Thus, just as personal supposition is direct reference to the term’s ac-
tual ultimate signiﬁcata, so appellation is oblique reference to a connotative term’s
connotata that are actual at the time connoted by the copula of the proposition
in which the term occurs.
Given that personal supposition and appellation in this way pick out the actual
ultimate signiﬁcata and connotata of terms that otherwise signify and connote
non-actual as well as actual individuals, and that actuality is relative to time and
modality, now we can make good sense of the qualiﬁcation added at the beginning
49A context is ampliative, if it extends the range of the supposition of the term to its non-actual
signiﬁcata, such as tensed and modal contexts, or intentional contexts (generated, according to
Buridan, by verbs, and their derivatives, signifying acts of the cognitive soul). For a reconstruc-
tion of Buridan’s treatment of intentional contexts, see Klima, G. ‘Debeo tibi equum: a Recon-
struction of the Theoretical Framework of Buridan’s Treatment of the sophisma’, in Sophisms
in Medieval Logic and Grammar, ed. S. Read, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1993, pp. 333-347.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
417
of the previous paragraph concerning non-ampliative contexts. For Buridan, am-
pliation is an extension of the range of supposition of a term from actual to past,
or future, or merely possible signiﬁcata of the term, demanded by its propositional
context. For example, whereas in the sentence ‘A man is wise’ the subject term
stands for actual humans, in the past tense sentence ‘A man was wise’ the range
of supposition of the term is ampliated to past humans, so that the subject stands
either for present or past humans. The predicate on the other hand is not held
for it supposita in this disjunctive manner: it is held strictly for the time of the
verb. That is to say, this sentence is true if something that is or was a man was
identical with something wise. So, if Socrates was wise, this sentence is true, even
if Socrates no longer exists (whence Socrates was, but is no longer, a man), and so
is not identical with any presently existing wise person. Again, if the only person
who used to be wise is no longer wise, although still exists, and no other person is
wise at the present time, this sentence is true, even if, of course, the corresponding
present-tense sentence is false. And similar considerations apply to future tense
and modal sentences, where the supposition of the subject is ampliated to future
or merely possible signiﬁcata of the term.
One counterintuitive result of this analysis explicitly considered by Buridan is
that the sentence ‘An old man will/can be a boy’ on this analysis will come out as
true.50 For this is equivalent to ‘Something that is or will be an old man will be
a boy’, which is true of someone who is a boy today, and will be a boy tomorrow
and will also be an old man years later. Buridan explains the problem away by
pointing out that we ﬁnd the result counterintuitive only because we tend to read
the original not as equivalent to the sentence with the ampliated subject, but with
one that is restricted to the present: ‘Something that is an old man will/can be a
boy’, which is of course false.
However, Buridan’s doctrine of ampliation, or in general, what we would call
“quantiﬁcation over non-existents”, seems to raise more serious problems concern-
ing Ockham’s and Buridan’s nominalism.51 After all, despite all their commitment
to eliminating all sorts of weird entities posited by their (moderate) realist oppo-
nents, are they not equally committed to some really weird “entities”, namely,
non-existents?
Quantiﬁcation, existential import, and ontological commitment
Since according to Buridan’s theory of predication an aﬃrmative proposition is
true only if its terms supposit for the same thing, and if at least one of the terms
of an aﬃrmative proposition supposits for nothing, then they cannot supposit for
the same thing, on his theory all aﬃrmative propositions carry existential import,
50Cf. SD 1.8.8 and Sophismata c. 4, fourth sophism.
51Ockham did not endorse the doctrine of ampliation, but he was still committed to quantifying
over non-existents.
Cf.
Priest, G. and Read, S. “Ockham’s Rejection of Ampliation”, Mind
90(1981), pp. 274-279.

418
Gyula Klima
provided they are non-ampliative of their terms.52 As has been mentioned before,
this approach immediately attributes existential import to universal aﬃrmatives
(with no ampliation), which at once validates the relations of the traditional Square
of Opposition.
In fact, Buridan would argue that even propositions with ampliated terms have
analogous inferential relations, even if one might not say in their case that a
universal aﬃrmative properly speaking has existential import. For example, the
modal universal aﬃrmative ‘Every man is possibly a philosopher’ would entail
‘Some man is possibly a philosopher’, still, neither of these would entail that
something is actually a man. The reason is that on Buridan’s theory of ampliation,
these propositions would be analyzed as ‘Everything/Something that is or can be
a man can be a philosopher’, which are true if every/some signiﬁcatum of the term
‘man’, including everything that is or can be a man, can be a philosopher, which,
however, can certainly hold even if nothing is actually a man.
Accordingly, Buridan would claim that his analysis of these propositions does
not commit him to the existence of anything: on his view neither of these proposi-
tions would entail the proposition that a man exists, or even the proposition that
a merely possible man exists. Indeed, in general, Buridan would perfectly agree
with Quine53 that everything exists and there are no non-existents or mere possi-
bilia, for on his analysis these propositions would be true. Still, Quine would not
be happy with Buridan’s analysis. He would say that Buridan’s analysis of propo-
sitions with ampliated terms, does ontologically commit him to non-existents, by
virtue of (existentially) quantifying over those non-existents.
At this point, however, we should notice that this Quinean charge against Buri-
dan is based on our implicit acknowledgement of the Tarskian distinction between
object-language and meta-language. For the point of the charge is that even if
Buridan in his object language says “all the right things” according to a Quine,
we can point out in his meta-language that in his analyses of propositions with
ampliated terms his variables range over mere possibilia.
However, Buridan would ﬂatly reject the presupposition of the objection, namely,
the distinction between object-language and meta-language. He would say that
the subject matter, as well as the medium, of his theory is one and the same
language, in which he is ontologically committed to those things, and only those
things, of which he has to say that they exist. But he is not committed to saying
this of any of the possibilia he of course can talk about, signify, refer to, supposit
for, and “quantify over”, for all these semantic relations relate our expressions to
objects we can conceive of, and of course we can conceive not only of things that
presently exist in our narrower or broader environment.
As Buridan put it in his question-commentary on Aristotle’s De Interpretatione:
52Or, if they are not interpreted according to natural supposition, but this issue is not relevant
to our present considerations. I deal with the issue though in my “Existence and Reference in
Medieval Logic”.
53Cf. Quine, W.V.O. ‘On What There Is’, in Quine, W. V. O., From a Logical Point of View,
2nd revised edition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980, pp. 1-19.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
419
. . . a name signiﬁes what is understood by it when it is put in an ex-
pression, for to signify is to give rise to some understanding of a thing
[intellectum rei constituere]. But by the name ‘rose’ we understand
a rose and by the name ‘roses’ we understand roses.
For example,
[suppose] last year we, you and I, saw many red roses together. If I
ask you: ‘The roses we saw were red, weren’t they?’, then you say:
‘Indeed’. And this you know to be true. But you wouldn’t know this,
unless you thought of those roses. Therefore, by the name ‘roses’, when
I say ‘We saw roses’, you understand those things that we saw. But
we saw red roses. So you think of roses. [. . . ] the name ‘rose’ refers
to [supponit pro] roses, although nothing is a rose, for according to the
above-mentioned case, namely, that last year we saw many red roses,
you concede the proposition ‘There were many red roses last year’, and
you know that this is true. And since this is an aﬃrmative [proposi-
tion], it would not be true, unless its subject, which is the name ‘roses’,
referred to some thing or some things. But it does not refer to [any]
other thing or other things, but roses. [. . . ] we should note that we
can think of things without any diﬀerence of time and think of past or
future things as well as present ones. And for this reason we can also
impose words to signify without any diﬀerence of time. For this is the
way names signify. Therefore, by the speciﬁc concept of ‘man’ I con-
ceive indiﬀerently all men, present, past and future. And by the name
‘man’ all [men] are signiﬁed indiﬀerently, present, past and future [ones
alike]. So we truly say that every man who was was an animal, and
every man who will be will be an animal. And for this reason it fol-
lows that the [verbs] ‘think/understand’ [‘intelligere’], ‘know’ [‘scire’],
‘mean/signify’ [‘signiﬁcare’] and the like, and the participles deriving
from them, ampliate the terms with which they are construed to refer
indiﬀerently to present, past and future and possible [things] which
perhaps neither are, nor will be, nor ever were. Therefore, even if no
rose exists, I think of a rose, not one that is, but one which was, or
will be, or can be. And then, when it is said: the name ‘rose’ signi-
ﬁes something, I concede this. And when you say: that [thing] is not,
I concede that; but it was. If, then, you conclude: therefore, some-
thing is nothing, I deny the consequence, for in the major premise the
term ‘something’ was ampliated to past and future [things], and in the
conclusion it is restricted to present ones.54
54Buridan, J. Questiones longe super librum Perihermeneias (QDI), edited with an introduc-
tion by R. van der Lecq, Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1984; Ph. D. thesis, Meppel: University
of Leiden, 1983, pp.12-14. Cf.: “All verbs, even in the present tense, which of their very nature
can concern future, past and possible things as well as present ones such as ‘think’, ‘know’, ‘mean’
and the like ampliate their terms to all times, future, past and present. And what accounts for
this is that a thing can be thought of without any diﬀerence of time, namely, abstracted from
any place and time. And so, when a thing is thought of in this way, then a thing which was, or
will be, or can be may be thought of as well as a thing which [actually] is. Therefore, if I have

420
Gyula Klima
So, when we say that in the proposition ‘Some roses existed here’ or ‘Some roses
could exist here’ we are referring to things that existed or could exist, but do not
exist. Still, according to Buridan it does not follow that therefore in these cases we
are referring to (quantifying over) non-existents. For we are referring to what we
are thinking of, and a non-existent or non-being cannot be thought of according
to Buridan, because the proposition ‘A non-being is understood’ cannot be true.
Buridan considers this issue in his Sophismata, when he raises the question
whether the sophisma (problem-sentence) ‘A non-being is understood’ is true.
First, he lays down that the proposition is aﬃrmative with an inﬁnite subject,
that is to say, the negation preceding the term ‘being’ is a narrow-scope term-
negation, and not a propositional negation, so the entire proposition is aﬃrmative.
Hence he argues for its truth as follows:
[. . . ] the sophism is proved: for such inﬁnite terms are analyzed so
that saying ‘A non-man runs’ is equivalent to saying ‘What is not a
man runs’. And thus saying ‘A non-being is understood’ is equivalent
to saying ‘What is not a being is understood’. But the second is true,
for Antichrist, who is not a being, is understood.55
Next, Buridan argues for the opposite side before resolving the issue:
O.1 The opposite is argued: for the term ‘non-being’ supposits for
nothing, but a proposition is false if its subject supposits for nothing
and it is aﬃrmative; therefore, etc.
In his response, Buridan sides with the second position, namely, that the sophism
is false, and argues for this position on the basis of his theory of ampliation.
I respond that the sophism is false, for the term supposits for nothing.
And this is clear in the following manner: for the verb ‘to understand’
or ‘to be understood’ ampliates supposition to past, and future, and
even all possible things. Therefore, if I say, ‘A being is understood’, the
term ‘being’ supposits indiﬀerently for every present or past or future
or possible thing. But the rule is that an inﬁnitizing negation added to
a term removes its supposition for everything for which it supposited
and makes it supposit for everything for which it did not supposit, if
there are any such things. Therefore, in the proposition ‘A non-being is
understood’, the term ‘non-being’ does not supposit for some present,
nor for some past, nor for some future, nor for some possible being;
the common concept from which we take this name ‘man’, then I can think indiﬀerently of all
men, past, present and future. And this is why these verbs can concern past or future things as
well as present ones.” Albert of Saxony. Perutilis Logica, , Venice, 1518; reprint, Hildesheim-
New York: Georg Olms Verlag, 1974, Tr. 2, c. 10, 8a regula. For an earlier example of the
same explanation of ampliation see the selection from the Logica Lamberti, in The Cambridge
Translations of Medieval Philosophical Texts, eds. N. Kretzmann and E. Stump, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988, pp. 104-163, esp. pp. 116-118.
55SD, p. 923ﬀ.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
421
therefore, it supposits for nothing, and so the proposition is false. And
I say that ‘A non-being is understood’ and ‘What is not a being is
understood’ are not equivalent, for by the verb ‘is’ you restrict the
inﬁnity [inﬁnitatem] to present things. Therefore, the supposition for
past and future [and possible] things remains, and thus this has to be
conceded: ‘What is not [a being] is understood’. If, therefore, we are
to give an equivalent analysis of ‘A non-being is understood’, then it
will be the following: ‘What neither is, nor was, nor will be, nor can
be is understood’, and this is false, just as the sophism was.56
Thus, even if we can certainly think of, refer to, and quantify over objects that do
not presently exist, it does not follow, that we can think of, refer to, and quantify
over non-existents: the sentence expressing this idea is just not true.
To be sure, a staunch Quinean might again try to move the objection to the level
of meta-language, claiming that even if in Buridan’s language, on his own analysis,
the sentence ‘I am referring to/quantifying over non-existents’ is false, in the meta-
language of his theory we can truly say this, and that is what matters. But then
Buridan might again just deny the validity of that distinction, and when challenged
with the semantic paradoxes and the issue of semantic closure motivating Tarski’s
distinction, he would just point to his own treatment of the paradoxes and his
resulting, radically diﬀerent conception of truth and validity, without any need for
such a global distinction. So now we need to turn to these issues, starting with
Buridan’s conception of propositional signiﬁcation.
The semantics of propositions: truth and validity in a semantically
closed language
Buridan’s semantics of propositional signiﬁcation is very simple: propositions sig-
nify whatever their categorematic terms signify. Thus, the propositions ‘God is
God’ and ‘God is not God’ signify the same simple thing as the term ‘God’ does,
namely, God. Yet, the reason why these linguistic expressions are non-synonymous
is that they signify diﬀerent concepts in the mind, whereby the same simple thing
is conceived diﬀerently.
So, whereas these phrases ultimately signify the same
thing ad extra, outside the mind, they signify diﬀerent concepts immediately apud
mentem, i.e., in the mind.
But then it is clear that these contradictory propositions cannot be veriﬁed
either in terms of the existence of their immediate signiﬁcata or in terms of the
existence of their ultimate signiﬁcata (for the existence of those would verify both,
which is impossible); whence, in stark contrast to the via antiqua conception, their
truth is not to be determined in terms of their signiﬁcation at all.
Therefore, the truth of propositions is to be determined for Buridan on the basis
of the supposition of their terms.57 However, since this varies with propositional
56Ibid.
57See SD 9. c. 2.

422
Gyula Klima
context, the conditions of their truth given in terms of the supposition of their
terms needs to be provided separately for diﬀerent types of propositions:
Therefore, recapitulating, we put forth the fourteenth conclusion, namely
that every true particular aﬃrmative is true because the subject and
predicate supposit for the same thing or things. And every true univer-
sal aﬃrmative is true because for whatever thing or things the subject
supposits for, the predicate supposits for that thing or for those same
things. And every false particular aﬃrmative is false because the sub-
ject and the predicate do not supposit for the same thing or things.
And every false universal aﬃrmative is false because not every thing
or all things which the subject supposits for are also supposited for by
the predicate. And every true particular negative is true because the
universal aﬃrmative contradictory to it is false; and we have declared
what the reason for this is. And every true universal negative is true
because the particular aﬃrmative contradictory to it is false; and we
have declared what the reason for this is. And every false particular
negative is false because the universal aﬃrmative contradictory to it is
true; and we have declared what the reason for this is. And every false
universal negative is false because the particular contradictory to it is
true; and we have declared what the reason for this is.58
These clauses, in fact, may look very much like the clauses of the satisfaction
conditions of formulae in a formal semantics, serving a “deﬁnition of truth” (in a
model). Indeed, we may get the same impression from what Buridan says imme-
diately after these clauses:
And this fourteenth conclusion, which contains eight partial conclu-
sions, appears to be entirely true on the basis of the foregoing [points]
given the principle that whatever is the cause of truth of one of the
contradictories, or is required for its truth, is the cause of the falsity of
the other, or is required for its falsity. But in the end we should note
— since we can use names by convention, and many people commonly
use this way of putting the matter — that in respect of every true
proposition we say: ‘It is so’, and in respect of every false one we say:
‘It is not so’, and I do not intend to eliminate this way of speaking.
But for the sake of brevity I may use it often intending by it not what
it signiﬁes on account of its primary imposition, but the diverse causes
of truth and falsity assigned above for diverse propositions, as has been
said.59
58Ibid. pp. 858-859.
59Buridan will often refer back to this remark, reminding us that whenever he uses his simple
formula qualitercumque propositio signiﬁcat ita est [‘In whatever way the proposition signiﬁes
things to be, so things are’] or any of its stylistic variants, he uses it as a place-holder for the
conditions of the truth of the several types of propositions he laid down here. Note also how this
general formula is related to the colloquial phrase: A est B, necne? — Ita est. [literally: ‘A is

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
423
However, upon a closer look it should be clear that Buridan is not providing a
“deﬁnition of truth” here whether in an Aristotelian or in a Tarskian manner.
That he is not providing an Aristotelian truth-deﬁnition in terms of the existence
of what a proposition as a whole signiﬁes in the way the via antiqua semantics
did is clear from the foregoing considerations concerning Buridan’s conception of
propositional signiﬁcation, as well as from his remark here that whenever he uses
the Aristotelian formula, he means it merely as a shorthand for his own clauses
listed above. It is also clear that these clauses do not list satisfaction-conditions or
even truth-conditions for the various types of propositions listed here (amounting
to deﬁnitions of truth for these proposition types). Indeed none of these clauses
are anything like Tarskian biconditionals. They are not saying ‘A proposition of
type T is true if and only if such and such conditions are met’. They are saying
‘A true/false proposition of type T is true/false, because the supposita of their
terms satisfy such and such conditions’. So, what these clauses assert is not even
the necessary and suﬃcient conditions of the assertibility of truth or falsity of
these various types of propositions; rather, they are stating the “correspondence
conditions” of true or false propositions, i.e., what circumstances need to obtain
in reality concerning the supposita of their terms for their truth or falsity (these
circumstances being quite literally the causes of their truth or falsity). Finally,
the same point, namely, that these clauses do not constitute Buridan’s deﬁnition
of truth, or strictly-speaking his statement of truth-conditions, is clear from his
treatment of Liar-type paradoxes, according to which such paradox statements
are simply false, despite the fact that in their case their correspondence conditions
stated in the above clauses are perfectly met.
For according to Buridan, the
Liar-type paradoxes, or insolubilia, as they were known in medieval logic, merely
show that meeting its correspondence conditions is not suﬃcient for the truth of
a proposition.
Without going into a detailed discussion of Buridan’s treatment of the Liar
paradox and its cognates,60 while focusing on its relevance to his construction of
semantic theory, one can provide the gist of his solution in the following manner.
Consider the following Liar-sentence, named L:
(L) L is false
What is paradoxical about L is that apparently (1) its truth entails its falsity,
whereas (2) its falsity entails its truth. Buridan’s solution consists in arguing that
on account of the validity of entailment (1), the Liar-sentence L is false; however,
no paradox arises, because entailment (2) is not valid. Therefore, pace Tarski,
B, isn’t it? — It is so.’] What causes the trouble in the translation is the fact that apart from
such a conversational context English demands some identiﬁcation of the grammatical subject of
this reply, which is not demanded by Latin. This is why, in translating qualitercumque propositio
signiﬁcat ita est [literally, but not in good English: ‘Howsoever the proposition signiﬁes so it
is’, although T. K. Scott did use this rather awkward solution], I will use the somewhat more
complicated circumlocution ‘In whatever way the proposition signiﬁes things to be, so they are’,
or its stylistic variants. [This is my note to this passage in my translation of Buridan’s Summulae.]
60Of which he provides an astounding array in his Summulae.

424
Gyula Klima
semantic closure (i.e., the condition that a language contains its own semantic
predicates and means of referring to its own elements) need not render a language
inconsistent.
But how can Buridan claim that (2) is not valid? After all, if L is false, then its
terms supposit for the same thing, namely, L itself, which would seem to suﬃce
for its truth.
But Buridan disagrees.
First he observes that any proposition
“virtually implies”61 another proposition, stating its truth. So, L implies ‘L is
true’. But then, since on account of (1) L is false, ‘L is true’ is not true. Thus,
by modus tollens, L is not true either, whence, by virtue of bivalence, it is false.
Therefore, L cannot be true, whence its falsity cannot entail its truth, despite
the fact that its correspondence condition is satisﬁed: it is false, whence its terms
co-supposit for itself. Still, this is not suﬃcient for calling it true, since for that,
besides the correspondence condition its “virtual implication condition” would
also have to be met, that is to say, the “virtually implied” proposition stating
its truth would also have to be true. So, what is necessary and suﬃcient for a
proposition to be called true, according to Buridan, is not only the fulﬁllment
of its correspondence condition, but also the fulﬁllment of its virtual implication
condition, plus, obviously, the proposition also has to exist.
But even this formulation cannot be regarded as a Buridanian “deﬁnition of
truth”. After all, since the “virtual implication” condition (according to which ‘L
is true’ implied by L must be true) contains the notion of truth, mentioning it
in the right-hand side of this Buridanian equivalence would render this putative
deﬁnition circular.62 But I do not think this would be the correct interpretation of
this equivalence. The right-hand side of this equivalence is rather a list of trivial,
separately necessary and jointly suﬃcient conditions of the correct assertibility of
‘true’.
In the case of non-reﬂexive sentences, the correspondence and virtual implica-
tion conditions are always met together, and that is why they do not give rise to
paradox. What is peculiar about the Liar-type sentences, however, is that because
of their meaning, their correspondence conditions can be met separately from their
virtual implication condition, whence (the appearance of) a paradox arises. How-
ever, if one clearly spells out all conditions of the assertibility of ‘true’, it will be
clear that meeting the correspondence condition without the virtual implication
condition does not make a proposition true, whence the falsity of the Liar-sentence
does not entail its truth; there is no genuine paradox.
But then, if Buridan’s solution works for reﬂexive-sentences in general, then he
is not compelled by considerations that motivated Tarski to introduce a global
split between object language and meta-language, so his possible defense against
the Quinean charges concerning ontological commitment discussed earlier may just
work as well.
However, one may still raise the issue that if the list of the assertibility conditions
61The import of ‘virtually’ will be discussed soon.
62For this charge, see especially Read, S. L. “The Liar Paradox from John Buridan back to
Thomas Bradwardine”, Vivarium 40(2002), pp. 189-218, p. 201.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
425
of the truth-predicate does not constitute a Buridanian deﬁnition of truth, then
how can he have a working semantic deﬁnition of validity (an inference is valid
if and only if the premises and the negation of the conclusion cannot be true
together), which apparently needs to be based on a deﬁnition of truth?
The Buridanian answer to this question is that the notion of validity is not to
be provided in terms of a deﬁnition of truth; indeed, Buridan argues that in (what
we would describe as) a token-based, semantically closed system, the notion of
validity cannot be based on the notion of truth. The simple reason for this is that
items of our language are individual token-symbols, which are parts of Buridan’s
ontology just as any other really existing individual. These token-symbols come
into and go out of existence, whereas their existence may be part of the conditions
of their correspondence to reality and their truth. For instance, the proposition
‘No proposition is negative’, being a negative proposition, can never be true, for
its very existence falsiﬁes it. Still, it would not be an impossible situation in which
there are no negative propositions (in fact, this was the actual situation before
the appearance of humans, provided we restrict our notion of a proposition to
those formed by humans whether in writing, speech or in the mind). But then,
in the case of this proposition there is again a divergence between the satisfaction
of truth conditions and correspondence conditions, this time on account of the
existence and non-existence of the proposition itself. Therefore, if he allowed a
deﬁnition of validity in terms of truth, Buridan would have to accept as valid any
odd consequences that have this proposition as their antecedent.
To avoid this, Buridan proposes a diﬀerent, improved deﬁnition of validity,
not in terms of truth, but in terms of the correspondence conditions he laid out
for diﬀerent types of propositions, summarized in the (improperly interpreted)
Aristotelian formula:
The ﬁfth conclusion is that for the validity of a consequence it does not
suﬃce for it to be impossible for the antecedent to be true without the
consequent if they are formed together [. . . ] for this is not valid: ‘No
proposition is negative; therefore, no proposition is aﬃrmative’. And
this is clear because the opposite of the consequent does not entail the
opposite of the antecedent. Yet, the ﬁrst cannot be true without the
truth of the second, for it cannot be true. Therefore, something more
is required, namely, that things cannot be as the antecedent signiﬁes
without being as the consequent signiﬁes. But in connection with this
it has been determined that this is not the proper expression of the
point, but we use it in the sense given above, for we cannot generally
express in a single expression covering all true propositions a reason
why they are true, nor concerning all false propositions a reason why
they are false, as has been said elsewhere.63
So, by means of the re-interpreted Aristotelian formula Buridan ﬁnds a way of
expressing the satisfaction of the correspondence conditions of a proposition in
63SD, pp. 955-956.

426
Gyula Klima
a given situation independently from its truth, indeed, independently from its
existence in that situation. This is most obvious in Buridan’s discussion leading
to his ﬁnal deﬁnition of logical validity, where, using the example ‘No proposition
is negative; therefore, some proposition is negative’, he ﬁrst argues against his
improved deﬁnition as follows:
Again, it is not possible for things to be as the ﬁrst [proposition, i.e.,
the antecedent] signiﬁes without their being as the second [the conse-
quent] signiﬁes; therefore, the consequence is valid. The consequence
seems to be manifest from what we said a valid consequence was in the
previous sophism, and you cannot otherwise express the reason why
a consequence is said to be valid. But I prove the antecedent: for it
follows that if things are as it signiﬁes, then it signiﬁes; and it follows
that if it signiﬁes, then it is; and, if it is, then things are as signiﬁed
by the second.64
In his reply to this objection, Buridan draws a very important distinction between
two possible ways of understanding his improved deﬁnition of validity:
To the second, which seems to be troublesome, I reply that a conse-
quence is never true or false unless it is; and thus the validity or truth of
a consequence requires that its antecedent and consequent exist. And
then, with this assumption, we give the rule that a consequence is valid
if it is impossible for things to be as the antecedent signiﬁes without
their being as the consequent signiﬁes. And this rule can be under-
stood in two ways: ﬁrst, that it is one proposition about impossibility
in the composite sense, in the way that this is commonly used, and its
sense then is that this is impossible: ‘When it is formed, things are as
the antecedent signiﬁes and not as the consequent signiﬁes’. And taken
in this way the rule is not valid, for according to this rule it follows
that the sophism is true. And it is according to this false rule that the
argument proceeded. Taken in the other way, the rule is understood as
a proposition about impossibility in the divided sense, so that its sense
is: a consequence is valid if in whatever way the antecedent signiﬁes
[things to be], it is impossible for things to be in that way without
their being in the way the consequent signiﬁes [them to be]. And it is
clear that this rule would not prove the sophism true, for in whatever
way the proposition ‘No proposition is negative’ signiﬁes, it is possible
for things to be in that way, and yet for them not to be in the way in
which the other signiﬁes; for this would be that case if, while the aﬃr-
matives stayed in existence, all negatives were annihilated, and this is
possible.65
64SD, pp. 956-957.
65SD, pp. 957-958.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
427
So, his ﬁnal deﬁnition of validity is the improved deﬁnition with the important
proviso that it is to be understood in the divided sense.
But in that sense it
provides a clear criterion for judging the validity of a consequence, regardless of
the existence of the antecedent and consequent in the possible situations in which
the satisfaction of their correspondence conditions needs to be checked in order to
determine the validity of the consequence in which they actually occur.
But with this notion of validity Buridan is certainly entitled in his solution of
the Liar-type paradoxes to use the notion of a “virtual implication”, i.e., a valid
consequence whose consequent need not actually be formed. Indeed, despite his
strict nominalist criteria concerning the existence of the token-sentences whose
truth or falsity we assert, he can certainly talk about the validity of a virtual
implication, because his notion of validity is not tied to the notion of truth whose
assertibility would require the existence of the relevant token-sentences.
Thus, by means of the re-interpreted Aristotelian formula, as summarizing the
correspondence conditions of propositions that Buridan laid down in terms of the
supposition of their terms, he managed to identify the ways things are in a possible
situations, regardless of whether the proposition that would signify them to be this
way exists in those situations. Yet, relying on his theory of supposition, Buridan
can do so without reifying the way things are as a “state of aﬀairs”, a complexe
signiﬁcabile, distinct from the ordinary things admitted in his nominalist ontology.
CONCLUSION: RECONSTRUCTING MEDIEVAL LOGIC
After this sketch of Buridan’s semantics, what remains is to provide the sort of ra-
tional reconstruction I was talking about in the introduction, at least in outline, to
facilitate its comparison with the competing medieval conception as reconstructed
here, as well as with modern quantiﬁcation theory. In fact, perhaps the best way
to approach this reconstruction from “our side” is to see how the standard mod-
ern semantic construction of quantiﬁcation theory would need to be modiﬁed to
represent, at least in part, the contrasting features of the medieval viae. Next we
should see what further features cannot be captured by such simple modiﬁcations,
and ﬁnally what would need to be done to capture even those features for our own
use.
As we have seen in connection with both medieval viae, much of the traditional
analysis of categorical propositions, their immediate inferential relations in the
Square of Opposition and traditional syllogistic can quite easily be restituted by
some very simple modiﬁcations of the syntax and semantics of standard quantiﬁ-
cation theory with identity.
All we need to do is add restricted variables to the language, and evaluate them
in the semantics in such a way that they pick out elements of the extension of their
matrix in a model, provided this extension is not empty; otherwise they should
get some evaluation that renders any aﬃrmative predication about them false.66
66I have presented such systems in my Ars Artium, and “Existence and Reference in Medieval

428
Gyula Klima
This simple modiﬁcation of quantiﬁcation theory renders it capable of represent-
ing some common features of both medieval viae, through attributing existential
import to all aﬃrmative predications, as both viae did, although for diﬀerent
reasons. For the via antiqua, aﬃrmative (non-ampliative) predications carry ex-
istential import because of the impossibility of the existence of the form signiﬁed
by the predicate in a suppositum of the subject without the existence of any sup-
positum of the subject (barring the miraculous cases of transubstantiated bread
and wine).67 For the via moderna, on the other hand, aﬃrmative (non-ampliative)
predications must carry existential import because of the requirement of the co-
supposition of the terms of the aﬃrmative predication, which of course cannot
take place unless both terms actually do have supposita.
These diﬀerences are partly representable already in the modiﬁed version of
quantiﬁcation theory with identity and restricted variables. In this system, the
via moderna analysis of a universal aﬃrmative proposition would have to be rep-
resented as a universal identity claim with two quantiﬁable variables:
(∀x.Sx)(∃y.Py)(x.Sx = y.Py)
The via antiqua analysis, on the other hand, would have to be represented as a
universal predication where only the subject term is represented by a quantiﬁable
variable:
(∀x.Sx)(P(x.Sx)).
These formulae represent quite well the symmetry of the semantic functions of the
two terms in the via moderna analysis, and the asymmetry of the same in the via
antiqua analysis. However, it is only the via moderna analysis that is represented
quite well by the semantic functions of the restricted variables of the ﬁrst formula.
The function of the predicate of the second formula (designating a subset of the
domain) is nowhere near the signiﬁcation function attributed to such a predicate
by the via antiqua. Thus, in a formal semantic reconstruction of that conception,
we would have to assign to the predicates of our language the sort of signiﬁcation
function discussed earlier. However, that will inevitably bring with it having to
modify the domain of interpretation of our model, where we would have to distin-
guish at least actual and non-actual elements (corresponding at least to actual vs.
non-actual ultimate signiﬁcata of our predicates, rendering our predications true
or false). But if we want to represent the ﬁner details of the via antiqua concep-
tion, we will also have to introduce new terms into our language, corresponding to
Logic”. A simple, non-modal system is provided here in the Appendix. This system I believe is
about as close as one can get to Buridan’s semantics by modifying quantiﬁcation theory “as we
know it”.
67For the logical complications caused by this supernatural scenario, see Bakker, Paul J. J. M.
“Hoc est corpus meum. L’analyse de la formule de cons´ecration chez les th´eologiens du XIVe
et XVe si`ecles,” in Costantino Marmo (ed.), Vestigia, Imagines, Verba: Semiotics and Logic in
Medieval Theological Texts (XIIth-XIVth Century). Turnhout: Brepols, 1997. pp. 427-51, and
Ashworth, E. Jennifer, “Medieval Theories of Singular Terms”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Fall 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2006/entries/singular-terms-medieval/, sect. 8.

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
429
abstract common terms, with the function of suppositing for the signiﬁcata of the
predicates representing our concrete common terms. Furthermore, at this point it
will be also inevitable to introduce a copula with the function of asserting the ex-
istence of these signiﬁcata. However, since these signiﬁcata cannot be regarded as
entities in the same sense in all cases, we would have to distinguish several senses
of existence, and introduce further sub-domains into our domain of interpretation
accordingly. Finally, we should also represent the function of the copula asserting
the signiﬁcata of entire propositions, which could then serve to provide a simple
Aristotelian formula for the deﬁnition of truth-in-a-model, grounding a deﬁnition
of validity. These adjustments, however, already involve major departures from
the standard construction of quantiﬁcation theory.
As we have seen, the via moderna analysis is actually much closer, at least
in the ﬁrst approach, to standard quantiﬁcation theory.
Indeed, the function
attributed to predicate letters (that of denoting subsets of the domain or of its
Cartesian products with itself) is not a far cry from the nominalist conception of
the signiﬁcation of common terms, according to which these terms signify certain
individuals of the domain, or their ordered collections in the case of connotative
terms. And the identity sign is clearly a good representation of the function of the
copula in accordance with the via moderna conception.
However, again, if we need to represent the ﬁner details of the via moderna
conception, we need to depart considerably from the standard construction of the
semantics of quantiﬁcation theory. In the ﬁrst place, although using restricted
variables to represent common terms in personal supposition yields “the right re-
sults” concerning the square of opposition and syllogistic, nevertheless, it does so
at the expense of representing simple common terms (say, F) as complex vari-
ables with an intrinsic propositional structure embedded in their matrix (‘x.Fx’,
amounting to something expressible as ‘thing that is an F’). But according to
our via moderna authors it is the simple term ‘man’, for example, that has this
referring function, and not a complex term like ‘thing that is a man’. In fact,
Buridan would pointedly distinguish the two in various contexts. So, to represent
this feature of via moderna semantics, we would need to devise “term-logics” along
the lines proposed by Lesniewski, Lejewski, Henry, Sommers and Englebretsen.
However, even if all the ﬁner details of via moderna semantics were neatly rep-
resented in a semantic theory that describes the semantic features of an object
language in a distinct meta-language, the entire construction of the semantic the-
ory, as we have seen, would be radically unfaithful to Buridan’s conception. In the
ﬁrst place, the global split between object-language and meta-language would not
do justice to his sophisticated conception of ontological commitment, oﬀering a
genuine third alternative “between” Quine’s and Meinong’s. In the second place,
it would preclude his intriguing treatment of Liar-type paradoxes with all their
implications concerning the theory of truth. Finally, it would also be incapable
of representing Buridan’s “relentlessly” nominalist account of logical validity in a
semantically closed, token based system.
To approach these issues, therefore, one might provide a semantic construction

430
Gyula Klima
in which the object language is capable of “cannibalizing” its own meta-language,
by introducing distinguished semantic predicates into the object-language match-
ing those originally deﬁned in the meta-language.
The payoﬀof such a project would be the ability to see exactly what it takes, in
precise model-theoretical terms, to construct a nominalist semantics, facilitating
its comparison both with the competing medieval conception and with a number
of modern conceptions. And this, in the end, might just get us closer to a genuine
understanding of the fundamental semantic relations between language, thought
and reality.
APPENDIX
Language
L := ⟨C, P, V, Trm, F⟩[language : constants, parameters, variables, terms, formu-
lae]
C := { ∼, &, =, ∀, ., (, )} [constants: negation, conjunction, identity, universal
quantiﬁer, punctuation marks]
P := Pr∪I, Pr := ∪{F m
n }, I := ∪{an} [parameters: predicates, individual names]
V := X ∪Xr, X := ∪{xi}, [variables: simple variables plus restricted variables]
Xr := {tn : tn =‘x.A’ and A ∈F} [restricted variable: formula preﬁxed with
simple variable and dot]
Trm:=I∪V [terms: individual names plus variables]
Formulae:
1. t1. . .tm ∈Trm, F m
n ∈Pr →‘F m
n (t1). . .(tm)’ ∈F
2. t1, t2 ∈Trm →‘t1 = t2’ ∈F
3. A, B ∈F →‘∼(A)’, ‘A&B’ ∈F
4. A ∈F, v ∈V →‘(∀v)(A)’ ∈F
Model
M := ⟨D, T, E, 0, 1, SGT⟩, where
D ̸= ∅, T ̸= ∅, t ∈T, E(t) ⊂D, 0 /∈D, 1 /∈D, SGT : P →D ∪P(Dm) [non-empty
domain, set of times, times, set of existents at time t, 0 and 1: False and True,
signiﬁcation function: from parameters to the domain plus the power-set of the
m-th Cartesian product of D with itself]
1. SGT(an) ∈D
2. SGT(F m
n ) ∈P(Dm)

The Nominalist Semantics of Ockham and Buridan
431
Supposition (value-assignment in a model)
1. SUP(a)(t) = SGT(a), if SGT(a) ∈E(t),
otherwise SUP(a)(t) = 0
2. SUP(x)(t) ∈D
3. SUP(‘x.A’)(t) = SUP(x)(t), if SUP(A)(t) = 1,
otherwise SUP(‘x.A’)(t) = 0
4. SUP(‘F m
n (t1). . .(tm)’)(t) = 1, if ⟨SUP(t1)(t), . . ., SUP(tm)(t)⟩∈SGT(F m
n )∩
E(t)m,
otherwise SUP(‘F m
n (t1). . .(tm)’)(t) = 0
5. SUP(‘t1 = t2’)(t) = 1, if SUP(t1)(t) = SUP(t2)(t) ∈E(t),
otherwise SUP(‘t1 = t2’)(t) = 0
6. SUP(‘∼A’)(t) = 1, if SUP(A)(t) = 0, otherwise SUP(‘∼A’)(t) = 0
7. SUP(‘A&B’)(t) = 1, if SUP(A)(t) = SUP(B)(t) = 1,
otherwise SUP(‘A&B’)(t) = 0
8. SUP(‘(∀v)(A)’)(t) = 1, if for every u ∈RSUP(v)(t), SUP[v : u](A)(t) = 1,
otherwise SUP(‘(∀v)(A)’)(t) = 0, where RSUP(v)(t) := {u ∈E(t) : for
some SUP, u = SUP(v)(t)}, if {u ∈E(t) : for some SUP, u = SUP(v)(t)} ̸=
∅, otherwise RSUP(v)(t) := {0}, and SUP[v : u](w)(t) = u, if w = v,
otherwise SUP[v : u](w)(t) = SUP(v)(t) — [RSUP(v)(t) is called “the
range of v at t”]
A is true in M iﬀfor some SUP, SUP(A)(t) = 1; A is valid iﬀfor every M, A
is true in M.

This page intentionally left blank

LOGIC IN THE 14th CENTURY
AFTER OCKHAM
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
This chapter is meant to complement the previous chapter on Ockham’s and
Buridan’s respective semantic systems, and the chapters on modalities, on self-
referential paradoxes and on supposition in this volume. Here, I intend to cover
for as much as possible the important material from the 14th century that is not
covered by these other chapters.
The 14th century was a period of intense intellectual activity in Christian Eu-
rope, in spite of the image of decline and disaster often associated with this period.
By that time, the Universities of Paris and Oxford, whose birth had taken place
in the previous centuries, had acquired maturity as institutions, and the diﬀerent
forms for intellectual investigation had been laid down. Even the Black Death in
the mid-14th century did not provoke a total decline in the degree of sophistication
of the knowledge being produced at the time, in spite of having taken the lives of
some of its brightest masters (e.g. Bradwardine, cf. [Read, 2006b]).
Logic occupied a privileged position in the medieval curriculum; it was part
of the trivium along with rhetoric and grammar, the three subjects a medieval
student worked on at the very beginning of his career. In many senses, logic was
thought to be the general method with which any student had to have a high degree
of familiarity before proceeding to any other topic (cf. [Zupko, 2003, ch. 2]). So,
on the one hand, at least some of the logic of that period was really meant for very
young students just beginning their intellectual career; on the other hand, while
it was indeed the most common for masters to move on to more ‘serious’ topics
(especially theology) at later stages of their careers (but this was not always the
case; Buridan is the most prominent but not the only example of a master having
stayed at the faculty of Arts throughout his career — cf. [Courtenay, 2004]), many
of them viewed logic not only as the matter to be covered by very young students.
Indeed, the 14th century corpus on logic presents logical analysis of the highest
quality.
But ﬁrst, of course, we must clarify what was meant by ‘logic’ in the 14th
century.
That medieval logic is very diﬀerent from what we call logic in 21st
century is almost a truism. However, a case can be made for the non-equivocal
use of the term ‘logic’ applied to these two radically diﬀerent traditions (cf. [Dutilh
Novaes, 2007, ‘Conclusion’]), insofar as some of the most basic traits of what is/was
thought to be logic in each of these periods seem to converge in signiﬁcant aspects.
But this is not the place for such a conceptual, intensional analysis; rather, for
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

434
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
the present purposes, it is suﬃcient to present the extension of the term ‘logic’
in the 14th century — that is, the kinds of theories that were treated under the
heading of logic in that period.
As any list of 14th century authors and texts (such as in [Spade, 1996, 329]) will
show, the main logical topics treated in that period were: insolubilia (paradoxical
propositions); modal propositions; supposition; the analysis (‘proof’) of proposi-
tions; obligations; and consequence. One also encounters works bearing the title
‘sophismata’ (William Heytesbury, Albert of Saxony, Richard Kilvington), but
sophismata are not theories in themselves; rather, sophismata are logical and/or
philosophical puzzles (cf. [Pironet, 2005]). The apparatus to be used to solve a
given sophisma obviously depends on the source of the problem in question, and
may come from any of the familiar theoretical frameworks most used then (theories
of supposition, theories of fallacies etc.).
As for the ﬁrst two topics of this list, insolubilia and modal propositions (two
of the main topics in 14th century logic), they are treated in detail elsewhere this
volume, so I will not approach them here. We are thus left with the other four
prominent logical genres in the 14th century: supposition, the analysis (‘proof’)
of propositions, obligationes, and consequence. Indeed, this chapter is composed
of three main parts, each of them dedicated to one of these topics – under the
common heading of ‘semantics’, I treat supposition and, brieﬂy, the theory of
proofs of propositions.
But before I move to the study of these three topics,
in a preliminary section I give an overview of names, dates and places, so as to
provide the reader with some of the historical background before we proceed to the
conceptual analysis. The reader may also choose to turn directly to the thematic
sections, if the historical aspects are not her main interest.
1
NAMES, DATES AND PLACES
While it is true that there has been growing interest in 14th century philosophy
over the last decades, and that the number of publications on this subject has
grown exponentially, we are still nowhere near a complete account of the historical
and bibliographical events involving the authors in question.
It is signiﬁcant,
for example, that even the exact date of death of an author as inﬂuential as
John Buridan remains unknown (cf.
[Zupko, 2002a, section 1]).
It may be a
matter of further work on the extant manuscripts and records, which remain largely
unstudied in libraries, but it may also be that some of these details will never be
revealed for lack of extant records.
Be that as it may, and although there is deﬁnitely a signiﬁcant amount of work
still to be done on manuscripts and records, scholars have managed to compile an
impressive, albeit incomplete, amount of information on the philosophers of that
period. Here I attempt to present the main lines of our current state of knowledge
on 14th century philosophers and logicians, especially in view of the conceptual
analyses to follow. Naturally, several important texts remain without deﬁnitive
authorial attribution and are listed as ‘Anonymous’; whenever relevant, such texts

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
435
will be mentioned in the thematic sections to follow this one.
1.1
Beyond Paris and Oxford
What is perhaps most interesting in the historical development of logic in the 14th
century is the spread of logical and philosophical knowledge to places other than
the two traditional centers, Paris and Oxford. Indeed, even though it would be
incorrect to say that Paris and Oxford were the only centers of intellectual and
academic development in Christian Europe in the centuries preceding the 14th
century (the University of Bologna is generally considered to be the oldest univer-
sity in Christian Europe, and there were important studia, i.e. schools of higher
learning, in many European cities), it is undeniable that Oxford and especially
Paris (which was the great center for theology from the 12th up to the 15th cen-
tury) were the two great poles of development concerning the Ars in general (i.e.
logic, rhetoric, grammar, geometry, astronomy, music and arithmetic, plus the
three ‘philosophies’: moral philosophy, metaphysics and natural philosophy), and
concerning logic in particular (cf. [De Libera, 1982], on the Paris and Oxford tra-
ditions in the 13th century). In the 14th century, however, especially in the second
half of the century, this was no longer the case.
The regional element was always an important one in how academic learning
was organized in the Faculty of Paris, which was divided in ‘nations’ in such a way
that it was most common for a student to study under a master originally coming
from his own home region (cf. [Courtenay, 2004]).1 But with the creation of several
new universities in diﬀerent locations in Europe, by the end of the 14th century
it was no longer necessary for a student to go to Paris or Oxford to obtain his
degree; he could often stay within the boundaries of his own country. By the same
token, the two traditional centers were no longer the only places where original
and inﬂuential work in philosophy and logic was being done. It may still be useful,
though, for explanatory purposes, to draw a distinction between the British and
the Paris traditions in logic in the 14th century (even though there are of course
multiple points of contact and mutual inﬂuence between the two traditions), and to
track how each of these traditions was exported to and reworked in new centers of
knowledge. Indeed, even at the time this distinction was recognized: Continental
authors usually referred to the authors of the British tradition (in particular those
currently referred to as the ‘Mertonians’) as ‘Anglici’ or ‘Britannici’ (cf. [Sylla,
1982, 541]).
Two interesting examples of the transmission of the British and Parisian tradi-
tions in logic are the inﬂuence of British logic in Italy and the inﬂuence of Parisian
logic in Eastern Europe. Take Italy, for example: even though the country already
had a great tradition of institutions of knowledge, an interesting phenomenon is
1The four Parisian nations were: Normandy, Picardy, France and the English/German nation.
Other universities often followed Paris’ example and were organized in (usually four) nations as
well (but naturally, diﬀerent nations other than the original Parisian ones). The University of
Prague, for example, was organized in the Bohemian, Bavarian, Saxon and Polish nations (see
[Ashworth, 2006, 212]).

436
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
the spread of ‘British logic’ in Italy in the 14th century, especially in the second
half of the century. In this period, more and more Italian students were sent to
Oxford2, and often brought back to Italy the knowledge they acquired there (cf.
[Courtenay, 1982, p. 17]); British masters such as Ockham and Burley also visited
and worked in Italy (cf. [Courtenay, 1982, p. 17]). It is very telling that he who
is perhaps the most inﬂuential logician of the ﬁrst half of the 15th century was an
Italian having studied in Oxford in the last decade of the 14th century, namely
Paul of Venice. After obtaining his degree, he taught in Italy for most of his ca-
reer (cf. [Conti, 2005b]), and this exempliﬁes the aforementioned phenomenon of
spread of knowledge beyond the traditional centers of Oxford and Paris that took
place in the 14th century.3
A similar phenomenon occurred in Eastern Europe with the exportation of
Parisian knowledge (logic in particular), which is made even more evident by the
foundation of several inﬂuential universities in the region in the second half of
the 14th century — the Universities of Prague4 in 1348, Vienna in 1365 (but to
be re-founded in 1384), Erfurt (papal bull in 1379, but inaugurated in 1392),
Heidelberg in 1385 and Cologne in 1388/9 are the main examples. Some of the
most inﬂuential masters of the second half of the 14th century were directly related
to the foundation of these universities, most notably Albert of Saxony for the
University of Vienna5 (cf. [Biard, 2004, section 1]) and Marsilius of Inghen for
the University of Heidelberg (cf. [Hoenen, 2001, section 1]). These two masters
are particularly representative of the spread of ‘Parisian’ trends (especially the
‘Buridanian’ approach to logic6) into other regions.
2As a result of the papal schism (1378–1417, a period during which there were two and
sometimes even three ‘popes’, each of whom considering the other(s) to be an usurper), Italians
could no longer go to Paris, since Italy and France supported opposing parties in the papal
dispute.
3Even before Paul of Venice, Italy had already an important tradition of logicians. See for
example the introduction to Blaise of Parme’s logical Questiones [Blaise of Parme, 2001].
4In this respect, the University of Prague diﬀers slightly from the other Eastern European
universities at the time in that not only the teaching of Parisian masters was inﬂuential; Prague
enjoyed equally close relations with Oxford. Thus, not only Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen
were inﬂuential in Prague, but also Heytesbury and later Wyclif (see [Ashworth, 2006, 212]).
5However, Albert of Saxony stayed only for a year in Vienna (cf. [Shank, 1988, 13]). For
several political and social reasons, the University of Vienna only came to existence with its
re-foundation in 1384; but at that point it was again the importation of Parisian knowledge that
marked its rebirth, as three of the most distinguished Germanic theologians trained in Paris
(Henry of Langenstein, Henry of Oyta and Gerard of Kalkar) were recruited to be at the head
of the reborn university (cf. [Shank, 1988, 17]). However, even before that, the Parisian master
Thomas of Cleves was appointed chief schoolmaster at St. Stephen’s Cathedral School in Vienna
(the basis for the soon-to-be re-founded University of Vienna) (cf. [Read, 1991, 61]).
6Buridan was certainly one of the most inﬂuential logicians in the 14th century, probably
more than Ockham himself (who, ironically, was more inﬂuential in Paris in the ﬁrst half of the
14th century than in his own home country, England — cf. [Courtenay, 1984; 1987a]). See also
[Markowski, 1984] for a detailed account of the reception of Buridan’s texts in Eastern Europe.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
437
1.2
A survey of the traditions
Establishing the relations of mutual inﬂuence between the diﬀerent authors and
trends in 14th century logic is deﬁnitely not a straightforward matter, and one
often winds up with an oversimpliﬁcation of the facts.
But given this caveat,
in the following sections I will attempt to present a survey of 14th century logic
with respect to names, dates and places, following the thread of these two main
traditions, British and Parisian logic.
1.2.1
The British tradition
Let us start with the British tradition; it is somewhat easier to follow than the
Parisian/continental tradition, as it developed in a relatively more compact way.
(For a detailed overview of the British tradition, [Courtenay, 1987b; Ashworth and
Spade 1992] are invaluable sources of information and references to other works
on the topic).
The origin of the British tradition in logic is still a matter of debate among
scholars. While it seems clear that one cannot speak of a British tradition in the
12th century — a time in which activity in logic was virtually entirely concentrated
in Paris — there are important British authors from the 13th century, such as
William of Sherwood, Roger Bacon, Simon of Faversham and Robert Kilwardby
(who nevertheless all studied and/or worked in Paris). In fact, it has been argued
that, while Paris was taken over by the ‘modist’ fashion at the end of the 13th
century, Oxford remained faithful to the ‘older’ terminist tradition (cf. [Ebbesen,
1985]), which was in turn re-imported into the continent at the beginning of the
14th century, and which is the matrix for the developments in the 14th century to
be discussed here. But this theory also encountered opposition, to an extent that
we cannot as of now speak of an entirely clear picture of these developments.
The most important British philosopher of the very beginning of the 14th cen-
tury is, beyond any doubt, Walter Burley. He was extremely inﬂuential in his own
time as well as in the remaining of the century (his date of death is estimated at
around 1344); he exempliﬁes the introduction of ‘new’ logical and semantic tools
and techniques characteristic of the late medieval period, but in his case often
used to defend rather conservative views – he is viewed as the main representative
of late-medieval ‘realism’, as opposed to the nominalism of Ockham and Buridan
(for the relations of criticism but also of mutual inﬂuence between Ockham and
Burley, see [Conti, 2004]).
In the early stages of his career, Burley was linked to Merton College in Oxford,
the college to which most of the important British masters of the ﬁrst half of
the 14th century were connected (more on Merton College shortly).
It is also
noteworthy that he obtained his doctorate in theology in Paris, which also shows
that one cannot speak of entirely independent developments in the British and
Parisian traditions. Throughout his life, Burley traveled extensively in Europe for
several diplomatic missions, while at the same time never stopping his scholarly
work, and thus can be seen as one of the actors in the dissemination of British

438
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
logic in the continent, especially in Italy.7
Burley’s work is also representative of the topics that were to become the logical
topics par excellence throughout the 14th century: he wrote a treatise on conse-
quences early in his career [Walter Burley, 1980] (Green-Pedersen argues that this
treatise was certainly written before 1302 — cf. [Green-Pedersen, 1981], as well as
a treatise on supposition, and an inﬂuential treatise on obligations [Green, 1963].
But he is perhaps most famous for his On the Purity of the Art of Logic [Walter
Burley, 2000], of which he wrote a shorter and a longer version.8 For the present
purposes, Burley’s treatises on consequences and on obligations are particularly
important, as well as the parts of the Purity concerning consequences; they will
be the starting point for the conceptual analyses of each of these topics in this
chapter.
Ockham, perhaps the most famous 14th century philosopher now as well as then,
was slightly younger than Burley. He led an agitated life, most notably marked
by his quarrels with the Avignon popes.9 He wrote on logic for only a very brief
period of his life, before his departure to Avignon; but his work on logic, especially
his Summa Logicae [William of Ockham, 1974] was to have a signiﬁcant impact
in subsequent developments. However, Ockham’s writings will not be among the
main objects of analysis in this chapter: his semantics is already thoroughly ex-
amined elsewhere in this volume, and his theory of obligations (described in his
Summa Logicae III-3, chaps. 39-45) is not particularly important for the devel-
opment of these theories in the 14th century. Only his writings on consequence
(Summa Logicae III-3) will be examined in the appropriate section below.
Of the same period, Adam Wodeham is now mostly known as the secretary
and assistant of Ockham in the period in which the latter was writing the Summa
Logicae (in the 1320s); although Wodeham has made important contributions as
diﬀusor and also critic of Ockham (especially with respect to his epistemology),
his contribution to logic does not seem to have been signiﬁcant. He is, though,
currently thought to be the creator of the doctrine of complexe signiﬁcabile, which
was later to be defended by the Parisian theologian Gregory of Rimini (see below in
the next section), and was to become an inﬂuential theory concerning the meaning
and truthmakers of propositions, with applications to epistemology.
Besides the very famous Ockham and Burley, several other extremely innova-
tive and bright masters were active in the ﬁrst half of the 14th century in England
(the Black Death in 1349 is usually considered as a convenient divisor between
this period and the one to follow, each having quite distinct characteristics — cf.
[Ashworth and Spade, 1992]). As already mentioned, most of these masters were
connected to Merton College in Oxford, and are thus often referred to as the ‘Mer-
tonians’ (often also as the ‘Oxford Calculators’ — see [Sylla, 1982]). The Merto-
7For brief but informative overviews of Burley’s life and inﬂuence, see [Spade, 2000; Conti,
2004].
8On the rather awkward title of Burley’s masterpiece, which might be better translated as
On the Essence of the Art of Logic, see [Spade and Menn, 2003].
9For an account of Ockham’s life and inﬂuence, see [Courtenay, 1999].

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
439
nians excelled not only in logic; their works on natural philosophy were probably
even more inﬂuential; they are often viewed as precursors of the ‘mathematical
turn’ in physics to take place a few centuries later (see [Sylla, 1982, 541]).
The main authors among the Mertonians of the ﬁrst half of the 14th century (for
our present purposes) are: Thomas Bradwardine, William Heytesbury, Richard
Billingham, Roger Swyneshed (not to be confounded with the famous Richard
Swyneshed, also a Mertonian and in fact known as ‘The Calculator’), and Richard
Kilvington (for a more detailed presentation of each of these authors, see [Ashworth
and Spade, 1992]).
Until not so long ago, it was though that Thomas Bradwardine’s contribution
to logic was, to say the least, meager, and that his main contributions were to
be found in the ﬁeld of natural philosophy, mathematics and theology.
But a
recent interest in Bradwardine’s insolubilia (including a new edition of the text
now in preparation by Stephen Read) has arisen, showing that his work on Liar-
like paradoxes was extremely innovative and sophisticated (cf. [Read, 2006b]).
Since I will not be dealing with insolubilia in this chapter (as they are the topic
of a diﬀerent chapter in this volume), Bradwardine will not ﬁgure prominently in
the analyses to follow. But his historical as well as philosophical importance must
not be overlooked.
William Heytesbury was seemingly more proliﬁc than Bradwardine. The list
of his still extant works is rather long, and includes treatises on consequence and
obligations (which are only to be found in manuscripts — cf. [Longeway, 2003,
section 2]), an inﬂuential treatise on divided and composite senses, some work on
insolubilia, among others. But he is most famous for his Regulae solvendi sophis-
mata (1335)10, a work composed of six parts, where logical, semantic and physical
sophisms are dealt with. In the ﬁrst part he deals with the paradoxical proposi-
tions known as insolubilia, and his approach to them was later to be inﬂuential,
especially in the continent (e.g. Peter of Ailly’s treatment of insolubilia). The sec-
ond part is dedicated to what we now call ‘reference in opaque contexts’; the third
and fourth parts deal with semantic puzzles (related to the supposition of relative
pronouns, in the third, and to the terms ‘begins’ and ‘ceases’ in the fourth); the
last two concern physical puzzles. Thus, since the subject-matter of the ﬁrst two
parts is to be dealt with elsewhere in this volume, and since the last two parts do
not concern logic and/or semantics directly, in the analysis to follow Heytesbury
will not ﬁgure prominently. Nevertheless, it is important to notice that Heytesbury
was to become very inﬂuential in Italy in the 15th century (while almost entirely
forgotten in England), again exemplifying the exportation of British logic to Italy
in the 14th and 15th centuries (see [Braakhuis, 1982]).
Richard Billingham, another inﬂuential Mertonian (apparently a few years younger
than Bradwardine and Heytesbury), was most known in his own time for one of his
works, his Speculum puerorum [Maier´u, 1970; de Rijk, 1975; 1982], even though he
also wrote on all the traditional topics in 14th century logic (obligations — also in-
10A transcription of the text by F. Pironet, en route for a critical edition, can be found at
http://mapageweb.umontreal.ca/pironetf/Sophismata.html

440
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
ﬂuential, cf. (Ashworth 1985) — consequences, insolubilia, supposition etc. — for
complete list of his still extant works, see the bibliography in [Richard Billingham,
2003]). His Speculum puerorum is dedicated to what seems to be a 14th century
invention, the theory of the ‘proofs of propositions’. To ‘prove’ a proposition is, in
a general sense, to show it to be true, but not necessarily in a rigorous, formal way
(as we now understand the notion of ‘proof’); the basic idea is that there are some
propositions that are basic, that is, whose truth does not depend on the truth of
other propositions, but that the majority of propositions are not of this nature.
The task is thus to ‘unfold’ these propositions that are not basic into basic propo-
sitions, so that it becomes clear what the truth of these non-basic propositions
depends on. For this reason, the theory of the proof of propositions is essentially
a semantic theory, that is, a theory intended to explain the meaning of complex
propositions in terms of more primitive ones, to which they can be reduced, and
therefore will be (brieﬂy) treated under the heading ‘Semantics’ below.
Billingham’s treatise on the proof of propositions (Speculum puerorum) is not
the ﬁrst and probably not even the most remarkable among the treatises of the
genre in the 14th century (see [De Rijk, 1975; Ashworth and Spade, 1992, 42]);
it was, however, very inﬂuential in its time (see [De Rijk, 1976]), more than any
of his other writings. Furthermore, his treatise on consequences has been given a
modern edition recently [Richard Billingham, 2003], and will be mentioned in the
section dedicated to consequences below.
Roger Swyneshed and Richard Kilvington are both minor ﬁgures if compared to
the inﬂuential Bradwardine, Heytesbury and Billingham, but they both composed
works that had considerable impact in later developments. Swyneshed is known
for his treatise on insolubilia [Spade, 1979] — which, in spite of being heavily
attacked by Heytesbury, eventually became quite popular in the 15th century —
and for his treatise on obligations [Spade, 1977], which seemingly initiated a new
trend in obligational disputations, the so-called nova responsio (as opposed to the
antiqua responsio, exempliﬁed by Burley’s treatise). Indeed, Swyneshed’s treatise
on obligations will be one of the main objects of analysis in the section on obliga-
tions below. Kilvington will be mentioned in the same section, as parts of his quite
popular Sophismata (cf. [Kilvington, 1990a] for the Latin text and [Kilvington,
1990b)]for the translation), which otherwise mostly deals with problems of motion
and change from a logical perspective (see [Jung, 2001]), present important views
on obligational disputations as well.
The next period in the history of British logic in the 14th century is, accord-
ing to Ashworth and Spade [1992, 39] ‘a period still of sophistication, even if no
longer of great originality, during which earlier issues and doctrines were devel-
oped, consolidated and transmitted to the rest of Europe’. They also mention as
characteristic features of this period a tendency to produce summary treatments of
diﬀerent logical topics, which seem to have been intended for teaching rather than
to be original contributions; a strong interest in the theory of ‘proofs of proposi-
tions’, in the fashion of Billingham’s Speculum puerorum, and in the problem of
truth and signiﬁcation of propositions. For our purposes, the main authors of this

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
441
period are: Ralph Strode, Richard Lavenham, Richard Ferrybridge, John Wyclif,
and Paul of Venice (the last two being beyond any doubt the best known to us
and probably the most inﬂuential ones in their time too).
Richard Lavenham was neither particularly inﬂuential nor particularly original,
but his (usually short) writings in many senses illustrate exceptionally well the
general themes and theories of this period.
It is perhaps for this reason that
many of his writings have been given modern editions (see in particular [Spade,
1974], where his treatises on consequences and on supposition are edited, and
[Spade, 1978], for his treatise on obligations; see also [Spade, 1980] for a general
presentation of Lavenham); this obviously means that he is a key ﬁgure for anyone
wishing to understand the logic of the second half of the 14th century, given the
easy access to his writings.
Ralph Strode and Richard Ferrybridge were both more inﬂuential ﬁgures than
Lavenham (they were to be particularly inﬂuential in Italy — see [Maieru, 1982a]
and [Del Punta, 1982]), but unfortunately most of their works have not yet been
given modern editions. Ralph Strode has written a Logica that exempliﬁes per-
fectly the main interests of logicians in the 14th century, composed of the following
treatises: two introductory chapters on the principles of logic, one on consequence,
one on supposition, one on obligationes, and ﬁnally one on insolubilia (on the order
of the treatises within the Logica, see [Maieru, 1982a]). His treatise on consequence
has been given a modern edition [Seaton, 1973], and there is an ongoing project to
edit the rest of Strode’s Logica, but which so far has not been completed. Strode
will be mentioned in the sections below dedicated to obligationes and to conse-
quences.
Ferrybridge wrote two known works in logic, a ‘Logic, or treatise on the truth
of propositions’ and a treatise on consequences (cf. [Ashworth and Spade, 1992,
57]). To my knowledge, neither has been given a full modern edition, but the two
ﬁrst chapters of the Logica can be found in [Del Punta, 1982], and many passages
of his treatise on consequences can be found in [Pozzi, 1978]; the latter will be
commented upon in the section dedicated to consequences below.
By contrast, John Wyclif and Paul of Venice are much better known to us
(see [Conti, 2005a; 2005b]); their works are often easily accessible to the modern
reader, including translations. Wyclif is most known for his metaphysical positions
(he is the main advocate of realism in the second half of the 14th century), but
his importance in the history of logic must not be underestimated. His logical
doctrines are indeed usually intimately related to some metaphysical problem; for
example, the issue of universals led him to reﬂect on the notion of predication
(cf. [Conti, 2005a, section 2.3]). He did write a Logica and a sequel to it (ed.
Dziewicki, 1893-99), where again his realist metaphysics plays a prominent role;
his discussion of the notion of supposition, heavily borrowed from Burley but with
important modiﬁcations, will be brieﬂy examined below. He also wrote on the
issue of the truth of propositions, on insolubilia and on the ‘proof of propositions’
(cf. [Ashworth and Spade, 1992]).
At ﬁrst sight it may seem strange to place Paul of Venice under the heading of

442
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
‘British logic’; he was after all an Italian who spent almost his entire life working
in Italy. He did though spend a short period (at least three years, it would seem11)
in Oxford in his formative years, and the logic he learned in Oxford remained his
main source of inﬂuence in his subsequent writings. It makes thus good sense
to place him among the ‘British’ logicians; moreover, in the 15th century it was
mainly in Italy that ‘British’ logic ﬂourished, as in Great Britain properly speaking
a period of stagnation in logic occurred.
Paul’s work covers an impressive array of themes, as is attested for example by
the length of his Logica Magna (of which several parts have been recently edited
and translated into English — see bibliography).
His Logica Parva (complied
around 1395, at Oxford) was one of the most inﬂuential logic textbooks in the
15th century (Paul of Venice 1984). True enough, most of Paul’s career took place
in the 15th century, so one might think that he should be treated elsewhere in
this volume, and not in this chapter dedicated to the 14th century; but in many
senses he epitomizes 14th century logic. Not only did he deal with virtually all
of the important logical topics of this century (supposition, obligations, the truth
of propositions etc.); he also usually summarized the logical knowledge produced
in this century in his discussions, often quoting verbatim from his sources (for
example, his use of Strode in his treatise on obligations — cf. [Ashworth and
Spade, 1992, fn.99]), while also making original contributions to the discussions.
Another author who was of Italian origin (in fact he was Greek-born) and who
adopted much of the Oxford logic framework after having studied there is Peter of
Candia, later Pope Alexander V. Mostly a theologian, among his logical works are
a treatise on obligationes and one on consequence (cf. [Green-Pedersen, 1985]).
Less inﬂuential ﬁgures still worth being mentioned are Henry Hopton (in par-
ticular his discussion of the truth of propositions), Robert Fland (in particular
his works on consequence and on obligations, cf. [Spade, 1976; 1980c], Martinus
Anglicus (in particular his works on consequence and on obligations), Johannes
Venator (his Logica is in the spirit of Billingham’s theory of ‘proofs of propositions’
— cf. [de Rijk, 1982] and edited in [Johannes Venator, 1999]), Robert Alington
(a follower of John Wyclif) and Richard Brinkley (in particular his theory of the
signiﬁcation of propositions and his obligationes — [Brinkley, 1987; 1995]). John
of Holland is an interesting case of an author in some senses belonging to both
traditions, British and Continental.
While his writings (cf.
[John of Holland,
1985]) show a familiarity with British logicians, which seems to indicate that he
may have studied at Oxford, he is best known for his career at the University of
Prague; therefore, he will be treated in more detail in the section dedicated to the
continental tradition below.
As already said, the end of the 14th century coincides with a general decline
in British logic. According to Ashworth and Spade [1982, 35], it is a period of
‘logic stagnation leading eventually in the sixteenth century to the rejection of
the ‘thorns’ of scholastic logic’.
In the 15th century, the most interesting and
innovative contributions within the tradition of ‘British’ logic were to take place
11Cf. [Ashworth and Spade, 1992, 60].

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
443
elsewhere, in particular in Italy.
1.2.2
The Parisian/continental tradition
The continental tradition in logic in the 14th century begins with what could
be described as a hiatus; according to our current state of knowledge about that
period, it appears that, in the ﬁrst three decades of the 14th century, no signiﬁcant
novelties were put forward by Parisian logicians. However, it must be said that
the ﬁrst half of the 14th century in Paris, and in the continent generally speaking,
is as of now not as well studied as the same period in Oxford with respect to logic;
but it is to be hoped that, with further research, our knowledge of this period in
Paris will become more thorough in the coming years.
For as far as we can tell at present, this period in Paris was still very much mar-
ket by the Modist theories, a late-13th century creation (which is treated elsewhere
in this volume); indeed, what is perhaps the most important text of the Modist
tradition, namely Thomas of Erfurt’s De modis signiﬁcandi, appears to have been
written in the ﬁrst decade of the 14th century (cf. [Zupko, 2002b]. Important
Parisian Art Masters of this period (also within the general Modist trend) were
Radulphus Brito and Siger of Courtrai, but one cannot speak of them as having
made particularly original contributions in the domain of logic besides their inﬂu-
ence in the development of the Modist doctrines. Another important ﬁgure of this
period in Paris was Peter Auriol (see [Friedman, 2002]), who was predominantly
a theologian, but whose doctrines had implications for the theory of cognition (cf.
[Tachau, 1982]).
There is, however, one author of this period who is worth being mentioned in
connection with the development of logic in Paris, namely Giraldus Odonis. His
Logica [Giraldus Odonis, 1997] seems to have been written at some point in the
ﬁrst half of the 1320s (cf. [de Rijk, 1997, 24]); what is interesting is that it is
nothing like the works in logic of the generation to follow, such as Buridan’s, so
apparently it was not particularly inﬂuential for subsequent developments. It was
written roughly at the same time as Ockham’s Summa Logicae, and according to de
Rijk [1997, 24], ‘neither in Girald’s work nor in Ockham’s Summa Logicae [. . . ] is
there any trace of acquaintance with each other’s work’. The historical signiﬁcance
of Girald’s logic is to show that there was seemingly activity within the terminist
tradition in Paris at this time — contrary to the idea that the ﬁrst three decades
of the 14th in Paris were totally dominated by the Modist tradition, and that the
terminist tradition was only practiced in Britain. Granted, Girald was familiar
with Burley’s work (recall that, at this period, Burley was a student of theology in
Paris), so it is still possible that the terminist tradition was reintroduced in Paris
as a British import, as claimed by Ebbesen [1985]. But what is very signiﬁcant is
how diﬀerent Girald’s theory of supposition is from Burley’s, to the point that one
wonders whether there wasn’t indeed a genuine Parisian terminist tradition in this
period, which however seems to have become surpassed by what can be loosely
referred to as the ‘British approach’ in later works, such as those of Buridan.

444
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
By contrast, an Englishman12 thought to have been working in Paris in the
1320s and 1330s, Thomas Maulevelt, illustrates the early penetration of Ockhamist
logical doctrines in Paris (the history of which deserves closer attention — cf.
[Courtenay, 1984]).
Very little is known about him (cf.
[Lorenz, 1996]), and
the fact that his name is spelled in several diﬀerent ways (Maulvelt, Manlevelt,
Maulﬁeld, among others), does not make the job of tracing his steps any easier.
But we do know, for example, that his works in the parva logicalia (‘textbook’-
style logic) were to be very inﬂuential in Germany and Eastern Europe. Modern
editions of some of his texts are now in preparation, but so far none of his works is
available in print. What is in any case clear is that Thomas, while working in Paris,
was already following the footsteps of Ockham in logic, and sometimes taking the
Ockhamist project of ontological reduction even further than Ockham himself (cf.
[Andrews, forthcoming], on Maulevelt’s denial of the category of substance).
Be that as it may, by the end of the third decade of the 14th century, ‘a new
academic generation with diﬀerent concerns was emerging [. . . ], but its directions
and importance would not become visible for almost a decade’ [Courtenay, 1999a,
5]. The most famous member of this new generation is John Buridan, but other
inspired masters were Nicholas of Autrecourt, Nicholas of Oresme and Gregory of
Rimini. Strictly speaking, the contributions in logic of the three latter authors are
not particularly signiﬁcant; however, they were important ﬁgures for the general
development of the Ars in that period. Gregory of Rimini, for example, was an
Italian Augustinian who came in contact with the works of Oxford scholars in
Italy (after having studied theology in Paris in the 1320s), and upon his return
to Paris in the 1340s is thought to have been particularly instrumental in the
spread of Oxford philosophy in general and Oxford logic in particular in Paris (cf.
[Schabel, 2001, section 2]) — in the 1330s, very little attention was paid in Paris to
the revolutionary works of English logicians of that period, such as Bradwardine,
Heytesbury etc. (cf. [Courtenay, 1984, p. 46]).13 Predominantly a theologian,
Gregory is also known for defending the doctrine of complexe signiﬁcabile, the
doctrine according to which the object of knowledge is neither propositions nor
the things in the external world signiﬁed by its terms, but rather that which is
signiﬁed by the proposition (complexe signiﬁcabile), whose ontological status was
seen by some (such as Autrecourt — cf. [Thijssen, 2001, section 7]) as problematic.
John Buridan is, as already mentioned, without a doubt one of the most inﬂu-
ential philosophers of the 14th century. His writings range over a wide variety of
12Although English, Thomas is treated in the Parisian/continental section here because he is
known to have worked in Paris, and because his subsequent inﬂuence was particularly noticeable
in Europe.
13Explicit or implicit signs of Oxford logic in Paris are always historically important, but less
so the other way round.
This is because one can virtually take for granted that the British
logicians were always very much aware of what was going on in Paris, but the converse was not
necessarily the case. For example, a manuscript on obligationes partially edited by P. V. Spade
and attributed by him to a certain John of Wesel (a set of questions disputed in Paris — cf.
[Spade, 1996b]) is signiﬁcant insofar as it seems to show that as early as 1344 there may have
been knowledge in Paris of Swyneshed’s obligationes treatise and of his nova responsio.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
445
topics of the Ars curriculum (logic, natural philosophy (physics), psychology and
moral philosophy, metaphysics — he commented on all major Aristotelian texts),
but, as often noted, he never moved on to ‘higher’ levels of intellectual activity
(such as law, medicine or theology) (cf. [Zupko, 2002a]). While it was not the
most usual path for a master to remain in the Arts faculty throughout his career,
Buridan was not the only one to have had such a trajectory (cf. [Courtenay, 2004]).
In any case, this meant that Buridan spent his entire career focusing on the sub-
jects of the Arts curriculum, producing a large corpus of extremely sophisticated
philosophical texts.
For Buridan, logic was the basic methodology permeating not only all intellec-
tual investigation, but also a key component for the political life of a good citizen
(cf.
the preface to his Summulae [Buridan, 2001, 3]); in other words, the im-
portance of logic for Buridan can hardly be overestimated. Of course, it must be
understood that what Buridan conceived logic to be goes beyond the narrower con-
ception that the discipline currently has (this, in fact, holds of the whole medieval
tradition): for him, logic encompassed investigations that we would now consider
to belong to the ﬁelds of semantics, formal epistemology, philosophy of language,
metaphysics, among others. Still, Buridan produced a sophisticated and coherent
system of doctrines, which has been the object of growing interest over the last
couple of decades. Like Ockham, Buridan was a nominalist, that is, a defender of
ontological and theoretical parsimony, but while sharing a certain common base,
his doctrines diﬀered in content and in general approach from those of Ockham’s
in many signiﬁcant aspects. Buridan, not Ockham, is usually thought to be the
pioneer of a whole new approach to logic that was to be inﬂuential for at least
another century, the so-called ‘via moderna’ of ‘via Buridanii’.
For our purposes, his most important texts are his long Summulae de Dialectica
(a heavily modiﬁed commentary of Peter of Spain’s Summulae — available in
English in [Buridan, 2001], and in Latin in several volumes, as part of an ongoing
project of critically editing the whole text of the Summulae) and his Treatise on
Consequences [Buridan, 1976]. In fact, since his semantics will be treated elsewhere
in this volume, and since he did not write on obligations, he will be discussed in the
section dedicated to consequences and, more brieﬂy, in the analysis of the concept
of supposition; however, in the section on consequence, he will indeed feature as
a most prominent ﬁgure, as his treatise on consequences and his remarks on the
topic in the Summulae are in many respects the most interesting of such medieval
texts.
Albert of Saxony was once thought to have been a pupil of Buridan’s, but this
is now considered as highly unlikely, since they belonged to two diﬀerent nations
(Buridan to the Picardy nation and Albert to the English-German nation); as
noted above, the most customary was for a pupil to be trained under a master of
his own nation (often of his own home region). However, the inﬂuence of Buridan’s
doctrines over Albert is evident; in fact, Albert’s work is often seen as a synthesis
of Ockham’s and Buridan’s ideas (cf. [Biard, 2004, section 1]). This is to some
extent true, but the importance of Albert as an original thinker should not be

446
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
underestimated.
His most important logical work is his Perutilis Logica (Very
useful logic — [Albert of Saxony, 1988; Kann, 1993] for the second treatise14),
where he deals extensively with properties of terms, in particular supposition,
with consequences, fallacies, insolubilia and obligations — in sum, the traditional
logical topics in the 14th century. His treatise on obligations in the Perutilis Logica
is one of the only three genuinely ‘continental’ treatises on obligations of this period
(the others being overwhelmingly British or written under British inﬂuence — cf.
[Braakhuis, 1993]). He also wrote a Sophismata and several question commentaries
in logic (cf. [Biard, 2004, section 1]) (one of such sets of questions has received a
modern edition — [Albert of Saxony, 2002]). We shall be interested in particular
in his treatment of supposition, and, to some extent, his treatment of consequence.
William Buser may have been a pupil of Albert of Saxony (they were members
of the same English-German nation in Paris), and in turn Thomas of Cleves and
Marsilius of Inghen (who will be discussed below) were later pupils of William (cf.
[Read, 1991, 71]). Besides these interesting relations of ‘intellectual hereditariness’,
the importance of William Buser for the present purposes is mainly that he is the
author of one of the only three continental treatises on obligations. Other than
his treatise on obligations, no other logical text by him is known (in fact the only
other written record by him still extant is his last will — cf. [Kneepkens, 1993,
343]).
Thomas of Cleves is another still obscure Parisian ﬁgure of the mid-14th century
(for his biography, see [Bos and Read, 2001, 15–18]). He was a pupil of William
Buser, and appears to have become a full master of arts in 1365, in Paris. One
interesting aspect of his biography is the fact that he became the schoolmaster of
the St. Stephen’s Cathedral School in Vienna, which (as already mentioned) was
the foundation for the University of Vienna to be re-founded in 1384, exemplifying
thus the spread of the ‘Buridanian’ tradition in logic in Eastern Europe.
As
far as his writings are concerned, we have now recent editions of his treatise on
concepts [Bos and Read, 2001] and a reconstruction of his Logica (in [Bos, 2004]).
For the present purposes, his position with respect the fourth mode of personal
supposition, i.e. collective supposition, will be particularly important in the section
on supposition theory below.
Marsilius of Inghen, who was a few years younger than Albert of Saxony (born
around 1340) and also a pupil of William Buser, had a decisive role in the es-
tablishment of the via Buridanii as one of the two main approaches to logic in
the late 14th and 15th century. In particular, as already mentioned, he was one
of the founders and many times the rector of the University of Heidelberg, again
exemplifying the spread of Parisian logic in Eastern Europe. At a later stage of his
life he eventually obtained his degree in theology, but for most of his career he was
writing predominantly on logic, natural philosophy and metaphysics (see [Hoenen,
2001, section 1]).
Noteworthy are his treatises on the properties of terms: on
supposition, ampliation, appellation, restriction; and his treatises on obligations,
14Selections from Albert’s masterpiece are available in English translation by T. Parsons et al.
at http://www.humnet.ucla.edu/humnet/phil/faculty/tparsons/download/AlbertSL.pdf

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
447
insolubles, and consequences. Unfortunately, so far only his treatises on the prop-
erties of terms have received a modern edition [Bos, 1983]. Marsilius will be a
central ﬁgure in our discussion on supposition below.
John of Holland is another interesting case of an author somehow belonging
to both the Continental and the British traditions. While there is no conclusive
evidence to the eﬀect that he did study at Oxford, his familiarity with the works of
some Oxford logicians such as Heytesbury and Bradwardine is an indication that
this might have been the case (cf. [Bos, 1985, *14*]). In fact, little is known about
him, but we do know that he studied in Prague15, and was later to become Dean
of the faculty of arts in Prague in 1369. His treatises on supposition, fallacies,
obligation and insolubilia have received modern editions [John of Holland, 1985].
Peter of Ailly was a Parisian master who wrote his best known work in 1372,
his Concepts and Insolubles [Ailly, 1980]. This work deals with mental language
and in particular the signiﬁcation of mental and spoken terms, and, as the title
says, with insolubles. His deﬁnition of signiﬁcation was to be very inﬂuential in
the 15th century. Although inﬂuential for subsequent developments, Ailly will not
be treated in any of the analyses to follow, since his main contribution to logic
concerns insolubilia and semantic notions such as that of signiﬁcation, which for
reasons of space will not be dealt with here.
Besides France, Britain, Central Europe and Italy, there was also vivid intellec-
tual activity in Spain; indeed, a handful of universities were founded in Spain in
the 14th century. But contrasting with the 15th and 16th centuries, when Spain
was to become one of the main centers for original work within the Scholastic
tradition, we know of no Spanish logicians in the 14th century having had the
same inﬂuence and importance as later authors such as Domingo de Soto. Worth
noticing, however, is that the (otherwise) famous St. Vincent Ferrer composed
an interesting treatise on supposition around 1372 (edited in [Trentman, 1977]).
Particularly signiﬁcant is the fact that St. Vincent Ferrer went through his whole
student career in his native Spain; so while he seemed to be acquainted with most
of the important logical texts of the 14th century, he was in practice outside the
circle of inﬂuence of the main centers, and claimed that his main source of inspi-
ration was St. Thomas Aquinas. St. Vincent will be brieﬂy mentioned in the
section on supposition below.
By contrast, an author such as Blaise of Parme indicates that, in Italy, the
‘usual’ 14th century authors were indeed very inﬂuential, such as Ockham and
Buridan. The logic taught at Italian universities then was referred to (and dis-
missed) by humanists such as Petrarca as ‘Ockhamist logic’, and Blaise is perhaps
the most prominent example thereof. His only surviving logical text is a set of
questions on Peter of Spain’s Tractatus (edited recently by J. Biard and G. Fed-
erici Vescovini — [Blaise of Parme, 2001]), which is in many ways idiosyncratic
for a 14th century logical work in that it does not treat of supposition and other
typical 14th century topics. It does have a section on consequence, but it does not
15But remember that, unlike other Eastern European universities, Oxford logic was quite
inﬂuential in Prague, so John’s knowledge of British logic may have been acquired in Prague.

448
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
consider for example the crucial material vs. formal distinction with respect to
consequence. Blaise of Parme is, in any case, an essential author for the under-
standing of the development of logic in Italy.
John Dorp, working at the very end of the 14th century, is most famous for his
commentary on Buridan’s logic (John Dorp 1499), which in 1393 became required
reading material for a student to obtain the degree of Bachelor of Arts in Paris
(cf. [Lorenz, 1996, 148]). Dorp’s commentary consisted of the main text from
Buridan’s Summulae (the parts supposedly taken from Peter of Spain, but with
signiﬁcant modiﬁcations), and Buridan’s own commentary was replaced by Dorp’s
more concise commentary (this was indeed the form of the early printed editions
of Buridan’s Summulae, that is, in fact with Dorp’s commentary — cf. [Klima,
2001, xxxii]). Dorp deals with and even solves many of the tensions that could
be felt in Buridan’s logical doctrines, for example with respect to the eﬀect of
the negation over the personal supposition of terms (cf. [Karger, 1993]) — his
ingenious solution to this problem will be discussed in the section on supposition
below.
1.3
Conclusion
From the foregoing considerations, the picture that emerges of the 14th century is
of an extremely active period of intellectual and academic activity, in particular
with respect to logic. Many were the authors involved in these activities, and
many were their contributions to the ﬁeld. We will now see that the result of all
these activities was exceptionally sophisticated logical analysis.
2
SEMANTICS
2.1
Supposition
While at the beginning of the 14th century the concept of supposition and the doc-
trines built upon it were already respectable and mature elements of the terminist
logic tradition, one can surely speak of a further development of these doctrines in
the 14th century. The concept of supposition was one of the most important con-
ceptual tools used in ﬁelds as wide-ranging as natural philosophy and theology;
another typical place to capture the development of the concept of supposition
and its uses is in the sophismata literature. But here, I will focus on treatises on
supposition properly speaking.
Moreover, for reasons of space, the discussion to follow is not intended to be
comprehensive in a historical sense: it is impossible to mention the doctrines held
by every single signiﬁcant author, or to discuss all the important aspects concerning
the concept of supposition of this period. Rather, the discussion here is thematic
in that it focuses on a few interesting conceptual developments concerning the
notion of supposition, and particular authors are mentioned only insofar as they
are representative of a given position.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
449
In the post-Ockham and post-Buridan period, the development of supposition
theories can be summarized as their successors essentially dealing with the ‘loose
ends’ left by these earlier authors in their theories. While it is undeniable that
Ockham as well as Buridan had constructed impressive (and mutually diﬀerent)
semantic systems where the notion of supposition was central, a few aspects and
conclusions that could be drawn from their systems had not been discussed by them
as thoroughly as one might wish. So several of the masters in the generations to
follow saw it ﬁt to draw and discuss some of these conclusions and to oﬀer solutions
to the diﬃculties emerging from Ockham’s and Buridan’s systems, as we shall see.
(For a comprehensive and systematic approach to supposition theory, including
the deﬁnition of its main concepts, I refer to T. Parson’s piece in this volume.)
2.1.1
Simple supposition: yes or no?
One of the recurring debates concerning the concept of supposition in the 14th
century regarded simple supposition, more explicitly whether it should be included
among the main kinds of supposition. Traditionally, there are three main kinds of
supposition: personal, simple and material (such as in Peter of Spain and William
of Sherwood). Personal supposition occurs when a term in a proposition stands for
thing(s) that fall(s) under it. For example, if the term ‘man’ in a given proposition
would stand for actual men, then it would have personal supposition. Material
supposition occurs when a term in a proposition stands for a word (in particular
for itself). Finally, simple supposition occurs when a term in a proposition stands
for the corresponding universal, that is, in the case of ‘man’, the abstract universal
‘manhood’.
Ockham notoriously denied existence to those ‘universals’ for which terms in
simple supposition were said to stand, and contended that there is no such thing
as a common nature that Plato and Socrates shared insofar as they are both men.
The only thing common to Socrates and Plato in this respect is that the (mental,
written or spoken) term ‘man’ can be correctly predicated of each of them. So,
for Ockham, if simple supposition were to be the supposition for universals, it
would at best be a completely idle concept, since there are no such things in his
ontology. At this point, two options were open to Ockham: (i) either to exclude
simple supposition from his theory of supposition altogether, (ii) or else to keep
it but with a signiﬁcant reformulation. Ockham opted for (ii): for him, simple
supposition becomes the supposition for a mental term (a concept) (in chapter 68
of Ockham’s Summa Logicae). One may wonder why he chose to maintain and
reformulate simple supposition instead of simply getting rid of it (as Buridan later
did), and a good guess would be that he did so for the sake of conservativeness
and respect for the tradition.
By contrast, Buridan, who shared Ockham’s denial of universals, opted for (i).
For Buridan, it makes no sense to distinguish the supposition for mental terms
(simple supposition for Ockham) from the supposition for written and/or spoken
terms (material supposition for Ockham); as far as Buridan is concerned, they

450
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
are both supposition for terms, and thus both material supposition (cf. chapter
4.3.2 of Buridan’s Summulae). He added that, being the conventionalist about
language that he was, he did not really care whether some people prefer to call
the supposition for mental terms simple supposition [Buridan, 2001, 253]. But
from the point of view of the theoretical simplicity advocated by Ockham himself,
it would seem more reasonable not to multiply concepts and terms unnecessarily;
if the concept of simple supposition becomes theoretically superﬂuous, one may
as well get rid of it. So it would seem that Buridan’s position was overall more
coherent.
Another related point is that, while Ockham ascribed diﬀerent kinds of suppo-
sition to terms in mental language as well (yielding a few counterintuitive results
related to equivocation in mental language16), Buridan only allowed for personal
supposition in mental language [Buridan, 2001, 522], whereas in written and spo-
ken language both personal and material supposition could occur. In this respect
too Buridan’s position was more coherent, as argued in the literature (cf. [Spade,
1980b]).
However, this was not the end of the story. Authors of the following genera-
tions kept on debating whether simple supposition was indeed required or in fact
superﬂuous for a theory of supposition. Most nominalists, i.e. those who followed
Ockham and Buridan in their denial of the existence of universals, ultimately opted
for simplicity and followed Buridan in his exclusion of simple supposition. This
was in particular the case of Marsilius of Inghen. Moreover, in the second half of
the 14th century, with the revival of realism about universals with Wyclif and his
followers, simple supposition became again an important theoretical tool within
this trend.17 But interestingly, there was an author who followed Ockham both in
his ontology (denial of universals) and in his inclusion of simple supposition in the
theory of supposition — a position that, as already argued, is not entirely straight-
forward. This author boldly holding Ockham’s banner was Albert of Saxony (cf.
[Berger, 1991]).
Moreover, Albert’s position with respect to simple supposition and to the sup-
position of mental terms is also rather idiosyncratic: he accepted personal, simple
and material supposition in spoken and written language, but only personal and
material supposition in mental language.18
This is rather surprising, since one
16Cf. [Spade, 1980b; Normore, 1997]. The problem is essentially the following: ambiguity in
spoken/written language (equivocation/amphiboly) is accounted for by Ockham in terms of a
one-many mapping between spoken/written expressions and mental expressions (an ambiguous
expression is one corresponding to more than one mental expression).
However, how can he
account for ambiguity in mental language if there is no super-mental level to play the role that
the mental level plays for the spoken/written level?
17The realist tradition in 14th century logic is still largely understudied. Its ﬁrst exponent
was, as already mentioned, Burley, who for example maintained the traditional deﬁnition of
simple supposition as the supposition for a universal. In the second half of the century, realism
underwent a revival, mainly with Wyclif and his followers (Robert Alyington, Johannes Sharpe
— see the entries on these authors in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, and a whole issue
of Vivarium 43(1) (2005) dedicated to the realists).
18“[...] a mental term cannot have simple supposition, but only material or personal supposi-

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
451
could expect him either to side with Ockham in maintaining that all the diﬀer-
ent kinds of supposition that occur in spoken and written language also occur in
mental language, or to side with Buridan in maintaining that there is only per-
sonal supposition in mental language. However, there is a striking coherence in
his position, as I shall argue.
The ﬁrst element to be taken into account is that his formulations of these
three modes of supposition diﬀer slightly but signiﬁcantly from those of Ockham.
Personal supposition is deﬁned roughly in the same way as by Ockham, as the
supposition for the things that the term signiﬁes; material supposition, by contrast,
is deﬁned as the supposition for terms but not necessarily spoken or written terms,
as it is by Ockham.
According to Albert’s deﬁnition, a term having material
supposition can supposit for itself or for a similar term (be they written, spoken
or mental).
It is clear thus that, in mental language, if a given mental term
supposits for itself or for another term (mental or otherwise), Albert’s deﬁnition
allows for it to be a case of material supposition, whereas for Ockham it had to be a
case of simple supposition, since his deﬁnition of material supposition necessitated
that the supposition be for a spoken or written term. Albert, however, with the
deﬁnitions of personal and material suppositions thus stated, could already account
for all the diﬀerent kinds of supposition in mental language, making thus simple
supposition in the mental realm superﬂuous.
He was still left with the cases of terms in spoken or written language suppositing
for mental terms, which were presumably excluded from his deﬁnition of material
supposition. Following Ockham and against Buridan, he prefers to keep such cases
in a category of their own — perhaps in order to maintain a more ﬁne-grained and
discriminating taxonomy — a category in which the supposition of a term for itself
could not occur. From this point of view, what characterizes and gives unity to
the concept of material supposition is above all the possibility of supposition of a
term for itself (a spoken term for a spoken term, a written term for a written
term, and a mental term for a mental term), whereas simple supposition would
deal with the ‘left-over’ cases where this could not occur, namely the cases where
a spoken or written term was explicitly meant to supposit for a concept.
As for the risk of provoking equivocation in mental language by the ascription
of diﬀerent kinds of supposition to mental terms, such as in Ockham, Albert
avoids this problem with another feature of his logical system: unlike most of his
immediate predecessors such as Ockham and Buridan and his own contemporaries,
Albert denies that some propositions must be distinguished, that is, that they are
ambiguous.19
Now, if there is no equivocation with respect to propositions in
written and spoken language, where there are three kinds of supposition, then a
fortiori there will not be this kind of equivocation in mental language either.
In sum, Albert’s preservation of simple supposition seems to be better motivated
tion.” (Translation by Parsons et al, p. 12, on the website mentioned above).
19See [Ashworth, 1991, 156]. Albert contends that the propositions that must be distinguished
according to others in fact correspond to the conjunction or disjunction (depending on the case)
of each of their possible readings.

452
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
than Ockham’s, and that on purely logical/semantic grounds — that is, it is not
motivated by ontological considerations (i.e. realism about universals) as it is in
the case of Wyclif and Paul of Venice (see chap. 2 of Paul’s treatise on supposition
in his Logica Magna — [Paul of Venice, 1971]).20 Moreover, thanks to the position
he holds with respect to propositions in general, i.e.
that they should not be
distinguished, he escapes the risk of introducing equivocation in mental language
even though he accepts diﬀerent kinds of supposition in mental language.
However, the simplicity of Buridan’s doctrines, namely the exclusion of simple
supposition from spoken and written language and of all kinds of supposition
except for personal supposition from mental language, remained very appealing;
it is not by chance that the vast majority of nominalists sided with Buridan and
not with Albert, and that virtually all other upholders of simple supposition were
essentially motivated by ontological considerations.
2.1.2
A fourth mode of personal supposition?
As shown in T. Parson’s contribution to this volume, in the 14th century the modes
of personal supposition were virtually always associated to relations of ascent and
descent between propositions and the corresponding singular propositions. The
descensii ad inferiora are ‘certain types of inferences in which the common terms
of which the mode of supposition is being characterized is replaced by singular
terms falling under it, appearing in either nominal or propositional conjunctions
or disjunctions.’ [Klima and Sandu, 1990, 177]. Singular terms are proper names
or, as most frequent in the case of descents, demonstrative pronouns (usually
accompanied by the appropriate common term).
For example, in the case of
‘Every man is an animal’, if it is the supposition of the term ‘man’ that is at stake,
then the singular propositions in question would be of the form ‘This man is an
animal’, ‘That man is an animal’ etc. (pointing at each individual falling under
the term ‘man’, i.e. each man), and the question is then how the descent to these
singular propositions can be made, i.e. either nominally or propositionally, and
either conjunctively or disjunctively.
Let the basic form of categorical propositions be represented as “ΦA is ΦB”,21
where A and B are terms and Φ stands for any syncategorematic expression (such
as ‘Every’, ‘Some’, ‘No’ etc.) or the absence thereof. The diﬀerent kinds of propo-
sitional descent can then be characterized as:
Propositional conjunctive descent for A ⇔from ‘ΦA is ΦB’ one can
descent to ‘This A is ΦB and that A is ΦB and . . . ’
20Notice though that in his Logica Parva Paul of Venice only recognizes personal and material
supposition.
21In fact, most often than not there was no quantifying expression preceding the predicate.
However, in a few cases there was such an expression (such as in an example to be discussed
below, ‘Socrates diﬀers from every man’), and therefore for the sake of generality I introduce a
place-holder for a quantifying expression also in front of the predicate. See also [Karger, 1993]
for more of such examples.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
453
Propositional disjunctive descent for A ⇔from ‘ΦA is ΦB’ one can
descent to ‘This A is ΦB or that A is ΦB or . . . ’
Nominal disjunctive descent for A ⇔from ‘ΦA is ΦB’ one can descent
to ‘This A or that A or . . . is ΦB.’
Nominal conjunctive descent for A ⇔from ‘ΦA is ΦB’ one can descent
to ‘This A and that A and . . . is ΦB.’
These deﬁnitions apply, mutatis mutandi, to the predicates of a proposition as
well.
With respect to the main propositional forms (A, E, I, O), it is evident that at
least three types of descent are required to account for the supposition of their
terms:
(A)
Every S is P ⇔Propositional conjunctive descent is possible for the subject
and nominal disjunctive descent is possible for the predicate: ‘This S is P
and that S is P and ...’ and ‘Every S is this P or that P or etc.’
(E)
No S is P ⇔Propositional conjunctive descent is possible for both subject
and predicate: ‘This S is not P and that S is not P and etc.’ and ‘No S
is this P and no S is that P and ...’
(i)
Some S is P ⇔Propositional disjunctive descent is possible for both sub-
ject and predicate: ‘This S is P or that S is P or etc.’ and ‘Some S is this
P or some S is that P or ...’
(O)
Some S is not P ⇔Propositional disjunctive descent is possible for the
subject and propositional conjunctive descent is possible for the predicate:
‘This S is not P or that S is not P or etc.’ and ‘Some S is not this P and
some S is not that P and ...’
Notice that, whenever (conjunctive or disjunctive) propositional descent is pos-
sible, so is the corresponding nominal descent (since propositional descent cor-
responds to wider scope and thus to a stronger reading of the proposition), and
whenever conjunctive descent is possible, so is disjunctive descent (due to the
logical properties of conjunctions and disjunctions).22 We thus have:
Propositional conjunctive descent is
possible
⇒
Propositional
disjunctive
descent
is
possible
Nominal conjunctive descent is possible
Nominal disjunctive descent is possible
Propositional
disjunctive
descent
is
possible
⇒
Nominal disjunctive descent is possible
Nominal conjunctive descent is possible
⇒
Nominal disjunctive descent is possible
In the early 14th century, three of these patterns of descent were associated to
modes of personal supposition:
22Naturally, these two claims ought to receive a formal proof, but I take them to be suﬃciently
intuitive so that these proofs are not necessary in the present context.

454
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
Conjunctive
Disjunctive
Nominal
XXXXXXX
Merely confused
Propositional
Confused and distributive
Determinate
Naturally, since nominal disjunctive descent is always possible, merely confused
supposition is not deﬁned as the supposition of a term whenever nominal dis-
junctive descent is possible (otherwise all terms would have merely confused sup-
position); rather, it is (usually) deﬁned as the supposition of a term when only
nominal disjunctive supposition is possible. Similarly, determinate supposition is
not deﬁned as the supposition of a term whenever propositional disjunctive descent
is possible; rather, it is deﬁned as the supposition of a term when propositional dis-
junctive descent is possible but not propositional conjunctive descent (otherwise
the categories of confused and distributive, and determinate supposition would
overlap — cf. [Read, 1991b, 74]).
It is easy to see why at ﬁrst no interest was paid to nominal conjunctive descent:
it does not correspond to the supposition of any of the terms in the four traditional
categorical propositional forms. Accordingly, since it was tacitly assumed that all
other propositions could be in some way or another reduced to one of these four
forms, it was thought that only those three kinds of personal supposition were
required to account for the supposition of terms in propositions.
But even at its early stages, the suppositional framework was also applied to
cases other that these four traditional propositional forms. For example, in the
case of exceptive propositions of the form ‘Only S is P’, it was recognized that S
has merely confused supposition (cf. [Marsilius of Inghen, 1983, 59] — see below).
In other cases, it was necessary to bend the concepts of the modes of personal to
such an extent (for instance, by rephrasing the original sentence so that it would
ﬁt into one of the recognized propositional forms, but with rather implausible
results) that one cannot help but wonder whether supposition theory with only
these three modes of personal supposition was complete in the sense of being able
to account for all, or at least most, propositions. But, since in most formulations
of the modes of personal supposition merely confused supposition was in practice
a ‘catch-all’ category (cf. [Read, 1991b, 75]) (since nominal disjunctive descent is
always possible, as noted above), in the end no semantic phenomenon was excluded
from the taxonomy with these three modes of personal supposition.
But at some point in the ﬁrst half of the 14th century, some authors were led
to acknowledge at least the logical possibility of a fourth mode of descent, namely
nominal conjunctive descent. According to [Read, 1991b, 74], the ﬁrst mention to
nominal conjunctive descent that we know of is to be found in Thomas Maulevelt’s
De Suppositionibus: there, Maulevelt says that when merely confused supposition
occurs, nominal disjunctive as well as nominal conjunctive descent are possible.
Maulevelt’s example of the supposition of a term which is best accounted for by
nominal conjunctive descent instead of nominal disjunctive descent is ‘Socrates

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
455
diﬀers from every man’. According to Maulevelt, the descent allowed for the term
‘man’ giving the intended meaning of the proposition is ‘Socrates diﬀers from this
man and that man and. . . ’, and not ‘Socrates diﬀers from this man or that man
or. . . ’ (although in principle, the second descent should also be allowed, since
nominal conjunction should imply the corresponding nominal disjunction).
In
other words, according to Maulevelt, nominal conjunctive descent is not only a
logical possibility; it is also the actual descent required by some real cases.
Albert of Saxony, writing after Maulevelt, explicitly rejects his analysis of
‘Socrates diﬀers from every man’ as requiring nominal conjunctive descent; ac-
cording to him, ‘man’ in this case should have determinate and not merely con-
fused supposition (cf. [Read, 1991b, 80]). Moreover, Albert criticizes the inclusion
of the clause for nominal conjunctive descent in the deﬁnition of merely confused
supposition, thus implicitly defending the idea that nominal conjunctive descent is
not a phenomenon that needs to be taken into account in the deﬁnition of modes of
personal supposition (being at best only a logical possibility). Obviously, for those
who reject nominal conjunctive descent as a relevant phenomenon, such as Albert
of Saxony, three modes of personal supposition provide a complete picture of the
(personal) supposition of all terms not only in the sense that all cases were taken
into account (which happens anyway if merely confused supposition is deﬁned as
a catch-all clause), but also in the sense that these three categories are suﬃciently
ﬁne-grained and discriminating so as to give a coherent grouping of these semantic
phenomena, since they correspond to the three relevant kinds of descent.
Among those who recognize nominal conjunctive descent as an important phe-
nomenon, two positions are possible; either to associate nominal conjunctive de-
scent to merely confused supposition, together with nominal disjunctive descent
(as did Maulevelt and later Paul of Venice — cf. [Read, 1991a, 53]), yielding thus
a rather heterogeneous notion of merely confused supposition as a ‘miscellaneous’
category; or to associate nominal conjunctive descent to a fourth mode of per-
sonal supposition altogether. According to our current state of knowledge, while
the notion of a descensus copulatim (nominal conjunctive supposition) seems to
have been familiar in Paris and Oxford in the 1350s and 1360s, the ﬁrst to asso-
ciate a fourth mode of supposition to nominal conjunctive descent seems to have
been Thomas of Cleves (cf. [Read, 1991a; 1991b]) in his Suppositiones written in
the ﬁrst half of the 1370s in Paris23, before he moved on to be the rector of St.
Stephen’s cathedral school in Vienna This fourth mode of personal supposition
became known as collective supposition.
Some of the examples usually associated with nominal conjunctive descent (from
[Read, 1991a]) were: ‘You are not every man’, ‘No animal is every man’, and ‘Some
penny will be seen by every man’ (in all three cases with respect to ‘man’). But
in such cases, the opponents of descensus copulatim usually proceeded by showing
that, if this kind of descent was possible at all, so were other kinds of descent,
23At this point, no surviving manuscript of Thomas of Cleves’ Suppositiones has been located;
but a reconstruction of it has been made recently (in [Bos, 2004]) on the basis of references made
to this work in other texts.

456
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
and therefore the supposition of such terms could be classiﬁed among the three
usual modes of personal supposition (since, presumably, the category of collective
supposition would be deﬁned as the cases where only nominal conjunctive descent
would be possible).24 Their usual strategy consisted of an appeal to Ockham’s
Razor, to the eﬀect that if the job of accounting for the diﬀerent modes of personal
supposition could be done with only three categories, then there was no need to
posit a fourth one.25
But a fourth type of examples poses more serious diﬃculties. It is epitomized
by the proposition ‘All the apostles of God are twelve’. The nominal conjunc-
tive descent under ‘the apostles of God’ is a very natural one indeed, either with
demonstrative pronouns or even with proper names: ‘Peter and James and John
and Judas etc. are twelve’. But nominal disjunctive descent seems not to be al-
lowed, since it is not of each of them that the predicate ‘twelve’ can be predicated,
but rather of all of them taken collectively.26 In other words, only nominal con-
junctive descent seems to be allowed, and if this kind of descent is not accounted
for in the deﬁnitions of the (three) modes of personal supposition, then no mode
of personal supposition can be assigned to ‘the apostles of God’.
There were diﬀerent replies from those who rejected the notion of a fourth mode
of personal supposition and nominal conjunctive descent, with various degrees of
plausibility. Some proposed to treat ‘all the apostles of God’ as a singular term
used to refer to the collection of apostles of God, having thus discrete supposition;
others implausibly rephrased the proposition as ‘All all of the apostles of God are
twelve’ and attributed confused and distributive supposition to the subject (cf.
Read 1991a, 80).
It is worth noticing that, in his 1372 treatise on supposition (thus roughly at
the same time as Thomas of Cleves was presumably writing his treatise on sup-
position), Vincent Ferrer advocates a rather idiosyncratic position with respect
to the modes of personal supposition: he also recognizes three modes of common
personal supposition, but not the three traditional ones. According to him, com-
mon personal supposition is subdivided into determinate, distributive confused,
and collective confused (Trentman 1977, 134); in other words, he does recognize
24That poses a logical problem since, according to the usual laws for conjunction and dis-
junction, whenever nominal conjunctive descent is possible, so is nominal disjunctive descent, as
indeed nominal disjunctive descent is always possible. So arguing that, in such cases what we
have are cases of merely confused supposition because nominal disjunctive descent is possible
is in some sense fallacious, since this holds of the other modes of personal supposition as well.
In this sense, collective supposition should be deﬁned as the cases where nominal conjunctive
and nominal disjunctive descents are possible, but no propositional descent is possible. However,
as we shall see shortly, there are cases where nominal conjunctive descent seems to be possible
but not nominal disjunctive descent, which would violate the usual rules for conjunction and
disjunction.
25An anonymous author of a commentary on Marsilius’ Parva Logicalia says: “everything
can be explained without positing collective supposition”, and “one should not multiply entities
without necessity” (cf. [Read, 1991a, 79]).
26Indeed, this seems to indicate that the logical behavior of nominal conjunctive and disjunctive
descents, or in any case the semantics of collective nouns, is more complicated than what the
mere truth-functional properties of conjunction and disjunction can account for.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
457
Thomas of Cleves’s ‘fourth’ mode of personal supposition, but to him this is not
a fourth but rather a third mode, because he does not recognize merely confused
personal supposition. While this may seem an awkward position at ﬁrst sight, it
is not altogether implausible considering that, for Vincent Ferrer, and following
very early (12th and 13th century) notions of supposition, it is only the subject of
a categorical proposition that has supposition, not the predicate (cf. [Trentman,
1977, 89-92]). Given that, usually, merely confused personal supposition concerns
the supposition of the predicate (in particular in universal aﬃrmative proposi-
tions), if one does not attribute supposition to the predicate, then there may seem
to be no need to recognize merely confused personal supposition.
But the fact that Ferrer recognized collective supposition poses a historiographic
problem. While there is a clear line of continuity between the other authors men-
tioned so far (Maulfelt, Albert of Saxony, Thomas of Cleves, all roughly belonging
to the same Parisian nominalist tradition), Vincent Ferrer was, as already men-
tioned, educated in Spain, and saw himself as belonging to a Thomist tradition,
thus completely out of the circle of inﬂuence of the nominalist tradition. Read
[1991a, 74] argues that Ferrer’s treatise ‘does not read like that of an author in-
venting an original theory’; that is, presumably collective supposition was already
a recognized mode of supposition in the tradition within which he was schooled.
We could thus have two independent ‘inventions’ of the concept of collective sup-
position. But our knowledge of the 14th century Spanish logical tradition is as of
yet still insuﬃcient in order to tell us whether the concept of collective supposition
was indeed independently developed within this tradition (which seems unlikely,
given the coincidence in terminology), or whether there were earlier points of con-
tact between the two traditions in such a way that there might have been inﬂuence
in one direction or in the other (or both).
In sum, the debate concerning nominal conjunctive descent and a fourth mode
of supposition was a heated one in the second half of the 14th century. While it is
fair to say that the majority of the authors preferred to maintain the traditional
scheme with three modes of common personal supposition (see [Ashworth, 1978]),
for the sake of theoretical parsimony and probably also out of respect for the tra-
dition, many authors nevertheless recognized the fourth kind of descent. But all
in all, considered from a systematic point of view, it seems that supposition the-
ory containing four modes of personal supposition is indeed a more sophisticated
version of the traditional theory: it respects the logical symmetry of nominal and
propositional descent, and it allows for a very intuitive account of the semantics
of some terms (even if some of them can also be accounted for with only the three
traditional kinds of descent).
2.1.3
Diﬀerent modes of supposition also for material supposition
In the traditional formulations of theories of supposition, in particular with the
13th century summulists (William of Sherwood, Peter of Spain), but also with
authors of the ﬁrst half of the 14th century such as Ockham and Buridan, there

458
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
is a remarkable asymmetry between personal supposition on the one hand and
simple/material supposition on the other hand.
While personal supposition is
further divided into the diﬀerent modes of personal supposition, as just discussed,
the same does not occur with simple and material supposition.
The diﬀerent modes of personal supposition concern the fact that, in a given
proposition, we do not always wish to talk about every single object that falls under
a given term; for example, when using the term ‘man’, we sometimes wish to talk
about all men, but sometimes only about some of them. In anachronistic terms,
the modes of personal supposition are the medieval counterpart of theories of
quantiﬁcation, and, roughly speaking, allow us to determine how many individuals
are being ‘talked about’ with a given proposition.
At ﬁrst sight, it may seem natural that personal supposition should have the
privilege of being further subdivided, while simple and material supposition should
not: given that simple and material supposition are not the signiﬁcative kinds of
supposition, why should we quantify over things that do not fall under a given
term?
What is the need to quantify over the word that a term stands for if
it has material supposition, or, even more awkwardly, over the universal that it
stands for if it has simple supposition? For example, if the term ‘man’ has simple
supposition, then there is only one thing it can stand for, namely the unique
universal ‘manhood’, so there is no point in discussing how many universals the
term ‘man’ stands for if it has simple supposition.
But further reﬂection quickly shows that there may be indeed a point in further
distinguishing the kinds of supposition other than personal supposition. In the
14th century, material supposition is usually not deﬁned exclusively by the fact
that the term in question supposits for itself; it may also supposit for other terms,
either its equiform occurrences or even non-equiform terms (for example, a term
in a given case — nominative, accusative etc. — may supposit for the same term
but in a diﬀerent case, thus generally not being equiform). So it is clear that,
just as much as with personal supposition, there is a rather wide range of objects
(diﬀerent occurrences of diﬀerent words) that a given term can stand for if it has
material supposition (and that has led some to conclude that material supposition
is such a wide-ranging concept that it winds up becoming ineﬀective — cf. [Read,
1999]).
As for simple supposition, for as long as it was exclusively the supposition for
the unique universal corresponding to a given term, there was indeed not much
point in further distinguishing diﬀerent kinds of simple supposition with respect
to quantiﬁcation — notice that Burley, for example, distinguished simple suppo-
sition into absolute and compared simple supposition [Burley, 2000, 92], but this
subdivision concerned diﬀerent ways in which a term had simple supposition, and
not the number of things being talked about. However, with Ockham’s reformu-
lation of the notion of simple supposition as the (non-signiﬁcative) supposition
for concepts, this issue acquired an entirely diﬀerent shape. For Ockham (in his
mature theory) concepts are simply the very acts of conceiving (things) by a given
intellect; that is, they are (temporary) attributes of the intellect. In other words,

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
459
concepts, just as much as spoken words, have diﬀerent temporal occurrences: the
concept man does not correspond to one single concept that perdures in the intel-
lect, but rather to each and every occurrence of this concept in the intellect every
time it conceives of men, just as much as the spoken word ‘man’ corresponds to
each of its temporal occurrences.
Hence, if both simple supposition and material supposition concern a wide range
of objects for which a term can supposit (diﬀerent occurrences of a given concept
or of a given word), just as much as personal supposition, then it seems counterin-
tuitive that only personal supposition should receive further distinctions. In fact,
Ockham’s and Buridan’s nominalism seems almost to require these distinctions;
for both of them, all that exists are the diﬀerent actual occurrences of written,
spoken and mental terms – that is, what we now call ‘tokens’, but not the corre-
sponding types. For this reason, also in simple and material supposition it seems
necessary to consider the number of entities (concepts, words) being talked about
with a given proposition, just as much as with personal supposition.
Buridan seemed to be well aware of the fact that one can quantify over the
diﬀerent occurrences of a term. Take this passage, from the ﬁrst treatise of the
Summulae:
Next, we should say that if the subjects in the aforementioned propo-
sitions supposit materially, then the proposition “[A] man is a species”
is [. . . ] indeﬁnite, for the term ‘man’ is not to be understood as sup-
positing only for itself, but indiﬀerently for other similar terms as well
[. . . ]. And in this way “Every man is a species” would be universal,
and “Some man is a species”, i.e. “Some term man is a species” would
be particular, and “This man is a species”, i.e. “This term man is a
species”, would be singular. [Buridan, 2001, 92]27
But Buridan does not go as far as actually applying the diﬀerent modes of personal
supposition to material supposition, even though from saying that a proposition
is universal to acknowledging that its subject has confused and distributive sup-
position is but a small step (as it was widely recognized that the subject of an
aﬃrmative universal proposition has confused and distributive supposition, and
similarly that the subject of a particular or indeﬁnite supposition has determinate
supposition and the subject of a singular proposition has discrete supposition).
To my knowledge, the ﬁrst author to have made the small but signiﬁcant step
of introducing the distinctions originally pertaining only to personal supposition
also to other kinds of supposition is Buridan’s follower, Marsilius of Inghen. In his
treatise on supposition [Marsilius of Inghen, 1983, pp. 52-97], Marsilius presents
a compelling and elegant way of structuring the diﬀerent kinds of supposition and
their subdivisions. What is most remarkable about his doctrine is that, unlike his
predecessors, who began by dividing proper supposition into personal, simple and
material, Marsilius actually begins by the division of what were traditionally the
diﬀerent modes of personal supposition. This is a sensible move, considering that
27I am indebted to Gyula Klima for having drawn my attention to this passage.

460
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
the subdivisions of the diﬀerent modes of supposition are considerably more com-
plicated than the division between personal and material supposition (recall that
Marsilius, following Buridan, does not recognize simple supposition as a class of its
own and views the supposition for mental terms as a kind of material supposition).
Here is a tree representing his divisions:
Supposition
Common
Discrete
Determinate
Confused
Material
Personal
Confused and
distributive
Merely confused
Material
Personal
Personal
Material
Personal
Material
We thus have four kinds of material supposition, just as much as four kinds
of personal supposition. Thereby, Marsilius is able to present a more ﬁne-grained
account of the phenomenon of terms standing for other terms. Indeed, a term may
stand for:
• one speciﬁc non-ultimate signiﬁcate28 only – discrete material supposition,
for example if I say ‘This ‘man’ is written in red’ pointing at a speciﬁc
occurrence of the word ‘man’ (cf. [Marsilius of Inghen, 1983, 55]);
• any non-ultimate sigiﬁcate in a disjunctive way — determinate material sup-
position, for example if I say ‘Man is written on this page’ meaning that there
is at least one occurrence of the word ‘man’ in a given page (cf. [Marsilius
of Inghen, 1983, 57]);
• any non-ultimate signiﬁcate with disjunction of the term — merely confused
material supposition, for example with ‘Only man is a monosyllabic word’,
from which follows ‘Only this [occurrence of] man or that [occurrence of]
man etc. is a monosyllabic word’ (cf. [Marsilius of Inghen, 1983, 59]);
28For Marsilius, following Buridan, the ultimate signiﬁcates of terms are the things that fall
under them, such as men for ‘man’, concepts for ‘concept’ etc., and the non-ultimate sigiﬁcates
of terms are the things that they also signify — the corresponding mental, spoken and written
terms — but not ultimately.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
461
• every non-ultimate signiﬁcate in a conjunctive way — confused distributive
material supposition, for example with ‘Every man is a monosyllabic word’,
meaning that every single occurrence of ‘man’ is monosyllabic (cf. [Marsilius
of Inghen, 1983, 59]).
Indeed, in these divisions we see the recognition of individual concepts, inscrip-
tions and utterances as legitimate members of the ontology (something that was
already crucial for Buridan), and the possibility of talking about them in a much
more reﬁned way. With these divisions, we can attribute a certain property to
one speciﬁc occurrence of a term, to some or even to all its occurrences; in other
words, here we certainly have a conceptual predecessor of the important token-type
distinction, which was to be fully developed only in the 20th century.
Marsilius’s reformulation (or, perhaps better put, improvement) of supposition
theory so as to attribute the so-called modes of personal supposition to material
supposition as well seems to have become the standard practice in the 15th century.
It is symptomatic that Paul of Venice, in his very inﬂuential Logica Parva [Paul
of Venice, 1984, 147], also adopted these distinctions of modes of supposition for
material supposition.
2.1.4
Problems and solutions for the negation
Both in Buridan’s treatise on supposition and in the part of Ockham’s Summa
Logicae dedicated to supposition (the last chapters of Part I), one of the main
topics are the syntactic rules determining which mode of (personal) supposition
a term has on the basis of the syncategorematic terms present in a proposition
(quantifying terms such as ‘some’, ‘every’, negating terms etc.) and word order.
We learn for example that an aﬃrmative sign of universality (‘every’) causes the
term immediately following it to have confused and distributive supposition, and
that it causes a term mediately (i.e. not immediately) following it to have merely
confused supposition (so in ‘Every man is an animal’, the subject, which follows
‘every’ immediately, has confused and distributive supposition, while the predicate,
which follows ‘every’ mediately, has merely confused supposition). We also learn
that a negative sign of universality (‘no’) causes all terms following it (immediately
and mediately) to have confused and distributive supposition, and that when the
negation is placed relative to the copula (as in ‘A man is not a stone’), it causes
the predicate to have confused and distributive supposition. As for determinate
supposition, it occurs when a term immediately follows a sign of particularity
(‘some’) or when it does not follow any syncategorematic term (as in ‘a man is an
animal’).
But matters become signiﬁcantly more complicated once one departs from the
four traditional propositional forms (‘Every A is B’, ‘Some A is B’, ‘No A is B’ and
‘Some A is not B’), especially when iteration of syncategorematic terms occurs.
As argued by Parsons in [Parsons, 1997] and in his piece in this volume, in the 14th
century it became current to classify the modes of personal supposition globally
rather than locally, as had been done in the 13th century — that is, taking into

462
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
account the whole propositional context, and not only the syncategorematic term
immediately preceding a given term. For this reason, the occurrence of several
syncategorematic terms all having the same categorematic terms under their scope
posed the problem of the eﬀect of those embedded syncategorematic terms over
each other with respect to the (personal29) supposition of the categorematic terms
in question.
In particular, the treatment of the negation requires a great deal of ingenuity.
The basic problem is: what is the eﬀect of a negating term over the supposition
of a term which, if the negating term was removed, would have such-and-such
personal supposition in a given proposition? In other words, rules determining
the kind of supposition that a term would have if a negation is added to the
proposition where it stands are required for all three cases, namely if the term
in the original proposition had determinate, confused and distributive or merely
confused supposition. And this is where the issue arises.
Buridan, for example, oﬀers an explicit rule concerning the eﬀect of the negation
over a term that, without the negation, would have determinate or merely confused
supposition: A negating negation distributes every common term following it that
without it would not be distributive and does not distribute anything that precedes
it. [Buridan, 2001, 269]
That means that, if in a proposition P, a term A has determinate supposition,
and if a negation is added to P (yielding P∗) in such a way that A follows the
negation (immediate or mediately), then A will have confused and distributive
supposition. For the purposes of clarity in the exposition, let me introduce a few
notations in order to express this rule more precisely:
Det(A)P
⇔The term A has determinate supposition in proposition P.
Dist(A)P ⇔The term A has confused and distributive supposition in
proposition P.
Conf(A)P ⇔The term A has merely confused supposition in proposition
P.
⟨∼, A⟩P
⇔The negation is followed by term A in proposition P.
Buridan’s rule can then be formulated as follows:
Rule 1
Det(A)P &⟨∼, A⟩P ∗→Dist(A)P ∗
Rule 2
Conf(A)P &⟨∼, A⟩P ∗→Dist(A)P ∗
There is, however, a serious problem concerning the eﬀect of a negating sign upon a
term that, without the negation, would have confused and distributive supposition.
Given the structure of the theory, it seems at ﬁrst sight impossible to provide a
general rule for the negation and for confused and distributive supposition, for the
following reason. Consider the four traditional kinds of categorical propositions:
29Or material supposition, if one follows Marsilius of Inghen in applying the traditional modes
of personal supposition also to material supposition.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
463
Some A is B (1)
Every A is B (3)
(contradiction 1)
(contradiction 2)
No A is B (2)
Some A is not B (4)
is the contradictory of
is the contradictory of
‘Some A is B’ (1) should be equivalent to ‘Not: No A is B’ (2′) (the contradictory
of (2)) and ‘Every A is B’ (3) should be equivalent to ‘Not: Some A is not B’ (4′)
(the contradictory of (4)). If these equivalences hold, then the supposition of the
terms in (1) and (2′) should be the same: A and B have determinate supposition
in (1), so they should have the same kind of supposition in (2′).
For this to happen, the eﬀect of the negation in (2′) should be to turn the
confused and distributive supposition of A and B in ‘No A is B’ into determinate
supposition. This is indeed the rule proposed by Ockham: Nevertheless, it should
be noted that the aforementioned rules hold only in the case where the term in
question would not stand confusedly and distributively if the negation sign or the
relevant verb or name were taken away. For if the term were to stand confus-
edly and distributively when one of these expressions [negation sign] were taken
away, then with the addition of such an expression it would stand determinately.
[Ockham, 1998, 214]
Ockham’s rule can be formulated as follows:
Rule 3o
Dist(A)P &⟨∼, A⟩P ∗→Det(A)P ∗
But what about the equivalence between (3) and (4′)?
In (3) A has confused
and distributive supposition and B has merely confused supposition. So the same
should occur in (4′). However, in ‘Some A is not B’, A has determinate supposition
and B has confused and distributive supposition. According to rule 1, the negation
would make A have confused and distributive supposition in (4′), that is, the same
supposition of A in (3) (so far, so good). But what about B? According to the rule
proposed by Ockham, since it has confused and distributive supposition in ‘Some
A is not B’, it would have determinate supposition in (4′), under the eﬀect of
the negation. But in fact it ought to have merely confused supposition, because
of the equivalence between (3) and (4′). So the rule stated by Ockham does not
safeguard this equivalence.
Buridan, on the other hand, presents a rule that does safeguard the equivalence
between (3) and (4′): A common term is confused nondistributively by two dis-
tributive [parts of speech] preceding it, either of which would distribute it without
the other.
[Buridan, 2001, 275]
Buridan’s rule can be formulated as follows:
Rule 3b
Dist(A)P &⟨∼, A⟩P ∗→Conf(A)P ∗
That is, under the eﬀect of two negations, B in (4′) would have merely confused
supposition, which is the desired result. But then the equivalence between (1) and

464
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
(2′) would no longer be preserved: B would have merely confused supposition in
(2′), whereas it ought to have determinate supposition, as in (1).
Thus, neither of these rules is able to preserve both equivalences: thus formu-
lated, a rule concerning the eﬀect of the negation upon a term originally with
confused and distributive supposition either preserves the equivalence between (1)
and (2′) (Ockham’s rule) or it preserves the equivalence between (3) and (4′) (Buri-
dan’s rule). This is due to the following asymmetry: in the case of contradiction 1,
the opposition in the supposition of B in each proposition is between determinate
supposition and confused and distributive supposition, whereas in contradiction
2 the same opposition is between merely confused supposition and confused and
distributive supposition. Therefore, it would seem impossible to provide a homo-
geneous account of the eﬀect of the negation (or other distributive term) upon
terms with confused and distributive supposition (for a systematic approach to
this problem, see part 8 of Parson’s contribution to this volume).
However (and fortunately for the general robustness of supposition theory as a
semantic framework), later masters were well aware of this diﬃculty and proposed
ways to deal with it.
Already at the end of the 14th century, in his popular
commentary to Buridan’s Summulae, John Dorp [1499] proposed a method to
determine the supposition of terms following a negation based on the idea that
the proposition should be rephrased in such a way that the negation would be
all the way at the end of the proposition, in which case the usual (i.e. positive)
rules for the determination of the personal supposition of a term could be applied.
On this approach, ‘[t]he problem of assigning the mode of supposition to a term
following a negation becomes that of determining a procedure for bringing negative
sentences into a non-ordinary form [one where the negation only precedes the verb]
such that the mode of supposition of each term remains unchanged.’ [Karger, 1993,
419]
On the basis of Dorp’s examples, Karger proposes a reconstruction of what this
procedure would be like, essentially based in the idea of bringing the negation
towards the end of the proposition, immediately before the verb, and introducing
universally quantifying signs (to recover the distributive eﬀect of the negation)
where there was none, and deleting such universally quantifying terms previously
present. Here is an example (cf. [Karger, 1993, 419], and [Read, 1991a, fn. 8] for
Dorp’s text):
Nullum animal omnis homo est (No animal is every man)
is rephrased as
Omne animal homo non est (Every animal a man is not).
Nullum is replaced by Omne, omnis preceding homo in the original proposition is
deleted, and the negation comes to be followed only by the verb est. Now, it is clear
that animal has confused and distributive supposition (which was clear already in
the original proposition), but moreover it becomes apparent that homo has merely
confused supposition (as it follows mediately the universal sign), whereas in the
original proposition it would have been unclear (from 3o and 3b alone) whether it

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
465
had determinate or merely confused supposition.
A diﬀerent approach to the same issue can be found for example in the writ-
ings of the early 17th century philosopher and theologian John of St. Thomas
(admittedly a few centuries oﬀour period);30 there, one ﬁnds a precise account
of the eﬀect of distributive terms (the negation in particular) upon terms already
having confused and distributive supposition. For this purpose, one has to con-
sider the whole propositional context, i.e. the supposition of the other term in the
proposition. Here is how John formulates it: If two universal signs simultaneously
aﬀect the same term, then you must see how it remains after the ﬁrst negation
or universal sign is removed; and if it remains distributive with reference to a
term having determinate supposition, then it originally had confused supposition;
if however the term remains distributive with reference to a term having confused
supposition, it originally was determinate. [John of St. Thomas, 1955, 69]
Here are his own examples: ‘For example, if I said, No man is not an animal,
then when the ﬁrst negative, i.e. the no, is taken away, animal becomes distributive
with reference to man, which is determinate. Thus originally animal had confused
supposition. However, if I said, Not every man is an animal, then when I take the
not away, man becomes distributive with reference to animal which is confused.
And thus man originally had determinate supposition.’ [John of St. Thomas,
1955, 69]
Making use of the symbolism introduced here, these rules can be formulated as:
Rule 3o′ Dist(A)P & Conf(B)P &⟨∼, A⟩P ∗→Det(A)P ∗
Rule 3b′ Dist(A)P & Det(B)P &⟨∼, A⟩P ∗→Conf(A)P ∗
If a uniform account of the eﬀect of distributive terms upon terms already
having distributive and confused supposition could not be provided, this would
have been a serious drawback for theories of supposition as a whole. Seemingly,
at the time of Ockham and Buridan a solution for this issue had not yet been
found; however, later authors such as John Dorp and John of St. Thomas were
clearly aware of the problem, and succeeded in ﬁnding appropriate rules to deal
with it. Clearly, many other cases may seem problematic and appear to be, at ﬁrst
sight, unaccountable for within supposition theory; but the reformulation of the
rules for confused and distributive supposition above shows that the supposition
framework is more resourceful than one might expect at ﬁrst sight, allowing for
constant reﬁnement.31
30But this approach was already known in the 15th and 16th centuries, see [Ashworth, 1978,
600].
31See (Klima and Sandu 1991) for the use of supposition theory to account for complex quan-
tiﬁcational cases.

466
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
2.2
Other important developments
2.2.1
The doctrine of proof of terms/propositions
Besides the ‘older’ semantic tradition based on the concept of supposition, another
semantic tradition became very inﬂuential in the 14th century.32 This tradition
was known as the doctrine of the proof of terms (probationes terminorum) or
propositions, and its most inﬂuential text was Billingham’s Speculum Puerorum.
Billingham’s text was not the ﬁrst in this tradition (for example, de Rijk dates
Martin of Alnwick’s text also edited in [De Rijk, 1982] as earlier than Billigham’s),
but it seems to have been the main source for the popularity of this genre in the
second part of the 14th century.
‘Proof’ here is not to be understood in its mathematical/logical sense, as demon-
stration; in this sense, to prove a proposition is to show what its truth depends on,
in particular which simpler propositions must be true in order for a given propo-
sition to be true. It is essentially an analytic procedure, in which the meaning
of a ‘diﬃcult’ proposition is decomposed in terms of simpler propositions, known
as immediate propositions, on the basis of the analysis of the term(s) causing the
proposition to be a ‘diﬃcult’ one. Immediate propositions are those, according
to Billingham, which cannot be proved (veriﬁed) except by a direct appeal to
the senses or the understanding. These would be primarily propositions with di-
rectly referential pronouns or adverbs such as ‘I’, ‘this’, ‘that’, ‘here’, ‘now’ etc (cf.
Billigham, Probationes Terminorum, in [De Rijk, 1982, 49]).
There are three basic techniques to ‘prove’ a proposition, according to whether
the proposition is an exponible, a resoluble or an oﬃciable proposition. An ex-
ponible proposition is one that corresponds to several propositions taken in con-
junction, such as ‘Socrates begins to be white’, which corresponds to ‘Socrates was
not white and Socrates is now white’. Propositions containing comparative and
superlative terms, or the verbs ‘begins’, ‘ceases’ and ‘diﬀers from’ are analyzed
in this fashion. A resoluble proposition is one that involves the descent from a
general term to discrete terms, such as ‘A man is running’, which is proved by an
appeal to sense experience codiﬁed by the propositions ‘This is a man’ and ‘This
is running’. Finally, an oﬃciable proposition is one containing the nominalization
of a proposition with the accusative-plus-inﬁnitive construction, and corresponds
roughly to what is now known as ‘opaque contexts’ (modalities and verbs related
to propositional attitudes such as ‘think’, ‘believe’ etc.).
Although we dispose of several texts presenting the doctrine of the proof of
propositions/terms, it is still in fact quite understudied. Indeed, it is fair to say
that we still do not really understand the purpose and the mechanisms deﬁning it
(see [Spade, 2000, part IV]). For this reason, it is to be hoped that scholars will
at some point take up the challenge of analyzing this doctrine systematically, as
32This approach was sometimes used instead of supposition theories (cf. Johannes Venator’s
Logica which uses the doctrine of the proof of propositions exclusively), but at other times both
theories co-existed together, for example as distinct chapters of the same work (such as Paul of
Venice’s Logica Parva).

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
467
it is still by and large murky terrain.
2.2.2
Other developments worth mentioning
For reasons of space, it is impossible here to treat the totality of inﬂuential 14th
century semantic theories; but before we move on to the next section, a few more
of these should be at least mentioned, so that the interested reader may further
pursue his/her investigations. One of them is the doctrine of the supposition of
relative pronouns, a vivid topic already in Ockham’s Summa Logicae (Part I, chap.
76), which is the medieval counterpart of modern theories of anaphora (cf. [King,
2005]).
Another important aspect which, for reasons of space, could not be addressed
here are the fascinating discussions on the semantics of propositions. In the same
way that the medieval authors were interested in what single terms stood (suppo-
sited) for, many 14th century authors raised similar questions concerning phrases
and propositions (see for example Chapter 6 of [Spade, 1996]). One of such ques-
tions was what, in the extra-mental physical realm, the accusative-plus-inﬁnitive
constructions then known as dicta (which are in fact nominalizations of indicative
propositions) corresponded to. Another important question concerned what in the
physical world, if anything, makes a true proposition true. Some of the authors
who addressed such issues are Burley (cf.
[Cesalli, 2001]), Wyclif (cf.
[Conti,
2005a, 2.1; Cesalli, 2005]), Henry Hopton (cf. [Ashworth and Spade, 1992, 51]),
[Richard Brinkley, 1987]; Paul of Venice (part II, fascicule 6 of his Logica Magna),
among others, often in treatises bearing the conspicuous titles of De signiﬁcato
propositionis and De veritate et falsitate propositionis, or similar ones.
In sum, while 14th century semantics has been a popular topic of research in
the last decades, this tradition itself is so rich that much of it still remains to be
further studied and better understood. Therefore, the foregoing analyses should
not be seen as an exhaustive account of this tradition but rather as a starting
point for further research.
3
CONSEQUENCES
Theories of consequences are considered to be genuine medieval inventions. Of
course, investigations on the nature of logical and inferential relations between
propositions have existed ever since logic has existed; but medieval theories of
consequence present a characteristic approach to the issue and a level of system-
atization that is arguably not to be found in previous investigations. Some (see
[Moody, 1953]) see in them the forerunners of the ‘propositional turn’ in logic
that took place to its full extent only in the 19th century with Frege, after mil-
lennia of predominance of term logic — that is, of logical systems whose basic
units were terms, such as in traditional Aristotelian logic, and not propositions.33
33With the notable exception of Stoic logic, which is usually recognized as the ﬁrst propositional
system of logic in the history of logic (see [Mates, 1973]).

468
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
This picture, however, is not entirely accurate, as the logic of terms also occu-
pies a prominent place in 14th century theories of consequence, as we shall see.
But 14th century logicians were probably the ﬁrst to attempt a systematization
of the propositional rules of inference that we now take as fundamental, such as
contraposition, ex falso, the behavior of conjunctions, disjunctions etc. Medieval
logicians sought not only to establish the validity of such basic rules; they also
made inquiries on the very nature of logical consequence and inference. In this
sense, their investigations overlap not only with modern ‘proof theory’, but also
with modern philosophy of logic (as exempliﬁed by modern discussions on the
nature of logical consequence such as [Etchemendy, 1990]).
In this section, I begin with a brief historical overview of this logical genre, and
then move on to the three main subjects that the medievals discussed with respect
to consequence: a general deﬁnition/criterion of what is to count as consequence;
the distinctions of diﬀerent kinds of consequence; and the most widely accepted
rules of consequence. Finally, I show that at that time too there was no absolute
consensus as to what rules of inference should be accepted, and that a few authors
questioned some of the rules that were otherwise widely accepted.
3.1
Historical development
3.1.1
Origins
The precise historical origin of 14th century theories of consequence is still con-
troversial among specialists. It is still something of a mystery why and how, all
of a sudden, at the beginning of the 14th century, treatises bearing the title De
consequentiis or the like began to appear. Why then, and not before? Naturally,
the subject itself, that is, the logical and inferential relations between propositions,
was very often discussed by earlier authors; the very term ‘consequentia’ was in
constant usage (in the same sense) since at least the 12th century, and dates as
far back as Boethius in the 5-6th century (cf. [Boh, 1982, 302]). But no treatises
or chapters were speciﬁcally dedicated to the topic or bore such titles before the
14th century.
According to an inﬂuential hypothesis concerning the origin of theories of con-
sequences, they stemmed essentially from the tradition on the Topics (cf. [Bird,
1961; Stump, 1982]). The Topics was the ﬁfth book of Aristotle’s Organon, a
book that can be described as a rather loose collection of rules for the conduction
of non-demonstrative reasoning and argumentation. At ﬁrst sight, this hypothesis
makes good sense: in the tradition of Aristotelian logic, the role of the Topics was
often that of accounting for the patterns of (correct) inference and reasoning that
did not ﬁt into the syllogistic system presented in the Prior Analytics. While it
is a wonder of systematicity and formality, syllogistic is not a very wide-ranging
theory in that it accounts for only a small portion of the patterns of reasoning that
we are prepared to accept as valid. The Topics, even though not as rock-solid as
syllogistic patterns, provided an account of many more of such patterns of reason-
ing. So, conceptually, it would seem quite natural that the tradition on the Topics

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
469
would be at the origin of theories of consequences, as these are essentially theories
about the relations between propositions that go beyond the patterns recognized
by syllogistic. Moreover, some earlier investigations on the notion of consequence
were made explicitly within the context of an analysis of the Topics; Abelard, in
the 12th century, developed a sophisticated theory of the logical relations between
propositions precisely in the part of his Dialectica [Abelard, 1956] dedicated to
the topics.
However, this hypothesis did not receive the historical conﬁrmation that one
could have expected. It has been argued [Green-Pedersen, 1984, 270] that the late
13th century literature on the Topics, that is, the period immediately preceding
the emergence of treatises on consequences, gives absolutely no clue of what was
to come; that is, there is no signiﬁcant similarity between the contents of these
13th century treatises on the topics and 14th century treatises on consequences.
Therefore, it has been concluded that the Topics could not have been the main
source for 14th century theories of consequences.34
Although our current state of knowledge on the matter still does not allow for a
conclusive account of these developments, the picture that at this point seems more
plausible is that diﬀerent strands of traditional Aristotelian logic converged in or-
der to give rise to the 14th century theories of consequences. It seems that at least
three other traditions contributed to the development of theories of consequence:
treatises on syncategoremata, especially in connection with the syncategorema ‘si’
(corresponding to the ‘if . . . then’ structure in English); the analysis of hypotheti-
cal syllogisms, a concept absent from Aristotle’s logic and introduced by Boethius
in the 6th century AD (his treatise De hypotheticis syllogismis is referred to 6
times in Burley’s De puritate artis logicae — cf. [Green-Pedersen, 1984]); and
commentaries on the Prior Analytics — indeed, it is in the Prior Analytics that
Aristotle explicitly states a formulation of the notion of ‘following’ that is arguably
the (remote) source for the most fundamental deﬁnition of consequence in the 14th
century.35
Be that as it may, the importance of the Topics for the development of 14th
century theories of consequences should not be altogether dismissed. It is worth
noticing that two of the ﬁrst authors having written explicitly on consequence,
Ockham and Burley, are both in some way or another inﬂuenced by the Topics.
Burley explicitly says that all valid consequences are based on dialectical Topics
[Burley, 2000, 158]. By contrast, the relation of Ockham’s theory of consequence
to the Topics is more convoluted; Green-Pedersen argued convincingly that Bird’s
reconstruction of Ockham’s theory within the framework of the Topics [Bird, 1961]
is not satisfactory [Green-Pedersen, 1984, 268], but he also conﬁrms that Ockham’s
‘intrinsic’ and ‘extrinsic’ middles, crucial concepts for his theory of consequence,
are concepts essentially taken (albeit heavily modiﬁed) from the topical framework.
34Chapter E of [Green-Pedersen, 1984], on topics and the theory of consequence, is the most
comprehensive survey of these developments that I am aware of.
35“A deduction is a discourse in which, certain things being stated, something other than what
is stated follows of necessity from their being so.” Prior Analytics 24b19-20.

470
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
In sum, while we are not yet able to reconstruct a complete history of the devel-
opment of these theories, at this point it seems that the most plausible hypothesis
is that at least these four traditions — topics, syncategoremata, hypothetical syl-
logisms and Prior Analytics — must be taken into account to explain the rise of
theories of consequences in the 14th century. Diﬀerent aspects of each of these
traditions contributed to the development of diﬀerent aspects of the theories of
consequence.36 Green-Pedersen [1984, 295] argues for example that the late 13th
century treatises that most resemble early 14th century treatises on consequences
are ‘the treatises on syncategorematic words and a number of sophism-collections
arranged after syncategoremes.’ Some of these connections will be commented
upon in what follows, when speciﬁc aspects of theories of consequence are dis-
cussed.
3.1.2
Development in the 14th century
The 14th century treatises on consequences can be divided in roughly four groups:37
1. The treatises on consequences from the very beginning of the 14th century
(Burley’s De consequentiis and two anonymous treatises of roughly the same
time — cf. [Green-Pedersen, 1981]) are in fact rather unsystematic collec-
tions of rules of consequence/inference. It seems as though their purpose
was solely to provide ‘rules of thumb’ to deal with sophismata related to
some syncategorematic terms; no conceptual or systematic discussion of the
nature of consequences is presented therein.
2. The second stage of their development is represented by Burley’s De Puritate
[Burley, 2000], the chapters on consequence in Ockham’s Summa (III-3),
a few Pseudo-Ockham treatises and the Liber consequentiarium edited in
[Schupp, 1988]. I group these texts together because in them the concept of
(intrinsic and extrinsic) middles plays a crucial role and thus the presence of
the (reworked) topical framework is more clearly perceived. They display a
much deeper interest in the very nature of consequences than the previous
group, presenting general deﬁnitions and criteria of what is to count as a
consequence as well as divisions of kinds of consequence.
3. The third stage is represented by Buridan’s treatise (Buridan 1976) and the
treatises inspired by it, most notably Albert of Saxony’s (a section of his Pe-
rutilis logica), the commentary on the Prior Analytics formerly attributed to
Scotus (Pseudo-Scotus 2001)38, and Marsilius of Inghen’s (which is still only
to be found in manuscripts). In these treatises the doctrine of intrinsic and
36For several of these tentative connections, see chapter E of [Green-Pedersen, 1984].
37My division is inspired by the division presented in [King, 2001, fn.
1], but with a few
modiﬁcations. Here I refer mostly to treatises that can be found in print. For a list of these
printed treatises, see [King, 2001]; for a list of British treatises only available in manuscripts, see
[Green-Pedersen, 1985].
38On the identity of the author of this text, see [Read, 1993, fn. 10].

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
471
extrinsic middles has disappeared completely, and they present sophisticated
analyses of the nature of consequences. What characterizes them as a group
is the deﬁnition of formal consequence based on the substitutivity criterion
(more on it below).
This tradition can be referred to as the continental
tradition on consequences.
4. The fourth group of treatises is predominantly British, and signiﬁcantly more
represented in number of treatises than group (3). It is represented by the
treatises by Robert Fland, John of Holland, Richard Billingham, Richard
Lavenham, Ralph Strode, among others. What characterizes this group as
such is the deﬁnition of formal consequence in terms of containment of the
consequent in the antecedent; it is a distinctly epistemic deﬁnition of formal
consequence, when compared to that of group (3).39
In sum, the development of theories of consequence in the 14th century is charac-
terized by an early and rather ‘primitive’ stage, then by a stage of further develop-
ment but with emphasis on the idea that consequences need something extrinsic
to validate them (most generally quasi-Topics), and then by two further traditions
that run more or less parallel, the British tradition and the continental tradition.40
3.2
General deﬁnition of consequence
Before we inspect the diﬀerent general deﬁnitions of consequence, we must ﬁrst
address the question of the relation between consequences and conditionals. For
explanatory purposes, it may be convenient to consider three related but distinct
concepts:
• A conditional proposition, a proposition that relates logically two embedded
phrases, which are themselves not assertions properly speaking.
• A consequence, which is a logical relation between assertions or propositions.
• An inference, which is the action performed by somebody of inferring a
conclusion from a (set of) (asserted) premise(s).
The medieval authors were well aware of these distinctions, or at least of the
distinction between conditional sentences and consequences/inferences, but they
often treated these diﬀerent notions simultaneously, causing some confusion among
modern interpreters.41 Conditional sentences were generally treated by the me-
dievals under the general heading of ‘hypothetical propositions’, along with con-
junctions, disjunctions and others (cf.
for example Chapter 1.7.3 of Buridan’s
39For a compelling account of how this epistemic notion of formal consequence may have been
the background for the emergence of the Cartesian notion of inference, see [Normore, 1993].
40This is in any case the general picture, but of course I do not claim that there are no
exceptions to it — that is, there may very well be treatises that do not ﬁt this description.
41For example: if the medieval notion of consequentia is not to be assimilated to that of a
conditional sentence or implication, as I will argue, then the discussion on whether Ockham knew
of material implication based on his theory of consequence seems rather misguided.

472
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
Summulae — [Buridan, 2001]); however, many of them recognized that a true
conditional corresponds to a valid consequence/inference42 (cf. Ockham, Summa
Logicae, Part II, chapter 31, where he says that he will not discuss conditionals
extensively since their logical properties correspond to the logical properties of
consequences). Moreover, if the historical hypothesis of the inﬂuence of theories
on the syncategoremata and on hypothetical syllogisms for the development of
theories of consequences is correct, it becomes then patent that the two notions of
conditionals and consequences were intimately related for our authors.
Nevertheless, as argued in [King, 2001], there are various reasons to conclude
that the medievals were not only aware of these distinctions, but also that they
viewed their consequentiae as primarily corresponding to arguments and infer-
ences, i.e. to relations between statements, and not to conditional statements.
Perhaps the most conspicuous of these reasons, taken from the structure of Ock-
ham’s Summa, is that consequences are treated there in Part III, dedicated to
arguments, and not in part II, dedicated to propositions. Buridan explicitly ad-
dresses this distinction between conditionals and arguments in 7.4.5 of his Sum-
mulae de Dialectica, and while he says that consequentia is a twofold concept
(covering conditionals and arguments), in most cases the logical properties of con-
ditionals are treated under the heading ‘conditionals’, and what is dealt with in
sections on consequence is predominantly logical properties of arguments. King
[2001, 123] also discusses how Burley presents rules of consequences involving con-
ditional propositions, explicitly contrasting ‘the conditional sentences that enter
into such reasoning with the consequences made out of them’. Hence, for the pur-
poses of the present analysis, medieval consequences are not to be understood as
conditional sentences but rather as inferences/arguments.
Now, as for the general deﬁnition of consequence, most authors of the 14th
century accept at least as a necessary condition for a (valid) consequence that the
antecedent cannot be true while the consequent is false; many accept this as a
suﬃcient condition as well. This is, of course, the very familiar modal deﬁnition of
consequence, present in Aristotle and also widely accepted in current (philosophy
of) logic (at least as a necessary condition).
Another formulation of the same
idea is that a consequence is valid if from the contradictory of the consequent
the contradictory of the antecedent follows [Ockham, 1974, 728]43, or similarly
that the contradictory of the consequent is incompatible with (the truth of) the
antecedent [Burley, 2000, 149].
In fact both Ockham and Burley give several
equivalent formulations of this core idea, but the key point is obvious: for our
authors, the most fundamental characteristic of a consequence is that the truth of
the antecedent is incompatible with the falsity of the consequent.
Buridan’s formulation of the fundamental criterion of what is to count as a
consequence follows the same idea, but it is more convoluted because he has to take
42We shall see in due course that absolute consequences correspond to necessarily true condi-
tionals, while as-of-now consequences correspond to contingently true propositions.
43Naturally, this should not be seen as a deﬁnition, as it is obviously circular, but rather as a
rule of thumb for the recognition of putative consequences.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
473
into account a few extreme counterexamples related to his commitment to actually
formed propositions as the bearers of truth value (for the details of Buridan’s
discussion, see [Dutilh Novaes, 2005c]). His ﬁnal formulation is ‘a proposition is
antecedent to another when it is related to it [the other] in such a way that it is
impossible for things to be in whatever way the ﬁrst signiﬁes them to be without
their being in whatever way the other signiﬁes them to be, when these propositions
are put forward together.’ [Buridan, 1976, 22]. Pseudo-Scotus [2001] also considers
this formulation, but he notices that it is not immune to a form of what is now
known as Curry paradox44, so he adds a clause to the eﬀect that the deﬁnition
does not hold in such extreme cases.
In the British tradition, variations of the same basic deﬁnition of consequence
can be found, as for example in Billingham [Billingham, 2003, 80], Strode (in
[Pozzi, 1978, 237]) and Paul of Venice [Paul of Venice, 1983, 167]; in fact, these
authors present this deﬁnition without much discussion or analysis, as opposed to
what one can ﬁnd in Buridan’s treatise for example. That seems to indicate that at
later stages the deﬁnition was seen as unproblematic. It must also be noted that,
while earlier authors such as Ockham and Buridan consider to be consequences
only those pairs of propositions that satisfy the criterion, later authors such as
Billingham and Paul of Venice (cf. same as above) recognized invalid consequences
— that is, those that do not satisfy this criterion — as consequences nevertheless,
making thus the distinction between valid and invalid consequences (while for
Buridan and others, an invalid consequence was simply not a consequence).
3.3
Types of consequence
Medieval logicians recognized that the class of pairs (or triplets etc.) satisfying the
general modal deﬁnition of consequence is rather heterogeneous. Indeed, one of
the main focuses of treatises on consequences is the distinction of diﬀerent kinds of
consequences. There are three main kinds of distinctions: natural vs. accidental
consequences, absolute vs. as-of-now consequences and formal vs. material conse-
quences. While the same terms are generally used by diﬀerent medieval authors,
they often mean diﬀerent things and have dissimilar criteria diﬀerentiating one
kind from another. However, the natural vs. accidental distinction, while very
important in early theories of consequence, is to be found only in Burley in the
14th century (cf. [Green-Pedersen, 1984, 286; Pozzi, 1978, 58], so we shall not
spend any time on it here. It is really the ut nunc vs. simple distinction and, even
44The paradoxical case put forward by Pseudo-Scotus is the following: ‘God exists, hence
this argument is invalid’. If this consequence is valid, then it has a necessary antecedent and a
false consequent (since the consequent says that it is invalid). But then it is invalid. In sum,
if it is valid, it is invalid, thus by reductio ad absurdum it is invalid. But if it is invalid, it is
necessarily so, since the premise is a necessary proposition; therefore, we have a consequence
with a necessary consequent, thus satisfying the modal criterion, but which is bluntly invalid,
thus violating the modal criterion. See [Read, 2001] for an account of Pseudo-Scotus ‘paradox’,
where it is also shown that this so-called paradox did not obtain the desired eﬀect of violating
the modal criterion.

474
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
more so, the formal vs. material distinction that are crucial for the understanding
of 14th century theories of consequence. Besides these, there is also a distinction
that is sometimes found explicitly stated but sometimes not, and which sometimes
overlaps with the formal vs. material distinction but sometimes does not, namely
the distinction bona de forma vs. bona de materia.
It is important to understand that these divisions are not necessarily meant to
be sub-divisions of each another; they are also often understood as alternative,
overlapping ways of dividing consequences. Ockham, for example, presents sev-
eral such distinctions but does not present them as sub-divisions of one another
(Summa III-3, Chapter 1). So let us now take a closer look at each of them.
Formal vs. material consequences. This distinction ﬁrst appears in Ockham
(cf. [Green-Pedersen, 1984, 287]), but afterwards it is to be found in virtually all
treatises on consequence in the 14th century. However, what distinguished formal
from material consequences varies per author.
For Ockham, this distinction is related to his doctrine of intrinsic and extrinsic
middles. Ockham says that a consequence is formal when there is such middle,
intrinsic or extrinsic, validating the consequence; otherwise, when there isn’t such
middle and the consequence holds only in virtue of its very terms (Summa Logicae,
p. 589), it is a material consequence. As already mentioned, Ockham’s extrinsic
and intrinsic middles are reminiscent of the topical framework, but they are ex-
tremely modiﬁed versions of topical concepts, as shown by Green-Pedersen [1984,
chapter E].
But what are intrinsic and extrinsic middles? An extrinsic middle is a proposi-
tion not containing the terms that form the antecedent and the consequent of the
putative consequence, but which is a general rule describing the fact (ontological,
logical or other) that warrants the passage from the antecedent to the consequent.
An intrinsic middle, by contrast, is formed by the very terms that form the an-
tecedent and the consequent of the putative consequence. Ockham says that some
formal consequences hold only in virtue of an extrinsic middle, while others need
an intrinsic as well as an extrinsic middle to hold. Syllogisms, for example, hold
only in virtue of extrinsic middles; a consequence such as ‘Only a man is a donkey,
therefore every donkey is a man’ holds in virtue of the following extrinsic mid-
dle: ‘an exclusive and a universal with transposed terms signify the same and are
convertible’. But a consequence such as ‘Socrates is not running, therefore a man
is not running’ requires that the intrinsic middle ‘Socrates is a man’ be true in
order to hold (and it still requires an extrinsic middle to validate it mediately).
(Ockham, Summa Logicae, p. 588).
What exactly a material consequence is for Ockham is still a matter of contro-
versy among scholars, as the passage where this notion is explained is known to
be corrupted (Summa Logicae, p. 589).45 Ockham gives two examples of material
consequences, one of the ex impossibili kind (from an impossible proposition any-
thing follows) and one of the ad necessarium kind (a necessary proposition follows
45See [Schupp, 1993] on the corruption of the text.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
475
from anything), and that has led many commentators to believe that these are the
only kinds of material consequences that Ockham recognizes. This matter cannot
be settled at this point, but some have also raised the hypothesis that Ockham’s
notion of material consequence would go beyond such speciﬁc cases (see [Schupp,
1993; Kaufmann, 1993]).
Buridan, by contrast, is crystal clear concerning his distinction between formal
and material consequence. His very terms are: ‘Formal consequence means that
[the consequence] holds for all terms, retaining the form common to all. Or [. . . ]
a formal consequence is that which, for every proposition similar in form which
might be formed, it would be a good consequence.’ [Buridan, 1976, 22-23]. A
material consequence is one that does not satisfy this criterion but only the modal
criterion.
While it is not immediately obvious why Ockham chose this nomenclature for
his distinction46, in the case of Buridan the terminology espouses perfectly the
traditional Aristotelian notions of form and matter: the matter of a proposition is
deﬁned by its categorematic terms, while its form is deﬁned by its syncategorematic
terms. Thus, a formal consequence is one that holds in virtue of its form (the
meaning of its syncategorematic terms); a material consequence is one that does
not hold in virtue of its form alone but also in virtue of its matter (the meaning of
its categorematic terms). Another way of describing Buridan’s criterion is with the
notion of substitutivity: a formal consequence is one that holds in all substitutional
instances of its categorematic terms.
Buridan’s use of the substitutional criterion is remarkable in that it is immune to
much of the recent criticism against this criterion, most notably in [Etchemendy,
1990].
This is so because the substitutional criterion is applied only to conse-
quences which already satisfy the modal criterion of incompatibility between the
truth of the premise and the falsity of the conclusion. Under purely substitutional
accounts of (logical) consequence, a clearly invalid logical consequence such as ‘Bill
Clinton was a president of the USA, thus Bill Clinton was male’ comes out as valid
if ‘Bill Clinton’ is seen as the only non-logical term of the consequence (as it hap-
pens to be so that, thus far, all presidents of the USA have been male, and thus all
substitutional instances for ‘Bill Clinton’ will also validate the consequent). But
in Buridan’s account, this putative consequence would not be considered as a valid
consequence in the ﬁrst place, since it is not incompatible for somebody to be the
president of the USA and not be a male (in fact this may happen even in the
foreseeable future); therefore, it cannot be a formal consequence because it is not
a consequence to start with. Buridan’s account is best seen as what Shapiro [1998]
has coined the ‘hybrid’ notion of formal (logical) consequence (which he presents
as the most accurate conceptual characterization of logical consequence), that is,
46Ockham’s choice of the term ‘formal consequence’ seems to be related to John Duns Scotus’
notion of ‘formal distinction’. Moreover, references to consequentia formalis can be found in
Scotus’ writings, for example in his Quaestiones super libros Elenchorum (p. 77 of the Viv`es
edition of Opera Omnia).
On the relation between Scotus and Ockham on this matter, see
[Martin, 2004].

476
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
the notion according to which a formal (logical) consequence must satisfy both
criteria, the modal one and the substitutional one (see [Dutilh Novaes, 2005b].
This criterion for diﬀerentiating consequences had been proposed before by
Abelard, who distinguished perfect from imperfect consequences [Abelard, 1956,
253-4]: perfect consequences received their warrant from their structure (com-
plexio) alone, while imperfect inferences needed external warrant (for which Abelard
turned to the Topics — cf. [Abelard, 1956, 256-7]). The same criterion was later
rediscovered by Bolzano [1973] and further developed by Tarski [2002].
Intuitive though as it may seem to the modern reader, the deﬁnition of formal
consequence based on the substitutional criterion was not widely accepted in the
14th century. As already mentioned, while the treatises on consequence inﬂuenced
by Buridan did maintain this criterion (Pseudo-Scotus, Albert of Saxony, Mar-
silius of Inghen), the majority of treatises followed a diﬀerent notion of formal
consequence. This alternative notion of formal consequence is what we could call
the containment notion: a consequence is formal iﬀthe consequent is contained in
the antecedent, in such a way that whoever understands the antecedent necessarily
understands the consequent.47
Here is Lavenham’s formulation (as quoted in [King, 2001, 133]): ‘A consequence
is formal when the consequent necessary belongs to the understanding of the an-
tecedent, as it is in the case of syllogistic consequence, and in many enthymematic
consequences’. Strode’s similar formulation is: ‘A consequence said to be formally
valid is one of which if it is understood to be as is adequately signiﬁed through
the antecedent then it is understood to be just as is adequately signiﬁed through
the consequent. For if someone understands you to be a man then he understands
you to be an animal.’ (as quoted in [Normore, 1993, 449]). Many other authors
held similar deﬁnitions, such as Billingham [2003, 80] and Fland [1976].
Besides the fact that this is notably an epistemic notion of formal consequence
(as opposed to Buridan’s substitutional notion), for the authors adopting the con-
tainment notion, the extension of the concept of formal consequence is usually
wider than that of those adopting the substitutional notion of formal consequence.
Lavenham explicitly says that some enthymematic consequences are formal con-
sequences — that is, consequences that, with the addition of an extra premise,
acquire a syllogistic form, such as ‘Socrates is a man, thus Socrates is an animal’,
which acquires a syllogistically valid form with the addition of ‘Every man is an
animal’. For Buridan, however, enthymematic consequences are not formal conse-
quences because they do not satisfy the substitutional criterion, e.g. this particular
example is not valid for all substitutional instances of ‘man’ and ‘animal’. They do
become formal consequences with the addition of the missing premise, but before
that occurs they are merely material consequences (cf. [Buridan, 1976, 23]).
Another diﬀerent criterion for formal consequences is presented at the very end
of the 14th century by Paul of Venice; he characterizes formal consequences as those
47The containment notion of (formal) consequence is not a 14th century invention. For Abelard,
it was a necessary condition for all valid consequences; in the 13th century, it was held by authors
such as Faversham and Kilwardby.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
477
‘in which the opposite of the consequent is repugnant formally to the antecedent’,
by which he means that the antecedent and the opposite of the consequent cannot
even be conceived together. His example of a material consequence is ‘God is not,
therefore no man is’: even though it is (or so he thinks) metaphysically impossible
for men to be without God being, it is not inconceivable.
Consequences bona de materia vs.
bona de forma.
A criterion diﬀer-
entiating consequences that is intimately related to but not always identical to
the formal vs.
material distinction is the distinction bona de forma vs.
bona
de materia.
For those who adopt the substitutional criterion to deﬁne formal
consequences, this distinction is usually equivalent to the formal vs.
material
distinction; but for those who follow diﬀerent criteria for formal consequences,
there is indeed a point in recognizing that some consequences are valid no matter
what their categorematic terms are, if their syncategorematic terms are retained.
Ockham, for example, while using the rather idiosyncratic notion of ‘middles’ to
deﬁne his formal consequences, also recognizes that some consequences are valid
‘de forma’ (cf. Summa III-1, cap. 13, 32-35). Similarly for Paul of Venice; next
to his ‘conceivability’ distinction between formal and material consequences, he
adds the distinction between consequences ‘bona de forma’ and ‘bona de materia’
[Paul of Venice, 1984, 168]. Confusingly, though, he says that ‘man runs, therefore
animal runs’ is a consequence ‘bona de forma’, while it clearly does not satisfy the
substitutional criterion that is usually associated with the notion of a consequence
‘bona de forma’.
Absolute vs.
as-of-now consequences.
The other important distinction of
consequences for 14th century authors is the one between absolute vs. as-of-now
(simplex vs. ut nunc) consequences. Intuitively, the idea is that absolute con-
sequences hold always and necessarily, while as-of-now consequences hold at a
speciﬁc time or under speciﬁc assumptions (in particular at the moment indicated
by the verbs in the consequence).
A clear account of this distinction is to be found in Pseudo-Scotus [2001]: for
him, the absolute vs. as-of-now distinction applies only to material consequences
(recall that for Ps.-Scotus a formal consequence is one that satisﬁes the substi-
tutional criterion), and amounts to the modal value of the missing premise that
can be added in order to turn the (enthymematic) consequence into a formal one.
That is, if the missing premise is a necessary proposition, then the consequence
is an absolute one (it always holds, since the condition for it to hold, namely the
truth of the ‘missing premise’, always obtains); if the missing premise is a contin-
gent truth (it has to be true with respect to the time indicated by the verbs of the
consequence, otherwise the original material consequence does not hold), then the
original material consequence holds only in some situations, namely the situations
in which the contingent proposition happens to be true, and is thus an as-of-now
consequence.
Although there may be slightly diﬀerent formulations of the absolute vs. as-
of-now distinction, these diﬀerences are in fact conceptually immaterial if com-

478
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
pared to the very diﬀerent formulations of the distinction formal vs.
material
consequence. An important diﬀerence, however, is that, while for some authors
(Pseudo-Scotus, Buridan) the absolute vs. as-of-now distinction is posterior to the
formal vs. material distinction and applies only to material consequences, there
are also authors (e.g. Peter of Mantua — cf. [Pozzi, 1978, 61]) who present the
absolute vs. as-of-now distinction as primary, and who see the formal vs. material
distinction as applying only to absolute consequences (as-of-now consequences are
always material consequences). In the latter case, clearly the distinction can no
longer be cast in terms of the modal value of the missing premise, since at least in
some cases of absolute formal consequences (e.g. valid syllogisms) there is in fact
no missing premise. Alternatively, for Peter of Mantua, an as-of-now consequence
is a consequence in which the contradictory of the consequent can indeed be true
at the same time as the antecedent, but not at the time indicated by the copula or
verb in question (the present if the verb is present-tense, the past if it is past-tense
etc.).
For a while, modern commentators have been particularly interested in as-of-
now consequences (in particular with respect to Ockham — cf. [Mullik 1971]), as
some of them (cf. [Bohener, 1951]) saw these consequences as possible forerunners
of modern material implication. The ﬁrst problem with this association, as already
argued, is that it seems unﬁtting to view medieval consequences as conditional
sentences/implications (material or otherwise). Moreover, as-of-now consequences
are contingent only insofar as the truth of the ‘missing premise’ is contingent. For
the rest, the logical relation of necessity between the propositions involved is just
as tight as with other consequences, provided that the missing premise is true —
if the missing premise is true, then the truth of the antecedent is incompatible
with the falsity of the consequent. In other words, as-of-now consequences display
a stronger logical relation than mere truth-functional material implication.
The modern reader may be wondering: what is the point in distinguishing these
diﬀerent kinds of consequences? Is it yet one of those futile exercises that logicians
of all times tend to be fond of, but with no practical application? Not so; the reason
for such distinctions is in fact very practical: the diﬀerent rules of consequences
(to be presented in the next section) apply to speciﬁc kinds of consequences. That
is, some rules apply only to formal or absolute consequences; others apply to
material or as-of-now consequences. And such rules are extremely useful for the
purposes of construing an argumentation; in fact, it seems that construing valid
arguments is really the ultimate purpose of theories of consequences. But for a
sound application of such rules, it is essential to identify the kind of a consequence
in question, whence the importance of these criteria being as clearly formulated
and eﬀective as possible.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
479
3.4
Rules of inference recognized by the medieval authors
Let us now look at the logical rules of consequence recognized by our 14th cen-
tury authors. Some of them had already been identiﬁed by earlier authors48 (for
example the rules of opposition, equipollence and conversion for categorical propo-
sitions described in Aristotle’s De Interpretatione); but what is remarkable in at
least some of the medieval treatises is how they attempt at a systematization of
these rules, such that from primary rules secondary rules are derived (see for ex-
ample the ﬁrst chapters of Burley’s De Puritate, The Shorter Treatise — [Burley,
2000, 3-26]). Granted, other treatises are really no more than rather unsophisti-
cated lists of rules, with no attempt to link the logical properties of each of them
together. But quite a few of them present what we could view as the ﬁrst stages
of a proof theory.
Here, I present some of these rules making use of a notation inspired by Gentzen-
style sequent calculus. The list of rules presented here is not exhaustive in that
not all the rules studied and recognized by the medievals will be presented; the
purpose here is to give the reader an idea of the level of logical sophistication
attained by medieval treatises on consequences. A more thorough and extremely
useful listing of the rules recognized by the medieval authors can be found in
[Pozzi, 1978, 69-73].49
Burley, for example, lists ten main rules and several other rules that follow
from these main rules. The ﬁrst four rules are indeed easily rendered within the
conceptual framework of propositional calculus, while the other six rely heavily
on the properties of terms as well (and this is why it is inaccurate to say that
medieval theories of consequences are purely propositional in nature; logical prop-
erties of terms still play a prominent role). Boh [1982, 312-314] presents a neat
reconstruction of main rules 1 to 4, plus their derived rules, but the problem with
his reconstruction is that it implies the view that consequences are conditionals, a
view that, as already said, is rejected here.
Burley’s rule 2, for example, states that ‘whatever follows from a consequent
follows from the antecedent’, or alternatively, ‘whatever is antecedent to the an-
tecedent is antecedent to the consequent’ [Burley, 2000, 4]. This is basically a
formulation of the Cut-rule in sequent calculus (with the diﬀerence that no men-
tion is made to the contextual propositional variables that are included in sequent
calculus for the sake of generality).
Rule 2
A ⇒B
B ⇒C
A ⇒C
48It is also often said that the Stoics are the genuine pioneers of propositional logic; however,
there is as of yet no evidence of direct or even of indirect inﬂuence from Stoic logic on the
development of medieval theories of consequences. That is, even if many of such rules of con-
sequence had already been recognized by the Stoics, it all seems to indicate that the medievals
re-discovered them independently.
49Pozzi’s study is based on the treatises on consequences of the following authors: Ockham,
Burley, Pseudo-Scotus, Buridan, Albert of Saxony, Ralph Strode, Peter of Mantua, and Richard
Ferrybridge.

480
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
From this he derives a few other rules, among which: (2′) ‘whatever follows from
a consequent and from its antecedent follows from the antecedent by itself’ [Bur-
ley, 2000, 6] and (2′′) ‘whatever follows from a consequent with something added
follows from the antecedent with the same thing added’ [Burley, 2000, 7].
Rule 2′
A ⇒B
A, B ⇒C
A ⇒C
Rule 2′′
A ⇒B
B, C ⇒D
A, C ⇒D
Burley derives (2′) from Rule 2 plus what he takes to be a logical fact, which
the modern reader may recognize as a special case of right-weakening: ‘every
proposition implies itself together with its consequent’; similarly, he derives (2′′)
from Rule 2 plus simultaneous applications of special cases of right-weakening
and left-weakening: ‘an antecedent together with something added implies the
consequent with the same thing added’. His arguments can be reconstructed as
follows:
(2′)
A ⇒B
WR
A ⇒A, B
A, B ⇒C(hyp.)
Rule 2
A ⇒C
(2′′)
A ⇒B
WR, WL
A, C ⇒B, C
B, C ⇒D(hyp.)
Rule 2
A, C ⇒D
After having shown that the medievals did know the procedure of deriving rules
from primitive rules, I now present a few other rules recognized by them (taken
from Pozzi’s very useful list, unless otherwise stated), not paying speciﬁc attention
to the deductive structure between these rules:
‘From the impossible anything follows.’
⊥⇒A
In the case of material as-of-now consequences the requirement is weaker: from
a false proposition anything follows.
‘The necessary follows from anything.’
A ⇒T
Similarly, in the case of material as-of-now consequences the requirement is
weaker: a true proposition follows from anything (these two weaker formulations

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
481
for as-of-now consequences are to be found in Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus, (cf.
[Pozzi, 1978, 69])).
‘If the antecedent must be conceded, so must be the consequent.’
⇒A
A ⇒B
⇒B
‘If the consequent must be denied, so must be the antecedent.’
⇒¬B
A ⇒B
⇒¬A
‘From the contradictory of the consequent the contradictory of the antecedent
follows’: contraposition [Ockham, 1974, 728].
A ⇒B
¬B ⇒¬A
‘Whatever follows from the contradictory of the antecedent follows from the
contradictory of the consequent.’
A ⇒B
¬A ⇒C
¬B ⇒C
‘Whatever is antecedent to the contradictory of the consequent is antecedent to
the contradictory of the antecedent.’
A ⇒B
C ⇒¬B
C ⇒¬A
‘From a conjunction to one of its parts constitutes a valid consequence.’
A&B ⇒A
‘From one of its parts to the whole disjunction constitutes a valid consequence.’
A ⇒A ∨B
‘From a conditional with its antecedent to its consequent constitutes a valid
consequence.’50
A →B, A ⇒B
Now something perhaps slightly surprising for the modern reader: rules for
consequences that do not obtain (which I represent by ‘̸⇒’). In modern systems
50Here again it is clear that our authors were very much aware of the distinction between
conditionals and consequences.

482
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
this is not necessary, as the enumeration of the valid rules is supposed to be
exhaustive, and all patterns not falling within the patters of these valid rules are
immediately false. The medievals, however, did not have the ambition of presenting
exhaustive lists of valid rules, and therefore it was also useful for them to know
how to identify when a consequence did not hold.51
‘Whatever does not follow from the antecedent, does not follow from the con-
sequent.’
A ⇒B
C ̸⇒B
C ̸⇒A
‘Of that from which the consequent does not follow, the antecedent does not
follow from it either’
A ⇒B
C ̸⇒B
C ̸⇒A
They also discussed rules involving modalities, such as ‘from the necessary the
contingent does not follow’ or ‘from the possible does not follow the impossible’.52
The rules presented here are those that can be easily formulated within a purely
propositional framework. However, as already noted, treatises on consequences
contained many more rules which, by contrast, were based on properties of terms;
these rules were just as signiﬁcant, and the only reason why they are not treated
here is because their formulation presupposes concepts from elsewhere (such as
supposition theory — for reasons of space, it is not possible to go into such de-
tails here). But just to illustrate the point, here is an example, Burley’s Rule 7
in the shorter version of De Puritate: ‘an inference holds from a distributed su-
perior to an inferior taken either with distribution or without distribution. But
an inference does not hold from an inferior to a superior with distribution. For
it follows: ‘Every animal runs, therefore, every man runs, and a man runs’, but
not conversely.’ [Burley, 2000, 16] ‘Animal’ is the superior of ‘man’, and from
a proposition where ‘animal’ is distributed follow both the proposition where its
inferior ‘man’ is distributed and the one where it is not.
3.5
Dissident voices
So far I have treated medieval theories of consequences as if they were homogeneous
with respect to the rules of consequence accepted by their authors. While not all
authors stated all these rules explicitly, they are in any case all compatible with
one another. However, a small minority rejected two of the very basic rules of
the notion of consequence presented so far, namely the ex impossibili and the
ad necessarium rules. These rules follow naturally from the modal deﬁnition of
51In the same manner that theories of fallacies — that is, theories of apparently sound but in
fact unsound reasoning — were crucial for medieval logicians.
52More on modal inferences can be found in the chapter on modalities in the present volume.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
483
consequence (if it is seen as a suﬃcient condition), such that those who accept this
deﬁnition as a suﬃcient condition for a consequence must admit the validity of
these two principles. This is so because the deﬁnition states that B is a consequence
of A if it is impossible for A to be true while B is false. If it is impossible for A to
be true tout court, the deﬁnition is satisﬁed a fortiori for any B whatsoever, and
hence ex impossibili must hold. Similarly, if ex impossibili holds, by contraposition
ad necessarium must hold.
But in several periods of the history of logic, some have seen these two principles
as highly counterintuitive53 given that, according to them, propositions that are
otherwise not related by meaning or logic in any way whatsoever are in a relation
of consequence with one another: ‘It is raining and it is not raining, therefore I am
God’; ‘The cat is on the mat, therefore it is raining or it is not raining’ would be
examples of such counterintuitive inferences/consequences. On a semantic level,
to deny the validity of these rules amounts to denying the modal deﬁnition of
consequence as a suﬃcient criterion; on a syntactic level, modiﬁcations of the usual
rules are required, since the derivation of any proposition from a contradiction can
be obtained very easily from the usual rules of deduction (as shown by the famous
Lewis argument, which may have been known already in the 12th century — cf.
[Martin, 1986]): from P and not-P follows P; from P follows P or Q; but from P
and not-P not-P also follows, and hence by disjunctive syllogism Q follows from
P or Q and not-P. To block this derivation, at least one of these otherwise very
natural rules must be discarded.
Prior to the 14th century, illustrious logicians such as Abelard and Kilwardby
had already restricted their notion of consequence, not accepting the modal deﬁni-
tion as a suﬃcient condition. Abelard, for example, required that the consequent
be contained in the antecedent for a consequence to hold [Abelard, 1956, 253]. (As
we have seen, 14th century logicians also made use of this criterion, but to deﬁne a
sub-class of the valid consequences and not as a necessary and suﬃcient condition
for all consequences.) With this move, ex impossibili and ad necessarium no longer
hold.
In the 14th century we know of at least a few dissident voices. A certain Nicolaus
Drukken of Dacia, writing in Paris in the 1340s, proposes a revision of the suﬃcient
criterion of a valid consequence such that the ‘total signiﬁcate of the consequent
be signiﬁed by the antecedent’ [Read, 1993, 241]54 in his commentary to the Prior
Analytics (edited by [Green-Pedersen, 1981]).
Richard Ferrybridge also rejects
ex impossibili and ad necessarium if the impossible and necessary propositions
in question are impertinent to the other proposition in a putative consequence,
precisely because he requires there to be a relation of relevance between antecedent
and consequent (cf. [Pozzi, 1978, 60]. In practice, what such authors seem to be
proposing is that the criterion of containment of the consequent in the antecedent
be used as a necessary and suﬃcient criterion for all valid consequences, and not
53Recent examples of such dissident voices are paraconsistent and relevant logicians.
54Read [1993, 251] mentions that the early 16th century philosopher Domingo de Soto was
another dissident voice with respect to ex impossibili.

484
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
only for the formal ones as in the case of Billinham, Strode et al.
3.6
Conclusion
14th century theories of consequences are without a doubt among the most im-
portant and most interesting developments in the logic of this century. Given the
considerable length of the literature on the topic, and for reasons of space, here I
had to focus on its main lines of development and disregard some of the secondary
points and details that are nonetheless very interesting (such as Buridan’s refor-
mulation of the modal criterion in order to accommodate his token-commitment,
Pseudo-Scotus analysis of a Curryian paradox, among others). Indeed, my purpose
here was to give the reader a hint of the richness of this material, and encourage
him/her to go look further.
4
OBLIGATIONS
4.1
Introduction
Obligationes were a regimented form of oral disputation. It consisted of two par-
ticipants, Opponent and Respondent; Opponent would put forward several propo-
sitions, and Respondent was expected to accept, deny or doubt them on the basis
of speciﬁc rules (the discussion of which will constitute the core of this chapter).
It is without a doubt one of the main logical genres of the 14th century: virtually
every important author of this period wrote on obligationes. However, contrary to
what is sometimes thought, obligationes are not a 14th century invention; inter-
esting 13th century Parisian treatises55 indicate that the genre was already quite
developed at that time and place.56 Even though the contents of these treatises
fall out of the scope of the present investigation, it may be added that the theory
of obligationes presented in them is very much in the spirit of the earliest of such
treatises in the 14th century, namely Burley, indicating thus that Burley was most
probably inspired by this early tradition.
With obligationes we have a phenomenon that falls in the context of the OX-
INAT theory (cf. [Ebbesen, 1985]) previously mentioned, according to which the
typical logical topics of the 14th century were re-introduced into Paris as British
import, after a period of modistic predominance. Indeed, after these 13th century
Parisian treatises on obligationes, few continental treatises on the topic were writ-
ten in the 14th century; the fact is that in the 14th century, obligationes was an
overwhelmingly British genre.
The 14th century British tradition on obligations begins, as already said, with
Burley; his treatise seems to have been written in the very ﬁrst years of the century
(cf. [Braakhuis, 1993, 323]). Then, for at least two decades, nothing much seems
55Such as those edited in [Braakhuis, 1998] and [de Rijk, 1974; 1975; 1976].
56See also [Martin, 2001] for very early (12th century) developments in the genre.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
485
to have been written on obligationes (in any case, we have not been able to un-
earth anything so far) until Kilvington’s Sophismata [Kretzmann and Kretzmann,
1990], written before 1325), which contains interesting remarks on the genre (with-
out actually presenting a full-ﬂedged theory of obligationes — see [Spade, 1982]).
Kilvington’s remarks seem to have sparked renewed interest in the genre, espe-
cially among the Oxford Calculators, who then began to write proliﬁcally on obli-
gationes. The ﬁrst of such treatises is Roger Swyneshed’s treatise (∼= 1330-1335)
[Spade, 1977], which indeed inaugurated a new trend within the genre, later to be
named ‘nova responsio’ by Robert Fland in his treatise (∼= 1350) [Spade, 1980c],
as opposed to the ‘antiqua responsio’ represented by the Burley-style form of obli-
gationes. As for what exactly diﬀerentiates the antiqua from the nova responsio,
this will be the core of the conceptual discussion to follow.57
Other British authors having written on obligationes in the decades following
Swyneshed’s treatises are (for the dates, I follow [Braakhuis, 1993]): Billingham
(∼= 1350s) (cf. [Ashworth, 1985]), Martin of Alnwick (∼= 1350s), Richard Brinkley
(∼= 1350s) [Spade, 1995], Ralph Strode (∼= 1360s) (cf. [Ashworth, 1993; Dutilh
Novaes, 2006b]), an anonymous Mertonian [Kretzmann and Stump, 1985], and
Richard Lavenham (later 14th century) [Spade, 1978]. Paul of Venice, who for
our present purposes is counted among ‘British’ authors, has a long treatise on
obligationes in the Logica Magna [Paul of Venice, 1988], which is heavily inspired
by Strode’s treatise, and a short chapter on obligationes in the Logica Parva.
Among these, Martin of Alnwick, Richard Lavenham and, to some extent, Robert
Fland, follow Swyneshed’s nova responsio style of obligationes; the others remain
by and large faithful to the antiqua responsio.
As for continental authors, currently we only know of six continental authors
who wrote obligationes treatises: Albert of Saxony (∼= 1350) (cf. Braakhuis 1993),
John of Wesel (∼= 1350) (cf. [Spade, 1996b]), William Buser (∼= 1355) (cf. [Keep-
kens, 1982; 1993; Pozzi, 1990] for the edited text), Marsilius of Inghen (just before
1360) (cf. [Keepkens, 1982, 159-160]), John of Holland (just after 1360) (cf. John
of Holland 1985) and Peter of Candia (very end of 14th century) (cf. [Keepkens,
1982, 154]). The last two are thought to have studied in England, and therefore
their exposure to the British obligationes literature can be taken for granted. As
for the others: it has been argued convincingly that Albert of Saxony would have
drawn signiﬁcantly from Billingham’s treatise, or in any case from the chapter on
obligationes of the general manual Logica oxoniensis, which in turn is basically
Billingham’s text (see [Ashworth, 1985; Braakhuis, 1993]). As for William Buser
and Marsilius of Inghen, it is certain that they would have had direct contact with
Albert and his obligationes; Buser’s text resembles Albert’s in many aspects, and
Marsilius’s text in turn is visibly inspired by his master Buser’s text (cf. [Keep-
57Notice though that these terms, ‘antiqui’ and ‘moderni’, are not consistently used by our
authors; given the natural ﬂow of generations, those that are referred to as ‘moderni’ often end
up being referred to as ‘antiqui’ in subsequent generations (cf. [Spade, 1980, 42; Pozzi, 1990, 17,
fn. 25]). In any case, in this section I will use the term ‘nova responsio’ to refer to Swyneshed’s
style and ‘antiqua responsio’ to refer to Burley’s style of obligationes.

486
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
kens, 1982]). Concerning John of Wesel (in Paris in 1344-1353), of whom little is
known, Spade argues that his text shows ‘a close familiarity with the writings of
Oxford logicians from the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century, in particular with
those of Roger Swyneshed’ [Spade, 1996b, 3]). Therefore, we may conclude that
all these continental obligationes treatises of the 14th century were directly or
indirectly under the inﬂuence of the British literature on the topic.
And as for the antiqua responsio vs. nova responsio dichotomy with respect
to the continental authors, it seems that, while all of them were aware of the
innovations introduced by Swyneshed, they were mostly critical of them. John of
Wesel seems to be sympathetic to some of Swyneshed’s views (cf. [Spade, 1996b]);
as for Peter of Candia, in spite of the attribution by some commentators of the
qualiﬁcation of modernus to him (cf. [Keepkens, 1982, 154]), from the description
of his text in [Pozzi, 1990, 55] it becomes apparent that he was not a modernus
with respect to relevance, which is the main aspect considered here.58
All the
other authors clearly side with the antiqui.
In what follows, I concentrate on Burley’s and Swyneshed’s treatises, as they
are the most famous treatises of each of these trends (it is in fact a condensed
version of [Dutilh Novaes, 2005a; 2006a]). Moreover, Burley’s treatise has received
a partial translation into English [Burley, 1988], and it seems reasonable to focus
on a text that can be consulted also by those who do not read Latin.
In his treatise, Burley describes six kinds of obligationes: petitio, sit verum,
institutio, positio, depositio and dubitatio. Swyneshed, by contrast, recognizes
only three kinds: positio, depositio and impositio (Burley’s institutio). We shall
be focusing on positio, as it is arguably the most representative form of obligationes
(even though impositio in particular also oﬀers the opportunity for very interesting
semantic analysis).
4.2
Burley’s treatise: antiqua responsio
The disputation has two participants, Opponent and Respondent. In the case of
positio, the game starts with Opponent putting forward a proposition, called posi-
tum, which Respondent must accept as true for the sake of the disputation, unless
it is self-contradictory. Opponent then puts forward propositions (the proposita),
one at a time, which Respondent must either concede, deny or doubt, on the basis
of inferential relations with the previously accepted or denied propositions, or, in
case there is none (and these are called irrelevant or impertinent propositions59),
on the basis of the common knowledge shared by those who are present. Respon-
dent loses the disputation if he concedes a contradictory set of propositions. At
58Unfortunately, this text is still only available in the form of manuscripts (S. Brown is re-
portedly preparing and edition of the text), and I have not had the occasion of examining the
manuscripts myself.
59Throughout the text, I use the terms ‘relevant’ and ‘pertinent’ as synonymous, as much as
‘irrelevant’ and ‘impertinent’. The terms in Latin are ‘pertinens’ and ‘impertinens’, but they are
often translated as ‘relevant’ and ‘irrelevant’, for example in the translation of Burley’s treatise.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
487
the end, Opponent and possibly a jury determine whether Respondent responded
well, in particular if he was able to keep consistency
I have argued elsewhere that Burley’s obligationes is best seen as a logical game
of consistency maintenance (cf. [Dutilh Novaes, 2005a]): here, I will follow this
basic idea.60
4.2.1
Reconstruction
DEFINITION 1 (The obligational game (Burley)).
Ob = ⟨KC, Φ, Γ, R(φn)⟩
KC is the common state of knowledge of those present at the disputation com-
plemented by the casus. The casus was usually a proposition to be assumed as
true, often to make it explicit that the positum was false. An example from Bur-
ley: “Suppose Socrates is black, and suppose it is posited that Socrates is white”
[Burley, 1988, 378]. That Socrates is black is the casus, a proposition which all
the participants are to assume to be true, and ‘Socrates is white’ is the positum.61
KC is an incomplete model, since some propositions do not receive a truth-
value in it: for some propositions, it is not known whether they are true or false,
although it may be known that they are true-or-false (these must be doubted —
cf. [Burley, 1988, 381]). So, the state of common knowledge is a state of imperfect
information: it includes all information that is considered common sense (that
the pope is in Rome, all religious dogmas etc.), plus information circumstantially
available, due to the pragmatics of the disputational situation, plus the casus.
Φ is an ordered set of propositions. It is the set of propositions actually put
forward by O(pponent) during an obligation. Each element of Φ is denoted by
‘φn’, where n is a natural number, denoting the place of φnin the ordering. The
order corresponds to the order in which the propositions are put forward by O,
starting with φ0 (the positum).
Γ is an ordered set of sets of propositions, which are formed by R(espondent)’s
responses to the various φn. How each Γn is formed will be explained below. The
ordering is such that Γn is contained in Γn+1.
R(φn) is a function from propositions to the values 1, 0, and ?. This function
corresponds to the rules R must apply to respond to each proposition φn.
1
corresponds to his accepting φn, 0 to his denying φn and ? to his doubting φn (cf.
[Burley, 1988, 381]).
The procedural rules of the game are quite simple: O ﬁrst puts forward a
proposition. If R accepts it (according to R(φ0) deﬁned below), then the game
60In fact, even though the game-interpretation is to my mind the one that best explains the
data, how to interpret obligationes in terms of modern concepts is still an on-going issue. Other
proposals have been put forward, such as obligationes as a logic of counterfactuals, obligationes
as thought-experiments, obligationes as belief-revision, among others. I have discussed each of
these proposals in [Dutilh Novaes, 2007, 3.2].
61For more on the notion of casus, see [Yrj¨onsuuri, 1993].

488
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
begins. Then O puts forward a further proposition, R responds to it according to
R(φn), and this procedure is repeated until the end of the game.
The logical rules of the game are deﬁned by R(φn), in the following way:
DEFINITION 2 (Rules for positum).
R(φ0) = 0 iﬀφ0 ⊩62⊥
R(φ0) = 1 iﬀφ0 ̸⊩⊥
The rule deﬁning the response that R should give to φ0 (the positum — [Burley,
1988, 378]) has interesting consequences for the idea that obligationes are games of
consistency maintenance. If R is obliged to accept at the beginning a proposition
that entails a contradiction — for example, any paradoxical proposition such as
Liar sentences and the like — then there is no possible winning strategy for R.
He cannot maintain the consistency of a set of propositions that, from the outset,
contains a contradictory paradoxical proposition. So the rules of the game stipu-
late that there always be a winning strategy for R, starting from this restriction
upon the positum. Burley expresses this clause by saying that it must be in the
Respondent’s power to satisfy the requirement (of not falling in contradiction) (cf.
[Burley, 1988, 376]).
DEFINITION 3 (Rules for proposita).
R(ϕn) = 1 iﬀ
 Γn−1 ⊩φn, or
Γn−1 ̸⊩φn, Γn−1 ̸⊩¬φn and Kc63 ⊩φn
R(φn) = 0 iﬀ

Γn−1 ⊩¬φn, or
Γn−1 ̸⊩φn, Γn−1 ̸⊩¬φn and KC ⊩¬φn
R(φ)n) =? iﬀΓn−1 ̸⊩φn, Γn−1 ̸⊩¬φn, KC ̸⊩φn, KC ̸⊩¬φn
That is, if Respondent fails to recognize inferential relations and if he does not
respond to a proposition according to its truth-value within common knowledge,
then he responds badly (cf. [Burley, 1988, 381]).
Formation of Γn.
The diﬀerent sets of propositions accepted by R (i.e., the
propositions to which R has committed himself in the disputation) are formed in
the following way:
DEFINITION 4 (The sets Γn).
If R(φn) = 1, then Γn = Γn−1 ∪{φn}
62I use the forcing turnstyle ⊩throughout to express the relation of semantic implication
between propositions.
That is, within obligationes the relation of ‘following’ is not deﬁned
syntactically or proof-theoretically, but rather semantically.
63In case of KC, it is not so much that KC semantically implies a proposition φn, but rather
that φn is contained in KC (therefore a fortiori KC also implies φn). For the sake of simplicity,
I use only the forcing turnstyle.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
489
If R(φn) = 0, then Γn = Γn−1 ∪{¬φn}
If R(φn) =?, then Γn = Γn−1
In particular, if R(φ0) = 1, then Γ0= {φ0}. If R(φ0) = 0 or R(φ0) = ?, then
there is no disputation.
These rules mirror closely the clauses of Lindenba¨um’s lemma, the main idea
being that propositions are gradually added to a set of propositions (which starts
with one single element, the positum), while consistency is also maintained. There
is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence, though, in that, in the construction of a maximal consis-
tent set according to this lemma, if the set Γn = Γn−1∪{φn} formed is inconsistent,
then the construction simply continues with Γn−1, i.e. the so far largest consistent
set built. In the obligationes framework, however, if an inconsistent set is con-
structed, the procedure comes to a halt, as respondent has responded badly and
thus lost the game.
Outcome. O wins the game if it is recognized that Γn ⊩⊥; that is, if R has con-
ceded a contradictory set of propositions. R wins the game if, when the disputation
is declared to be over, it is recognized that Γn ̸⊩⊥. The clause about the stipulated
time concerns the feasibility of the game: the construction of maximal-consistent
sets of propositions is not feasible within human time, therefore respondent is
expected to keep consistency only during a certain time.
4.2.2
Can respondent always win?
The rules of the obligational game as deﬁned guarantee that there always be a
winning strategy for R. This is due to two facts: one is a stipulated rule of the
game and the other is a general logical fact.64
The relevant rule of the game
is: a paradoxical positum should not be accepted. As stated by Burley himself,
the point of this clause is exactly to guarantee that R stands a chance to win.
Therefore, R always starts out with a consistent set of propositions.
It is a general principle of logic (and also the backbone of Lindenba¨um’s lemma)
that any consistent set of propositions can always be consistently expanded with
one of the propositions of a contradictory pair φnand ¬φn.65 R starts with a con-
sistent set of propositions (the set composed of the positum); so at each move, there
is in theory at least one ‘correct’ way of answering, i.e. either accepting or denying
φn, which maintains the set of accepted and denied propositions consistent.
4.2.3
Why does R not always win?
But why does the game remain hard?
It is a fact that R often makes wrong
choices and is not able to keep consistency, even though to keep consistency is
64This fact has already been noticed by J. Ashworth:
‘a certain kind of consistency was
guaranteed for any correctly-handled disputation’ (Ashworth 1981, 177).
65Proof: Assume that Γ is consistent. Assume that Γ ∪{φ} is inconsistent. Thus Γ ⊩¬φ (1).
Moreover, assume that Γ ∪{¬φ} is inconsistent. Thus Γ ⊩φ (2). From (1) and (2), it follows
that Γ ⊩φ&¬φ, that is, that Γ is inconsistent, which contradicts the original assumption. The
principle to be proven follows by contraposition.

490
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
always logically possible. If it were easy, then it would not fulﬁll its pedagogical
and theoretical purposes. It seems that obligationes remains a diﬃcult kind of dis-
putation for Respondent for two basic reasons: Opponent makes use of intricacies
(for example, the phenomena of synonymy and equivocation) of the language be-
ing used in the game to set up ‘traps’ for Respondent; and the game is essentially
dynamic.
4.2.3.1
Intricacies of the language
To have a glimpse of the kind of trap
Opponent may set up, take a look at the hypothetical disputation represented in
the scheme below (it is not an example taken from Burley’s text, but it is very
much in the spirit of the examples he proposes).
Proposition
Calculation
Verdict
Outcome
φ0:
You are in
Rome or you are
the Pope.
Possible
Conceded
Γ0 = {φ0}
φ1:
You are in
Rome.
Γ0 ̸⊩φ1, Γ0 ̸⊩¬φ1,
KC ⊩¬φ1
Denied
Γ1 = {φ0, ¬φ1}
φ2:
The pope is
in Rome.
Γ1 ̸⊩φ2, Γ1 ̸⊩¬φ2,
KC ⊩φ2
Conceded
Γ2 = {φ0, ¬φ1,φ2}
φ3:
You are the
pope.
Γ2 ⊩φ3 (from φ0
and ¬φ1)
Conceded
Γ3 = {φ0, ¬φ1,φ2,φ3}
φ4:
You are in
Rome.
Γ3 ⊩φ4 (from φ2
and φ3)
Conceded
Γ4 ={φ0,¬φ1,φ2,φ3,φ4}
But φ1 = φ4. So Γ4 ⊩⊥.
Where did it go wrong? Why was Respondent forced both to accept and to deny
φ4 in the last round? Could he have avoided the trap? A closer inspection of the
propositions shows that φ2 is not irrelevant (i.e., with no inferential connections to
the previously accepted or denied propositions), as it might seem at ﬁrst. Actually,
from φ0 and ¬φ1,¬φ2 follows: by negating the ﬁrst disjunct, Respondent has
already (logically) committed himself to the second disjunct, that he is the Pope.
So if he is not in Rome and he is the Pope, then the Pope cannot be in Rome. So
Respondent should deny φ2, instead of accepting it as a proposition irrelevant and
true according to KC, even though he has not explicitly granted φ3 yet.
4.2.3.2
The game is dynamic
Another source of diﬃculty in this game is
its dynamic character. This is related to the inclusion of irrelevant propositions,
accepted or denied according to KC, in the set of propositions that will be used
to respond to each propositum still to come. Burley himself attracts the reader’s
attention to this point: “One must pay special attention to the order [of the
propositions].” [Burley, 1988, 385]

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
491
This means that, during a disputation, it may occur that (1) φ0, φ1 ⊩φ2 but
φ0, φ2 ̸⊩φ1, or else that (2) φ0, φ1 ⊩φ2 but φ0 ̸⊩φ2.
(1) is related to the
obvious asymmetric character of implication, and (2) to the dynamic nature of the
game, what I shall call the ‘expansion of the informational base Γn’. This can be
best seen if we examine what happens in terms of models during an obligational
disputation. For that, here are some deﬁnitions:
DEFINITION 5. Γn= Informational base, i.e. a set of propositions.
DEFINITION 6. UM n = The class of models that satisfy informational base Γn.
DEFINITION 7. UM φn = The class of models that satisfy φn.
DEFINITION 8. UM n ⊩Γn iﬀUM n ⊩P for all P in Γn.
A model that satisﬁes a set of propositions satisﬁes each of them (i.e. they are all
true in this model). It is clear that, if Γk= {φn}∪{φm}, then UM k= UM φn
∩
UM φm. So, the set of models that satisfy Γk is the intersection of all the models
that satisfy each of the elements of Γk. Similarly, if Γn+1 = Γn ∪{φn+1}, then
UM n+1 = UM n
∩UM φn+1.
THEOREM 9. If Γn ⊩φn+1 and φn+1 is accepted, then UMn = UMn+1.
Assume that, at a given state of the game, Γn ⊩φn+1. According to R(φn), φn+1
must be accepted, forming Γn+1 = Γn ∪{φn+1}. Now take UM n, that is, all the
models that satisfy Γn. According to the model-theoretic deﬁnition of implication
(i.e. P ⊩Q iﬀQ is true in all models where P is true, that is, if UM P ⊩Q),
if UM n ⊩Γn and Γn ⊩φn+1, then UM n ⊩φn+1. Since Γn+1 = Γn ∪{φn+1},
UM n ⊩Γn and UM n ⊩φn+1, then UM n ⊩Γn+1. It is deﬁned that UM n+1 ⊩
Γn+1, so UM n = UM n+1.
Thus, all the models that satisfy Γn also satisfy Γn+1.
THEOREM 10. If Γn ̸⊩φn+1 and φn+1 is accepted, then UMn+1 ⊂UMn.
Assume that, at a given state of the game, Γn ̸⊩φn+1 and KC ⊩φn+1. Accord-
ing to R(φn), φn+1 must be accepted, forming Γn+1 = Γn∪{φn+1}. UM n+1 is
the intersection of UM n and UM φn+1 (UM n+1 = UM n
∩UM φn+1). But
because Γn ̸⊩φn+1, UM n ̸⊩φn+1. So not all models that satisfy Γnalso satisfy
φn+1. Since Γn+1 = Γn∪{φn+1}, not all models that satisfy Γn also satisfy Γn+1.
Thus UM n+1 ̸= UM n. But Γn is contained in Γn+1, so all models that satisfy
Γn+1 also satisfy Γn – UM n+1 ⊩Γn. So UM n+1
⊂UM n.
Thus, all the models that satisfy Γn+1 are contained in the set of models that
satisfy Γn.
Summing up; in an obligational game, UM n+1 ⊆UM n. If Γn ⊩φn+1, Γn ⊩
¬φn+1 or R(φn+1) = ?, then UM n = UM n+1, otherwise UM n+1
⊂UM n.
That is, the larger the informational base, the fewer models will satisfy it, and
greater the constraints on the choice between ¬φn and φn will be (a model-theoretic
way to see why a larger base implies that more propositions will have inferential
relations with Γn).
Clearly, the base is expanded (and therefore the range of
models that satisfy it is reduced) only by inclusion of ‘irrelevant’ propositions.

492
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
4.3
Swyneshed’s treatise: nova responsio
The main modiﬁcation introduced by Swyneshed concerns the notion of pertinent
propositions: while for Burley whether a propositum was pertinent was deter-
mined on the basis of all the previously accepted or denied propositions (positum
and proposita), for Swyneshed being pertinent is a property of a propositum only
with respect to the positum.66
There were other aspects that were thought to
characterize the nova responsio (such as the treatment of pragmatically inconsis-
tent posita — cf. [Braakhuis, 1993, 334]), but here I focus on the redeﬁnition
of the notion of pertinent proposition and its corollaries (such as the behavior of
conjunctions and disjunctions). As a result, while the main purpose of Burley’s
obligationes seems to be consistency maintenance, Swyneshed’s obligationes seems
to have as its main purpose that of inference recognition.67
4.3.1
Reconstruction
In Swyneshed’s version, an obligation corresponds to the following quadruple:
DEFINITION 11 (The obligational game (Swyneshed)).
Ob = ⟨Σ, Φ, I, R(φn)⟩
Σ is an ordered set of states of knowledge Sn. This is the ﬁrst signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence with respect to Burley’s theory. In the latter, all irrelevant propositions were
supposed to be answered to according to the static state of common knowledge
KC. Changes in things during the time of the disputation were not supposed to
aﬀect the response to (irrelevant) propositions, all the more since, once proposed
and accepted or denied, these were included in the ‘informational base’ of the dis-
putation. So, in Burley’s theory, if, at a certain point, ‘You are seated’ is proposed
to Respondent, and Respondent is indeed seated, he should accept the proposi-
tion. Subsequently, if Respondent stands up, and Opponent proposes ‘You are not
seated’, Respondent should deny it, because it contradicts the set of previously
accepted/denied propositions, and this logical relation has priority over reality.
In Swyneshed’s theory, since irrelevant accepted or denied propositions are not
included in the informational base of the disputation, as we shall see, the state of
knowledge is not required to be static. So the response to irrelevant propositions,
according to Swyneshed’s theory, should take into account the changes in things
during the time of the disputation; therefore, what we have is a series of states
of knowledge Sn, ordered according to their index n, which is a natural number
and corresponds to the stage of the disputation in which the state of common
66This fact has been acknowledged by virtually all studies on medieval obligationes, including
[Stump, 1981; Ashworth, 1981; 1993; Spade, 1982b; Keﬀer, 2001] etc.
67In fact, from this point of view, the disagreement between Burley and Swyneshed may be
viewed as a disagreement concerning the very purpose of obligationes, in terms of a student’s
training.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
493
knowledge must come into play.68
Φ is an ordered set of propositions φn.
(No diﬀerence here with respect to
Burley’s theory.)
I is an ordered set of responses ιn = [φn; γ].
Responses are ordered pairs
of propositions and one of the replies 1, 0 or ?, corresponding to Respondent’s
response to proposition φn.69 Note that the index of the response need not be (but
usually is) the same as the index of the proposition, in case the same proposition
is proposed twice, in diﬀerent moments of the disputation (in which case, for
convenience, it is referred to by the index it received in the ﬁrst time it was
proposed).
R(φ) is a function from propositions to the values 1, 0, and ?. This deﬁnition
is identical to the deﬁnition of R(φ) in the reconstruction of Burley’s theory, but
the function corresponding to the rules of Swyneshed’s theory is diﬀerent from
the function of Burley’s theory, since the rules are diﬀerent.
4.3.2
Rules of the game
Swyneshed’s procedural rules are quite simple (cf. [Spade, 1978, §72]70), and
identical to the procedural rules in Burley’s theory. By contrast, the logical rules
are quite diﬀerent from Burley’s.
Swyneshed’s analysis of the requirements for a proposition to be accepted as
obligatum (that is, the ﬁrst proposition proposed, named positum in the speciﬁc
case of positio) is less extensive than Burley’s.
Since an inconsistent positum
gives no chance of success for Respondent, Burley clearly says that the positum
mustn’t be inconsistent. Swyneshed does not follow the same line of argumenta-
tion; rather, he requires that a proposition be contingent to be a positum (§ 73).
This excludes impossible propositions — always false — and necessary propositions
– always true –, and that is a necessary requirement in view of the ex impossibili
sequitur quodlibet rule: if Swyneshed’s rules of obligationes are indeed meant to
test Respondent’s abilities to recognize inferential relations, an impossible obli-
gatum would make the game trivial (any proposition would follow).71 Moreover,
from a necessary proposition only necessary propositions follow, so if the obligatum
is a necessary proposition, then the game becomes that of recognizing necessary
68But why use states of knowledge, and not simply states of aﬀairs? Because (both in Burley’s
and Swyneshed’s theories) proposed propositions whose truth-value is unknown to the partic-
ipants of the disputation — for example, ‘The Pope is sitting now’ — should be accordingly
doubted. We are dealing here with imperfect states of information.
69In my reconstruction of Burley’s theory, responses were not primitive constituents of the
game. But to express some of the interesting properties of Swyneshed’s theory, the notion of
responses is crucial.
70All references are to Spade’s edition of the text. For the relevant passages and translations,
see [Dutilh Novaes, 2006a].
71Notice that Swyneshed’s reason for excluding impossible propositions is diﬀerent from Bur-
ley’s: trivialization of the game versus absence of a winning strategy for Respondent. Keﬀer
[2001] has also remarked that impossible (and true) posita have a Trivialisierungseﬀekt on both
kinds of responses, but for diﬀerent reasons (pp. 158-164).

494
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
propositions, i.e. a deviation from its (presumed) original purpose.
So the rule for accepting the positum could be formulated as:
DEFINITION 12 (Rules for positum).
R(φ0) = 0 iﬀ, for all moments n and m, and for one reply γ, ιn = [φ0; γ] and ιm
= [φ0; γ].
R(φ0) = 1 iﬀ, for some moments n and m, for two replies γ and κ, γ
̸= κ, ιn =
[φ0; γ] and ιm = [φ0; κ]
Moreover, Swyneshed also gives instructions as to how to respond to the positum
if it is posited again during the disputation (§§ 62-64). A positum which is re-
proposed must be accepted, except in the cases of a positum which is inconsistent
with the very act of positing, admitting and responding in an obligational context.
The paradigmatic example is ‘Nothing is posited to you’: it should be accepted
as a positum, according to the rules above, but if it is again proposed during the
same disputation, it should be responded to as if it were an irrelevant proposition.
In this case, it would be denied, even though it had been accepted as positum.
Burley, by contrast, would probably not accept such pragmatically inconsistent
propositions as posita in the ﬁrst place (cf. [Braakhuis, 1993, 330]).
In eﬀect, from the start, the set of all propositions (not only those put forward
during the disputation, which constitute Φ) is divided in two sub-sets, namely
the set of propositions that are pertinent with respect to the positum φ0(§4, §7)
— denoted ∆φ0- and the set of those that are impertinent with respect to the
positum φ0(§8) – denoted Πφ0. The sets are deﬁned as follows:
DEFINITION 13 (Pertinent and impertinent propositions).
∆φ0 = {φnε∆φ0 : φ0 ⊩φn or φ0 ⊩¬φn}
Πφ0 = {φnεΠφ0 : φ0 ̸⊩φn and φ0 ̸⊩¬φn}
Assuming that any proposition implies itself, the positum φ0 belongs to ∆φ0.72
E. Stump [1981, 167] mentions the possibility of allowing for a second positum at
any given moment of the disputation. In this case, obviously the two sets deﬁned
above must be revised, and the set of pertinent propositions is deﬁned by the
conjunction of the two (or more) posita.
4.3.2.1
Proposita
The rules for responding to proposed propositions other
than the positum are better formulated in two steps, ﬁrst for the pertinent, then
for the impertinent propositions, as this division is in fact the decisive aspect of
the game in Swyneshed’s version.
DEFINITION 14 (Rules for proposita).
72Except for the posita that are (pragmatically) repugnant to the act of positing (cf. §64);
according to Swyneshed, those should be answered to as if they were impertinent, thus belonging
to Πφ0.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
495
Pertinent propositions (φn ̸=
φ0, φn ε
∆φ0) ((§24, §67, §68).
R(φn) = 1 iﬀφ0 ⊩φn73R(φn) = 0 iﬀφ0 ⊩¬φn
Impertinent propositions (φn εΠφ0) (§ 26, §69)
R(φn) = 1 iﬀSn ⊩φn
R(φn) = 0 iﬀSn ⊩¬φn
R(φn) =? iﬀSn ̸⊩φn and Sn ̸⊩¬φn
The game ends when Opponent says ‘Cedat tempus obligationis’.
From
Swyneshed’s text, it seems that Opponent can say it at any time; he will say
it when Respondent has made a bad move, and thus has lost the game (§98), but
he may say it when he is satisﬁed with the performance of Respondent, who until
then has not made any bad move, and therefore has ‘won’ the game.
4.3.3
Logical properties of nova responsio
Now I discuss some of the noteworthy logical properties of nova responsio, in par-
ticular those related to the reformulation of the notion of impertinent proposition.
4.3.3.1
The game is fully determined
It is clear that, in Swyneshed’s obli-
gationes, only one answer to each proposition is correct at a given point. That this
is the case is seen from the fact that R(φ) really is a function, assigning exactly
one value to each argument of its domain (the class of propositions). Swyneshed’s
rules divide the class of propositions in two sets and in ﬁve sub-sets: pertinent
propositions — 1. repugnant to or 2. following from the positum — and imper-
tinent propositions — 3. which are known to be true; 4. which are known to be
false; 5. which are not known to be true and are not known to be false. These ﬁve
subsets exhaust the class of propositions, and for each of them there is a deﬁned
correct answer. In other words, at each stage of the disputation, Respondent’s
moves are totally determined by the rules of the game.
4.3.3.2
The game is not dynamic
The game played according to the an-
tiqua responsio is, as we have seen, dynamic in that the player must take into
account all previous moves of the game in their corresponding order.
By con-
trast, the game played according to the nova responsio is ‘static’: the response to
a proposition is entirely independent of the order in which it occurs during the
disputation, as it is entirely independent of all previous moves except for the ﬁrst
one, relative to the positum. In eﬀect, for any proposition φn, at any round n of
the disputation, the reply to φn is always the same.
73Clearly, if the introduction of extra posita occurs, then this deﬁnition holds for the set of
posita, instead of for the ﬁrst positum only.

496
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
Indeed, the great diﬀerence with respect to Burley’s theory is that, in Swyneshed’s
version, the game is totally determined already once the positum has been posited,
from the start, and not only at each move. All Respondent has to do is to de-
termine correctly the two sets of pertinent and impertinent propositions from the
outset. Opponent can do nothing to interfere with Respondent’s winning strategy,
as it simply consists of assessing correctly the presence or absence of relations of
inference between the positum and the proposed propositions. Once more, the
fact that the game is totally determined from the moment the positum is posited
means that the order of presentation of the proposita does not matter, and that
Opponent cannot do much to make the game harder for Respondent. Moreover,
it also means that, during a disputation, only one response is the right one for a
given proposition, independent of when it is proposed. In Burley’s game, it can
happen that a proposition is ﬁrst doubted (as impertinent and unknown) and then
accepted or denied (it has become pertinent in the meantime, given the expansion
of the informational base). This cannot occur in Swyneshed’s game.
There is one exception to this rule: impertinent propositions whose truth-values
change during the course of the disputation. Swyneshed says that these proposi-
tions should be responded to according to the state of knowledge of that moment,
and therefore the response depends on the moment in which they are proposed
— but not on the moment within the disputation in which they are proposed
(their relative position with respect to other propositions). Similarly, if such propo-
sitions are proposed twice during the same disputation, they may receive diﬀerent
answers, as a consequence of a change in things.
4.3.3.3
Two disputations with the same positum will prompt the same
answers, except for variations in things.
This is perhaps the main motiva-
tion for the changes introduced by Swyneshed to the obligational game. In many
passages, he emphasizes that the response to impertinent propositions must vary
only in virtue of changes in things, and not in virtue of other previously ac-
cepted/denied propositions. Indeed, the crucial element of a winning strategy for
Swyneshed’s game is the accurate deﬁnition of the two sets of propositions relative
to a positum (the set of pertinent propositions and the set of impertinent ones).
So, if the game is deﬁned once the positum is posited, then any two disputations
with the same positum have the same winning strategy, that is, the establish-
ment of the same two sets of pertinent and impertinent propositions. Since the
propositions proposed by Opponent may vary, two disputations with the same
positum will not necessarily be identical. But any given proposition proposed in
both disputations will belong to the same set of propositions — either pertinent
or impertinent — in both cases.
Again, the dissimilarity with Burley’s theory is striking. In Burley’s version
of the game, the positum was merely one of the propositions constituting the set
according to which a proposed proposition was to be evaluated as pertinent or
impertinent (the others being the previously accepted/denied propositions). So in
two disputations having in common only the positum, a given proposition proposed

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
497
in each of them was most likely bound to receive diﬀerent responses.
4.3.3.4
Responses do not follow the usual properties of the connectives
One of the most discussed aspects of the nova responsio, not only among medieval
authors but also among modern commentators, is the non-observance of the usual
behavior of some sentential connectives, in particular conjunction and disjunction.
This is a corollary of the basic rules of the nova responsio, and it was thought to
be one of its distinctive traits.74
Apparently, these two corollaries have struck some of Swyneshed’s contempo-
raries as very odd, and were for them suﬃcient reason to reject the nova responsio
as a whole. However, in careful inspection, it is only in appearance that two of
the most fundamental laws of logic — the truth-conditions of conjunction and dis-
junction – are being challenged. As Yrj¨onsuuri suggested [Yrj¨onsuuri, 1993, 317],
it is as if the bookkeeping of a Swyneshed-style obligational disputation featured
two columns of responses, one for pertinent propositions and one for impertinent
propositions. Within each column, the laws for conjunction and disjunction are
in eﬀect observed. So, if in one of the columns two propositions have been cor-
rectly granted, then their conjunction will also be granted (disregarding changes
in things); similarly, if in one of the columns a disjunction has been correctly
granted, then at least one of the disjuncts will have to be granted too.75 This
fact only emphasizes the idea that the crucial aspect of playing a Swyneshed-style
game of obligationes is the correct division between pertinent and impertinent
propositions.76
4.3.3.5
The set of accepted/denied propositions can be inconsistent
Perhaps the most surprising feature of Swyneshed’s obligationes is the little im-
portance attributed to consistency maintenance. That is, if one takes the set of
all propositions granted and the contradictories of all propositions denied during
a disputation, this set is very likely to be inconsistent, and this feature struck
many medieval authors as very odd (cf. [Keﬀer, 2001, pp. 164-166]). There are
two main sources of inconsistency in Swyneshed’s game: the most obvious one
is the case of impertinent propositions which receive two diﬀerent responses in
diﬀerent times of the disputation (in particular if they are ﬁrst denied and then
accepted or vice-versa), in virtue of changes that occurred in things during the
time of the disputation. The second source of inconsistency for this set is the
behavior of conjunctions and disjunctions explained above (§101).
But again, the bookkeeping metaphor implies that this corollary is not as awk-
ward as it seems. Since the set of propositions that follow from a proposition is
74Cf. [Stump, 1981, 139]. For formal proofs of these properties, see [Dutilh Novaes, 2006a;
Keﬀer, 2001, pp.176-178].
75For simplicity, I am disregarding impertinent propositions whose truth-value may change
during the disputation.
76For a discussion of the apparent conﬂict arising in cases in which a conjunction or disjunction
is formed by propositions taken from both columns, see [Dutilh Novaes, 2006a].

498
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
always consistent, the column for pertinent propositions will always be consistent,
— for each contradictory pair of propositions (A, ¬A), a given proposition B im-
plies either one of them (B →A), or the other (B →¬A), or none, but never both
contradictory propositions. Therefore, it will never be the case that a positum
forces the granting of a proposition A and its contradictory ¬A. By contrast, the
column for impertinent propositions can very well be inconsistent, in the case of
impertinent propositions whose truth-value changes during the disputation and
which are in fact proposed twice (and receive diﬀerent responses).
These considerations indicate thus that Swyneshed has no interest whatsoever
in the set formed by all granted and denied propositions during a disputation, and
that he is perfectly willing to accept its inconsistency. For Burley, on the contrary,
the ultimate goal of the obligationes game is to keep this very set consistent. So
the diﬀerences between the two versions of the game do not only regard the rules
governing them, but seemingly the very motivations for playing the game.
4.4
Conclusion
This section is not intended to give a comprehensive picture of the obligationes
genre; the topic is much more complex than what can be covered in just a few
pages. My goal was just to outline some of the interesting logical properties of
this genre so as to inspire the reader to go look for further literature on the
topic. Some signiﬁcant aspects of obligationes had to be left out for reasons of
space; in particular, the sophisms (i.e. logical puzzles) treated in the obligationes
literature are particularly interesting, especially those related to self-reference and
to pragmatic inconsistencies — see for example [Ashworth, 1993; Pironet, 2001]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was funded by a grant from the Niels Stensen Foundation (The
Netherlands). I also thank Stephen Read and Sara Uckelman for comments on
earlier drafts of the chapter.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Andrews, forthcoming] R. Andrews. Thomas Maulevelt’s Denial of Substance. In L. Newton,
ed., Medieval Commentaries on Aristotle’s Categories. Leiden: Brill.
[Ashworth, 1978] E.J. Ashworth. Multiple quantiﬁcation and the use of special quantiﬁers in
early sixteenth century logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 19, 599–613, 1978.
[Ashworth, 1981] E.J. Ashworth. The Problems of Relevance and Order in Obligational Dispu-
tations: Some Late Fourteenth Century Views. Medioevo 7, 175-193, 1981.
[Ashworth, 1985] E.J. Ashworth. English Obligationes Texts after Roger Swyneshed: The Tracts
beginning ‘Obligatio est quaedam ars’. In P. Osmund Lewry O.P. (ed.), The Rise of British
Logic. Papers in Mediaeval Studies 7. Toronto, Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 309-
333, 1985.
[Ashworth, 1991] E.J. Ashworth. ‘Nulla propositio est distinguenda’: La notion d’equivocatio
chez Albert de Saxe. In J. Biard (ed.), Itin´eraires d’Albert de Saxe. Paris, Vrin, 149-160,
1991.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
499
[Ashworth, 1993] E.J. Ashworth. Ralph Strode on Inconsistency in Obligational Disputations.
In K. Jacobi (ed.), Argumentationstheorie, Leiden, Brill, 363-386, 1993.
[Ashworth, 2006] E.J. Ashworth. Logic teaching at the University of Prague around 1400 A.D.
In History of Universities XXI(1), 211-221, 2006.
[Ashworth and Spade, 1992] E.J. Ashworth and P.V. Spade. Logic in Late Medieval Oxford, in
The History of the University of Oxford, J.I. Catto & R. Evans eds., vol. 2, pp. 35–64. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1992.
[Berger, 1991] H. Berger. Simple supposition in William of Ockham, John Buridan and Albert
of Saxony. In J. Biard, Itineraires d’Albert de Saxe. Paris, Vrin, 31-43, 1991.
[Biard, 2004] J. Biard. Albert of Saxony. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2004. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/albert-saxony/
[Bird, 1961] O. Bird. Topic and consequence in Ockham’s logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic 2, 65-78, 1961.
[Boh, 1982] I. Boh. Consequences. In N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg (eds.) 1982, 300-314.
[Boh, 2000] I. Boh. Four Phases of Medieval Epistemic Logic. Theoria 56(2), 129-144, 2000.
[Boh, 2001] I. Boh. Consequences and Rules of Consequence in the Post-Ockham Period. In M.
Yrj¨onsuuri (ed.) 2001, 147-181.
[Bohener, 1951] Ph. Bohener. Does Ockham know of material implication? Franciscan Studies,
vol. 11, 203-230, 1951.
[Bos, 1985] E.P. Bos. Introduction. In [John of Holland, 1985].
[Bos and Read, 2001] E.P Bos and S. Read 2001. Concepts : the treatises of Thomas of Cleves
and Paul of Gelria :
an edition of the texts with a systematic introduction. Louvain-la-
Neuve : ´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie, 2001.
[Bos, 2004] E.P. Bos. Logica modernorum in Prague about 1400 : the sophistria disputation
’Quoniam quatuor’ (ms Cracow, Jagiellonian Library 686, ﬀ. 1ra-79rb), with a partial re-
construction of Thomas of Cleve’s Logica. Leiden, Brill, 2004.
[Braakhuis, 1982] H.A.H Braakhuis. Paul of Pergula’s commentary on the Sophismata of
William of Heytesbury. In [Maier`u, 1982, 343-357].
[Braakhuis, 1993] H.A.G. Braakhuis. Albert of Saxony’s De obligationibus. In [Jacobi, 1993,
323-342].
[Braakhuis, 1998] H.A.G. Braakhuis. Obligations in Early Thirteenth Century Paris: the Obli-
gationes of Nicholas of Paris (?)
(Ms Paris, B.N. lat., 11.412). Vivarium 36(2), 152-233,
1982.
[Cesalli, 2001] L. Cesalli. Le r´ealisme propositionnel de Walter Burley, Archives d’histoire doc-
trinale et litt´eraire du Moyen Age, 68, 155-221, 2001.
[Cesalli, 2005] L. Cesalli. Le pan-propositionnalisme de Jean Wyclif. Vivarium 43(1), 124-155,
2005.
[Conti, 2004] A. Conti. Walter Burley. In E. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2004.
Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/burley/
[Conti, 2005a] A. Conti. John Wyclif. In E. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005.
Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/wyclif/
[Conti, 2005b] A. Conti. Paul of Venice. In E. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005.
Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/paul-venice/
[Courtenay, 1982] W. Courtenay. The early stages in the introduction of Oxford logic into Italy.
In [Maier`u (ed.), 1982, 13-32].
[Courtenay, 1984] W. Courtenay. The reception of Ockham’s thought at the University of Paris.
In Z. Kaluza and P. Vignaux (eds.). Preuve et Raisons at l’Universite de Paris: Logique,
Ontologie et Theologie au XIVe siecle. Paris, Vrin, 43-64, 1984.
[Courtenay, 1987] W. Courtenay. The reception fo Ockham’s thought in Fourteenth-Century
England. In A. Hudson and M. Wilks (eds.), From Ockham to Wyclif. Oxford, Blackwell,
89-107, 1987.
[Courtenay, 1999] W. Courtenay. The academic and intellectual worlds of Ockham’. In [Spade,
1999, 17-30].
[Courtenay, 1999] W. Courtenay. Parisian Scholars in the Early Fourteenth Century. Cam-
bridge, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[Courtenay, 2004] W. Courtenay. The University of Paris at the time of Jean Buridan and Nicole
Oresme. Vivarium 42-1, 3-17, 2004.

500
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
[de Rijk, 1974] L.M. de Rijk. Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of Obligations I.
Vivarium 12, 94-123, 1974.
[de Rijk, 1982] L.M. de Rijk. Semantics in Richard Billingham and Johannes Venator. In
[Maier`u, 1982, pp. 167-184].
[de Rijk, 1997] L.M. de Rijk. Introduction. In [Giraldus Odonis, 1997].
[Del Punta, 1982] F. Del Punta. La “Logica” di R. Feribrigge nella tradizione manoscritta ital-
iana. In [Maier`u, 1982, 53-85].
[Dutilh Novaes, 2005a] C. Dutilh Novaes. Medieval Obligationes as Logical Games of Consis-
tency Maintenance. Synthese 145(3), 371-395, 2005.
[Dutilh Novaes, 2005b] C. Dutilh Novaes. Buridan’s consequentia: consequence and inference
within a token-based semantics. History and Philosophy of Logic 26(4), 2005, 277-297, 2005.
[Dutilh Novaes, 2006a] C. Dutilh Novaes. Roger Swyneshed’s obligationes: a logical game of
inference recognition?. Synthese 151(1), 127-155, 2006.
[Dutilh Novaes, 2006b] C. Dutilh Novaes. Ralph Strode’s obligationes: the return of consistency
and the epistemic turn. Vivarium 44 (2-3), 338-374, 2006.
[Dutilh Novaes, 2007] C. Dutilh Novaes. Formalizing Medieval Logic: Supposition, Consequen-
tia and Obligationes. Berlin, Springer, 2007.
[Ebbesen, 1985] S. Ebbesen. OXYNAT: A Theory about the Origins of British Logic. In P.
Osmund Lewry O.P. (ed.), The Rise of British Logic. Papers in Mediaeval Studies 7. Toronto,
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1-17, 1985.
[Etchemendy, 1990] J. Etchemendy. The Concept of Logical Consequence. Cambridge, Harvard
University Press, 1990.
[Friedman, 2002] R. Friedman. Peter Auriol. In E. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2002. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/auriol/
[Green-Pedersen, 1981] N.J. Green-Pedersen. Walter Burley, De consequentiis and the origin
of the theory of consequence. In H.A.G. Braakhuis, C.H. Kneepkens & L.M. de Rijk (eds.),
English Logic and Semantics. Nijmegen, Ingenium, 279-301, 1981.
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N.J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages.
M¨unchen, Philosophia Verlag, 1984.
[Green-Pedersen, 1985] N.J. Green-Pedersen. Early British Treatises on Consequences. In P.
Osmund Lewry O.P. (ed.), The Rise of British Logic. Papers in Mediaeval Studies 7. Toronto,
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 285-307, 1985.
[Hoenen, 2002] M. Hoenen. Marsilius of Inghen. In E. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
phy, 2002. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/marsilius-inghen/
[Jacobi, 1993] K. Jacobi, ed. Argumentationstheorie. Leiden, Brill, 1993.
[Jung, 2001] E. Jung. Richard Kilvington. In E. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2001. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kilvington/
[Kann, 1993] C. Kann. Die Eigenschaften der Termini. Eine Untersuchung zur ‘Perutilis Log-
ica’ des Alberts von Sachsen. Leiden, Brill, 1993.
[Karger, 1993] E. Karger. A theory of immediate inferences contained in Buridan’s logic, in
[Jacobi, 1993, 407–429].
[Kaufmann, 1993] M. Kaufmann. Nochmals; Ockhams consequentiae und die materiale implika-
tion. In [Jacobi, 1993, 223-232].
[Keﬀer, 2001] H. Keﬀer. De Obligationibus — Rekonstruktion einer sp¨atmittelalterlichen Dis-
putationstheorie. Leiden, Brill, 2001.
[King, 2001] P. King. Medieval proof theory. In [Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001, 117-145].
[King, 2005] J. King. Anaphora. E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005.
Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/anaphora/
[Karger, 1993] E. Karger. A theory of immediate inferences contained in Buridan’s logic, in K.
Jacobi (ed.), Argumentationstheorie. Leiden, Brill, 407-429, 1993.
[Klima, 2001] G. Klima. Introduction. In [Buridan, 2001].
[Klima and Sandu, 1990] G. Klima and G. Sandu. Numerical quantiﬁers in game-theoretical
semantics. Theoria 56, 173-192, 1990.
[Kneepkens, 1982] C.H. Kneepkens. The mysterious Buser again: William Buser of Heusden
and the ‘Obligationes’ tract ‘Ob rogatum’. In [Maier`u, 1982, 147-166].
[Kneepkens, 1993] C.H. Kneepkens. William Buser of Heusden’s Obligationes – Treatise “ab
rogatum”. In [Jacobi, 1993, 343-362].
[Kretzmann et al., 1982] N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny and J. Pinborg, eds. The Cambridge History
of Later Medieval Philosophy. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
501
[de Libera, 1982] A. de Libera. The Oxford and Paris Traditions in Logic. In [Kretzmann et al.,
1982, 147-187].
[Longeway, 2003] J. Longeway. William Heytesbury. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, 2003. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/heytesbury/.
[Lorenz, 1996] S. Lorenz. Thomas Manlefelt (Maulefelt), Zu Leben und Werk. In M. Kintzinger,
S. Lorenz & M. Walter, Schule und Sch¨uler in Mittelalter. Beitrage zur europ¨aischen Bil-
dungsgeschichte des 9. bis 15. Jahrhunderts. Beihefte zum Archiv fur Kulturgeschichte 42,
Cologne, 145-164, 1996.
[Markowski, 1984] M. Markowski. L’inﬂuence de Jean Buridan sur les Universit´es d’Europe
Centrale. In In Z. Kaluza and P. Vignaux (eds.). Preuve et Raisons at l’Universite de Paris:
Logique, Ontologie et Theologie au XIVe siecle. Paris, Vrin, 149-163, 1984
[Maier`u, 1982] A. Maier`u, ed. English Logic in Italy in the 14 th and 15 th Centuries. Napoli,
Bibliopolis, 1982.
[Maier`u, 1982a] A. Maier`u. Le Ms. Oxford, Canonici Misc. 219 et la ‘Logica’ de Strode. In
[Maier`u, 1982, 88-110].
[Martin, 1986] C.J. Martin. William’s Machine. The Journal of Philosophy 83 (10), 564-572,
1986.
[Martin, 1992] C.J. Martin. Obligations and Liars. In S. Read (ed), Sophisms in Medieval Logic
and Grammar, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 357-381, 1992.
[Martin, 2001] C.J. Martin. Obligations and Liars. In [Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001, 63-94]. (Revised version
of Martin 1992)
[Martin, 2004] C.J. Martin, Distinction formelle et cons´equence naturelle: de Duns Scot `a Ock-
ham. In O. Boulnois, E. Karger, J.-L. Solere & G. Sontag (eds.), Duns Scot `a Paris 1302-2002:
Actes du colloque de Paris, 2-4 Septembre 2002. Turnhout, Brepols, 2004.
[Mates, 1973] B. Mates. Stoic Logic. University of California Press, 1973.
[Parsons, 1997] T. Parsons. Supposition as Quantiﬁcation versus Supposition as Global Quan-
tiﬁcational Eﬀect. Topoi 16, 41-63, 1997.
[Pironet, 2001] F. Pironet. The relations between insolubles and obligations in medieval dispu-
tations. In [Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001, 95-114].
[Pironet, 2005] F. Pironet. Sophismata. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2005. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/sophismata/
[Pozzi, 1978] L. Pozzi. Le consequentiae nella logica medievale. Padova, Liviana, 1978.
[Pozzi, 1990] L. Pozzi. La coerenza logica nella teoria medioevale delle obbligazioni :
con
l’edizione del trattato ’Obligationes’ di Guglielmo Buser. Parma, Zara 1990.
[Read, 1991a] S. Read. Thomas of Cleves and Collective Supposition. Vivarium 29(1), 50-84,
1991.
[Read, 1991b] S. Read. Descensus copulatim: Albert of Saxony vs. Thomas Maulfelt. In J.
Biard, Itineraires d’Albert de Saxe. Paris, Vrin, 71-85, 1991.
[Read, 1993] S. Read. Formal and material consequence, disjunctive syllogism and Gamma. In
[Jacobi, 1993, 233-262].
[Read, 1999] S. Read. How is material supposition possible?. Medieval Philosophy and Theology
8(1), 1-20, 1999.
[Read, 2001] S. Read. Self-reference and validity revisited. In [Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001, 183-196].
[Read, 2006a] S. Read. Medieval Theories of Properties of Terms. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2006. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
medieval-terms/
[Read, 2006b] S. Read. Symmetry and Paradox. History and Philosophy of Logic 27 (4), 307-
318, 2006.
[Schnabel, 2001] C. Schnabel. regory of Rimini. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, 2001. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/gregory-rimini/
[Schupp, 1993] F. Schupp. Zur Textrekonstruktion der formalen und materialen Folgerung in
der kritischen Ockham-Ausgabe. In [Jacobi, 1993, 213-221].
[Shank, 1988] M. Shank. “Unless you believe, you shall not understand” – Logic, University
and Society in Late Medieval Vienna. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1988.
[Shapiro, 1998] S. Shapiro. Logical consequence: models and modality. In M. Schirn (ed.), Phi-
losophy of Mathematics Today. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 131-156, 1998.
[Spade, 1980] P.V. Spade. Richard Lavenham and the Cambridge Logic, in Studies in Medieval
Linguistic Thought Dedicated to Geoﬀrey L. Bursill-Hall on the Occasion of His Sixtieth
Birthday on 15 May 1980 (= Historiographia Linguistica 7 (1980)), 241–247.

502
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
[Spade, 1980b] P.V. Spade. Synonymy and Equivocation in Ockham’s Mental Language. Journal
of the History of Philosophy 18, 9-22, 1980.
[Spade, 1982] P.V Spade. Three Theories of Obligationes: Burley, Klivington and Swyneshed
on Counterfactual Reasoning. History and Philosophy of Logic 3, 1-32, 1982.
[Spade, 1996] P.V. Spade. Thoughts, Words and Things. Available at www.pwspade.com.
[Spade, 1999] P.V. Spade, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Ockham. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1999.
[Spade, 2000] P.V. Spade. Why don’t mediaeval logicians ever tell us what they’re doing? Or,
What is this, a conspiracy? Available at www.pvspade.com/Logic/docs/Conspiracy.pdf
[Spade, 2000b] P.V. Spade. Introduction to Walter Burley, On the Purity of the Art of Logic,
2000.
[Spade, 2003] P.V. Spade. Obligationes. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2003. Available at \underline{http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/obligationes/}
[Spade, 2006] P.V. Spade. William of Ockham. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy, 2006. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ockham/
[Spade and Menn, 2003] P.V. Spade and S. Menn. A note on the title of Walter Burley’s On the
purity of the Art of Logic, 2003. Available at http://pvspade.com/Logic/docs/BurlNote.pdf
[Stump, 1981] E. Stump. Roger Swyneshed’s Theory of Obligations, Medioevo 7, 135-174, 1981.
[Stump, 1982] E. Stump. Topics: their development and absorption into consequences. In Kret-
zmann, Kenny and Pinborg (eds.) 1982, 273-299, 1982.
[Sylla, 1982] 100 E.D. Sylla. The Oxford Calculators. In [Kretzmann et al, 1982, 540-563].
[Thijssen, 2001] H. Thijssen. Nicholas of Autrecourt. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, 2001. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/autrecourt/
[Tachau, 1982] K. Tachau. The response to Ockham’s and Aureol’s epistemology (1320-1340).
In [Maier`u, 1982, 185-218].
[Yrj¨onsuuri, 1993] M. Yrj¨onsuuri. The Role of Casus in some Fourteenth Century Treatises on
Sophismata and Obligations. In [Jacobi, 1993, 301-322].
[Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001] M. Yrj¨onsuuri, ed. Medieval Formal Logic. Dordrecht, Kluwer, 2001.
[Zupko, 2002a] J. Zupko. John Buridan. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2002. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/buridan/
[Zupko, 2002b] J. Zupko. Thomas of Erfurt. In E. Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy, 2002. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/erfurt/
[Zupko, 2003] J. Zupko. John Buridan:
portrait of a fourteenth-century arts master. Notre
Dame, University of Notre Dame Press, 2003.
Original Texts
[Albert of Saxony, 1988] Albert of Saxony. Perutilis logica, in the incunabular edition of Venice
1522, with a Spanish translation by A. Mu˜noz Garc´ıa, Univ. del Zulia, Maracaibo, 1988.
[Albert of Saxony, 2002] Albert of Saxony. Twenty-Five Disputed Questions on Logic. A critical
edition of the Questiones circa logicam by Michael J. Fitzgerald, Brill, Leiden-Boston-K¨oln,
2002.
[Blaise of Parme, 2001] Blaise of Parme. Questiones super Tractatus Logice Magistri Petri His-
pani. Ed. J. Biard and G. Federici Vescovini. Paris, Vrin, 2001.
[de Rijk, 1975] L.M. de Rijk. Another Speculum Puerorum attibuted to Richard Billingham –
Introduction and Text, Medioevo, 1, 203-236, 1975.
[Grialdus Odonis, 1997] Giraldus Odonis. Opera Philosophica. Vol. 1: Logica. Critical edition
by L.M. de Rijk. Leiden, Brill, 1997.
[Green, 1963] R. Green. The logical Treatise ‘De Obligationibus’: An Introduction with Critical
Texts of William of Sherwood (?) and Walter Burley. PhD dissertation, Universit´e Catholique
de Louvain, 1963.
[John Buridan, 1976] John Buridan. Iohannis Buridani tractatus de consequentiis. (ed. H. Hu-
bien). Series Philosophes M´edievaux Vol. XVI. Louvain, Universit´e de Louvain, 1976.
[John Buridan, 1998] John Buridan. Summulae de Suppositionibus (ed. R. van der Lecq). Ni-
jmegen, Ingenium, 1998.

Logic in the 14th Century after Ockham
503
[John Buridan, 2001] John Buridan. Summulae de Dialectica (transl. G. Klima). New Haven,
Yale University Press, 2001.
[John Dorp, 1499] John Dorp. Perutile Compendium totius logicae Joannis Buridani cum
preclarissima solertissimi viri Joannis Dorp expositione. Venice, 1499. Reprinted Frank-
furt/Main, Minerva, 1965.
[John of Holland, 1985] John of Holland. Four Tracts on Logic (ed. E.P. Bos). Nijmegen, Inge-
nium, 1985.
[John of St. Thomas, 1955] John of St. Thomas. Outlines of Formal Logic (transl. Francis C.
Wade). Milwaukee, Marquette University Press, 1955.
[John Wyclif, 1893-99] John Wyclif. Tractatus de logica (ed. M.H. Dziewicki). London Publ. for
the Wiclif Society, 1893–99.
[Johannes Venator, 1999] Johannes Venator. Logica (ed. L.M. de Rijk). Suttgart, Frommann-
Holzboog (Grammatica speculative 6), 1999.
[Kretzmann and Stump, 1985] N. Kretzmann and E. Stump. The Anonymous De arte obliga-
toria in Merton College MS. 306. In E. P Bos (ed.), Medieval Semantics and Metaphysics:
Studies Dedicated to L. M. de Rijk, Ph.D., Professor of Ancient and Mediaeval Philoso-
phy at the University of Leiden on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday. Nijmegen, Ingenium
(”Artistarium,” Supplementa, vol. 2.), 239–280, 1985.
[Maier´u, 1970] A. Maier´u. Lo Speculum Puerorum sive Terminus est in quem di Riccardo
Billingham, Studi Medievali Serie Terza, X (Sup.), 297-398, 1970.
[Marsilius of Inghen, 1983] Marsilius of Inghen. Treatises on the Properties of Terms (ed. and
transl. E.P. Bos). Dordrecht, Reidel, 1983.
[Paul of Venice, 1984] Paul of Venice. Logica Parva (English translation by. A. Perreiah). Mu-
nich, Philosophia Verlag, 1984.
[Paul of Venice, 2002] Paul of Venice. Logica Parva (Latin text; ed. A. Perreiah). Leiden, Brill,
2002.
[Paul of Venice, 1971] Paul of Venice. Logica Magna: Tractatus de suppositionibus, A. R. Per-
reiah, ed. & trans., (St Bonaventure, N. Y.: The Franciscan Institute, 1971).
[Paul of Venice, 1979] Paul of Venice. - Part I, Fascicule 1: Tractatus de terminis, N. Kretz-
mann, ed. & trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979).
[Paul of Venice, 1981] Paul of Venice. Part I, Fascicule 7: Tractatus de scire et dubitare, Pa-
tricia Clarke, ed. & trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
[Paul of Venice, 1991] Paul of Venice. -art I, Fascicule 8: Tractatus de necessitate et contin-
gentia futurorum, C. J. F. Williams, ed. & trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991).
[Paul of Venice, 1990a] Paul of Venice. Part II, Fascicule 3:
Tractatus de hypotheticis, A.
Broadie, ed. & trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).
[Paul of Venice, 1990b] Paul of Venice. Part II, Fascicule 4: Capitula de conditionali et de
rationali, G. E. Hughes, ed. & trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990).
[Paul of Venice, 1978] Paul of Venice. Part II, Fascicule 6: Tractatus de veritate et falsistate
propositionis et tractatus de signiﬁcato propositionis, F. del Punta ed., M. McCord Adams,
trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978).
[Paul of Venice, 1988] Paul of Venice. Part II, Fascicule 8: Tractatus de obligationibus, E. J.
Ashworth, ed. & trans., (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988).
[Peter Abelard, 1956] Peter Abelard. Dialectica (ed. L.M. de Rijk). Assen, van Gorcum, 1956.
[Peter of Ailly, 1980] Peter of Ailly. Concepts and Insolubles: An Annotated Translation (transl.
P.V. Spade). Synthese Historical Library, vol. 19. Dordrecht, Reidel, 1980.
[Pseudo-Scotus, 2001] Pseudo-Scotus. Questions on Aristotle’s Prior Analytics: Question X. In
Yrj¨onsuuri 2001 (ed.), 225-234, 2001.
[Richard Billingham, 2003] Richard Billingham. Richard Billingham “De Consequentiis” mit
Toledo-Kommentar (ed. S. Weber). Amsterdam, B.R. Gr¨uner, 2003.
[Richard Brinkley, 1987] Richard Brinkley. Theory of Sentential Reference. Edited and trans-
lated with introduction and notes by M. J. Fitzgerald. Leiden, Brill, 1987.
[Richard Kilvington, 1990a] Richard Kilvington. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington. Edited
by N. Kretzmann and B. Ensign Kretzmann. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1990.
[Richard Kilvington, 1990b] Richard Kilvington. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington. Intro-
duction, translation and commentary by N. Kretzmann and B. Ensign Kretzmann. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[Schupp, 1988] F. Schupp. Logical problems of the medieval theory of consequences, with the
edition of the Liber consequentiarum. Naples, Bibliopolis, 1988.

504
Catarina Dutilh Novaes
[Seaton, 1973] W. Seaton. An Edition and Translation of the “Tractatus de Consequentiis” by
Ralph Strode, Fourteenth Century Logician and Friend of Geoﬀrey Chaucer. Ph.D. Disserta-
tion, University of California, Berkeley, 1973.
[Spade, 1974] P.V. Spade. Five Logical Tracts by Richard Lavenham, in J. Reginald O’Donnell,
ed., Essays in Honour of Anton Charles Pegis, Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval
Studies, 1974, pp. 70–124.
[Spade, 1976] P.V. Spade. Robert Fland’s Consequentiae: An Edition,” Mediaeval Studies 38
(1976), pp. 54–84.
[Spade, 1977] P.V. Spade. Roger Swyneshed’s Obligationes: Edition and Comments. Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du Moyen Age (1977). (Paris, 1978), 243-285.
[Spade, 1978] P.V. Spade. Richard Lavenham’s Obligationes: Edition and Comments, Rivista
critica di storia della ﬁlosoﬁa 33 (1978), pp. 225–242.
[Spade, 1980] P.V. Spade. Robert Fland’s Obligationes:
An Edition, Mediaeval Studies 42
(1980), pp. 41–60.
[Spade, 1995] P.V. Spade. Richard Brinkley’s Obligationes: A Late Fourteenth Century Trea-
tise on the Logic of Disputation, (Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des
Mittelalters, Neue Folge, Band 43; M¨unster: Aschendorﬀ, 1995). Co-authored with Gordon
A. Wilson
[Spade, 1996] P.V. Spade. Three questions by John of Wesel on obligationes and insolubilia,
1996. Available at http://www.pvspade.com/Logic/docs/wesel.pdf
[Thomas of Cleves, 2001] Thomas of Cleves. Concepts. In [Bos and Read, 2001].
[Trentman, 1977] J. Trentman. Vincent Ferrer’s Tractatus de Suppositionibus – Critical edition
and introduction. Stuttgart, Frommann-holzboog, 1977.
[Walter Burley, 1955] Walter Burley. De Puritate Artis Logicae – Tractatus Longior (ed. Ph.
Boehner). St. Bonaventure, The Franciscan Institute, 1955.
[Walter Burley, 1980] Walter Burley. De Consequentiis (ed. N.J. Green-Pederson). Fransciscan
Studies 40, 102-166, 1980.
[Walter Burley, 1988] Walter Burley. Obligations (selection). In N. Kretzmann & E. Stump
(eds), Logic and the Philosophy of Language. The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philo-
sophical Texts. Cambridge, Cambridge University, 369-412, 1988.
[Walter Burley, 2000] Walter Burley. On the Purity of the Art of Logic – the shorter and the
longer treatises (transl. P.V. Spade). New Haven, Yale University Press. 2000.
[William Heytesbury, 1994] William Heytesbury. Sophismata asinina. Une introduction aux dis-
putes logiques du Moyen Age. Pr´esentation, ´edition, critique et analyse par Fabienne Pironet.
Paris: J. Vrin, 1994.
[William of Ockham, 1974] William of Ockham. Opera Philosophica I. St. Bonaventure, The
Franciscan Institute, 1974.
[William of Ockham, 1993] William of Ockham. Somme de Logique, Iere partie (French transl.
with introduction and notes by J. Biard). TER, Mauvezin (revised 2nd edition), 1993.
[William of Ockham, 1996] William of Ockham. Somme de Logique, IIeme partie (French transl.
with introduction and notes by J. Biard). TER, Mauvezin, 1996.
[William of Ockham, 2003] William of Ockham. Somme de Logique, partie III.1 (French transl.
with introduction and notes by J. Biard, C. Grellard and K. Sang Ong-Van-Cung). TER,
Mauvezin, 2003.
[William of Ockham, 1998] William of Ockham. Summa Logicae Part I (transl. M. Loux). South
Bend, St. Augustine’s Press, 1998.

MEDIEVAL MODAL THEORIES
AND MODAL LOGIC
Simo Knuuttila
The main ancient sources of early medieval logic were Boethius’s translations
of Aristotle’s Categories and De interpretatione and Porphyrius’s introduction
to the Categories (Isagoge), Boethius’s commentaries on these works and on Ci-
cero’s Topica, as well as a number of other logical treatises by Boethius, includ-
ing De syllogismis categoricis, De hypotheticis syllogismis, De topicis diﬀerentiis,
and De divisione.1 Some historians, following medieval usage, call early medieval
logic based on these sources the old logic, as distinct from the new logic the
textual basis of which was extended by twelfth-century recovery of the rest of
Aristotle’s Organon (Prior Analytics, Topics and On Sophistic Refutations, trans-
lated by Boethius, and Posterior Analytics, translated by James of Venice in the
second quarter of the twelfth century).2 The elements of distinctly medieval logic
and semantics had been introduced since the twelfth century in what was called
1The translation of the Categories is edited by L. Minio-Paluello in Aristoteles Latinus I.1-5
(Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1961) and the translation of the De interpretatione by L.
Minio-Paluello in Aristoteles Latinus II.1-2 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1965). The trans-
lation of Porphyry’s Isagoge is edited by L. Minio-Paluello and B.G. Dod in Aristoteles Latinus
I.6-7 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1966). Boethius’s commentary on Aristotle’s Categories
is found in Patrologia Latina (ed. J.-P. Migne), 64, 159-294, De syllogismis categoricis in Pa-
trologia Latina 64, 793-832, In Ciceronis Topica in Patrologia Latina 64, 1039-1169; an English
translation with notes and an introduction by E. Stump, and De diﬀerentiis topicis in Patrologia
Latina 64, 1174-1216; an English translation with notes and essays by E. Stump, Boethius’s De
topicis diﬀerentiis (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1978), Boethius’s In Ciceronis
Topica (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1988). Boethius’s two commentaries on De
interpretatione are edited by C. Meiser (Leipzig: Teubner, 1877-1880), his two commentaries on
Porphyry’s Isagoge by S. Brandt, Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum 48 (Leipzig:
G. Freytag, Vienna: F.Tempsky, 1906), De hypotheticis syllogismis by L. Obertello (Brescia:
Paideia, 1969) and De divisione by J. Magee, with a translation and commentary (Leiden: Brill,
1998). Some other ancient works were also used, such as Apuleius’s Peri hermeneias (ed. C.
Moreschini in Opera III (Stuttgart: Teubner, 1991), Augustine’s Dialectica, trans. with notes
by B.D. Jackson from the text edited by J. Pinborg, Synthese Historical Library 16 (Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1975), and pseudo-Augustinean De decem categoriis, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, in Aristoteles
Latinus I.1-5, 133-75. For the sources of eleventh and twelfth century logic, see J. Marenbon,
‘Medieval Latin Commentaries and Glosses on Aristotelian Logical Texts, Before c. 1150 AD’ in
Ch. Burnett (ed.), Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts (Warburg Institute
Surveys and Texts 23), (London: Warburg Institute, 1993), 77-127, republished and revised in
J. Marenbon, Aristotelian Logic, Platonism, and the Context of Early Medieval Philosophy in
the West, Variorum Collected Studies Series (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000).
2Analytica priora, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, Aristoteles Latinus III.1-4 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee
de Brouwer, 1962), Analytica posteriora, ed. L. Minio-Paluello and B.G. Dod, Aristoteles Lat-
inus IV.1-4 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1968), Topica, ed. L. Minio-Paluello and B.G.
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

506
Simo Knuuttila
modern logic (logica moderna) and some historians call terminist logic because
of its concentration on an analysis of the properties of terms, such as signiﬁca-
tion, supposition, appellation, and ampliation.
This trend was also associated
with the rise of some new genres in logic: the treatises on sophisms, which were
inﬂuenced by Aristotle’s On sophistic refutations, insoluble propositions, syncat-
egorematic terms, and the logic of ‘obligational’ disputations.3 The subjects of
the old and new logic were combined with those of terminist logic in many early
and mid-thirteenth century introductions and compendia, the most inﬂuential of
which proved to be Peter of Spain’s Tractatus.4
Ancient modal theories were extensively dealt with in Boethius’s two commen-
taries on De interpretatione, early medieval authors being acquainted with Aris-
totelian and other ancient modal paradigms through these works before the later
Aristotle reception. The modal themes which were brought into the discussion
by the new logic were mainly the modal syllogistics and the conversion of modal
propositions which formed part of it. Early medieval theories of modality were
also inﬂuenced by Augustine’s ideas about divine power and freedom which de-
viated from the philosophical assumptions of ancient views of possibility. There
were analogous discussions of ancient philosophical theories and their relationship
to divine modalities in Arabic philosophy. Arabic modal theories inﬂuenced Latin
discussions mainly through the translations of the works of Averroes.5
Dod, Aristoteles Latinus V.1-3 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1969), De sophisticis elen-
chis, ed. B.G. Dod, Aristoteles Latinus VI.1-3 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer and Leiden:
Brill, 1975). See also S. Ebbesen, ‘Echoes of the Posterior Analytics in the Twelfth Century’ in
M. Lutz-Bachmann, A. Fidora, P. Antolic (eds.), Erkenntnis und Wissenschaft. Probleme der
Epistemologie in der Philosophie des Mittelalters (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2004), 69-92; id.,
Commentators and Commentaries on Aristotle’s Sophistici Elenchi, Corpus Latinum Commen-
tariorum in Aristotelem Graecorum VII.1-3 (Leiden: Brill, 1981); id., ’Medieval Latin Glosses
and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical texts of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries’ in Ch.
Burnett (ed., 1993), 129-77; N.J. Green-Pedersen, The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle
Ages (Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1984).
3See L.M. de Rijk, Logica Modernorum. A Contribution to the History of Early Terminist
Logic I: On the Twelfth Century Theories of Fallacy, II.1-2: The Origin and Early Development
of the Theory of Supposition, Wijsgerige teksten en studies 6, 16 (Assen: van Gorgum, 1962,
1967); H.A.G. Braakhuis, De 13de eeuwse tractaten over syncategorematische termen. Inlei-
dende studie en uitgave van Nicolaas van Parijs’ Sincategoreumata, 2 vols (Meppel: Krips Repro,
1979); S. Read (ed.), Sophisms in Medieval Logic and Grammar, NijhoﬀInternational Philosophy
Series 48 (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993); M. Yrj¨onsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal Logic: Obligations,
Insolubles and Consequences, The New Synthese Historical Library 49 (Dordrecht:
Kluwer,
2001), P. Spade, The Mediaeval Liar: A Catalogue of the Insolubilia-Literature (Toronto: The
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975); id., Thoughts, Words and Things: An Introduc-
tion to Late Mediaeval Logic and Semantic Theory, http://pvspade.com.Logic/.
4Tractatus called afterwards Summule logicales, ed.
L.M. de Rijk, Wijsgerige teksten en
studies 22 (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1972).
5For medieval Arabic Logic, see T. Street, ‘Arabic Logic’ in J. Woods and D.M. Gabbay
(eds.), Handbook of the History of Logic I (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004), 471-556; for modalities
in Arabic philosophical theology, see T. Kukkonen, ‘Possible Worlds in the Tahˆafut al-falˆasifa.
Al-Ghˆazalˆı on Creation and Contingency’, Journal of the History of Philosophy 38 (2000), 479-
502; A. B¨ack, ‘Avicenna and Averroes: Modality and Theology’ in T. Buchheim, C.H. Kneepkens
and K. Lorenz (eds.), Potentialit¨at und Possibilit¨at. Modalaussagen in der Geschichte der Meta-
physik (Stuttgart and Bad Canstatt: Frommann-Holzbook, 2001), 125-45.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
507
In Section (1) I shall deal with some inﬂuential medieval interpretations of
modal concepts from Boethius to Aquinas. I do not mean that these were shared
by everybody before Aquinas and by nobody after him. Since the eleventh century
recovery of philosophical modal theories, Boethian formulations of central ancient
conceptions had often been considered congenial, but were also qualiﬁed by theo-
logical considerations. These discussions were accompanied by some attempts to
redeﬁne modal concepts using the idea of alternativeness. While all these trends
inﬂuenced mid-thirteenth century discussions, many thinkers were particularly in-
terested in interpreting modal terms in the light of Aristotelian essentialism. This
approach is also found in Robert Kilwardby’s commentary on Aristotle’s Prior
Analytics (c. 1240) which became the standard thirteenth-century textbook for
modal syllogistics. Many thirteenth-century paradigms lost their signiﬁcance in
early fourteenth-century discussions of modal theory, as will be shown in section
(3). Before this, however, I shall discuss the details of earlier logical modal theories
including modal syllogistics in section (2). Section (3) is about fourteenth-century
developments and section (4) about medieval theories of applied modalities.
1
GENERAL SEMANTIC PARADIGMS FROM BOETHIUS TO THOMAS
AQUINAS
1.1
Extensional Interpretation of Modality
In the introductory remarks of his commentary on Chapter 9 of Aristotle’s Peri
hermeneias, Thomas Aquinas classiﬁes various types of propositions on the basis
of their ‘matter’:
In necessary matter all aﬃrmative propositions are determinately true;
this holds for propositions in the future tense as well as in the past
and present tenses; and negative ones are false. In impossible matter
the contrary is the case.
In contingent matter, however, universal
propositions are false and particular propositions are true.
This is
the case in future tense propositions as well as those in the past and
present tenses. In indeﬁnite ones, both are at once true in the future
tense propositions as well as those in the past and present tenses. (In
Peri herm. I.13, 168 [5], trans. Oesterle, with changes)6
The matter of a proposition is associated with the habitude of a predicate to a
subject and is explained as follows:
If the predicate is per se in the subject, it will be said to be a propo-
sition in necessary or natural matter, for example ‘Man is an animal’
6In Aristotelis libros Peri Hermeneias et Posteriorum analyticorum expositio, ed. R. Spiazzi
(Turin: Marietti, 1964); Aristotle: On Interpretation. Commentary by St. Thomas and Cajetan,
J.T. Oesterle, Mediaeval Philosophical Texts in Translation 11 (Milwaukee, Wisc.: Marquette
University Press, 1962).

508
Simo Knuuttila
and ‘Man is risible’. If the predicate is per se repugnant to the subject,
as in a way excluding the notion of it, it is said to be a proposition in
impossible or remote matter, for example ‘Man is an ass’. If the predi-
cate is related to the subject in a way midway between these two, being
neither per se repugnant to the subject nor per se in it, the proposition
is said to be in possible or contingent matter. (In Peri herm. I.13, 166
[3], trans. Oesterle, with changes)
Aquinas employs the terms enunciatio and propositio as synonyms and takes them
to mean statement making sentences. For reasons of simplicity, I shall use the term
‘proposition’ for these and related terms in medieval authors.7
The ancient theory of the matter of propositions was often associated with the
rules of contraries, subcontraries and contradictories in the traditional square of
opposition. While these rules deﬁned how the members of various opposed pairs
were related to truth and falsity, it was thought that they could be further speciﬁed
by classifying propositions on the basis of their matter. An interesting feature
in Aquinas’s account of the contingent matter is that universal aﬃrmative and
negative propositions are false and particular aﬃrmative and negative propositions
are true. Comparing this with what is said about propositions in other matters,
modal diﬀerences can be characterized as corresponding to a descending order
in the frequency of true cases: the predicate is not truly said of any subject in
impossible matter, it is truly said of some subjects in contingent matter and of all
subjects in necessary matter. Aquinas’s formulations are possibly inﬂuenced by
Ammonius’s commentary on Aristotle’s Peri hermenias, translated into Latin by
William of Moerbeke in 1268, but the ancient theory of the matter of propositions
was also known through the works of Boethius and found in many Latin authors
before the translation of Ammonius’s work.8
7For medieval terminology, see G. Nuchelmans, Theories of the Proposition. Ancient and
Medieval Conceptions of the Bearers of Truth and Falsity (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1973).
8Ammonius, Commentaire sur le Peri hermeneias d’Aristote. Traduction de Guillaume de
Moerbeke, ed. G. Verbeke, Corpus Latinum Commentariorum in Aristotelem Graecorum (Lou-
vain: Publications Universitaires, Paris:
B´eatrice-Nauwelaerts, 1961), 168.41-169.57; 175.69-
176.95; 178.27-32; 179.38-43; 180.61-181.82; 199.23-201.63; the Greek text is edited by A. Busse
in Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 4.5 (Berlin, 1897). Boethius was acquainted with the
same doctrine which Ammonius explains, though he does not use the same terminology. Am-
monius’s work was not known to Boethius; see R. Sorabji, ‘The Tree Deterministic Arguments
Opposed by Ammonius’, in Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, trans. D. Blank, with
Boethius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, ﬁrst and second Commentaries, trans. N. Kretz-
mann, with Essays by R. Sorabji, N. Kretzmann and M. Mignucci (London: Duckworth 1998),
3-15. In dealing with the opposition between the pairs of universal and particular propositions,
Boethius distinguishes between predications which are natural (necessary), impossible and nei-
ther natural nor impossible. While universal aﬃrmative and negative contraries of the third case
are both false, the corresponding particular propositions are both true. A universal aﬃrmative
proposition is true in the ﬁrst case and a universal negative proposition in the second case (In
Periherm. II, 177.18-178.8; see also 303.15-306.13; 325.8-15.) Garland the Computist explains
the same classiﬁcation, distinguishing between propositions with natural, remote and impossible
matter (Dialectica, ed. L. M. de Rijk, Wijsgerige teksten en studies 3 (Assen: van Gorcum, 1959),
54.21-30; 82.25-30.) In a late eleventh century logical treatise attributed to William of Cham-

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
509
Some of those who discussed the matter of propositions did not maintain that
both of the particular sub-contraries are true in contingent matter, apparently
thinking that it was somewhat strange to exclude the possibility, say, that at a
certain time no human being is sitting. Those who did not ﬁnd this problematic
could think that universal and particular propositions should basically be under-
stood as making assertions without temporal restrictions (simpliciter) and not
how things are at the moment of utterance (ut nunc).9 In this approach universal
and particular propositions are regarded as statements about the generic features
of the order of being, such as natural kinds and the necessary or contingent prop-
erties of their members. It is possible that a true predication in contingent matter
is universal ut nunc though it is particular simpliciter.
The Thomist version of the doctrine of the matter of propositions is in agreement
with what some historians call the statistical or frequency model for modality in
ancient philosophy. This refers to the habit of associating the notion of necessity
with omnitemporal actuality or actuality in all members of a species, contingency
with actuality at some times or in some members of a species, and impossibility
with the lack of actuality in these respects. Possibilities are dealt with from the
point of view of their actuality in history without an idea of alternative domains.10
This way of thinking, which was known to medieval thinkers through Boethius, was
later employed by many authors, although it never was the only modal paradigm.
Aristotle made use of modal terms in this manner, particularly in the contexts
in which he discussed eternal beings, the natures of things, the types of events,
or generic statements about such things. (See, e.g., Met. IX.8, 1050b6-34; IX.10,
1051b9-30; XII.6, 1071b18-22; XIV.2, 1088b14-25; De caelo I.12, 282a4-25; Phys.
III.4, 203b29-30; De generatione et corruptione II.11, 338a1-3).
According to
the temporal version of this paradigm as it is found in Boethius, what always
is, is by necessity, and what never is, is impossible. Possibility is interpreted as
expressing what is at least sometimes actual (In Periherm. I, 200.20-201.3, II,
peaux by its editor, propositions are divided on the basis of their having natural, contingent or
remote matter; universal opposite propositions are false in contingent matter and particular ones
are true; see Y. Iwakuma, ‘The Introductiones dialecticae secundum Wilgelmum and secundum
G. Paganellum’, Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin, Universit´e de Copenhague 63
(1993), I.3.2 (60); II.1.2-3 (66).
9Aquinas writes in his commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics that predications can
be taken to be ‘as of now’, as dialecticians sometimes do, or simpliciter with respect to all times,
as is done in demonstrations; see In libros Posteriorum Analyticorum expositio, ed. R.M. Spiazzi
(Turin: Marietti, 1964), I, 9.79. Treating a temporally indeﬁnite proposition as true ‘as of now’
is to take it as true at the moment of utterance. See note 11 below.
10The term ‘statistical interpretation of modality’ was introduced into the modern discussion
by Oscar Becker in Untersuchungen ¨uber den Modalkalkul (Meisenheim am Glan: Anton Hain,
1952) and it is sometimes applied in historical studies, particularly by Jaakko Hintikka in Time
and Necessity: Studies in Aristotle’s Theory of Modality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973). The
assumption that all genuine possibilities will be actualized was called the principle of plenitude
by Arthur O. Lovejoy who traced its various forms in the history of Western thought in The
Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1936). For this modal conception in medieval authors, see S. Knuuttila, Modalities in
Medieval Philosophy (London: Routledge, 1993), 51-4, 101-3, 113-14, 119-21, 130-3.

510
Simo Knuuttila
237.1-5). Correspondingly, a property which belongs to all members of a group
is a necessary property. If it is not actual at all in that group, it is impossible;
and if it is exempliﬁed at least in one member, it is possible (In Periherm. I,
120.24-121.16).
Aristotle sometimes treats aﬃrmative sentences as token reﬂexive type sentences
which express how things are at the moment of their utterance and consequently
have changing or unchanging truth-values (e.g., Cat. 5, 4a23-b2). In Metaphysics
IX.10 this is associated with the frequency paradigm as follows:
Regarding contingent things, then, the same opinion or the same propo-
sition comes to be false and true, and it is possible at one time to have
truth and at another time to be in error, but regarding things that can-
not be otherwise opinions are not at one time true and at another false,
the same opinions being always true or always false. (1051b13-17)
When contingency is equated with the change in things and truth-values, it fol-
lows that unchangingly true sentences are necessary and unchangingly false ones
are impossible.11 This seems to be the background of some prima facie obscure
formulations in Boethius:
For it is only those things that can both be and not be that not always
are and not always are not. For if they always were, their status could
not change, and so they would of necessity be; but if they always were
not, it would be necessary that they not be. For of course just as the
very nature of the things, events or states of aﬀairs coming about is
various, so also does the one or the other part of the contradiction have
variable truth. And, indeed, it is always true or false – not, however,
one deﬁnitely, in such a way that this one is determinately true, or
that one – but in either of two ways. And so just as the very status
of things, events or states of aﬀairs is mutable, so also is the truth or
falsity of the propositions dubitable. And indeed it comes about that
as regards some things the one is more often but not always true and
the other is more rarely true although it is not necessary that it be
false. (In Periherm. I, 124.30-125.14; trans. Kretzmann)12
This text is part of Boethius’s discussion of the truth of singular future contingent
propositions. He does not argue that these as such have a changing truth-value,
but assumes that as their objects belong to changeable things which make present
11See also Thomas Aquinas, In duodecim libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis expositio, ed. M.-
R. Cathala and R.M. Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti, 1964), IX.11 (1900): ‘Regarding to those things
which can be compounded and divided one and the same proposition is clearly sometimes true
and sometimes false, for example ‘Socrates is sitting’ is true when he sits and false when he
stands up. And the same holds true of an opinion. But regarding the things which cannot be
otherwise, namely those which are always compounded or always divided, it is not possible that
a same proposition or opinion is sometimes true and sometimes false, but that which is true is
always true and which is false is always false.’
12For the translation, see note 8 above.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
511
tense propositions about their prevalence sometimes true and sometimes false, it
is illuminating to characterize future propositions about the objects of this kind as
variably true or false. Since ‘Socrates is sitting’ is sometimes true and sometimes
false, depending on when it is uttered, the proposition as such is not simply true or
false. It is this indeterminacy which Boethius tries to express in calling temporally
determinate future contingent propositions variably true or false.13
There is a similar shift from temporally deﬁnite cases to temporally indeﬁnite
ones in Boethius’s discussion of Aristotle’s remark that what is necessarily is when
it is (De int. 19a23). Boethius draws a distinction between simple necessity and
temporal or conditional necessity (In Periherm. I, 121.20-122.15; II, 241.1-242.15).
By temporally conditional necessity he means the immutability of a state of aﬀairs
as long as a condition is actual. One example of unconditional (simple) necessity is
the motion of the sun, of which he says that, as distinct from temporal necessity,
‘it is not because the sun is moved now, but because it will always be moved,
that there is necessity in its motion’ (II, 241.5-7). Conditional necessities are of
two sorts: the condition may be the actuality of what is said to be necessary, e.g.
Socrates is necessarily seated when he happens to be seated, or the actuality of the
subject, e.g. ﬁre is necessarily hot as long as it exists (II, 187.24-188.2; 243.1-6).
Boethius is particularly interested in the ﬁrst group of conditional necessities. He
thinks that this necessity expresses the necessity of the present and stresses that
it does not imply any other necessity which has deterministic implications.
The Boethian view of the necessity of the present shows how it was understood
in ancient modal thought which did not involve the idea of synchronic alternatives.
Boethius typically maintains: ‘For since the same person cannot be sitting and
not sitting at the same time, whoever is sitting cannot be not sitting at the time
when he is sitting; therefore, it is necessary that he be sitting’ (II, 241.10-13). It
is assumed here that
(1)
−M(pt& −pt)
implies
(2)
−(pt&Mt −pt)
which is equivalent to
(3)
pt →Ltpt.
Boethius thought that the temporal necessity of the present is qualiﬁed by the
possibility to be otherwise at another time. Referring to the consequent in (3), he
states that ‘if we separate from the proposition . . . the temporal condition, then
truth vanishes from the whole proposition’ (242.1-3).14 One might wonder how
the alleged necessity of Socrates’s sitting at a certain moment of time is qualiﬁed
13See also In Periherm. I, 106.11-23; 123.16-24.
14In his similar account Ammonius writes: ‘That you are necessarily seated or walking, as long
as one of these holds of you, is true, but not absolutely, for we are not always walking or sitting’
(153.24-6).

512
Simo Knuuttila
by what he does at other times. According to Boethius, this shows that sitting
as such does not inhere in Socrates by necessity (II.242.22-243.2). Many twelfth
and thirteenth century authors applied this analysis in discussing the sentence ‘A
standing man can sit’, adding to the true divided (or de re) reading ‘at another
time’ or something similar.15 Another Boethian strategy was to refer to antecedent
contingency; I shall return to this in 1.3 below.
Even though there are many examples of the frequential use of modal terms in
Western authors from Boethius to Thomas Aquinas, they did not deﬁne modal
terms through the ideas of various degrees of generality or changing and unchang-
ing truth.16 These aspects of modalities were regarded as concomitant rather than
deﬁnitional. Modifying Boethius’s classiﬁcation of ancient theories from this point
of view, Thomas Aquinas writes that:
Some who distinguished them by results – for example Diodorus – said
15See, for example, the anonymous texts in De Rijk 1962, 210.10-17; 311.8-15; 316.1-7; 613.23-8;
De Rijk 1967 (II.2), 687.28-688.1; William of Sherwood, Introductiones in logicam, ed. M. Grab-
mann in Sitzungsberichte der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-hist. Abteilung
1937, 10 (Munich: Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1937), 90.11-24, trans.
with an introduction and notes by N. Kretzmann in William of Sherwood’s Introduction to Logic
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1966), 141-2; Peter of Spain, Tractatus VII.68,
70-1; Lambert of Auxerre, Logica, ed. F. Alassio (Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1971), 158.
16For an equation of modal and temporal notions (necessarily-always, possibly-sometimes), see
Averroes’s commentary of Aristotle’s De caelo in Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis
(Venice 1562-74), vol. V, 84A-D, 87H-M, and Avicenna’s treatise al-Masa’il, quoted in T. Street,
‘Fahradd¯ın Ar-R¯az¯ı’s Critique of Avicennan Logic’ in D. Perler and U. Rudolph (eds.) Logik und
Theologie.
Das Organon im arabischen und lateinischen Mittelalter, Studien und Texte zur
Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 84 (Leiden: Brill, 2005), 104. Further typical examples are
the principles that if something can be destroyed, it will be destroyed (Moses Maimonides, The
Guide of the Perplexed, trans. with introduction and notes by Sh. Pines (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1974), II, 247, 249; Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae, ed. P. Caramello
(Turin: Marietti, 1948-50) I.2.3; In Post.
an.
I.13, 117; cf.
Aristotle, Metaphysics XII.6),
what is possible with respect to a species will be actualized (Moses Maimonides in a letter to
Samuel ibn Tibbon, quoted in Ch.H. Manekin, ‘Problems of ‘Plenitude’ in Maimonides and
Gersonides’ in R. Link-Salinger, R. Long and Ch.H. Manekin (eds.), A Straight Path: Studies in
Medieval Philosophy and Culture. Essays in Honor of Arthur Hyman (Washington: Catholic
University of America Press, 1988), 187, and that universal propositions are false and particular
propositions are true in contingent matter (De Rijk 1967, II.2, 115.5-12; 138.24-6; Albert the
Great, Commentarius in Perihermenias, in Opera omnia, ed. A. Borgnet, vol. I (Paris: Viv`es,
1890), 5.6, 422, and the texts mentioned in note 8 above). Gersonides also assumed that all
genuine possibilities will be actualized; see The Book of Correct Syllogism I.1.14 in The Logic of
Gersonides. A Translation of Sefer ha-Heqqesh ha-Yashar (The Book of the Correct Syllogism),
with introduction, commentary, and analytical glossary by Ch.H. Manekin, The New Synthese
Historical Library 40 (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992). One of distinctions between modalities per
se and per accidens, which were employed in logical treatises, was based on the idea that the
modal status of a temporally indeﬁnite tensed proposition may be changeable. According to
the early thirteenth-century Logica ‘Ut dicit’, true future tense singular propositions referring to
non-existent future things, such as ‘The Antichrist will be existent’, are necessary per accidens,
for they cannot have been false in the past nor false now, though they will be false in the future
(de Rijk 1967, II.2, 390.21-2);‘necessarily’ is said to mean the same as ‘in all times’ in this treatise
(411.8-9). It was more usual to associate accidental necessities and impossibilities with past tense
singular propositions; see note 111 below. Peter of Spain wrote that ‘Antichrist has not been’
will be accidentally impossible, though it is true now (Tractatus IX.4).

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
513
that the impossible is that which never will be, the necessary that
which always will be, and the possible that which sometimes will be,
sometimes not. The Stoics distinguished them according to exterior
restraints. They said the necessity was that which could not be pre-
vented from being true, the impossible that which is always prevented
from being true, and the possible that which can be prevented or not.
However, the distinctions in both of those cases seem to be inadequate.
The ﬁrst distinctions are a posteriori, since something is not necessary
because it always will be, but will always be because it is necessary;
this holds for the possible as well as the impossible. The second desig-
nation is taken from what is external and accidental, since something
is not necessary because it does not have an impediment, but does not
have an impediment because it is necessary. (In Peri herm. I.14, 183
[8], trans. Oesterle, with changes)
Aquinas criticized Diodorus for regarding the eﬀects of necessity or possibility as
their deﬁnitions and the Stoics for similarly considering something external as the
basis of deﬁnitions. He then describes the true model based on the nature of the
things:
Others distinguished these better by basing their distinctions on the
nature of things. They said that the necessary is that which in its
nature is determined only to being, the impossible that which is deter-
mined only to non-being, and the possible that which is not altogether
determined to either. (Ibid.)
It may be noticed that when the characterizations of modalities are turned in the
way suggested by Aquinas, one gets the assumption typical of the frequency model
that what is possible is sometimes actual. Combining frequential and essentialist
ideas was not unusual among Western thinkers before Aquinas, but this is also
found in Moses Maimonides, Avicenna and Averroes. I shall return to early me-
dieval qualiﬁcations of this model because of divine possibilities and some other
considerations.
1.2
Possibility as a Potency
Another Aristotelian modal paradigm used by Boethius was that of possibility as
potency. In Met. V.12 and IX.1 potency is said to be the principle of motion
or change either as an activator (in Latin potentia activa) or as a receptor of a
relevant inﬂuence (in Latin potentia passiva). One group of possibilities is deﬁned
as those which are based on potency.
The types of potency-based possibility
belonging to a species are recognized as possibilities because of their sometime
actualization – no natural potency type can remain eternally frustrated (De caelo
I.12). According to Boethius, some potencies are never unrealized, their nature
being such that they are always actual and as such necessarily so. When potencies

514
Simo Knuuttila
are not actualized, their ends are said to exist potentially (In Periherm. II, 453.10-
455.19).
Necessarily actual potencies leave no room for the potencies of their
contraries. There are no contrary potencies in these cases, Boethius says, because
they would remain unrealized forever and the constitution of nature cannot include
elements which are in vain (II, 236.11-18). It is implied here that all natural types
of potency must show their reality through actualization. The potencies of non-
necessary features of being do not exclude contrary potencies. They are not always
and universally actualized, but as potency-types even these are taken to fulﬁl the
criterion of genuineness mentioned (II, 237.1-5). This is in agreement with the
‘statistical’ model of modality.
The theory of active and passive potencies was originally meant to explain how
and why a singular change takes place.17 Possibilities as active and passive poten-
cies are the dynamic aspects of an actual change. This background to the potency
paradigm made it a cumbersome model for singular possibilities. While it allowed
Aristotle and his medieval followers to speak about unrealized possibilities in the
sense of partial possibilities, i.e., as the correlates of active or passive potencies,
full singular possibilities were actualized when they could be actualized. Natu-
ral passive potencies could not be actualized without an active power and they
were necessarily actualized when an active power activated them and there was
no external hindrance (Met. IX.5, 1048a5-21).
According to Thomas Aquinas, the generic natural potentialities, divided into
passive propensities (potentia passiva) and related activating principles (potentia
activa), are necessary features of things, determined by the nature of the subjects
in which they occur. These necessary structures cannot be violated, and therefore
miraculous events, which take place against the common course of nature, must
occur through a special supernatural causation. Corresponding to the supernatural
active power, there is a passive potentia obedientiae by which creatures may receive
exceptional inﬂuences from the divine cause.18
Boethius believed that the passive and active conditions of a great number of
events were embedded in the antecedent causes of these events, but in criticizing
the Stoic causal determinism he also taught that according to an Aristotelian view
there were indeterminate events based on free choice, chance and ad utrumlibet
contingency which were not determined by preceding causes.19 As for the eﬃcient
causes, he distinguished between necessary causes which always produced their
eﬀects and lower causes which may be prevented because of an indeterminacy
factor in the causal nexus of nature.20 Related frequential ideas became popular
17For agent and patient in Aristotle’s natural philosophy in general, see S. Waterlow, Nature,
Change and Agency in Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982), 159-203.
18Summa theologiae I.82.1; In Metaph. V.6, 832-4; IX.1, 1782; for obedient powers, see De
potentia, ed. P.M. Pession in Quaestiones disputatae, vol. II (Turin: Marietti 1965), 1.3, ad 1;
6.1, ad 18.
19See N. Kretzmann, ‘“Nos ipsi principia sumus”: Boethius and the Basis of Contingency’ in
T. Rudavsky (ed.), Divine Omniscience in Medieval Philosophy, Synthese Historical Library 25
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985) 28-9; Knuuttila 1993, 47-51.
20In Periherm. II.197.10-198.3; In Ciceronis Topica, Patrologia Latina 64, 1148, 1152, trans-

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
515
through Averroes’s works in the thirteenth century.21 Following the Averroistic
view, Thomas Aquinas and Siger Brabant, his contemporary in Paris, deﬁned
necessary natural causes as causes which, when actual as cause, always bring
about their eﬀect. Contingent causes are divided into those which bring about the
eﬀect in most cases (ut in pluribus) and are in a few cases prevented by chance
and those which are not associated with a natural tendency to a deﬁnite result
(ad utrumlibet).
A particular cause is here considered necessary or contingent
depending on how causes of the same type usually behave. Similarly, the eﬀect
which is necessary with respect to its actual causes can be called contingent by
referring to what happens in other similar cases.22 In asking how things can be
contingent if they are eternally known by divine omniscience and included in the
immutable providential plan, Aquinas sometimes states that things are contingent,
if their proximate causes are not necessary, i.e., causes which always bring about
their eﬀect.23
While the conceptions of power and potentiality were widely regarded as essen-
tial elements in understanding modality, Anselm of Canterbury attempted to base
the whole of modal semantics on these notions. Putting forward a detailed analysis
of direct (proper) and indirect (improper) modes of agency, he suggested that the
lated in Stump 1988, 162-3.
21For Averroes’s view of causation, see A. Maier Die Vorl¨aufer Galileis im 14 Jahrhundert
(Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1949), 219-50.
22See Siger of Brabant, Quaestiones in Metaphysicam:
´Edition revue de la Reportation de
Munich, texte in´edit de la Reportation de Vienne, ed.
W. Dunphy, Philosophes m´edi´evaux
24 (Louvain-la-Neuve:
´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie, 1981), 369.51-370.81;
378.58-380.26; De necessitate et contingentia causarum in J. Duin, La doctrine de la providence
dans les ´ecrits de Siger de Brabant, Philosophes m´edi´evaux 3 (Louvain: ´Editions de l’Institut
Sup´erieur de Philosophie, 1954) , 28.10-30.49; 32.1-34.34; Thomas Aquinas, Scriptum super libros
Sententiarum, ed. P. Mandonnet and M.F. Moos, 5 vols (Paris: Lethielleux, 1929-56), I.38.1.4-5;
Summa contra gentiles, ed. C. Pera, P. Marc, P. Caramello (Turin: Marietti, 1961-7), I.67.3; De
malo, ed. P. Bazzi and P. M. Pession in Quaestiones disputatae, vol. II (Turin: Marietti, 1965),
16.7; In Peri herm. I.13, 172; 14, 194, 197; In octos libros Physicorum Aristotelis expositio, ed.
M. Maggi`olo (Turin: Marietti, 1954), II.8.210.
23Scriptum super libros Sententiarum I.38.1.4-5. While repeating this view in his later works
(Summa contra gentiles I.85.4; III.72.2; Summa theologiae I.14.13, ad 1), Aquinas qualiﬁed it
stating that he did not mean that things could be considered necessary as such. He stressed
that God as the ﬁrst cause provided things which naturally necessary or contingent causes so
that contingent events, particularly the acts of free will, were not reducible to a necessitating
ultimate cause, though dependent on God’s irresistible will which transcended the natural orders
of necessity and contingency (Quaestiones disputatae I: De veritate, ed. R.S. Spiazzi (Turin:
Marietti, 1964), 23.5; In Peri herm. I.14, 197; see also H. Goris, Free Creatures of an Eternal
God: Thomas Aquinas on God’s Infallible Foreknowledge and Irresistible Will (Utrecht: Thomas
Instituut, Leuven: Peeters, 1996), 293-302). Siger of Brabant refers to some Parisian masters
who argued that associating the modality of an eﬀect with that of its proximate cause was
compatible with metaphysical determinism (De necessitate et contingentia causarum 26.67-79).
In order to avoid this, he stated that the ﬁrst cause left room for individual coincidences the
results of which were not known even by divine foreknowledge (De necessitate et contingentia
causarum 26.80-28.9; 31.78-32.00; 42.10-25). When accused of heresy, he became more cautious
when speaking about indeterminate events in nature (Quaest. in Met. (Vienna), 370.1-387.89; R.
Hissette, Enquˆete sur les 219 articles condamn´es `a Paris le 7 Mars 1277, Philosophes m´edi´evaux
22 (Louvain: Publications Universitaires, Paris: Vander-Oyez, 1977), 42-3.

516
Simo Knuuttila
concepts of potency and impotency should be treated in the same way. According
to Anselm, ‘A is necessarily B’ properly ascribes a constraint to A and ‘A is pos-
sibly B’ properly ascribes a capacity to A. Modal terms proper refer to properties
of things, such as the power to bring something about, or constraints caused by
other things. If modal terms are used in another way, they are used improperly.
Since Anselm regards the notion of capacity as the basic modal notion, something
is necessary in an improper sense with respect to causes which cannot prevent it,
and something is similarly impossible with respect to causes which cannot bring
it about. There are no constraining necessities proper in God, and divine impos-
sibilities are similarly analysed by referring to external impossibilities. In trying
to solve problems associated with the notions of freedom, sin and grace, Anselm
also employed the distinction between full and partial potencies. The shortcom-
ings of these analyses and some artiﬁcial constructions of the meaning of modal
statements based on the distinction between proper and improper capacity show
that the notion of potency is too narrow a basis for modal semantics.24
1.3
Temporal modalities
A third ancient modal paradigm in Boethius meant for discussing singular pos-
sibilities could be called the diachronic model of modality. In chapter 9 of Peri
hermeneias, Aristotle tries to qualify the necessity of the present — a corollary
of the lack of simultaneous alternatives in his theory — stating that not every-
thing which is actual is necessary simpliciter, without qualiﬁcation (19a23-4). If
necessity without qualiﬁcation means ‘necessary even without the temporal qual-
iﬁcation’, as Boethius reads it in his ﬁrst commentary, Aristotle’s point would be
that the temporal necessity of actual events does not imply that such events are
necessary in themselves in the sense that they always take place in similar cir-
cumstances.25 As already mentioned, this is a problematic attempt to qualify the
necessity of a deﬁnite singular event with the help of frequential considerations.
Some medieval and modern interpreters have opted for another interpretation:
Aristotle wanted to show that the necessity of an event at a certain time does
not imply that it would have been antecedently necessary. There are some places
in which Aristotle speaks about genuine singular possibilities with respect to def-
inite future points of time which may be realized or remain unrealized (De int.
19a13-17, EN III.5, 1114a17-19, Met. VI.3).26 This idea of diachronic modalities
was considered important in the later Peripatetic tradition. It was argued against
Stoic determinism that there are genuine future alternatives which remain open
24See E. Serene, ‘Anselm’s Modal Conceptions’ in S. Knuuttila (ed.), Reforging the Great
Chain of Being, Synthese Historical Library 20 (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1981), 117-62; S. Knuuttila,
‘Anselm on Modality’ in B. Davies and B. Leftow (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Anselm
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 111-31.
25See Hintikka 1973, 147-175; Boethius, In Periherm. I.121.25-122.4.
26This is a central theme in S. Waterlow, Passage and Possibility: A Study of Aristotle’s
Modal Concepts (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982); see also G.H. von Wright, Truth, Knowledge,
and Modality (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984), 72-8.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
517
until the moment of time to which they refer. Even the Stoics spoke about alterna-
tive prospective possibilities which are not yet ﬁxed at the level of known causes,
but they also regarded fate as an active potency which ultimately necessitates
everything. In the Peripatetic theory of diachronic modalities it is assumed that
there are transient individual alternative possibilities, but those which will not be
realized disappear.27 When Boethius refers to chance, free choice, and possibility,
which restrict the domain of causal necessity, his examples include temporalized
modal notions which refer to diachronic prospective possibilities at a given moment
of time.28 A temporally determinate prospective possibility may not be realized at
the time to which it refers, in which case it ceases to be a possibility. Boethius did
not develop a theory of simultaneous synchronic possibilities which remain intact
even when diachronic possibilities have vanished, insisting that only what is actual
at a certain time is possible at that time with respect to that time.
The model of diachronic modalities provided Boethius with a more satisfactory
tool for qualifying the necessity of the present than the frequency interpretation
did. Instead of arguing that when the condition of the conditionally necessary
proposition is removed, the proposition itself is contingent, he could also remark
that when the antecedent conditions of a temporally necessary state of aﬀairs are
considered, it may be realized that it was not necessary before it was actualized.29
(See also 2.3 below.)
1.4
Divine Modalities
While Boethius’s works formed the main source of knowledge about philosophical
modal theories for early medieval thinkers, Augustine’s doctrine of creation made
them aware of a theological discussion of possibility and necessity which was based
on diﬀerent ideas. Augustine argued that God simultaneously created the ﬁrst
things and the seminal reasons for later things out of nothing. The creation was
based on an eternal free act of God’s perfectly good will, and took place through
his omnipotence. In Augustine’s Trinitarian view, the Son is a perfect image of
the Father and, as the Word, the seat of the ideas of ﬁnite beings which in a
less perfect manner can imitate the highest being.
The ideas refer to possible
actualization in the domain of mutability. In this sense the possibilities have an
ontological foundation in God’s essence.30 This became the dominating conception
of theological modal metaphysics until Duns Scotus departed from it.31
27See R.W. Sharples, Alexander of Aphrodisias on Fate, text, translation and commentary
(London: Duckworth, 1983); S. Bobzien, Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1998).
28See, e.g., In Periherm. I, 106.11-14; 120.9-16; II, 190.14-191.2; 197.20-198.3; 203.2-11; 207.18-
25.
29In Periherm. II, 245.4-246.19. See also Thomas Aquinas, In Peri herm. I.15, 201; Albert
the Great, Comm. in Periherm. I.5.6, 421; Siger of Brabant, De necessitate et contingentia
causarum 32.4-18.
30S. Knuuttila, ‘Time and Creation in Augustine’ in E. Stump and N. Kretzmann (eds.), The
Cambridge Companion to Augustine (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 103-115.
31Knuuttila 1993, 135-6.

518
Simo Knuuttila
Augustine thought that the world was not necessary and that many possibilities
remained unrealized.
In book 12 of The City of God, he criticizes the ancient
doctrines which claimed that the only permissible notion of inﬁnity is that of
potential inﬁnity, arguing that an inﬁnite series of numbers actually exists in God’s
mind, and that God could create an inﬁnite number of individuals and know each
of them simultaneously.32 Augustine regards God’s omnipotence as an executive
power with respect to his free choice, which is conceptually preceded by knowledge
about alternative possibilities. God could have done other things, but did not want
to.33 Augustine’s remarks on various unrealized possibilities remained sketchy, but
the basic idea is pretty clear and was often repeated in the early medieval doctrine
of God as acting by choice between alternatives. This involved an intuitive idea
of modality based on synchronic alternativeness.34
The discrepancy between the Catholic doctrine of God’s freedom and power and
the philosophical modal conceptions was stressed in Peter Damian’s On Divine
Omnipotence and formulated in a less ambiguous manner by Anselm of Canter-
bury.35 Like Peter Damian, Anselm also avoided speaking about the restrictions of
divine omnipotence and preferred formulations according to which all necessities
and impossibilities are subject to God’s will. He did not mean that all necessary
truths were dependent on God’s will, for example those about God’s existence or
properties or the principles of logic. His point was that the natural order was
created. Events which take place in accordance with the common course of nature
or against it are naturally necessary or impossible with respect to the laws of the
created order, but God as the Lord of this order can bring about eﬀects which
are naturally impossible. Miraculous divine interventions do not strictly speak-
ing violate natural patterns, since they are meant to be subordinate.36
These
ideas were codiﬁed in the commonly employed distinction between possibilities
secundum inferiorem causam as possibilities secundum cursum naturae and pos-
sibilities secundum superiorem causam as God’s possibilities.37 Some theologians
32Augustine, De civitate Dei, ed.
B. Dombart and A. Kalb, Corpus Christianorum Series
Latina 47-8 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1955), 12.9
33‘Potuit sed noluit’; Contra Faustum, ed.
I. Zycha, Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum
Latinorum 25 (Vienna: F. Tempsky, Leipzig: G. Freytag, 1891), I.30.
34Plotinus also thought that the various levels of reality outside the One, the ﬁrst principle,
are caused and thus diﬀerent from Aristotle’s conception of higher spheres. However, the power
of being eternally proceeds from the One and does not leave any genuine possibility of being un-
realized. See H.Buchner, Plotins M¨oglichkeitslehre, Epimeleia 16 (Munich and Salzburg: Anton
Pustet, 1970); for the principle of plenitude in Proclus, see T. Kukkonen, ‘Proclus on Plenitude’,
Dionysius 18 (2000), 103-28.
35For Peter Damian, see Lettre sur la Toute-Puissance Divine (De divina omnipotentia),
introduction, critical text, translation and notes by A. Cantin, Sources Chr´etiennes 191(Paris:
Cerf, 1972), 603a-604b, 610d-615b, Knuuttila 2004, 115-18.
36See, for example, Cur Deus homo 2.17 in F. Schmitt (ed.), Opera omnia (Edinburgh: Nelson,
1946-61), vol. II, 122.25-30; Meditatio redemptionis humanae (Opera omnia III, 86.60-2); De
conceptu virginali et de originali peccato (Opera omnia II, 153.7-9, 154.4-15); for non-created
modalities, see, for example, Proslogion 3-5 (Opera omnia I, 102-4); De grammatico 1-2 (Opera
omnia I, 145-6).
37Peter Lombard, Sententiae in IV libris distinctae ed.
PP. Collegium S. Bonaventurae

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
519
asked whether one should apply the notion of possibility without qualiﬁcation to
divine possibilities and the notion of qualiﬁed possibility, such as natural possibil-
ity, to those spoken of in accordance with the lower causes, or vice versa.38 This is
a sign of an increasing awareness of the fact that the conception of omnipotence,
which included the idea of eternal alternatives, was very diﬀerent from philosophi-
cal modalities, and there were some twelfth-century attempts to explicate the idea
of synchronic alternatives more systematically.
In addition to the doctrines of omnipotence and eternal choice between provi-
dential options, divine modalities were discussed in treating the compatibility of
divine omniscience and the contingency of events in the created world.
In his
longer commentary on De interpretatione, Boethius says of God that ‘he knows
future events as happening contingently and not necessarily so that he does not
ignore the possibility that something else might take place.’39 In his later work
Consolation of Philosophy, Boethius argues that God is atemporal and has timeless
knowledge of everything. God’s timelessness involves his having the whole history
present to him simultaneously. God’s knowledge is not foreknowledge, since it is
not temporally located, but the predictions of future contingents are true or false
from the point of view of God’s eternal knowledge of the things referred to. It
is necessary that if God knows that p, then p. This ‘conditional necessity’ does
not imply the ‘simple necessity’ of p.40 This approach was very inﬂuential and
was further developed in Aquinas’s theory of God who grasps all combinations of
things at particular times by one eternal vision. God has an immediate knowl-
edge of all things and their relative temporal order, though none of them is past
or future with respect to His cognition. The objects of divine omniscience are
necessary by supposition (i.e., with respect to God’s knowledge and providential
plan), but many of them are contingent with respect to their proximate causes.41
God’s eternal and immutable vision includes the knowledge of things which are
future contingents in the temporal order, and he can supranaturally inform lower
intellects about these things – otherwise there could not be true prophetic predic-
(Grottaferrata: Collegium S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, 1971-81), II.18.5-6; Simon of Tour-
nai, Disputationes, ed. J. Warichez, Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense, ´Etudes et Documents 12
(Louvain: Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense,1932), 35.2 (104.32-105.29); Peter of Poitiers, Senten-
tiae, I.7 (65.444-66.452, 67.498-68.502); Alan of Lille, Regulae caelestis iuris, ed. N.M. H¨aring,
Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 78 (1981), 164-5. This was the back-
ground of the scholastic doctrine of God’s absolute and ordained power. For similar discussions
in medieval Arabic thought, see Kukkonen 2000.
38William of Auxerre, Summa aurea, ed. J. Ribaillier, Spicilegium Bonaventurianum 16-20
(Paris: ´Editions du CNRS and Rome: Collegium S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, 1980-86),
I.11.2 (206-9).
39In Periherm. II, 226.9-12.
40Philosophiae consolatio, ed. L. Bieler, Corpus Christianorum Series Latina 94 (Turnhout:
Brepols, 1957), V.6, 25-32; cf. Augustine, De civitate Dei XI.21. Boethius’s conception of God’s
atemporal knowledge is meant to explain how future contingent events retain their indetermi-
nateness while being certainly known as atemporally present. See also J. Marenbon, Boethius
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 123-45.
41Scriptum super libros Sententiarum, I.38.1.4-5; Summa contra gentiles, I.66-7; Quaestiones
disputatae I: De veritate, 2.12; In Peri herm. I.14, 194-6; Summa theologiae I.14.13.

520
Simo Knuuttila
tions.42 While prophetic statements are formally future contingent propositions,
their being true is based on a revelation of atemporal knowledge. This is how
Aquinas tries to combine the doctrine of divine omniscience and the lack of def-
inite truth and falsity in future contingent propositions.43 (See also 1.6 below.)
An inﬂuential formulation of divine foreknowledge was put forward by Peter
Abelard. William of Champeaux, one of Abelard’s teachers, dealt with an argu-
ment against the compatibility between contingency and divine omniscience which
was discussed in Augustine’s City of God (V.9). In response to Cicero’s De fato
and De divinatione, Augustine refuted the claim that the possibility of events
having happened otherwise implies the possibility of error in God. William stated
that the antecedent of the argument is true but the consequent is false and there-
fore the consequence is not valid. Peter Abelard, in discussing the same example
in his Dialectica and Logica ‘Ingrdientibus’, applied a systematic division which
he elsewhere drew between modal statements de sensu or in the compound sense
and modal statements de re or in the divided sense.44 Abelard’s analysis of Ci-
cero’s argument was often repeated in medieval theology, since it was presented
in slightly modiﬁed form in Peter Lombard’s Sententiae, which became the stan-
dard medieval introduction to theology. Abelard states that when the proposition
‘A thing can be otherwise than God knows it to be’ is taken to mean that it is
possible that a thing is otherwise than God knows, which corresponds to what he
elsewhere calls the de sensu reading, the antecedent is false. When the antecedent
is taken to say that a thing may be otherwise than God knows it to be, which
corresponds to what Abelard elsewhere calls de re possibility, the antecedent is
true, but the consequent is false, since if things were otherwise, God would pos-
sess diﬀerent knowledge of them. This shows that the consequence is not valid.45
Following Peter Abelard, Peter Lombard formulated the same view in stating that
‘Things cannot be other than as God foreknows them’ is true in the compound
sense and false in the divided sense. The truth of the compound sense saves God’s
infallibility and the falsity of the divided sense expresses God’s freedom and the
42Summa theologiae II-2.171.3.
43For various interpretations of divine knowledge and future contingents in Aquinas, J.F.
Wippel, ‘Divine Knowledge, Divine Power and Human Freedom in Thomas Aquinas and Henry
of Ghent’ in T. Rudavsky (ed.), Divine Omniscience and Omnipotence in Medieval Philosophy,
Synthese Historical Library 25 (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985), 213-41; Goris 1996, 213-54; W.L.
Craig, The Problem of Divine Foreknowledge and Future Contingents from Aristotle to Suarez
(Leiden: Brill, 1988), 103-26. See also J. Marenbon, Le tempts, l’´eternit´e et la prescience de
Bo`ece `a Thomas d’Aquin (Paris: Vrin, 2005).
44For this terminology, see Super Periermenias XII-XIV, ed.
L. Minio-Paluello in Twelfth
Century Logic: Texts and Studies II: Abaelardiana inedita (Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Leter-
atura, 1958), 3-47. Later authors often used the expression de dicto instead of de sensu. See
below, section 2. For the historical background of Abelard’s argument, see J. Marenbon, The
Philosophy of Peter Abelard (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 226-8.
45Peter Abelard, Philosophische Schriften I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus’, ed.
B. Geyer,
Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters XXI, 1-3 (M¨unster:
Aschendorﬀ, 1919-27), 429.26-430.36; Dialectica, ed. L.M. de Rijk, Wijsgerige teksten en studies
1 (Assen: van Gorcum, 1956), 217.27-219.24.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
521
metaphysical contingency of the future. It is assumed that when something is, it
is possible that it is not at that very instant of time at which it is actual.46
1.5
Modality as Alternativeness
Augustine’s doctrine of God’s eternal choice involved an intuitive idea of modality
as alternativeness which inﬂuenced early medieval theological discussions of divine
omnipotence and omniscience. Some authors regarded this as a special theological
matter which did not aﬀect the use of traditional ideas in other disciplines, an
attitude supported by the general Aristotle reception in the thirteenth century,
but there were twelfth-century thinkers who realized the philosophical signiﬁcance
of this new modal conception.
According to Abelard, the possibilities and necessities belonging to the individ-
uals of a species are determined by their shared nature. What nature demands
or allows and what is repugnant to it is the same for all members of a species,
and what is possible is seen in what has taken place in the representatives of the
species.47 One could regard these essentialist possibilities as abstract Philonian
possibilities, many of which never become or even can become actual in an indi-
vidual.48 This is one aspect of Abelard’s modal views, but there are others. He
assumes that what is actual is temporally necessary at a certain point of time as
no longer avoidable, but he also argues that unrealized alternatives are possible
at the same time in the sense that they could have happened at that time. Some
of the alternatives of a singular being are real counterfactual alternatives. These
are unrealizable because of some previous changes in the conditions of the subject.
There are also merely imaginable alternatives, such as Socrates’ being a bishop,
which never had a real basis in things.49 (See also 2.3 below.)
Gilbert of Poitiers stresses the idea that natural regularities which are called
natural necessities are not absolute, since they are chosen by God and can be
overridden by divine power. This had become a widespread theological view in
the twelfth century. Gilbert explained it in the light of the Augustinian view of
God’s acting by divine will, which chooses between alternative providential plans,
and divine omnipotence as an executive power. It has been sometimes thought
46Sententiae I.38.2.
47Dialectica 193.36-194.3; 385.1-8.
48Philo’s deﬁnitions of modal concepts are described in Boethius’s commentary on De inter-
pretatione (II, 234.10-21). One of his examples was that it is possible for a piece of wood at
the bottom of the sea to be burnt, in virtue of the ﬁtness of the subject. See also Alexander
of Aphrodisias, In Aristotelis Analyticorum priorum librum I commentarium, ed. M. Wallies,
Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 2.1 (Berlin: Reimer, 1883), 184.6-12; John Philoponus, In
Aristotelis Analytica Priora commentaria, ed. M. Wallies, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca
13.2 (Berlin: Reimer, 1905), 169.19-20.
49See the discussion of Logica ‘Ingredientibus’, 272.39-273.19, and some other texts in C.J.
Martin, ‘An Amputee is Biped. The Role of the Categories in the Development of Abelard’s
Theory of Possibility’ in J. Biard and I. Catach-Rosier (eds.), La Tradition m´edi´evale des Cate-
gories (XIIe-XIVe si`ecles), Philosophes m´edi´evaux 45 (Louvain-la-Neuve: ´Editions de l’Institut
Sup´erieur de Philosophie, Louvain and Paris: Peeters, 2003), 225-42.

522
Simo Knuuttila
that Gilbert wanted to deny the necessity of the past in this context, but the
texts interpreted in this way can be read as meaning that temporal necessities are
based on God’s free choice and do not imply any lack of Divine power. There is an
interesting formulation of Plato’s ‘Platonitas’ in Gilbert. He says that this includes
all what Plato was, is and will be as well as what he could be but never is. Even
though Gilbert does not explain why there is a modal element in the individual
concept, it was probably needed in order to speak about Plato in alternative
possible histories or, as Abelard did, about Socrates as a bishop. Gilbert seems to
have been the ﬁrst to formulate an individual concept in this way.50
A third context of the systematic interest in synchronic alternatives was the
new twelfth-century theory that declarative singular propositions should be pri-
marily treated as temporally deﬁnite and as having an unchanging truth-value.
This approach was developed by twelfth-cantury authors who were later called
nominales. One of their theses was that ‘What is once true is always true.’51 This
was applied in discussing of the question of how the beliefs of Abraham and others
who lived before the coming of Christ and believed various things about him were
the same as the beliefs of those who live after His coming – the previous beliefs
were formulated in future tense statements and the latter in present or past tense
statements. According to the nominales, one could regard as basic a temporally
deﬁnite propositional content which is expressed by various tensed expressions
depending on when they are uttered. While tensed statements about temporally
deﬁnite singular events have a changing truth-value, the corresponding non-tensed
propositions are unchangingly true or false.52
Peter of Poitiers, one of the twelfth-century authors taking this approach, argued
that propositions pertaining to contingent things have a truth-value on the basis
of God’s eternal choice. These truth-values would be otherwise, if the providential
design of the world were diﬀerent in relevant respects.
The contingent truth-
values of future contingent propositions do not prevent future events from being
indeterminate. They may begin to be temporally unavoidable, but they do not
begin to be metaphysically contingent nor do the propositions pertaining to them
begin to be true or false.53 This is in accordance with the immutability of God’s
knowledge. God does not know contingent things through tensed propositions,
50See Knuuttila 1993, 75-82.
51See Y. Iwakuma and S. Ebbesen, ‘Logico-Theological Schools from the Second Half of the
12th Century: A List of Sources’, Vivarium 30 (1992), 196, n. 46; 199, n. 50a, b; 200, n. 51a;
201, n. 52d; 205, n. 62d; 206, n. 64a. For the history of the principle, see also J. Marenbon, ‘Vo-
calism, Nominalism and the Commentaries on the Categories from the Earlier Twelfth Century’,
Vivarium 30 (1992), 58-61 and S. Ebbesen, ‘What Must One Have an Opinion About’, Vivarium
(30), 1992, 73-4. For the history of twelfth-century nominales, see W. Courtenay, ‘Nominales
and Nominalism in the Twelfth Century’ in J. Jolivet, Z. Kaluza, A. de Libera (eds.), Lectionum
varietates. Hommage `a Paul Vignaux (1904-1987) (Paris: Vrin 1991), 11-48.
52Nuchelmans 1973, 177-89; for some later examples of distinguishing between temporally
deﬁnite and temporally indeﬁnite declarative sentences, see H. Goris, ‘Tense Logic in 13th-
Century Theology’, Vivarium 39 (2001), 161-84.
53Peter of Poitiers, Sententiae I, ed. P.S. Moore and M. Dulong, Publications in Medieval
Studies 7 (Notre Dame: The University of Notre Dame Press, 1961), I.7.133-43; I.12.164-82;
I.14.328-53.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
523
since their truth-value is changeable. If God’s knowledge is described by using
tensed propositions, analogously to the articles of faith before and after the coming
of Christ, one should read them so that they signify the same. This became a well-
known position, since it was also employed in Peter Lombard’s Sententiae.54
The formulations by Peter Abelard, Gilbert of Poitiers, Peter Lombard and
Peter of Poitiers discussed above exemplify twelfth-century deviations from the
Aristotelian thesis ‘What is necessarily is when it is.’ This was traditionally un-
derstood as implying the principle of the necessity of the present, which was not
questioned in ancient modal theories. Since God’s knowledge about contingent
things was regarded as unchangeable, the contingency of this knowledge also im-
plied the denial of the Aristotelian equation of immutability with necessity, a denial
regarded as an explicit doctrine of the nominales.55
The idea of modal alternativeness was also discussed by Robert Grosseteste in
early thirteenth century. Grosseteste taught that the opposites of actualized con-
tingent things are no longer realizable possibilities, though they are possible in
the sense that they could have been included in God’s eternal providential choice.
Actual history is an explication of one of the divine alternatives with respect to
which things are primarily called necessary, possible or impossible. Modalities at
this basic level are called modalities ‘from eternity and without beginning’. Math-
ematical truths are necessary in this way. In addition to these ‘simple’ necessities,
there are necessities and impossibilities which have a beginning and which are
eternal contingencies in the sense that God could have chosen their opposites.56
The contingency of the divine acts of knowledge and will is based on an atemporal
causal priority between the power and its acts.57
1.6
Future Contingents
Some Stoics took Aristotle to deny that future contingent propositions are true or
false, as Boethius reports in his second commentary on Aristotle’s De interpreta-
tione (208.1-4). Future contingent propositions were regarded as true or false in
Stoic logic, the Stoics taking the universally valid principle of bivalence to imply
the predetermination of all future events. (See Cicero, De fato, 20-1.)58 Boethius
regarded the Stoic view of future contingent propositions as well as the Stoic
characterization of Aristotle’s position as false, his interpretation being based on
54Sententiae
I.12.193-223; I.13.192-220; cf. Peter Lombard, Sententiae.1.39.1; 41.3.
55Ebbesen and Iwakuma 1992, 194.
56Robert Grosseteste, De libero arbitrio in Die philosophischen Werke des Robert Grosseteste,
ed. L. Baur, Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 9 (M¨unster: Aschendorﬀ,
1912), 168.26-170.33, 178.28-9; N. Lewis, ‘The First Recension of Robert Grosseteste’s De libero
arbitrio, Mediaeval Studies 53 (1991), 1-88.
57Ibid. 178.24-6.
58On the basis of a note in Simplicius’s commentary on Aristotle’s Categories (407.6-13), it
is argued that some Aristotelians also qualiﬁed the principle of bivalence; for this and other
ancient deviations from the principle, see R. Sorabji, Necessity, Cause, and Blame: Perspectives
on Aristotle’s Theory (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1980), 92-3. For the Stoic views,
see also Bobzien 1998, 59-86.

524
Simo Knuuttila
the distinction between deﬁnite and indeﬁnite division of truth and falsity in the
contradictory pairs of propositions. This terminology was also used in Ammo-
nius’s commentary. Since this work was not known to Boethius, both authors
apparently based their commentaries on earlier Greek discussions in which these
qualiﬁcations were introduced.59 According to Boethius, Aristotle argues that if
all pairs of contradictory propositions deﬁnitely divide truth and falsity and all
propositions are deﬁnitely true or deﬁnitely false, then everything necessarily oc-
curs as it does.60
The fact that contingent future things, events and states of
aﬀairs are not determined refutes the thesis that all aﬃrmations or negations are
deﬁnitely true or deﬁnitely false.61 The disjunctive pairs of contradictory future
contingent propositions can be said to divide truth and falsity only in a very spe-
cial sense; ‘the whole body of the contradiction does indeed separate into truth
and falsity, but this truth and falsity is undiﬀerentiated and alterable.’62 Boethius
interprets Aristotle’s ﬁnal solution as follows:
For it is necessary as regards future and contingent contradictions that
the whole contradiction have one part true and the other false. For
example, if someone aﬃrms that there is going to be a sea battle to-
morrow . . . and if someone denies it . . . the whole contradiction will
indeed have one part true, the other false; but there will not be one
of them deﬁnitely true and the other deﬁnitely false. (In Periherm. I,
122.26-123.10, trans. Kretzmann)63
The majority interpretation of contemporary commentators is that Ammonius and
Boethius ascribe to Aristotle the view that the predictions of future contingent
things and their denials diﬀer from other contradictory pairs, because truth and
falsity are not deﬁnitely distributed between these propositions, which are conse-
quently neither deﬁnitely true nor deﬁnitely false. This is taken to mean that they
are not true or false. In answering the Stoic criticism, Boethius might have thought
that future contingent propositions have the disjunctive property of being true-
or-false, which would mean something other than simply lacking a truth value.64
59Sorabji 1998. Ammonius’s commentary was translated by William of Moerbeke in 1268 and
was used by Thomas Aquinas. See note 8.
60Boethius thinks that the term ‘deﬁnitely’ can be added to Aristotle’s argument as part of
what Aristotle means (In Periherm.
I, 108.18-26; 125.20; II, 204.8-25; see also I, 109.9-17;
110.28-112.4; 114.8-24; II, 208.7-23; 211.26-213.4).
61In Periherm. II, 219.5-17.
62In Periherm. I, 108.2-5; cf. I, 106.30-107.6; II, 208.7-18.
63This contradiction is said to be indeﬁnitely both true and false (I, 124.28); according to the
longer commentary, ‘one part of the contradiction is true and the other false only indeﬁnitely’
(II, 246.12-13).
64Craig 1988, 79-98; R. Gaskin, The Sea Battle and the Master Argument, Quellen und Studien
zur Philosophie 40 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1995), 146-84; N. Kretzmann, ‘Boethius and the Truth
about Tomorrow’s Sea Battle’ in Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, 24-52. D. Frede
argues argues that Boethius gives up the principle of bivalence and does not extend it to include
the disjunctive formulation; see ‘The Sea-Battle Reconsidered : A Defense of the Traditional
Interpretation, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, vol. III (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985),
44-5.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
525
Another interpretation of Boethius and Ammonius holds that future contingents
are not deﬁnitely true or false, because their truth-makers are not yet determined,
but are true or false in an indeterminate way. No qualiﬁcation of the principle
of bivalence is involved. True statements are either determinately true or simply
(indeterminately) true.65 While Ammonius and Boethius assumed that Aristotle
denied the deﬁnite truth of predictions which they took to imply determinism, it
is less clear how they understood the indeﬁnite truth of these. Boethius’s formu-
lations often suggest that future contingent propositions are true-or-false without
being simply true or false, but perhaps he was not quite sure about this.66
The past and the present are necessary in Boethius. Prospective contingent al-
ternatives with respect to a future event remain open until the relevant causes are
settled or the event takes place and the alternative options vanish. Correspond-
ingly he seems to take the truth of future propositions to mean that things cannot
be otherwise, for the antecedently assumed actuality of future truth-makers im-
plies that alternative prospective possibilities refer to things which are rendered
temporally impossible by the actualized alternatives.
In his early commentary on De interpretatione, Abelard follows Boethius’s anal-
ysis of future contingent propositions. He understands Boethius’s comments in the
way most contemporary commentators do and accepts the idea that future con-
tingent propositions are merely true-or-false. Contradictory present tense proposi-
tions are determinately true and determinately false and also disjunctively deter-
minately/necessarily true or false (etiam sub disjunctione), whereas contradictory
future contingent propositions are merely disjunctively true or false (tantum sub
disjunctione).67
Abelard changed his view in the Dialectica and his longer commentary on De
interpretatione in Logica ‘Ingredientibus’. The historical order of these two works
is not quite clear. Many scholars have argued that the Dialectica is earlier68, but
it is also possible that the texts contain parts written at diﬀerent times. While the
main structure of Aristotle’s argument in De interpretatione 9 is understood in
the same way in the Dialectica and the early commentary on De interpretatione,
Abelard now argues that future contingent propositions are true or false, although
not determinately or necessarily so, and takes this to be Aristotle’s view as well.
The diﬀerence between future contingent propositions and other propositions has
nothing to do with bivalence; it concerns the determinateness or indeterminateness
of the truth of propositions and what is signiﬁed by propositions.
Misguided
opinions are based on the mistaken idea that the necessity or determinateness of
65M. Mignucci, ‘Truth and Modality in Late Antiquity: Boethius on Future Contingent Propo-
sitions’ in G. Corsi, C. Mangione and M. Mugnai (eds.), Atti del convegno Internazionale di
Storia della Logica. Le Teorie delle Modalit`a (Bologna: CLUEB, 1989), 47-78, and ‘Ammonius’
Sea Battle’ in Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, 53-86.
66See also Sorabji 1998.
67Editio super Aristotelem De interpretatione, ed. M. Dal Pra in Pietro Abelardo, Scritti di
logica (Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1969), 100.13-19; 112.7-113.3.
68See Marenbon 1997, 40-8.

526
Simo Knuuttila
a disjunction implies that the disjuncts are necessary or determinate.69 This is
close to what Mignucci regards as Boethius’s position.
The commentary on De interpretatione 9 in Logica ‘Ingredientibus’ involves
Abelard’s most detailed analysis of the structure of Aristotle’s argument. Chapter
9 is described as a dialectical discussion of the thesis that in all contradictories one
part is necessarily true and the other false. The correct reading of this is that of
all contradictory pairs necessarily one part is true and the other false. This does
not imply that one is necessarily true and the other necessarily false, although one
is true and the other false.70
Abelard pays attention to some propositions about past and present states of
aﬀairs the truth and falsity of which depend on future, such as ‘Socrates is the
name of a man going to eat tomorrow’ or ‘He has spoken falsely’, when this is
said of a man who said yesterday that Socrates will eat tomorrow. The truth and
falsity of propositions of this kind are not knowable without knowledge of future
contingent states of aﬀairs which are indeterminate and epistemically inaccessible
to human beings. Hence the propositions have an indeterminate truth and falsity
and do not diﬀer from future contingent propositions in this respect. In discussing
these examples, Abelard states that ‘Aristotle calls propositions determinately or
indeterminately true with respect to the determinate or indeterminate states of af-
fairs they propose’. This terminology is part of Abelard’s rational reconstruction
of Aristotle’s discussion; being probably aware that Aristotle did not use these
terms at all, Abelard suggests that Aristotle would consider propositions indeter-
minately true or false if their truth depended on indeterminate future contingent
states of aﬀairs. Propositions which propose the actual inherence of truth in a fu-
ture contingent proposition are of the form: “Socrates will eat tomorrow’ is true’.
As far as determinateness is understood in accordance with what Abelard calls
Aristotle’s view, this is no more determinate than ‘Socrates will eat tomorrow’.
As for the truth as a present fact, Abelard repeats the remark from the Dialectica
that one could call this present state of aﬀairs determinate and, correspondingly,
the propositions determinately true or false. In this sense all true propositions
are determinately true, but this has nothing to do with causal determination.
Abelard also remarks that God knows whether any proposition is true and false,
and all true propositions are determinately true with respect to this omniscience.
The determinateness in the sense of divine knowability pertains to truth-values
and truth-makers, but this supranatural knowability does not make things nec-
essary.71 While the truth-values of these propositions are in principle knowable,
human beings cannot know them without supranatural illumination. The present
truth of a future contingent proposition implies that what is predicted will obtain
but not that it is determinate, since future contingent states of aﬀairs are inde-
69Dialectica 211.28-32; 212.36-213.7; 221.15-24.
70Logica ‘Ingredientibus’ 431.13-432.9; 445.22-446.29.
71Logica ‘Ingredientibus’ 421.28-422.30. For truth and determinateness in Abelard, see also C.
Normore, ‘Future Contingents’ in N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg (eds.), The Cambridge
History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 362-3;
N.T. Lewis, ‘Determinate Truth in Abelard’, Vivarium 25 (1987), 81-109.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
527
terminate.72 In discussing the necessity of the present, Abelard follows Boethius
in stating that what is actual at a certain point of time is necessary in the sense
that it can no longer be avoided,73 but he also argues that unrealized alternatives
may be possible at the same time in the sense that they could have happened at
that time.74 The actuality of a contingent state of aﬀairs at a speciﬁed future time
does not exclude the non-temporal possibility of simultaneous alternatives and the
truth of a proposition about this state of aﬀairs does not make it necessary. This
seems to be the background of Abelard’s deviation from Boethius’s approach to
the truth and falsity of future contingent propositions.
According to Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas, Aristotle argues in De
interpretatione 9 that future contingent propositions diﬀer from other assertoric
propositions in not being determinately true or determinately false. Their general
view of the structure of Chapter 9 is similar to that of Boethius. Instead of the
Boethian deﬁnite-indeﬁnite distinction, Albert and Aquinas employed the terms
‘determinate’ and ‘indeterminate’, as most medieval commentators did.75 Asser-
toric propositions are related to truth or falsity in the same way as their correlates
are related to being or non-being. When future things are indeterminate with
respect to being and non-being, the contradictory propositions about them must
also be indeterminate with respect to truth and falsity. A future contingent propo-
sition and its denial form a disjunction which is necessarily true. The members of
this disjunction are disjunctively true or false. The indeterminate truth or falsity
of a member of the disjunction does not imply that it is true or that it is false.
It is merely true-or-false. Because of the prospective indeterminateness of a sea-
battle, the propositions pertaining to it ‘must be true or false under disjunction,
being related to either, not to this or that determinately.’76 According to Aquinas,
truth is not altogether lacking in a pair of contradictory singular future contingent
propositions. It not true to say that both of these are false, for if one of these is
false, the other is true, and vice versa.77
Following Boethius, Aquinas thinks that contingency pertains to the future.
Past and present things are necessary. The absence of the idea of synchronic alter-
natives in Boethius’s approach makes a true proposition about a future contingent
event determinately and necessarily true. Aquinas describes this assumption as
follows:
72Logica ‘Ingredientibus’ 422. 33-40.
73Logica ‘Ingredientibus’ 437.37-438.17.
74See note 49 above.
75Albert the Great, Comm. in Periherm. I.5.4-5, 418-21; Thomas Aquinas, In Peri herm.
I.13, 170-1.
76Thomas Aquinas, In Peri herm. I.15, 202-3; Albert the Great, Comm. in Periherm. I.5.6,
422; see also Averroes, De interpretatione
in Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois commentariis
I.1 (Venice, 1562–74), 82va and Peter of Ireland, Expositio et quaestiones in librum Aristotelis
Peryermenias seu De interpretatione, ed. M. Dunne, Philosophes m´edi´evaux 34 (Louvain-la-
Neuve: ´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie, Louvain and Paris: Peeters, 1996), I.17,
132.164-133.173; I.19, 143.47-56.
77In Peri herm. I.13, 175.

528
Simo Knuuttila
If it is always true to say of the present that it is, or the future, that
it will be, it is not possible that this not be or that it will not be. The
reason for this consequence is evident, for these two are incompossible,
that something truly be said to be, and that it not be, for this is
included in the signiﬁcation of the true that what is said to be is. If
therefore that which is said concerning the present or the future is
posited to be true, it is not possible that this not be in the present or
future. (In Peri herm. I.13, 173 [10]; trans. Oesterle, with changes)78
While the necessity of the disjunction of future contingent contradictory proposi-
tions does not imply that one of these is necessarily true, the truth of one part
implies that it is necessarily true, because it excludes the truth of the other as im-
possible. In commenting on Aristotle’s thesis that everything is necessarily when
it is, though not simply necessary, Aquinas writes:
This necessity is founded on the principle that it is impossible at once
to be and not be, for if something is, it is impossible that it not be
at the same time; therefore it is necessary that it be at that time . . .
Similarly, if something is not, it is impossible that it be at the same
time. This is not absolute necessity, but necessity by supposition. (I.15,
201 [2], trans. Oesterle, with changes)
Necessity by supposition is the impossibility of being otherwise when one is ac-
tual.
This necessity of the present does not imply the antecedent necessity of
what is actual. Similarly the determinate division between truth and falsity in
a contradictory pair of present propositions does not imply that even beforehand
one or the other is determinately true.79 Following Boethius, Aquinas assumes,
as distinct from Abelard, that the disjunctive necessity of a contradictory pair of
future contingent propositions implies that if one part were true, the other would
be impossible, because the truth implies the actuality of the predicted state of
aﬀairs, and it is necessarily actual when it is actual, since antecedently possible
alternatives are excluded.80
78For incompossible possibilities, see also In Aristotelis libros De caelo et mundo expositio,
ed. R.M. Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti, 1952), I.29, 280; cf. Summa theologiae I.24.4, ad 2. See also
the discussion in F. Mondadori, ‘Leibniz on Compossibility: Some Scholastic Sources’ in R.L.
Friedman and L.O. Nielsen (eds.), The Medieval Heritage in Early Modern Metaphysics and
Modal Theory, 1400-1700, The New Synthese Historical Library 53 (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2003),
324-6.
79In Periherm. I.15, 201.
80See also 1.4 above. After Aquinas, many authors endorsed the interpretation that Aristotle
did not regard future contingent propositions as true or false.
John Buridan was one of the
few who read Aristotle like Abelard. All assertoric statements are true or false though those
about future contingents are not determinately true or false; Questiones longe super librum
Perihermeneias, ed. R. van der Lecq, Artistarium 4 (Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1983), I.10.
Since most theologians thought that divine omniscience presupposed bivalence, the discussion of
future contingents was divided into historical constructions of Aristotle’s view and the systematic
discussions in theology which usually followed the Abelardian lines. Peter Auriol argued that
since future contingent propositions lack a truth value, even God is aware of the future in a way

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
529
1.7
Essentialist Assumptions
In his treatise On Hypothetical Syllogisms Boethius speaks about two kinds of
conditionals which express a necessary consequence between the antecedent and
the consequent. The consequence is accidentally necessary when the antecedent
and consequent are immutably true but have no internal link between them, for
example ‘If ﬁre is hot, the heavens are spherical’. In a non-accidental consequence,
which Boethius calls natural, there is a conceptual connection between the parts;
for example, ‘If something is human, it is an animal’. Abelard also teaches that
a genuine conditional expresses a necessary consequence in which the antecedent
of itself requires the consequent. These were taken to express immutable laws of
nature derivable from the nature of things.81 A related distinction between per se
and per accidens necessary propositions was employed in mid-thirteenth century
discussions of modal conversion and modal syllogistic. Robert Kilwardby states
that some necessary connections between terms are merely accidentally necessary
in the sense that the things signiﬁed are inseparable. These necessities are not
dealt with in modal syllogistic the necessity propositions of which express per se
necessities explained in Posterior Analytics I.4. The ﬁrst type is said to occur
when the deﬁnition of the subject includes the predicate and the second type
when the deﬁnition of the predicate includes the subject. Typical per se necessary
propositions were those expressing the properties determined by the substantial
form of a subject or, as in the second class, other features based on the genus-
species structure. Terms themselves were necessary if they stood necessarily for
what they signiﬁed, for example ‘horse’. Other terms were accidental, for example
‘white’ or ‘walking’. (See also 2.4 below.)
Necessary propositions which were not per se necessary were often exempliﬁed
by propositions about inseparable accidents. In the Isagoge, Porphyry deﬁnes the
inseparable accident as something which cannot actually be removed from its sub-
ject though the subject can be conceived of without it (3.5-6). The idea of the
degrees of necessity and impossibility was also developed in late ancient discus-
sions of indirect proofs and impossible hypotheses. In order to defend Aristotle’s
indirect proofs with impossible premises, Alexander of Aphrodisias argued that
Aristotle had in mind impossibilities which were not nonsensical.82
Some late
ancient authors were interested in impossible hypotheses as tools for conceptual
which does not imply that future contingent statements are true or false. This was an exceptional
view. See C. Schabel, Theology at Paris, 1316-1345: Peter Auriol and the Problem of Divine
Foreknowledge and Future Contingents (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001).
81Boethius, De hypotheticis syllogismis, I.3.7; Abelard, Dialectica, 253.28-30; 279.12-14;
280,12-18; 283.37-284.17; see also Garland the Computist, Dialectica, 141.7-22.
Some later
twelfth-century masters regarded the principle that the antecedent is not true without the conse-
quent as a suﬃcient condition for the truth of a conditional and accepted the so-called paradoxes
of implication. See C.J. Martin, ‘Logic’ in J. E. Brower and K. Guilfoy (eds.), The Cambridge
Companion to Abelard (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 164-5, 179-81.
82See the report in Simplicius, In Aristotelis Physicorum libros quattuor posteriores commen-
taria, ed. H. Diels, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 10 (Berlin: Reimer, 1895), 1039.13-14,
26-7; translated by C. Hagen in Simplicius, On Aristotle’s Physics 7 (London: Duckworth, 1994),
105.

530
Simo Knuuttila
analysis. In the arguments which were called Eudemian procedures something im-
possible was assumed in order to see what followed. The impossibilities discussed
in this way by Philoponus and Boethius show similarities with Porphyry’s char-
acterization of inseparable accidents as something which cannot occur separately
but can be separated in thought. This analysis, which was counterpossible rather
than counterfactual, inﬂuenced the branch of medieval obligations logic which was
called positio impossibilis. The rules of this logical theory were often applied to
theological problems – impossible hypotheses were regarded as conceivable but
doctrinally impossible.83
In thirteenth-century philosophy, Aristotelian impossible hypotheses were also
explained with the help of special abstract possibilities referring to states of aﬀairs
which could not exist. It was thought that the possibilities of a thing are deter-
mined by its genus, species, and matter. Something which is possible for a subject
as a member of a genus may be impossible for it as a member of a species, and the
same holds of its being a member of a species and a singular being individuated
by matter. This was an essentialist counterfactual analysis without the idea of
alternative possibilities.84 In explaining why Aristotle says that the elements can
be continuous with each other and with the celestial bodies, Aquinas writes as
follows:
But it must be said that the contingent and the impossible are taken
in diﬀerent ways when something is demonstrated of a genus and when
something is demonstrated of a species. For when a species is treated,
that must be taken as impossible which is repugnant to either the genus
or the speciﬁc diﬀerence from which the nature of the species is consti-
tuted. But when a genus is treated, everything which is not repugnant
to the nature of the genus is taken as contingent, even though it may be
repugnant to the diﬀerentia which constitutes the species. For example,
if I am speaking of animal, I can say that every animal being winged is
contingent. But if I descend to the consideration of man, it would be
impossible for this animal to be winged. Now Aristotle is speaking here
about movers and mobile objects in general ... Therefore, he states as
a contingency that all mobile objects are continuous with each other.
83C.J. Martin, ‘Thinking the Impossible: Non-Reductive Arguments from Impossible Hypothe-
ses in Boethius and Philoponus’, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 19 (1999), 279-302, id.,
‘Impossible positio as the Foundation of Metaphysics or, Logic on the Scotist Plan’, in C. Marmo
(ed.), Vestigia, imagines, verba. Semiotics and Logic in Medieval Theological Texts (Turnhout:
Brepols, 1997), 255-76; id., ‘Obligations and Liars’ in S. Read (ed.), Sophisms in Medieval Logic
and Grammar (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993), 357-81.
An example analysed in twelfth century
Christological discussion was that a person is both man and donkey.
This was regarded as
naturally impossible and supernaturally possible since Jesus Christ was a human being and a
divine being simultaneously. See S. Knuuttila, ‘Positio impossibilis in Medieval Discussions of
the Trinity’ in Marmo (ed., 1997), 277-88;
84See Averroes, Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics in Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Com-
mentariis, vol.
5 (Venice 1562-1574), VI.15, 255vb; VII.2, 307vb; Thomas Aquinas, In
Phys.IV.12, 538; VI.3, 774; VII.2, 896; VIII.1, 1009; S. Knuuttila, ‘On the History of Theory of
Modality as Alternativeness’ in T. Buchheim et al. (ed., 2001), 233-5.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
531
This, however, is impossible if mobile objects are considered according
to their determinate natures. (In Phys. VII.2.896)85
Aquinas’s formulations illustrate the nature of medieval essentialism, also showing
some baroque aspects of the theory.
2
MODAL SEMANTICS AND MODAL LOGIC IN TWELFTH AND
THIRTEENTH CENTURIES
2.1
Equipollences and Oppositions
In the Latin translation of Aristotle’s Peri hermeneias by Marius Victorinus, Aris-
totle’s two terms for possible, dunaton and endechomenon, were apparently ren-
dered by possibile and contingens.86
Boethius states that these words may be
taken as meaning the same, although they are not used in quite the same way:
while the privation of possibility is expressed by inpossibile, the corresponding word
incontingens is not used.87 Many twelfth-and thirteenth-century authors thought
that the terms possibile and contingens are used as synonyms or, if not, the term
possibile is used for what is not impossible (possibility proper) and contingens for
what is neither impossible nor necessary (two-edged possibility).88 Using the term
‘possible’ for the basic modality which includes necessity and contingency became
85The translation is quoted from Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, trans-
lated by R.J. Blackwell, R.J. Spath, and W.E. Thirlkel (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1963).
86A. Becker-Freysing, Die Vorgeschichte des philosophischen Terminus ‘contingens’:
Die
Bedeutungen
von
‘contingere’
bei
Boethius
und
ihr
Verh¨altnis
zu
den
Aristotelischen
M¨oglichkeitsbegriﬀen, Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des Altertums und des
Mittelalters D 7 (Heidelberg: Bilabel, 1938), 20-4.
87In Periherm. II, 382.17-22; 384.6-7; 392.17-393.12.
88For the synonymous use, see Peter Abelard, Dialectica 193.31; Super Periermenias XII-XIV,
8, 37; William of Sherwood, Introductio in logicam, 44-5; trans. Kretzmann (1966), 47, 50; Peter
of Spain, Tractatus, I.24.
In an anonymous twelfth-century commentary on Aristotle’s Prior
Analytics (Ms. Orl´eans BM 283) possibile refers to what is not impossible and contingens to this
or to what is neither impossible nor necessary; f. 181a. (For this work, see S. Ebbesen, ‘Analyzing
Syllogisms or Anonymus Aurelianensis III
— The (Pesumably) Earliest Latin Commentary on
the Prior Analytics, and Its Greek Model, Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin,
Universit´e de Copenhague 37 (1981), 1-20.)
In the Dialectica Monacensis the term possibile
is characterized as expressing something like a genus of two species of modality, namely the
necessity and the contingent (De Rijk II-2, 481.9-13, 20-21). Lambert of Auxerre and Robert
Kilwardby suggest that while the common term may be ‘contingent’ or ‘possible’, ‘contingent’
is used for two-edged possibilities (Lambert of Auxerre, Logica, 40.1-42.2; Robert Kilwardby, In
libros Priorum Analyticorum expositio (Venice, 1516, reprinted Frankfurt am Main: Minerva
1968), 7ra-b); see also Albert the Great, Commentarius in librum I Priorum Analyticorum, ed.
A. Borgnet in Opera omnia I (Paris: Viv`es, 1890), IV.4, 546. Roger Bacon and some others
stated that contingens is used of what is true or actual but can be false or un-actual, while
possibile refers to what is false or un-actual but can be true or actual; Roger Bacon, Summulae
dialectices, I: De termino, II: De enuntiatione, ed. A. de Libera, Archives d’histoire doctrinale
et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 61 (1986), II.1.6, 247, 260-1, 395-6, 408-10; de Rijk 1967, II.1, 467;
II-2, 391.19-19.

532
Simo Knuuttila
more common in late medieval logic. The contingency which was separated from
necessary and impossible was often divided into natural (naturale or natum) and
indeﬁnite (inﬁnitum) depending whether the contingency was founded on a natu-
ral tendency which was realized in most cases or was without such a tendency.89 In
Boethius’s frequential classiﬁcation, the contingency was divided into what takes
place in most cases, in few cases, and indeterminately, all these being cases of
utrumlibet.90 While some medieval authors called non-necessary contingency ad
utrumlibet,91 it became more usual to equate ad utrumlibet with the indeﬁnite
contingency.92
Modifying Boethius’s systematization of Aristotle’s remarks in De interpreta-
tione 12 and 13, the authors of this period often presented the equipollences be-
tween modal terms and opposed relations between modal propositions with the
help of the following diagram:
non possibile est non esse
contratriae
non possibile est esse
non contingens est non esse
non contingens est non esse
impossibile est non esse
impossibile est esse
necesse est esse
necesse est non esse
possibile est esse
possibile est non esse
contingens est esse
contingent est non esse
non impossibile est esse
non impossibile est non esse
non possibile est non esse
subcontrariae
non necesse est esse
The square could be taken to refer to modals de dicto or singular modals de re.93
89The background of this division was Aristotle’s Prior Analytics I.13, 32b4-14; see In Pr. an.
(Orl´eans) 186b; Lambert of Auxerre, Logica, 42.5-25; Robert Kilwardby, In Pr. an. 7vb- 8rb;
Albert the Great, In Pr. an. I.12, 477a.
90In Periherm. II, 240.6-21; 248.11-26.
91In Pr.an. (Orl´eans) 181a; Dialectica Monacensis, 481.18-21; Lambert of Auxerre, Logica,
42.4-5.
92Robert Kilwardby, In Pr. an. 7vb, 8rb; Roger Bacon, Summulae dialectics III: De argumen-
tatione, ed. A. de Libera, Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 62 (1987),
III.1.2, 62. Both uses are found in Albert the Great, In Pr. an. I.12, 476a-477a; 1.14, 481b;
see also K. Jacobi, Die Modalbegriﬀe in den logischen Schriften des Wilhelm von Sherwood und
in anderen Kompendien des 12. und 13. Jahrhunderts: Funktionsbestimmung und Gebrauch
in der logischen Analyse (Cologne: Brill, 1980), 92-4; H. Lagerlund, Modal Syllogistics in the
Middle Ages, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 70 (Leiden: Brill, 2000),
23-5.
93de Rijk 1967, II-1, 469-70; II-2, 393.6-394.5; 431.19-26; 483.1-484.5; William of Sherwood,
Introductiones in logicam, 45.11; Peter of Spain, Tractatus I.25, 16.12-13; Roger Bacon, Summu-
lae dialectics II.1.6, 354; Thomas Aquinas, De propositionibus modalibus, ed. H.-F. Dondaine,
Opera omnia 43 (Rome: San Tommaso, 1976), 422. Peter of Abelard explained the relations
without a diagram (Super Periermenias 22.4-25.5).

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
533
Peter Abelard tried to deﬁne the opposed relations between quantiﬁed de re modals
as well. He thought that these were the same as those between singular modal
propositions, which is completely wrong. This question was not much discussed
before its satisfactory solution in the early fourteenth century. (See p. 554 below.)
In discussing the imperfect ﬁrst ﬁgure assertoric-contingency syllogisms, Aris-
totle formulated the principle ‘If when A is, B must be, then when A is possible,
B must be possible’. On the basis of this, he describes syllogisms as follows: ‘If
someone were to put the premises as A and the conclusion as B, it would not only
follow that B is necessary, if A is necessary, but also that B is possible, if A is
possible’ (Prior Analytics I.15, 34a5-7, 22-4). These are the rules of inference
(4)
p →q ⊨Lp →Lq
and
(5)
p →q ⊨Mp →Mq.
In Metaphysics IX.9, 1047b14-20, Aristotle argues for (5) by applying the charac-
terization of potentiality in Metaphysics IX.3, 1047a24-6, which is based on the
deﬁnition in Prior Analytics I.13, 32a18-19: ‘I use the expressions ‘to be possible’
and ‘what is possible’ in application to something if it is not necessary but nothing
impossible will result if it is put as being the case.’ If this is applied to possibility
proper, it could be formulated as
(6)
Mp & (p →q) ⊨Mq.
Aristotle did not develop his general remarks on propositional modal logic, but
these principles were dealt with in later ancient discussions of the logic of condi-
tionals and related issues.94 Similar rules were often put forward in early medieval
logical treatises.95
2.2
Modalities de dicto and de re
In dealing with modal propositions in his later commentary on De interpretatione,
Peter Abelard argues that modal terms in the proper grammatical sense of the
word are adverbs which modify the inherence between a subject and a predicate.
Terms like ‘necessarily’, ‘well’ or ‘rapidly’ are used in this manner; adverbs like
‘possibly’ or ‘falsely’ are analogously called modals, although they do not modify
actual inferences. Nominal modal terms occur in propositions like ‘Necesse est
94See W. and M. Kneale, The Development of Logic (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962), 128-
38; J. Vuillemin, N´ecessit´e ou contingence: l’aporie de Diodore et les syst`emes philosophiques
(Paris: Les ´Editions de Minuit, 1984); S. Bobzien, ‘Chrysippus’s Modal Logic and Its relation to
Philo and Diodorus’ in K. D¨oring and T. Ebert (eds.), Dialektiker und Stoiker (Stuttgart: Franz
Steiner, 1993), 63-84.
95See, e.g., Peter Abelard, Dialectica, 202.6-8; 219.5; Logica ‘Ingredientibus’ 429.36-7; 430.16-
17.

534
Simo Knuuttila
Socratem currere’. When this is understood in accordance with its grammatical
construction, it is not a genuine modal proposition, the mode itself being said of
the grammatical subject which is the accusative and inﬁnitive phrase. The nomi-
nal mode can also be understood in an adverbial manner, however, in which case
the proposition expresses a modalized predication.96 In Abelard’s view, these and
some further ambiguities demanded a systematic investigation of the properties
of various propositions including modal terms. In his approach, grammatical dis-
tinctions were transformed into a logical distinction between de sensu modes and
de re modes. Abelard states that in the present treatise he uses the terms de
sensu and de re in the same way as Aristotle uses the expressions ‘in a compound
sense’ (per compositionem or coniunctionem) and ‘in a divided sense’ (per divi-
sionem) in Sophistici elenchi 4, 166a23-30, and that the distinction, understood
in this way, maintains an inference from an aﬃrmative possibility proposition de
sensu to a corresponding aﬃrmative possibility proposition de re. When possi-
bility propositions de sensu are interpreted in a compound sense, both de sensu
readings and de re readings are in fact de re readings which express modalized
predications about actual things. The diﬀerence between these is that a modal
proposition de sensu in a compound sense asserts that a subject which is said to
have a predicate possibly, necessarily, or impossibly has it together with all de-
scriptions of the subject mentioned in the proposition. A modal proposition de re
does not imply this combination.97 The compound de sensu reading of ‘An F is
necessarily/possibly/impossibly G’ is:
(7)
An x which is F is necessarily/possibly/impossibly G while remaining F
and the de re reading is
(8)
An x which is F is necessarily/possibly/impossibly G.
In addition to this analysis, Abelard mentions that de sensu modalities can also be
understood in an impersonal manner in which case they do not refer to capacities or
incapacities embedded in actual beings but instead to what can or cannot be. A de
sensu possibility proposition in this strict sense does not imply a de re possibility
proposition with an existential import. Abelard’s examples are ‘Every substance
is a spirit’ and ‘My son is living’ said by a person not having a son. These are not
true in the Aristotelian sense, but possible in the sense of what is not repugnant
to nature.98 The diﬀerences between Abelard’s strict de sensu — reading and (7)
and (8) could be expressed in standard modern notation as follows:
(9)
♦Ex(Fx & Gx)
96Super Periermenias 3.7-11.16.
97Super Periermenias 13.15-14.4; 30.25-31.10.
98Super Perihermenias 29.13-30.25; cf. 20.13-21.15. For impersonal modal constructions in
Abelard, see K. Jacobi, ‘Diskussionen ¨uber unpers¨onliche Aussagen in Peter Abaelards Kommen-
tar zu Peri hermeneias’ in E.P. Bos (ed.), Medieval Semantics and Metaphysics, Artistarium
Supplementa 2 (Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1985), 30-40.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
535
(10)
Ex(Fx & ♦(Fx & Gx))
(11)
Ex(Fx & ♦(Gx).
As already mentioned, Abelard applied the distinction between compound and
divided meanings, without using these terms, in his inﬂuential analysis of the
compatibility between contingency and divine omniscience.
After Abelard the
sections about modal propositions in logical treatises often begin with remarks
on adverbial and nominal modes. According to the Dialectica Monacensis, the
modal adverb qualiﬁes the composition between the subject and the predicate.
Modal propositions with nominal modes can be taken to mean the same as cor-
responding adverbial modal propositions or can be taken to mean that what is
expressed by the accusative and inﬁnitive element is necessary, possible, or impos-
sible. The adverbial modes are said to be dealt with in Aristotle’s Prior Analytics
and the non-adverbial nominal modes in his De interpretatione.99 The structure
of adverbial modal propositions without negation is:
(12)
quantity/subject/mode, copula/predicate.
The question of the quality (aﬃrmative, negative) is associated with the problem
that the sign of negation can be located in two diﬀerent places:
(13)
quantity/subject/negation, mode, copula/predicate
or
(14)
quantity/subject/mode, negation, copula/ predicate.
If modal propositions with a negation are read in accordance with (13), then
the mode is denied; if they are read in accordance with (14), the modal adverb
qualiﬁes a negated predication. The quality and quantity of modal propositions
are determined by those of the corresponding non-modal propositions. Thus (14)
is a negative modal proposition and (13) an aﬃrmative proposition with a negated
mode. Propositions with non-adverbial nominal modes are always singular, their
form being:
(15)
subject/copula/mode.
In the Dialectica Monacensis, modal propositions with the structure of (12)–(14)
are also called de re or divided modalities and those with the structure of (15) de
dicto or compound modalities.100 This terminology was commonly employed in
later medieval treatises.101 In the twelfth century some logicians began to apply
the grammatical distinction between categorematic and syncategorematic terms to
99de Rijk 1967, II-2, 479.35-480.26.
100de Rijk 1967, II-2, 570.22-9.
101See Jacobi 1980, ch. 4.

536
Simo Knuuttila
modal terms. These were taken to have a categorematic meaning as de re modes
and a syncategorematic meaning as de dicto modes.102
The distinction between various interpretations of possibility propositions was
extensively dealt with in twelfth- and thirteenth-century discussion of Aristotle’s
examples of fallacies based on shortcomings in distinguishing between compound
and divided meanings. The compound interpretation of ‘A standing man can sit’
was usually taken to be ‘It is possible that a man sits and stands at the same time’.
Many authors formulated the corresponding divided interpretation as involving a
reference to a later or earlier time.103 The reference to another time was based on
the assumption that the necessity of the present prevents the acceptance of
(16)
p (now) & ♦−p (now).
The authors who regarded (16) as false did not operate with counterfactual alter-
natives. They thought that if an unactualized present possibility is assumed to
be actualized, something impossible follows, as is seen in the rule of thirteenth-
century obligations logic, according to which one should deny that the ‘now’ of a
disputation is the present ‘now’, if it is assumed for the case of argument that a
contingent proposition which is false now is true.104
In discussing the proposition ‘That which is standing can sit’ the author of
the Dialectica Monacensis states that the de re possibility can be predicated of
the subject abstracting from the subject’s actual qualiﬁcations; this may imply a
counterfactual interpretation of the modal proposition. Another example of the
idea of modal alternativeness in this and some other works is found in the theory
that the word ‘can’ may ampliate the subject term so that it stands for actual and
merely possible beings.105
102For some examples, see Syncategoremata Monacensia in Braakhuis 1979, 99-100, translated
in N. Kretzmann and E. Stump (eds.), The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical
texts I: Logic and the Philosophy of Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988),
168-9; William of Sherwood, Syncategoremata, ed. J.R. O’Donnell, Mediaeval Studies 3 (1941),
72-3, trans. with an introduction and notes by N. Kretzmann in William of Sherwood’s Treatise
on Syncategorematic Words (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1968), 100-101; Jacobi
1980, 86-7, 207-9, 339-41.
103See notes 15 and 29 above.
104In De obligationibus attributed to Willam of Sherwood, the author writes: ‘When a false
contingent proposition concerning the actual instant of time has been posited one must deny that
it is the actual instant. This is proved as follows. Let A be the name of the actual instant; it is
discrete name and not a common name. When it is false that you are in Rome, it is impossible
that it is true then or in A. It can become true only through a motion or through a change, but
it cannot become true trough a motion in A, because there is no motion in an instant. And it
cannot become true through a change, since if there were a change to truth in A, the truth would
be in A, for whenever there is a change, there is the term of that change. So it is impossible
that this false proposition becomes true in A. Therefore, if it is true, A is not actual.’ The text
is edited in R. Green, The Logical Treatise ‘De obligationibus’: An Introduction with Critical
Texts of William of Sherwood (?) and Walter Burley (PhD diss., University of Louvain, 1963).
105de Rijk 1967, II-2, 570.18-571.9; 623.33-624.26. Cf. 1.5 above.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
537
2.3
Modalities with Temporal Determinations
Avicenna and Abelard showed particular interest in alethic modalities with deter-
minations. Like Boethius, Abelard divided propositions with a dum -phrase (‘so
long as’) into two groups, depending on whether the determination was intrinsic
or extrinsic, i.e., whether it is the same as the modalized predicate or not. Both
of these can be understood in two ways. The word dum can be taken to indicate
time and to form a compound predicate.
In this ‘modal’ reading the intrinsic
or extrinsic dum phrase is included as a restriction in what is predicated with a
modal qualiﬁcation. Or they may be considered as complex propositions which
have as parts a modal proposition and a non-modal dum proposition and assert
that something is necessary or possible or impossible and things are as the dum
phrase says they are.106 There were similar discussions in Avicenna. In the part
on logic of his Pointers and Reminders, Avicenna distinguishes between absolute
necessity propositions (like ‘God exists), which are always true and refer to eternal
things, and various conditional necessity propositions. These are true while the
non-eternal substances referred to by the subject terms exist (like ‘Man is neces-
sarily a rational body’), some descriptions are attached the substances (like ‘All
that is moving is necessarily changing’), what is predicated is actual or a deﬁnite
or indeﬁnite time is actual.107 Propositions which are necessary on the condition
that the subject is qualiﬁed by a description show similarities to Abelard’s de re
compound modal propositions.
Apart from the distinction between two basic readings Abelard’s remarks on
the propositions which contain a modal term and a dum phrase are not always
easily understood. If the temporal dum phrase is included in the modal propo-
sition, one may wonder how to understand the diﬀerence between simple modal
propositions and modal propositions with temporal determinants. Abelard states
that a determined possibility proposition implies a corresponding simple possibil-
ity proposition, but not vice versa, and a simple necessity proposition implies a
determinate necessity proposition, but not vice versa.108 These principles could be
derived from the standard idea that simple possibilities are temporally indeﬁnite
and may be prevented from being actualized as temporally qualiﬁed, but Abelard
also refers to a distinction between treating the determination as pertaining to
a modal term and treating it as pertaining to the scope which is modalized.109
106Dialectica 206.14-37; Super Periermenias 36.22-37.23.
107Avicenna, Pointers and Reminders, part one, Logic, trans. by S.C. Inati (under the title
Remarks and Admonitions, Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1984), 92-4; see
also T. Street, ‘An Outline of Avicenna’s Syllogistic’, Archiv f¨ur Geschichte der Philosophie 84
(2002), 133-4; P. Thom, Medieval Modal Systems: Problems and Concepts, Ashgate Studies in
Medieval Philosophy (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003), 67-8, 74-6. For temporal and modal concepts
in medieval Arabic logic, see also N. Rescher, Temporal Modalities in Arabic Logic, Foundations
of Language Supplementary Series 2 (Dordecht: Reidel, 1967).
108Super Perihermenias 36.11-21.
109Super Perihermenias 41.23-42.6. See also the discussion in R. Pinzani, The Logical Grammar
of Abelard, The New Synthese Historical Library 51 (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2003), 111-16.

538
Simo Knuuttila
‘Socrates necessarily sits when he sits’ is true in the ﬁrst case but false in the
second case. Perhaps he means that while the modal status of a proposition per-
taining to a temporally deﬁnite event is basically independent of temporal changes,
it can be changeable when the modal qualiﬁcation is evaluated from a temporal
point of view. Things which are not necessary now may be so to-morrow. This is in
agreement with Abelard’s view about unchangeable metaphysical necessities and
possibilities and temporal modalities which are associated with real potencies.110
After Abelard, an often discussed theory about time and modality was associ-
ated with the distinction between temporal modalities per se and per accidens.
Per se necessary propositions were said to be true whenever they were uttered and
per accidens necessary propositions, true past tense singular propositions referring
to a deﬁnite event, were unchangeably true after having begun to be true. The
same analysis was applied to impossible propositions as well.111
2.4
Modal Conversion
While the conversion of assertoric propositions was frequently discussed in early
medieval logic, the modal conversions were not often dealt with before the Prior
Analytics began to be used in logic teaching in the thirteenth century. One ear-
lier example is Peter Abelard’s remark that modal propositions in the divided
sense are only convertible into assertoric propositions, not into modal proposi-
tions; for example, ‘For every man it is possible to run’ converts into ‘Something
for which it is possible to run is a man’.112 This was found problematic when
it was realized that conversion of modals into modals played an important role
in Aristotle’s modal syllogistics which seemed to concentrate on modalities in the
divided sense.113 According to Aristotle (An. pr. I.3), necessity propositions are
converted in the same way as the corresponding assertoric propositions: a univer-
sal aﬃrmative predication (AaB) implies a converted particular predication (BiA),
a particular aﬃrmative predication (AiB) is equivalent with a converted predica-
tion (BiA), and a universal negative predication (AeB) is converted into universal
negative predication (BeA). The ﬁrst conversion was called accidental and the
others simple. While these rules are not problematic with respect to modals in
the compound sense, Aristotle employed them in proving modal syllogisms some
of which seem to be acceptable only when the premises are modal propositions in
110Abelard often thinks of possibility in terms of potency attaching to things of a particular
species; see J. Marenbon, ‘Abelard’s Concept of Possibility’ in B. Mojsisch and O. Pluta (eds.),
Historia philosophiae medii aevi: Studien zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters (Am-
sterdam and Philadelphia: Gruener, 1991), 595-609, reprinted in Marenbon 2000; for the idea of
metaphysical alternatives, see C.J. Martin, ‘Abelard on Modality: Some Posibilities and Some
Puzzles’, T. Buchheim et al. (eds. 2001), 97-124; Martin 2003.
111See de Rijk II-1, 371; II-2; 429.1-10; 481.22-482.14; Roger Bacon, Summulae dialectices 2.1.6,
366-72; William of Sherwood, Introductiones in logicam 41.8-16, trans. Kretzmann 1966, 41, and
note 16 above.
112Super Perihermenias 11.17-12.20.
113For this view of modal syllogistics, see Summe Metenses in de Rijk 1967, II-1, 468; Dialectica
Monacensis, de Rijk 1967, II-2, 480.10-16; Lambert of Auxerre, Logica 30.17-23.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
539
the divided sense. One of the problems of his modal syllogistics is that reading
these conversion rules in the divided sense leads to obvious diﬃculties: the actu-
ality of subjects changes into necessity and possibility into actuality. Contrary to
what one might expect, the relationship between compound and divided modali-
ties was not dealt with in mid-thirteenth-century discussions of Aristotle’s rules,
these being associated with various philosophical ideas of the nature of necessity
and contingency. Many authors tried to redeﬁne syllogistic necessity propositions
in a way which would match the conversion rules. This took place in treating some
often repeated counter-examples, such as
(17)
Everything literate is necessarily a human being
(18)
Everything healthy (or awake) is necessarily an animal
or
(19)
Everything white is necessarily a body.
It was considered an obvious fact that no animal is necessarily healthy or that
‘Some animal is healthy’ is not a necessary truth. Some authors argued that in
examples like (17)–(19) the denominative subject terms refer to things which are
qualiﬁed by non-essential forms and that these terms should be treated in the same
way when they are predicates.114 ‘An animal is necessarily healthy’ is taken to
mean that an animal is necessarily that which is healthy. Accordingly, (17) could
be read: ‘Every literate being is necessarily a member of the class of human beings’,
but even then the conversion ‘Some human beings are necessarily members of the
class of literate beings’ is false, if this is not understood, as Lambert of Auxerre
suggests, to mean that some human beings are necessarily those who are literate,
that is, human beings.
Robert Kilwardby, after mentioning this pretty artiﬁcial idea, moves to a ‘more
probable’ interpretation which is based on the view that convertible necessity
premises in modal syllogistic are necessity propositions per se and not per acci-
dens, like (17)–(19), which are not convertible. In aﬃrmative necessity proposi-
tions per se, the subject is per se connected to the predicate. In negative necessity
propositions per se, the subject is apparently per se incompatible with the predi-
cate. In accidental necessity propositions, the connection is not based on a per se
inherence or repugnance.115 In explaining the notion of per se later in his work,
114See Lambert of Auxerre, Logica 39.1-41; Robert Kilwardby, In Pr. an. 7ra; Roger Bacon,
Summulae dialectices III.1.2, 58, 60; cf. In Pr. an. (Orl´eans) f. 180b.
115In Pr. an. 7ra-b; cf. 45rb for essential negative propositions. Kilwardby’s concludes in 7rb:
‘Therefore, when Aristotle teaches that necessity propositions are convertible, he means that
only per se necessity propositions are convertible’. Aristotle did not say this; Kilwardby followed
the medieval commentator habit of maintaining that what commentators found reasonable was
what Aristotle said or meant. Kilwardby seems to assume that syllogistic necessity propositions
should be taken in the divided sense or at least not in the composite sense (27va). For per se
necessity in Kilwardby, see also Lagerlund 2000, 25-42; Thom 2003, 93-6; P. Thom, Logic and
Ontology in the Syllogistic of Robert Kilwardby, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des
Mittelalters 92 (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 19-28.

540
Simo Knuuttila
Kilwardby refers to Aristotle’s discussion of diﬀerent types of essential predication
in Posterior Analytics I.4. He does not give a detailed explanation of why the
per se inherences or incompatibilities make propositions convertible, but he does
associate convertible propositions with terms signifying their subjects invariably
and in this sense necessarily.116 This excluded the conversion of per se necessary
predications involving accidental terms, such as ‘All walking is necessarily moving.’
There were similar discussions among Arabic philosophers. Avicenna did not
accept the conversion of aﬃrmative necessary propositions, although he considered
the conversion of universal negative necessity propositions as valid.117 Averroes
restricted the syllogistic necessity premises to necessity propositions per se. In
these propositions the terms, such as ‘animal’, are essential, invariably signifying
necessary constituents of things. Accidental terms, such as ‘walking’ or ‘white’,
signify accidental things. The background to this distinction is Post. An. I.4.118
The conversion of these propositions is regarded as unproblematic. The idea that
the terms of syllogistic necessity premises are themselves essential also occurs in
Kilwardby, although he does not use quite the same terminology.
Averroes, Robert Kilwardby, Albert the Great, and their followers regarded
Aristotle’s modal syllogistics as a correct theory of modalities, the explication of
which often demanded metaphysical considerations. Restricting the modal con-
version of necessity propositions to those involving essential terms is an example
of this attempt to discern the unity and coherence of Aristotle’s theory. The same
orientation dominated the discussion of the conversion of contingent propositions.
According to Aristotle, a two-edged negative contingency proposition (neither
necessary nor impossible) implies an aﬃrmative contingency proposition of the
same quantity, and all contingency propositions are converted by the conversion
of terms into particular contingency propositions (An. pr. I.3, 25a37-b19; 13,
116In Pr. an. 8va; 22ra; 25rb; Roger Bacon, (Summulae, III.1.2, 59) refers to Aristotle’s ﬁrst
and second mode of per se predication (An. post. I.4, 73a34-b5). Cf. Albert the Great, In Pr.
an. IV.10,559a.
117Avicenna’s discussion of the conversion diﬀers from other medieval approaches because of
his special view that the subject terms and predicate terms of assertoric propositions stand
for all possible applications. The instantiations of the subject term of a universal aﬃrmative
proposition are asserted to have the predicate at least once (Pointers and Reminders 2.5, trans.
in Street 2002, 134). Other classes of proposition are treated in an analogous way. Avicenna
took this to mean that universal negative assertoric propositions are not convertible (3.3; Street
2002, 143). The terms of modal propositions are ampliated in the same way as the terms of
assertoric propositions.
Universal negative necessity propositions are simply convertible and
other necessity propositions are not convertible. Universal negative possibility propositions do
not convert. Aﬃrmative possibility proper propositions convert like assertoric propositions (3.5;
Street 2002, 144-5; Thom 2003, 65-6, 69).
118Averroes’s detailed discussion of the structure of modal propositions is included in his sep-
arate essay on modal syllogistics, translated into Latin in the Quaesita octo in librum Priorum
Analyticorum Aristotelis in Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis I.2b (Venice 1562-
1574); see IV.3, 83-4.
In his commentary on the Prior Analytics (Media expositio in libros
Priorum Resolutoriorum in Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis (Venice, 1562-74),
I.1) Averroes simply says that necessary predications express essential connections; see 45va.
See also Thom 2003, 81-5.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
541
32a29-b1). This was taken for granted in mid-thirteenth-century logical treatises.
It was noted that while the converted propositions of indeﬁnite contingency propo-
sitions are of the same type of contingency, the conversion of natural contingency
propositions or of those of the minor part contingency, whether with respect to
quality or terms, result in diﬀerent modal propositions.119 There were extensive
discussions of the kinds of contingency in the commentaries by Robert Kilwardby
and Albert the Great and in other treatises by their contemporaries based on
various philosophical ideas of contingency.120 Following Aristotle’s remark in An.
pr. I.13, 32b23-32, according to which ‘A contingently belongs to B’ may mean
either ‘to that to which B belongs’ or ‘to that to which B contingently belongs’,
Kilwardby argues that the major premise in uniform ﬁrst ﬁgure contingency syl-
logisms is read in the second way, having the form ‘Everything/something that
is contingently B is contingently A’.121 Contingency premises are ampliated, if
syllogistic relations do not demand restrictions.122
In explaining the diﬀerence
between necessity propositions and contingency propositions in this respect, Kil-
wardby teaches that syllogistic terms are substantial or accidental. Substantial
terms necessarily stand for the things they signify, while accidental terms con-
tingently stand for them.
Since the terms in per se necessity propositions are
substantial, ‘Every A is necessarily B’ and ‘Whatever is necessarily A is necessar-
ily B’ mean the same.123
Averroes did not have much to add to what Aristotle says about the convertibil-
ity of contingent propositions, except that the subject terms of syllogistic contin-
gency
propositions
are
always
meant
to
be
read
with
the
preﬁx
‘Everything/something which is or is contingently’.124 As distinct from the mid-
119In Pr. an. (Orl´eans), 186b; Lambert of Auxerre, Logica, 42.26-49.43; Robert Kilwardby,
In Pr. An. 8rb-va; Peter of Spain, Syncategoreumata, ed. with an introduction by L.M. de
Rijk, with an English translation by J. Spruyt, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des
Mittelalters 30 (Leiden: Brill, 1992), VII.6, 284-7: 17-19, 294-7; Albert the Great, Pr. an. I.13,
477a-480b; 14, 482b; Roger Bacon, Summulae III.1.2, 61-6; Jacobi 1980, 83-4, 382. For the kinds
of contingency, see also Averroes, Media expositio in libros Priorum Resolutoriorum 35vb-36ra.
120According to Aristotle, universal negative possibility proper propositions are simply convert-
ible into universal negative possibility propositions (An. pr. 1.3, 25b3-14). It was concluded
from this that a universal negative contingency proposition is convertible into a universal neg-
ative possibility proposition; see Lambert of Auxerre, Logica, 47.14-48.7; Robert Kilwardby, In
Pr. an. 9ra; Roger Bacon, Summulae, III.1.2, 64; Albert the Great, In Pr.an. I.14, 480a-482b.
121Kilwardby, In Pr. an. .
122In Pr. an. 19vb; 21ra-b; Kilwardby says later that the subject term of the minor premise
of a universal ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogism may also be actual (22rb).
123In In Pr.
an.
21ra-b; 22ra-b.
See also Thom 2007, 22-3.
These considerations did not
inﬂuence conversion rules. Kilwardby did not ﬁnd it problematic that the contingency premises
in various mixed third-ﬁgure moods, which he did not treat as ampliated, were converted in
Aristotle’s modal syllogistic.
124Media expositio in libros Priorum Resolutoriorum, 38rb; 44ra-b.
According to Averroes,
Alfarabi mistakenly argued that the subject-term ampliates to the possible in all syllogistic
premises. In fact this is true only of contingency propositions (28vb). Alfarabi’s lost commentary
on the Prior Analytics may be the source of Avicenna’s view of ampliation (note 117 above).
See also T. Street, “‘The Eminent Later Scholar” in Avicenna’s Book of the Syllogism’, Arabic
Science and Philosophy 11 (2001), 205-18.

542
Simo Knuuttila
thirteenth century Latin commentators, Averroes taught that dealing with the
various types of non-necessary contingent propositions is not relevant in logic.125
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics continued to be part of university logic teaching in
the thirteenth century. Kilwardby’s commentary was used in this context as is
shown by the fact that many of the questions dealt with by him were considered
in later thirteenth-century treatises on the Prior Analytics. These have not yet
been edited. The next edited work is Richard Campsall’s Questions on Prior An-
alytics, written in Oxford c. 1305.126 Campsall often refers to various views which
show that he was familiar with modal ideas diﬀerent from those in Kilwardby.
Fourteen of twenty questions are about modal propositions and two are about
past and future tense propositions. Campsall almost always begins his discussions
of modal questions by referring to the distinction between compound and divided
modal propositions, apparently thinking that one should deal with the logic of
both readings, as he does to some extent. This became a standard procedure after
Campsall. Analysing the ﬁne structure of singular modal propositions and reduc-
ing the role of metaphysical principles were further new features of Campsall’s
work in comparison to the mid-thirteenth century logic of modalities. He wanted
to show that Aristotle’s theory was consistent, although it was associated with
various problems. In trying to resolve these, Campsall was obliged to formulate
some rules which were not used by Aristotle.
Campsall treats the conversions of necessity and contingency propositions in
the compound sense as the conversions of their assertoric contents (dicta). These
conversions are based on the rules that when assertoric propositions are qualiﬁed
by the notions of necessity or contingency (neither necessary nor impossible), the
converted propositions are qualiﬁed by necessity or contingency, with the exception
that the conversion of universal aﬃrmative contingency propositions does not al-
ways result in the same kind of contingency.127 Divided necessity propositions are
also converted in the same way as assertoric propositions, and the same holds true
of aﬃrmative contingency propositions.128 Negative contingency propositions are
regarded as equivalent to aﬃrmative contingency propositions of the same quan-
tity.129 Campsall regards these as Aristotelian modal principles and makes use of
some additional rules in order to defend their questionable validity.
Campsall describes the notion of necessity as follows:
An aﬃrmative necessity proposition in the divided sense is true only
125Media expositio in libros Priorum Resolutoriorum 36rb.
126Quaestiones super librum Priorum Analyticorum in The Works of Richard Campsall I, ed.
E.A. Synan (Totonto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1968); there are a lot of mistakes
in this is edition. For unedited works, see Ch.H. Lohr, ‘Medieval Latin Aristotle Commentaries’,
Traditio 23-30 (1967-74).
1275.39 (111); 6.21 (121); 7.32 (135).
When ‘contingens’ and ‘possibile’ are not treated as
synonyms, ‘contingens’ refers to what is neither necessary nor impossible and ‘possibile’ to what
is not impossible (as in 7.32). Campsall does not discus the distinctions between the kinds of
contingency on which earlier authors spent much time.
1285.40 (111); 6.22-4 (121-2); 7.33 (135-6).
12916.21 (250).

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
543
if something contained under the predicate term is unchangeable with
respect to something contained under the subject term, as long as this
exists. This holds when the terms are common. When the terms are
singular, it is required that what is signiﬁed by one is not changeable
with respect to what is signiﬁed by the other, as long as this exists.130
Unchangeable features signiﬁed by common terms may be transcendental proper-
ties, such as ‘something’, substantial forms, properties based on the species nature
of things, such as ‘mortal’, ‘living’, or other inseparable attributes.131
Divided
aﬃrmative necessity propositions with common or singular terms include the as-
sumption that the properties designated by the terms belong invariably to some
same actual individuals, as long as these exist.132
Campsall believes that this
reading of divided necessity propositions explains why they are regulated by the
Aristotelian rules of conversion.
The strict restriction to actual things is not
separately explained since Campsall probably thought that Aristotelian necessity
premises should be treated in this way and that only actual things can have nec-
essary properties. Much attention is paid to the example ‘A pale Socrates is nec-
essarily Socrates’. This is said to be false for the reason that what the accidental
subject term signiﬁes is not an invariable characterization of Socrates.133 Camp-
sall does not deal with the traditional universal or particular counter-examples,
thinking that they can be analysed into the conjunctions or disjunctions of singular
propositions with terms standing for accidental combinations.
The equation of necessity with unchanging relations pushes Campsall’s theory
toward the temporal frequency approaches of necessity. It is also characterized by
some versions of the principles that the present is necessary and that possibility
implies actuality. Let us take a look at his proofs of the conversion of divided
necessity propositions. According to Campsall, ‘Every/some B is necessarily A’
is converted into ‘some A is necessarily B’, because the negation of the converted
proposition ‘Every A is possibly not B’ is not compatible with the proposition to
be converted. This is allegedly shown by the fact that were the negation true, a
particular being, say c, which is B and necessarily A would be possibly not B.
This is said to be impossible, apparently because c is necessarily B qua being
unchangingly A.134
Campsall’s proof of the convertibility of universal negative
divided necessity proposition is similar — this time he states that ‘this consequence
is necessary: c can be one of those which are now contained under B; therefore it
1306.25 (122-3).
1315.43-5 (112-3); 9.18 (157).
132For the actuality condition, see 5.40 (111); divided negative propositions express that the
things under the terms are necessarily separated (5.38 (110)).
1336.25-31 (122-5).
1346.22 (121-2). According to Lagerlund, Campsall assumes that if c is possibly not B now, it
is not B now (2001, 68). Campsall explicitly denies this principle later (19.21 (297)) and the
argument can be understood as indicated above. Campsall maintains, however, that if c is not
B now, it is necessarily not B now (5.50 (114)). If all negative propositions about actual things
are necessary, it is clear that there are no simultaneous de re alternatives. In this sense actuality
implies necessity. It seems that Campsall was not fully aware of the problems embedded in his
formulations.

544
Simo Knuuttila
is one of those which are now contained under B’.135 Possibility implies actuality
in the sense that an aﬃrmative possibility proposition about actual connections
between things implies the corresponding aﬃrmative proposition.
Campsall states that Aristotle’s rules for the conversion of divided contingency
propositions can be applied to predications the subject terms of which stand for
things which are under them or which are contingently under them. As far as
the predicate term stands for actual things, the distinction pertains to contingent
attributes of things which are necessarily (per se) or contingently (per accidens)
under the subject term.136
Contingency means in this context that things sig-
niﬁed by the terms are not invariable with respect to each other. Applying the
standard supposition analysis, Campsall states that a universal aﬃrmative con-
tingency proposition in the divided sense means that A1 is contingently B1 or B2
and so on and A2 is contingently B1 or B2 and so on. A particular proposition is a
disjunction of these. ‘This A is contingently this B’ is said to express a conjunction
of two possibility proper propositions one of which is aﬃrmative and the other is
negative, ‘This A is possibly this B and this same A is possibly not this same B’.
The converted form can be neither necessary nor impossible, because the cover-
sions of these would be incompatible with the original contingency proposition.137
If the terms stand for actual things, the negative possibility proposition denies
that the attribute which possibly and therefore actually belongs to the subject
does so necessarily, i.e., A and B as the attributes of this c are not invariable with
respect to each other.
2.5
Modal Syllogistics
Avicenna wrote a brief summary of Aristotle’s modal syllogistics, but his own the-
ory was diﬀerent, concentrating on necessities and proper possibilities understood
in the same way as divided modal propositions in Latin discussions and being based
on ampliated terms and conversion rules mentioned above. He also sketched some
ideas about modal syllogistics for propositions with temporal determinants. Inso-
far as Avicenna treated the terms of assertoric propositions as modally ampliﬁed
and equated the truth-conditions of purely assertoric propositions and possibility
propositions, syllogisms with assertoric and necessity premises are similar to syl-
logisms with possibility and necessity premises and syllogisms with assertoric and
possibility premises or with assertoric premises to uniform possibility syllogisms.138
While Averroes’s commentary on the Prior Analytics follows the main lines of
Aristotle’s text, his separate treatise on modality involves new systematic ideas,
mainly the theory of accidental and per se necessary essential terms. According
to Averroes, necessary syllogistic premises are per se necessary propositions with
1355.40 (111).
1367.33 (135), 17.56 (270).
1377.34-6 (135-7). See also Lagerlund 2000, 69-72.
138See note 117 above; Street 2002; Thom 2003, 67-80. For later Arabic criticism of Avicenna’s
temporal frequency approach to modality and modal syllogistic, see also Street 2005.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
545
per se necessary essential terms. Since modal premises are of the divided type, as-
sertoric premises in Aristotelian mixed necessary-assertoric-syllogisms must have
a predicate term which in fact is necessary. Universal and particular propositions
of this kind are called assertoric per se and necessary per accidens, since the pred-
icate always belongs to the subject when the subject is actual. Propositions with
a necessary subject term and a non-necessary predicate term are said to be tem-
porally assertoric, since the predicate belongs to the subject merely at some times.
The ﬁrst premise in mixed assertoric-necessary syllogisms must be of this kind (or
a proposition of necessary matter). The conclusion in the ﬁrst case is necessary
per accidens and in the second case temporally assertoric.139 This is a speculative
explanation of Aristotle’s asymmetric treatment of mixed necessary-assertoric syl-
logisms and mixed assertoric-necessary syllogisms.140 Analogous essentialist ideas
were developed in thirteenth-century Latin discussions.141 According to Averroes,
all syllogistic contingency propositions are ampliated with respect to potential sub-
jects.142 Assertoric premises in mixed contingency-assertoric syllogisms are based
on universal predications which hold for all times for all subjects or at least for
most subjects.143
The ﬁrst known Latin commentary on Prior Analytics (Ms. Orl´eans BM 283)
involves fairly detailed explications of Aristotle’s modal moods and discussions
of many problems dealt with in ancient commentaries.
A concise summary of
Aristotle’s modal syllogistic is also provided in the late twelfth-century Dialectica
Monacensis, and the elements of modal syllogistics seem to have been discussed in
logic courses in the ﬁrst part of the thirteenth century.144 In the 1240’s, Robert
Kilwardby’s commentary became an authoritative work on Aristotle’s Prior Ana-
lytics. The remarks on modal syllogistics in Albert the Great’s commentary were
largely derived from Kilwardby.
According to Kilwardby, the premises and the conclusion in uniform neces-
sity syllogisms should be necessary per se, as is clear from his interpretation of
the conversion rules of necessary propositions.145 In mixed ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogisms
with a major necessity premise and a minor assertoric premise, the non-modalized
premise should be simpliciter assertoric rather than merely ut nunc (as-of-now).
A simply assertoric premise of this mixture includes a predication which is per se
139Quaesita octo in librum Priorum Analyticorum, IV.3, 84.
140See also the discussion in Thom 2003, 81-5.
141Gersonides tries to develop further Averroes’s remarks in the modal part of his Book of the
Correct Syllogism; see Manekin, 1992, 309.
142See note 124 above.
143Media expositio in libros Priorum Resolutoriorum, 45va-b.
144See, e.g., Braakhuis 1979, 243-4; de Rijk 1967, II-1, 468; Peter of Spain, Syncategoreumata,
304; Compendium examinatorium Parisiense, ed. C. Laﬂeur and J. Carrier (Qu´ebec: Facult´e de
Philosophie, Universit´e Laval, 1992), 176-94.
145While Kilwardby does not analyse the structure of necessity premises in discussing the uni-
form necessity syllogism (15ra-16ra), he explains the nature of per se necessity premises elsewhere
(16va; 21ra; 22ra; 25rb). In treating the exposition proofs of Baroco and Bocardo, Kilwardby
states that either particular premises are changed into universal premises in expository syllogisms
or expository syllogisms are formed by taking one singular example and having two singular
premises (16ra).

546
Simo Knuuttila
in the ﬁrst or second way (cf. Aristotle, An. post. I.4) and consequently nec-
essary per se and not merely per accidens.
Similarly Kilwardby states that in
mixed ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogisms with contingent and assertoric premises the assertoric
premise must be simply assertoric, but now not necessary. It is simply assertoric
if the predicate belongs to the subject essentially, invariably or by natural contin-
gency.146 Kilwardby states that even though the conclusions in mixed ﬁrst-ﬁgure
necessary-assertoric moods and mixed assertoric-necessary moods with simply as-
sertoric premises are necessary, they are syllogistically derived as necessary only
in the ﬁrst case. The modal character of the predicate in the conclusion of perfect
ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogisms follows that of the ﬁrst premise which involves the whole
syllogism in accordance with the dici de omni et nullo.147
In explaining the varieties in reading assertoric premises in mixed syllogisms,
Kilwardby states that a ﬁrst-ﬁgure major necessity premises ‘appropriates’ to itself
a minor which is unrestrictedly assertoric, i.e., necessary per se. No such appropri-
ation occurs in ﬁrst-ﬁgure mixed assertoric-necessity syllogisms, the ﬁrst premise
being either necessary or true as-of-now. In the second ﬁgure, while the universal
negative necessity premise appropriates to itself an unrestricted assertoric premise,
a particular necessity premise cannot appropriate a universal to itself, nor an aﬃr-
mative a negative. There are similar considerations about third-ﬁgure moods.148
In uniform contingency syllogisms, the subject term of the major premise is
read ‘Everything/something that is contingently A’ but this ampliation does not
concern mixed contingency syllogisms.149 This major contingency premise is al-
ways false when the subject is an accidental term and the predicate a substantial
term. If the same applies to contingent minor premises, it seems that a major
premise can be true with a minor only when the middle term is accidental, taking
for granted that both terms cannot be substantial in a true contingency proposi-
tion. Kilwardby explains, however, that if the subject term of the minor premise
is not ampliated, it may be true even when the predicate is a substantial term.150
Kilwardby’s considerations show similarities to Averroes’s classiﬁcation of modal
propositions with essential and accidental terms. Both authors assume that propo-
sitions of the same form can have diﬀerent interpretations depending on how they
are related to other propositions in a syllogism. These interpretation rules are
based on various metaphysical assumptions. Kilwardby’s ad hoc remarks on con-
tingency premises read in the sense of natural contingency in certain moods show
the same approach.151
146Kilwardby, In In Pr.
an.
16va; 25rb; see also Albert the Great, In In Pr.
an.
IV.10,
558b-559b.
147Kilwardby, op. cit. 16vb-17ra; 21ra-b; Albert the Great, op. cit. IV.4, 526a-b. For the
application of the dici de omni et nullo in this context, see also Lagerlund 2001, 41-2.
14816vb; 17va-b; 18vb; 24vb. See also Thom 2007, 148, 160-1, 165-6, 172-4.
149Kilwardby, op. cit. 19vb, 21ra-b; Albert the Great, op. cit. IV.2, 540b-541a.
150Kilwardby, op. cit. 22ra; Albert the Great, op. cit. IV.4, 545a-b.
151In a mixed ﬁrst-ﬁgure necessity-contingency mood the ﬁrst negative premise ‘appropriates’

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
547
As distinct from his forerunners, Campsall comments separately on Aristotelian
modal syllogisms with premises in the compound and divided senses. Uniform
necessity syllogisms are valid on both readings. Syllogisms in the compound sense
are reduced to the principle
(20)
If the premises are necessary, the consequent is necessary.
Syllogisms in the divided sense are valid because they are regulated by the same
principles as the assertoric syllogisms, i.e., dici de omni et nullo.152 Mixed necessity-
assertoric moods are valid in the compound sense on the basis of (20), when the
assertoric premise (de inesse proposition) is of the de inesse simpliciter type, i.e.,
necessarily true. These consequences are not syllogistic, however, and the same
holds of mixed assertoric-necessity moods with a necessary conclusion.
Mixed
necessity-assertoric syllogisms in the divided sense are valid when the assertoric
premise is de inesse simpliciter or ut nunc primo modo, i.e., a proposition which
express a necessary relation between actual things. Propositions de inesse secundo
modo express accidental relations and assertoric minor premises of this kind do
not make valid syllogisms. Campsall describes the validity of the perfect necessity-
assertoric syllogisms by referring, like Kilwardby, to the principle that the whole
syllogism is implicitly included in the ﬁrst premise. The middle term is said to
be suﬃciently the same in both premises only when the minor premise is in fact
necessary.153
If syllogistic premises are contingent in the compound sense, it does not follow
that the consequent is contingent in the compound sense. Aristotelian uniform
contingency syllogisms are valid for divided modals when the middle term is am-
pliated with respect to contingency.154 Aristotelian ﬁrst-ﬁgure mixed contingency-
assertoric syllogisms are said to be valid for divided modals provided that the
contingency premise is not ampliated and the assertoric premise is assertoric sim-
pliciter or ut nunc primo modo.155 Because aﬃrmative and negative contingency
propositions with terms standing for actual things imply aﬃrmative assertoric
propositions and the contingent premises in mixed necessary and contingent syl-
logisms are of this type, the conclusions are assertoric. Aristotle seemingly denied
this, but in fact he wanted to say that the assertoric conclusion was evident in
negative moods and less apparent in aﬃrmative moods.156 The conclusions are
to itself a natural contingency minor; op. cit. 27va-b. For Kilwardby’s discussion of contingency
syllogisms, see also Thom 2007, ch. 6.
152Campsall 11.58-9 (194); see also Lagerlund 2000, 74.
15312.33-5 (205). Campsall states that mixed assertoric-necessity Baroco and mixed necessity-
assertoric Bocardo with necessary conclusions are syllogistically valid. When Aristotle did not
accept these, he did not mean that they were not acceptable — it was only because the indirect
proof involved a possibility proper syllogism which was presented later in the Prior Analytics.
The corresponding mixed necessity-assertoric Baroco and mixed assertoric-necessity Bocardo are
valid consequences, but not syllogistic (14.16-19 (221-2)).
15417.48-9, 17.70 (268-9, 274).
15518.36-8 (283-4).
15620.14-17 (304). Campsall does not deal with Aristotelian mixed contingency-necessity moods,
apparently regarding them immediately obvious when the contingency premises are not ampli-

548
Simo Knuuttila
assertoric also in mixed assertoric-contingency syllogisms, for the predicate of the
contingency premise must stand for actual things and consequently be equivalent
to an assertoric premise, but this time Campsall says that the assertoric conclu-
sions do not follow syllogistically.157
As far as the middle terms of contingent syllogisms stand for actual things, as is
the case with mixed moods with contingent minor premises, there is no diﬀerence
in the logic of aﬃrmative premises and contingency premises. A negative assertoric
premise is said to imply the corresponding necessity premise. Why is this step asso-
ciated with negative propositions and not with aﬃrmative propositions? Campsall
seems to think that negative premises express actual incompatibilities which are
analogous to essentialist de re necessities. The possible denial of ‘Socrates is pale’
does not refer to the actual time at which Socrates is pale; Campsall says that as
long as Socrates exists, being pale is variable with respect to him and ‘sometimes
when he is ‘Socrates is a pale Socrates’ is true and sometimes it is false’.158 Even
though a de re possibility of not being does not imply non-being now, it seems to
imply non-being later.
It has been argued that the asymmetry between aﬃrmative and negative de re
possibilities is based on the insight that if a contingency proposition with actual
terms implies two possibility propositions, one aﬃrmative and one negative, and
the aﬃrmative implies actuality, the negative cannot imply actuality. The no-
tion of contingency would otherwise be self-contradictory. Campsall was allegedly
familiar with the Scotist denial of the necessity of the present and applied it to af-
ﬁrmative ut nunc propositions, although he continued to think that true negative
ut nunc propositions were necessarily true.159 However, if Campsall made use of
the Scotist idea of simultaneous alternatives, why did he think that what can be
actual now is actual now and that actual things are contingent only if they change
later? Scotus’s idea was that contingently actual things can be otherwise at the
very moment of their actuality. Campsall cannot say this, because all proposi-
tions expressing present alternatives are necessarily false.160 While there are no
alternative possibilities with respect to the present, actual things are not simply
necessary if they can change later. This is one of the traditional ways to qualify
the necessity of the present.
ated.
15718.71-2 (291-2). Campsall states that when the ﬁrst premise of a ﬁrst ﬁgure mood is aﬃr-
mative simpliciter or ut nunc primo modo, the syllogistic conclusions are contingent and not
merely non-impossible, as in negative moods. Aristotle says that all conclusions are possible,
and Campsall states that this follows when the major premise may also be ut nunc secundo
modo (18.54-7 (287-9)). This is meant to explain Aristotle’s formulations.
Campsall’s earlier
remark that Aristotle did not operate with assertoric premises of this kind in mixed syllogisms
apparently pertains to minor assertoric premises (12.32, (205)).
15812.31 (204), 19.21 (297).
159Lagerlund 2000, 87-90. For Scotus’s view, see 3.1.
160See note 134 above.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
549
3
LATER MEDIAEVAL DEVELOPMENTS
3.1
Modalities in Philosophy and Theology
It has been assumed that the increasing interest in modal syllogistic and modal
logic in general in early fourteenth century was associated with certain philosoph-
ical and theological developments which added to the interest in modal theories.
These often involved the idea of simultaneous alternatives which did not play a
signiﬁcant role in mid-thirteenth-century essentialist theory.
Following the twelfth-century model, Henry of Ghent (d. 1293) applied obliga-
tions logic to Trinitarian doctrine by assuming doctrinally impossible positions in
order to see what followed from them and what did not.161 This was an inﬂuential
idea. Several early fourteenth-century authors found an obligational analysis as
a useful tool for analysing conceptual connections between theological concepts.
The most popular version of this logic was called positio. It deals with how an
increasing set of true and false propositions might remain coherent in a disputation
in which an opponent puts forward a contingent and false initial proposition and
a respondent accepts this and accepts or denies other propositions in a logically
consistent way. Irrelevant propositions are granted, denied or doubted according
to the best knowledge of the respondent. Relevant propositions should be treated
in a consistent way. These either follow from the initial position and/or what has
been granted and/or the opposites of what has been correctly denied or are incom-
patible with them. Thirteenth-century positio rules denied that a now false but
possible position could refer to the time of an actual obligations discussion. This
was in agreement with the traditional doctrine of the necessity of the present.162
As part of his new interpretation of modal concepts, John Duns Scotus dropped
this rule, a revision which made it possible to understand obligational answers as
partial descriptions of how things could be instead of regarding them as a internally
consistent set of propositions without a sensible interpretation.163
Scotus’s revision of obligations rules was in agreement with his modal meta-
161Henry of Ghent, Summae quaestionum ordinarium I.56 (Paris 1520, reprinted St. Bonaven-
ture, N.Y.: The Franciscan Institute; Louvain: Nauwelaerts; Padenborn: Sch¨oningh, 1953),
vol. 2, 92r-v. One twelfth-century predecessor is Tractatus Emmeranus de impossibili positione,
edited by L.M. de Rijk in ‘Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of Obligation’, Vivar-
ium 12 (1974), 94-123; an English translation by M. Yrj¨onsuuri in M. Yrj¨onsuuri (ed.), Medieval
Formal Logic, The New Synthese Historical Library 49 (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001), 217-23.
162See note 104 above.
163For Scotus’ revision, see Lectura I.39.1-5, 56, 59 in in Opera omnia, ed.
C. Bali´c et al.
(Vatican City: Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, 1950-), vol. 17; an English translation in John Duns
Scotus, Contingency and Freedom: Lectura I.39, introduction, translation and commentary by
A. Vos Jaczn., H. Veldhuis, A.H. Looman-Graaskamp, E. Dekker and N.W. den Bok, The New
Synthese Historical Library 42 (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994).
For obliga-
tions logic, see M. Yrj¨onsuuri, Obligationes: 14 th Century Logic of Disputational Duties, Acta
Philosophica Fennica 55 (Helsinki: Societas Philosophica Fennica, 1994) and note 83 above; for
obligations logic in fourteenth-century theology, see H. Gelber, It Could Have Been Otherwise.
Contingency and Necessity in Dominican Theology at Oxford 1300-350, Studien und Texte zur
Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 81 (Leiden: Brill, 2004).

550
Simo Knuuttila
physics. In arguing for the contingency of the created order Scotus writes:
I do not call something contingent because it is not always or neces-
sarily the case, but because the opposite of it could be actual at the
very moment when it occurs.164
This is a denial of the traditional thesis of the necessity of the present and the
temporal frequency characterization of contingency. In the Scotist deﬁnition, the
meaning of the notion of contingency is spelt out by considering simultaneous
alternatives. What is actual is contingent only if, instead of being actual, it could
be not actual. This conception of simultaneous contingent alternatives is part of
an argument that the ﬁrst cause does not act necessarily. According to Scotus, the
eternal creative act of divine will is free only if it is a choice between alternatives
and could be other than it is in a real sense.165
That God acts by choice between alternatives had been a common theological
view since Augustine, but Scotus formulated its conceptual foundation in a new
way, which had consequences for how modal terms in general were understood.
In the Augustinian tradition, it was thought that metaphysical possibilities are
ultimately based on the divine essence and represent the ways in which it could be
imitated by created things. Scotus was the ﬁrst to deviate from this metaphysical
tradition in which possibilities are founded on divine being. According to Scotus,
when God as an omniscient being knows all possibilities, he does not know them
by turning ﬁrst to his essence. Possibilities can be known in themselves.166 In
fact they would be what they are even if there were no God. Scotus states that
if it is assumed that, per impossibile, neither God nor the world exists and that
the proposition ’The world is possible’ then existed, this proposition would be
true. The actual world is possible as it is, and this possibility and the possibilities
of unrealized things are primary metaphysical facts which are not dependent on
anything else.167
Scotus calls the propositional formulations of pure possibilities logical possibil-
ities (possibile logicum). These express things and states of aﬀairs to which it is
not repugnant to be, which means that their descriptions do not involve a contra-
diction. Possibilities as such have no kind of existence of their own, but are real
in the sense that they form the precondition for everything that is or can be.168
A great deal of Scotus’s discussion of metaphysical themes concentrates on the
164Ordinatio I.2.1.1-2, 86 (Opera omnia, vol. 2); De primo principio, ed. and translated by W.
Kluxen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1974), IV.4.
165Lectura I.39.1-5, 58; see also L. Honnefelder, Duns Scotus ((Munich: C.H. Beck, 2005), 85-6.
166Ord. I.35, 32 (Opera omnia, vol. 6); Knuuttila 1993, 103-4; S. Knuuttila, ’Duns Scotus and
the Foundations of Logical Modalities’ in L. Honnefelder, R. Wood, M. Dreyer (eds.), John Duns
Scotus: Metaphysics and Ethics, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 53
(Leiden: Brill, 1996), 135-36.
167Ord. I.7.1, 27 (Opera omnia, vol. 4); ; Lect.I.7, 32 (Opera omnia, vol. 16); Lect.; I.39.1-5,
49; Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis libri VI-IX, ed. R. Andrews et al. (St.
Bonaventure: The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University, 1997), 9.1-2, 18.
168Knuuttila 1996, 137-41.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
551
modal explication of being and the disjunctive transcendental notions of necessity
and contingency.169
God’s omniscience involves all possibilities and as objects of God’s knowledge
they receive an intelligible or objective being. Some of these are included in God’s
providential plan of creation and will receive an actual being. The description of a
possible world at a certain moment consists of compossible possibilities. Though
possibilities necessarily are what they are, the actualizations of non-necessary pos-
sibilities are not necessary but contingent. All things which are contingently actual
at a certain moment could be not actual at that very moment. Since all ﬁnite be-
ings are contingently actual, the contingent alternative possibilities are possible
with respect to the same time, though they are not compossible with what is ac-
tual. According to Scotus, impossibilities are incompossibilities between possible
ingredients, such as Socrates’s sitting at a certain time and Socrates’s not sitting
at that same time. God could have chosen a world in which the ﬁrst happens
by Socrates’s free will or a world in which the second happens by Socrates’s free
will. Since these possibilities are real possibilities, though not compossible, they
are Socrates’s possibilities in alternative histories.170
Scotus’s new modal metaphysics inﬂuenced early fourteenth-century philosophy
and theology in many ways. From the point if view of logic and its applications
to natural philosophy, the most signiﬁcant ideas were the distinction between
logical and real modalities and the association of logical modalities with alternative
imaginative domains.
Thirteenth-century essentialist assumptions were largely
dropped from modal logic based on new modal semantics.
3.2
Early Fourteenth-Century Modal Logic
I shall sketch the main lines of early fourteenth-century modal logic by concen-
trating on three works. The ﬁrst is William Ockham’s Summa logicae (OSL). In
respect to the variety of the combinations of types of premises in modal syllogisms,
this includes the most extensive fourteenth-century discussion of the topic. The
169For modalities in Scotus’s metaphysics, see L. Honnefelder, Scientia transcendens.
Die
formale Bestimmung der Seiendheit und Realit¨at in der Metaphysik des Mittelalters und der
Neuzeit (Duns Scotus – Suarez – Wolﬀ– Kant – Peirce) (Hamburg: Meiner, 1990), 3-108.
170Ord. I.43, 14; Lect. I.39.1-5, 62-5; Ord. I.35, 32, 49-51; I.38, 10. For Scotus’ modal theory,
see also Knuuttila 1993, 139-46; C. Normore, ‘Scotus, Modality, Instants of Nature, and the
Contingency of the Present’ in Honnefelder, Wood and Dreyer (eds., 1996), 161-74; Normore,
‘Duns Scotus’s Modal Theory’ in T. Williams (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Duns Scotus
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 129-60; S.P. Marrone, ‘Revisiting Duns Scotus
and Henry of Ghent on Modality’ in Honnefelder, Wood and Dreyer (eds., 1996), 175-89. Many
scholars have paid attention to similarities between Scotus and Leibniz and regarded both as
predecessors of the ideas codiﬁed in possible worlds semantics. Scotus, as distinct from Leibniz,
did not use the term ‘possible world’, but it received a theoretical role in modal discussions
before Leibniz; see S.K. Knebel, ‘Necessitas moralis ad optimum. Zum historischen Hintergrund
der Wahl der Besten aller m¨oglichen Welten’, Studia Leibnitiana 23 (1991), 3-24; J. Schmutz,
‘Qui a invent´e les mondes possibles’ in J.-C. Bardout and V. Jullien (eds.), Les mondes possibles,
Cahiers de philosophie de l’Universite de Caen (Caen: Presses universitaires de Caen, 2006),
9-45.

552
Simo Knuuttila
second is John Buridan’s Treatise on Consequences (BC). According to the edi-
tors, Ockham’s Summa logicae was written in 1323 and Buridan’s Tractatus
in
1335.The third is an anonymous Questions on Prior Analytics (PS). Its anony-
mous author is known as Pseudo-Scotus since it was included in the seventeenth-
century edition of Duns Scotus’s works. I refer to this work as PS. Buridan dis-
cussed modal logic and modal syllogistic also in his Summulae de Dialectica and
in Quaestions on Prior Analytics. Some modal questions are dealt with in his
Questions on Peri hermeneias.171 I refer mainly to the Treatise on consequences
because it contains a carefully considered summary of his modal theory. It seems
that the treatise by Pseudo-Scotus is later than the works of Ockham and Buri-
dan, many of the questions being similar to those in Buridan’s Questions on Prior
Analytics.172
Buridan presents modal logic as part of his general theory of consequences,
which includes sections on the equipollences between various modes in combina-
tion with negations and on the relations of the standard square of opposition
between them, the nature and conversions of compound and divided (de dicto and
de re) modal propositions, the mutual relationship between these two types of
modal propositions and their relations to assertoric propositions, further modal
consequences, and modal syllogisms.173 The same themes occur in all works men-
tioned. Fourteenth-century modal logic strove for generality, which had eﬀects on
the attitudes towards Aristotle’s modal syllogistics. For one thing, it was thought
171William Ockham, Summa logicae, ed. Ph. Boehner, G. G´al, S. Brown, Guillelmi de Ock-
ham Opera philosophica, vol. III (St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: St. Bonaventure University, 1974);
John Buridan, Tractatus de consequentiis, ed. H. Hubien, Philosophes m´edi´evaux 16 (Louvain:
Publications Universitaires, Paris: Vander-Oyez, 1976); id., Questiones longe super librum Peri
hermeneias, ed. R. van der Lecq, Artistarium 4 (Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1983); id.,
Quaestiones in Analytica priora, ed. H. Hubien (not published); idem, Summulae de Dialec-
tica, an annotated translation with a philosophical introduction by G. Klima (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2001); Pseudo-Scotus, In librum primum Priorum Analyticorum Aristotelis
quaestiones (John Duns Scotus, Opera omnia, ed. L. Wadding (Lyons, 1640), vol. I, 273-341.
For the date and author of this treatise, see S. Read, ‘Self-Reference and Validity Revisited’ in
Yrj¨onsuuri (ed., 2001), 184. Buridan’s Treatise on Consequences is translated in King, 1985.
172For late medieval modal logic and modal theories, see also G.E. Hughes, ‘The Modal Logic in
John Buridan’ in G. Corsi, C. Mangione and M. Mugnai (eds.), Atti del convegno Internazionale
di Storia della Logica. Le Teorie della Modalit`a (Bologna: CLUEB, 1989), 93-111; Knuuttila
1993, 149-96; Spade 1996, ch. 10; Lagerlund 2000; Thom 2003; Normore 2003; S. Knuuttila,
‘Medieval Theories of Modality’, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford/
edu/entries/modality-medieval/ (2006).
173In the ﬁrst half of the fourteenth century, many logicians wrote detailed studies on con-
sequences, either in comprehensive works on logic, such as Walter Burley’s De puritate artis
logicae or William Ockham’s Summa logicae or in independent treatises, such as Burley’s De
consequentiis and Buridan’s Tractatus de consequentiis. For recent works on late medieval dis-
cussions of consequences, see P. King, ‘Consequences as Inference: Mediaeval Proof Theory’
in M. Yrj¨onsuuri (ed., 2001), 117-45; I. Boh, ‘Consequence and Rules of Consequences in the
Post-Ockham Period’, in M. Yrj¨onsuuri (ed., 2001), 147-81; C. Dutilh Novaes, ‘Buridan’s conse-
quentia: Consequence and Inference within a Token-based Semantics’, History and Philosophy
of Logic 26 (2005), 277-97. While Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus based their discussions on modal
syllogistic on the theory of modal consequences, Ockham did not deal with modal syllogistic in
the section on consequences of the Summa logicae.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
553
that the notion of possibility proper (Mp = -L-p) must be added to modal syllogis-
tics as the basic notion. Furthermore, it was considered imperative to distinguish
between modal premises in the compound (de dicto) and the divided (de re) senses
and to divide de re modals into two groups depending on whether the subject terms
refer to actual things or possible things. Aristotle’s modal syllogistics was regarded
as a fragmentary theory in which the distinctions between diﬀerent types of ﬁne
structure were not explicated.
The truth conditions of categorical propositions in the traditional square of op-
position were given in terms of supposition theory as follows: provided that no
semantic paradoxes are involved in the propositions, a universal aﬃrmative propo-
sition is true iﬀthe predicate term stands for everything for which the subject
term actually stands. A particular aﬃrmative proposition is true iﬀthe predi-
cate term stands for some of those for which the subject term actually stands.
Negative propositions did not have existential import, and negatives with empty
subject-terms were considered true. Aristotelian assertoric conversion rules, viz.,
the simple conversions between universal negative propositions and aﬃrmative
particular propositions and the so-called accidental conversion from aﬃrmative
universal proposition to particular aﬃrmative proposition are valid in this inter-
pretation.174 These rules were in agreement with the identity theory of predication
which was also employed by Campsall.175
As far as these authors treated propositions as tensed, the above remarks were
taken to pertain to propositions the copulas of which were understood as present
tense verbs. Since the twelfth century, there had been various attempts to deﬁne
the truth conditions of past and future tense propositions. This discussion con-
tinues in early fourteenth-century logic. According to Buridan, the supposition of
the subject term of the past tense proposition ‘A was B’ is ampliated so that it
stands for past and present As while the predicate term stands for past Bs; ‘A
was B’ is read as ‘What was or is A was B’. Similarly, in ‘A will be B’ the sup-
position of the subject term is ampliated so that it stands for present and future
As. It is read as ‘What is or will be A will be B’. The restrictive phrase ‘which is’
(quod est) prevented ampliation when it was added to the subject term.176 Some
early thirteenth-century logicians applied the theory of ampliation to possibility
propositions so that their subject terms associated with the verb ‘can’ were taken
to stand for actual and merely possible beings, which is how the subjects in di-
vided possibility propositions without the restriction (quod est) were understood
by Ockham, Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus.177
Following the traditional doctrine
of the matter of propositions, fourteenth-century logicians stated that assertoric
174OSL II.2-4, 249-66; II.21, 318-21; BC I.5, 25-6; I.8, 44-5; PS I.12-15, 290-96.
175See Lagerlund 2000, 86.
176See BC I.6, 26-30; I.8.14, 45-7; Summulae de Dialectica IV.6.2, 299-300; cf. OSL II.7, 269-
72; II.22, 321-5; PS I.17, 297-9. In question 11 of his treatise on the Prior Analytics, Campsall
discussed syllogisms with tensed premises, and this syllogistic tense logic was developed further
in Ockham’s Summa logicae III-1.17-19, 406-11.
177OSL I.72, 216; II.25, 331-2; BC I.6, 27; PS I.3, 277; I.26, 311. See also Lagerlund 2000,
108-12, 138-40, 171-6.

554
Simo Knuuttila
propositions are necessary, possible, or impossible depending on whether they can
or cannot be true or false. Only those propositions were counted as modal, how-
ever, which included modal terms connected to the copula (divided modals) or
connected by the copula to propositions or to dicta (compound modals).178
The conversions of compound necessity and possibility propositions with respect
to the dictum were not considered problematic. As in Campsall, these were said to
hold by the rules that if the antecedent of a valid consequence is possible then the
consequent is possible, and if the antecedent is of necessity then the consequent
is of necessity or, as with simple conversions, if one of the convertibles is possi-
ble (necessary) then the other is possible (necessary). Of compound contingency
propositions only those with simply convertible dicta are converted; the rule that if
the antecedent is contingent then the consequent is contingent is not valid.179 The
whole logic of compound modal propositions was in fact based on the Aristotelian
principles for propositional modal logic which, as noted above, were widely known
in early medieval logic as well. When modal syllogisms were regarded as syllogisms
with respect to the dicta, connecting the mode ‘necessary’ with the premises and
conclusions of valid assertoric syllogisms yielded valid modal syllogisms. This was
based on (4) and the rule that if the conjuncts are necessary, the conjunction is
necessary.
Uniform syllogisms consisting of compound contingency or possibil-
ity modals were not considered valid, because the compossibility of two possible
premises was not assured. Ockham and Pseudo-Scotus remark that because de
dicto necessities are compossible with any de dicto possibilities or contingencies,
mixed compound necessity and possibility or contingency syllogisms with possible
or contingent conclusions are valid. Buridan did not mention this.180
The main object of the fourteenth-century modal logic was the theory of di-
vided modals. Some treatises include discussions in which the logical relations
between various divided modal propositions were codiﬁed in the same way as
the relations between the types of assertoric propositions in the square of oppo-
sition. Buridan taught that there were two types of copula, the aﬃrmative ‘is’
and the negative ‘is-not’, and that modality was part of the copula in divided
modal propositions. Combining the equivalences between quantifying words with
negations with equivalent modalities, Buridan arranged divided modals into eight
groups of nine equivalent formulae. In the Summulae, these groups are presented
in a diagram showing the relations of contradiction, contrariety, sub-contrariety,
and sub-alternation between them.181
178BC II.1, 56; PS I.25, 309; William Ockham., Expositio in librum Perihermenias Aristotelis,
ed. A. Gambatese and S. Brown, Opera philosophica II (St. Bonaventure: St. Bonaventure
University, 1978), 459-66.
179OSL II.24-5, 27, 327-8, 330-31, 334; BC II.7.12-14, 72-4; PS I.25, 310; I.30, 319.
180PS I.27, 313; I.33, 323; OSL III-1.20, 412-13; III-1.23, 419; III-1.44, 474; III-1.47, 479; BC
IV.1.1, 113.
181For this octagon of opposition, see Summulae de Dialectica I.8.4-7 and the diagram in Ques-
tiones longe super librum Perihermeneias II.9, 87; see also Hughes 1989, 109-10; E. Karger, ‘Buri-
dan’s Theory of the Logical Relations between General Modal Formulae’ in H.A.G. Braakhuis
and C.H. Kneepkens (eds.), Aristotle’s Peri hermeneias in the Latin Middle Ages, Artistarium
supplementa 10 (Groningen – Haren: Ingenium Publishers, 2003), 429-44.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
555
According to Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus, the subject terms of all divided
modals are ampliated to stand for actual and possible beings which fall under
those terms. The phrase ‘what is’ (quod est) attached to subject terms restrict
them to standing for actual beings only.182
Divided necessity modals with re-
stricted subject terms are not converted simply or accidentally, and the same
holds true of the conversions of divided necessity propositions with non-restricted
subject terms, with the exception that universal negative propositions are convert-
ible simply.183 Unlike Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus, Ockham did not accept any
conversions of terms of divided necessity propositions.184 In fact he did not treat
divided necessity propositions with unrestricted subject terms at all in his modal
logic.185
As to unrestricted divided possibility propositions, Ockham, Buridan and Pseudo-
Scotus state that aﬃrmative modals are converted in the same way as assertoric
propositions, those with restricted subject terms not being convertible.186
Ac-
cording to Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus, an unrestricted divided proposition de
contingenti ad utrumlibet can be converted into one of the opposite quality, but
no conversions of the terms are valid.187 They treated these propositions as am-
pliated with respect to possibility. Ockham states that if the subject terms are
ampliated with respect to contingency, unrestricted universal contingency propo-
sitions convert into particular contingency propositions.188
In discussing the logical properties of the unrestricted divided modal proposi-
tions, Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus made some comments on the question whether
such propositions should be treated as categorical propositions with a disjunctive
subject (what is or can be ...), as they did, or whether they should be taken as
complex propositions.189 Pseudo-Scotus claimed that they could be read as con-
junctions or disjunctions as follows: ‘Every A is-possibly(-not) B’ is a conjunction
of ‘Everything which is A is-possibly(-not) B’ and ‘Everything which can be A,
etc.’ and ‘Some A is-possibly(-not) B’ is the disjunction: ‘Something which is A
is-possibly(-not) B’ or ‘Something which can be A, etc.’190
It has been suggested that one could supply a Kripke-style possible worlds
semantics for Buridan’s modal system as an axiomatic basis for it.191
I think
182BC II.4, 58; II.6, 61, 63; IV.1, 111; Summulae de Dialectica IV.6.2, 299; PS I.26, 312-13.
183BC II.6.6, 67; PS I.26, 312-13.
184OSL II.24, 329-30; III-1.21, 416.
185See also Lagerlund 2000, 112-15.
186OSL II.25, 331-2; III-1.24, 423-4; BC II.6.5, 66-7; PS I.26, 312.
187BC II.6.7, 68; PS I.30, 320.
188OSL II.27, 338; III-1.27-8, 430-33.
189BC II.4, 58-60; PS I.26, 310-11.
190Pseudo-Scotus’s remarks on the conversion of these readings are sketchy and problematic. It
is not clear why he thinks that possibility propositions would be convertible in the same was as
assertoric propositions, the simple conversion of universal negative included. Necessity proposi-
tions are said to be non-convertible except when they are about the necessary characteristics of a
necessary being. The author does not mention that a conversion from universal negative to par-
ticular negative necessity propositions would be acceptable in this approach. See also Lagerlund
2000, 172-6.
191Hughes 1989.

556
Simo Knuuttila
that the general ideas of Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus can be described with the
help of some models similar to those on which the possible worlds semantics is
based, although many basic theoretical questions of modern formal semantics were
beyond the purview of medieval logicians. Constructing the details of the intuitive
model which the authors possibly had in mind is a cumbersome task. Ockham and
Buridan state that the truth of ‘A white thing can be black’ demands the truth of
‘This can be black’ and that ‘This can be black’ and “‘This is black” is possible’
mean the same.192 It is reasonable to suppose that the possible truth of ‘This is
black’ means that it is true in at least one of the possible states of aﬀairs in which
the possible being referred to by ‘this’ occurs and that the necessary truth of ‘This
is black’ means that it is true in all possible states of aﬀairs in which the thing
referred to by ‘this’ occurs. Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus assume that he subject
terms of quantiﬁed divided modal propositions stand for possible beings. The truth
of these propositions demand the truth of all or some relevant singular propositions
of the type just mentioned.
Compound possibility propositions maintain that
assuming their dicta as true does not imply any contradictions. Buridan typically
did not show any understanding of the idea of abstract unrealizable possibilities
in Averroes and Aquinas – he took it for granted that if a counterfactual state of
aﬀairs is possible, it can be coherently imagined as actual.193
One might wonder why, instead of regarding the reading with actual or possi-
ble subjects as basic for all modals, Ockham discussed the necessity propositions
with restricted subject terms. This makes his modal syllogistics less systematic
than those of Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus who argued that if divided possibility
propositions are ampliated, the equipollences between various modals requires that
necessity propositions are ampliated.194 It seems that the diﬀerences are related
to the fact that the authors did not make use of the same notion of necessity while
discussing divided modals. If the distinction between divided necessity proposi-
tions with restricted and unrestricted subject terms is not nugatory, one should
admit that possible beings may have necessary properties without occurring in
every possible state of aﬀairs. This condition is fulﬁlled by a relative de re ne-
cessity as Buridan and Pseudo-Scotus understood it. That which can be A is of
necessity B in this sense iﬀit could not be actual without being B. This notion of
necessity is relative to possible actuality and is weaker than that of simple necessity
by which a thing is necessarily something without qualiﬁcation, i.e., always and
in all thinkable states of aﬀairs, and it is stronger than that of temporal necessity
by which an actual thing is invariably something in the actual world.195 Some of
Ockham’s examples also refer to necessity which is relative to possible actuality,
but his syllogistic theory of divided necessity propositions is based on the view
192OSL II.10, 276-9; III-1.32, 448; III-3.10, 632-4; BC II.7.16, 75-6.
While compound and
divided readings do not diﬀer at this level, they are separated in dealing with standard universal
and particular propositions.
193For Averroes and Aquinas, see note 84 and Knuuttila 2001, 234.
194BC II.6.2, 63; PS I.26, 312.
195For these types of necessity, see Buridan, In An. pr. I.25; BC V.1, 112; PS I.26, 311.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
557
that de re necessities pertain to actual beings.196
Buridan states that the relations between unrestricted divided modal proposi-
tions and the corresponding non-modal propositions are governed by the following
principles. There are no valid consequences from divided necessity and possibil-
ity propositions to corresponding assertoric propositions, except that a univer-
sal negative assertoric proposition follows from an unrestricted universal negative
divided necessity proposition.
There are no valid consequences from assertoric
propositions to corresponding divided necessity propositions. Particular divided
possibility propositions follow from universal and particular aﬃrmative assertoric
propositions by valid consequences. Buridan adds that a possibility proposition
follows from any necessity proposition.197 Ockham’s position with respect to these
relationships is diﬀerent for reasons already mentioned, compound and divided ne-
cessity propositions implying corresponding assertoric propositions.198 As for the
relationships between compound and divided modal propositions, Buridan states
that particular divided possibility propositions follow from compound universal
and particular aﬃrmative possibility propositions, and a universal negative com-
pound necessity proposition follows from an unrestricted universal negative divided
necessity proposition.199 According to Ockham, compound and divided readings of
all singular modal propositions are equivalent, provided that the subject terms are
demonstrative pronouns or proper names. Divided necessity propositions which
are universal, particular, or have as their subject a common term with a demon-
strative pronoun do not imply corresponding compound modals, and the same
holds e converso with the exception that aﬃrmative compound propositions hav-
ing as a subject of their dicta a common term with a demonstrative pronoun imply
a corresponding divided necessity proposition. Ockham’s rules for universal and
particular possibility propositions are the same as those of Buridan.200
In discussing divided modal syllogistic in Tractatus de consequentiis, Buridan
196See, e.g., OSL III-1.32, 448.119-122.
197BC II.6, 64-6. Lagerlund (2001, 150) remarks that Buridan does not want to exclude the
consequence from negative assertoric to divided negative possibility propositions which is not
mentioned.
198OSL III-3.11, 637-8.
199BC II.7, 76-8. In denying that a universal aﬃrmative compound necessity proposition implies
a divided necessity proposition, Buridan states that while Aristotle says that ‘Every horse is
an animal’ is necessary, no horse is necessarily an animal, for any horse can fail to exist and
consequently fail to be an animal (77). This is a strange example, for it is said earlier that divided
aﬃrmative necessity propositions do not imply assertoric propositions, which is in agreement with
the relative conception of necessity mentioned above. See also IV.1, 112 where Buridan says that
‘A horse is an animal’ is not necessarily true by a simple necessity, for it is possible that there
will be no horses, although horses are necessarily animals as long as they exist. Perhaps the
ﬁrst example was about simple necessity which presupposed necessary existence. Some problems
could be avoided by regarding compound necessity propositions as law-like statements with an
ampliated supposition. In this case ‘Every horse is an animal’ is necessarily true as well as the
divided statement that every horse is necessarily an animal, while ‘Everyone walking is moving’
is necessarily true and the divided statement that all walking are necessarily moving is false. Cf.
In An. pr. I.25-6. See also the discussion in the introduction to the translation of Summulae de
Dialectica by G. Klima, xlv-xlvii.
200OSL III-3.10, 632-4.

558
Simo Knuuttila
ﬁrst presents the valid moods with necessity or possibility premises. All four ﬁrst-
ﬁgure moods corresponding to direct assertoric ones are valid when they are modal-
ized as follows: MMM, LLL, LML, MLM.201 When assertoric premises are as-
of-now statements, LAL and MAM with particular conclusions are valid as well as
the universal negative mood in ALA. All ALA moods are valid if the subject of ne-
cessity premise is restricted to stand for actual things.202 If assertoric propositions
are assertoric simpliciter, equivalent to compound necessity propositions, all four
ﬁrst-ﬁgure moods are valid in LAL, ALL, AMM.203 In outlining the syllogistics
for contingency-propositions, Buridan states the validity of all ﬁrst-ﬁgure moods in
CMC, CCC, MCM, LCL, CLC and in CAC for particular moods.204 When the
restrictive phrase ‘what is’ is preﬁxed to the subject of a divided modal (L′, M ′, C′),
all ﬁrst ﬁgure moods are valid in L′L′L′, L′AL′, M ′L′M ′, M ′AM ′, C′AC′.205
Valid second and third ﬁgure moods are reduced to perfect ﬁrst ﬁgure moods or
proved by an expository syllogism or, on few occasions, by reductio ad impossibile.
First ﬁgure divided modal moods without assertoric premises can be delineated as
follows: if that which is or can be P is necessarily, possibly or contingently (not)
Q and if that which is or can be S is necessarily, possibly or contingently P, then
that which is or can be S is necessarily, possibly or contingently (not) Q. It does
not matter by which modality the minor term is connected to the middle term —
the modality of predication in the conclusion is always that of the ﬁrst premise.
The same principle holds true of the cases where the major premise is modalized
and the minor premise is assertoric, but the conclusions are then always particular.
Buridan regarded these moods as perfect and clear through the dici de omni et
nullo.206
Buridan made some historical comments on Aristotle’s theory claiming, for in-
stance, that Aristotle meant by ‘simply assertoric propositions’ assertoric propo-
sitions which are necessary, that he considered propositions like ‘A horse is an
animal’ as simply necessary because of his view of the eternity and unchangeabil-
ity of natural species, and that he understood mixed modal syllogisms as divided
modal syllogisms.207 However, he did not make any attempt to reconstruct Aris-
totle’s modal syllogistic as a uniform system; in the light of his modal principles,
such a construction was impossible. Some Aristotelian moods are valid only as
mixed compound and divided modal syllogisms, some are valid in this way and as
divided modal syllogisms with non-ampliated subject terms, and some are valid
201BC IV.2.4, 115.
202BC IV.2.10 (118-9), 15-16, 124-5.
203BC IV.2.11, 120; IV.2.19, 127-8.
204BC IV.2.21-4, 130-1.
205BC IV.2.7, 117; IV.2.10, 119; Summulae V.7.2-4. Buridan says that if the major necessity
premise is restricted and the minor is not, the conclusion is not restricted.
He should have
added that the conclusions are particular. (The same holds of ALM moods which are mentioned
in Summulae V.7.3, 355.)
If the major necessity premise is not restricted and the minor is,
universal conclusions are said to be restricted. Lagerlund (2000, 239) does not pay attention to
this qualiﬁcation.
206BC IV.2.4, 115; IV.2.10, 119; IV.2.16, 124-5.
207BC IV.1, 111-112; In Pr. an. I. 30.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
559
only with ampliated subject terms. Buridan thought that Aristotle’s modal syl-
logistic was a partial theory of valid modal deductions where the diﬀerent types
of ﬁne structures made use of in dealing with modal premises were not distin-
guished.208 Some moods which are accepted in the Treatise on consequences are
not mentioned in the Quaestions on the Prior analytics or in the Summulae, and
some valid moods which are discussed in the Summulae are omitted in the Treatise
on consequences.209 Buridan’s treatment of modal moods in all works is restricted
to those the unmodalized counterparts of which are valid direct moods of three
syllogistic ﬁgures. He does not treat valid indirect moods or moods with singular
terms.
Ockham’s divided modal syllogistic also concentrates on the moods which have
valid assertoric counterparts, but his discussion is more throughout than that of
Buridan. Ockham considers the indirect moods as well, and he treats the combi-
nations in which one of the premise is a compound modal and the other a divided
modal. He also mentions some moods with restricted premises which are valid in
Buridan’s system as well although Buridan does not mention them: e.g., all ﬁrst
ﬁgure moods MM ′M ′, CC′C′ and the third ﬁgure moods MM ′M and M ′MM.
As Ockham considered the subject terms of divided necessity propositions as re-
stricted, he did not accept any second ﬁgure moods with divided necessity proposi-
tions as premises nor any moods with mixed divided modal premises and necessity
conclusions.210 Pseudo-Scotus’s discussion of divided modal moods is of the same
type as that of Buridan, but it is less detailed.211
4
APPLIED MODAL LOGIC
Some twelfth-century thinkers considered that the logic of pure modal terms could
be used as a model for studying the logical behaviour of related concepts. It was
asked whether the basic rules for modal sentences de dicto, viz. (4) and (5), held for
other concepts showing prima facie similarities with the notions of necessity and
possibility. Many logicians in the fourteenth century were interested in this kind of
applied modal logic. The extensive lists of terms which were found interesting in
this regard included verum, falsum, per se, scitum, dubium, opinatum, creditum,
apparens, notum, volitum, dilectum, obligatum, licitum, and illicitum. 212
208See also OSL III-1, 31, 443.
209See also Lagerlund 2000, 149-61; Thom 2003, 169-91.
210OSL III-1, 21 (416-7), 23 (420), 26 (428), 44 (476).
211For divided modal syllogistics in Ockham and Pseudo-Scotus, see Lagerlund 2000, 196-29,
171-83; Ockham’s modal syllogistic is also discussed in Thom 2003, 141-67. Nicholas Drukken’s
view of necessity moods was inﬂuenced by Ockham’s theory; most later medieval authors followed
Buridan. See Lagerlund 2000, 134-5, 184-227.
212PS I.25, 310; I.36, 328-9.

560
Simo Knuuttila
4.1
Epistemic Logic
Knowledge and belief were widely considered as partially analogous to necessity
and possibility in late medieval times.213 Although the inference rules of modal
logic de dicto were usually not accepted as rules for knowledge and belief, there
was a lively discussion of some other important questions pertaining to epistemic
logic. The standard Aristotelian reasons for not accepting (4) and (5) with respect
to knowledge or belief is stated by John Buridan as follows:
From compound sentences de scito, de opinato, de dubitato, and other
similar modals, there is no valid syllogism. It does not follow: ‘That
every B is A is known by Socrates, and that every C is B is known by
Socrates, therefore that every C is A is known by Socrates’, because
although the two premises are known by Socrates, he nevertheless may
perhaps fail to order them in a syllogism, or fail to see that the third
follows from them.214
Most medieval authors did not operate with the conception of logical omniscience
that is included in some modern theories, treating the logic of epistemic notions
from the point of view of factual attitudes.215 However, Peter of Poitiers men-
tions that according to some twelfth-century thinkers, knowing the antecedent of a
sound consequence implies knowing the consequent.216 Another example is Ralph
Strode’s (d. 1387) inﬂuential treatise on consequences. According to rule 13, if the
antecedent of a sound consequence is known, the consequent is also known.217 The
logicians, who commented on Strode’s rules, usually considered the reference to a
person essential in epistemic contexts, adding the condition that the consequence
must not only be valid, but must be known to be valid as well. Strode also stressed
the same later in his work.218
In the prologue to his Commentary on the Sentences, William Ockham states
that some acts of the intellect are apprehensive and others are judicative. An
apprehensive act can be directed to anything which may occur as the object of a
cognitive power. It is an act of entertaining the content of a possible judgment.
A judicative act is an act by which the intellect assents to or dissents from the
complex objects of apprehension. We assent to what we regard as true and we
dissent from what we regard as false.219 If the assent or dissent which is part of
213For medieval epistemic logic, see I. Boh, Epistemic Logic in the Later Middle Ages (London
and New York: Routledge, 1993).
214Tractatus de consequentiis IV.1.3, 114.
215See, for example, J. Hintikka, Knowledge and Belief (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1962).
216Sententiae I.9 (82.139-83.154).
217Strode’s treatise is edited by W.K. Seaton in An Edition and Translation of the ‘Tractatus
de consequentiis’ by Ralph Strode, Fourteenth-Century Logician and Frend of Geoﬀrey Chauser
(Ph. D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1973).
218For these comments and related discussions, see Boh 1993, 89-125; Boh, ‘Four Phases of
Medieval Epistemic Logic’, Theoria 66 (2000), 137-40; Boh 2001, 161-70.
219William Ockham, Scriptum in Librum primum Sententiarum. Ordinatio, prol. and dist.1,
ed. G.G´al and St. Brown, Opera theologica 1 (St. Bonaventure: Franciscan Institute of St.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
561
knowledge in Ockham is considered an act of judicative belief, Ockham’s concept
of knowledge could be regarded as implying the principle
(21)
Kap →Bap.
Robert Holcot explicitly treated assent as a belief, pointing out that the most
common sense of believing (credere) is to assent to what is stated by a proposition.
‘A proposition is believed when it is assented to, and in this way we believe what
we know as well as what we formally opine.’220 Ockham remarks that the term
‘knowledge’ is sometimes applied to ﬁrm cognition of a truth, but he considered
this use less proper than those which included a reference to evidence as some kind
of justiﬁcation. Instead of the deﬁnition
Kap = Bap & p
he prefers
Kap = Bap & p & Jap.
(Jap stands for ‘the person a is justiﬁed in believing that p’.)221 As shown by
Ivan Boh, some later authors were reluctant to accept the ﬁrst use of knowledge.
Their reasons were similar to those which have been presented in the contemporary
discussion of the Gettier problem.222 Some authors were interested in the question
of the role of the will in assenting to a proposition. It was usually thought that
evident assent was caused naturally and that there were types of non-evident assent
which were freely caused, such as the religious assent of faith or the opinative
assent based on probabilistic arguments. Robert Holcot argued that beliefs were
not freely chosen, but this view was considered over-stated. 223
The theory of free assent was sometimes associated with the question of making
moral decisions in uncertain cases, which anticipated the later controversy over
Bonaventure University, 1967), prol. 1, 16.3-18. For the distinction between apprehensive and
judicative acts in late medieval and early modern thought, see K. Tachau, Vision and Certitude in
the Age of Ockham: Optics, Epistemology and the Foundations of Semantics 1250-1345 (Leiden:
Brill, 1988), 117-18; A. Broadie, Notion and Object: Aspects of Late Medieval Epistemology
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 125-48.
220Robert Holcot, In quatuor libros Sententiarum quaestiones (Lyon, 1518, reprinted Frankfurt
am Main: Minerva, 1967), I.1.6.
221See William Ockham, Expositio in libros Physicorum Aristotelis, prol. et libri I-III, ed. V.
Richter and G. Leipold, Opera philosophica 4 (St.
Bonaventure: Franciscan Institute of St.
Bonaventure University, 1985), prol. 5.29-6.50.
222Boh refers to a passage from Peter of Mantua’s Logica which shows that a person could be
said to know (in the ﬁrst sense of ‘scire’) that p even when the assent is based on a mistake: ‘Let
it be posited that Plato is very near you and you know that he is running, but you believe that
he is Socrates so that you ﬁrmly believe that Socrates is running. But let Socrates in fact be
running in Rome, although you do not know this. You thus know that Socrates is running and
do not know that Socrates is running, therefore, on the same basis, what is known is doubtful to
you’ (Logica 17rb, translated in Boh, 2000, 136).
223See Holcot, Sent. I.1.1; Holcot’s view is criticized, e.g., in Peter of Ailly, Questiones super
libros Sententiarum
(Paris 1500), princ. III, I D, 1.2 BB. For the discussion of this question in
Paris between 1500 and 1530, see Broadie 1989, 149-78.

562
Simo Knuuttila
probabilism and probabiliorism. Thomas Aquinas, Boethius of Dacia, and some
other Parisian masters explained Aristotelian dialectical probabilities by stating
that what is probable in the sense that most experts accept it is probably true
because it is not probable that the majority of well informed experts would be
mistaken in the same way.224 These and other similar examples show that, con-
trary to what has been sometimes maintained, an intuitive conception of objective
frequency probability, diﬀerent from epistemic probability, was developed in the
Middle Ages.225
The question of the relationship between epistemic propositions de dicto and de
re belonged to standard fourteenth-century topics of epistemology. It was thought
that knowledge statements de dicto did not imply knowledge statements de re or
vice versa.226 Buridan says, however, that when a person knows that some A is B,
then of something which is A he or she knows that it is B. The reason for denying
this could be that Socrates does not know which A is B. Buridan would agree that
in this sense the de re reading does not follow from the de dicto reading, but there
is another kind of de re reading (or which might be called so) which does follow
from the de dicto reading. This is a kind of intermediate reading between pure
de dicto and de re readings. The idea can be formulated as follows. According to
Buridan, statements of the type
(22)
Ks(Ex)(Fx)
imply that there are individuals having property F, although S does not necessarily
know which they are. In principle they are identiﬁable, however, and if we suppose
that one of them is z, we can write:
(23)
Ks(Ex)(Fx) →(Ex)((x = z) & Ks(Fx)).
From the de dicto statement ‘Socrates, who is sitting in a cellar, knows that a star
is above’ it does not follow the de re reading understood as ‘There is a star which
Socrates knows as the star which is above’, but the following de re reading does
follow from it: ‘There is a star of which Socrates knows that it is above, although
Socrates does not know which star it is.’227
Buridan was not the ﬁrst to employ this reading.
In his De obligationibus,
Walter Burley discussed the following case:
224See Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae II-1.105.2, ad 8; II-2.70.2; Boethius of Dacia, Quaes-
tiones super librum Topicorum, ed. N. J. Green-Pedersen and J. Pinborg, Corpus Philosophorum
Danicorum Medii Aevi VI.1 (Copenhagen: Gad, 1976), III.14, 187.
225For this notion of probability and its role in later medieval thought, see I. Kantola, Probability
and Moral Uncertainty in Late Medieval and Early Modern Times (Helsinki: Luther-Agricola
Society, 1994); for later discussions , see S.K. Knebel, Wille, W¨urfel und Wahrscheinlichkeit. Das
System der moralischen Notwendigkeit in der Jesuitenscholastik 1550-1700 (Hamburg: Meiner,
2000).
226See, for example, the extensive discussion of the question in the second chapter of William of
Heytesbury’s Rules for Solving Sophismata (Venice 1494), translated in Kretzmann and Stump
1988, 436-72.
227Sophismata, ed. T.K. Scott (Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1977) IV,14,
trans. by G. Klima in Summulae de Dialectica, 900-902.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
563
You know that Marcus is running. But Marcus is Tully. Therefore,
you know that Tully is running.
And furthermore, ‘Therefore, you
know who is called Tully.’ But it was posited that you don’t know
this. Solution. This is multiplex: ‘You know that Tullius is running.’
It may signify that you know the dictum: ‘That Tullius is running’,
and this is false and the consequence is not valid. Or it may signify
that of that person who is Tully you know that he is running, and this
can be true, although you don’t know who is signiﬁed by this term
‘Tully’.228
The same analysis can be found in many fourteenth century writers.229
Let us turn to medieval deontic logic. The following equivalences analogous to
those between modal concepts were used in the fourteenth-century discussions of
the norms:
(24)
−O −p ↔Pp
(25)
−P −p ↔Op
(26)
Op ↔P −p
(27)
−Pp ↔O −p
(28)
Op ↔F −p
(29)
Fp ↔O −p.
O stands here for obligation (obligatum), P for permission (licitum), and F for
prohibition (illicitum). One can ﬁnd some of these equivalences used earlier and
there were some twelfth-century writers who anticipated the later habit of treating
deontic concepts as a species of modal concepts. According to one deﬁnition of
modal terms sometimes used by Peter Abelard, necessity is identiﬁed with what
nature demands, possibility with what nature allows, and impossibility with what
nature forbids.230
At the beginning of his Ethics, Abelard asks whether it is
possible that that the antecedent is permitted or obligatory while the consequent
is forbidden.231 Later he discusses some problematic cases associated with this
question. These remarks form the ﬁrst known discussion of deontic consequences.
Abelard also formulated the question of whether willing the antecedent of a good
consequence which is known to be such implies willing the consequent. His view
is that if will is understood in the sense of consent and not merely in the sense
of wish and if the consequence expresses a relationship between a goal and a
228The text is edited in Green 1963, 39.29-40.7.
229See, e.g., The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, trans. with introduction and commentary
by N. and B. Kretzmann (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 118-20, 314-23; Albert
of Saxony, Sophismata (Paris, 1502), III, 32-33.
230See, e.g., Dialectica 385.1-8.
231Peter Abelard, Ethics, ed. with trans. and notes by D.E. Luscombe (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1971), 20.1-11. Cf. 38.22-40.5; 40.15.

564
Simo Knuuttila
means, consenting to the antecedent (goal) implies consenting to the consequent
(a means).232
Some twelfth-century authors realized that even though willing an end eﬀec-
tively implies that a necessary means to it is also willed, a rule (W), analogical
to (5) cannot be applied without restriction to eﬃcient will in the form that if
Socrates wills that p and he knows that there is a valid consequence from p to q,
he also wills that q. The principle holds about the end-means relationship, but the
necessary means are not the only consequents of what is willed. Peter of Poitiers
formulated a counter-example as follows: if S repents of a sin, S is guilty of a sin,
and S wills to repent of a sin, but S does not will to be guilty of a sin.233 Stephen
Langton’s counter-example was of the same type: if a man visits his sick father,
the father is sick. This man wills to visit his sick father, but it does not follow
that he wills the father to be sick.234
When it was realized that one cannot apply (W) to eﬀective will without qual-
iﬁcation, medieval thinkers took an interest in ﬁnding cases in which a rational
agent does not will the consequent of what he or she wills. The twelfth-century
examples just mentioned specify the case in which to will something in certain cir-
cumstances implies that those circumstances prevail, although this is something
which the agent does not will. This exception to (W) was thought philosophi-
cally interesting and was also used in later medieval deontic logic. Contrary to
what Abelard thought, it was realized that (4) and (5) cannot be applied without
qualiﬁcation to the notions of obligation and permission. The reasons were simi-
lar to those which demanded the qualiﬁcation of (W). Another relevant but more
problematic idea was that a separately unwanted side-eﬀect of what is willed is
willed more indirectly than a separately unwanted means to an end. This line of
thought forms the background to Thomas Aquinas’s distinctions between directly
and indirectly willed things.235
One can follow the discussion of the question of how (W) should be qualiﬁed
with respect to will by tracing the comments on the example of a man who ‘wills to
be in the mud and have 100 marks’ (in luto esse cum 100 marchis). This example
was considered ambiguous, and it was possible to interpret it (i) as a case of willing
reluctantly to become dirty as a means of receiving 100 marks, (ii) as a case of
willing to become dirty as a side-eﬀect or (iii) willing something in a situation in
which one would become dirty in any case. The third alternative was particularly
relevant to later discussions of conditional obligations.
The most extensive fourteenth-century discussion of the logical properties of
deontic concepts is to be found in the ﬁrst question of Roger Roseth’s Lecture on
232Ethics 8.21-10.2; 14.14-19; 16.11-18.
233Sententiae IV.16 in Patrologia latina, ed. J.P. Migne, 211, 1199.
234Quaestiones theologiae, quoted in R. Quinto, ‘Die Quaestiones des Stephan Langton ¨uber
die Gottesfurcht’, Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin, Universit´e de Copenhague
62 (1992), 77-165, at 129-130.
235See, e.g., Summa theologiae II.2.64.7-8; De malo 2.1. See also Knuuttila 2006, 205-18.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
565
the Sentences, which he ﬁnished c. 1335.236 The opening question of this work
is devoted to the problem of whether somebody can be obliged to do something
against his or her conscience. In the second article, Roseth ﬁrst formulates ﬁve
general principles or rules which deﬁne the rationality of a system of norms, and
the rest of the article consists of a discussion of various objections to the rules
of rationality. In rules 1 and 2, Roseth deﬁnes formal rationality: describing be-
haviour in accordance with the norms must not yield contradictions, i.e., a person
should not violate a norm by fulﬁlling a norm in the same system of norms. New
obligations can be added to a system as rational norms without further changes
only if they refer to omissions and commissions which one is permitted to will.
Roseth pays particular attention to this point because he is interested in the fact
that there are omissions or commissions which are permitted, although it is not
permitted to will them; as they cannot be legitimately willed, they cannot be
prescribed as such in a rational body of norms. Referring to the dictates of right
reason, Roseth adds to the ﬁrst rule that what is prescribed must be in the power
of the agent in such a way that fulﬁlling the obligation does not result in a great
disaster. Rules 3 and 4 are related to the Catholic doctrine of the salvation of
the soul. Rule 5 refers to the doctrine of God’s absolute power, through which an
act which cannot be legitimately willed can be changed into an act which can be
legitimately willed.237
After these general rules, Roseth discusses various possible objections and devel-
ops some philosophical and logical ideas pertaining to norms. The second objection
runs as follows. It is permitted to will to behave in a way which is not meritorious
though the order that one should will to behave in a non-meritorious way is not
rational. It is not rational because it could be violated only in a meritorious way.
The ﬁrst part is proved as follows. If you are sleeping, you do not behave in a
meritorious way. Furthermore, you know that this is a good consequence: since
you are permitted to will the antecedent, you are permitted to will the consequent.
The main point of Roseth’s answer to the second objection is that it is mistak-
enly assumed that if one is permitted to will the antecedent of a good consequence,
one is also permitted to will the consequent:
I accept the following consequence: you are sleeping; therefore you do
not beneﬁt from an elicited act. But I deny this consequence: this
consequence is good and you know that it is good; therefore if you
are permitted to will the antecedent, you are permitted to will the
consequent. This is because there are consequences which are good
236This work was copied several times during the second half of the fourteenth century and is
preserved to us in eight manuscripts, only three containing the complete work. The ﬁrst article
of the book aroused interest as an independent study of natural philosophy and was circulated
in several copies. It was printed, together with the second article of the ﬁrst question, as the
ﬁrst question of Determinationes magistri Roberti Holcot at Lyon in 1518. The printed version
is abridged and unreliable. The translations below are based on a transcription of manuscripts
and quoted from S. Knuuttila and O. Hallamaa, ‘Roger Roseth and Medieval Deontic Logic’,
Logique & Analyse 149 (1995), 75-87.
237These rules are translated in Knuuttila and Hallamaa 1995, 79-83.

566
Simo Knuuttila
and which I know to be good the antecedent of which I am permitted
to will without being permitted to will the consequent. For example,
this consequence is good and known to be good: I repent of my sin;
therefore I am in sin. I am permitted to will the antecedent but I am
not permitted to will the consequent, because I am permitted to repent
of my sins, but I am not permitted to will to be in sin. Therefore the
consequence is not valid.
Examples of this kind show that there are obligations which can be rationally
fulﬁlled only in cases in which some norms have already been violated. Rules (4)
and (5) could be applied to the notions of obligations and permissions only if there
were no conditional norms by which one’s conduct is regulated after having violated
certain norms. Roseth realized that conditional norms of this kind, called contrary-
to-duty imperatives in contemporary literature, prevent one from accepting the
rules of inference of modal logic in deontic logic without qualiﬁcation.
These are not the only problematic cases according to Roseth.
There is a
second class of conditional obligations and permissions regulating conduct in those
situations in which the moral agent has not violated any rules but which he or she
cannot will without violating some rule. This group of obligations and permissions
could serve as Roseth’s answer to the so-called paradox of the Good Samaritan.
Roseth’s example is that one may accept that one’s father will be killed because
of a serious transgression. A simpler case would have been a variant of Stephen
Langton’s example of conditional will; one should will to visit one’s sick father,
but one is not permitted to will that there be such a situation.
Roseth then discusses the question of how the conditional obligation should be
formulated. He thinks that a reasonable prima facie formulation is
(30)
p →Oq
where p may stand for something forbidden or permitted such that it is not per-
mitted to will it. Roseth thought, however, that (30) was not a suﬃcient form.
The ﬁrst addition is formulated in his answer to the following question. If the
conditional obligation is formulated so that it is obligatory and allowable to will
to repent if one is guilty of a sin, one could ask whether Socrates, who wills to
repent without having committed any sin, should repent or not. If he should, he
is doing what he ought to do, but then he should not repent. If he should not, he
violates a rule and he ought to see that he repents. So if he should not repent, he
should repent and vice versa.
According to Roseth, the intention of the rule-giver is that Socrates ought to
will to repent of his sins only when he is guilty of sin and that the prescribed act
of repentance is diﬀerent from the act of willing to repent when one has not sinned
before repenting. Thus Socrates, while willing to repent in this way, violates the
intention of the rule-giver, although he seems to fulﬁl his obligation.
In order
to avoid diﬃculties of this kind, one apparently should add to formula (30) the
qualiﬁcation that fulﬁlling the condition of a conditional obligation does not fulﬁl
the obligation:

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
567
(31)
(p →Oq) & −L(p →q).
This form is similar to that which von Wright suggests in order to solve diﬃculties
in deﬁning conditional obligation.238
Rule (31) had certain antecedents in me-
dieval logic. Conditional norms were also discussed in treatises De obligationibus
which dealt with the logic of disputation and which as such had nothing particular
to do with morality or ethics. One example of the interest in normative notions in
obligations treatises is the discussion of disputations where the expression ‘must be
granted’ is included in the initial positum. It was realized that a positum of the type
‘That you are in Rome must be granted’ can be read prescriptively as a norm or
descriptively as a proposition expressing the existence of an obligation. The initial
proposition including ’must be granted’ is read descriptively in a positio disputa-
tion, but it is read normatively in the species of disputations called petitio. In his
De obligationibus, Walter Burley discusses some problems of formulating condi-
tional norms in connection with the disputations called positio dependens, positio
cadens, and positio renascens. What they have in common is that a proposition
begins or ceases to be the positum when a condition is fulﬁlled. The condition is
a disputational act. Burley’s remarks on how the condition should be formulated
show similarities with Roseth’s treatment of conditional obligations.239
In order to show that (31) is not suﬃcient, Roseth deals with a variant of
a well-known medieval sophism. Let us assume that those and only those who
say something true will cross a bridge and that Socrates says: ‘I shall not cross
the bridge.’ It is then asked whether this is true or false. According to Roseth,
one should not accept the assumed case. Fulﬁlling the condition of a conditional
obligation must not make it impossible that the obligation is fulﬁlled. When this
restriction is added to (31), the resulting form is as follows:
(32)
(p →Oq) & −(p →q) & M(p & q).
Roseth presents other similar problems associated with the questions of semantic
paradoxes in this context.240
CONCLUDING REMARKS
While early medieval discussions of modal matters were inﬂuenced by ancient
modal paradigms such as temporal frequency interpretation of modal notions, the
conception of possibility as a power, the ideas of diachronic modalities and essen-
tialist modal assumptions, there were also new insights. Following Peter Abelard,
238G.H. von Wright, ‘Deontic Logic and the Theory of Conditions’ in R. Hilpinen, ed., Deontic
Logic: Introductory and Systematic Readings (Reidel: Dordrecht, 1971), 169.
239S. Knuuttila and M. Yrj¨onsuuri, ‘Norms and Action in Obligational Disputations’ in Pluta
(ed.), Die Philosophie im 14.
und 15.
Jahrhundert, Bochumer Studien zur Philosophie 10
(Amsterdam: Gruener, 1988), 191-202.
240For the original txt, see Ms. Oxford, Oriel College 15, f. 249rb-252ra; see also Knuuttila
1993, 190-5.

568
Simo Knuuttila
Peter Lombard wrote in his inﬂuential Sentences that ‘Things cannot be other than
as God foreknows them’ is true in the compound sense and false in the divided
sense. The truth of the compound sense saves God’s infallibility, while the falsity
of the divided sense expresses God’s freedom and the metaphysical contingency
of the future. It is assumed that when something is, it is possible that it is not
at that very instant of time at which it is actual. These theological formulations
exemplify twelfth-century deviations from the Aristotelian thesis ‘What is neces-
sarily is when it is’. This was traditionally understood as implying the principle of
the necessity of the present, which was not questioned in ancient modal theories.
Since temporally deﬁnite propositions about contingent things were regarded as
unchangingly true in God’s knowledge, the contingency of these propositions also
implied the denial of the Aristotelian equation of immutability with necessity. The
new modal idea could be characterized as the model of simultaneous alternatives.
Its theological foundation was Augustine’s idea of God, who as the creator and
providence of the world, acts by free choice between alternatives.
In accordance with the new modal conception, possibilities as the objects of
divine power were regarded as much more numerous than possibilities associated
with natural powers.
While exempliﬁcation in the actual world was often re-
garded as a criterion of the genuineness of the types of natural possibility, it was
not relevant for divine possibilities. In twelfth-century theology, natural possibil-
ities secundum inferiorem causam were said to be possibilities secundum cursum
naturae and possibilities secundum superiorem causam meant divine possibilities.
There were similar discussions in medieval Arabic philosophy.
In twelfth-century logical treatises, which were inﬂuenced by Boethius’s works,
one can ﬁnd ideas not discussed in ancient sources in Abelard’s analysis of the
types of modal propositions, future contingents and the logic of conditionals and
late twelfth-century and early thirteenth-century works on the logic of terms, time
and modality, some of these being associated with the idea of modality as referen-
tial plurality. The increasing reception of Aristotle’s philosophy in the thirteenth
century gave support to traditional modal paradigms, as is seen in the discus-
sions of modal conversion and Robert Kilwardby’s very inﬂuential commentary on
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics, in which modal syllogistic is treated as an essentialist
theory of the structures of being.
While twelfth-century modal innovations were used to some extent in thirteenth-
century theology, they were not extensively discussed in philosophical contexts.
Things became diﬀerent when John Duns Scotus combined the various elements
of the conception of modality as alternativeness into a detailed theory. Scotus
describes the simultaneous alternatives as the domains with respect to which God
chooses the actual world, but the structure of the theory is taken to pertain to
logical modalities which are what they are independently of whether anything
exists. A possible state of aﬀairs is characterized as expressing something to which
to be is not repugnant. What is impossible is a combination of elements which are
incompossible.
Even Aristotle said that when a possibility is assumed to be actualized, noth-

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
569
ing impossible follows, but he had in mind actualization in the history of the
actual world. The denial of an omnitemporally actual state of aﬀairs is said to
be impossible. In the thirteenth century, some thinkers qualiﬁed Aristotle’s char-
acterization of possibility as something which can be assumed as actual without
contradiction by explaining that possibilities referring to the same moment of time
are not necessarily compossible in the sense that they could be actual at the same
time. In Scotus’s theory, actualizability as a criterion of possibility does not refer
to the already existing actual world, nor is it explained by referring to prospective
options of which the unrealized will disappear, as in the theories of diachronic
modalities. Temporally deﬁnite possibilities are primarily treated as referring to
alternatives, as is shown by the deﬁnition of a contingent state of aﬀairs: ‘I do
not call something contingent because it is not always or necessarily the case, but
because its opposite could be actual at the very moment when it occurs’.
In the fourteenth century, many authors followed Scotus in explicating the
meaning of modal terms by referring to simultaneous alternatives as the basic
model. This is also reﬂected in the reformulation of modal logic with the sys-
tematic distinction between modalities de dicto and de re and the division of
de re modalities into those with actual subject terms and those with non-actual
subject terms. The basic notion was that of logical possibility which was distin-
guished from the more restricted notion of natural possibility. John Buridan’s
theory of modal consequences is considered as one of the greatest achievements
of medieval logic. Aristotle’s modal syllogistics was regarded as a fragmentary
theory in which the diﬀerent types of the ﬁne structure of modal statements were
not distinguished. Contrary to thirteenth-century approaches, Ockham, Buridan
and their followers did not try to reconstruct Aristotle’s theory as such into a
uniform system. The new modal paradigms which show some similarities to the
background ideas of possible worlds semantics also inﬂuenced fourteenth century
logic of discourse (obligations logic) and the treatments of applied modal logic,
the logic of knowledge and belief and the logic of norms.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Primary Literature
[Alan of Lille, 1981] Alan of Lille. Regulae caelestis iuris, ed. N.M. H¨aring, Archives d’histoire
doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 78 (1981), 97-226.
[Albert of Saxony, 1502] Albert of Saxony. Sophismata (Paris, 1502).
[Albert the Great, 1890a] Albert the Great. Commentarium in Perihermenias, in Opera omnia,
ed. A. Borgnet, vol. I (Paris: Viv`es, 1890).
[Albert the Great, 1890b] Albert the Great. Commentarium in Librum I Priorum Analytico-
rum, in Opera omnia, ed. A. Borgnet, vol. I (Paris: Viv`es, 1890).
[Alexander of Aphrodisias, 1883] Alexander of Aphrodisias. In Aristotelis Analyticorum prio-
rum librum I commentarium, ed. M. Wallies, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 2.1 (Berlin:
Reimer, 1883).
[Ammonius, 1961] Ammonius. Commentaire sur le Peri hermeneias d’Aristote. Traduction de
Guillaume de Moerbeke, ed. G. Verbeke, Corpus Latinum Commentariorum in Aristotelem
Graecorum (Louvain: Publications Universitaires, Paris: B´eatrice-Nauwelaerts, 1961); the
Greek text is edited by A. Busse in Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 4.5 (Berlin, 1897).

570
Simo Knuuttila
[Ammonius, 1998] Ammonius. On Aristotle:
On Interpretation 9, trans. D. Blank, with
Boethius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, ﬁrst and second Commentaries, trans. N. Kretz-
mann, with Essays by R. Sorabji, N. Kretzmann and M. Mignucci (London: Duckworth 1998).
[Anonymus, 1992] Anonymus. Compendium examinatorium Parisiense, ed. C. Laﬂeur and J.
Carrier (Qu´ebec: Facult´e de Philosophie, Universit´e Laval, 1992).
[Anonymus, 1974] Anonymus. Tractatus Emmeranus de impossibili positione, edited by L.M.
de Rijk in ‘Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of Obligation’, Vivarium 12 (1974),
94-123; an English translation by M. Yrj¨onsuuri in M. Yrj¨onsuuri (ed.), Medieval Formal
Logic, The New Synthese Historical Library 49 (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001), 217-23.
[Anonymus, s.a.] Anonymus. Commentarium in analytica Priora (Ms. Orl´eans BM 283, 178–
203).
[Anselm of Canterbury, 1946–61] Anselm of Canterbury. Opera omnia, ed. F.S. Schcmitt (Ed-
inburgh: Nelson, 1946-61).
[Apuleius, 1991] Apuleius. Peri hermeneias, ed. C. Moreschini, Opera III (Stuttgart: Teubner,
1991).
[Aristotle, 1968] Aristotle. Analytica posteriora, trans. James of Venice, ed. L. Minio-Paluello
and B.G. Dod, Aristoteles Latinus IV.1-4 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1968).
[Aristotle, 1962] Aristotle. Analytica priora, trans. Boethius, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, Aristoteles
Latinus III.1-4 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1962).
[Aristotle, 1961] Aristotle. Categories, trans. by Boethius, ed. L. Minio-Paluello in Aristoteles
Latinus I.1-5 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1961).
[Aristotle, 1965] Aristotle. De interpretatione, trans. by Boethius, ed. L. Minio-Paluello in Aris-
toteles Latinus II.1-2 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1965).
[Aristotle, 1975] Aristotle. De sophisticis elenchis, trans. Boethius, ed. B.G. Dod, Aristoteles
Latinus VI.1-3 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer and Leiden: Brill, 1975).
[Aristotle, 1969] Aristotle. Topica, trans. Boethius, ed. L. Minio-Paluello and B.G. Dod, Aris-
toteles Latinus V.1-3 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1969).
[Augustine, 1891] Augustine. Contra Faustum, ed. I. Zycha, Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiastico-
rum Latinorum 25 (Vienna: F. Tempsky, Leipzig: G. Freytag, 1891).
[Augustine, 1955] Augustine. De civitate Dei, ed. B. Dombart and A. Kalb, Corpus Christiano-
rum Series Latina 47-8 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1955).
[Augustine, 1975] Augustine. Dialectica, trans. with notes by B.D. Jackson from the text edited
by J. Pinborg, Synthese Historical Library 16 (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1975)
[Averroes, 1562–74] Averroes. Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois commentariis, (Venice 1562–74,
reprinted, Frankfurt am Main: Minerva 1962).
[Avicenna, 1984] Avicenna. Pointers and Reminders, part one, Logic, trans. by S.C. Inati (under
the title Remarks and Admonitions (Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1984).
[Boethius, 1877-80] Boethius. Commentarii in librum Aristotelis Perihermeneias I-II, ed. C.
Meiser (Leipzig: Teubner, 1877-80). Commentaries on Chapter 9 are translated by N. Kretz-
mann in Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, 129-91.
[Boethius, 1978] Boethius. De diﬀerentiis topicis in Patrologia Latina 64, 1174-1216; an English
translation with notes and essays by E. Stump in Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis (Ithaca
and London: Cornell University Press, 1978).
[Boethius, 1998] Boethius. De divisione by J. Magee, with a translation and commentary (Lei-
den: Brill, 1998).
[Boethius, 1969] Boethius. De hypotheticis syllogismis, ed. L. Obertello (Brescia: Paideia, 1969)
[Boethius, ] Boethius. De syllogismis categoricis in Patrologia Latina 64, 793-832.
[Boethius, 1998] Boethius. In Ciceronis Topica in Patrologia Latina 64, 1039-1169; an English
translation with notes and an introduction by E. Stump in Boethius’s In Ciceronis Topica
(Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1988).
[Boethius, 1906] Boethius. In Isagogen Porphyrii Commenta, ed. S. Brandt, Corpus Scriptorum
Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum 48 (Leipzig: G. Freytag, Vienna: F.Tempsky, 1906).
[Boethius, 1957] Boethius. Philosophiae consolatio, ed. L. Bieler, Corpus Christianorum Series
Latina 94 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1957).
[Boethius of Dacia, 1976] Boethius of Dacia. Quaestiones super librum Topicorum, ed. J. G.
Green-Pedersen and J. Pinborg, Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi VI.1 (Copen-
hagen: Gad, 1976).
[Cicero, 1968] Cicero. De fato, with an English translation by H. Rackham, Loeb Classical
Library (London: Heinemann, and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1968).

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
571
[de Rijk, 1962, 1967] L. M. de Rijk. Logica Modernorum. A Contribution to the History of Early
Terminist Logic I: On the Twelfth Century Theories of Fallacy, II.1-2: The Origin and Early
Development of the Theory of Supposition, Wijsgerige teksten en studies 6, 16 (Assen: van
Gorgum, 1962, 1967).
[Garland the Computist, 1959] Garland the Computist. Dialectica, ed. L. M. de Rijk, Wijsgerige
teksten en studies 3 (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1959).
[Gersonides, 1992] Gersonides. The Book of Correct Syllogism in The Logic of Gersonides. A
Translation of Sefer ha-Heqqesh ha-Yashar (The Book of the Correct Syllogism), with intro-
duction, commentary, and analytical glossary by Ch.H. Manekin, The New Synthese Historical
Library 40, (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992).
[Henry of Ghent, 1950] Henry
of
Ghent.
Summae
quaestionum
ordinarium
(Paris
1520,
reprinted St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: The Franciscan Institute; Louvain: Nauwelaerts; Paden-
born: Sch¨oningh, 1953.)
[John Buridan, 1983] John Buridan. Questiones longe super librum Perihermeneias, ed. R. van
der Lecq, Artistarium 4 (Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1983).
[John Buridan, 1977] John Buridan. Sophismata, ed. T.K. Scott (Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt:
Frommann-Holzboog, 1977).
[John Buridan, 2001] John Buridan. Summulae de Dialectica, an annotated translation with a
philosophical introduction by G. Klima (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001).
[Buridan, 1976] John
Buridan.
Tractatus
de
consequentiis,
ed.
H.
Hubien,
Philosophes
m´edi´evaux 16 (Louvain: Publications Universitaires, Paris: Vander-Oyez, 1976.
[Buridan, s.a.] John Buridan. Quaestiones in analytica priora, ed. H. Hubien, not published.
[John Duns Scotus, 1974] John Duns Scotus. De primo principio, ed. and translated by W.
Kluxen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1974).
[John Duns Scotus, 1950] John Duns Scotus. Opera omnia, ed. C. Bali et al. (Vatican City:
Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, 1950).
[Duns Scotus, 1997] John Duns Scotus. Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis
libri VI-IX, ed. R. Andrews et al. (St. Bonaventure: The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
University, 1997).
[John Philoponus, 1905] John Philoponus. In Aristotelis Analytica Priora commentaria, ed. M.
Wallies, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 13.2 (Berlin: Reimer, 1905).
[Lambert of Auxerre, 1971] Lambert of Auxerre. Logica, ed. F. Alassio (Florence: La Nuova
Italia, 1971).
[Maimonides, 1974] Moses Maimonides. The Guide of the Perplexed, trans. with introduction
and notes by Sh. Pines (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974).
[Peter Abelard, 1956] Peter Abelard. Dialectica, ed. L.M. de Rijk, Wijsgerige teksten en studies
1 (Assen: van Gorcum, 1956).
[Peter Abelard, 1969] Peter Abelard. Editio super Aristotelem De interpretatione, ed. M. Dal
Pra in Pietro Abelardo, Scritti di logica (Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1969).
[Peter Abelard, 1971] Peter Abelard. Ethics, ed. with trans. and notes by D.E. Luscombe (Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1971).
[Peter Abelard, 1919–27] Peter Abelard. Philosophische Schriften I. Die Logica ‘Ingredientibus’,
ed. B. Geyer, Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters XXI,
1-3 (M¨unster: Aschendorﬀ, 1919-27).
[Peter Abelard, 1958] Peter Abelard. Super Periermenias XII-XIV, ed. L. Minio-Paluello in
Twelfth Century Logic: Texts and Studies II: Abaelardiana inedita (Rome: Edizioni di Storia
e Leteratura, 1958).
[Peter Damian, 1972] Peter Damian. Lettre sur la Toute-Puissance Divine (De divina omnipo-
tentia), introduction, critical text, translation and notes by A. Cantin, Sources Chr´etiennes
191(Paris: Cerf, 1972).
[Peter Lombard, 1971–81] Peter Lombard. Sententiae in IV libris distinctae, ed. PP. Collegium
S. Bonaventurae (Grottaferrata: Collegium S. Bonaventurae ad Claras Aquas, 1971-81).
[Peter of Ailly, 1500] Peter of Ailly. Questiones super libros Sententiarum (Paris, 1500).
[Peter of Ireland, 1996] Peter of Ireland. Expositio et quaestiones in librum Aristotelis Peryer-
menias seu De interpretatione, ed. M. Dunne, Philosophes m´edi´evaux 34 (Louvain-la-Neuve:
´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie; Louvain and Paris: Peeters, 1996).
[Peter of Poitiers, 1961] Peter of Poitiers. Sententiae I, ed. P.S. Moore and M. Dulong, Publi-
cations in Medieval Studies 7 (Notre Dame: The University of Notre Dame Press, 1961).

572
Simo Knuuttila
[Peter of Spain, 1972] Peter of Spain. Tractatus called afterwards Summule logicales, ed. L.M.
de Rijk, Wijsgerige teksten en studies 22 (Assen: Van Gorcum, 1972).
[Porphyry, 1966] Porphyry. Isagoge, trans. by Boethius, ed. L. Minio-Paluello and B.G. Dod in
Aristoteles Latinus I.6-7 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1966).
[Pseudo-Augustine, 1961] Pseudo-Augustine. De decem categoriis, ed. L. Minio-Paluello, in
Aristoteles Latinus I.1-5 (Bruges-Paris: Descl´ee de Brouwer, 1961).
[Pseudo-Scotus, 1640] Pseudo-Scotus. In librum primum Priorum Analyticorum Aristotelis
quaestiones (John Duns Scotus, Opera omnia, ed. L. Wadding (Lyons, 1640), vol. I, 273-
341.
[Ralph Strode, 1973] Ralph Strode. Tractatus de consequentiis, ed. and trans. by W.K. Seaton
(Ph. D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1973).
[Richard Kilvington, 1990] Richard Kilvington. Sophismata, trans. with introduction and com-
mentary by N. and B. Kretzmann (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
[Richard of Campsall, 1968] Richard of Campsall, Quaestiones super librum Priorum Analyti-
corum in The Works of Richard Campsall I, ed. E.A. Synan (Totonto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of
Mediaeval Studies, 1968).
[Robert Grosseteste, 1912] Robert Grosseteste. De libero arbitrio in Die philosophischen Werke
des Robert Grosseteste, ed. L. Baur, Beitr¨age zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters
9 (M¨unster: Aschendorﬀ, 1912); a new edition by N. Lewis in ‘The First Recension of Robert
Grosseteste’s De libero arbitrio, Mediaeval Studies 53 (1991), 1-88.
[Robert Holkot, 1518] Robert Holkot. In quatuor libros Sententiarum quaestiones . . . Determi-
nationes item quarundam aliarum quaestionum (Lyon 1518, reprinted Frankfurt am Main:
Minerva, 1967).
[Robert Kilwardby, 1516] Robert Kilwardby. In libros Priorum Analyticorum expositio (Venice,
1516, reprinted Frankfurt am Main: Minerva 1968 (under the name of Giles of Rome)..
[Rober Bacon, 1986, 1987] Roger Bacon. Summulae dialectices, ed. A. de Libera, Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 61 (1986), 139-289; 62 (1987), 171-278.
[Siger of Brabant, 1981] Siger of Brabant. Quaestiones in Metaphysicam: Edition revue de la
Reportation de Munich, texte in´edit de la Reportation de Vienne, ed. W. Dunphy, Philosophes
m´edi´evaux 24 (Louvain-la-Neuve: ´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie, 1981).
[Siger of Brabant, 1954] Siger of Brabant. De necessitate et contingentia causarum in J. Duin,
La doctrine de la providence dans les ´ecrits de Siger de Brabant, Philosophes m´edi´evaux 3
(Louvain: ´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie, 1954).
[Simon of Tournai, 1932] Simon of Tournai. Disputationes, ed. J. Warichez, Spicilegium Sacrum
Lovaniense, ´Etudes et Documents 12 (Louvain: Spicilegium Sacrum Lovaniense,1932).
[Simplicius, 1907] Simplicius. In Aristotelis Categorias commentarium, ed. C. Kalbﬂeisch, Com-
mentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 8 (Berlin: Reimer, 1907).
[Simplicius, 1895] Simplicius. In Aristotelis Physicorum libros quattuor posteriores commen-
taria, ed. H. Diels, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca 10 (Berlin: Reimer, 1895); translated
by C. Hagen in Simplicius, On Aristotle’s Physics 7 (London: Duckworth, 1994).
[Stephen Langton, 1992] Stephen Langton. Quaestiones in R. Quinto, ‘Die Quaestiones des
Stephan Langton ¨uber die Gottesfurcht’, Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin,
Universit´e de Copenhague 62 (1992), 77-165.
[Thomas Aquinas, 1965] Thomas Aquinas. De malo, ed. P. Bazzi and P.M. Pession in Quaes-
tiones disputatae, vol. II (Turin: Marietti, 1965).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1965] Thomas Aquinas. De potentia, ed. P.M. Pession in Quaestiones dispu-
tatae, vol. II (Turin: Marietti 1965).
[Thomas Aquinas(?), 1952] Thomas Aquinas(?). De propositionibus modalibus,
ed. H. F.
Dondaine, Opera omina 43 (Rome: San Tommaso, 1976).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1952] Thomas Aquinas. In Aristotelis libros De caelo et mundo, De genera-
tione et corruptione et Meteorologicorum expositio, ed. R.M. Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti, 1952).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1971] Thomas Aquinas. In duodecim libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis ex-
positio, ed. M.-R. Cathala and R.M. Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti, 1971).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1989] Thomas Aquinas. In libros Aristotelis Peri hermeneias et Posteriorum
analyticorum expositio, ed. R.M. Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti 1964); Expositio libri Peryermenias,
ed. cura et studio Fratrum Praedicatorum (Rome: Commissio Leonina, Paris: Vrin, 1989);
On interpretation, trans. by J. T. Oesterle (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1962).

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
573
[Thomas Aquinas, 1954] Thomas Aquinas. In octos libros Physicorum Aristotelis expositio, ed.
M. Maggi`olo (Turin: Marietti, 1954); Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, translated by R.J.
Blackwell, R.J. Spath, and W.E. Thirlkel (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1929–56] Thomas Aquinas. Scriptum super libros Sententiarum, ed. P. Man-
donnet and M.F. Moos, 5 vols (Paris: Lethielleux, 1929-56).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1961–7] Thomas Aquinas. Summa contra gentiles, ed. C. Pera, P. Marc, P.
Caramello (Turin: Marietti, 1961-7).
[Thomas Aquinas, 1948–50] Thomas Aquinas. Summa theologiae, ed. P. Caramello (Turin: Ma-
rietti 1948-1950).
[Walter Burley, 1963] Walter Burley. De obligationibus, edited in R. Green, The Logical Treatise
‘De obligationibus’: An Introduction with Critical Texts of William of Sherwood (?)
and
Walter Burley (Ph. D. diss., University of Louvain, 1963).
[William of Champeaux, 1993] William of Champeaux,
Introductiones dialecticae,
ed. Y.
Iwakuma in ‘The Introductiones dialecticae secundum Wilgelmum and secundum G. Pa-
ganellum’, Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin, Universit´e de Copenhague 63
(1993), 45-114.
[William of Ockham, 1985] William of Ockham, Expositio in libros Physicorum Aristotelis, prol.
et libri I-III, ed. V. Richter and G. Leipold, Opera philosophica IV (St. Bonaventure: Fran-
ciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure University, 1985).
[William of Ockham, 1978] William of Ockham. Expositio in librum Perihermenias Aristotelis,
ed. A. Gambatese and S. Brown, Opera philosophica II (St. Bonaventure: St. Bonaventure
University, 1978).
[William of Ockham, 1967] William of Ockham. Scriptum in Librum primum Sententiarum.
Ordinatio, prol. and dist.1, ed. G.G´al and St. Brown, Opera theologica I (St. Bonaventure:
Franciscan Institute of St. Bonaventure University, 1967).
[William of Ockham, 1979] William of Ockham. Scriptum in Librum primum Sententiarum,
dist. 19-48, ed. G.I. Etzkorn and F.E. Kelley, Opera theologica IV (St. Bonaventure: St.
Bonaventure University, 1979).
[William of Ockham, 1974] William of Ockham. Summa logicae, ed. Ph. Boehner, G. G´al, S.
Brown, Guillelmi de Ockham Opera philosophica III (St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: St. Bonaventure
University, 1974).
[William of Heytesbury, 1494] William of Heytesbury. Regulae solvendi sophismata (Venice
1494), chapter 2 translated in Kretzmann and Stump 1988, 436-72.
[William of Sherwood, 1963] William of Sherwood. De obligationibus, edited in R. Green, The
Logical Treatise ‘De obligationibus’: An Introduction with Critical Texts of William of Sher-
wood (?) and Walter Burley (Ph. D. diss., University of Louvain, 1963).
[William of Sherwood, 1966] William of Sherwood. Introductiones in logicam, ed. M. Grabmann
in Sitzungsberichte der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-hist. Abteilung 1937,
10 (Munich: Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1937); William of Sher-
wood’s Introduction to Logic, trans. with an introduction and notes by N. Kretzmann in
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1966).
[William of Sherwood, 1941] William of Sherwood. Syncategoremata, ed. J.R. O’Donnell, Me-
diaeval Studies 3 (1941), 46–93, trans. with an introduction and notes by N. Kretzmann
in William of Sherwood’s Treatise on Syncategorematic Words (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1968).
Secondary Literature
[B¨ack, 2001] A. B¨ack. Avicenna and Averroes: Modality and Theology. In Buchheim et al. (eds.,
2001), 125-45.
[Becker, 1952] O. Becker. Untersuchungen ¨uber den Modalkalkul (Meisenheim am Glan: Anton
Hain, 1952).
[Becker-Freysing, 1938] A. Becker-Freysing. Die Vorgeschichte des philosophischen Terminus
‘contingens’: Die Bedeutungen von ‘contingere’ bei Boethius und ihr Verh¨altnis zu den Aris-
totelischen M¨oglichkeitsbegriﬀen, Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des Alter-
tums und des Mittelalters D 7 (Heidelberg: Bilabel, 1938).

574
Simo Knuuttila
[Bobzien, 1993] S. Bobzien. Chrysippus’s Modal Logic and Its relation to Philo and Diodorus.
In K. D¨oring and T. Ebert (eds.), Dialektiker und Stoiker (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1993),
63-84.
[Bobzien, 1998] S. Bobzien. Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon,
1998).
[Boh, 1993] I. Boh. Epistemic Logic in the Later Middle Ages (London and New York: Rout-
ledge, 1993).
[Boh, 2001] I. Boh. Consequence and Rules of Consequences in the Post-Ockham Period. In M.
Yrj¨onsuuri (ed., 2001), 147-81.
[Braakhuis, 1979] H.A.G. Braakhuis. De 13de eeuwse tractaten over syncategorematische ter-
men. Inleidende studie en uitgave van Nicolaas van Parijs’ Sincategoremata, 2 vols (Meppel:
Krips Repro, 1979).
[Braakhuis and Kneepkens, 2003] H.A.G. Braakhuis and C.H. Kneepkens. Introduction. In
Braakhuis and Knepkens (eds.), Aristotle’s Peri hermeneias in the Latin Middle Ages, Artis-
tarium supplementa 10 (Groningen – Haren: Ingenium Publishers, 2003), ix-xli.
[Broadie, 1989] A. Broadie. Notion and Object: Aspects of Late Medieval Epistemology (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1989), 125-48.
[Buchheim et al., 2001] T. Buchheim, C.H. Kneepkens and K. Lorenz, eds. Potentialit¨at und
Possibilit¨at. Modalaussagen in der Geschichte der Metaphysik (Stuttgart and Bad Canstatt:
Frommann-Holzbook, 2001).
[Buchner, 1970] H. Buchner. Plotins M¨oglichkeitslehre, Epimeleia 16 (Munich and Salzburg:
Anton Pustet, 1970).
[Courtenay, 1991] W. Courtenay. Nominales and Nominalism in the Twelfth Century. In J.
Jolivet, Z. Kaluza, A. de Libera (eds.), Lectionum varietates. Hommage `a Paul Vignaux
(1904-1987) (Paris: Vrin 1991), 11-48.
[Craig, 1988] W.L. Craig. The Problem of Divine Foreknowledge and Future Contingents from
Aristotle to Suarez (Leiden: Brill, 1988).
[de Rijk, 1962, 1972] L.M. de Rijk. See above.
[Dutilh Novaes, 2005] C. Dutilh Novaes. Buridan’s consequentia: Consequence and Inference
within a Token-based Semantics. History and Philosophy of Logic 26 (2005), 277-97.
[Ebbesen, 1981] S. Ebbesen. Commentators and Commentaries on Aristotle’s Sophistici
Elenchi, Corpus Latinum Commentariorum in Aristotelem Graecorum VII.1-3 (Leiden: Brill,
1981).
[Ebbesen, 1981] S. Ebbesen. Analyzing Syllogisms or Anonymus Aurelianensis III — The (Pe-
sumably) Earliest Latin Commentary on the Prior Analytics, and Its Greek Model, Cahiers
de l’Institut du Moyen- ˆAge grec et latin, Universit´e de Copenhague 37 (1981), 1-20.
[Ebbesen, 1992] S. Ebbesen. What Must One Have an Opinion About, Vivarium (30), 1992,
62-79.
[Ebbesen, 1993] S. Ebbesen. Medieval Latin Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical
texts of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. In Ch. Burnett (ed.), Glosses and Com-
mentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts: The Syriac, Arabic and Medieval Latin Traditions,
Warburg Institute Surveys and Texts 23 (London: The Warburg Institute, 1993), 129-77.
[Ebbesen, 2004] S. Ebbesen. Echoes of the Posterior Analytics in the Twelfth Century. In M.
Lutz-Bachmann, A. Fidora, P. Antolic (eds.), Erkenntnis und Wissenschaft. Probleme der
Epistemologie in der Philosophie des Mittelalters (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2004), 69-92.
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N.J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages
(Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1984).
[Fine, 1984] G. Fine. Truth and Necessity in De interpretatione 9, History of Philosophy Quar-
terly 1 (1984), 23-47.
[Frede, 1985] D. Frede. The Sea-Battle Reconsidered : A Defense of the Traditional Interpreta-
tion, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, vol. III (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985), 31-87.
[Gaskin, 1995] R. Gaskin. The Sea Battle and the Master Argument, Quellen und Studien zur
Philosophie 40 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1995).
[Gelber, 2004] H. Gelber. It Could Have Been Otherwise. Contingency and Necessity in Domini-
can Theology at Oxford 1300-350, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters
81 (Leiden: Brill, 2004).
[Goris, 1996] H. Goris. Free Creatures of an Eternal God. Thomas Aquinas on God’s Infallible
Foreknowledge and Irresistible Will (Leuven: Peeters, 1996).

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
575
[Goris, 2001] H. Goris. Tense Logic in 13th-Century Theology’, Vivarium 39 (2001), 161-84.
[Green-Pedersen, 1984] N. J. Green-Pedersen. The Tradition of the Topics in the Middle Ages
(Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1984).
[Hintikka, 1973] J. Hintikka. Time and Necessity: Studies in Aristotle’s Theory of Modality
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973).
[Hintikka, 1962] J. Hintikka. Knowledge and Belief (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1962).
Reprinted, College Publications, 2006.
[Hissette, 1977] R. Hissette. Enquˆete sur les 219 articles condamn´es `a Paris le 7 Mars 1277,
Philosophes m´edi´evaux 22 (Louvain: Publications Universitaires, Paris: Vander-Oyez, 1977).
[Honnefelder, 1990] L. Honnefelder. Scientia transcendens. Die formale Bestimmung der
Seiendheit und Realit¨at in der Metaphysik des Mittelalters und der Neuzeit (Duns Scotus
– Suarez – Wolﬀ– Kant – Peirce) (Hamburg: Meiner, 1990).
[Honnefelder, 2005] L. Honnefelder. Duns Scotus (Munich: Beck, 2005).
[Honnefelder et al., 1996] L. Honnefelder, R. Wood, and M. Dreyer, eds. John Duns Scotus:
Metaphysics and Ethics, Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 53 (Leiden:
Brill, 1996).
[Hughes, 1989] G.E. Hughes. The Modal Logic in John Buridan. In G. Corsi, C. Mangione and
M. Mugnai (eds.), Atti del convegno Internazionale di Storia della Logica. Le Teorie della
Modalit`a (Bologna: CLUEB, 1989), 93-111.
[Iwakuma and Ebbesen, 1992] Y. Iwakuma and S. Ebbesen. Logico-Theological Schools from
the Second Half of the 12th Century: A List of Sources, Vivarium 30 (1992), 173-210.
[Jacobi, 1980] K. Jacobi. Die Modalbegriﬀe in den logischen Schriften des Wilhelm von Sher-
wood und in anderen Kompendien des 12. und 13. Jahrhunderts: Funktionsbestimmung und
Gebrauch in der logischen Analyse (Cologne: Brill, 1980).
[Jacobi, 1985] K. Jacobi. Diskussionen ¨uber unpers¨onliche Aussagen in Peter Abaelards Kom-
mentar zu Peri hermeneias. In E.P. Bos (ed.), Medieval Semantics and Metaphysics, Artis-
tarium Supplementa 2 (Nijmegen: Ingenium Publishers, 1985), 1-63.
[Kantola, 1994] I. Kantola. Probability and Moral Uncertainty in Late Medieval and Early Mod-
ern Times (Helsinki: Luther-Agricola Society, 1994).
[Karger, 2003] E. Karger. Buridan’s Theory of the Logical Relations between General Modal
Formulae. In H.A.G. Braakhuis and C.H. Kneepkens (eds.), Aristotle’s Peri hermeneias in the
Latin Middle Ages, Artistarium supplementa 10 (Groningen – Haren: Ingenium Publishers,
2003), 429-44.
[King, 2001a] P. King. Consequences as Inference: Mediaeval Proof Theory. In M. Yrj¨onsuuri
(ed., 2001), 117-45.
[King, 2001b] P. King. Duns Scotus on Possibilities, Powers and the Possible’ in Buchheim et
al. (eds., 2001), 175-99.
[King, 1985] P. King. Jean Buridan’s Logic:
The Treatise on Supposition, The Treatise on
Consequences. Translated with a Philosophical Introduction, Synthese Historical Library 27
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985).
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962).
[Knebel, 1991] S.K. Knebel. Necessitas moralis ad optimum. Zum historischen Hintergrund der
Wahl der Besten aller m¨oglichen Welten, Studia Leibnitiana 23 (1991), 3-24.
[Knebel, 2000] S.K. Knebel. Wille, W¨urfel und Wahrscheinlichkeit. Das System der mora-
lischen Notwendigkeit in der Jesuitenscholastik 1550-1700 (Hamburg: Meiner, 2000).
[Knuuttila, 2004] S. Knuuttila. Anselm on Modality. In B. Davies and B. Leftow (eds.), The
Cambridge Companion to Anselm (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 111-31.
[Knuuttila, 1996] S. Knuuttila. Duns Scotus and the Foundations of Logical Modalities. In Hon-
nefelder et al. (eds., 1996), 127–43.
[Knuuttila, 2006] S.
Knuuttila.
Emotions
in
Ancient
and
Medieval
Philosophy
(Ox-
ford:Clarendon Press, 2006).
[Knuuttila, 1993] S. Knuuttila. Modalities in Medieval Philosophy (London, New York: Rout-
ledge, 1993).
[Knuuttila, 2001] S. Knuuttila. On the History of Theory of Modality as Alternativeness. In
Buchheim et al. (eds., 2001), 219-36.
[Knuuttila, 1997] S. Knuuttila. Positio impossibilis in Medieval Discussions of the Trinity. In C.
Marmo (ed.), Vestigia, imagines, verba. Semiotics and Logic in Medieval Theological Texts
(Turnhout: Brepols, 1997), 277-88.

576
Simo Knuuttila
[Knuuttila, 2001] S. Knuuttila. Time and Creation in Augustine. In E. Stump and N. Kretzmann
(eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Augustine (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2001), 103-115.
[Knuuttila and Hallamaa, 1995] S. Knuuttila and O. Hallamaa. Roger Roseth and Medieval
Deontic Mogic’, Logique & Analyse 149 (1995), 75-87.
[Knuuttila and Yrj¨onsuuri, 1988] S, Knuuttila and M. Yrj¨onsuuri. Norms and Action in Obliga-
tional Disputations. In Pluta (ed.), Die Philosophie im 14. und 15. Jahrhundert, Bochumer
Studien zur Philosophie 10 (Amsterdam: Gruener, 1988), 191-202.
[Kretzmann, 1985] N. Kretzmann. “Nos ipsi principia sumus”: Boethius and the Basis of Con-
tingency. In T. Rudavsky (ed.), Divine Omniscience in Medieval Philosophy, Synthese His-
torical Library 25 (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985), 23-50.
[Kretzmann, 1998] N. Kretzmann. Boethius and the Truth about Tomorrow’s Sea Battle. In
Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, 24- 52.
[Kretzmann and Stump, 1988] N. Kretzmann and E. Stump, eds. The Cambridge Translations
of Medieval Philosophical texts I: Logic and the Philosophy of Language (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1988).
[Kukkonen, 2000] T. Kukkonen. Possible Worlds in the Tahˆafut al-falˆasifa. Al-Ghˆazalˆı on Cre-
ation and Contingency, Journal of the History of Philosophy 38 (2000), 479-502.
[Kukkonen, 2000] T. Kukkonen. Proclus on Plenitude, Dionysius 18 (2000), 103-28.
[Lagerlund, 2000] H. Lagerlund. Modal Syllogistics in the Middle Ages, Studien und Texte zur
Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 70 (Leiden: Brill, 2000).
[Lewis, 1987] N. Lewis. Determinate Truth in Abelard, Vivarium 25 (1987), 81-109.
[Lohr, 1967-74] C. H. Lohr. Medieval Latin Aristotle Commentaries, Traditio 23, 313-413; 24,
149-245; 26, 135-216; 27, 251-351; 28, 281-39; 29, 93-197; 30, 119-44 (1967-74).
[Lovejoy, 1936] A.O. Lovejoy. The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1936).
[Manekin, 1988] Ch. H. Manekin. Problems of ‘Plenitude. In Maimonides and Gersonides’ in
R. Link-Salinger, R. Long and Ch.H. Manekin (eds.), A Straight Path: Studies in Medieval
Philosophy and Culture. Essays in Honor of Arthur Hyman (Washington: Catholic University
of America Press, 1988), 183-94.
[Marenbon, 1991] J. Marenbon. Abelard’s Concept of Possibility. In B. Mojsisch and O. Pluta
(eds.), Historia philosophiae medii aevi: Studien zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittel-
alters (Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Gruener, 1991), 595-609.
[Marenbon, 1992] J. Marenbon. Vocalism, Nominalism and the Commentaries on the Categories
from the Earlier Twelfth Century, Vivarium 30 (1992), 51-61.
[Marenbon, 1993] J. Marenbon. Medieval Latin Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logi-
cal texts, Before c. 1150 AD. In Ch. Burnett (ed.), Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian
Logical Texts: The Syriac, Arabic and Medieval Latin Traditions, Warburg Institute Surveys
and Texts 23 (London: The Warburg Institute, 1993), 77-127, republished and revised in J.
Marenbon, Aristotelian Logic, Platonism, and the Context of Early Medieval Philosophy in
the West, Variorum Collected Studies Series (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000).
[Marenbon, 1997] J. Marenbon. The Philosophy of Peter Abelard (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1997).
[Marenbon, 2003] J. Marenbon. Boethius (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003).
[Marenbon, 2005] J. Marenbon. Le tempts, l’´eternite et la prescience de Bo`ece `a Thomas
d’Aquin (Paris: Vrin, 2005).
[Marrone, 1996] S.P. Marrone. Revisiting Duns Scotus and Henry of Ghent on Modality. In
Honnefelder et al. (eds., 1996), 175-89.
[Martin, 1993] C. Martin. Obligations and Liars. In S. Read (ed.), Sophisms in Medieval Logic
and Grammar (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993), 357-81.
[Martin, 1997] C. Martin. Impossible positio as the Foundation of Metaphysics or, Logic on the
Scotist Plan’, in C. Marmo (ed.), Vestigia, imagines, verba. Semiotics and Logic in Medieval
Theological Texts (Turnhout: Brepols, 1997), 255-76.
[Martin, 1999] C. Martin. Thinking the Impossible: Non-Reductive Arguments from Impossible
Hypotheses in Boethius and Philoponus, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 19 (1999),
279-302.
[Martin, 2001] C. Martin. Abelard on Modality: Some Posibilities and Some Puzzles. In Buch-
heim et al. (eds., 2001), 97-124.

Medieval Modal Theories and Modal Logic
577
[Martin, 2003] C. Martin. An Amputee is Biped. The Role of the Categories in the Development
of Abelard’s Theory of Possibility. In J. Biard and I. Catach-Rosier (eds.), La Tradition
m´edi´evale des Categories (XIIe-XIVe si`ecles), Philosophes m´edi´evaux 45 (Louvain-la-Neuve:
´Editions de l’Institut Sup´erieur de Philosophie, Louvain and Paris: Peeters, 2003), 225-42.
[Martin, 2004] C. Martin. Logic. In J.E. Brower and K. Guilfoy (eds.), The Cambridge Com-
panion to Abelard (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 158-99.
[Mignucci, 1989] M. Mignucci. Truth and Modality in Late Antiquity: Boethius on Future Con-
tingent Propositions. In G. Corsi, C. Mangione and M. Mugnai (eds.), Atti del convegno
Internazionale di Storia della Logica. Le Teorie delle Modalit`a (Bologna: CLUEB, 1989),
47-78.
[Mignucci, 1998] M. Mignucci. Ammonius’ Sea Battle. In Ammonius, On Aristotle: On Inter-
pretation 9, 53-86, 1998.
[Mondadori, 2003] F. Mondadori. Leibniz on Compossibility: Some Scholastic Sources. In R.L.
Friedman and L.O. Nielsen (eds.), The Medieval Heritage in Early Modern Metaphysics and
Modal Theory, 1400-1700, The New Synthese Historical Library 53 (Dordrecht:
Kluwer,
2003), 309-338.
[Normore, 1982] C. Normore. Future Contingents. In N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny, J. Pinborg
(eds.), The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1982), 358-381.
[Normore, 1996] C. Normore. Scotus, Modality, Instants of Nature, and the Contingency of the
Present. In Honnefelder et al. (eds., 1996), 161-74
[Normore, 2003] C. Normore. Duns Scotus’s Modal Theory. In T. Williams (ed.), The Cambridge
Companion to Duns Scotus (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 129-60.
[Nuchelmans, 1973] G. Nuchelmans. Theories of the Proposition: Ancient and Medieval Con-
ceptions of the Bearers of Truth and Falsity (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1973).
[Pinzani, 2003] R. Pinzani. The Logical Grammar of Abelard, The New Synthese Historical
Library 51 (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003).
[Read, 2001] S. Read. Self-Reference and Validity revisited. In Yrj¨onsuuri (ed., 2001), 183-96.
[Rescher, 1963] N. Rescher. Studies in the History of Arabic Logic (Pittsburg: University of
Pittsburgh Press), 1963.
[Rescher, 1967] N. Rescher. Temporal Modalities in Arabic Logic, Foundations of Language Sup-
plementary Series 2 (Dordecht: Reidel, 1967).
[Schabel, 2001] C. Schabel. Theology at Paris, 1316-1345: Peter Auriol and the Problem of
Divine Foreknowledge and Future Contingents (Aldershot: Ashgate), 2001.
[Schmutz, 2006] J. Schmutz. Qui a invent´e les mondes possibles. In J.-C. Bardout and V. Jullien
(eds.), Les mondes possibles, Cahiers de philosophie de l’Universite de Caen (Caen: Presses
universitaires de Caen, 2006), 9-45.
[Serene, 1981] E. Serene. Anselm’s Modal Conceptions in S. Knuuttila (ed.), Reforging the Great
Chain of Being, Synthese Historical Library 20 (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1981), 117-62.
[Sharples, 1983] R.W. Sharples. Alexander of Aphrodisias on Fate, text, translation and com-
mentary (London: Duckworth, 1983).
[Sorabji, 1980] R. Sorabji. Necessity, Cause, and Blame: Perspectives on Aristotle’s Theory
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1980).
[Sorabji, 1998] R. Sorabji. The Tree Deterministic Arguments Opposed by Ammonius. In Am-
monius, On Aristotle: On Interpretation 9, 3-15, 1998.
[Spade, 1975] P. Spade. The Mediaeval Liar:
A Catalogue of the Insolubilia-Literature
(Toronto: The Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975).
[Spade, online] P. Spade. Thoughts, Words and Things: An Introduction to Late Mediaeval
Logic and Semantic Theory, http://pvspade.com.Logic/
[Street, 2001] T. Street. “The Eminent Later Scholar” in Avicenna’s Book of the Syllogism,
Arabic Science and Philosophy 11 (2001), 205-18.
[Street, 2002] T. Street. An Outline of Avicenna’s Syllogistic, Archiv f¨ur Geschichte der Philoso-
phie 84 (2002), 129-60.
[Street, 2004] T. Street. Arabic Logic. In J. Woods and D.M. Gabbay (eds.), Handbook of the
History of Logic I (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2004), 471-556.
[Street, 2005] T. Street. Fahraddˆın Ar-Rˆazˆı’s Critique of Avicennan Logic. In D. Perler and U.
Rudolph (eds.) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im arabischen und lateinischen Mittelalter,
Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 84 (Leiden: Brill, 2005), 99-116.

578
Simo Knuuttila
[Tachau, 1988] K. Tachau. Vision and Certitude in the Age of Ockham: Optics, Epistemology
and the Foundations of Semantics 1250-1345 (Leiden: Brill, 1988).
[Thom, 2003] P. Thom. Medieval Modal Systems: Problems and Concepts, Ashgate Studies in
Medieval Philosophy (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003 ).
[Thom, 2007] P. Thom. Logic and Ontology in the Syllogistic of Robert Kilwardby, Studien und
Texte zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters 92, (Leiden: Brill, 2007).
[von Wright, 1971] G.H. von Wright. Deontic Logic and the Theory of Conditions. In R.
Hilpinen, ed., Deontic Logic:
Introductory and Systematic Readings (Reidel:
Dordrecht,
1971), 159-77.
[von Wright, 1984] G.H. von Wright. Truth, Knowledge, and Modality (Oxford:
Blackwell,
1984).
[Vos et al., 1994] A. Vos, H. Veldhuis, A.H. Looman-Graaskamp, E. Dekker, and N.W. den
Bok. John Duns Scotus, Contingency and Freedom. Lectura I.39, trans. with introduction
and commentary, The New Synthese Historical Library 42 (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers), 1994.
[Vuillemin, 1984] J. Vuillemin. N´ecessit´e ou contingence: l’aporie de Diodore et les syst`emes
philosophiques (Paris: Les ´Editions de Minuit, 1984).
[Waterlow, 1982a] S. Waterlow. Nature, Change and Agency in Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982).
[Waterlow, 1982b] S. Waterlow. Passage and Possibility: A Study of Aristotle’s Modal Concepts
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982).
[Wippel, 1985] J.F. Wippel. Divine Knowledge, Divine Power and Human Freedom in Thomas
Aquinas and Henry of Ghent. In T. Rudavsky (ed.), Divine Omniscience and Omnipotence
in Medieval Philosophy, Synthese Historical Library 25 (Dordrecht: Reidel), 213-41.
[Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001] M. Yrj¨onsuuri, ed. Medieval Formal Logic: Obligations, Insolubles and Con-
sequences, The New Synthese Historical Library 49 (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001).

TREATMENTS OF THE PARADOXES OF
SELF-REFERENCE
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
In chapter II, 51 of Don Quixote, Miguel de Cervantes describes a curious case
presented to Sancho Panza as the governor of the island Barataria. There was a
river, a bridge, a gallows — and a law. According to the law, everyone crossing the
bridge must ﬁrst tell under oath where he is going. If he is truthful, he may pass
freely, but if he lies, he will be hanged on the gallows. Now, a man is brought to
Sancho after having taken the oath that he was going to be hanged on the gallows.
The judges had been unable to solve the case, for if he was hanged, he had spoken
the truth and thus should not have been hanged. And if he was not hanged, he
lied, and thus should have been hanged. Even Sancho with his meager intellectual
powers is able to see that the case is paradoxical. No solution would accord to the
law.
Cervantes did not invent the paradox himself. Instead it was developed in the
medieval literature concerning the paradoxes of self-reference, and the formulation
is so similar to certain medieval formulations that Cervantes must have got it in
some way or other from the logicians. This is, of course, no surprise. Don Quixote
draws upon many other philosophical discussions of the schools as well.
Aristotle considers in Sophistical Refutations 25 (180a27–180b7) whether and
in what sense a person who “swears that he will break his oath” can keep his oath,
and claims that there are parallel arguments “as regards the problem whether the
same man can at the same time say what is both false and true”. Although it is
very diﬃcult to judge whether Aristotle really had in mind genuine paradoxes of
self-reference like the Liar, ‘this sentence is false’, many medieval authors refer to
this passage as the context where Aristotle oﬀers his solution of such paradoxes.
There was, thus, a very authoritative source for connecting oaths to the context
of self-referential paradoxes.
It is a very distinctive characteristic of the general manner in which medieval
authors discuss paradoxes of self reference that they are put into the framework of
a supposed situation. In a typical, simple fourteenth-century version of the Liar,
there is a person, Socrates, who begins speaking with the sentence ‘what Socrates
says is false’, and says nothing more (cf., e.g.
[Ockham, 1974, p. 744]). In this
way, the paradoxes of self-reference are supposed to arise from something people
do, not from linguistic constructions in abstracto. In this sense, an oath is a quite
natural element to use in constructing a self-referential paradox.
Clearly, oaths were not at the core of medieval discussions of these paradoxes.
The core was the truth-predicate applied in such a way as to produce a paradox,
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
c⃝200
Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.
8

580
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
but even with the truth-predicate analogous paradoxes were constructed in sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀering ways. The semantic paradoxes of self-reference seem to have
been discussed in both Arabic and Latin logic well before the thirteenth century
so that the standard example was ‘what I utter is false’, but various authors de-
veloped versions that in many cases were interestingly diﬀerent in terms of the
solutions given for the core paradox. Roughly at the beginning of the fourteenth
century treatments of the topic became really a ﬂourishing genre of logic. The
most original work seems to have been done in the 1320s and 1330s in Oxford
by authors like Richard Kilvington, William Heytesbury and Roger Swyneshed.
Especially Thomas Bradwardine’s treatment accrued well-deserved fame in the
following centuries. These logicians really can be said to have undertaken the task
of giving a consistent, theoretically satisfactory solution to the Liar paradox and
its associates rather than simply having the interest of studying various logical
aspects of the Liar and other congenial paradoxes.
In the following I will go through a selection of medieval texts. The choice of the
texts is not straightforwardly based on the historical importance or even quality
in logic. The aim is, rather, that the sample gives a picture of the multiplicity and
theoretical richness of this particular medieval discussion.
INSOLUBILIA MONACENSIA
The oldest known Latin tract dedicated to the paradoxes of self-reference is an
anonymous text written about at the end of the twelfth century, called Insolu-
bilia Monacensia according to the current location of the manuscript in Munich.
Scholars know about occasional references to the Liar paradox already long before
that, like in Adam of Balsham’s Ars disserendi, which was written in 1132 [Adam
of Balsham, 1956, 107]. However, the scarcity of the surviving early treatments of
the paradox has made it diﬃcult to give a story how the medieval Latin discus-
sions got started. One alternative is that they originate from Byzantine Greek or
medieval Arabic logical texts, which are not known either.1
In any case, Insolubilia Monacensia presents a theory that is already relatively
developed. The word for these paradoxes is insolubilia, or “insolubles”, and the
author explains that this is due to the diﬃculty in giving a truth value evaluation
of the paradoxical sentences. In a manner typical for medieval logicians, he puts
the problem in a disputational context. “A solution is,” as he says, “an appropriate
determination of a thing”, which means that the semantic value of a proposition
is evaluated in a satisfactory way, typically by saying “yes” (ita) or “no” (non),
or “it is true” or “it is false” [De Rijk, 1966, 104]. That the author is thinking
of disputations in fairly technical terms becomes obvious from his comment that
1Cf.
[De Rijk, 1966, 83–86, 103]; edition of the Insolubilia Monacensia on pp.
104–115.
The text has been discussed also by, e.g. [Spade, 1973]; see also [Spade, 1987; Martin, 1993;
Bottin, 1976].
For a listing of medieval texts, see [Spade, 1975].
For other interesting early
treatments, see [Braakhuis, 1967; De Rijk, 1976; Roure, 1970]. Discussions are also to be found
in commentaries on Aristotle’s Sophistical Refutations.

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
581
sometimes refraining from an evaluation can be the correct determination. Thus,
if you are asked to doubt whatever is put forward to you ﬁrst in the disputation,
answering with doubt is the correct determination for the ﬁrst proposition, given
your obligation. Such an obligation clearly has the taste of a technical duty.2
An insoluble is a proposition that cannot be solved in this way: no answer will
be satisfactory. Or further, “an insoluble is a circular and necessary deduction
to both sides of a contradiction” [De Rijk, 1966, 105]. The author compares two
propositions:
God is one in essence and three in persons
I utter a falsehood
In his view, the ﬁrst of these propositions is insoluble absolutely (simpliciter). No
correct and consistent answer can be given to whether God is one or to whether he
is three. But on the other hand, the latter proposition is insoluble only in a certain
respect (secundum quid) and thus allows for a solution [De Rijk, 1966, 104–105].
This attitude shows strong optimism about ﬁnding a solution to the paradoxes of
self-reference, and indeed such optimism was to remain dominant throughout the
middle ages, even in two senses. First, authors thought that solving the paradoxes
is not impossible but only diﬃcult, maybe diﬃcult to the extent of admitting that
no solution had yet been found. And second, they did not consider it a problem
if no solution is in sight. It seems that no medieval logician saw the threat of the
logical systems collapsing in mere inconsistence in the face of the paradoxes. In
the eyes of medieval logicians, the Liar paradox was not a threat but a treasure.
It gave an especially interesting test case for semantical theories and was indeed
used for that work.
The main approach taken by the author of Insolubilia Monacensia is to look
at how putting a proposition forward relates to asserting it. His solution of the
paradox, as far he really presents a solution, is simply cancellation (cassatio). It
seems that the idea is that the paradoxes somehow fail to be such that they would
need to be answered, and thus they ought to be “cancelled”. The author divides
his treatment to three ways in which the paradox may arise: through a human
act (of asserting or such like), through a feature of the (linguistic) instrument, or
through the nature of what is asserted [De Rijk, 1966, 105]. The examples are as
follows.
The act of uttering is at issue when one considers a paradox like ‘I utter a
falsehood’, ‘I lie’, or something such. These utterances are such that they allow
for inferring a contradiction. Consider whether ‘I utter a falsehood’ is true or false.
If it is true, it can be proved to be false:
Proof
That I utter a falsehood is true
I utter a falsehood and nothing other than this
This is a falsehood
■
2[De Rijk, 1966, 104].

582
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
If it is false, it can be proved to be true:
Proof.
That I utter a falsehood is false
I do not utter a falsehood and I utter something
I utter a truth and nothing other than this
This is a truth
■
The author gives these inferential chains as proofs for the opposites, showing that
the utterance “I utter a falsehood” must be cancelled (est cassandum) so that
one can respond saying “you are not saying anything” (nil dicis) [De Rijk, 1966,
105–106].
The problem is, as the author recognizes, that some words undeniably seem to
be uttered even if you want to say that there is nothing in need of an evaluation.
He distinguishes between asserting (asserere) and putting forward (proferre) so
that both are necessary in order to make a claim: “To claim is nothing but to
assert ﬁrst and to put forward then.” [De Rijk, 1966, 106]. However, the author
does not really tell what these stages of making of a claim are. He seems to be
ready to admit that either or maybe even both of these stages take place when
the insoluble sentence is pronounced, although not together. In saying ‘I utter
a falsehood’, the two stages apparently fail to come together. He compares the
situation to how the deﬁnition of human, ‘a rational animal’, has two parts both
of which refer even to non-human things, but never together [De Rijk, 1966, 106].
As another example of the same kind, the author presents the truth-teller para-
dox, ‘I utter a truth’. He claims that some people dispute its paradoxical character,
but diﬃculties cannot be avoided if one considers the evaluations of two statements
by other people, one saying that the claim is true and the other saying that it is
false. Thus, the truth-teller’s sentence can equally be proved to be true and to be
false, but it cannot be both: we have a paradox [De Rijk, 1966, 106–107].
Still staying with examples of the same type, the author considers how the
ﬁrst person pronoun is not necessary to produce the paradox: ‘Socrates utters a
falsehood’ is paradoxical if uttered by Socrates but not if uttered by someone else
[De Rijk, 1966, 108–109]. Further, the author notes that direct self-reference is
not needed for the paradox. Circular reference will do. Thus, if Socrates says that
Plato lies, when Plato says that Cicero lies and Cicero says that Socrates lies, we
have essentially the same paradox in our hands even if none of these persons refers
to himself [De Rijk, 1966, 109].
Linguistic paradoxes of self-reference are discussed as the second type.
For
example, if the clause “a proposition not described by its predicate” is used as the
predicate, a paradox results. Thus, the following sentence is paradoxical:
This is a proposition not described by its predicate.

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
583
If it is asked whether the predicate of this proposition refers to the proposition
itself, no answer can be given. For if the predicate describes the whole, the propo-
sition must be like it says, that is, a proposition not described by its predicate,
contrary to what was assumed, and if it does not, then the proposition is de-
scribed by its predicate, contrary to what was assumed. The author claims that
the mentioned clause cannot be a predicate in a proposition, and thus the consid-
ered sentence-looking piece of language lacks a predicate and is not a proposition.
This of course solves the problem, but leaves one wondering why exactly the clause
cannot be a predicate [De Rijk, 1966, 113].
The same arbitrariness of the solution is visible in an even more serious way in
another example considered by the author. Suppose that on an otherwise empty
page, or embedded within a completely true text it reads
A proposition written on this page is false.
The author claims: “it must be said that this proposition cannot be written either
alone or with truths”. But what does this mean? Does the pen stop if one tries
to write something like this?
The author seems to go back to something like
the distinction between asserting and putting forward discussed above. Literally,
he distinguishes between writing as “drawing ﬁgures” (ﬁguras protrahere) and as
“representing ﬁgures” (ﬁguras representare). The latter can, the author claims,
be cancelled (cassari). Thus, it appears that it is possible to draw on the page
something looking exactly like a proposition, but the ink will fail to become letters
and words [De Rijk, 1966, 113–114].
The third class of insolubles is discussed so shortly that it is impossible to see
what the author exactly means.
The example is ‘something is not true about
itself’, and the idea appears to be that such examples are based on what it is to be
a proposition [De Rijk, 1966, 115]. However, in the short discussion the example
looks like it would belong together with the former example of using ‘proposition
not referred to by its predicate’ as the predicate. That example was classiﬁed as
a linguistic paradox. In the later treatises on insolubles the distinction between
insolubles arising from human acts or from linguistic structure seems to remain a
standard classiﬁcation. The third category seems to disappear, though.
‘THE POSITUM IS FALSE’ AS THE POSITUM
As we noted, the author of Insolubilia Monacensia discusses the paradoxes of self-
reference in a distinctively disputational context, where the respondent evaluates
sentences put forward by the opponent. Also, he shows knowledge of the medieval
disputational technique of obligations. However, the disputational context plays
no substantial role in his ways of setting the paradox or his solutions of it. In
particular, he does not present the paradox as a technical obligation in the way
medieval obligational disputations were presented. The medieval logical genres of
obligations and insolubles thus started as distinct ﬁelds. Nevertheless, it seems

584
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
that they were closely connected from the very beginning, and many later authors
chose to present insolubles as obligational disputations in the technical sense.
As they were known in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the technical
obligational disputations consisted of encounters between an opponent and a re-
spondent, with the opponent ﬁrst assigning the respondent some special duty (obli-
gatio), typically that of accepting a sentence known to be false, and then putting
forward sentences for the respondent to concede, deny or doubt in a consistent
manner. The idea was that the respondent had to pay attention to inferential
relationships between diﬀerent sentences. In the standard form, the disputation
would start with the opponent “positing” a sentence, or laying down as the basis
of reasoning a false, perhaps impossible sentence, the positum as it was called. The
respondent should accept the positum if he thought that it could be maintained
consistently. Then he should answer other sentences so that he concedes consis-
tently everything that logically follows from the presented positum. In a way, this
technique served for the Latin medieval period as a paradigm of how one should
deal with false assumptions in a disputational context.3
In the medieval manuscripts from thirteenth century onwards, treatises on insol-
ubles were very often associated with treatises of obligational disputations. Fur-
thermore, paradoxical or at least complicated types of self-reference were often
constructed in the obligations treatises. It seems that already the very earliest
obligations treatises address issues that are of genuine relevance to the topics
discussed in the treatises on insolubles. One such is the anonymous “Emmeran
Treatise on False Positio”, which seems to date from the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth
century.4
The author of this text takes considerable eﬀort to discuss exact rules for what
the respondent should do if the opponent wishes to lay down as the positum some-
thing containing ‘a falsehood is posited’. As the text tells, the respondent ought
not to accept this sentence as the positum, since “a contradiction would follow”.
Interestingly, the author does not say that a contradiction would follow technically
in the disputation, but outside it. As he says, the opponent would then say “time
is ﬁnished”, which in these disputations means that one must turn into real dis-
cussion of truth values and not care anymore about the duty to grant the positum
and anything following from it [Anonymous, 2001, 199–200]. The idea is simple:
when ‘a falsehood is posited’ is posited, it becomes a sentence that claims itself to
be false. The resulting paradox is quite near the standard Liar.
In another interesting move the author considers ‘a falsehood is conceded’ as
the positum. It can be accepted, as he points out, since no contradiction follows at
this stage. The sentence is not paradoxical as a positum, because the response to
the positum is not called ‘conceding’ but ‘accepting’. However, if it is posited and
accepted, and the opponent puts it forward as a proposition, the respondent loses
the disputation. The proposition put forward follows directly from the positum
as a repetition of the same sentence. Therefore, it should be conceded, but it
3For deeper discussion of the genre, see, e.g. [Yrj¨onsuuri, 1994; 2001; Keﬀer, 2001].
4Edition in [De Rijk, 1974], translation [Anonymous, 2001].

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
585
cannot be, because from conceding only the sentence ‘a falsehood is conceded’ and
nothing else, a paradox would follow. [Anonymous, 2001, 203].
In both of these cases, the paradox can be avoiding by the respondent’s refusal
to go into such situation, since the rules of obligations allow such a move. Without
respondent’s acceptance nothing can be posited, and without him conceding the
crucial sentence nothing dangerous is conceded, and no self-reference arises.
After discussing the case of positing ‘a falsehood is posited’ (let us call it ‘p’)
alone, the author goes into a discussion of the opponent wishing to posit a molecu-
lar sentence containing ‘p’. The rules concerning these situations are quite simple,
and again the idea is to avoid the paradox. The disjunction p ∨q can be posited
if q is true but not if it is false. Similarly, the conjunction p&q can be posited if
q is false but not if it is true. The underlying idea is, of course, that it should be
possible to assign truth values without problems. In the case of the disjunction
that is true because of q, it can be entertained that the positum is true and thus
‘a falsehood is posited’ is false. Similarly, in the case of positing the conjunction
having an unambiguously false conjunct, it can be entertained that ‘a falsehood is
posited’ is true [Anonymous, 2001, 200–201]. At this point it may also be pointed
out that Insolubilia Monacensia too addresses the issue and resolves it similarly.
According to that text, ‘I utter a falsehood or God exists’ can be granted because
of the latter disjunct, while ‘I utter a falsehood and God exists’ is insoluble and
must be cancelled because its truth would require the truth of the ﬁrst conjuct
[De Rijk, 1966, 109–111].
According to a further rule in the Emmeran Treatise, if the opponent wants to
posit a material equivalence between the positum and some other sentence, the
respondent must check whether the sentence at issue is true or false: if it is false,
the positum may not be accepted. If the opponent wants to posit something like
“the positum and [the ﬁrst sentence] put forward are similar [in truth value]”, the
respondent can only accept the positum in case the ﬁrst sentence will be true.
Unfortunately the author does not recognize that this ruling allows the opponent
to trap the respondent who maybe does not know what the opponent is going to
put forward as the ﬁrst sentence [Anonymous, 2001, 201–202].
These rules about molecular sentences containing self-reference show that the
intention is not to prohibit reference to the positum in the positum itself. It is
not the self-reference that is taken to be problematic, but the possibly ensuing
paradoxes. Thus, the suggestions do not amount to even trying to give a solution
to the paradox. Rather, the author sketches ways of seeing how it could arise and
how it can be avoided in advance. The picture gets very complicated because of the
two-tier structure involving the technical disputational context and the discussion
outside the disputation. Somewhat interestingly, the author does not pay attention
to how self-referential paradoxes could arise within the technical disputation itself.
In the later treatments of the obligations technique self-referential structures
become more rare or merely apparent.5 Occurrences of the sentence ‘the positum
5As an outstanding exception, Obligationes Parisiensis contains material similar to that found
in the Emmeran Treatise. Cf. [De Rijk, 1975].

586
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
is false’ provide an illuminating example. Walter Burley, for example, considers
whether one should grant ‘the positum is false’ if it really is. Thus, if the positum is
‘You are in Rome’ in a disputation held in Oxford, one should concede ‘the positum
is false’ as the ﬁrst proposition. According to Burley, this has the implication that
then one should deny ‘’you are in Rome’ is the positum’, which may result in a
complicated (and curious) disputation with sentences like ‘”you are in Rome” is
true and irrelevant’ being conceded in Oxford [Burley, 1963, 62]. It seems that
Burley was thinking about the fact that there is nothing inconsistent in supposing
that one is participating an obligational disputation in Rome with a false positum,
and insofar as this was his idea, he was not dealing with self-referential paradoxes
in this context.6
THOMAS BRADWARDINE
Despite work done by many authors, including such excellent logicians as Walter
Burley and William Ockham, it seems that the medieval discussion concerning the
paradoxes of self-reference did not make much visible progress for more than a cen-
tury. The account given in Insolubilia Monacensia appears almost as advanced as
some late thirteenth-century ones. This may be partly due to a modern pretension
that progress would be marked by the oﬀered solutions becoming better in some
respect, while the thirteenth century authors apparently were more interested in
forming a clear picture in how self-reference leads to a paradox and in mapping the
various versions of the paradox that can be built. Ockham, to mention a diﬀerent
kind of a case, appears to have been simply not very interested in the topic. He
ends the relevant section in his Summa logicae to the comment that it is there just
for the sake of completeness.7
In any case, the discussion was brought to a turning point by Thomas Brad-
wardine in the early 1320s.8 His discussion of the topic seems to be the ﬁrst that
gives the feeling of a systematic solution cast in a logically careful format. Brad-
wardine was one of the so-called Oxford Calculators, which was a group of scholars
working in Oxford and in eﬀect producing a new mathematical and logical way
of doing philosophy that was to have repercussions even until Galileo Galilei and
early modern science in general. Bradwardine has in recent discussion been best
known for his work in mathematical physics, but it is clear that his solution of the
insolubles was a very remarkable achievement. Also other calculators, including
Richard Kilvington and William Heytesbury, produced treatments of insolubles
that are of a very high logical quality.9
Bradwardine’s treatise is systematically structured. It starts oﬀwith discussions
6For an edition of Burley’s treatise on the insolubles, see [Roure, 1970].
7[Ockham, 1974, 746]. In respect to the substance of what Ockham has to say about insolubles,
it seems clear that this part of Summa logicae must have been written without knowledge of
Bradwardine’s work.
8For Bradwardine’s position in the discussion, see e.g. [Read, 2002, esp. pp. 189–199].
9For a general discussion of the Oxford calculators, see e.g. [Sylla, 1982].

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
587
and refutations of the earlier solutions of the paradox. This part of the treatise
is useful even in a historical sense. After that he presents his own solution in
the form of “divisions, deﬁnitions, postulates and theses” In other words, he puts
forward a kind of axiomatic basis for discussions of insolubles, and derives results
that are directly applicable to diﬀerent kinds of self-referential paradoxes. The
rest of the treatise applies the oﬀered solution to a variety of examples, including
even “sophisms which seem to be insolubles but are not”.10
The core of Bradwardine’s solution of the paradoxes of self-reference is that a
sentence that claims itself to be false signiﬁes not only that it is false but also that
it is true. On the basis of such a signiﬁcation, it is unproblematic to judge that
the sentence is false because the falsity can now be associated to the truth-claim.
The problematic point in this solution is, as is easy to see, the proof that and the
explanation how and why the insoluble sentence signiﬁes itself to be true, since
there seems to be nothing such explicitly said in the sentence. Bradwardine deals
with the issue in terms of his second thesis, which has been put under close scrutiny
by modern scholars.11 Instead of starting with that, let us however ﬁrst see how
Bradwardine’s solution works in a real case, taking up postulates and theses as
they are needed in the argumentation.
The ﬁrst example analyzed by Bradwardine after the discussions presenting the
axiomatic basis is cast in the format of an analysis of a very simple obligational
disputation. [Bradwardine, internet, 47]. It runs as follows:
Case: Socrates utters only this: (a) Socrates utters a falsehood
Proposition: (b) Socrates utters a falsehood
The idea is this.
You, the respondent, will have to evaluate the proposition
‘Socrates utters a falsehood’ on the basis of an imagined case, where Socrates
only utters ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’. Bradwardine’s solution of the paradox is
that you ought grant the sentence, because what Socrates says (that is, ‘a’) would
in the imagined case be false. Therefore, the proposition put forward to you (that
is, ‘b’) is true.
The crucial practical edge of the discussion comes from the fact that as said by
your opponent, ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’ is not self-referential, and thus it can
be admitted as true, but as Socrates himself utters ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’,
the sentence is self-referential in a problematic way. Bradwardine makes a distinc-
tion between these two propositions (‘a’ and ‘b’) and points out that in granting
‘b’ you do not grant the proposition ‘a’ uttered by Socrates, but “another like it”
(aliam sibi similem) [Bradwardine, internet, 47]. The discussion thus relies on
the standard medieval approach that truth-values are attributed to sentence to-
kens and not types (in Bradwardine’s terms, to sentences as they diﬀer secundum
numerum, rather than secundum speciem; cf. [Bradwardine, internet, 62].
10Printed edition of the treatise can be found in [Roure, 1970]. I have used Stephen Read’s
edition and translation available on the internet [Bradwardine, internet].
11See esp. [Read, 2002; Spade, 1981; Spade, internet].

588
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
Bradwardine wants to say that the sentence ‘a’ is false, but the sentence ‘b’
is true. This becomes even more clear if we look at how he analyses a counter
argument, which is as follows [Bradwardine, internet, 47]:
Proof.
‘a’ and ‘b’ are equivalent
‘b’ is true
so ‘a’ is true
■
To this argument Bradwardine objects that the ﬁrst premise is false. To prove
this, he works out an analysis of what ‘a’ and ‘b’ signify, and it is this analysis
that really reveals what his solution of the paradox is. Thus, let us take a close
look at the argumentation in the text.
The sentence uttered by Socrates, ‘a’, is the natural point of departure. Brad-
wardine says:12
(1) ‘a’ signiﬁes that Socrates utters a falsehood, from which it follows
that what is uttered by Socrates is false.
Unfortunately, there are diﬀerent readings of the consequence mentioned here, de-
pending on the reference of “from which” (ex quo). What exactly is the antecedent
of the intended consequence? Bradwardine uses the consequence to apply his sec-
ond postulate (P2), which runs as follows:13
(P2) Every proposition signiﬁes or means as a matter of fact or abso-
lutely <respectively> everything which follows from it as a matter of
fact or absolutely.
Here again, the “it” (ista) is not too lucid, but the natural reading would be that
a sentence means what follows from the sentence itself. In the examined example
Bradwardine applies this principle to infer that
(2) ‘a’ signiﬁes that what is uttered by Socrates is false.
If he means the principle (P2) in the exact form quoted above, it seems that in
(1) he should have said that the consequent at issue follows from ‘a’ itself. This
is however something that the Latin sentence does not directly mean. Either it
means that the consequent follows from ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’ or that it
follows from ‘a’ signifying that.14
12”a signiﬁcat quod Sortes dicit falsum, ex quo sequitur quod dictum a Sorte est falsum.”
Bradwardine, [internet, 46; translation p. 47].
13“Quelibet propositio signiﬁcat sive denotat ut nunc vel simpliciter omne quod sequitur ad
istam ut nunc vel simpliciter.” Text and translation from Bradwardine, [forthcoming, 38, 39].
Roure [1970] has ‘illam’ instead of ‘istam’.
14To apply his second postulate correctly, Bradwardine should, it seems, have said that ‘a’ is
(rather than “signiﬁes”) ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’. However, when medieval logicians used
letters as names of sentences they often formulated this by saying that the letter “signiﬁes”
the intended sentence. Thus Bradwardine may be intending to say exactly that ‘a’ names the
sentence ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’ as an explanation why he thinks that ‘a’ implies that what
is uttered by Socrates is false.

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
589
The issue makes a diﬀerence, as can be seen by considering whether Bradwardine
accepts a modiﬁed version of (P2), namely,
(P2)* Every proposition signiﬁes or means as a matter of fact or abso-
lutely <respectively> everything which follows from what it signiﬁes
as a matter of fact or absolutely.
There are two ways to attribute (P2)* to Bradwardine.
One is to claim that
Bradwardine accepted both (P2) and (P2)*, the latter through accepting that
every sentence implies what it signiﬁes. However, this attribution has the problem
that it forces Bradwardine quite visibly to consequences that he explicitly wanted
to avoid.15 Also, it does not accord very well with the way he puts the example.
The other way is to attribute minor textual problems to Bradwardine’s formulation
and claim that he means to state (P2)* rather than (P2). This would make the
example run smoothly.
The question concerns the exact way in which Bradwardine believed that signi-
ﬁcation is “closed” under the consequence relation. To put it formally (using the
colon for the relation of signifying),16 Bradwardine may mean:
(P2)
a →p
‘a’ : p
or he may rather mean:
(P2)*
‘a’ : p, p →q
‘a’ : q
The problem with (P2) is that it is somewhat counterintuitive and does not work
the way Bradwardine puts his principle to work. The problem with (P2)* is mainly
that it is not what he appears to say in the text. To some extent, thus, the question
comes down to the historian’s methodological choices.
indexRead, S.
Immediately after Bradwardine’s work, medieval scholars started to discuss the
nature of propositional signiﬁcates (complexa signiﬁcabilia). In this discussion,
the problem was to determine what exactly is signiﬁed by a proposition over and
above that which is signiﬁed by its terms. Indeed it is possible that Bradwardine’s
work gave a seminal motivation for such a discussion in a context where standard
semantic theories had room only for things and not for states of aﬀairs as signiﬁed
entities.
Be that problem as it may, we can see what Bradwardine is aiming at in the
examined example. Given (2), Bradwardine points out that the subject of the
signiﬁed proposition ‘what is uttered by Socrates is false’, or ‘what is uttered by
Socrates’ has in the assumed case only one suppositum, or refers to only one thing,
15Paul Spade has defended this kind of reading of Bradwardine.
See e.g.
[Spade, 1981].
Stephen Read rejects the reading. See [Read, 2002, 208–214].
16I am using the arrow for medieval consequence, which makes it in certain cases ambiguous
between conditional and inference.

590
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
which is ‘a’. Thus, ‘a’ signiﬁes the aﬃrmative predication of falsehood to that
suppositum [Bradwardine, internet, 47]. This step is taken in virtue of the second
part (T1.2) of Bradwardine’s ﬁrst thesis, which is as follows:17
(T1) Every proposition whose extreme:
(T1.1) has many supposita, signiﬁes or means aﬃrmation or
denial for one of them, and
(T1.2) if it has only one, for that.
The idea of this thesis is to formulate for the context the theory of truth conditions
that was standard at the time, usually given in the form of supposita. Propositions
claim something about the things they refer to, which is to say that they aﬃrm or
deny something of their supposita. Bradwardine aims at a technically satisfactory
way of saying that falsehood is aﬃrmed in ‘a’ of ‘a’ itself. Thus, the subject term
of the latter part of (2), or ‘what is uttered by Socrates’ can be substituted by ‘a’
in order to move to:
(3) ‘a’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is false
A reference to (P2) is again needed, and again it is applied in the form (P2)* as
allowing one to move from ‘a’: p to ‘a’: q when p →q. Substituting the pronoun
‘itself’ for ‘a’, Bradwardine achieves [Bradwardine, internet, 47]
(4) ‘a’ signiﬁes itself to be false.
Now Bradwardine is almost there, since his second thesis applies to sentences like
this. It runs as follows18:
(T2) If some proposition signiﬁes itself not to be true or itself to be
false, it signiﬁes itself to be true and is false.
Using this thesis, Bradwardine achieves for the analyzed case the crucial result.
Thus [Bradwardine, internet, 47]:
(5) ‘a’ signiﬁes itself to be true
and
(6) ‘a’ is false.
If we collect the argument together, it runs as follows:
Proof.
17”Quelibet propositio cuius extremum multa habet supposita signiﬁcant sive denotat aﬃr-
mationem vel negationem pro aliquo istorum, et si unicum, pro isto.”
Text and translation
[Bradwardine, internet, 38, 39].
18“Si aliqua propositio signiﬁcet se non esse veram vel se esse falsam ipsa signiﬁcant se esse
veram et est falsa.” [Bradwardine, internet, 38; 39].

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
591
(1) ‘a’ signiﬁes that Socrates utters a falsehood
(2) ‘a’ signiﬁes that what is uttered by Socrates is false
P2
(3) ‘a’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is false
T1.2
(4) ‘a’ signiﬁes itself to be false
P2
(5) ‘a’ signiﬁes itself to be true
T2
(6) ‘a’ is false
T2
■
The edge of the argument really comes from the fact that if a similar reasoning is
applied to ‘b’, or the proposition put forward to you in the disputation, it will not
go through. The beginning of the reasoning works, of course, in the same way:
(1)* ‘b’ signiﬁes that Socrates utters a falsehood
(2)* ‘b’ signiﬁes that what is uttered by Socrates false
P2
(3)* ‘b’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is false
T1.2
But after this line it is clear that the introduction of the pronoun ‘itself’ would be
fallacious. For ‘a’ is not ‘b’, it is a diﬀerent token of the same type. And because
there is no self-reference, Bradwardine’s second thesis (T2) cannot be used. The
true claim that Socrates utters a falsehood gets separated from the false one.
Bradwardine’s solution of the paradox amounts thus to exact logical way of
spelling out the fact that whereas ‘a’ signiﬁes something about itself, there is no
such self-reference for ‘b’. Thus, the meanings of ‘a’ and ‘b’ diﬀer, and they diﬀer
so that ‘a’ means everything ‘b’ does, but ‘a’ additionally means that ‘a’ is true.
To be sure, ‘b’ does not mean that ‘a’ is true, and it does not mean that ‘b’ is true.
Even if this is the core of the solution, working it out in an acceptable way was
not a simple project. When we look at Bradwardine’s successors, we ﬁnd that in
general they did not buy Bradwardine’s (T2). There were exceptions, though. At
least Albert of Saxony and to some extent John Buridan, as we will see, accepted
(T2) in virtue of accepting the stronger claim that all sentences signify their own
truth, but this seems not to have been Bradwardine’s intention. He appears to
say that it is only the paradoxical sentences that signify their own truth.19
Bradwardine’s proof of the crucial thesis (T2) is diﬃcult to spell out, but it is
really the most important part of the solution, since without proof the thesis just
is not acceptable. With the proof, Bradwardine can rely only on (P2), which is
much easier to accept as it stands. To prove (T2), he ﬁrst proves that any sentence
which signiﬁes that it itself is not true also signiﬁes that it itself is true. Then he
extends the result to sentences that signify their own falsehood. As the last part
he proves the ﬁnal bit that because these sentences signify their own truth, they
are false. The crucial part of the logic is to found in the ﬁrst part, which works
19The agreements and diﬀerences between Bradwardine, Buridan and Albert of Saxony have
been spelled out in detail by Stephen Read in [Read, 2002].

592
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
with the assumption that the sentence either does or does not mean something
else as well. The ﬁrst part of this proof is relatively understandable, and we can
still use ‘a’ as a name for the sentence at issue (although it must now be taken as
a name for an arbitrary sentence satisfying the criterion of self-reference, or any
sentence for which the ﬁrst premise (1) is true).20
Proof.
(1) ‘a’ signiﬁes only that ‘a’ is not true
Assumed
(2) ‘a’ is not true
Assumed
(3) It is not wholly as ‘a’ signiﬁes
(2), (Def. of truth)
(4) It is not the case that ‘a’ is not true
(1), (3), (T1.2)
(5) ‘a’ is true
(4)
(6) ‘a’ signiﬁes itself to be true
(1), (2)–(5), (P2)
■
Most steps of this argument seem clear enough. In essence, (3) expresses what
it is for ‘a’ not to be true.21 Then at step (4), ‘the case that ‘a’ is not true’ is
substituted for ‘wholly as ‘a’ signiﬁes’ since that is all that ‘a’ signiﬁes according to
(1). Then at step (5) the double negation is eliminated. At step (6), Bradwardine
applies his principle (P2), which is doing the crucial work.
A reader may wonder about the line (2) and the application of the principle
(P2). Is line (2) assumed for the sake of conditional proof? The lines (2)–(5)
would then infer “a’ is true’ from “a’ is not true’. The consequence would then
be used at (6). This interpretation seems a good suggestion, especially in view of
applying the principle (P2) on (1) to achieve (6). However, again it seems that it
is (P2)* that is needed, since line (2) appears to be what ‘a’ signiﬁes and not the
examined sentence ‘a’ itself.22 The reasoning seems to run from ‘a’ : ¬T‘a’ (cf.
(1)), proving (on steps (2)–(5)) the consequence ¬T‘a’ →T‘a’ and using it with
the principle (P2)* to achieve ‘a’ : T‘a’.
The second part of the proof is more diﬃcult. What if the examined sentence
means something else as well? Bradwardine proceeds as follows. Let that other
20In Stephen Read’s translation, the text runs as follows: “Let A be a proposition signifying
itself not to be true, whether signifying anything else or not. If not, then it follows from the
assumption that A is not true, by deﬁnition (D1), that it is not wholly as is signiﬁed by A, and
by A is signiﬁed only that A is not true (we supposed), so by thesis (T1.2) it follows that it is
not the case that A is not true, that is, that A is true, whence by postulate (P2) A signiﬁes itself
to be true.” [Bradwardine, internet, 45]. The proof has been analyzed in [Spade, 1981, 120–125;
Read, 2002, 211–212], but my analysis diﬀers slightly from both. See also [Read, forthcoming,
8–10].
21Bradwardine refers to his deﬁnition D1 (see footnote 19).
22There seems to be no suﬃcient reason for assimilating ‘a’ with “a’ is false’, since Bradwardine
quite explicitly presents the reasoning as something that applies to any sentence ‘a’ signifying
its own falsity, and “a’ is false’ is certainly only one such.

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
593
signiﬁcation be ‘B is C’, and run the reasoning similarly. Now it is as follows:23
Proof.
(1)* ‘a’ signiﬁes only that ‘a’ is not true and that B is C
Assumed
(2)* ‘a’ is not true
Assumed
(3)* It is not wholly as ‘a’ signiﬁes
(2)*, (Def. of truth)
(4)* It is not the case that ‘a’ is not true and B is C
(1)*, (3)*, (T1.1)
(5)* ‘a’ is true or B is not C
(4)*
(6)* ‘a’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is true or B is not C
(1)*, (2)*–(5)*, (P2)
(7)* ‘a’ signiﬁes that B is C
(1)*, (P2)
(8)* ‘a’ is true or B is not C, and B is C, therefore ‘a’ is true
(9)* ‘a’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is true.
(P2)
■
This reasoning is a bit more confusing, and not only because Bradwardine jumps
between ﬁrst order claims ((4)*, (5)* and (8)*) and claims about the examined
paradoxical sentence and its signiﬁcation ((1)*, (2)*, (3)*, (6)*, (7)* and (9)*)
more than in the previous proof. It is, however, possible to see what really happens.
After laying the ground with the two assumptions (1)* and (2)*, Bradwardine
construes the disjunctive signiﬁcation (6)* through the conditional proof (2)*–
(5)*. The he excludes the latter disjunct at (7)*, and proceeds with the support
of the inference (8)* to the main goal (9)*.
At (7)* Bradwardine makes a choice. He could at that step exclude the for-
mer disjunct by taking the corresponding proposition “a’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is not
true’ and using it in a similar way, to achieve instead of step (9)* the claim
“a’ signiﬁes that B is not C.’
That is, he could reason as follows.
Assume
‘a’ : (¬T‘a’&p). Thus ¬T‘a’ →¬(¬T‘a’&p) →(T‘a’ ∨¬p) →¬p. By (P2)*,
it follows that ‘a’ : (¬T‘a’&p&¬p), and since any sentence follows from the con-
tradiction (¬T‘a’&p&¬p), ‘a’ signiﬁes everything, including its own truth.
For quite obvious reasons, this is not the way Bradwardine goes. He wants to
prove the thesis (T2) in a sensible way, and for this he needs “a’ signiﬁes that ‘a’
is true’ but not much more. Thus, he reasons as follows. Assume ‘a’ : (¬T‘a’&p).
Thus ¬T‘a’ →¬(¬T‘a’&p) →(T‘a’ ∨¬p) →T‘a’.
By (P2)*, it follows now
23The text continues from footnote 19: “If, on the other hand, A signiﬁes more than that it
itself is not true, for example, that B is C, then supposing that A is not true, it follows that it
is not wholly as A signiﬁes, that is, that A is not true and B is C, whence it is not the case that
A is not true and that B is C, and so, by postulate (P4), A is true or B is not C, and so, by
postulate (P2), A signiﬁes that A is true or B is not C, and since it signiﬁes the opposite of the
second part of this disjunction (we supposed), namely, that B is C, we have by postulate (P5),
from this disjunction with the opposite of its second part that the ﬁrst part follows, namely, that
A is true. Hence by postulate (P2), A signiﬁes A to be true.” [Bradwardine, internet, 45]. (P4)
and (P5) are ordinary principles of propositional logic; see [Bradwardine, internet, 39].

594
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
that ‘a’ : (¬T‘a’&p&T‘a’), which is a much more sensible kind of inconsistence.
However, this way of looking at the proof makes it apparent that Bradwardine is in
fact applying the principle (P2)* on the proposition at issue so that it is possible to
infer contradictions and thus to make any impossible proposition signify whatever
you want. Thus, the idea that the paradoxical sentence signiﬁes its own truth is
not very informative, since in the same manner it can be shown to signify whatever.
Let us go back to the example we have analyzed, and the way Bradwardine
develops the discussion. He considers an imagined opponent arguing that just as
‘a’ in the example signiﬁes both “a’ is false’ and “a’ is true’, in fact ‘b’ signiﬁes those
two sentences too. As his imagined opponent argues: “‘a’ being true follows from
‘a’ being false . . . therefore, it follows that from ‘b’ it follows that ‘a’ is true, and
so ‘b’ signiﬁes consequentially that ‘a’ is true, and so ‘b’ signiﬁes the same as ‘a’,
so ‘a’ and ‘b’ are equivalent.” The idea seems to be that since Bradwardine shows
in his proof of (T2) that ¬T‘a’ →T‘a’ under the given conditions, a proposition
signifying ¬T‘a’ will signify T‘a’ as well. Thus if ‘b’ : ¬T‘a’ it follows by (P2)*
that ‘b’ : T‘a’, and thus ‘b’ should be as false as ‘a’.
This is a reasoning that Bradwardine cannot accept, and thus he must show that
there is something wrong. He needs a way of showing that if you as the respondent
say that Socrates utters a falsehood, you do not imply that Socrates utters a
truth even if Socrates himself uttering that sentence does commit himself to that
implication. The way Bradwardine argues here sheds light on how he understood
his crucial principle (P2). He rejects the claim that “that ‘a’ is true follows from ‘a’
being false”. Bradwardine formulates his point as follows [Bradwardine, internet,
49]:
“Rather, from ‘a’ signifying itself to be false it was earlier deduced with
certain truths that ‘a’ signiﬁes itself to be true”
Thus, we should try to understand his proof of the thesis (T2) so that he does
not really infer from ‘a’ or from “a’ is false’. The reasoning is concerned with
the signiﬁcation of ‘a’, not its truth. Also, the reasoning leans on some auxiliary
premises. It seems that what Bradwardine has in mind is the way in which moving
from (3) to (4) requires (1). For consider the following:
(1)** ‘b’ signiﬁes only that ‘a’ is not true
Assumed
(2)** ‘a’ is not true
Assumed
(3)** It is not wholly as ‘a’ signiﬁes
(2)**, (Def. of truth)
(4)** It is not the case that ‘a’ is not true
Here step (4)** is fallacious, since there are no premises about what ‘a’ signiﬁes.
Thus, there is no analogous way of showing that ‘b’ signiﬁes that ‘a’ is true. This
is what Bradwardine wants. With this kind of an interpretation his solution to
the paradox appears to work.
Either Bradwardine did not manage to give a ﬁnal solution of the Liar, or he
did not manage to get understood. He did, however, give so lucid an exposition

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
595
of the logical structures involved that apparently all important medieval solutions
after him are more or less reactions to his work. Further, many of his examples of
the diﬀerent applications are interesting enough to look at in their own right.
RICHARD KILVINGTON
In the early 1320’s when Bradwardine composed his treatise on insolubles, Richard
Kilvington was his younger colleague who was a bit ahead in his studies. At about
the same time, Kilvington’s wrote a collection of sophisms.24
In the medieval
tradition of sophismata, sophisms were sentences that were for some reason diﬃcult
to evaluate.
Typically there was a casus assumed at the background, just as
in obligational disputations.
Most of Kilvington’s Sophismata deals with limit
decision problems of continuous quantities, issues concerning with acceleration
and mean speed, and other topics of mathematical physics. The last group of nine
sophisms, however, addresses issues of epistemic logic and semantical theory, and
the very last sophism is more or less directly dedicated to insolubles. It seems
that Kilvington’s discussion is to be understood as a reaction to Bradwardine’s
theories.
One of the most crucial general issues in Bradwardine’s solution of the paradoxes
of self-reference is the semantic relation between a sentence and its own truth.
Kilvington takes this relation under scrutiny, and he proves two crucial results.
First, as is proved in sophism S41(l), truth is not a thing, and thus signifying
the truth or falsity of a sentence will have to work diﬀerently from signifying
things. Indeed, Kilvington explains, the truth of a sentence is nothing other than
the sentence itself and thus it may appear that in talking about the truth of a
sentence you do not talk about anything else than what you talk about when you
talk about the sentence itself. And second, as is proved in sophism S47(t)–(y),
a sentence and the claim that it is true follow form each other only under very
stringent conditions. That is, Kilvington would not have accepted the so called
Tarskian biconditionals in any general fashion.
So what is wrong with the equivalence “p’ is true, if and only if p’? The main
issues Kilvington takes up are existence and signiﬁcation.
Following the stan-
dard medieval approach of token-based semantics, Kilvington assumes that truth
bearers must be existing sentence tokens, which implies that there is a diﬀerence
between claiming something about things in themselves and claiming truth for a
sentence. A sentence token must exist in order to be true. Kilvington is not satis-
ﬁed with the existence condition, however. He points out also that claiming truth
for a sentence token of a certain type may leave it open what the sentence token
means. Thus, “you are in Rome’ is true’ has nothing to do with your whereabouts
if ‘you are in Rome’ means that man is an animal. Signiﬁcation is ultimately a
contingent matter, and thus the claim “p’ is true’ does not in general imply p. It
24Edited by N. Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzmann in [Kilvington, 1990a]; their translation and
commentary in [Kilvington, 1990b]. I refer to the text by sophisma number and paragraph letter.
Sylla [1982] gives a good introduction to what sophisms in the medieval sense are.

596
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
seems obvious that Kilvington’s real aim is not at such clear cases, but rather at
paradoxes of self-reference understood in a Bradwardinian manner.
In the last sophism of his collection S48, Kilvington goes directly to the para-
doxes of self-reference. The sophism is based on the following two sentences:
(p) God exists
(q) Nothing granted by Socrates is known by you
Now suppose a situation where Socrates evaluates and grants one of these sentences
and no other sentence, but you do not know which one it is. You are nevertheless
asked whether the sentence granted by Socrates is something you know. If the
sentence is ‘p’, no problems of referential circularity arise and you are in the me-
dieval context supposed to know ‘p’. However, if the sentence granted by Socrates
is ‘q’, there is a possible self-reference arising. Not for Socrates, of course, but for
you.
Can you say that you know ‘q’? But ‘q’ is the sentence that Socrates granted,
and if you know it, it is true, and what Socrates granted is not known by you.
Thus, if you know ‘q’, you do not know ‘q’. S48(c).
Can you then say that you do not know ‘q’? No. For that would mean saying
that you do not know the very sentence granted by Socrates, or in other words
that nothing granted by Socrates is known by you. But then, by saying that you
do not know it, you obviously claim to know that the case is as it signiﬁes, or that
it is true, and thus you seem to know it. S48(d).
The core of the sophism is that you do not know which one of the two Socrates
grants. The sophism is structured so that the one Socrates grants, is nevertheless
named ‘a’, and then you are asked whether you know ‘a’.
Thus, the crucial
sentence to evaluate in this situation is ‘a’ is known by you’. As a whole, the
sophism shows quite elaborated command of the ways of building a paradox on
self-reference. Indeed, the structure is so elaborated that it remains unclear even
whether the sophisms should be treated as insoluble in the medieval sense.
Kilvington starts his solution by saying that many people solve this sophism
by saying that it is insoluble, thus referring people back to their solutions of the
self-referential paradoxes. But, as Kilvington notes, if the sentence put forward to
Socrates is ‘p’, no self-reference arises, and then one is not facing an insoluble in the
technical sense. As Kilvington continues, he ﬁrst goes into a discussion showing
that “this does not follow: ‘I know that ‘a’ is true; therefore, I know ‘a””(S48, n).
In short, he wants to open space for doubting a sentence in contexts where there
is a way of referring to the sentence so that under that description you know the
sentence to be true. His prime example is one where “‘a’ is the singular name of
the true proposition in the pair ‘A king is seated’ and ‘No king is seated’ ” (S 48,
q). If you know how to use the name ‘a’, you know that ‘a’ is true, but this will
not help you to know whether any king is seated.
It seems that Kilvington discusses these problems of epistemic logic just in
order to open some space between a sentence and the attribution of truth to the
sentence. This is crucial for his solution of the Liar, into which he turns for the

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
597
rest of the sophism. His solution, namely, depends on the idea that “each insoluble
is true in a certain respect and false in a certain respect and neither true nor false
absolutely.” (S48, cc.) Although Kilvington is not very clear about what he means
by “in a certain respect” and “absolutely” in this context, it seems safe to suppose
that his approach is a version of Bradwardine’s. He seems to think that when
two sentence tokens of the same type have diﬀerent truth values at the same time,
there is a fallacy involved and what really happens is that neither of them is true
absolutely but that they we must speak of truth “in a certain respect.”
WILLIAM HEYTESBURY
Another Oxford calculator, William Heytesbury wrote in 1335 a work titled “Rules
for Solving Sophisms” (Regulae solvendi sophismata).25 The aim of this work, as
the introduction tells us, is to advice young students in their everyday duty to deal
with sophisms. It seems that such exercises formed at the time the core of the
practical side of the study of logic and semantics, and it seems that paradoxes of
self-reference held a place of pride there. The ﬁrst chapter of Heytesbury’s Rules
is dedicated to insolubles.
Right in the beginning Heytesbury tells his readers, “although the insolubles
can be solved, nevertheless they have not yet been solved.” [Heytesbury, 1979,
15]. Accordingly, his work should not be understood as oﬀering a solution to the
paradox. Rather, he aims at telling students how to deal with the paradox in their
logic exercises. Essentially, Heytesbury’s advice is to avoid problems through not
admitting that any examined paradoxical sentence would signify exactly as the
common meaning of the terms would make it to signify. Thus, he reverts back to
the strategy we saw in the thirteenth century treatises: avoid the paradox rather
than face and solve it. But now this strategy has a Bradwardinian twist. Instead
of saying that the respondent in a disputation should simply refuse self-referential
paradoxes, Heytesbury advices the respondent to avoid admitting that one knows
what exactly a sentence like ‘I utter a falsehood’ means.
Before going into his advice in detail, Heytesbury criticizes earlier solutions. He
lists three diﬀerent views that he takes to be worse than his own approach. The
second and third of these are not very interesting. They verge on the question
whether insolubles are truth-bearing sentences. The second denies their sentential
status. The third allows, in Heytesbury’s formulation, that insolubles are sentences
and thus truth-bearers, but claims that they just do not have a truth value. Quite
righteously Heytesbury wonders what it means to be a truth bearer without a
truth value.
The ﬁrst view has been interpreted as Roger Swyneshed’s theory,26 and Heytes-
bury’s discussion of it is perhaps the most interesting part of the treatise. Since
25The whole work is edited in [Heytesbury, 1494]. For the chapter on insolubles, see translation
in [Heytesbury, 1979].
26See Spade’s study in [Heytesbury, 1979, esp. p. 72–79]. For a study of Swyneshed’s theory,
see Spade, 1983; for an edition of the text, see [Spade 1980].

598
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
Swyneshed’s approach was developed on the basis built by Bradwardine, many of
Heytesbury’s arguments tackle issues already in Bradwardine, though still not by
abandoning the approach. Rather, Heytesbury continues on the same track.
The modiﬁcation Swyneshed made to Bradwardine’s theory was to shift at-
tention from signiﬁcation to consequences. His idea was that there are sentences
— the paradoxical ones — which have the truth value ‘false’ not on the basis of
their signiﬁcation but due to their self-falsiﬁcatory character. Thus, any sentence
implying that it itself is false, falsiﬁes itself and is false because of this falsiﬁca-
tion regardless of the signiﬁcation. Thus, it seems that Swyneshed did not buy
Bradwardine’s principle (P2), or at least he did not think that it would have any
signiﬁcant application in the theory of self-referential paradoxes.
Swyneshed’s theory shares the feature of Bradwardine’s theory that the para-
doxical sentences are deemed false. This has the implication that there at least
appear to be contradictory sentences that are both false. Although Bradwardine
recognizes the problem, he tries to do away with it.
Swyneshed, for his part,
accepts the oddity with straight face, buying the strange view that contradicto-
ries are sometimes both false. Furthermore, there appear to be cases where two
tokens of exactly the same sentence type have diﬀerent truth values as regards
the same time and the same situation (‘Socrates utters a falsehood’ as uttered by
Socrates or by someone else). Both Bradwardine and Swyneshed accept directly
this implication of their solution.
One further oddity concerns inferential relationships.
Consider the con-
sequence:27
This is false, therefore, this is false,
where both demonstrative pronouns indicate the consequent (let the consequent
be ‘a’ and the antecedent ‘b’). According to both Bradwardine and Swyneshed, as
a self-referential token ‘a’ must be deemed false, but ‘b’ is to be counted as true,
because it is not self-referential but instead refers to ‘a’, which indeed is false. The
inference appears valid: the contradictory of the consequent is inconsistent with
the antecedent. If the same thing is indicated, ‘this is false’ and ‘this is not false’
are contradictories.
Swyneshed accepts the reasoning, conﬁrms that the consequence is valid and
allows that in a valid inference there is a true antecedent with a false consequent
[Spade, 1979, 189]. This is an interesting choice, since it makes it appear that
he did not think that the main point in a consequence would be to account for
truth preservation or any of its modal varieties, as has mostly been the approach in
modern logic. Rather, this suggests that Swyneshed thought that consequence is a
relation between the meanings of the sentences, and it is more or less a coincidence
that in most cases it preserves truth.
It seems that Bradwardine would not need to accept the validity of this con-
sequence even if he would accept the same understanding of the consequential
relationship, since in his theory the diﬀerence between the truth values of ‘a’ and
27See [Heytesbury, 1979, 29].

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
599
‘b’ is based on a diﬀerence in signiﬁcation. Thus, what is aﬃrmed by the antecedent
is only a part of what is aﬃrmed by the consequent. This may of course result
in the inference being blocked. Furthermore, Bradwardine tries to show that the
contradictory of a self-referential sentence like ‘a’ is not simply ‘this is not false’
but more like ‘either ‘a’ is not false or ‘a’ is not true’, which clearly would not
be inconsistent with ‘this is false’ indicating ‘a’ from the outside [Bradwardine,
internet, 51].
For his part, Heytesbury takes it to be odd if consequences of the form
p, therefore, p
are not formally valid. Since he provides the example as a criticism of the at-
tempted solution, he does not oﬀer any solution of the problem.
Instead, he
continues with a whole series of examples where logical properties of sentences
misbehave if Swyneshed’s (and Bradwardine’s) solution is accepted. To pick up
another example, let ‘a’ be ‘this sentence is not necessary’, indicating itself, and
let its contradictory ‘b’ be ‘this sentence is necessary,’ indicating ‘a’. Now, there
seems to be no reason to count ‘a’ as false in the way insolubles are false, and
it seems even to signify as is the case, since it does not appear to be necessary.
Indeed, if ‘a’ was necessary, its contradictory ‘b’ would signify as is the case and
thus ‘b’ would be true. This seems unacceptable. However, it appears that ‘a’
signiﬁes as is necessarily the case, as Heytesbury puts it, and thus it seems not
to be a contingent sentence either. Thus, ‘a’ is a true sentence that cannot be
ascribed a modal status [Heytebury, 1979, 31]. Without modiﬁcations, neither
Bradwardine’s nor Swyneshed’s theory will solve the case. And if modiﬁcations
are made, it seems that they will be necessary for all kinds of logical properties,
since corresponding examples arise in many directions.
Heytesbury’s own rules about what one should do when faced with an insoluble
draw considerably on the disputational context. One really gets the feel that he is
giving advice to a student on how to behave in a speciﬁc kind of disputation. For
example, his third rule concerns the situation where the constructed case has an
insoluble sentence and it is assumed together with it that the sentence “signiﬁes
as its terms pretend, but not precisely” [Heytesbury, 1979, 49]. In such a case, the
insoluble sentence must be granted, but one must deny its truth:
Case: Socrates is saying only this: ’Socrates is saying what is false’,
and it so signiﬁes, but not precisely.
Proposition 1: Socrates is saying what is false.
Granted, follows
Proposition 2: ‘Socrates is saying what is false’ is true.
Denied
Heytesbury seems to follow Bradwardine in judging that the actual sentence ut-
tered by Socrates can be deemed false. This seems to be his reason for denying
proposition 2.
The text continues with a discussion of what the meaning diﬀerence between
proposition 1 and the sentence uttered by Socrates is. In putting this question,
Heytesbury seems to be thinking of Bradwardine’s theory and the idea that when

600
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
uttered by Socrates himself ‘Socrates is saying what is false’ has a diﬀerent sig-
niﬁcation than when uttered in a disputation by other people. Heytesbury does
not, however, want to specify the diﬀerence in meaning. In particular, he does not
say anything like Bradwardine’s claim that the self-referential sentence signiﬁes its
own truth. He advises the respondent to refuse any question concerning precise
signiﬁcation. Even more strongly, if the respondent is asked to assume that the
sentence signiﬁes precisely as terms pretend, the whole assumption should be re-
fused. As a practical advice for a disputation, this may seem satisfactory. But as
Heytesbury recognizes, logically the solution is far from perfect.
JOHN BURIDAN
John Buridan’s massive textbook of logic Summulae de Dialectica ends with a
collection of sophisms, seemingly as a section containing exercises. The last set in
this collection deals with self-referential propositions and thus also with insolubles.
This is not the only location where Buridan discusses paradoxes of self-reference,
but it is perhaps the most accessible one. The textbook as a whole was widely
used for several centuries, but no other section in it is directly dedicated to self-
reference.28
Buridan’s way of treating these paradoxes becomes obvious through looking at
how he has put together the set dedicated to self-reference. Let us start from the
second sophism in the set [Buridan, 2001, 956–958]. The sophism is the conse-
quence:
‘No proposition is negative; therefore, some proposition is negative.’
Buridan’s proof for this is straightforward, and for us interesting not so much be-
cause of the self-refuting character of the antecedent but because of the connection
that the reasoning has to the Tarskian truth-scheme. For Buridan uses the claim
“no proposition is negative’ is true’ as an intermediate step. The crucial claim
that he will use in his solution of the insolubles is that all sentences imply their
own truth. This is something that he tackles already at this stage of the series.
Thus, the following chain appears to be a valid inference:
Proof.
(1) No proposition is negative
(2) ‘No proposition is negative’ is true
(3) The proposition ‘no proposition is negative’ exists
(4) A negative proposition exists
(5) Some proposition is negative
■
28[Buridan, 2001] has the English translation. See [Buridan, 2004] for a critical edition, and
e.g. [Pironet; 1993; 1998] and [Zupko, 2003] for an evaluation of Buridan’s diﬀerent texts on
insolubles and more bibliographical information.

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
601
Buridan’s solution of the sophism is that it must be denied. Surprisingly, the step
at which he blocks the inference is already (2) [Buridan, 2001, 957]. Thus, he seems
to reject a principle that will turn out to be of utmost importance for his solution
of the insolubles. However, this is a move where we see a good logician at work.
The equivalence between a sentence and its truth had been put under scrutiny by
Bradwardine and others after him, and thus Buridan could by no means take it
for granted and just use for his solution of the paradox. He had to ﬁrst achieve a
ﬁrm grip of what exactly is the logical relation between a sentence and its truth.
Consider the consequence
A man exists, therefore, ‘a man exists’ is true.
Buridan rejects this with the consideration that it might be the case that there
are men but no propositions. He thinks that a proposition needs to exist in order
to be true: he too is committed to token-based semantics. In the ﬁrst sophism
of the series, Buridan has accepted ‘every proposition is aﬃrmative, therefore,
no proposition is negative’ as valid inference despite the fact that the consequent
is self-refuting and thus cannot be true [Buridan, 2001, 953]. He wants to say
that inference is fundamentally a modal relation, and a proposition is not called
possible on the basis of whether it can be true, but rather on the basis of whether
the case can be as it signiﬁes. Thus, a proposition can be possible without being
possibly-true.29
In the same vein, consequences do not hold on the basis of a
connection between truth values, but on the basis of whether things can be as is
signiﬁed by the antecedent and consequent. In a valid consequence, the case is as
is signiﬁed by the consequent if it is as is signiﬁed by the antecedent. Existence
of the propositions will not aﬀect inferential validity in the ordinary way, though
it will aﬀect truth. As Buridan notes concerning the example, ‘every proposition
is aﬃrmative, therefore, no proposition is negative’: “something true can entail
something false.” But as he explains, “when this is concluded, the former is no
longer true, but false.” [Buridan, 2001, 955].
In the case analyzed in the second sophism, existence of the proposition matters,
since the consequent in the consequence ‘a man exists, therefore, ‘a man exists’ is
true’ is about truth value, not about humans. Buridan notes that the following is
a valid inference
A man exists
‘A man exists’ exists
Therefore, ‘a man exists’ is true
Thus the above discussed inference ‘a man exists, therefore, ‘a man exists’ is true’
would be a valid enthymeme with reference to a true premise “a man exists’ exists’,
although as it stands it is not valid. A reader familiar with Richard Kilvington’s
work will at this point wonder why Buridan skips any worry about signiﬁcation. As
29Cf. [Prior, 1969]. The corresponding problem with inferences has been discussed in, e.g.,
[King, 2001, pp. 129] and [Dutilh Novaes, 2005].

602
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
we saw above, Kilvington — and Heytesbury — would have here made reservations
about what ‘a man exists’ means. But not Buridan.
However, as Buridan notes, in order to be valid or true, a consequence needs to
exist: not only truth but even asserted validity appears to be carried by tokens of
inferences [Buridan, 2001, 957]. But now, does the existence of the consequence
not guarantee the existence of its antecedent and thereby also the existence of the
proposition ‘a man exists’? Yes and no. Whenever the reasoning is evaluated, the
antecedent exists, but as Buridan shows, to be valid the consequence should hold
also for situations in which it does not exist. This is a distinction Buridan spends
some time to clarify, though we can leave it obscure in respect to our limited
purposes.30
One further sophism, the fourth one in the set, deserves attention before we
go to Buridan’s treatment of insolubles proper. This sophism still concerns the
attribution of truth values. Suppose you say,
I say that a man is a donkey
Do you now utter a truth or a falsehood? Buridan’s answer is: a truth, literally
speaking. For you indeed say the words ‘a man is a donkey’, and your claim is
that you say those words, and no more. As supporting his claim, Buridan cites
the Psalmist saying “the fool hath said in his heart, there is no God.” As Buridan
notes, this does not commit the Psalmist to the proposition ‘there is no God’ and
indeed this proposition is not in the Psalm as a proposition, but only as a part of
a proposition [Buridan, 2001, 960].
But now, if you say,
‘Man is an animal’ is true,
doesn’t this analysis make the sentence false since here ‘man is an animal’ is not
a proposition? It is just the subject term of a proposition, and as such it cannot
be ascribed a truth value. Buridan accepts [Buridan, 2001, 960–961]. In his view
there is a reading of this sentence that indeed makes it false. For an appropriate
evaluation one needs to know what the subject of the proposition, i.e. ‘man is an
animal’ is taken to supposit for. If you are there referring to another linguistic
structure, similar to the one you mention but used as a proposition, then your
claim may be true. But if you intend your claim to be about the set of words you
utter as the subject in this utterance, then the claim is false for the very same
reason as ‘I say that a man is a donkey’ is true in the sophism.
It seems that Buridan’s idea in structuring his work is that these sophisms
provide exercise and make certain issues clearer before he goes to the genuine
paradoxes of self-reference. This takes place as the seventh sophism, where Buridan
30It seems that Buridan distinguishes between validity and truth of a consequence so that
an existing consequence (nowadays called ’conditional’) is true if and only if the consequence
(nowadays called ’inference’) from the antecedent to the consequent is valid. Thus, for validity,
the conditional need not be formulated, but for asserting the validity one needs to make a claim,
a conditional proposition needs to be actually formulated. See [King, 2001].

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
603
even gives his general solution to the insolubilia [Buridan, 2001, 965–971]. His
paradigm version of the paradox assumes the case that all true propositions have
been annihilated but false ones remain in existence. Then Socrates utters
‘Every proposition is false’,
and the question is whether his utterance is true or false.
After considering brieﬂy some earlier suggestions for a solution, Buridan turns
to his own. He takes the view that the paradoxical sentence is false. However, he
rejects the view that this is because the sentence signiﬁes or asserts its own truth
in the way every sentence does. He admits that this had been his opinion earlier.
However, now he argues against it, rejecting the idea that all propositions signify
their own truth.
Consider a typical token of the claim made by the defenders of this theory:
‘Man is an animal’ signiﬁes that it is true
There are two ways to read this sentence. The clause ‘that it is true’ can be taken
“materially or signiﬁcatively”, in Buridan’s own terms.
Following the former reading, the claim is that the proposition ‘man is an ani-
mal’ signiﬁes the proposition ‘this proposition ’man is an animal’, is true’, which
Buridan ﬁnds hard to believe, because ‘man is an animal’ is about men and ani-
mals, not about linguistic entities like words and propositions whereas the truth-
claim concerns an actually existing linguistic structure.
As for the latter reading, consider an impossible proposition like ‘a man is a
donkey’. What would it be for it to be true? As Buridan argues, nothing, and it is
not true to say that something that is not and cannot be, is signiﬁed or understood
[Buridan, 2001, 968–969]. Though it is diﬃcult to see what exactly Buridan has
in mind here, it seems to be related to his refusal to accept so-called propositional
signiﬁcates (complexa signiﬁcabilia). Maybe the argument is intended to point
out that even if you were able to claim that true sentences signify real states of
aﬀairs and possible sentences, possible states of aﬀairs, impossible sentences will
not signify anything sententially. For what would the impossible states of aﬀairs
signiﬁed by impossible propositions be?
Claiming that this line is a dead end, Buridan takes another approach. Ac-
cording to him, every proposition implies virtually another proposition such that
the predicate ‘true’ is aﬃrmed for a subject suppositing for the proposition [Buri-
dan, 2001, 969]. This is included in the truth conditions. Thus, no proposition is
true unless in this aﬃrmative consequent both the subject and the predicate sup-
posit for the same. To cite ﬁrst a simple example, we may consider the following
consequence
Man is an animal, therefore, ‘a’ is true.
Here ‘a’ refers to the antecedent ‘man is an animal’. This appears to be similar to
a case discussed above, and the reader ought keep all the appropriate reservations
in his mind. For Buridan turns to an example that is more complicated. He looks

604
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
at the case, where Socrates utters ‘no proposition is true’. This proposition is
given the proper name ‘c’. Now the consequence required by his theory is:
No proposition is true, therefore, ‘c’ is true.
As Buridan explains, the antecedent proposition ‘c’ cannot be true unless the
implied condition is true, that is unless its subject ‘c’ and its predicate ‘true’
supposit for the same [Buridan, 2001, 969].
‘Supposite for the same’ is Buridan’s normal theory of truth, but here he claims
carefully and explicitly that this criterion is not quite suﬃcient. The consequential
consideration needs to be added as a condition. It can be argued that by the
condition Buridan makes the truth of a sentence dependent on itself. No sentence
can be true, unless it ﬁlls all the normal conditions and in addition is true. This
sounds circular, and thus a problem.31 Be that as it may, the criterion does help
Buridan to evaluate the paradoxical sentences as false. Thus, when it is claimed
that the sophism ‘every proposition is false’ is true because all the propositions
that the subject supposits for are indeed supposited for by the predicate as well,
Buridan can answer that the sameness of supposition is not enough for the truth
of the proposition, since the implied consequent aﬃrming truth to the sentence
turns out inconsistent and false. For if one looks at the content of the antecedent,
it follows that
No proposition is true, therefore, ‘c’ is not true
And if this consequence is valid together with the one that has the same antecedent
but the opposite consequent, it can only be because the antecedent is false and
even impossible.
As we noted, Buridan’s second sophism in this set shows that consequences of
the form
p, therefore, ‘p’ is true
are not as such valid. Now we have seen on the contrary that his solution of the
insolubles requires or even is based on such consequences being valid. Buridan
notes this fact, but points out that consequences of the form
p, and ‘p’ exists, therefore, ‘p’ is true
are valid. Buridan seems to think that this issue forces him to qualify his theory,
but then he also notes that in an insoluble case it is normally assumed that the
sentence at issue exists. For this reason, the qualiﬁcation should not engender
problems [Buridan, 2001, 970].
It seems that Buridan thinks that at this point he has given a suﬃcient expla-
nation of how the core of the paradoxes of self-reference can be solved. He turns
to diﬀerent versions of the paradox and considers further examples.
31See [Read, 2002, 200–201].

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
605
The series of sophisms contains thirteen more. They develop interestingly dif-
ferent problems resulting from either immediate or mediated self-reference. By the
latter Buridan means situations like the one in the ninth sophism, where Plato is
supposed to say ‘Socrates utters a falsehood’ while Socrates says ‘Plato utters a
truth’. Here neither of the propositions refers to itself, but together they generate
a loop.
Two further sophisms deserve mention here.
The eleventh sophism assumes
that I utter only the sentence ‘I utter a falsehood’ (‘a’).
Buridan applies his
theory systematically. Thus, he says that ‘a’ is false and rejects the proof that it
follows that it is true. The crucial arguments are as follows:
‘a’ is false, therefore, ‘a’ exists
a, and ‘a’ exists, therefore, ‘a’ is true
Buridan accepts both of these two arguments, but rejects that together they would
show that “a’ is true’ follows from “a’ is false’. As he explains, the conjunctive
antecedent of the latter inference is to be rejected because of the ﬁrst part. Thus,
he distinguishes between ‘a’ is false’ and ‘a’ even in a case where ‘a’ means that
‘a’ is false. Indeed, he grants “a’ is false’ as true while claiming that ‘a’ is false
[Buridan, 2001, 978].
Then Buridan turns to the issue of contradictories and equivalencies. What
should you say to say the same as I say when I say ‘I utter a falsehood’? According
to Buridan, your sentence should be ‘You utter a falsehood, and ‘a’ is true’, ‘a’
referring to my sentence. Correspondingly, the contradictory of my sentence would
be the disjunction: “You do not utter a falsehood, or ‘a’ is not true.” As one can
see, in the paradoxical case the contradictory is indeed true [Buridan, 2001, 979–
980].
However, by claming that the paradox sentence in fact turns into a conjunction,
Buridan shows that he has not really got very far from the theory that the sentence
signiﬁes its own truth and not only implies. For suppose a valid consequence
p →q
If we want to ﬁnd the contradictory of ‘p’, we do not in general include ‘q’. That is,
it seems odd to say that the contradictory of ‘p’ has the disjunctive form ‘(¬p∨¬q)’
whenever something follows from p. This formulation — or the talk about mental
language that Buridan goes into in this context — both seem natural only if ‘q’ is
somehow signiﬁed by rather than simply follows from ‘p’. It seems that Buridan
was not able to say what he really meant by his theoretical idea that the insoluble
sentences imply rather than signify their own truth.
If compared to Bradwardine’s work, Buridan’s discussion of the insolubles does
not appear very ingenious and original. He wavers and leaves room for doubt,
allowing the reader to get the feeling that his solution is sketchy. The work is,
however, clearly on a very advanced logical level and the problems obviously result
from diﬃculties in the subject matter. Given the extremely wide circulation of

606
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
Buridan’s Summulae, it is very understandable that his solution achieved a very
high reputation and a wide inﬂuence in the coming centuries.
The seventeenth sophism in Buridan’s set is the sentence ‘You will throw me in
the water’. Buridan writes: “Let us posit the case that Plato is the master of the
bridge and that he guards it with such a powerful military support that nobody
can cross it without his permission. And then Socrates arrives, asking Plato with
insistence to let him cross. Then Plato, getting angry, vows and takes an oath of
the form: ‘Certainly, Socrates, if with your ﬁrst proposition that you will utter
you say something true, I will let you pass, but certainly if you say something
false, I will throw you in the water’. And then Socrates says to Plato the above
mentioned sophism, namely, ‘You will throw me in the water’. The problem then
is: what should Plato do to keep his promise?”
As a careful, not to say tedious logician, Buridan gives a much fuller analysis
of the sophism than Sancho Panza will do later. In Buridan’s analysis, Socrates’s
sentence concerns a future contingent and therefore, its truth value can be de-
termined only later, when it will be seen what happens. Thus, refraining from
evaluation does not mean asserting a truth value gap. Further, Plato’s claim is
a conditional one, and there is no necessary connection between the antecedent
and the consequent. In the strict sense, Plato speaks falsely. However, as Buridan
notes, one should rather interpret Plato as giving a promise, which is usually said
to be true when the person keeps his promise. And Plato does not. As a promise,
the utterance is false. Socrates does not ﬁll the condition, because he utters a
proposition that is not yet determinately true or false (though it is, in Buridan’s
view, either true or false). Plato is not able to keep his promise, because through
his utterance Socrates makes Plato’s promise self-reﬂexive (habens reﬂectionem
supra se). When it is asked, whether Plato needs to keep his promise, Buridan
answers negatively, just as Sancho Panza will. Plato cannot keep his promise, and
thus he need not. He should not have given a promise vulnerable to paradox.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adam of Balsham, 1956] Adam of Balsham. Adam Balsamiensis Parvipontani Ars Disserendi
(Dialectica Alexandri). Lorenzo Minio-Paluello, ed. Twelfth Century Logic: Texts and Studies,
vol. 1. Rome: Edizioni di storia e letteratura, 1956.
[Anonymous, 2001] Anonymous. The Emmeran treatise on false positio, in Medieval Formal
Logic, (ed.) Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri, The New Synthese Historical Library, 49. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
2001.
[Bottin, 1976] F. Bottin. Le antinomie semantiche nella logica medievale. Padua: Antonore,
1976.
[Braakhuis, 1967] H. A. G. Braakhuis. The second tract on insolubilia found in Paris, B.N. Lat.
16.617. An edition of the text with an analysis of its contents. Vivarium 5, 111–145, 1967.
[Bradwardine, internet] T. Bradwardine. Insolubilia. Ed. and transl. by Stephen Read. Available
at http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/∼slr/medieval.html.
[Buridan, 2001] J. Buridan. Summulae de Dialectica. An annotated translation, with a philo-
sophical introduction by Gyula Klima, Yale Library of Medieval Philosophy.New Haven &
London: Yale University Press, 2001.
[Buridan, 2004] J. Buridan. Summulae: De Practica Sophismatum. Fabienne Pironet, ed. Turn-
hout: Brepols, 2004.

Treatments of the Paradoxes of Self-reference
607
[Burley, 1963] W. Burley. Tractatus de obligationibus, in Romuald Green, The Logical Treatise
’De obligationibus’: An Introduction with Critical Texts of William of Sherwood (?)
and
Walter Burley, Ph.D. thesis, Louvain, 1963.
[De Rijk, 1966] L. M. De Rijk. Some Notes on the Mediaeval Tract De insolubilibus, with the
Edition of a Tract Dating from the End of the Twelfth Century. Vivarium 4 (1966), pp. 83-115,
1966.
[De Rijk, 1974] L. M. De Rijk. Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of Obligation I.
Vivarium 12, 94-123, 1974.
[De Rijk, 1975] L. M. De Rijk. Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of Obligation II.
Vivarium 13, 22-54, 1975.
[De Rijk, 1976] L. M. De Rijk. Some Thirteenth Century Tracts on the Game of Obligation III.
Vivarium 14, 26-49, 1976.
[Dutilh Novaes, 2005] C. Dutilh Novaes. Buridan’s consequentia:
consequence and inference
within a token-based semantics. History and Philosophy of Logic 26(4), 277–297, 2005.
[Heytesbury, 1494] William Heytesbury. Tractatus Gulielmi Hentisberi de sensu composito et
diviso, Regulae euiusdem cum Sophismatibus... Venice: Bonetus Locatellus, 1494.
[Heytesbury, 1979] William Heytesbury. On Insoluble Sentences. Chapter One of his Rules for
Solving Sophisms, transl. with an introduction and study by Paul Spade, Medieval Sources
in Translation, 21. Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, 1979.
[Keﬀer, 2001] H. Keﬀer. De Obligationibus: Rekonstruktion Einer Spatmittelalterlichen Dispu-
tationstheorie. Leiden: Brill, 2001.
[Kilvington, 1990a] R. Kilvington. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, ed. N. Kretzmann
and B. E. Kretzmann, (Auctores Britannici Medii Aevi, vol. XII). British Academy: Oxford
University Press, 1990.
[Kilvington, 1990b] R. Kilvington. The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, introduction, trans-
lation and commentary by N. Kretzmann and B. E. Kretzmann. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
[King, 2001] P. King. Consequence as Inference: Medieval Proof Theory 1300–1350. In Medieval
Formal Logic, (ed.) Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri, The New Synthese Historical Library, 49. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 117–145, 2001.
[Martin, 1993] C. J. Martin. Obligations and Liars. In Stephen Read, ed., Sophisms in Medieval
Logic and Grammar. NijhoﬀInternational Philosophy Series, 48. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 357-81,
1993.
[Ockham, 1974] Ockham, William of. Summa logicae. Gedeon G´al et al., ed. St. Bonaventure,
NY: The Franciscan Institute, 1974.
[Prior, 1969] A. N. Prior. The Possibly-True and the Possible. Mind 78, 481–492, 1969.
[Read, 2002] S. Read. The Liar Paradox from John Buridan back to Thomas Bradwardine.
Vivarium 40, 189-218, 2002.
[Read, forthcoming] S. Read. The Truth Schema and the Liar. In Essays on the Liar, ed. S.
Rahman, T. Tulenheimo and E. Genot, Springer Verlag, forthcoming.
[Roure, 1970] M. L. Roure. La probl´ematique des propositions insolubles au XIIIe si`ecle et
au d´ebut du XIVe, suivie de l’´edition des trait´es de W. Shyreswood, W. Burleigh et Th.
Bradwardine. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 37, 205-326, 1970.
[Spade, 1973] P. V. Spade. The Origins of the Mediaeval Insolubilia-Literature. Franciscan Stud-
ies 33, pp. 292-309, 1973.
[Spade, 1975] P. V. Spade. The Mediaeval Liar: A Catalogue of the Insolubilia-Literature. Sub-
sidia Mediaevalia, 5. Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975.
[Spade, 1980] P. V. Spade. Roger Swyneshed’s Insolubilia: Edition and Comments. Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage 46, 177-220, 1980.
[Spade, 1981] P. V. Spade. Insolubilia and Bradwardine’s Theory of Signiﬁcation. Medioevo:
Revista di storia della ﬁlosoﬁa medievale 7, 115-34, 1981.
[Spade, 1983] P. V. Spade. Roger Swyneshed’s Theory of Insolubilia: A Study of Some of his
Preliminary Semantic Notions. In History of Semiotics, eds. Achim Eschbach and J¨urgen
Trabant, Foundations of Semiotics, 7. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 105–113, 1983.
[Spade, 1987] P. V. Spade. Five Early Theories in the Mediaeval Insolubilia-Literature. Vivar-
ium 25, pp. 24-46, 1987.
[Spade, internet] P. V. Spade. Insolubles. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ed. Edward
N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/

608
Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri
[Sylla, 1982] E. D. Sylla. The Oxford Calculators. In The Cambridge History of Later Medieval
Philosophy, edited by Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg. Cabridge:
Cambridge University Press, 545-563, 1982.
[Yrj¨onsuuri, 1994] M. Yrj¨onsuuri. Obligationes: 14th Century Logic of Disputational Duties.
Acta Philosophica Fennica 55. Helsinki: Societas philosophica Fennica, 1994.
[Yrj¨onsuuri, 2001] M. Yrj¨onsuuri. Duties, Rules and Interpretations in Obligational Disputa-
tions.” in Medieval Formal Logic, (ed.) Mikko Yrj¨onsuuri, The New Synthese Historical Li-
brary, 49. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 3–34, 2001.
[Zupko, 2003] J. Zupko. John Buridan: Portrait of a Fourteenth-Century Arts Master. Notre
Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 2003.

DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FIFTEENTH AND
SIXTEENTH CENTURIES
E. Jennifer Ashworth
INTRODUCTION
The story of logic in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries is very much the story of
institutional change. Logic remained at the heart of the university curriculum for
students in faculties of arts throughout Europe, but there were signiﬁcant changes
both in the curriculum as a whole and in the approach to logic, particularly with
respect to the textbooks used and to the style in which they were written. I say
‘style’ rather than ‘language’, for while it is true that the ﬁrst known vernacular
logics appeared in Germany in 1534, in Italy in 1547, in France in 1555, and in
England in 1551,1 this development, which was partly a result of printing having
made book ownership possible for a wider range of people, had little to do with
the universities, where education was and continued to be strictly in Latin at least
until the end of the seventeenth century.2 The textbooks, the written and spoken
exercises, the lectures, the disputations were all in Latin, and ability to handle
Latin was the entrance requirement. There are two aspects of this use of Latin
that I would like to emphasize. First, it meant that university members were part
of one European culture, including the European book trade. Just as manuscripts
circulated widely in the ﬁfteenth century, so printed texts circulated widely in the
late ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. Second, it meant that university members
worked in a semi-artiﬁcial second language which was no one’s mother tongue,
and which mainly survived in the Roman Catholic Church and in educational
institutions.3 During the later middle ages, Latin’s artiﬁciality took the form of
the production of a special technical language for the discussion of logic and logical
grammar. With humanism and its emphasis on the study of the language and
literature of Classical Greek and Latin, a diﬀerent kind of artiﬁciality appeared,
1For a discussion of various aspects of language during the Renaissance, see Luce Giard, “Du
latin m´edi´eval au pluriel des langues, le tournant de la Renaissance”, Histoire Epist´emologie
Langage 6 (1984), 35–55. On p. 48 she gives a table of the dates at which grammatical and
logical texts in the vernacular ﬁrst appeared in various European countries, and I have used her
material here.
2Ong has emphasized the unread look of the surviving vernacular texts as opposed to the
dog-eared and annotated Latin texts: see W.J. Ong, Ramus, Method, and the Decay of Dialogue
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983 [ﬁrst printed in 1958]), p. 14.
3See Giard, “Du latin m´edi´eval”, p. 38.
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

610
E. Jennifer Ashworth
that of imitating the written texts of men who had been dead for ﬁfteen centuries.4
To understand the signiﬁcance of these developments for the logician, we have to
consider three questions. First, how much of the medieval logic described in the
previous chapters survived? Second, insofar as medieval logic survived, were there
any interesting new developments in it?5
Third, does humanist logic oﬀer an
interesting alternative to medieval logic?
In Part One of this chapter I shall consider the ﬁrst two questions in the context
of a historical overview in which I trace developments in logic from the later middle
ages through to 1606, the year in which the Jesuits of Coimbra published their
great commentary on Aristotle’s logical works, the Commentarii Conimbricensis
in Dialecticam Aristotelis.6 I shall begin by considering the Aristotelian logical
corpus, the six books of the Organon, and the production of commentaries on
this work. I shall then examine the fate of the speciﬁcally medieval contributions
to logic. Finally, I shall discuss the textbook tradition, and the ways in which
textbooks changed and developed during the sixteenth century. I shall argue that
the medieval tradition in logic co-existed for some time with the new humanism,
that the sixteenth century is dominated by Aristotelianism, and that what emerged
at the end of the sixteenth century was not so much a humanist logic as a simpliﬁed
Aristotelian logic.
In Part Two of this chapter, I shall ask whether the claims made about human-
ist logic and its novel contributions to probabilistic and informal logic have any
foundation. I shall argue that insofar as there is any principled discussion of such
matters, it is to be found among writers in the Aristotelian tradition.
4For its deleterious eﬀects, see Giard, “Du latin m´edi´eval”, p. 46. For more about the hu-
manist return to the past, see W. Keith Percival, “Grammar and Rhetoric in the Renaissance” in
Renaissance Eloquence. Studies in the Theory and Practice of Renaissance Rhetoric, ed. James
J. Murphy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), pp. 303–330, especially pp. 311–312.
See also Brian P. Copenhaver, “Translation, terminology and style in philosophical discourse” in
The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy, ed. Charles B. Schmitt, Quentin Skinner,
and Eckhard Kessler, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 77–110, especially
pp. 104–106. For humanist innovations in logical vocabulary, see G. Nuchelmans, Late-Scholastic
and Humanist Theories of the Proposition (Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company,
1980), part two, passim.
5For a full account of these matters, I refer the reader to my own writings, in particular:
E.J. Ashworth, Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period (Dordrecht, Boston: D. Reidel,
1974); E. J. Ashworth, “Traditional logic” in The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy,
pp. 143–172; E. J. Ashworth, introduction to Robert Sanderson, Logicae Artis Compendium, ed.
E. J. Ashworth (Bologna: Editrice CLUEB, 1985), pp. XI–LV.
6An unauthorized edition appeared earlier, in 1604. The author of the logic commentary was
Sebastian de Couto.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
611
Part One: Historical Overview
1
ARISTOTLE: TEXTS AND COMMENTARIES
The Organon of Aristotle played a central role throughout the medieval and post-
medieval period, at least in principle.7 During the medieval period, the Organon
was divided into two parts. The Logica vetus or ‘Old logic’ consisted of Boethius’s
translations of the Categories and Perihermenias along with Porphyry’s Isagoge
or introduction to the Categories; and it was already known by the beginning of
the twelfth century. The Logica nova or ‘New logic’ consisted of the Prior and
Posterior Analytics, the Topics and the Sophistici Elenchi. Boethius’s translations
of the Prior Analytics, Topics and Sophistici Elenchi were recovered from about
1120 on, and they were completed by James of Venice’s translation of the Pos-
terior Analytics. Other translations of all these works were produced during the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, but none of them seem to have shaken the vir-
tual monopoly of Boethius and James of Venice, which endured into the sixteenth
century.8 From the thirteenth century on both the Logica vetus and the Logica
nova were ﬁrmly embedded in the university curriculum, though some exception
must be made of the Topics, at least in the later period. Sometimes it was omitted
altogether, and sometimes only certain of its Books were to be read.9 Even in the
sixteenth century, the interest in Aristotle’s Topics was somewhat modiﬁed. The
Jesuit Ratio Studiorum of 1586 referred to the commitment to follow Aristotle in
logic, but noted that the Topics (except for Books I and II) and also the Sophistici
Elenchi should be passed over, though they added that the material of the topics
and fallacies should be presented in some more orderly way.10 These exhortations
were shown to be eﬀective by the brief treatment given to both the Topics and
the Sophistici Elenchi in the Coimbra commentary.11
From the beginning of the medieval period, Aristotle’s text was accompanied
by explanation and commentary.12 In the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries
7One has to be cautious because students who were supposed to read Aristotle himself may
often have read secondary sources instead.
8For details, see B. G. Dod, “Aristoteles latinus” in the Cambridge History of Later Medieval
Philosophy, edited by N. Kretzmann, A. Kenny and J. Pinborg (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1982), pp. 45–79, especially pp. 74–75; and the introductions to the various volumes
in the Aristoteles latinus series. The use made of various translations is sometimes diﬃcult to
establish: see introduction to Leonine editions of Aquinas’s Aristotle commentaries.
9For details, see Ashworth, “Traditional logic,” p. 143, and N. J. Green-Pedersen, The Tra-
dition of the Topics in the Middle Ages (M¨unchen, Wien: Philosophia Verlag, 1984), p. 90.
10K. Kehrbach, Monumenta Germaniae Paedagogica Band V (Berlin, 1887), pp. 129–130, p.
138.
11Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis e Societate Jesu. In universam dialecticam Aristotelis
(Cologne 1607; reprinted Hildesheim, New York, 1976), II, columns 733–766.
12For a listing of Aristotle commentaries in the medieval period, see C. H. Lohr, “Medieval
Latin Aristotle Commentaries:
Authors A-F,” Traditio 23 (1967), 313–413; “Authors G-I,”
ibid., 24 (1968), 149–245; “Authors Jacobus-Johannes Juﬀ,” ibid., 26 (1970), 135–216; “Authors
Johannes de Kanthi-Myngodus,” ibid., 27 (1971), 251–351; “Authors Narcissus-Richardus,” ibid.,
28 (1972), 281–396; “Authors Robertus-Wilgelmus,” ibid., 29 (1973), 93–197; “Supplementary

612
E. Jennifer Ashworth
what we ﬁnd is glossed texts, that is, texts with marginal notes, some of a very
simple nature, and some very lengthy and elaborate.13
By the mid-thirteenth
century, the fully-ﬂedged commentary had come to dominate, and during the thir-
teenth and fourteenth centuries all the great names in philosophy such as Albert
the Great, Thomas Aquinas, John Duns Scotus and William of Ockham, wrote
commentaries on at least some of the books of the Organon. There were two main
types of commentary.14 First, there is the literal commentary, typiﬁed by those
of Aquinas. The author of a literal commentary divided the work into a series of
lectiones, and then treated it passage by passage. A paraphrase would be oﬀered,
together with an explanation of diﬃcult or important phrases, and points of doc-
trine would be investigated. Especially in the later middle ages, dubia were often
added and discussed at some length. Second, there is the question-commentary,
whose author did not divide or paraphrase the text, but instead considered a
series of questions which arose from points in the text. During the ﬁfteenth cen-
tury the distinction between the two types of commentary became blurred, and
we ﬁnd question-commentaries which contain paraphrases, and literal commen-
taries which contain dubia whose length and structure allies them to the quaestio.
Moreover, literal commentaries ceased to be divided into lectiones, instead being
organized in accordance with the accepted division of Aristotle’s text into chap-
ters and tractates.15 The Coimbra commentary of 1606 is an excellent example
of the hybrid question-commentary with its chapter divisions, chapter summaries,
textual commentary and lengthy quaestiones.
The Coimbra commentary illustrates another trend which became important in
the ﬁfteenth century, that towards commentaries on the entire Organon.16 Indeed,
the very name Organon when used as a title rather than a description seems to be
a late ﬁfteenth-century innovation. Commentaries on individual books continued
to be written; but the ﬁfteenth-century Thomists at the Bursa Montis in Cologne
produced a single commentary on the Logica vetus and another on the Logica
nova, as did Johannes Versor in Paris.17 Also at Paris we ﬁnd George of Brussels
and Pierre Tartaret, whose respective commentaries on the entire Organon were
ﬁrst published in 1493, and enjoyed considerable success during the ﬁrst decades
of the sixteenth century. Later sixteenth-century commentaries included that by
Authors,” ibid., 30 (1974), 119–144. For a listing of Aristotle commentaries in the period 1500–
1650, see C. H. Lohr, Latin Aristotle Commentaries. II. Renaissance Authors, Firenze: Leo S.
Olschki, 1988. See also C. H. Lohr, “Renaissance Latin Aristotle Commentaries: Authors A-B,”
Studies in the Renaissance 21 (1974), 228–289; “Authors C,” Renaissance Quarterly, 28 (1975),
689–741; “Authors D-F,” ibid., 29 (1976), 714–745; “Authors G-K,” ibid., 30 (1977), 681–741;
“Authors L-M,” ibid., 31 (1978), 532–603; “Authors N-Ph,” ibid., 32 (1979), 529–580; “Authors
Pi-Sm,” ibid., 33 (1980), 623–734; “Authors So-Z,” ibid., 35 (1982), 164–256.
13Dod, “Aristoteles latinus”, pp. 73–74.
14Green-Pedersen, The Tradition of the Topics, pp. 88–89, distinguishes three.
15Green-Pedersen, The Tradition of the Topics, p. 91.
16For comment, see Lohr, “Renaissance Latin Aristotle Commentaries: Authors A-B”, pp.
230–231 or Lohr, Latin Aristotle Commentaries II, p. XIV.
17For publication details,
see W. R. Risse,
Bibliographia Logica Band I. 1472–1800
(Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1965).

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
613
Franciscus Toletus, published in Rome in 1572 and republished many times.
Another feature of the late ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries which should be
mentioned here is directly due to the invention of printing, and concerns the wide
dissemination of the medieval Latin commentators. Walter Burley and Antonius
Andreas were particularly important at the beginning of the sixteenth century; and
the commentaries of Aquinas reached a peak of popularity in the mid-sixteenth
century.18 The commentaries by, and attributed to, John Duns Scotus were also
published throughout the century.19 This publication history was to have the inter-
esting result that in the Aristotle commentaries of the second half of the sixteenth
century we ﬁnd much more attention paid to Aquinas and Scotus, along with other
thirteenth-century ﬁgures such as Albert the Great and Giles of Rome, than to the
perhaps greater logicians of the fourteenth century such as Ockham and Marsilius
of Inghen. This is clearly illustrated by the marginal references throughout the
Coimbra commentary. The reprinting and reediting of the great medieval Arab
commentator Averroes is also a noteworthy part of sixteenth-century publishing
history, which was to have its impact on the style of Aristotle commentaries in the
latter part of the sixteenth century.20 The inﬂuence of Averroes on Zabarella (see
below) is of particular importance, but his name occurs with some frequency in
the already-mentioned marginal references of the Coimbra commentary.
So far I have only mentioned the medieval tradition of Aristotle translation and
commentary, but one cannot understand sixteenth-century developments with-
out also considering the impact of humanism. During the ﬁfteenth century Greek
manuscripts became increasingly accessible, and proﬁciency in the Greek language
became more and more widespread, ﬁrst in Italy and then, gradually, in other Eu-
ropean countries.
The ﬁrst printed edition of the Greek text of Aristotle was
produced in Venice by Aldus Manutius from 1495 to 1498; but before that the
Byzantine humanist and philosopher Joannes Argyropulos (ca. 1415–1487) had
already produced new Latin translations of the works of the Organon. As more
and more attention was paid to the actual Greek text, more and more dissatisfac-
tion was felt with the old translations, including those of Argyropulos himself.21
People came to realize that Aristotle’s Greek “was more ‘literary’ and less tech-
nically consistent than early translations had suggested,”22 and this realization
could be used to cast doubt on earlier interpretations of his work. In his preface
to a translation of the Prior Analytics by Johannes Franciscus Burana, ﬁrst pub-
lished in 1524, Hieronymus Bagolinus wrote scathingly of the medieval translators
18F. E. Cranz, “The Publishing History of the Aristotle Commentaries of Thomas Aquinas,”
Traditio 34 (1978), esp. p. 163.
19The commentaries on the Prior and the Posterior Analytics are not by Scotus.
20See C. B. Schmitt, “Renaissance Averroism Studied Through the Venetian Editions of
Aristotle-Averroes (With Particular Reference to the Giunta Edition of 1550–2),” Study VIII in
The Aristotelian Tradition and Renaissance Universities (London: Variorum Reprints, 1984).
21See C. B. Schmitt, Aristotle and the Renaissance (published for Oberlin College by Harvard
University Press, 1983), p. 72.
22L. Jardine, in an earlier version of her chapter “Humanistic logic” in The Cambridge History
of Renaissance Philosophy, pp. 173–198.

614
E. Jennifer Ashworth
who had “presented all the thoughts of Aristotle as if they were enveloped in a per-
verted, corrupt, and noisome fog.”23 In the same place he praised Burana for his
use of both Greek and Arab commentators, including new translations of the lat-
ter from their Hebrew translations. An excellent example of the new Greek-based
texts is found in the Organon edition of Julius Pacius which was ﬁrst published in
1584. In it we ﬁnd the Greek text side-by-side with a new translation designed not
only to read well (as was the humanist goal) but also to capture the philosophical
signiﬁcance of Aristotle’s words. In the margins we ﬁnd a commentary dealing
with diﬃcult points both of theory and of translation.24
However, it must be noted that the humanist approach to Aristotle did cause
some problems both for commentators who wished to make use of medieval insights
and for publishers of medieval commentaries. The discussion of the Organon text
had been organized around a series of key terms which appeared in the old transla-
tions, and whose disappearance from new translations could make the task of expo-
sition, or of simply locating references, rather diﬃcult.25 Thus although Johannes
Eck in 1516–17 produced a complete Organon commentary for the University of
Ingolstadt26 which was based on the translations of Argyropulos, as indeed was the
Coimbra commentary of 1606, the Parisian humanist Jacques Lef`evre d’´Etaples
retained the translations of Boethius for his popular series of paraphrases and an-
notations on Aristotle’s logical works ﬁrst published in 1503. In the great 1570
edition of the Opera omnia of Thomas Aquinas two translations were included for
every commentary by Thomas. Thus, for the Perihermenias and Posterior An-
alytics commentaries, we ﬁnd both the translatio antiqua and the translation by
Argyropulos.27 It is also signiﬁcant to note that the popular and widely reprinted
translations of Aristotle into Ciceronian Latin by the French Benedictine Joachim
P´erion seem to have been without much philosophical inﬂuence.28
The other area in which humanism is particularly important for our purposes
is in the edition and translation of the ancient Greek commentators on Aristotle’s
logic. In his prefatory letter to the ﬁrst volume of the Greek Aristotle published in
1495, Aldus Manutius had announced his intention of printing the commentaries
of Ammonius, Simplicius, Porphyry, Alexander, Philoponus, and Themistius,29
and although he failed to complete the project, it was continued by his heirs,
23J. F. Burana, Aristotelis Priora Resolutoria (Paris, 1539), sig. A ii r: “[. . .] qu`od ante`a
non nisi per neotericos quosdam interpretes, qui omnia Aristotelis sensa depravata, corrupta, ac
teterrima quadam caligine involuta legebant, exponerentur [. . . ]”
24For discussion, see Schmitt, Aristotle and the Renaissance, pp. 83–85. Pacius also wrote an
analytic commentary on the Organon which was published separately in 1597.
25For discussion, see Cranz, “The Publishing History”, pp. 160–162, 169–178.
26This work was prescribed by the statutes of 1519/20, but it is not clear how much it was
actually used: see Terrence Heath, “Logical Grammar, Grammatical Logic, and Humanism in
Three German Universities,” Studies in the Renaissance 18 (1971), p. 59.
27Cranz, “The Publishing History”, p. 177.
28Cranz, “The Publishing History”, p.
178.
For discussion of P´erion as a translator, see
Schmitt, Aristotle and the Renaissance, pp. 72–79.
29C. B. Schmitt, “Alberto Pio and the Aristotelian Studies of his Time,” Study VI in The
Aristotelian Tradition, p. 55.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
615
particularly in the 1520s and 1530s. New Latin translations followed,30 and this
material had a great impact on the contents and style of new commentaries on
Aristotle. This is particularly evident in the works of Agostino Nifo. He used
material from medieval commentators, including the thirteenth-century Robert
Kilwardby and the fourteenth-century Marsilius of Inghen,31 but he gave pride of
place to the ancient Greek commentators, and at the end of his Topics commentary
he spoke harshly of those who tried to explain Aristotle while ignorant both of the
Greek language and of the Greek expositors.32 The Jesuits of Coimbra too were
to make full use of the Greek commentators.
The most interesting developments in purely Aristotelian logic took place in
Italy and concerned the logic of scientiﬁc method. Italian universities had always
been distinguished from Northern European universities by their strong emphasis
on law and medicine, combined with a relatively slight emphasis on theology. The
faculties of arts at such places as Padua provided studies leading to a degree “in
arts and medicine” and as a result, the main emphasis was placed on logic and
natural philosophy, as propaedeutic to medicine.33 In the ﬁfteenth century works
stemming from Oxford and Paris on such topics as the intension and remission
of forms were particularly important, but after about 1520 these works fell into
sudden oblivion.34 By the mid-sixteenth century the focus of attention was on the
Greek commentators, on Averroes, especially his Physics commentary,35 and on
the new Greek Aristotle. The main Aristotelian logic text studied was the Pos-
terior Analytics. This work was lectured on every year at Padua,36 and the Pisa
statutes of 1543 prescribed just Porphyry’s Isagoge and the Posterior Analytics
for logic.37 From Gaetano da Thiene (1387–1465) in the ﬁfteenth century through
Nifo and Balduino in the sixteenth century we ﬁnd a gradual reﬁnement of writ-
ings on demonstration and scientiﬁc method, and this movement culminated in the
logical work of Jacopo Zabarella, whose entire academic career was at the Univer-
sity of Padua.38 Zabarella wrote a long commentary on the Posterior Analytics,
30Schmitt, “Alberto Pio”, p. 56.
31E.g., Augustinus Niphus, Super libros Priorum Aristotelis (Venice, 1553), f. 14 va. Kil-
wardby is called ‘Culverbinus’ and Marsilius is called ‘Ingueneus’.
32For text and translation, see Jardine, “Humanistic Logic”, p. 196.
33See C. B. Schmitt, “Aristotelianism in the Veneto and the Origins of Modern Science: Some
Considerations on the Problem of Continuity,” Study I in The Aristotelian Tradition, p. 113;
and C. B. Schmitt, “Thomas Linacre and Italy,” Study XII in The Aristotelian Tradition, p. 49.
34C. B. Schmitt, “Hieronymus Picus, Renaissance Platonism and the Calculator,” Study V
in The Aristotelian Tradition, pp. 64–65; “Philosophy and Science in Sixteenth-Century Italian
Universities,” Study XV in The Aristotelian Tradition, p. 316.
35N. W. Gilbert, Renaissance Concepts of Method (New York: Columbia University Press,
1960), p. 166.
36Schmitt, “Thomas Linacre and Italy,” p. 50.
37C. B. Schmitt, “Philosophy and Science in Sixteenth-Century Universities: Some Preliminary
Comments,” Study V in Studies in Renaissance Philosophy and Science (London: Variorum
Reprints, 1981), p. 493.
38C. B. Schmitt, “Aristotelianism in the Veneto and the Origins of Modern Science,” p. 113.
This paper contains some useful corrections of Randall’s important work: J. H. Randall, Jr.,
The School of Padua and the Emergence of Modern Science (Padova: Editrice Antenore, 1961).

616
E. Jennifer Ashworth
ﬁrst published in 1582; but in addition he produced single works on a variety of
related themes, from necessary propositions to the species of demonstration.39 He
discussed the two main types of scientiﬁc method, the compositive, which is a
priori and moves from cause to eﬀect, and the resolutive, which is of secondary
importance, and moves from eﬀect to cause. In his work De regressu he described
how the two methods could be united, thus allowing the scientist a method which
would enable him to discover new causal relations at the same time as proving his
conclusions apodictically. Zabarella’s Opera logica were read throughout Europe
well into the seventeenth century; and were particularly important in Germany.
Just as the Coimbra commentary represents the new Aristotelian commentary, so
Zabarella represents the new Aristotelian philosopher of logic.
Another development in Aristotelian logic that calls for some comment is the
discussion of the fourth ﬁgure of the syllogism. To understand the problem, we
need to consider the relation of the terms in the premisses to the terms in the
conclusion. In standard examples, the subject of the conclusion appears in the
second premise, and is called the minor term, and the predicate of the conclusion
appears in the ﬁrst premise, and is called the major term. Whether there can be
non-standard examples depends on how one deﬁnes the major and minor terms.
John Philoponus (ca. 490–ca. 570), in a deﬁnition that became popular by the
seventeenth century, deﬁned the major term as the predicate of the conclusion.
Given this deﬁnition, one can easily diﬀerentiate syllogisms in which the middle
term stands as subject to the major term but stands as predicate to the minor
term (ﬁrst ﬁgure), from syllogisms in which the middle term stands as predicate to
the major term and stands as subject to the minor term (fourth ﬁgure). Moreover,
there can be no conclusion which is indirect in the sense that the major term is
subject and the minor term is predicate. However, during the medieval period, lo-
gicians tended to deﬁne the major term as that which appeared in the ﬁrst premise
and the minor term as that which appeared in the second premise. This deﬁnition
allows indirect conclusions, and many logicians from Theophrastus onward added
ﬁve indirect modes to the ﬁrst ﬁgure, giving a standard listing of nineteen valid
syllogisms (or twenty-four, if one adds the subalternate modes).40 It also leaves
open the possibility of acknowledging the fourth ﬁgure, but there are two ways
of introducing such a ﬁgure. One can take the ﬁrst ﬁgure direct syllogisms, and
transpose their premisses, thereby changing the relationship of the middle term to
the major and minor terms, and obtaining the indirect modes of the fourth ﬁgure.
Alternatively, one can take the ﬁrst ﬁgure indirect syllogisms and transpose their
For more information and bibliography, see William A. Wallace, “Circularity and the Paduan
Regressus: From Pietro d’Abano to Galileo Galilei,” Vivarium 33 (1995), 76–97.
39For Zabarella’s works, see Jacobi Zabarellae Opera Logica (Cologne, 1597; repr. Hildesheim:
Georg Olms, 1966).
40We need to remember that whereas modern logicians treat universal propositions about non-
existent objects as true and particular propositions as false, so that there are only ﬁfteen valid
categorical syllogisms when these are symbolized in classical ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcational logic,
late medieval logicians treated aﬃrmative propositions, whether universal or particular, about
non-existent objects as false and negative propositions as true.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
617
premisses, thus obtaining the direct modes of the fourth ﬁgure.
At this point, a diagram may be of use, with A, B, C as the terms, and with
S, P and M to indicate the diﬀerent structures that result.
Barbara (1 st direct)
Bambara (4th indirect)
All A is B
All M is P
All C is A
All P is M
All C is A
All S is M
All A is B
All M is S
∴All C is B
∴All S is P
∴All C is B
∴All P is S
Baralipton (1 st indirect)
Bamalipton (4th direct)
All A is B
All M is P
All C is A
All P is M
All C is A
All S is M
All A is B
All M is S
∴Some B is C
∴Some P is S
∴Some B is C
∴Some S is P
Buridan has been credited with the ﬁrst explicit recognition of an independent
fourth ﬁgure, but this is a debatable position.41 All Buridan means by the fourth
ﬁgure is the four direct modes of the ﬁrst ﬁgure with transposed premisses, which
give us only the four indirect modes of the fourth ﬁgure. He did not explicitly link
the indirect modes of the ﬁrst ﬁgure with the fourth ﬁgure.42 Certainly Johannes
Dorp, whose commentary on Buridan’s Summulae was published at least ﬁve times
between 1490 and 1504, only seems to accept a fourth ﬁgure which is formed from
the direct modes of the ﬁrst ﬁgure with transposed premisses.43 Like others, he
referred to Galen’s acceptance of a fourth ﬁgure, and remarked that Aristotle and
Buridan did not discuss it because it was so easily reduced to the ﬁrst ﬁgure.
Other logicians, such as Nifo, regarded the fourth ﬁgure as constituted by the
indirect modes of the ﬁrst ﬁgure with transposed premisses.44 Yet other logicians,
such as Johannes Eck, gave all nine possible modes of the fourth ﬁgure, both
direct and indirect.45
Eck was happy to accept the fourth ﬁgure, but others,
notably Zabarella, who devoted a whole work to the topic, argued at length that
it represented an unnatural form of reasoning, and should be rejected.46
It is
only in the second half of the seventeenth century that, owing to the acceptance
of Philoponus’s deﬁnition of major and minor terms, indirect modes were ﬁrmly
41Hubert Hubien, “John Buridan on the Fourth Figure of the Syllogism”, Revue internationale
de philosophie, 113 (1975), 271-285, especially pp. 284-285.
42John Buridan,
Iohannis Buridani Tractatus de Consequentiis,
ed.
Hubert Hubien
(Philosophes m´edi´evaux 16.
Louvain: Publications Universitaires, Paris: Vander-Oyez, S.A.,
1976), pp. 82-83. Buridan says that transposition only aﬀects whether the conclusion is direct
or indirect, and he notes that the direct modes of the ﬁrst ﬁgure are indirect modes of the fourth
“et econuerso”. There is no reason to read this phrase as an explicit recognition that there are
direct modes of the fourth ﬁgure which are indirect modes of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, an assumption that
Hubien seems to make (see article cited above). Later in his text (pp. 91-93) Buridan discusses
the direct and indirect modes of just three ﬁgures.
43Johannes Dorp, Perutile compendium totius logice, (Venetiis, 1499; repr. Frankfurt/Main:
Minerva G.m.b.H., 1965), sig. l 6 va–sig. m 1 ra.
44Niphus, Super libros Priorum, f. 27 va–vb.
45Johannes Eckius, Aristotelis Stagyrite Dialectica ([Augsburg, 1516–1517]), f. xii ra–f. xiii
rb.
46Zabarella, Liber de Quarta Syllogismorum Figura in Opera Omnia, cols. 101–132.

618
E. Jennifer Ashworth
rejected and the fourth ﬁgure accepted.47
2
THE FATE OF THE MEDIEVAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO LOGIC
So far I have considered only Aristotle and commentaries on Aristotle. However,
this is somewhat misleading so far as university instruction is concerned, since the
material in question was aimed at more senior students, including those studying
for the M.A. degree.
Medieval universities exposed ﬁrst-year arts students to
a wide range of logical writings, mostly contemporary; and during the sixteenth
century, although Italian universities continued a tradition of reading Aristotle and
his commentators directly,48 other universities turned more and more to textbooks
of one kind and another. What I have considered so far is misleading for another
reason as well, since I have totally ignored the development of areas of logic not
discussed by Aristotle. It is now time to remedy these defects, and I shall begin by
outlining the speciﬁcally medieval contributions to logic which have been discussed
in previous chapters.
One of the features of medieval logic was the production of independent texts,
each focussing on a particular topic. These texts were regarded as complete in
themselves, and as not needing any justiﬁcation in terms of Aristotelian logic.
They can be organized into three groups. The core of the ﬁrst group is formed
by the so-called parva logicalia, or treatises dealing with the properties of terms,
including their reference in various contexts. Here we ﬁnd tracts on supposition,
on relative terms, on ampliation, appellation, restriction and distribution. These
core treatises were supplemented in three ways. Logicians wrote about syncate-
gorematic terms, that is, the logical particles such as ‘all’, ‘some’, and ‘not’, which
determine the logical structure of a proposition.
They wrote about exponible
terms, that is, those logical particles such as ‘except’ and ‘only’ whose presence
requires the analysis of an apparently simple categorical proposition into several
conjoined propositions. Finally, they wrote about the proof of terms, or the ways
in which the truth-conditions of propositions are aﬀected by the presence of ex-
ponible terms, of modal terms such as ‘necessary’ and ‘possible’, or of epistemic
terms such as ‘knows’ and ‘believes’. Obviously there is a good deal of overlap
between writings on syncategorematic terms, on exponibles, and on the proof of
terms, since one and the same particle could be discussed in all three types of
treatise. The second group contains the ‘three tracts of the moderns’, that is, the
treatises on consequences, obligations and insolubles.49 The third group is formed
by the treatises on sophismata in which problematic or puzzling statements were
47For details, see E. J. Ashworth, “Some Notes on Syllogistic in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries”, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 11 (1970), 17–33.
48Schmitt, “Philosophy and Science in Sixteenth-Century Universities: Some Preliminary Com-
ments,” p. 508.
49For an interesting discussion of the way in which the phrase ‘Logica modernorum’ has been
extended in recent times to refer to all the new developments of medieval logic, see N. W. Gilbert,
“Ockham, Wyclif and the ‘via moderna’,” Miscellanea Mediaevalia 9 (1974), pp. 111–115.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
619
analyzed and tested against various logical rules. Since these rules were drawn
from the areas of investigation already mentioned, including supposition theory
and its ramiﬁcations, there was considerable overlap between these treatises and
those belonging to the ﬁrst and second groups. Indeed, the latter treatises, as
well as commentaries on Aristotle and Peter of Spain, themselves made heavy use
of sophismata in order to test the rules they enunciated against possible counter-
examples. Thus we get a two-way movement. A treatise on sophismata begins with
the sophism and proceeds to the rules; a treatise on, for instance, consequences
begins with the rules and proceeds to the sophismata.
As well as treatises on individual topics, medieval logicians wrote summulae or
general textbooks. The most famous example is the thirteenth-century work by
Peter of Spain which gives a fairly complete outline of Aristotelian logic, including
categories, syllogisms, topics and fallacies. More than three hundred manuscripts
of this work survive, and about two hundred printed editions, mostly with a com-
mentary.50
However, it would be a great mistake to think that Peter of Spain
had no rivals.
For those interested in medieval logic, Ockham’s Summa totius
logicae and the somewhat later Perutilis logica by Albert of Saxony must not be
overlooked. However, so far as the ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth centuries are con-
cerned, perhaps the most important textbook writers are John Buridan and Paul
of Venice. Paul of Venice’s Logica parva is worth considering more closely. Tract
1 presented the material of the summulae, and dealt with terms, nouns, verbs,
propositions, equipollence, conversion, hypothetical propositions, predicables, cat-
egories and syllogisms — everything, that is, that Peter of Spain had covered,
except for topics and fallacies, but in much briefer compass. Tract 2 dealt with
the material of the parva logicalia, tracts 3, 5, and 6 dealt with consequences,
obligations and insolubles. Tract 4 was devoted to the proof of terms; and the last
two tracts took up objections to the summulae and to the consequences. Thus
the Logica parva was a compendium of mid- to late-fourteenth century logic, as
indeed was the very much longer Logica magna.51
The Logica parva was very
popular. About eighty manuscripts survive and it was printed many times.52 So
far as we know, it was the ﬁrst medieval logic text to be printed, in 1472, and the
last edition was in 1614.
These medieval works dominated the curricula of ﬁfteenth-century universi-
50Peter of Spain, Tractatus called afterwards Summule Logicales, ed. L.M. de Rijk (Assen:
Van Gorcum, 1972), p. C. De Rijk comments that most of the printed editions are adaptations,
pp. C–CI.
51In his Logica magna, Paul of Venice quotes verbatim (though without acknowledgement)
from various logicians of the second part of the fourteenth century: see Paul of Venice, Logica
Magna Part II Fascicule 6, ed. and trans. F. de Punta and M. M. Adams (Printed for the
British Academy by the Oxford University Press, 1978) and Paul of Venice, Logica Magna Part
II Fascicule 8, ed. and trans. E. J. Ashworth (Printed for the British Academy by the Oxford
University Press, 1988). (Other volumes in the series tend not to trace Paul’s sources.)
52For a list of some 81 manuscripts, see Alan R. Perreiah, Paul of Venice: A Bibliographical
Guide (Bowling Green, Ohio: Philosophy Documentation Center, 1986).
See also F. Bottin,
“Alcune correzioni ed aggiunte al censimento dei codici di Paolo Veneto,” Quaderni per la Storia
dell’Universit`a di Padova 14 (1981), 59–60.

620
E. Jennifer Ashworth
ties. In Italy, the ﬁfteenth century was characterized by the enthusiastic reception
of fourteenth-century Oxford logic, not only as found in the works of Paul of
Venice, but also as found in original treatises by such men as Heytesbury, Strode
and Billingham.53
As Charles Schmitt remarked, “Contrary to what is gener-
ally thought, the most technical and most highly specialized products of medieval
scholasticism continued to remain popular during the Renaissance, precisely at
the same time as when humanism was at its height.”54 Indeed, those humanists
such as Leonardo Bruni whose fulminations against the ‘barbari britanni’ are often
quoted, were dead long before the wave of British logic was spent in Italy.55 Thus
the prescribed texts at Padua in 1496 included Paul of Venice’s Logica parva along
with works by Heytesbury, Strode, and the more recent Paul of Pergula (d. 1451),
who had taught at Padua.56
As well as producing his own logic text, Paul of
Pergula had commented on Strode’s Consequences, as had his colleague Gaetano
di Thiene.57 Outside Italy, matters were little diﬀerent. At Erfurt in 1420, Billing-
ham, John of Holland and Thomas Maulvelt were read;58 and the Erfurt statutes
of 1412 together with the additions of 1449 also mention Heytesbury, Albert of
Saxony, Buridan and Marsilius of Inghen.59 Peter of Spain’s Summulae were read
at Ingolstadt in 1478.60 Buridan was popular in Poland.61 At Oxford, a loose
collection of largely anonymous texts containing similar material to that found in
Paul of Venice’s Logica parva was read.62 I will not add more detail to this list; but
53See especially W. J. Courtenay, “The Early Stages in the Introduction of Oxford Logic into
Italy” in English Logic in Italy in the 14 th and 15 th Centuries, ed. Alfonso Maier`u (Napoli:
Bibliopolis, 1982), pp. 13–32.
54Schmitt, “Alberto Pio and the Aristotelian Studies of His Time,” p. 49.
55See E. Garin, “La cultura ﬁorentina nella seconda met`a del ’300 e i ‘barbari britanni’,” La
Rassegna della Letteratura Italiana 64 (1960), 181–195.
56Schmitt, “Philosophy and Science in Sixteenth-Century Universities: Some Preliminary Com-
ments,” p.
493, p.
520 note 43: “Deputati ad sophistariam teneantur legere Logicam Pauli
Veneti et Quaestiones Strodi cum Dubiis Pauli Pergulensis et pro tertia lectione Regulas seu
Sophysmata tisberi.”
57It is interesting to consider the title of the work published in Venice in 1517: Consequen-
tie Strodi cum commento Alexandri Sermonete. Declarationes Gaetani in easdem consequen-
tias. Dubia magistri Pauli pergulensis. Obligationes eiusdem Strodi. Consequentie Ricardi de
Ferabrich. Expositio Gaetani super easdem. Consequentie subtiles Hentisbari. Questiones in
consequentias Strodi perutiles eximii artium doctoris domini Antonii Frachentiani Vicentini.
For Paul of Pergula, see Paul of Pergula, Logica and Tractatus de Sensu Composito et Diviso,
ed. Sister Mary Anthony Brown (St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: The Franciscan Institute; Louvain,
Belgium: E. Nauwelaerts; Paderborn, Germany: F. Sch¨oningh, 1961).
58L. Thorndike, University Records and Life in the Middle Ages (New York, 1944), pp. 296–
297.
59A. L. Gabriel, “‘Via antiqua’ and ‘via moderna’ and the Migration of Paris Students and
Masters to the German Universities in the Fifteenth Century,” Miscellanea Mediaevalia 9 (1974),
467–468.
60Heath, “Logical Grammar”, p. 49.
61M. Markowski, Burydanism w Polsce w Okresie Przedkopernikanskim (Wroclaw, Warszawa,
Krakow, Gdansk, 1971), passim.
62L. M. de Rijk, “Logica Oxoniensis: An Attempt to Reconstruct a Fifteenth Century Oxford
Manual of Logic,” Medioevo 3 (1977), 121–164; E. J. Ashworth, “The ‘Libelli Sophistarum’ and
the Use of Medieval Logic Texts at Oxford and Cambridge in the Early Sixteenth Century,”
Vivarium 17 (1979), 134–158.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
621
I should point out that it is a very varied one, and that the emphasis is generally
on authors who wrote at least within the previous century, even if they could not
be described as recent. The one exception is Peter of Spain, and he was almost
inevitably read through the medium of later commentaries.63 The most popular
commentator was Johannes Versor (d. after 1482), who lectured at Paris and was
inﬂuenced by both Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas.64 Risse lists 23 editions
of his commentary on Peter of Spain, the last in 1639.65 Other thirteenth-century
ﬁgures such as William of Sherwood had not survived at all, and the reemergence
of Albert the Great and Aquinas in their role as commentators on Aristotle was
to be largely a sixteenth-century phenomenon. It should be pointed out that the
reading of the late medieval texts found in the curriculum was not necessarily
sympathetic. The Thomists of the Bursa Montis in Cologne, whose commentary
on Peter of Spain’s parva logicalia was reprinted a number of times between 1480
and 1507, included the prescribed nominalist texts on obligations, consequences
and insolubles in that work, but explicitly disagreed with many of the positions
taken.66
The big changes in logic teaching were to come in the ﬁrst half of the sixteenth
century. However, at the beginning of the century, particularly in Paris, there were
changes internal to the medieval tradition itself. Some medieval topics, including
sophismata, syncategorematic terms, and the proof of terms, simply disappeared
as the subject of separate treatises, while separate treatises on supposition theory,
exponibles, consequences, insolubles and obligations continued to be written. To
these were added new treatises on oppositions, or the logical relations between
diﬀerent kinds of categorical propositions, on syllogisms, and on terms. These
treatises covered material which had always to some extent been included in sum-
mulae and commentaries, but which was now the focus of particular attention for
such authors as the Scotsman John Mair, and the Spaniards Antonio Coronel,
Gaspar Lax and Fernando de Enzinas, all of whom taught at the University of
Paris. At the same time new commentaries on Peter of Spain were being pub-
lished by authors ranging from George of Brussels and Pierre Tartaret in late
ﬁfteenth-century Paris, to Johannes Eck in Germany in 1516 and Domingo de
Soto in Spain in 1529. The ﬁrst version of his Summulae, which drew heavily on
his earlier studies in Paris, included a commentary on the ﬁrst and fourth books
of Peter of Spain’s Tractatus, together with material on terms, supposition theory,
63Cf. Rita Guerlac, Juan Luis Vives Against the Pseudodialecticians: A Humanist Attack on
Medieval Logic [texts and translation], (Dordrecht, Boston, London: D. Reidel, 1979), p. 19.
64On Versor’s work as commentator and its reception, see Pepijn Rutte, “‘Secundum processum
et mentem Versoris’: John Versor and His Relation to the Schools of Thought Reconsidered”,
Vivarium 43 (2005), 292–329.
65Risse, Bibliographia Logica I, p. 282.
66I use the following edition: [Lambertus de Monte], Copulata super omnes tractatus parvorum
logicalium Petri hispani.
ac super tres tractatus modernorum textui pulcerrime annotata in
argumentis et replicis denuo diligentissime correcta iuxta inviolatum processum magistrorum
Colonie bursam montis regentium ([Cologne], 1493). For discussion, see H. A. G. Braakhuis,
“School Philosophy and Philosophical Schools: The Semantic-Ontological Views in the Cologne
Commentaries on Peter of Spain, and the ‘Wegestreit’,” Miscellanea Mediaevalia 20 (1989), 1–18.

622
E. Jennifer Ashworth
exponibles, insolubles, and obligations.
While much of the material found in the work of the Parisian authors, includ-
ing Domingo de Soto, stemmed from such predecessors as John Buridan, there
were original developments. For instance, in supposition theory logicians began
to use the letters of the alphabet as special signs, not only to allow diﬀerent in-
terpretations of sentences of standard form but also, more importantly, to handle
sentences of non-standard form such as “Of every man some donkey is running”.67
In particular, logicians wanted to explain how to provide contradictories for such
sentences which preserved the relevant truth conditions, and also how to analyse
them using the process called suppositional descent. The letter ‘a’ was used to
indicate that the term following it had merely confused supposition. For instance,
if one writes “a. man is not an animal”, this sentence turns out to be true because
if each of several men is identical to a diﬀerent animal, it is true to say of each
animal that one or more men is not identical to that animal. The letter ‘b’ was
used to indicate that the term following it had determinate supposition. Accord-
ingly, “Every man is b. animal”, unlike “Every man is <an> animal”, signiﬁes
by virtue of the special sign that every man is identical to one and the same ani-
mal, and hence is false. Subsequent letters of the alphabet were used to indicate
cases of mixed supposition, in which the type of supposition changed during the
stages of suppositional descent. The humanist Juan Luis Vives, who had himself
studied at the University of Paris, found this procedure particularly repellent. In
his diatribe Against the Pseudodialecticians he wrote “[. . .] a, b, c, d can make
those suppositions confused, determinate, and a mixture of both. Indeed you can
add more commixtions than any quack pharmacist ever made —e, f, g, h, i, j,
k— so that some of these men already have recourse to letters down as far as the
tenth letter of the second alphabet, dreaming up and combining wonderful kinds
of suppositions.”68
Another development concerned the semantics of propositions (where ‘proposi-
tion’ means an occurrent declarative sentence, whether written, spoken or mental),
and the problem of what it is they might be said to signify. As Juan Dolz put
the question, “Does a proposition signify some thing or some things or in some
way [aliqualiter]? Is there to be given a complexum signiﬁcabile or not, and if so,
is it to be distinguished from the signiﬁcates of the terms of the proposition?”69
Dolz and Fernando de Enzinas argued that indicative sentences signify aliqualiter,
in some way, rather than aliquid, some thing.70 They explained this by arguing
that propositions are analogous to syncategorematic rather than to categorematic
67See E. J. Ashworth, “Multiple Quantiﬁcation and the Use of Special Quantiﬁers in Early
Sixteenth Century Logic”, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 19 (1978), 599–613; reprinted
as Study X in E. J. Ashworth, Studies in Post-Medieval Semantics (London: Variorum Reprints,
1985).
68Guerlac, Juan Luis Vives, p. 61.
69Johannes Dolz, Termini (Parisius [ca. 1511]), f. v ra. Note that the more usual phrase is
‘complexe signiﬁcabile’.
70Dolz, Termini; Fernando de Enzinas, Tractatus de Compositione Propositionis Mentalis
(Lugduni, 1528).

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
623
words in their manner of signifying, performing a function other than that of
naming.71 To the question, “What does this proposition signify?” one could reply
only by a paraphrase. In particular, questions about the dictum of a proposition
were answered by replacing the dictum with a that-phrase. For instance, “‘Man
is an animal’ signiﬁes man being an animal (hominem esse animal)” (in which
‘hominem esse animal’ is the dictum) was rewritten as “‘Man is an animal’ signi-
ﬁes that man is an animal (quod homo est animal)”, thus removing the temptation
to think that the dictum ‘man being an animal’ functions as a name. However,
they recognized that there were some contexts in which the question “What is this
sentence about?” could be answered by naming or pointing to an object. On such
occasions a sentence was said to signify categorematically.
Another semantic issue that was discussed by Juan Dolz and other Parisian
logicians had to do with the use of proper names.72 Reﬂection on John Buridan’s
account of the problem of identity through time led them to adopt an even more
restrictive account of proper names than Buridan himself had countenanced. They
argued that a sequence of diﬀerent concepts of Socrates will be formed through
time, even by one acquainted with him, and hence that the name ‘Socrates’ is no
more a proper singular term than is the name ‘Seine’. It is radically equivocal,
since at every moment it is subordinated to a diﬀerent concept.73
Nor is this
incompatible with the intentions of the person who originally gave Socrates his
name. Strictly speaking, only the baby was called Socrates, but the name was
imposed equivalently or as a consequence to signify every successor to the boy by
means of diﬀerent concepts. Domingo de Soto was strongly opposed to this view.
He said that to regard the name ‘Socrates’ as an equivocal term which refers to a
succession of individuals is a denial of common speech and of the common sense
of the wise men who originally gave terms their signiﬁcation.74
Soto was equally opposed to Buridan’s initial account of identity through time
which made a division between strict identity which allowed of no change what-
soever, a lesser identity for which the continuity of one part, notably the human
soul, was suﬃcient despite bodily changes, and the weakest identity, based on a
continuity of diverse parts succeeding one another. Animals, bodies and rivers
have only the weakest kind of identity and so the Seine is the same river now as it
was ten years ago because of the continuous succession of water-parts. According
71For syncategorematic terms, see E. J. Ashworth, “The Structure of Mental Language: Some
Problems Discussed by Early Sixteenth Century Logicians”, Vivarium 20 (1982), 59–83, reprinted
as Study V in eadem, Studies in Post-Medieval Semantics. For the signiﬁcate of propositions,
see E. J. Ashworth, “Theories of the Proposition: Some Early Sixteenth Century Discussions”,
Franciscan Studies 38 (1978 [1981]), 81–121, reprinted as Study IV in eadem, Studies in Post-
Medieval Semantics.
72For full discussion and references, see E. J. Ashworth, “Singular Terms and Singular Con-
cepts: From Buridan to the Early Sixteenth Century” in John Buridan and Beyond: Topics
in the Language Sciences 1300–1700, ed. Russell L. Friedman and Sten Ebbesen (Copenhagen:
The Royal Danish Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2004), pp. 121–151.
73See, for instance, Dolz, Termini, f. xxx ra–rb.
74I cite the second edition: Domingo de Soto, Aeditio Secunda Summularum, (Salamanca,
1539–1540), f. xviii vb–f. xix rb.

624
E. Jennifer Ashworth
to this account the names ‘Socrates’ and ‘Aristotle’ on the one hand and ‘Seine’
and ‘Brownie’ (the donkey) on the other have a diﬀerent status. The former are
more properly singular terms than the latter even for those who are acquainted
with all of these individuals through time. Domingo de Soto rejected this con-
sequence, arguing that horses, trees and even rivers could enjoy a strong enough
identity, by virtue of the continuity of their forms and functions, to give a basis
for the application of one singular concept through time.
The topics of special quantiﬁers and the use of singular terms soon disappeared
from the logical literature, and the topic of the signiﬁcatum of propositions ceased
to be a central issue, though it was touched on in later Thomistic accounts of
the object of judgement.75
However, another topic to which Domingo de Soto
made a very important contribution was longer-lived. This was the classiﬁcation
of signs, both linguistic and non-linguistic.
In relation to the speaker, spoken
words were said to be instrumental signs, because they were used as instruments
of communication, and mental terms were said to be formal signs, because they
represented by their very nature. In relation to the things signiﬁed, spoken words
were said to be conventional signs, and mental terms were said to be natural
signs, since their signiﬁcation did not depend on choice or convention.
In the
various editions of his Summulae, Soto asked whether one should add a category
of customary signs, such as napkins on the table as a sign of lunch. In the end
he concluded that these signs were natural, albeit founded on a convention.76
Soto’s classiﬁcations were elaborated by many later authors, including Sebastian
de Couto in the Coimbra commentary and John of St. Thomas (1589–1644) in
the seventeenth century.77
3
THE NEW TEXTBOOKS
Outside Spain, work in the late medieval tradition came to an abrupt halt around
1530.
No new independent treatises in the medieval style or commentaries on
Peter of Spain were written; the publication of works written during the ﬁrst three
decades of the sixteenth century ceased, and the publication of such medieval
authors as Buridan, Heytesbury and Strode also ceased. Only in Spain did authors
75See Nuchelmans, Late-Scholastic and Humanist Theories of the Proposition.
76For discussion and references, see E. J. Ashworth, “The Doctrine of Signs in Some Early
Sixteenth-Century Spanish Logicians” in Estudios de Historia de la L´ogica. Actas del II Simposio
de Historia de la L´ogica, ed. Ignacio Angelelli and Angel d’Ors (Pamplona: Ediciones EUNATE,
1990), pp. 13–38; E. J. Ashworth, “Domingo de Soto (1494–1560) and the Doctrine of Signs”
in De Ortu Grammaticae: Studies in medieval grammar and linguistic theory in memory of
Jan Pinborg, ed.
B. L. Bursill-Hall, Sten Ebbesen and Konrad Koerner (Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 1990), pp. 35–48.
77For Sebastian de Couto, see John P. Doyle, trans., The Conimbricenses: Some Questions on
Signs (Milwaukee: Wisconsin: Marquette University Press, 2001); for John of St. Thomas [John
Poinsot], see John Deely, ed. and trans., Tractatus de Signis: The Semiotic of John Poinsot
(Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 1985). For some corrections to
Deely’s discussion, see E. J. Ashworth, “The Historical Origins of John Poinsot’s Treatise on
Signs”, Semiotica 69 (1988), 129–147.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
625
continue to produce, if not independent treatises, at least commentaries on Peter
of Spain. For instance, the commentary by Alphonso de Veracruz was published in
Mexico in 1554, followed by several printings in Salamanca; and in 1571 Thomas
de Mercado’s commentary made its ﬁrst appearance in Seville.78
In Northern Europe, excluding Spain and Italy for the moment, these changes
in publication were accompanied by a change in university curricula.
At such
universities as Oxford, Cambridge, Ingolstadt and T¨ubingen, authors such as
Agricola and Caesarius were required in place of the medieval texts, and Philip
Melanchthon’s simpliﬁed summaries of Aristotelian logic swept Germany.79 Later
Ramus was to enjoy a runaway success.
Yet the most important and inﬂuen-
tial texts of the second half of the sixteenth century were by no means simpliﬁed
humanist manuals, and they contained considerably more syllogistic logic than
Agricola and Ramus had thought appropriate. Indeed, many of them also con-
tained treatments of such medieval doctrines as supposition theory. In order to
understand these developments, we must ﬁrst consider humanist logic in more
detail.
Rudolph Agricola’s De inventione dialectica libri tres, written ca. 1479 but ﬁrst
published in 1515, is central to the development of humanist logic.80
Agricola
took up the well-known division between invention, that is, the part of logic which
ﬁnds the subject matter for argumentation by using the Topics, and judgement,
that is, the part of logic which organizes and evaluates the resulting arguments,
and he focussed almost exclusively on invention, as the title of his work suggests.
The work is divided into three Books. In the ﬁrst, Agricola discusses Topics. In
the second, he takes up the nature and role of dialectic, but while he mentions
the standard forms of argumentation, his focus is on literary examples and on
the use of arguments in actual situations. The last Book considers moving, or
the use of emotions, pleasing, and disposition. Much of this material came from
rhetoric manuals, and rhetoric itself was restricted by Agricola to questions of
style. For our present purposes, the two most important features of Agricola’s
work are his placing of invention before judgement, and his novel treatment of
the Topics. There was nothing new about the discussion of Topics as such, for
the three standard works about Topics, namely Aristotle’s Topics, together with
Boethius’s two works, De topicis diﬀerentiis and In Ciceronis Topica,81 had always
78For more details, see E. J. Ashworth, “The eclipse of medieval logic” in The Cambridge
History of Later Medieval Philosophy, ed. Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny and Jan Pinborg
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 790.
79For the curricula, see Jardine, “Humanistic logic”, pp. 800–801; Heath, “Logical Grammar”,
p.
59, p.
63; Peter Mack, Renaissance Argument: Valla and Agricola in the Traditions of
Rhetoric and Dialectic (Leiden, New York, K¨oln: E. J. Brill, 1993), esp. pp. 257–302.
80For full discussion of Agricola, see Mack, Renaissance Argument.
81For Boethius, see Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis, translated, with notes and essays on the
text, by Eleonore Stump (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1978) and Boethius’s
In Ciceronis Topica, translated, with notes and an introduction by Eleonore Stump (Ithaca and
London: Cornell University Press, 1988).
For discussion, see Eleonore Stump, Dialectic and
Its Place in the Development of Medieval Logic (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press,
1989).
For a history of Topics commentaries, see N.J. Green-Pedersen, The Tradition of the

626
E. Jennifer Ashworth
been ﬁrmly part of the logic syllabus. Boethius’s ﬁrst work was more important in
the medieval period, though in the fourteenth century it was largely replaced by
the account of Topics given by Peter of Spain in his Tractatus.82 In the sixteenth
century Boethius’s second work became popular again, as did Cicero’s original
text.83 Agricola himself was well-acquainted with both Aristotle and Boethius,
but he introduced a radical change of approach.
For Boethius, the notion of a Topic had covered two things. First, a Topic was a
maxim or maximal proposition, a self-evidently true universal generalization which
could either be inserted into an argument as a premiss or which could be appealed
to as providing a warrant for an argument. Some of these maxims were turned into
formal deductive arguments by medieval logicians, who had a tendency to absorb
invention into judgement,84 but others were not readily formalizable. As such,
they provide the perfect nucleus for a developed informal logic. The second sense
of Topic for Boethius was the Topic as the Diﬀerentia of a maximal proposition,
that is, the characteristic that enables us to classify maximal propositions into
groups. To list the Topics in this second sense is simply to list the headings under
which material can be gathered: ‘deﬁnition’, ‘genus’, ‘cause’, ‘opposite’, ‘similar’,
and so on. What we ﬁnd in Agricola is a deliberate rejection of the maxims,85 and
of material that might belong to judgement rather than invention. His attack has
two parts. With respect to particular Topics, such as the Topics of antecedents
and consequents, he claims that their only use is to present valid argument forms,
for they have no distinctive material of their own.86 Hence they must be rejected
in their Boethian form. In general, he argues that the purpose of any maxim is
simply to present a necessary argument, and that they are quite inappropriate for
all the cases in which we are dealing with probabilities. We should note here that
Agricola is clearly talking not just of the epistemological status of the premisses of
an argument, but of a probabilistic and informal relationship between premisses
and conclusion.87 He also claims that maxims are too restrictive, for they represent
an attempt to force a wide range of material into a narrow compass; and that
they are of no use to someone who really understands the nature of Topics.88
What we are left with, then, is the Topics solely as headings under which material
can be organised. Their most obvious link with argumentation, both formal and
informal, has been broken. Nor, as we have seen, is there any serious discussion
of argumentation.
Topics.
82Peter of Spain, Tractatus, pp. 55–78.
83For some details, see E.J. Ashworth, “Boethius on Topics, Conditionals and Argument-forms”
in History and Philosophy of Logic, 10 (1989), 214–215.
84See Stump, introduction to Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis, p. 25.
85Vives also rejected maxims: see Guerlac, Juan Luis Vives, p. 40.
86Rudolph Agricola, De Inventione Dialectica ...
per Alardum Amstelredamum accuratius
emendati, et additis annotationibus illustrati (K¨oln, 1523: repr. Frankfurt am Main: Minerva
G.M.B.H., 1967), pp. 107–108; cf. p. 170. Boethius was aware of the problem: see Stump,
Boethius’s In Ciceronis Topica, pp. 128–131.
87Cf. Agricola, De Inventione Dialectica, p. 109, pp. 110–113.
88Agricola, De Inventione Dialectica, p. 176.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
627
Agricola’s work was one of the most widely-published dialectic texts of the
sixteenth century, receiving more than forty editions.89 Nonetheless, its ﬁt with
the university curriculum in logic was not good, both because it was awkward to
place Topical invention before the rest of logic, and because it contained virtually
nothing about the rest of logic. The obvious answer to this problem was either to
provide supplementary texts, or to write new texts containing appropriate formal
material. As Monfasani has pointed out, in the earlier part of the sixteenth century
we often ﬁnd that the Isagoge dialectica of George of Trebizond (1395–ca. 1472),
which gave a brief outline of Aristotelian logic, was paired with Agricola.90 A good
example of the other approach, that of writing a new text, is provided by Philip
Melanchthon, the so-called Praeceptor Germaniae. His logic text, ﬁrst published in
1520, as Compendiaria dialectices ratio, but replaced by two later versions, became
very popular. In it we can see how the insights of Agricola were transmuted to
serve the textbook needs of educational institutions, in much the same way as the
Ramist innovations were to be transmuted in the last years of the sixteenth century.
On the one hand Melanchthon enjoyed the Agricolan emphasis on clarity of style
and the use of literary allusions, which he supplemented by a large number of
Biblical allusions; he accepted the importance of the Topics, although he restored
discussion of the maxims; and some remarks on order in the ﬁrst version of his
text grew into a full section on logical method as a way of ordering discourse.91
On the other hand, Melanchthon remained a convinced Aristotelian, who believed
that students needed to be taught some formal logic. He placed judgement before
invention, and the formal techniques he used were those of syllogistic, while his
work included a discussion of the other standard Aristotelian subjects, including
the categories and the square of opposition for propositions. At the same time, he
purged Aristotle of medieval accretions, approaching him through new readings of
the Greek text and of the Greek commentators. Any references to the speciﬁcally
medieval contributions to logic are most unfavourable, and he relegates supposition
theory to grammar.92
Such was not the case with the ﬁrst important English logical text of the six-
teenth century, John Seton’s Dialectica, published in 1545. Seton explained in
89Mack, Renaissance Argument, p. 257.
90See John Monfasani, George of Trebizond. A Biography and a Study of his Rhetoric and
Logic (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1976), pp. 333–335. For the text, see Georgius Trapezuntius, De Re
Dialectica Libellus (Coloniae, 1539; repr. Frankfurt am Main: Minerva G.M.B.H., 1966).
91See Philip Melanchthon, Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio in Opera (Corpus Reformatorum
XX, Brunsvigae 1854, repr. New York and Frankfurt am Main, 1963), columns 724–726; and
Erotemata Dialectices in Opera (Corpus Reformatorum XIII, Halis Saxonum, 1846; repr. New
York and Frankfurt am Main, 1963), columns 573–578. Sections on method became a standard
component of logic textbooks. Particularly after the publication of Zabarella’s Opera logica, it
became customary to add remarks on scientiﬁc method as well, in a mixture of subject-matters
that was not always happy.
92Melanchthon, Erotemata Dialectices, cols.
750–752.
He writes (col.
750): “Addita est
Aristotelis Dialecticae, doctrina verius Grammatica quam Dialectica, quam nominarunt Parva-
logicalia, in qua dum praecepta immodice cumularunt, et labyrinthos inextricabiles, sine aliqua
utilitate ﬁnxerunt, ut: Nullus et nemo mordent se in sacco, etiam illas admonitiones, quarum
aliquis est usus, tenebris involverunt.”

628
E. Jennifer Ashworth
his introduction that he had written the work because of the absence of a suit-
able text for the instruction of the young.93 Aristotle was too diﬃcult, Agricola
had deliberately restricted himself to the subject of invention, and Melanchthon’s
style was not suited to elementary teaching. He added that he hoped through
his eﬀorts to make Aristotle more accessible to the young. In the ﬁrst edition of
his work he dealt only with that part of logic called judgement, though, in the
editions of 1568 and later, a brief fourth Book on invention, based on Agricola’s
ﬁrst Book, was to be added, along with annotations by Peter Carter. The fourth
Book was somewhat redundant, since Seton had already given Agricola’s classiﬁ-
cation of the Topics in his second Book. There are frequent references to Agricola
throughout the work, as well as to Cicero, Quintilian and Erasmus. However, he
did include the bulk of traditional Aristotelian logic from the categories to the
syllogism, which he described as the most important part of judgement,94 and he
also retained the strictly medieval doctrine of the supposition of terms, though in a
considerably truncated form.95 It is interesting to compare Seton’s text to Robert
Sanderson’s Logicae Artis Compendium which appeared at Oxford in 1615, and
was to remain a standard text there well into the eighteenth century.96 This too
contains a full outline of strictly Aristotelian logic, together with brief discussions
of the medieval doctrines of supposition, exponibles and consequences, and a full
discussion of method as a way of ordering discourse. Both these works oﬀer the
student a compendium of simple logical devices for use in formal debate, as well
as a “guide to analyzing a Cicero oration or a passage from Ovid.”97
No account of logic in the sixteenth century would be complete without some
reference to Petrus Ramus (Pierre de la Ram´ee), the most notorious logician of
the period. He is known both for his attacks on Aristotle and for the simpliﬁed
logic presented in his Dialectique of 1555, which was published in Latin in 1556 as
Dialecticae libri duo. The Dialectique had two parts. The ﬁrst, on invention, cov-
ered the Topics, and the second, on judgement, presented a deliberately simpliﬁed
version of the syllogism followed by an account of method as a means of ordering
in the arts and sciences. The Topics are presented in an Agricolan way, without
maxims, and with a new theoretical foundation. They are not merely useful head-
ings for gathering material, but they represent the mind’s natural organization of
data.98 As such, Topics function as categories;99 and indeed, Ramus emphasized
that his Topics are more useful and more natural than Aristotle’s ten Categories.
If we are asked to discuss war, peace or the state, it is no use to think in terms of
93John Seton, Dialectica (Londini, 1545), sig. A ii v.
94Seton, Dialectica, sig. I ii r.
95Seton, Dialectica, sig. E iv r– v v.
96See Ashworth, introduction to Sanderson, Logicae Artis Compendium, pp. XIII–XVI.
97L. Jardine, “The Place of Dialectic Teaching in Sixteenth-Century Cambridge,” Studies in
the Renaissance 21 (1974), 57. Jardine is referring only to Seton.
98See, for instance, Petrus Ramus, Scholarum dialecticarum seu animadversionum in Organum
Aristotelis, in Scholae in tres primas liberales artes (Frankfurt 1581; repr. Frankfurt am Main
1965), p. 54. Agricola suggests the same thought: De Inventione Dialectica, p. 9.
99Ramus, Scholarum Dialecticarum, pp. 118–119.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
629
the category of substance. Instead we must appeal to such Topics as cause, event,
and opposites.100 No reference was made in the Dialectique to such standard ma-
terial as the categories, the square of opposition, conversion, demonstration and
fallacies. On the other hand, the work is rich with quotations from the poetry and
prose of Classical authors, which must have strengthened the impression among
students that logic was both easy and fun.
The publishing history of Ramus’s book was remarkable. Ong lists 262 editions,
151 of which appeared in Germany.101 Despite this fact, it is not clear how much
impact Ramus actually had on the university scene.
In England, he certainly
enjoyed some popularity at Cambridge, but was less well received at Oxford.102
Such textbooks as that of Sanderson betray little Ramist inﬂuence. In Central
Europe, Ramus was widely used in the pre-university curriculum, often in con-
junction with works by Melanchthon, and the study of Ramus in schools tended
to be followed by the study of Aristotle at universities and other higher-level in-
stitutions.103 Generally speaking, university teachers of logic found Ramus’s book
to display serious deﬁciencies, and in the 1590s a new school of textbook writ-
ers known as the Philippo-Ramists appeared in Germany.104 Their aim was to
combine what was best in Ramus with what was best in the more Aristotelian
works of Philip Melanchthon. As a result, they tended to restore all those parts
of Aristotelian logic that Ramus had deliberately omitted, and the syllogism was
once more presented as central to formal logic.
If France, England and Germany saw the production of slim textbooks exempli-
fying the marriage between humanism and a simpliﬁed Aristotelianism, Spain and
Italy were the scene of a much more substantial textbook production. Two impor-
tant texts, both recommended by the Jesuit Ratio Studiorum, were the Introductio
in dialecticam of Franciscus Toletus and the Institutionum dialecticarum libri octo
of Petrus Fonseca.105 Toletus’s book was ﬁrst published in Rome in 1561, and the
last of its eighteen editions appeared in Milan in 1621. Fonseca’s work was ﬁrst
published in Lisbon in 1564, and the last of its ﬁfty three editions appeared in Lyon
in 1625. The works were fairly similar in content, but I shall look more closely
at Fonseca’s work, which is available in a modern edition.106 The ﬁrst thing to
notice is that the Organon is very much the focus of attention. The material of the
Categories, Perihermenias, Prior and Posterior Analytics, Topics and Sophistici
100Ramus, Scholarum Dialecticarum, p. 147.
101W. J. Ong, Ramus and Talon Inventory (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1958). For a full discussion of Ramus, see Ong, Ramus, Method and the Decay of Dialogue; N.
Bruy`ere, M´ethode et dialectique dans l’oeuvre de La Ram´ee (Paris: Vrin, 1984); Mack, Renais-
sance Argument, pp. 334–355.
102See Ashworth, introduction to Sanderson, Logicae Artis Compendium, pp. XXVIII–XXIX.
103Joseph S. Freedman, “The Diﬀusion of the Writings of Petrus Ramus in Central Europe, c.
1570–c. 1630”, Renaissance Quarterly 46 (1993), 98–152.
104Ashworth, Language and Logic, pp. 16–17.
105The Ratio Studiorum of 1586 recommended Fonseca: see Kehrbach, p.
131.
The Ratio
Studiorum of 1599 added the name of Toletus: p. 332.
106Pedro da Fonseca, Institui¸c˜oes Dial´ecticas. Institutionum Dialecticarum libri octo, ed. J.
Ferreira Gomes (Universidade de Coimbra, 1964) 2 volumes.

630
E. Jennifer Ashworth
Elenchi is taken up in turn. However, medieval material is used to supplement
Aristotle in various places. Exponibles are discussed, albeit in a simpliﬁed form;
some non-syllogistic consequences dealing with truth and modality are listed, and
the material about supposition and related doctrines is presented as an aid to
understanding fallacies. Fonseca warned that these doctrines were “unreﬁned, un-
couth, and remote from use”, and that to dwell on them at length was dangerous to
good language. However, he remarked, some loss would come from ignoring these
doctrines altogether.107 He had nothing to say about other speciﬁcally medieval
doctrines covered in the treatises on insolubles and obligations.
The second thing to be noted is the general style and manner of Fonseca’s ap-
proach. He was frequently concerned to explain the precise intention of Aristotle’s
remarks, and in his attempt to understand Aristotle, he drew on his knowledge of
the Greek language and of Greek authors. He cited not only those who commented
on Aristotle, such as Alexander of Aphrodisias and Ammonius, but also Plato and
Pindar. Among Latin authors, he drew heavily on Cicero, and there are references
to Horace and Virgil. Later authors used include the great Arab commentator
Averroes. In all of this Fonseca reﬂected the renewed Aristotelianism of the six-
teenth century. There is a strong philological emphasis, based on the new study of
the Greek language, and Aristotle’s text is to be read through the eyes not of late
medieval logicians but of the Greek and Arab writers. Wider Classical learning
is used to illuminate points and to provide apt examples. Insofar as Fonseca did
make use of authors from the medieval Latin West, he tended to focus on Thomas
Aquinas. Ockham is cited, but the next logician in chronological order to be cited
is Rudolph Agricola. The authors popular ﬁfty years earlier have dropped out of
sight. In many ways, Fonseca’s logic text is far closer to the Coimbra commentary
of 1606 than it is to the work of his Spanish predecessors such as Fernando de En-
zinas or Domingo de Soto. Nor is this surprising, given that Fonseca taught at the
University of Coimbra, and was one of the moving spirits behind the production
of the Conimbricenses.
Part Two: Claims about Humanist Logic
One of the chief claims about humanist logic is that it rhetoricized logic.
For
instance, Kristeller spoke of “the attempt to reform logic by subordinating it
to rhetoric”;108 Rita Guerlac remarked “Agricola succeeded in rhetoricizing di-
alectic”;109 and John Monfasani wrote: “in making inventio not merely a part
of logic, but as Agricola insisted, the greater part, the Northern humanists trans-
formed logic, in all but name, into an expanded version of rhetorical invention”.110
One can see this supposed rhetoricization as the simple result of humanist literary
107Fonseca, Institui¸c˜oes Dial´ecticas, pp. 676–678. P. 676: “[...] inculta, horrida, et ab usu
remota [...]”
108P.O. Kristeller, “Rhetoric in Medieval and Renaissance Culture” in Renaissance Eloquence,
p. 18.
109Guerlac, Juan Luis Vives, p. 32.
110Monfasani, George of Trebizond, p. 303.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
631
studies, but broader and more substantial claims have been made, particularly by
Lisa Jardine. She holds that it is a mistake to think that the driving force behind
humanist logic was simply disgust at the non-Ciceronian Latin of the Scholastics,
and that the philosophical ideals lying behind the work of Lorenzo Valla (d. 1457)
and his follower Rudolph Agricola were more important. According to Jardine,
both Valla and, to a lesser extent, Agricola were concerned to oﬀer a logic which
was linked with Cicero’s Academic skepticism rather than with Aristotelian cer-
tainties.111 They wished to oﬀer argumentative strategies for rendering plausible
each of the two sides of an undecidable question, or for supporting one of them as,
perhaps only marginally, more plausible than the other. They were thus drawn to
consider a variety of non-deductive strategies in lieu of the formal techniques which
had dominated a large part of medieval logic, especially in the treatises on conse-
quences, and in lieu of Aristotle’s own syllogistic. These new strategies included
sorites, or the classical Heap argument, and classical dilemma, but they centred
on the Topics, which, especially as presented by Cicero and Quintilian, seemed to
oﬀer a method of classifying non-deductive strategies by their key terms rather
than by their form. At the same time, much of Agricola’s concern was with the
art of discourse as such, that is, with the problem of presenting and organizing
complete arguments and narrations, whether written or spoken. It was as a result
of this interest both in persuasive techniques and in discourse as such that logic
came to embrace much of what had been traditionally regarded as rhetoric, and
rhetoric came to be seen as concerned, not with the invention of Topics, but with
the ornamentation of discourse.
1
LORENZO VALLA
In order to evaluate these claims, we ﬁrst need to consider Lorenzo Valla (1405–
1457), and his Dialecticae disputationes, more accurately called Repastinatio Di-
alecticae et Philosophiae.112 In this work, Valla certainly attacked a number of
Aristotelian positions. For instance, he reduced the number of categories from ten
to three, he criticized the square of opposition, and he rejected the third ﬁgure of
the syllogism as insane. However, he retained a generally Aristotelian framework
for logic, and his discussion of Topics was merely a reproduction of Quintilian’s
material. He classiﬁed dialectic as a part of rhetoric, but found few supporters
for this move other than Marius Nizolius (1488–1567).113 He did indeed discuss
111Lisa Jardine, “Lorenzo Valla and the Intellectual Origins of Humanist Dialectic,” Journal
of the History of Philosophy 15 (1977), 143–164; “Humanism and the teaching of logic” in
The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, pp. 797–807; “Lorenzo Valla: Academic
Skepticism and the New Humanist Dialectic” in The Skeptical Tradition, ed. Myles Burnyeat
(Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 1983), pp. 253–286; “Humanistic
Logic”, pp. 173–198
112For all three redactions, see Lorenzo Valla, Repastinatio Dialecticae et Philosophiae, ed. G.
Zippel (Padua: Antenore, 1982). For a full discussion of Valla, see Mack, Renaissance Argument,
pp. 22–116.
113Mack, Renaissance Argument, pp. 115–116.

632
E. Jennifer Ashworth
sorites and dilemma, but he disapproved of them both; and the claim that he in-
troduced a new interest in sorites and other classical forms of argument is hardly
borne out by the evidence. It is true that some later authors mention sorites, but
in the hands of Philip Melanchthon and Petrus Fonseca it is identiﬁed with the
medieval argument ‘From First to Last’, a linked chain of syllogisms (or condi-
tionals).114 In his latest logical work, Erotemata dialectices, Melanchthon explains
that the chain is based on movement from lowest species to highest genus, or
from causes to proximate eﬀects.115 Dilemma does not fare better. Both Jodocus
Clichtoveus and Domingo de Soto give lengthy accounts of the lawsuit between
Protagoras and Euathlus, as reported by Aulus Gellius, but they assimilate the
story to medieval discussions of promises that cannot be kept.116 Agostino Nifo
in his Dialectica ludicra has a section entitled De dilematibus et antistrephontibus:
idest de insolubilibus, but places the classical material in the context of medieval
discussions of semantic and pragmatic paradoxes.117 Two further points casting
doubt on Jardine’s account of Valla’s importance are ﬁrst, that the evidence is
against his having been a sceptic;118 and second, that the work had only a limited
manuscript circulation, and few printed editions.119
While Valla seems not to have played the role assigned to him by Jardine, we
still need to confront the wider questions of how far logic was rhetoricized, and
how far humanist dialectic, or any other type of sixteenth-century logic, was con-
cerned with probabilistic and informal argumentation. In order to do this, we
need to make a series of distinctions about the key terms, ‘dialectic’, ‘probabil-
ity’, ‘rhetoric’, and ‘informal’, as a lack of such distinctions in the literature has
obscured the points at issue.
2
DIALECTIC AND PROBABILITY
In order to understand the issues here we need to consider the background. The
Aristotelian syllogism was taken to be the most important form of argumentation,
114Melanchthon, Compendiaria dialectices, cols. 747–748, has a discussion of sorites after the
other four forms of argumentation. He also mentions (col. 748) other arguments such as the
Crocodile, Asystaton, and Antistrephon, but only to say that they can be omitted. For Fonseca
on sorites, see Institui¸c˜oes Dial´ecticas, p. 348.
115Melanchthon, Erotemata dialectices, cols. 624–626.
116Jodocus Clichtoveus, Jacobi Fabri Stapulensis artiﬁciales introductiones per Judocum Clich-
toveum in unum diligenter collecte (Parisiis, 1520), f. 139 v–140r; Domingo de Soto, Summulae,
f. lv rb–va. For the problem of promises that cannot be kept, see E. J. Ashworth, “Will Socrates
Cross the Bridge? A Problem in Medieval Logic”, Franciscan Studies 36 (1976), 75–84, reprinted
as Study XII in Ashworth, Studies in Post-Medieval Semantics. For a full discussion of the lim-
ited treatment of dilemma and other classical arguments in sixteenth century logic, see Gabriel
Nuchelmans, Dilemmatic Arguments: Towards a history of their logic and rhetoric (Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1991).
117Augustinus Niphus, Dialectica ludicra (Venetiis, 1521), f. 156 ra– f. 163 ra.
118See John Monfasani, “Lorenzo Valla and Rudolph Agricola,” Journal of the History of Phi-
losophy 28 (1990), 181–200.
119Mack, Renaissance Argument, p. 115.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
633
and Aristotle twice deﬁnes the syllogism as a discourse (oratio) in which, certain
things being stated, something other than what is stated follows of necessity from
their being so. (Prior Analytics 24b18–20; Topics 100a 25–26). It is quite possi-
ble that the Greek word was intended to be taken in two senses, with the Prior
Analytics dealing with syllogisms in the technical sense of arguments with two
premisses and three terms arranged so arranged that each term appears twice, the
middle term in both premisses, and each of the other terms in just one premiss
and the conclusion, and the Topics dealing with deduction in general. However,
the standard medieval and post-medieval assumption was that the technical sense
of syllogism is intended in each case.120 Accordingly, the Topics (100a25–101b24)
was taken to list four species of syllogism, demonstrative, dialectical, deceitful
(the syllogismus falsigraphus or pseudographus, which argues from falsehoods be-
longing to the special sciences), and sophistical or contentious (litigiosus). We
will not be concerned with the last two, which are both fallacious. In the Topics
(105a10–19) Aristotle also tells us that there are two species of dialectical reason-
ing (dialecticarum ratiocinationum), syllogismus and inductio. From his Rhetoric
we learn that rhetoric accompanies dialectic (Rhetorica assecutiva dialecticae est),
that it is concerned with persuasion, and that it uses two other types of reasoning,
enthymeme, which is the rhetorical syllogism, and example, which is the rhetor-
ical induction (Rhet.
1355a4–8, 1356a36–b12).
These four types of reasoning
(argumentatio) were neatly summarized by Peter of Spain,121 and they formed a
standard list to be included in logic texts, despite the association of enthymeme
and example with rhetoric.
Other standard material was drawn from Boethius’s two works on the Topics,
In Ciceronis Topica and De topicis diﬀerentiis.
He discussed the uses of the
words ‘logica’ and ‘dialectica’; following Cicero, he described logic as a system of
discourse (ratio disserendi);122 and he told his readers that an argument “is a
reason that produces belief regarding something that was in doubt”.123 Moreover,
he handed on the important distinction between invention (the ﬁnding of material
for arguments) and judgement.124
If we now ask what counts as dialectic and whether it diﬀers from logic, two
main answers are possible. One can regard ‘logic’ and ‘dialectic’ as merely two
names for one discipline, or one can regard dialectic as a sub-part of logic which
studies dialectical syllogisms as presented in Aristotle’s Topics. Both of these an-
swers were generally recognized as acceptable in the medieval and post-medieval
period, and one did not exclude the other. A third answer, based on the discus-
sion of dialectical invention by Rudolph Agricola, is that dialectic focusses not on
the dialectical syllogism but on Topical discourse and debate, and hence, accord-
120Note that the ‘technical’ sense was normally extended to embrace hypothetical and expository
syllogisms.
121Peter of Spain, Tractatus, p. 56.
122Stump, Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis, p. 29.
123Stump, Boethius’s In Ciceronis Topica, p. 29; Stump, Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis, p.
39 (“Argumentum est ratio rei dubiae faciens ﬁdem”.)
124Stump, Boethius’s In Ciceronis Topica, p. 25.

634
E. Jennifer Ashworth
ing to Jardine and others, is a part of logic primarily concerned with persuasive
techniques and informal argumentation, that is, with non-deductive strategies. In
fact, the link between dialectic and disputation goes back to Aristotle, and was
generally accepted. Domingo de Soto, for instance, discusses the Greek derivation
of the word ‘dialectica’, saying that it comes from ‘disputo vel dissero’ and so
dialectic is a ‘disputatoria scientia’.125 He applies this assessment to logic as a
whole, rather than to a single part. The important question is whether it follows
from dialectic’s link with the Topics and with disputation that it is concerned with
informal argumentation, and if it is, how far this concern extends.
Before this question can be answered, we need to consider the notion of prob-
ability.
The term ‘probabilis’ itself had a fairly general meaning.
A probable
proposition was likely, plausible, susceptible of proof though not usually of demon-
stration in the strict Aristotelian sense. It was recognized that there are degrees
of belief, and that a probable belief or opinio is one that falls somewhat short of
certainty, while being more robust than mere suspicio, the special province of the
rhetorician. It was also recognized that even those propositions which ought to
be certain might be matters of opinion for some. As Paul of Pergula remarked,
not everyone believes that God exists, even though “God exists” was a standard
example of a necessarily-true proposition.126 No logician that I know of displayed
any awareness of statistical or relative frequency interpretations, and the notion
of subjective probabilities, according to which premisses support a certain degree
of probability attached to the conclusion, comes up only occasionally, particularly
in the work of Philip Melanchthon, as we shall see in section 4 below. More usu-
ally, however, if an argument was labelled as ‘probable’ this had to do, not with
the replacement of a strict logical relation between premisses and conclusion by
some other relation, but with the epistemological status of the premisses. If at
least one premiss was about contingent matters, or was wrongly taken to be about
contingent matters, the argument, albeit deductively valid, fell into the category
of probable or dialectical syllogism. This reading is, of course, based on the belief
that Aristotle’s reference to ‘syllogism’ in the Topics is to be taken as a reference
to a particular kind of formally-valid deductive structure. Thus, demonstrative
reasoning involves formal syllogisms with certainly-true premisses, and dialectical
reasoning involves the same formal syllogisms with probably-true premisses. So-
phistical reasoning may or may not involve formal syllogisms, since diﬀerent kinds
of logical error are possible. On this interpretation, dialectic is clearly a sub-part
of logic, or, for those who preferred the term ‘dialectic’ to the term ‘logic’, dialectic
in the narrow sense is a part of dialectic in the broad sense.
The notion that there are three diﬀerent kinds of syllogism, diﬀerentiated not
with respect to their form but with respect to the epistemic status of their pre-
misses, ﬁtted in with the standard ordering of the Organon. Terms were discussed
125Soto, Summulae, f. 3 va. Cf. Franciscus Toletus, Introductio in dialecticam Aristotelis in
Opera omnia philosophica I–III (Cologne 1615–1616; repr. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1985), p.
4a.
126Paul of Pergula, Logica, p. 88.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
635
in the Categories, propositions were discussed in the Perihermenias, syllogisms in
general were discussed in the Prior Analytics, and then the three kinds of syllogism
were discussed in the Posterior Analytics, Topics, and Sophistici Elenchi, in that
order. This arrangement, however, gave rise to some criticism, particularly from
Petrus Ramus. He attacked on two fronts. His ﬁrst target was the division given
by Averroes, and championed by Zabarella.127 Averroes had divided Aristotle’s
logic into general or universal logic, which was contained in the ﬁrst three books
of the Organon, and three special logics, apodictic, probable, and sophistic, which
were contained in the last three books. Ramus argued in his Scholae Dialecticae
that the list of three special logics was unacceptable, partly because the study of
sophistical reasoning was no more a part of logic than the study of barbarisms and
solecisms was a part of grammar, and partly because the Posterior Analytics and
the Topics were themselves both general in their application.128 They applied to
any epistemological material, and there was only one general doctrine applying to
terms, sentences, syllogisms, and method. Of course there is a diﬀerence between
apodictic, dialectic and sophistic propositions, but aﬃrmation and negation are
just as much features of propositions as are truth and falsehood, necessary and
probable truth, and the former are not elevated into divisions of logic as such. Nor
do we say that the Perihermenias is divided into necessary, true-seeming and cap-
tious, even though propositions are.129 Thus there is one logic or dialectic, and it
is the art of discourse.130 Ramus is assuming that indeed formal deductive struc-
tures are what counts in argumentation, and that the mistake of his opponents lay
only in their supposition that the application of these structures to diﬀerent kinds
of material would produce diﬀerent kinds of logic.
Ramus’s second target had to do with the application of the division between
invention and judgement or dispositio, as he frequently called it, to the books of
the Organon. This was not a new issue. For instance, in the thirteenth-century
Topics commentary ascribed to Robert Kilwardby the author writes that insofar
as inventio comes before the judgement of what is found, the Topics and the So-
phistici elenchi should come before the Prior and Posterior Analytics, but insofar
as the syllogism as such comes before the demonstrative syllogism, and the demon-
strative syllogism before the dialectical, and the dialectical before the sophistical
syllogism, the Prior Analytics should be followed by the Posterior Analytics, Top-
ics and Sophistici elenchi in that order. He felt that Aristotle approved the second
ordering.131For both Rudolph Agricola and Petrus Ramus it seemed obvious that
invention should precede judgement, and this arrangement became a hallmark of
Ramist textbooks, though not of those textbooks that retained traditional Aris-
totelian material. The issue was discussed by other authors, including the Coimbra
127Zabarella, De natura logicae, col. 51 ﬀ.
128Ramus, Scholarum Dialecticarum, pp. 38–42, p. 61.
129Ramus, Scholarum Dialecticarum, pp. 60–61.
130Ramus, Scholarum Dialecticarum, pp. 36–37.
131Olga Weijers, “Le commentaire sur les “Topiques” d’Aristote attribu´e `a Robert Kilwardby
(ms. Florence, B.N.C., Conv. Soppr. B.4.1618)”, Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca
Medievale 6 (1995), p. 126.

636
E. Jennifer Ashworth
commentary in their introduction to the Prior Analytics.132 They write that some
more recent thinkers have argued, on the basis of the Stoic division into invention
and judgement (“which is not disproved by the Peripatetics”), that the Prior An-
alytics does not precede the Topics, on the grounds that dialectic is divided into
invention and iudicium seu dispositio, and invention is naturally prior to disposi-
tio. This view is wrong. First, the two parts spoken of do not deal with the same
material. The Topics concerns only the invention of probable arguments, but the
Prior Analytics deals with the disposition of all arguments, with respect to their
form. Moreover, given that dialectic is most properly divided into the three modi
sciendi, deﬁning, dividing and arguing, it is clear that invention and judgement
have a role in all three parts. One should start by investigating and ﬁnding the
parts of a deﬁnition, and then aptly disposing them. Certainly we ﬁnd neither
invention alone nor disposition alone in the Topics and the Prior Analytics.133
The same is true of the Posterior Analytics. And even if in an art invention must
occur ﬁrst, there is no reason why it should be taught ﬁrst. It seems that one
cannot understand invention perfectly unless one has a prior notion of disposition.
The Coimbra commentary therefore opted for the standard ordering in which the
Perihermenias precedes the Prior Analytics, which is immediately followed by the
Posterior Analytics and then by the Topics.
The discussion of invention, and the association of judgement and dispositio
brings us to the question of rhetoric’s relation to dialectic.
3
RHETORIC AND ITS RELATION TO DIALECTIC
One can think of rhetoric merely as a means of presenting arguments in a clear and
engaging manner, and it is quite clear that, as a result of humanist literary studies
and the changes in the educational system, logical writings in general did undergo
change. The more tortured formulations of late medieval logic were abandoned,
classical examples were used, and classical vocabulary was often substituted for
medieval technical terms. However, it is rhetoric as an academic discipline that
is more important for our purposes. Again, it is quite clear that it had a more
important role in the curriculum than it had enjoyed during the medieval period,134
but this does not settle the question of its relation to logic. One issue concerns its
parts; the other main issue concerns its possible subsumption under logic.
In 1518, a student at Bologna debated the question “Is rhetoric a part of dialectic
132Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis, II, cols. 235–236
133Cf. Augustinus Niphus, Commentaria in octo libros Topicorum Aristotelis (Parisiis, 1542), f.
2 ra–vb. He argued that while there were reasons for attributing both invention and judgement to
the individual books of the Organon, there were better reasons for following the sharp distinction
found in Cicero and Boethius.
134For instance, the University of Glasgow’s new constitution of 1577 greatly reduced logic
teaching while increasing the time given to rhetoric: see J. M. Fletcher, “The Faculty of Arts”
in The History of the University of Oxford III. The Collegiate University, ed. James McConica
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), p. 158.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
637
or politics?”135 This was not a new question. Aristotle’s Rhetoric as well as his
Poetics had come to be regarded by the late Greek commentators of the School of
Alexandria as part of the Organon, that is, as part of logic in a wide sense, and the
Arabs followed this established tradition.136 Albert the Great, Aquinas, and Simon
of Faversham, among others, followed the Arabs, at least in principle. If we look
at Aquinas’s analysis of the parts of logic in his Posterior Analytics commentary,
we ﬁnd that demonstrative syllogisms produce certainty, while dialectic deals with
arguments on the basis of probable premisses that produce opinion or belief, and
rhetoric deals with arguments whose premisses produce suspicio, an inclination to
accept one position rather than its opposite.137 In the sixteenth century, the most
conspicuous defender of this tradition was Zabarella, who devoted a large part
of his work De natura logicae to arguing that rhetoric and poetics were genuine
parts of logic.138 None of these claims seem to have had any practical impact. One
reason for this, at least during the medieval period, was the relative inaccessability
of Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Poetics, but during the sixteenth century, when these
works were readily available,139 the consensus seemed to be that while rhetoric
should be taught in tandem with dialectic, it should nonetheless be regarded as a
separate discipline.
The most important issue is how the ﬁve parts of rhetoric, namely inventio,
dispositio, or the structuring and arrangement of material, elocutio, memoria and
pronuntiatio, were to be handled. For Agricola and Ramus, dispositio was inter-
changeable with judgement, and both inventio and dispositio were to be handled
by the logician. This arrangement left matters of eloquence to the rhetorician,
and anything to do with the Topics, with argumentation, or with the ordering of
discourse to the logician. With respect to inventio, Agricola insisted that the Top-
ics were to be conﬁned to dialectic, and that rhetorical Topics, which had covered
material of a more particular kind, were to be reduced to dialectical Topics.140 In
135Herbert S. Matsen, “Student “Arts” Disputations at Bologna around 1500”, Renaissance
Quarterly 47 (1994), p. 545. Rhetoric came after logic in order of importance as a disputation
topic, op.cit., p. 543 and p. 545.
136Black, Deborah L. Logic and Aristotle’s ‘Rhetoric’ and ‘Poetics’ in Medieval Arabic Philoso-
phy. Leiden etc.: E.J. Brill, 1990, pp. 17–18; Marmo, Costantino. ‘Suspicio: A Key Word to the
Signiﬁcance of Aristotle’s Rhetoric in Thirteenth Century Scholasticism.’ Cahiers de l’institut
du moyen-ˆage grec et latin 60 (1990), 145–198.
137Thomas Aquinas, In Aristotelis libros Peri Hermenias et Posteriorum Analyticorum Expo-
sitio (Turin: Marietti, 1964), Prooemium §6, pp. 147–148. He writes, p. 148: “Per huiusmodi
enim processum, quandoque quidem, etsi non ﬁat scientia, ﬁt tamen ﬁdes vel opinio propter
probabilitatem propositionum, ex quibus proceditur: quia ratio totaliter declinat in unam partem
contradictionis, licet cum formidine alterius, et ad hoc ordinatur Topica sive Dialectica. Nam syl-
logismus dialecticus ex probabilibus est, de quo agit Aristoteles in libro Topicorum. ¶Quandoque
vero, non ﬁt complete ﬁdes vel opinio, sed suspicio quaedam, quia non totaliter declinatur ad
unam partem contradictionis, licet magis inclinetur in hanc quam in illam. Et ad hoc ordinatur
Rhetorica.”
138Zabarella, De natura logicae in Opera omnia, cols. 71–100.
139See Brian Vickers, “Rhetoric and Poetics” in The Cambridge History of Renaissance Phi-
losophy, p. 718 for details of the reception of the Poetics in the sixteenth century, and p. 721
for the reception of the Rhetoric.
140Agricola, De Inventione Dialectica, pp. 313–319. Boethius had discussed the relationship

638
E. Jennifer Ashworth
the hands of Philip Melanchthon there was no real reduction, but instead a listing
of the so-called personal Topics, such as nation, age, education and sex, within
dialectic itself.141 With respect to dispositio, Agricola discussed the problem of
presenting and organizing complete arguments and narrations, whether written or
spoken, at great length. In Melanchthon we ﬁnd the same interest in dispositio. A
few remarks on order in the Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio grew into a full section
on logical method as a way of ordering discourse in the Erotemata Dialectices.142
In turn we ﬁnd method discussed in the second part of Ramus’s Dialectica, but
as we can see from his references to Agricola and Melanchthon, it is a mistake to
think that this was Ramus’s innovation. Sections on method became a standard
component of logic textbooks, and particularly after the publication of Zabarella’s
Opera logica, it became customary to add remarks on scientiﬁc method as well, in
a mixture of subject-matters that was not always happy.143
To conclude, if we mean by the rhetoricizing of logic that material from the
rhetoricians came to be included in logic texts, this is certainly the case. How far
the material absorbed included informal persuasive devices is another matter.
4
INFORMAL ARGUMENTATION
Whether or not sixteenth-century logic leaves room for the notion of informal
arguments depends on how ‘formal’ and ‘informal’ are to be deﬁned. The ﬁrst
thing we need to understand is that logic was never formal in the modern sense.
There was no notion of an uninterpreted system with its own set of properties,
nor was there any notion of a formal interpretation such that, for instance, any
proposition just says T or F. While letters such as ‘a’ and ‘b’ could be used to
stand for propositions, and rules could be described in neutral language, the basic
assumption was always that logic served the purpose of ﬁnding and expressing
truths. That being said, one might make a distinction between formal and informal
arguments in terms of deductive validity, so that an informal argument is one
that is acceptable but not deductively valid. This still leaves various possibilities
open, with respect to both categories. In the case of valid deductive arguments,
we need a further distinction between formal and non-formal arguments. Some
arguments are such that their conclusion is true whenever the premisses are true,
no matter what non-logical terms are substituted.
Other arguments are such
that their conclusion is true whenever the premisses are true just because of the
between rhetorical and dialectical Topics: see Stump, Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis, pp.
79–95.
141Melanchthon, Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio, cols. 751–755; Erotemata Dialectices, cols.
659–662.
142Melanchthon, Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio, cols. 724–726; Erotemata Dialectices, cols.
573–578.
143For more on discussions of method, see Cesare Vasoli, “The Renaissance concept of philos-
ophy” in The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy, pp. 71–72; Jardine, “Humanistic
logic”, pp.
191–192; Ashworth, introduction to Sanderson, Logicae Artis Compendium, pp.
XLVIII–L.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
639
semantic link between particular non-logical terms. I dub these ‘non-formal’. Such
arguments were discussed under the heading of ‘materially valid consequences’, by
those logicians who continued to include sections on consequences in their texts,
and who used the substitution criterion of formality.144 In the case of arguments
that are not deductively valid but are nonetheless acceptable, we might be talking
about incomplete arguments, notably enthymemes, that need to be re-expressed as
formal deductive arguments, or we might be talking about those arguments whose
premisses merely support the conclusion, or in some way make it reasonable to
accept the conclusion. Only the latter are properly dubbed ‘informal’.
At this point, we face another problem. As discussed in Part One, Agricola
and Ramus had excluded maxims and rules from the parts of dialectic devoted to
invention. This reduced or even eliminated the room for informal argumentation
connected with the Topics. Moreover, Agricola had accepted the four standard
types of argumentation as the subject of dialectical judgement, while Ramus in-
sisted that the syllogism, whether Aristotelian as in the Scholae, or reformed, as
in his Dialectica, was the general object of discussion under judgement. We also
have to take into account the rejection of speciﬁcally medieval material by many
sixteenth-century logicians. This meant that in a simpliﬁed logic manual there
was no discussion of types of conditional statement or of types of consequence,
any more than there was serious discussion of the standard types of argumenta-
tion. Accordingly, it is only in those texts that are more heavily scholastic and
Aristotelian in their approach that we ﬁnd anything more than a hand-waving hint
that there are indeed informal argumentative devices. I will consider just a few
examples.
I will start with conditionals and consequences. In his commentary on Peter
of Spain, Eck divides consequences into those that are merely inferential (illativa
tantum), those that are both inferential and convincing (illativa et probativa),
and those that are merely convincing (probativa tantum). Merely convincing con-
sequences are those in which the antecedent does not entail the conclusion, but
support it with reference to the Topics. They are persuasive, and are used in ethics
and rhetoric.145 That is, they do not really belong to logic.
Petrus Fonseca is less dismissive. Contrary to the view held by Peter of Spain
that all conditionals are either necessary or impossible, Fonseca, like Nifo before
him,146 allows for conditional statements that are contingent;147 and he also argues
that that while all formal consequences are necessary, material consequences can
144For the issues here, see the previous chapter on medieval theories of consequence. For those
who used the containment criterion of formality, the labels attached to what I call non-formal
consequences will diﬀer.
145Johannes Eckius, In summulas Petri Hispani (Augsburg, 1516), f. c vb. “Probativa tantum
est in qua antecedens non de necessitate infert consequens, tamen probat probabiliter et topice.”
He subsequently adds “consequentiam probativam non esse simpliciter bonam consequentiam
sed esse persuasivam, et in moralibus ac rhetoricis multum frequentatam, ut Hupertus fuit solus
cum Catherina in loco suspecto, ergo stupravit eam”.
146Niphus, Dialectica ludicra, f. 78 vb, f. 79 rb.
147Fonseca, Institui¸c˜oes Dial´ecticas, p. 198.

640
E. Jennifer Ashworth
be either necessary or probable.148
“A man is an animal, therefore every man
is an animal” is necessary, given that any man is necessarily an animal, but “A
mother loves her child, therefore this mother loves her child” is probable in the
sense that there is no necessary link between antecedent and conclusion.
The
conclusion follows often, but not always. We have here a recognition of genuine
informal arguments, but it is not enlarged on. It is presumably based either on
Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis where Boethius speaks of arguments which are
“readily believable and not necessary”, such as “If she is a mother, she loves [her]
child”,149 or on Cicero, De inventione I.29.46.
Fonseca also has a few relevant remarks in his discussion of the Topic from
associated accidents.150 These are circumstances which are often not necessarily
connected, and which give rise to suspicio, that epistemic state associated with
rhetoric. However, Fonseca explicitly allows that the dialectician may not only
teach the invention of such arguments, but use them insofar as they give rise to
probabilities. Toletus too had some relevant material in his discussion of the Topic
from associated accidents.151 He noted that there are two modes of argument,
necessary and non-necessary.
“It is bearing fruit, therefore it has ﬂowered” is
necessary, but “People are drinking, therefore there will be ﬁghts” (Bacchanalia
sunt, ergo rixae erunt) is non-necessary.
The latter mode is related to other
arguments based on natural signs, physiognomy, prodigies, portents, and those
once based on auguries but now empty and fallacious. He suggests that they are
based on suspicio, and they are not, or not all, necessary or probable. In eﬀect,
this once more relegates such arguments to rhetoric rather than logic.
Other discussions found in the logical literature relate to the classiﬁcation of en-
thymemes. Aristotle had written (Prior Analytics 70a10–11) that “An enthymeme
is a deduction starting from probabilities or signs [. . .]”, where these are two types
of proposition, and the same distinction between probabilities or non-necessary
signs and necessary signs was found in Quintilian.152 Commenting on Aristotle’s
classiﬁcation, Clichtoveus writes that the ﬁrst type of proposition is contingent,
for instance, “A mother loves her children”, and that it gives rise to a dialectical
enthymeme, such as: “A mother loves her children, therefore a mother does not
hate her children.”153 His example, however, seems more like a non-formal valid
deductive argument than it does a genuinely probabilistic informal argument.
In the section on enthymeme found in the Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio,
Melanchthon emphasizes that rhetoricians and dialecticians use the same ratio
argumentandi and the same structure of arguments, though dialectic is more cer-
148Fonseca, Institui¸c˜oes Dial´ecticas, p. 340.
149Stump, Boethius’s De topicis diﬀerentiis, p. 40.
150Fonseca, Institui¸c˜oes Dial´ecticas, p. 542–544. He uses the title ‘De locis praecurrentium,
comitantium et subsequentium’, but tells the reader that this is what Cicero called the Topic
from adjuncts. In turn, that Topic is the one also known as the Topic from associated accidents
(De communiter accidentibus).
151Toletus, Introductio in dialecticam, f. 82 b.
152Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, V.9.1–8.
153Clichtoveus, Introductiones artiﬁciales (Parisiis, 1517), f. 100 r–v.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
641
tain and rhetoric, freer.154 As he had remarked earlier, a good dialectical proof
could not be otherwise, but a rhetorical proof can always be put another way.155
In the section on Topics, however, he takes up the notion of signs, which he divides
into necessary and probable.156 He also uses an explicit probability operator, plac-
ing ‘probabile est igitur’ in front of the conclusion of an argument from probable
signs.He then links the discussion of signs with the personal Topics, saying that
they are both less relevant to the dialectician, who needs necessary and evident
arguments, than to the rhetorician, but their discussion should not be left to the
rhetorician. Arguments using premisses based on signs or the personal Topics need
to be put into the form of syllogisms, enthymemes, induction or example. For in-
stance, he gives the argument: “It is unlikely (verisimile non est) that students of
literature should indulge in pleasures, Coelius is a student of literature, therefore
it is unlikely that he indulges in pleasures.” The example suggests that he wanted
to treat probability operators as part of a deductive system, rather than using
them to construct a non-deductive probabilistic logic.
In the Erotemata Dialectices, enthymeme is linked with signs, and Melanchthon
explains that Aristotle deﬁned enthymeme as an imperfect syllogism whose pre-
misses are probabilities (ex icotibus) and signs.157 However, the point of discussing
true-seeming (verisimilia) signs is only to warn us against misleading and falla-
cious arguments. In the section on Topics, signs are now discussed quite separately
from the personal Topics, and are divided into those that are necessary and those
that are “not necessary but are associated accidents”, called ‘eikota’.158 We have
to be very careful using arguments based on the latter, lest we deceive ourselves,
as often happens “in suspicionibus et aliis malis persuasionibus.” We should re-
mind ourselves here that suspicio and persuasion belong to rhetoric. All in all,
Melanchthon, despite clear humanist interests, does not write like a logician who
is intent on legitimatizing informal, probabilistic argumentation.
Agostino Nifo ﬁrmly relegates one kind of enthymeme to rhetoric. In his Di-
alectica ludicra, he quotes Michael Psellus, an eleventh-century Byzantine writer,
whose work on rhetoric divided consequences into necessary and contingent.159
The latter were those that merely persuade without proving or convincing, such
as rhetorical enthymeme and example. Nifo went on to claim that there are two
sorts of enthymeme, the analytical enthymeme which diﬀers from a syllogism only
in that it uses one premiss, and the rhetorical enthymeme, which diﬀers from a
syllogism both in its use of just one premiss and in the fact that the suppressed
premiss is neither necessary nor probable but merely true-seeming (verisimilis).160
Such a premiss is not dependent on opinion or fact, but on a link with action.161
154Melanchthon, Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio, col. 743.
155Melanchthon, Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio, col. 733.
156Melanchthon, Compendiaria Dialectices Ratio, cols. 750–751.
157Melanchthon, Erotemata Dialectices, cols. 617–619.
158Melanchthon, Erotemata Dialectices, cols. 704–706.
159Niphus, Dialectica ludicra, f. 110 va.
160Niphus, Dialectica ludicra, f. 110 vb–111 ra.
161Niphus, Dialectica ludicra, f. 111 ra: “assumptio verisimilis non accipitur ab opinionem: vel

642
E. Jennifer Ashworth
By this he seems to mean that it would be plausible for people to act in that
way.
His example is “Caesar is seeking munitions, therefore he will become a
tyrant”, where the suppressed premiss is “All those who seek munitions are aim-
ing to become tyrants.” He goes on to argue that such consequences obey the
regulative principle that the negation of the consequent appears to be inconsistent
(verisimiliter repugnat) with the antecedent, but while we can call them rhetorical,
simply speaking they are just invalid and non-necessary.162
I confess that I have not done a complete survey of sixteenth-century logical
literature. However, based on the evidence so far, I think it fair to conclude that
the view that the sixteenth century made an important contribution to informal
logic is at best exaggerated.
CONCLUSION
To conclude this survey of changes in logic during the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth
centuries, I shall attempt to isolate the main diﬀerences between medieval texts and
their post-medieval successors, whether commentaries on Aristotle or introductory
textbooks.
One obvious diﬀerence is the emphasis on following the order and
material of Aristotle’s Organon. Such medieval material as survived was strictly
subordinated to this end, and even though Agricola and Ramus had tried to ignore
Aristotelian syllogistic and the doctrines propaedeutic to it, such as conversion and
opposition, their omissions were rapidly remedied by subsequent textbook writers.
Non-Aristotelian logic was on the whole to be excluded, but all of Aristotle himself
was to be retained. Fifteenth-century logic is still medieval, but sixteenth-century
logic becomes strictly Aristotelian.
However, there is a second diﬀerence to which I have so far paid little atten-
tion, and which concerns the language used in logical writings. Medieval logicians
treated Latin as a technical, almost artiﬁcial language. They were deeply con-
cerned with the eﬀects that diﬀerent word-orders and the addition of extra logical
particles had on both meaning and reference, and they frequently tried to express
semantic diﬀerences through diﬀerent syntactic structures. The clearest indication
of their attitude toward language is the place of sophismata in their logical texts,
for sophismata are precisely those tortured fragments of language which best il-
lustrate or raise logical problems;163 and these logical problems are in turn solved
by means of the tools provided by supposition theory and those doctrines allied
to it. The language of a post-medieval logician, whether humanist or Aristotelian,
commentator or textbook writer, is totally diﬀerent. Sophismata have completely
disappeared, and so too has any attempt to treat Latin as a technical language in
which diﬀerent word-orders represent diﬀerent logical structures. The propositions
used for such operations as syllogistic conversion are presented in an already fully
quia ita est: sed quia verisimile est in actione.”
162Niphus, Dialectica ludicra, f. 111 rb.
163For Juan Luis Vives’s attack on sophismata, which includes a wild variety of examples (many,
I think, invented by Vives) see Guerlac, Juan Luis Vives, passim.

Developments in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries
643
standardized form, and they are always relatively simple propositions devoid of
repeated logical particles or logical particles found in curious places. Insofar as
the language used is complex, it is because the logician is striving to be Classical
in style and vocabulary, not because he sees Latin itself as a logical tool. As Luce
Giard has put it, “[...] logic no longer bends language as an object to its own uses;
rather it itself bends before the uses of language. From being normative and tech-
nical, logic becomes descriptive and in a sense pragmatic.”164 Why these changes
came about is a delicate question, not easily to be resolved. Humanism coexisted
too long with medieval logic for humanism to be the sole explanation, and the
return to Averroes and Aquinas shows that mere revolt against anything medieval
is not a suﬃcient explanation either.165 Changes in grammar teaching;166 changes
in the relation of logic to the study of natural science;167 and changes in other
parts of the university curriculum presumably have a good deal to do with the ap-
pearance of a new style of logic.168 So too do Reformation, Counter-Reformation
and the resulting changes in theological studies. The logic needed for the study of
Peter Lombard’s Sentences was not the logic needed for reading the Bible or the
Church Fathers. But whether or not reasons can be given for them it, is still quite
clear that dramatic changes in logical writing took place in the sixteenth century.
164L. Giard, “Du latin m´edi´eval au pluriel des langues, le tournant de la Renaissance,” Histoire
´Epist´emologie Langage 6.1 (1984), 45. Her words (which I have translated rather freely) are
worth quoting in their full context: “Ce qui est en jeu dans ce refus de la logique scolastique, ce
n’est pas une discussion de son contenu sur le fond, mais la revendication d’un nouveau statut
pour la langue trait´ee. Dans cette perspective, la saisie de la langue ne peut plus ˆetre abandonn´ee
`a des instruments th´eoriques issus ou re¸cus directement de la logique. En cons´equence, le rˆole de
la grammaire change lui aussi: elle devient un savoir qui doit recenser et expliciter les r`egles de
l’usage de la langue pour les oﬀrir, dans un second temps, `a la logique, oblig´ee, pour sa part de
s’en accommoder. La logique ainsi entendue ne plie plus la langue-objet `a son usage, elle se plie
`a ses usages; de normative et technicis´ee, elle devient descriptive et pragmatique en un sens.”
165Schmitt, “Philosophy and Science in Sixteenth-Century Italian Universities,” pp. 316–317.
166See Heath, “Logical Grammar”.
167For sophismata and natural philosophy in the later middle ages, see Edith Sylla, “The Oxford
Calculators” in The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, pp. 540–563.
168See above, note 79. For some remarks on the curriculum at Oxford, see Ashworth, intro-
duction to Sanderson, Logicae Artis Compendium, pp. XXXII–XXXV. For a full discussion of
Oxford, see The History of the University of Oxford. Vol. III. The Collegiate University, ed. J.
McConica (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).

This page intentionally left blank

RELATIONAL LOGIC OF JUAN CARAMUEL
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
1
INTRODUCTION
Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz, born in Madrid in 1606, was educated at Alcal´a
(philosophy) and, as a member of the Cistercian religious order, in Salamanca
(theology). After spending some time at various universities in Spain and Portugal,
he settled in Louvain for several years where he received a doctorate in theology
(1638). There he sided with the Jesuits in a famous controversy over Jansenism.
In 1647 he became an abbot of a Benedictine abbey in Prague, Bohemia, and,
somewhat later, the vicar general of the Archbishop of Prague (not the archbishop,
as is sometimes mistakenly supposed). Being active in the political struggles of
his time and carrying out the project of re-Catholicisation perhaps too vigorously,
he made himself many enemies even within the Catholic camp. Consequently, he
left Central Europe for Italy in 1657. There he was appointed a bishop, ﬁrst of a
rather poor diocese in Southern Italy, in an exile of sorts far away from the major
centers of power, later in Vigevano, near Milan, where he died in 1682.
Being an extremely proliﬁc writer, Caramuel produced well over 50 diﬀerent
works of varying length (and quality), from short opuscula to thousand-page vol-
umes, some of them appearing in several editions. These works range from treatises
in the ﬁelds of mathematics and logic, through works on linguistics, music, art and
architecture, to books on political theory, philosophy and moral theology. He is
chieﬂy known as a defender of probabilism, a doctrine of moral theology which
fell into disfavor in the latter half of the 17th century (cf. [Fleming, 2006]). This
might be one of the reasons why his work in other ﬁelds, namely logic, did not
exert the inﬂuence it deserved in his own time and in later centuries. A second
reason for neglect is undoubtedly the fact that the locus classicus of formal logic in
Caramuel, his Theologia Rationalis (1654), appeared under the title of “Rational
Theology” rather than “Rational Philosophy” (see below), thus perhaps remaining
largely undiscovered by the logician.
There are two areas of particular interest in Caramuel’s logic: his “moral logic”,
i.e. a thorough analysis of arguments in legal discourse, but, above all, his rela-
tional logic, the ﬁrst systematic attempt at non-reductive formal logic of relational
statements and arguments built from them aimed at extending the powers of syl-
logistics.
The following contribution will introduce Caramuel’s logical work in
general (Chapter 2) and its most important aspect, the so-called oblique or dis-
crete logic, in particular (Chapter 3).
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

646
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
2
CARAMUEL’S LOGIC
“Rational Theology”, an anthology of sorts, brings together more or less indepen-
dent logical treatises, some of which were published separately either prior to 1654
or later.1 Designating a set of works in the ﬁelds of formal and applied logic, the
title appears to be misleading for two reasons: ﬁrst, the relation of the content
to Aquinas and his principal Summa is rather unclear and vague at best. Sec-
ond, the title intended by the author, Philosophia Rationalis, was changed at will
by the printer, as Caramuel reports in the printed list of his works composed in
Vigevano.2
Theologia Rationalis consists of two main parts, Praecursor Logicus3 and Met-
alogica.4 Let us introduce brieﬂy the former part ﬁrst. From the standpoint of
formal logic, not all works included in the ﬁrst part of “Rational Theology” are
of equal interest. Grammatica Audax (“The Bold Grammar”)5 deals with gram-
mar and contains only a brief summary of the standard logic of the time.6 On
the other hand, Logica Vocalis, Scripta et Mentalis (“Spoken, Written and Men-
tal Logic”) is a fully-ﬂedged logical work presenting a scholastic Aristotelian-style
“upright” logic (logica recta).7 Logic treats of language and the emphasis is put
on its spoken form. Hence, “Spoken Logic”, presenting the material in the classic
order of term-proposition-argument, is the most extensive. By contrast, “Written
and Mental Logics” add issues peculiar to their speciﬁc modes of language, either
written or mental. The view that logic primarily deals with language rather than
concepts clearly betrays a nominalist approach. The formal organization of the
material into the levels of language — spoken, written and mental — appears to
be novel.
It is only Logica Obliqua, however, (abbreviated as LO below) which marks a
truly original contribution to the ﬁeld in its content. It amounts to a systematic
1Theologia Rationalis was published under two full titles: “Juan Caramuel’s Rational Theol-
ogy or Liberal, Philosophical and Scholastic Meditations, Notes and Observations on the Golden
Summa of the Angelic Doctor in Two Volumes”, and “Rational Theology Explaining The Bold
Grammar, Spoken, Written, Mental, Upright, Oblique and Herculean Dialectics as well as Meta-
logic through Examples Human and Divine and Making Clear the Entire First Part of the Angelic
Doctor[’s Summa] in the Same Course and Work”.
2J. Caramuel, Ioannis Caramuelis [...] opera omnia, quae prodierunt in lucem: interseruntur
etiam libri aliqui, qui ultimam manum subierunt, et lucem opportunam exspectant, vol. XVI,
Miscellanea in-folio, in Biblioteca Universitaria di Pavia.
3Praecursor Logicus proper consists only of Grammatica Audax: Caramuelis Praecursor Log-
icus Complectens Grammaticam Audacem, cuius Partes Sunt Tres... Caramuel speaks, however,
of Herculis Logici Labores Tres as Praecursoris Logici Pars Altera, so one can assume that Gram-
matica Audax and the various “Logicae” form Praecursoris Logici Pars Prima. Hence the entire
four-volume structure could be rightly denominated Praecursor Logicus.
4Re-issued independently in 1682 as Metalogica Scholastica with book X omitted from the
volume.
5Published independently in 1651.
6Grammatica Audax, Pars III Critica, med.
I Logica, pp.
65–74.
One should notice the
quantiﬁcation of the predicate term in the part devoted to contemporary logic, for this is an
important presupposition of Caramuel’s own relational logic.
7Re-issued separately under the title Logica vocalis, scripta, mentalis, obliqua, Vigevano 1680.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
647
presentation of the logic of binary relational statements on the levels of proposition
(Part I) and argument (Part II). We shall take up the matter below in rather more
detail.
Herculis Logici Labores Tres (“Three Labors of Hercules, the Logician”) appears
to be an interesting collection of three studies devoted to three logical problems.8
The ﬁrst Labor called Nil-negans (“Negating nothing”) reduces the system of valid
modes of the syllogism based on the reduction of the negative copula to the nega-
tion of the predicate, i.e. term negation. Caramuel appears to have defended this
so-called inﬁnite logic (negated terms are called “inﬁnite”) as part of his bachelor
exams in philosophy at Alcal´a, early on in his career.9 The second Labor entitled
Non-omnis (“Not every”) deals with the issue that in natural language — Latin
— the compound expression non omnis (not every) is equivalent to “some... not...
and some...,” for instance, “not all students smoke” is equivalent to “some students
do not smoke and some do”, rather than to “some...not...” only, as is the purely
logical meaning.
It seems that the meaning of the natural language quantiﬁer
includes something over and above the logical one. Caramuel explores this idea
and shows the logical properties of statements including Latin non omnis: equiv-
alences and oppositions of these statements as well as valid modes of syllogism.
Finally, the third Labor under the name Contingens (“Contingent”) is a system-
atic treatment of modal logic. The basic idea is that contingens (contingent) is
not equivalent solely to “possible”, but “possible and possible not”.10
The second part of Rational Theology, Metalogica, or — as the full title reads
— Metalogica: Disputationes de Logicae Essentia, Proprietatibus et Operationibus
Continens (“Metalogic Containing Disputations on the Essence of Logic, its Prop-
erties and Operations”), rather than being a work in formal logic, is a set of
treatises, formally books, in the ﬁelds of the philosophy of logic (Book I), philo-
sophical logic (Books VII, IX), metaphysics (Books II, III, IV, V, VI, VIII, X)
and informal logic (Book X). The topics covered range from the nature of logic,
the theory of proposition and semantic paradoxes to issues of a metaphysical kind
(beings of reason, universals, individuation, self-evident principles etc.). The last
book, tenth in number, called De Severa Argumentandi Methodo (“On a Rigorous
Method of Argumentation”), is the most extensive of all.11 The content ranges
from informal logic to logic applied to speciﬁc problems in philosophy and theology.
Why is Metalogic needed, according to Caramuel?
He draws a parallel be-
tween logic and music, both directing sound, but for a diﬀerent purpose.
As
the knowledge of the production of musical sound, music, needs musical theory
(“metamusic”),12 so does the knowledge of the production of language sound —
logic — need metalogic. One might object that the knowledge of the production
of language sound is grammar, rather than logic. According to Caramuel, the lat-
8Sometimes listed as published independently in 1651, which is doubtful, however.
9Belazzi [1982], p. 17.
10This was by no means obvious at the time; cf. [Roncaglia, 2003]. For a detailed treatment
in Caramuel cf. [Dvoˇr´ak, 2005].
11It appeared as an independent work in 1644.
12Caramuel refers to A. Kircher’s Musurgia universalis and calls it “metamusic”.

648
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
ter characteristic applies to both disciplines; they diﬀer as to their goal, however.
While the goal of grammar is to speak correctly, the goal of logic is to discover
truth.13 Hence, grammar also needs its “metagrammar”.14 The goals Caramuel
assigns to metalogic are partly those dealt with today in the philosophy of logic
and partly in philosophical logic and metaphysics. This has to do with an alterna-
tive understanding of metalogic in Caramuel as dealing with topics belonging to
both logic and metaphysics. Hence, metalogic is metaphysical logic, rather than
the philosophy of logic (meta-logic).
What is the nature of logic according to Caramuel? Logic is the ability (faculty)
to coordinate phonemes and characters in language and the corresponding ideas
in the mind. By this, a natural order of things is saved.15 Hence, for Caramuel,
the order of language corresponds to the order of things. One cannot coordinate
words or infer statements from other statements at will. Caramuel is thus a nat-
uralist rather than a constructionist in his philosophical outlook on logic. Also,
logic is both the faculty (facultas) as well as a set of rules (methodus) given to
a speciﬁc purpose. Logic gives the rules of coordination on various levels (appre-
hension, judgment and argumentation), directing linguistic and mental operations
with the goal of manifesting or inferring truths hitherto unknown. As is commonly
the case in scholastic logic, Caramuel does not diﬀerentiate semantics from for-
mal logic proper, for the rules concern both semantic content rules of compossible
combinations of expressions as well as the rules accounting for logical form. The
subject of logic is also dual: linguistic expressions both spoken and written as well
as the mental operations or acts behind them. Even though Caramuel devotes the
greatest amount of space in his logical writings to analysis on the language level
(comparing the relative sizes of his “Spoken” and “Mental Logics”), a psycholo-
gist, mentalist streak in Caramuel’s conception of logic clearly cannot be brushed
aside.16
13And the goal of rhetoric, also having to do with the production of language sound, is to
speak ornately.
14This is what Caramuel sets out to provide in his Grammatica Audax. To speak correctly
means, among other things, to avoid ambiguity. Caramuel, recognizing at least ﬁve senses of
“being” and consequently regarding the verb “to be” (esse) as vague and ambiguous, coins a
host of new expressions (sare, sere, syre, sore, sure. . . ) to capture the various subtle meanings
projected onto the term by the Scholastics, thus making the language of theology and philosophy
more precise, in the hope of resolving scholastic dilemmas in these disciplines. He does this sys-
tematically in his later work Leptotatos latine subtilissimus (Vigevano 1681). For an explanatory
account of this endeavor cf. Soused´ık [1991]. This seems to be a key part of Caramuel’s universal
grammar.
15Metalogica, Lib. I, disp. I, pp. 3-4.
16Metalogica, Lib.
I., disp.
VI., § 2, p.
30: Pono secundo nomine Logicae a nobis hanc
intelligi scientiam, quae si Mentalis sit, tres dirigat mentis operationes: si Vocalis, tres lingua
operationes illis correspondentes: et tandem si Scripta, tres correspondentes linguae et menti.
(,,Secondly, I claim that under the name of “logic” we will understand such a science, which —
if mental — directs three operations of the mind, if spoken, [directs] three language operations
corresponding to the mental ones, if written, [directs three operations] corresponding to [the
operations] of language and the mind”).

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
649
The talk of compossible combinations of expressions reminds one of possible
worlds discourse. Indeed, Caramuel speaks of possible worlds (mundos possibiles)
in Metalogica in relation to divine knowledge.17 As has been stated, book X of
“Metalogic” applies logic to various philosophical and theological problems. His
aim is to clarify the various logical stages in God’s knowledge and thus draw a
parallel between human knowledge related to decision-making and that of God. As
one knows (i) possible characters, say a, e, i, o, and u, (ii) the production of this or
that character conditional on the knowledge of movements of the pen and (iii) the
actual character to be written based on the decision which character to write, so
God knows (i)’ possible worlds a, e, i, o, u, (iii)’ that e is or will be realized while
a, i, o, u will not, based on the previous decree of his will. Strangely enough, the
theological parallel of (ii), i.e. (ii)’, God’s conditional (or middle) knowledge, is not
mentioned (probably because Caramuel regards it explanatorily superﬂuous, as is
clear from his adherence to the Thomist theory of physical pre-determination).
We see Caramuel use possible worlds in theological models and theories.18 Pos-
sible worlds also serve in philosophical explanations, e.g. in explaining the on-
tological status and foundation of possibilia. And once again, a parallel between
grammar and metaphysics is used.
Characters now represent neither possible
worlds, nor possibilia, but perfections: as characters combine into words, so do
perfections into possible creatures. As words combine into statements and those
into books, so creatures combine into possible worlds (from today’s perspective we
could regard statements as corresponding to states of aﬀairs). The books actually
written represent the actual world (hunc mundum), and those capable of being
written all possible worlds (omnes possibiles).19 For Caramuel, the rules governing
the combinations of perfections and creatures (determining what is possible) are
probably ultimately grounded in the divine essence, as his example shows, for he
sees God as identical with all possible (simple) perfections, thinking all possible
strings of perfections (possibilia and possible worlds), while creating some of them
17Metalogica,, Lib. X, Theological Theses (on God’s omniscience and omnipotence), Thesis I,
p. 190ﬀ. For Caramuel on possible worlds cf. Dvoˇr´ak [2000].
18Earlier on in Metalogica (Lib. X, Pars II, Positiones Metaphysicae, Thesis VIII, p. 74) one
can ﬁnd a neat theological speculation employing possibilia; this time to clarify and understand
matters of dogmatic nature. Consider the following application: when God wanted to create
Adam, A, he ﬁrst came to know, by the ﬁrst type of knowledge – the knowledge of simple
apprehension — a great number of people- whom he could have created had he so wished: B, C,
D. . . etc. (note that here individual characters stand for possibilia, i.e. individual occupants of
possible worlds). By the same act of knowing by which God knows A, he also knows the whole
of his posterity. Since eﬀects become individual through their causes, no descendant of Adam
could have been created by any descendant of B and vice versa. By choosing A God relegated
B, C, D. . . etc.
to the ranks of the purely possible.
Yet Adam sinned, and the Original Sin
aﬄicts all of his descendants, future ones as well as merely possible ones. This does not aﬄict
the descendants of B, so God chose the Virgin Mary, the mother of God, who was exempt from
the Original Sin, from among B’s posterity, implanting her miraculously among the descendants
of Adam. By doing so he suspended the validity of the principle of the essentiality of origin
(eﬀects being individuated by their causes), to put it in Kripkean terms. Thus in Caramuel, the
principle is only physically necessary, not logically necessary.
19Grammatica Audax, Pars III, med. IV, art. VI, p. 119.

650
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
ad extra as someone pronouncing various combinations of characters (speaking)
out loud. This is consistent with Caramuel’s naturalism in logic mentioned above.
Yet Caramuel also employs the idea of possible worlds and possibilia in order
to capture the meaning of modal expressions in “Three Labors of Hercules, the
Logician”. The term used here is somewhat diﬀerent, i.e. “another world” (mundus
alter).20 While exploring the various meanings of “possible” he is making use of
the then familiar distinctions within possibilia, yet he uses them in order to clarify
both the ontological statuses of both this, i.e. the actual, world, and the other
world. Caramuel says that when “possible” is used in the pure sense, then this
world is not possible, while the other is. The other world does not exist in fact (de
facto non est), yet could be created (sed condi potest). When “possible” is used
in the abstract sense, then both worlds — the actual as well as the other — are
possible in this sense.21
It comes as no surprise to learn that Caramuel, famed for his moral theology,
also dealt with logic in moral and legal argument. This is to be found especially in
his Pandoxion physico-ethicum (“Physico-ethical summary of belief”) (1668) and
somewhat extended in Moralis seu Politica Logica (“Moral or Political Logic”)
(1680). One would expect to ﬁnd some predecessor of deontic logic in Caramuel’s
treatment, but the nature of legal argument, as Caramuel sees it, rather gives rise
to (i) the logical analysis of the scale or gradation of natural language quantiﬁers
and (ii) some considerations in epistemic logic. For in moral or legal argument,
what one ﬁnds is very often an inference from a statement where fewer than all
members of a certain class are subjects of predication to a statement whose truth is
consequently only more or less probable. Syllogismus iuridicus seu moralis consists
of a general major premise, which states some moral or legal norm (ius), while a
singular minor states some fact (whose occurrence is to be proved at the trial by
the accuser). The conclusion, also singular, is then the sentence.22 For instance:
1. Whoever injured some person with the intention of causing death
is to be guilty of murder and sentenced to death
2. Peter injured John with the intention of causing death
Therefore, Peter is to be guilty of murder and sentenced to death
The minor consists of two parts, the ﬁrst (Peter injured John) is established
by the testimony of the witnesses, while the second, intention, is to be proved by
another moral or legal argument:
20Herculis Logici Labores Tres, op. cit., p. 49ﬀ.
21According to Caramuel, the diﬀerence could also be captured terminologically: while in the
pure sense a world (another world) is said to be in potency in relation to existence, in the abstract
sense a world (this world) is said to have potency to exist.
22Moralis seu Politica Logica, Lib. I, Logicae Moralis Synopsis, sect. XVI, pp. 41-45.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
651
RA 1.
Rarely anyone (almost noone) boasts of a death crime which
he or she did not commit.
PI 2.
But Peter boasted of inﬂicting on John a serious injury in a
particular way
DI.
Therefore, it would be reckless to believe that he did not ac-
complish the crime
The abbreviations “RA”, “PI”, “DI” stand for syllables indicating the quantity of
the particular statement and hence, taken together, the mood of the syllogism (all
being of the ﬁrst ﬁgure). Caramuel gives the following table:23
Abbreviation
Quantiﬁer
Mood
The mode of the
conclusion
CA
absolutely all (cuncti omnes)
Camilli
really certain
FA
almost all (fere omnes)
Fallitis
morally certain
PL
most/majority (plures)
Placidi
more probable
MA
half (media pars)
Magistri
equally probable
PA
a minority/not half (pauciores)
Paridis
less probable
MU
many (multi)
Mugavit
scarcely probable
PU
few (pauci)
Pudici
reckless
RA
almost no (rari fere nulli)
Rapidi
reckless
NO
no (nulli)
Nobilis
against manifest
truth
A great amount of Moralis seu Politica Logica concerns what we would today
call the philosophy of law. However, in the second book, Caramuel analyses the
so-called moral modes and the logical properties of propositions containing them:
“it is certain that” (certum esse), “it is probable that” (probabile esse) and “it is
doubtful that” (dubium esse).24
There does not seem to be any treatment of deontic logic operators in Cara-
muel’s “Moral or Political Logic”. The closest one gets might be the operators
“must” (debeo) and “can” (possum), which Caramuel seems to be using in their
non-deontic meaning, however. He suggests, for the sake of simplicity and ease,
to reduce “it is necessary that” (N), “it is impossible that” (I) and “it is con-
tingent that” (C) to “must” (D) and “can” (P). Caramuel presents the following
23Ibid., p. 44. Caramuel does not seem to distinguish corresponding positive and negative
scales. For instance, one can say very many, i.e. almost half (positive), or a minority, i.e. less
than a half (negative), in relation to the same number.
24Ibid., Lib. II, cap. 2, sect. IX, p. 149.

652
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
equivalences (where “Pos” means “it is possible that”):25
N ↔D
N ↔¬P¬
I ↔D¬
Pos ↔P ↔¬D¬
Pos ¬ ↔P¬ ↔¬D
C ↔P ∧P¬ ↔¬D ∧¬D¬
Figure 1.
The latter modals could easily be assigned their deontic meaning with their logi-
cal behavior essentially remaining the same. This is precisely the case in the third
Labor of the “Three Labors of Hercules, the Logician” entitled “Contingent”,
containing a somewhat more extensive discussion of the various modes treated
explicitly as deontic.26
Hence debeo is to be rendered as “should” or “ought
25Ibid, Lib. I, Logicae Moralis Synopsis, sect. X Doctrina de Modalibus ad Summam Reducitur
Facilitatem, pp. 36-37. The abbreviations are mine.
26Herculis Logici Labores Tres, Labor III Contingens, Pars Ulterior, art. II De Modis Debiti
et Obligationis, p. 56-58.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
653
to” (obligation), rather than “must” (necessity), with the corresponding possum,
“can”, taken as permission. Caramuel also seems to be using “must” in the same
context: “it is necessary that I do”, but he does not diﬀerentiate its usage from
obligation (“should”). This could be understood as non-deontic necessity or com-
pulsion opposed to ability (see below). So Caramuel discusses “should (do)”, “can
(do)” and “must (do)” (debeo facere; possum facere; necesse est, ut faciam), fo-
cusing on “should” whose analysis is the same as above. “Facere” (“to do”) makes
explicit that the meaning has to do with human action in contrast to “esse” (“to
be”) used in the examples in “Moral or Political Logic”, where the meaning was
“real”, i.e. metaphysical and physical. The “can” of ability clearly re-surfaces in
Caramuel’s discussion of the relationship between “can” and “should”, or, more
precisely, the inference from “can” to “should”. Caramuel admits this inference
on analogy with the inference from possibility to actuality in necessary matter
(i.e. some necessary connection between the subject and the predicate is possibly
true, therefore, it is true). He admits the argument from the existence of a certain
norm obliging a particular person in conjunction with the ability of this person to
obey the norm to the conclusion that this person should obey the norm. It is clear
that Caramuel understands “can” in the sense of the absence of some hindering
conditions, in the non-deontic sense of ability, not in the sense of permission that
could stand for non debeo non facere. Hence, the inference he has in mind is an
altogether diﬀerent inference from the immediate illegitimate inference from per-
mission to obligation. To put it in a nutshell, Caramuel explicitly distinguishes
between real modes and modes having to do with human action, arguably not
discriminating within the latter group, at least not explicitly, between the deontic
modes of permission and obligation on one hand and ability and compulsion on the
other. Consequently, he does not discuss the interrelations among these modes.
In the same work Caramuel analyzes the epistemic mode of knowledge (scio)
and the mode of willing (volo).
Both are treated on a par with the universal
aﬃrmative, and again the opposing forms of modals within the logical square are
formulated using negation in the same way as with debeo (“should” or “must”)
above.27
And once again, there follows the analysis of modes having to do with evidence
and probability.28 In relation to probability, the oppositions examined hold be-
tween diﬀerent degrees of probability, and thus they really concern the respective
quantiﬁers used: mere, magis, minus, aeque. It is clear that the latter three quan-
tiﬁers are relational in the sense of essentially involving comparison between prob-
able propositions. The examination of comparative degrees of probability, and
probability in general, amounts to the logical background of Caramuel’s moral-
theological theory, namely that of probabilism, opposing probabiliorism. Accord-
ing to the latter, out of two competing moral norms in a particular situation of
moral choice, in the absence of proof of either of the two, one is to opt for the
more probable. Caramuel disagrees: one is morally justiﬁed to opt for either of
27Ibid., p. 58.
28Ibid., art. III, p. 59-61.

654
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
the two provided that it possesses at least a minimal degree of probability.
Finally, a mixture of epistemic and theological modes is dealt with: self-evident
proposition, demonstrative, evident, morally certain, de ﬁde.
The middle part
of this particular Herculean task ends with the discussion of theological modes
having to do with censure: diﬀerent degrees and types of erroneous doctrinal
propositions.29
3
RELATIONAL LOGIC
By far the most interesting contribution of Caramuel to formal logic is his oblique
logic. A key part of this is what we would call relational logic dealing with the
formal structure of relational statements and their properties (Pars I of Logica
Obliqua, pp. 407-429) and the theory of argument consisting of such propositions
(Pars II, pp. 429-503).30
Propositio obliqua seu discreta or relational statement is a statement including a
complex predicate which could be further analyzed and whose analysis is important
from the point of view of securing and determining validity within an argument.
Apart from a verb,31 this complex predicate consists of the so-called terminus
obliquus, oblique term, grammatically a noun in a case other than the nominative
(casus obliquus). For instance, in the statement “every man commits some sin” the
term “sin” is oblique, for the Latin equivalent peccatum would be in the accusative
form. In contrast, the subject term “man” is in the nominative (terminus rectus).
Thus oblique logic contrasts with “upright” logic dealing with statements in which
both terms, the so-called extremes, are recti or upright.32 The oblique predicate
term or extreme, called connotatus by Caramuel, is what we would call the second
member of a binary relation, while the upright subject term or extreme, called
connotans by Caramuel, would be the ﬁrst member.
As for the form of oblique statements or propositions, Caramuel recognizes three
types or genera: The ﬁrst type, called preposition by Caramuel, places the oblique
29Ibid., art. IV and V, p. 61-67.
30Properly speaking, logica obliqua covers more than relational logic, for Caramuel treats also
propositional logic under the same heading (the so-called “hypothetical” propositions).
The
meaning of the term “discrete” will become clear below.
Caramuel’s relational logic was presented for the ﬁrst time in the studies of S. Soused´ık (and
K. Berka) in the 1960s and early 70s, cf. Soused´ık [1969] and Berka–Soused´ık [1972]. Since then
only very few studies have appeared, for instance, Hern´andez [1992]. So far the most extensive
treatment can be found in Dvoˇr´ak, [2006]. Besides relational logic, the latter monograph also
explains the problem of non omnis in Labor II of the Herculean Labors and selected issues from
Metalogica, e.g. logical paradoxes (insolubilia), change of propositional truth value, future con-
tingents, etc. It also covers an interesting polemic of Leibniz against Caramuel on antistrephus.
For the truth-value of propositions about future contingents in particular cf. Dvoˇr´ak [2002].
31The verb is called “adjective” in contrast with the copula “to be” which is traditionally
called “substantive”, for it was viewed as a substance of which the predicate is an accident.
Hence Caramuel calls statements of this type “adjective”.
32It is quite interesting to note that in Caramuel’s work an analogical contrast exists within
his theory of architecture, i.e. that between architectura recta and obliqua. Cf. J. Caramuel,
Architectura civil recta y oblicua, Vigevano 1678.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
655
term or connotatus into subject position, the second type, called postposition,
into predicate position, the third type, called composition, into both. Caramuel
presents the following examples (the oblique term is in the brackets):
(i)
The soul which committed a sin will die (sin)
(ii) The soul aspires to glory (glory)
(iii) The soul which committed a sin will be sentenced to eternal damnation (sin,
eternal damnation)
One can see that the division into subject and predicate concerns the principal
predication.
In the ﬁrst and third examples, the oblique term is a part of an
embedded predication attached to the principal subject. The ﬁrst example is thus
an upright statement with an oblique predication embedded within it. In contrast,
the third example is an oblique statement with an oblique predication embedded
within it.
In his treatment of oblique statements, Caramuel concentrates on the second
type, i.e. postpositions, with some treatment of type one, prepositions, leaving
compositions out.
Caramuel in Logica Obliqua extends syllogistics to include relational logic, i.e.
to handle syllogisms consisting of relational statements, either some or all:
Every man commits some sin
Every sin is a moral fault
Therefore, every man commits some moral fault
Every ant is greater than every atom
Every elephant is greater than every ant
Every elephant is greater than every atom
While the former is a specimen of an argument Caramuel calls mixed relational
syllogism (syllogismus obliquus mixtus), for, apart from relational statements in
a premise and the conclusion, it contains an upright premise (propositio recta),
the latter is of a pure relational form (syllogismus pure obliquus). Prior to Cara-
muel these oblique syllogisms were typically reduced to non-oblique ones (Ockham,
Jungius) and thus accommodated within the standard Aristotelian system of ﬁg-
ures and moods. The reduction was based on the reduction of oblique statements
into non-oblique or upright ones. The oblique form of a proposition, seen as some-
how deﬁcient, was thus from the point of view of formal logic not recognized as
an independent form, diﬀerent from a non-oblique one. Thus the resulting logic
could be called the logic of relations but not relational logic proper. Only when
the oblique form is recognized as a logical form in its own right can one speak of
relational logic or relational syllogistics. This is what happens in Caramuel for the
ﬁrst time, though it is true that his more famous predecessor, Joachim Jungius
(1587–1657), recognized a non-reducible form of relational argument or inference,

656
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
that of a rectis ad obliqua (from terms in the nominative to oblique terms), but re-
garded it as a type of non-syllogistic immediate inference.33 A step further would
be to say that the standard upright form is a special case of the oblique form;
hence, really, the oblique form is paradigmatic for any statement. We shall see
below that this is arguably the path Caramuel will eventually take.
There seem to be two possible ways of analyzing a relational statement, for
instance “every man commits some sin”:
every man is [some sin is committed by]
The ﬁrst way regards the complex predicate consisting of a verb and an oblique
term to be an embedded predication; hence the oblique term is regarded to be
a (subordinate) logical subject.
Hence, there are two subject-predicate struc-
tures present within a relational statement and, consequently, two copulae. This
rather conservative view of the logical form of a relational statement accommo-
dates the latter statements within a quantiﬁer-subject-copula-predicate upright
scheme, without reducing them to this form altogether. (The relational form is
clearly seen as diﬀerent from the non-relational one, but not substantially, as one
can see). Caramuel takes this approach in his initial formal symbolism introduced
to grasp the logical form of the relational statement. Apart from the signs for
quantiﬁers “a”, “i”, “e” (all, some, no), the asterisk symbol * divides the subject
part from the predicate part. For instance, “a*i” means (every. . . is some. . . , e.g.
“every man commits some sin”). The introduction, however, of two symbols for
negation, copula negation “˜n” and quantiﬁer negation “n”, and their possible posi-
tions in Caramuel show that Caramuel assumes there are two copulae in relational
statements. The following are the possible places of negation:
(i)
n-*-
(ii) -˜n*-
(iii) -*n-
(iv) -*˜n-
33For example: A circle is a plane ﬁgure. Therefore, whoever draws a circle draws a plane
ﬁgure.
J. Jungius (Junge), Logica Hamburgensis, hoc est, Institutiones Logicae In usum Schol. Ham-
burgensis conscriptae, et sex libris comprehensae, ed. R. W. Meyer — J. J. Augustin, Hamburg
1957 (1st edition 1638), Lib. II, c. 4, § 6; Lib. III, c. 1. § 5. For the logic of relations in Jungius
cf. e.g. Ashworth [1967] and Dvo˘r´ak [2006].
Caramuel also suggests the reduction of oblique forms into upright ones, but more for the sake
of showing the usefulness of his new system, rather than as a necessary procedure to exhibit the
true form disguised or clouded by the oblique form, as in Jungius. Cf. Ibid., Lib. II, c. 16, § 1:
Crypsis est aﬀectio Syllogismi oratione externa propositi, qua ejus forma ita occultatur, ut cum
sit legitimus, talis tamen non esse videatur (“Disguise is a property of a syllogism put forth in
an external linguistic formulation, in which its form is so hidden that in spite of being valid, it
does not appear so”).

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
657
It is clear that (ii) and (iv) are both negations of the copula, but in each case a
diﬀerent one. The ﬁrst stands outside the predicate structure, the second within it.
“Every man does not commit any sin”, a˜n*i, and “every man non-commits some
sin”, a*˜ni, are diﬀerent, for the ﬁrst is equivalent to “every man non-commits every
sin”. Caramuel makes the former logical form with outside negation even more
explicit: “a˜n,q*i”, where “q” stands for the relative pronoun (qui): “every man is
not the one, who commits some sin”.34
In his relational syllogistics, however, Caramuel settles for another, less conser-
vative and more innovative approach. The symbolism is simpliﬁed. The asterisk
and relative pronoun signs are dropped. Thus “ai” means “every. . . some...” as in
“every man commits some sin”. The key idea in this analysis is the generalization
of the copula from the semantically rather empty verb “to be” to any meaningful
verb, e.g. “commits”, amounting to a major step in the direction towards contem-
porary predicate logic. Hence, there is only one copula present in the relational
statement. As for negation, only one symbol for negation is introduced, “n”, either
for quantiﬁer negation (n- - and -n-), or for the negation of the (inner) copula (-
-n). There is no place for the negation of the outer, non-predicate copula, for none
is needed. More precisely, since the form (ii) -˜n*- is equivalent to (iii) -*n-, one
does not need (ii) and can do with (iii), second quantiﬁer negation. This allows
for the simpliﬁcation, for two diﬀerent negation symbols are no longer necessary.
The position before or after the quantiﬁer makes all the diﬀerence now.
If the verb “to be” is only one copula among many possible ones, the standard
quantiﬁer-subject-copula-predicate upright form is but a special case of relational
statement quantiﬁer-subject term-copula-quantiﬁer-predicate term form.
Thus,
grammatically, even though there is no predicate quantiﬁer in “every man is an
animal”, it is just not made explicit, but logically, it is present (“every man is some
animal”).35 It is precisely this move of generalizing the copula and the consequent
34“a*˜ni” could be rendered as “every man is the one, who does not commit some sin”. Cf.
LO, Pars I, disp. I De Propositione Obliqua in Genere, pp. 407-415.
35Caramuel’s survey of contemporary logic in Grammatica Audax Pars III, art. 1 shows that
the quantiﬁcation of the predicate term is not an uncommon feature. Caramuel himself in LO
Pars II quite naturally occasionally rewrites “a” with “ai”. This would mean that the second
from the two squares of opposition presented below is the traditional square of A, E, I and O
statements. Caramuel could thus be credited with discovering another one.
Caramuel also speaks, however, of the extended number of moods in relational logic in com-
parison with the classical Aristotelian syllogistics owing to discrimination of two forms within
the universal aﬃrmative statement (A): either ai or aa: J. Caramuel, LO, Pars II, disp. IX, p.
432: Quatuor isti modi constant ex universalibus et aﬃrmativis, et tamen diﬀerunt inter se; ut
... intelligatur, quanto sit ditior obliqua Dialectica caeteris; siquidem quatuor aut pluribus modis
praemissas suas disponit, quas omnes rejiceret antiqua ad Bammada, et si non cognosceret hunc
modum, (non enim Aristotelicus sed Platonicus est) ad Barbara. (“These four moods arise from
universal aﬃrmatives; however, they diﬀer among themselves. In order ... to see to what extent
the oblique logic is richer than others, as it disposes its premises in four or more ways, which
ancient logic would all classify as the mood Bammada, or if it did not recognize this mood [for it
is not Aristotelian, but Platonic], as the mood Barbara.”). This would mean that the traditional
square of opposition of A, E, I and O statements contains within itself both squares, as it were.
The ﬁrst alternative, however, appears to be more likely the case.
The duality pointed out might be related to the two ways of analyzing relational statements, for

658
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
view of relational form as paradigmatic which guides A. de Morgan in his Formal
Logic, 1847 and later works in developing his relational logic, far more powerful
than Caramuel’s, because more general.
As A. de Morgan does, Caramuel recognizes eight basic logical forms of re-
lational statements.
These are gained from possible logical forms of relational
statements based on equivalences.
One can ﬁnd two equivalence rules used in
Caramuel’s writing:36
1. nx ↔y where x and y stand for contradictories (e.g. e and i)
2. xn ↔y where x is any statement (e.g. e) and y is its contrary or subcontrary
(e.g. a)
What we get are two equivalent eight-member sets of forms:37
ai
ee
aa
ein
ii
ine
ia
inin
ea
ain
ei
ae
ina
iin
ini
ie
Based on their logical relationships of oppositions, the forms in both of these
sets could be arranged into two squares of oppositions (with the traditional rela-
tionships):
the second way is more akin to the strategy of making the predicate more precise by analyzing
its embedded predicational structure, as in Fred Sommers (The Logic of Natural Language,
Clarendon, Oxford 1982). In a marginal note Caramuel recognizes relational syllogism to have
four terms; cf. LO, Pars II, disp. IX, p. 432.
36LO, Pars I, disp. I, De Aequipollentia Propositionum, pp. 411-412.
37LO, Pars I, disp. I, De oppositione obliquarum, pp. 412-413.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
659
Figure 2.

660
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
In dealing with relational syllogisms, Caramuel distinguishes the following ﬁg-
ures of the pure relational syllogism:38
A is related to M
Platonic ﬁgure
M is related to B
A is related to B
M is related to A
Figure I
B is related to M
B is related to A
A is related to M
Figure II
B is related to M
B is related to A/ A is related to B (indirect)
M is related to A
Figure III
M is related to B
B is related to A/ A is related to B (indirect)
The letters A, B, M stand for terms, where M is the middle term and A, B are
the extremes. All the terms are quantiﬁed and the quantiﬁcation is given by the
mood (see below). The expression “is related to” stands for a transitive verb, the
extended copula. We can see that the logical form of the syllogism
Every ant is greater than every atom
Every elephant is greater than every ant
Every elephant is greater than every atom
is that of Figure I.
Caramuel gives valid moods for each of the ﬁgures above. By way of an example,
let us present the valid moods under Figure I:
1. aa.aa.aa.
2. aa.ai.ai.
3. aa.ia.ia.
4. aa.ii.ii.
5. ai.aa.ai.
6. ai.ai.ai.
7. ai.ia.ii.
8. ai.ii.ii.
38Caramuel deals with the pure relational syllogism in LO, Pars II, disp. IX Syllogismorum
Pure Obliquorum Formas et Figuras Expendens, pp. 432-436. Only this type of syllogism is
presented in Soused´ık [1969].

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
661
We see that our specimen of a pure relational syllogism is of mood 1 (called
Parat astra famam by Caramuel).
Our second specimen syllogism
Every man commits some sin
Every sin is a moral fault
Therefore, every man commits some moral fault
is of the mixed type, as already known. The four ﬁgures could be distinguished
also for the mixed relational syllogism.39 Our example is of the most common
Platonic ﬁgure:
A is related to M
M is B
A is related to B
As we can see, the mood is ai.a.ai, and it is one of the valid moods Caramuel states
for this ﬁgure. (Caramuel gives names to the moods; the one at issue is dubbed
Altis ab astris):
aa.a.ai.
ein.a.ai.
aa.a.ii.
25.
ein.a.ein.
ae.a.ain.
ein.a.ii.
ae.a.ea.
ia.a.ii.
5.
ae.a.iin.
ian.a.iin.
ae.a.ina.
ian.a.ina.
ai.a.ai.
30.
ina.a.iin.
ai.a.ein.
ie.a.iin.
ai.a.ii.
ie.a.ina.
10.
ai.a.iin.
ine.a.ine.
ain.a.ain.
ine.a.ii.
ain.a.ea.
35.
ien.a.ii.
ain.a.ina.
ii.a.ii.
ea.a.ain.
iin.a.iin.
15.
ea.a.ea.
ina.a.iin.
ea.a.iin.
ina.a.ina.
ea.a.ini.
40.
ine.a.ii.
ee.a.ai.
ine.a.ine.
ee.a.ee.
ini.a.iin.
20.
ee.a.ein.
ini.a.ina.
ei.a.ain.
ei.a.ea.
ei.a.iin.
39Caramuel treats the mixed relational syllogism in LO, Pars II, disp.
XI De Syllogismo
Obliquo Mixto, pp. 442-457.

662
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
As has been said, apart from pure and mixed relational syllogisms in which the
oblique statements were of the type called postposition, Caramuel now gives valid
moods in all four ﬁgures of mixed relational syllogisms where the oblique state-
ments are prepositions.40 Recall that while postposition places the oblique term,
connotatus, into the predicate position (of the principal predication, one might
say, although postpositions do not contain any other predication, “principal” thus
being redundant), preposition, containing embedded predication attached to the
subject, places connotatus into the predicate position of the embedded predication.
The numbering (and naming) of the moods is taken from postpositional mixed syl-
logisms. Caramuel points out the moods in which the change from postposition
to preposition results in the mood being invalid. Some prepositional moods do
not have correlates in postpositions. Consequently, they are listed without any
number. By way of an example, let us present the prepositional moods only in the
Platonic ﬁgure, since the postpositional moods in the same ﬁgure are given above:
M . . . invalid (malus)
B . . . valid (bonus)
P . . . dangerous (periculosus)
1.
aa*a.ai* M
24.
ein*a.ai* M
2.
aa*a.ii*
25.
ein*a.ein* M
3.
ae*a.ain* M
-
ein*a.ei*n M
4.
ae*a.ea*
26.
ein*a.ii*
-
ae*a.ae*
27.
ia*a.ii*
5.
ae*a.iin*
28.
ian*a.iin* B
6.
ae*a.ina*
-
ian*a.ii*n M
7.
ai*a.ai* M
29.
ian*a.ina*
8.
ai*a.ein*
30.
ina*a.iin* B
9.
ai*a.ii*
-
ina*a.ii*n M
10.
ai*a.iin* P
31.
ie*a.iin*
11.
ain*a.ain*
-
ie*a.ii*n M
12.
ain*a.ea*
32.
ie*a.ina* M
13.
ain*a.ina*
33.
ine*a.ine*
14.
ea*a.ain* M
34.
ine*a.ii*
15.
ea*a.ea*
35.
ien*a.ii*
16.
ea*a.iin* M
36.
ii*a.ii*
-
ea*a.ii*n B
37.
iin*a.iin* B
17.
ea*a.ini*
-
iin*a.ii*n M
18.
ee*a.ai* M
38.
ina*a.iin* B
19.
ee*a.ee*
-
ina*a.ii*n M
40Caramuel treats the prepositional relational syllogism in LO, Pars II, disp. XII De Praepos-
itivo Obliquorum Genere, pp. 458-464.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
663
20.
ee*a.ein* M
39.
ina*a.ina*
21.
ei*a.ain* M
40.
ine*a.ii*
-
ei*a.ai*a B
41.
ine*a.ine*
22.
ei*a.ea* B
42.
ini*a.iin* B
-
ei*a.ei* B
-
ini*a.ii*n M
23.
ei*a.iin* M
43.
ini*a.ina* M
-
ei*a.ii*n B
If the upright statement is universal negative:
44.
aa*e.aius* M
45.
aa*e.iius*
46.
ai*e.aius* M
47.
ai*e.iius*
48.
ia*e.iius*
49.
ii*e.iius*
Incidentally, if we change our postpositional specimen syllogism
Every man commits some sin
Every sin is a moral fault
Therefore, every man commits some moral fault
into prepositional
Every man, who commits some sin, is evil
Every sin is a fault
Therefore, every man, who commits some fault, is evil
we see that it is one of those syllogisms where the change from postposition to
preposition results in its invalidity (see mood 7 in Caramuel’s list of postpositional
moods in the Platonic ﬁgure above, which he names Astris a validis).
What has been said concerning relational syllogisms here suﬃces as an illustra-
tion of Caramuel’s approach. Caramuel’s is a logic which is not only an extension,
but also a fundamental revision of the traditional syllogistics as such. Not only
does Caramuel in his opinion present logic of types of discourse previously not
treated (Sum traditurus Novam Logicam nempe Obliquam, de qua Antiqui Dialec-
tici nihil aut parum. “I am about to introduce new logic, truly oblique, about
which the ancient dialecticians [said] nothing or very little”), but he thinks syllo-
gistics is based on a false principle if this is to be regarded as the most general
logical principle:41
41J. Caramuel, LO, Lectori, p. 406. The text continues: Sum, inquam, traditurus LOGICAM
a veteri toto distinctam, et oppositis fundamentis inhaerens... ...majorem enim, quam Oraculi
loco habent Peripatetici, falsam assero: et novam viam ingressus Terminis realiter distinctis
utor, illisque novas propositiones et novos syllogismos fabricor. (“I say I am about to introduce
logic wholly distinct from the old one and based on opposite foundations ... I claim that the
major premise — which Aristotelians take as a dogma — is false [Caramuel means the syllogistic
principle of identity]. Having set out on a new way, I use really distinct terms from which I

664
Petr Dvoˇr´ak
Things, which are identical with some third, are identical themselves.42
In relational statements the terms are really distinct (discrete), not identical. Thus
Caramuel also dubs his system “discrete logic”. The most general principle of this
logic could be hypothesized as the following:
* Things, which are related to some third, are related themselves.
It is only to be regretted that Caramuel’s system remained little known and did
not exert a greater impact on the logic of his time. One could only speculate how
the discipline would unfold and what it would be like today had it been otherwise.
It is our hope that this historical injustice is remedied as time goes on and the
subtle genius of Caramuel achieves proper recognition at last.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Caramuel’s Logical Writings
[Caramuel, 1644] Severa Argumentandi Methodus, Douai (J. Serrurier), 1644.
[Caramuel, 1651] Grammatica Audax, Frankfurt am M. (J. G. Sch¨onwetter), 1651.
[Caramuel, 1654] Theologia Rationalis:
I. Caramuelis Theologia Rationalis sive In Auream
Angelici Doctoris Summam Meditationes, Notae et Observationes Liberales, Philosophicae,
Scholasticae Tomi Duo or Theologia rationalis Grammaticam Audacem, Dialecticam Vocalem
Scriptam et Mentalem: Rectam et Obliquam: Herculeam, Metalogicamque Primam Angelici
Doctoris Partem eodem cursu et labore dilucidat, Frankfurt am M. (J. G. Sch¨onwetter), 1654.
[Caramuel, 1989] Praecursor Logicus complectens Grammaticam Audacem (reprint), Introduc-
tion R. Sarmiento, Stuttgart (Frommann-Holzboog), 1989.
[Caramuel, 1668] Pandoxion Physico-ethicum, cuius tomi sunt tres, primusque Logicam, secun-
dus Philosophiam et tertius Theologiam realiter et moraliter novo modo, et studio dilucidat...,
Campagna (Typographia Episcopali), 1668.
[Caramuel, 1680a] Moralis seu Politica Logica, Vigevano (C. Corrado), 1680.
[Caramuel, 1680b] Logica Vocalis, Scripta, Mentalis, Obliqua, Vigevano (C. Corrado), 1680.
[Caramuel, 1682] Metalogica Scholastica, Vigevano (C. Corrado), 1682.
Secondary Literature
[Ashworth, 1967] E. J. Ashworth. Joachim Jungius (1587–1657) and the Logic of Relations.
Archiv f¨ur Geschichte der Philosophie IL, 1967, 1, pp. 72-85.
[Bellazzi, 1982] P. Bellazzi. Juan Caramuel Lobkowitz, Vigevano (Buona Stampa), 1982.
[Dvoˇr´ak, 2006] P. Dvoˇr´ak. Jan Caramuel z Lobkovic: Vybran´e aspekty form´aln´ı a aplikovan´e
logiky [Juan Caramuel Lobkowitz: Selected Aspects of Formal and Applied Logic], Prague
(Oikumene), 2006.
[Dvoˇr´ak, 2005] P. Dvoˇr´ak. The Logic and Semantics of Modal Propositions in Juan Caramuel.
Acta Comeniana, XLIII, 2005, 19, pp. 105-115.
create new propositions and new syllogisms.”) Ibid., p. 406: Non est animus diruere Antiquam
LOGICAM ab aliis aut etiam a nobis summo studio ﬁrmatam: sed illi Novam hanc accensere, et
numerum augere Musarum. (,,I have no intention to destroy ancient logic established by others
and also by us through greatest zeal, but to add to it this new logic and to extend the number
of Muses”)
42Cf. also J. Caramuel, Theologia Moralis Fundamentalis... Frankfurt am M. 1652, Lib. I,
fund. XLV, § 1177.

Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel
665
[Dvoˇr´ak, 2002] P. Dvoˇr´ak. John Caramuel on Future Contingents. In Bene scripsisti... ﬁlosoﬁe
od stˇredovˇeku k novovˇeku: sborn´ık k sedmdes´atin´am Stanislava Soused´ıka, ed. J. Beneˇs, P.
Glomb´ıˇcek, V. Urb´anek, Prague (Filosoﬁa), 2002, pp. 191-207.
[Dvoˇr´ak, 2000] P. Dvoˇr´ak. John Caramuel and the Possible Worlds Theory. Acta Comeniana,
XXXVIII, 2000, 14, pp. 87-97.
[Fleming, 2006] J. Fleming. Defending Probabilism: The Moral Theology of Juan Caramuel,
Washington, D.C. (Georgetown University Press), 2006.
[Hern´andez, 1992] N. B. Hern´andez. La l´ogica oblicua de Juan Caramuel. Theoria: Revista de
teor´ıa, Historia y Fundamentes de la Ciencia VII, 1992, 16-17-18, pp. 297-325.
[Roncaglia, 2003] G. Roncaglia. Modal Logic in Germany at the Beginning of the Seventeenth
Century: Christoph Scheibler’s Opus Logicum. In The Medieval Heritage in Early Modern
Metaphysics and Modal Theory 1400-1700, ed. Russell L. Friedman, L.O. Nielsen, Dordrecht
(Kluwer Academic Publishers), 2003, pp. 253-307.
[Soused´ık, 1991] S. Soused´ık. Universal Language in the Work of Juan Caramuel, a Contempo-
rary of Comenius. Acta Comeniana 9 (XXXIII), 1991, pp. 149-158.
[Soused´ık, 1969] S. Soused´ık. Diskr´etn´ı logika Jana Caramuela z Lobkovic [A Discrete Logic of
Juan Caramuel Lobkowitz]. Filosoﬁck´y ˇcasopis, XVII, 1969, 2, pp. 216-228.
[Berka and Soused´ık, 1972] K. Berka and S. Soused´ık. K relaˇcn´ı logice Jana Caramuela
z Lobkovic [On Relational Logic of Juan Caramuel Lobkowitz]. Acta Universitatis Caroli-
nae: Philosophica et Historica, Studia Logica, 1972, 2, pp. 9-16.

This page intentionally left blank

PORT ROYAL: THE STIRRINGS OF
MODERNITY
Russell Wahl
1
INTRODUCTION
Logic or the Art of Thinking, popularly known as the Port-Royal Logic, was prob-
ably the most important logic text book from the time after the mediaeval pe-
riod until the middle of the nineteenth century. Published anonymously, it was
authored by two associates of the abbey of Port Royal des Champs, Antoine Ar-
nauld (1612-1694) and Pierre Nicole (1625-1695). It is unclear how much each
contributed to the work, although there are indications that Nicole wrote the ﬁrst
and second discourses and also the additions, and that the rest was very much
a collaborative eﬀort.1 According to the forward, the initial draft was written in
just a few days with the aim of teaching a student to master “everything useful
about logic” in four or ﬁve days. This draft was expanded into a published version
in 1662 and the book went through ﬁve editions during the lives of the authors
and over ﬁfty editions in French, thirteen in Latin, and nine in English before
the twentieth century. The sixth English edition, entitled The Port-Royal Art of
Thinking, was, according to its subtitle, used in the ﬁrst class of the course of edu-
cation pursued at the Universities of Cambridge & Oxford.2 Arnauld and another
associate of Port Royal, Claude Lancelot published (also anonymously) the Gram-
maire g´en´erale et raisonn´ee in 1660. This work is also known as the Port-Royal
Grammar. Several points from the ﬁrst part are taken from the Grammar and
the ﬁrst two chapters of the second part, added in the ﬁfth edition, were taken
straight from Part II, Chapter 2 of the Grammar.
While including discussions of many topics found in previous logic works, the
Port-Royal Logic is primarily a statement of the new logic of the seventeenth
1This is from a remark by Racine, who also said that Arnauld wrote the entire fourth part.
See the ﬁrst note in [Arnauld and Nicole, 1662, 365], for the discussion of the composition of the
Logic. There is also some further discussion in [McKenna, 1986] which reveals just how diﬃcult
it is to determine what was written by Nicole and what by Arnauld. All the page numbers for
quotations from the Port-Royal Logic cited here will be from the critical edition by Clair and
Girbal. These pages are the only pages cited where the work is not speciﬁed. This edition is
based on the ﬁfth (1683) edition with reference to variations in other editions, and has become
the standard edition of the Port-Royal Logic. There is now a good translation by Jill Buroker,
as Logic or the Art of Thinking [Buroker, 1996b], which includes the page references from Clair
and Girbal.
2This is the subtitle on the sixth English edition listed in [Arnauld and Nicole, 1662, 9].
c
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 2: Mediaeval and Renaissance Logic
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors)
⃝2008 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved.

668
Russell Wahl
century, the logic of ideas. Like other authors of the seventeenth century, Arnauld
and Nicole were very critical of the old logic, which for them included not only the
“scholastic” work on syllogisms, but also the humanistic logic of Ramus. They saw
their logic as new and they were particularly inﬂuenced by Descartes, who had
also been critical of syllogistic logic, and they incorporated many of his doctrines
into their work. This new seventeenth-century logic, with its rejection of much
traditional logic and its concern with clarifying ideas and determining the truth of
simple propositions, has often been criticized by more recent logicians of mixing
psychology and epistemology with logic. Often it has been compared unfavorably
with mediaeval logic.3 Despite the fact that most of its topics are closer to the
mediaeval period, the Port-Royal Logic has a very modern feel to it, and covers
several topics now included in more informal introductory logic courses, such as
discussions of clariﬁcation of concepts, informal fallacies, causal reasoning, and
probability, as well as more traditional accounts of propositions and syllogisms.
2
THE NATURE OF LOGIC
Descartes had not written a speciﬁc treatise on logic but had developed his method
in the unpublished Rules for the Direction of the Mind and his later Discourse
on Method. A manuscript of the Rules had been made available to Arnauld and
Nicole, and they even incorporated a portion of this work in their own.4 Descartes’
focus was on clarifying simple ideas and developing a method which would lead to
new truths. His view was that the mind had no trouble making inferences,5 but
that it did have trouble discerning what was before it clearly and distinctly. His
method was developed to help the mind solve problems and more clearly discern
truths. Descartes recognized two operations of the intellect which help it reach
this goal, intuition and deduction. Intuition, he said, was not “the ﬂuctuating
testimony of the sense or the deceptive judgement of the imagination . . . but the
conception of a clear and attentive mind, which is so easy and distinct that there
can be no room for doubt about what we are understanding” [Adam and Tannery,
1964-76, X, 368; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 14]. He was less clear on what he
3[Kneale and Kneale, 1962, 315–320], is relatively more sympathetic toward the Port-Royal
logicians, but [Bochesnski, 1961, 258], does not mince words when summing up classical seven-
teenth century logic: “Poor in content, devoid of all deep problems, permeated with a whole
lot of non-logical philosophical ideas, psychologist in the worst sense.” Norman Kretzmann’s
long article on the History of Semantics [Kretzmann, 1967, 378–379], is also quite critical of the
Port-Royal Logic. [Ashworth, 1974] has some opening remarks which are also quite critical of
logic during this period.
4Adam and Tannery state that Clerselier gave Arnauld and Nicole the manuscript of the
Rules after the ﬁrst edition of the Logic appeared in 1662. The portion from Rule 13 included in
Part IV, Chapter 2, was included in the second (1664) edition of the Logic [Adam and Tannery,
1964-76, X, 352].
5Descartes is notorious for stating that “while our experiences of things are often deceptive,
the deduction or pure inference of one thing to another can never be performed wrongly by an
intellect which is in the least degree rational” [Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 12; Adam and
Tannery, 1964-76, X, 365]. This was an opinion shared by Arnauld and Nicole.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
669
means by deduction, but suggested that deduction is necessary, since “very many
facts which are not self-evident are known with certainty, provided they are inferred
from true and known principles through a continuous and uninterrupted movement
of thought in which each individual proposition is clearly intuited” [Adam and
Tannery, 1964-76, X, 369; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 15]. Deduction for
Descartes appears to involve the intuition of a necessary connection between two
distinct ideas which are clearly intuited. The items intuited are said to be ‘objects’
[objectum] [Adam and Tannery, 1964-76, X, 365; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I,
12] but also ‘propositions’ [propositionis] [Adam and Tannery, 1964-76, X, 379;
Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 20]. In the Discourse, too, the method focused
on attaining knowledge by breaking problems down to their simplest objects and
then, moving from “the simplest and most easily known objects” to “ascend little
by little, step by step, to knowledge of the most complex . . . ” [Adam and Tannery,
1964-76, VII, 18; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 120]. The examples he has in
mind appear to be simple proportions that hold between line lengths.6
While Descartes was concerned about apprehending simple propositions and
the relation between them, he was also concerned with clarifying simple ideas, and
seeing relations between simple ideas. The apprehension of relations of diﬀerent
line lengths is taken as the model for clear and distinct perception, which is then
used to explain immediate inferences from one proposition to the next.
Descartes’ view of logic as a tool for the discovery of truths and his criticism
of the old logic is present in the Port-Royal Logic as well. Throughout the Logic
there is a criticism of formal logic as being useless for discovering truths. Arnauld
and Nicole, however, did include discussions of such formal topics as conversion
of propositions and validity of syllogisms. But even when discussing these topics,
they were quick to remark that they view these matters of little importance. A
striking indication of their anti-formalism is the complete lack of variables in the
exposition. The authors give concrete examples of the various syllogisms and it
is clear that what is at issue are questions of form, but they never present the
syllogisms or categorical propositions with variables.
Arnauld and Nicole saw logic as “the art of thinking”, which, with Descartes,
they understood as the art of discerning the true from the false (15). Others of the
time classiﬁed logic as the art of reasoning well,7 but in the second discourse Ar-
nauld and Nicole speciﬁcally rejected this characterization as too narrow: “. . . the
purpose of logic is to give rules for all actions of the mind, and for simple ideas as
well as for judgments and inferences . . . ” (27). The rules in question are rules to
help discern the true from the false (15). The rules for valid arguments will form
part of this discipline, but only a small part. Arnauld and Nicole also included
rules for the determination of the truth of simple judgements or ideas, and in fact,
following Descartes, thought of this issue as the more pressing. However, unlike
Descartes, Arnauld and Nicole did think that the rules for ﬁgures of syllogisms
6See [Adam and Tannery, 1964-76, VII, 20; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 120-1]. For more
on Descartes’s theory of inference, see, [Gaukroker,1989] and [Grosholz, 1991].
7See the discussion in [Ashworth, 1974, 29].

670
Russell Wahl
have some use (22), but that more formal topics such as the demonstration of the
validity of those rules, and the rules of conversion were less useful and were only
included as exercises of the mind. In the ﬁrst edition there was an inclusion of the
reduction of the syllogisms to syllogisms of the ﬁrst ﬁgure, but they omitted this
in the later editions, judging it to be worthless.
Standard logic works were organized with sections on terms, propositions, and
arguments and often a ﬁnal section on method. This organization can be read into
Aristotle’s Organon, with the Categories dealing with terms, the De Interpreta-
tione dealing with propositions, the Prior Analytics dealing with arguments and
the Posterior Analytics and the Topics with method. This manner of dividing the
topic was quite common in the medieval period. The Port Royal authors followed
this pattern, but their choice of titles suggest that their concern was speciﬁcally
with operations of the mind, rather than with language. They organize the Logic
in the following way:
Part I Containing reﬂections on ideas, or the ﬁrst action of the mind,
which is called conceiving.
Part II Containing reﬂections people have made about their judgments.
Part III On reasoning
Part IV On method.
From this table of contents, the charge of psychologism appears to be justiﬁed,
since it seems to suggest an investigation in the workings of the mind rather than
in logic proper. However, while some irrelevant psychological considerations have
crept into the discussion of logic, by and large they are kept to a minimum. It
is true that, following Descartes, Arnauld and Nicole thought that our minds
were structured so as to yield correct concepts and judgments when we use our
reasoning correctly, and so they saw logic, or the art of thinking, as an art to
help improve our natural cognitive faculties. Thus the section headings suggest
that the cognitive faculties rather than the objects of those faculties are the topic
of inquiry. However, the analysis Arnauld and Nicole give is of the concepts and
propositions judged rather than the operations of the mind which lead to them.
For the most part, considerations from empirical psychology do not infect their
discussion of logic. However, as is often the case with works on informal logic even
today, their discussions of errors in concept formation and in inference do make
reference to psychological tendencies and even to theological concerns.8
While the contribution to anything we would now recognize as formal logic is
small, the Logic does contain a more sophisticated semantics than it might ﬁrst
seem, and uses that semantics, especially the distinction between comprehension
and extension made in the ﬁrst book, to later use in their analysis of propositions
and arguments.
8See the discussion of why people have certain obscure ideas in Part I, Chapters 9 and 10,
and the discussion of fallacies in Part III, Chapter 20.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
671
3
IDEAS OR TERMS
The ﬁrst section of traditional logic books was generally a discussion of terms,
or even words.
The Port-Royal Logic begins instead with ideas.
This is not
as big a shift as it may seem, as certain medieval writers, for example Ockham,
thought there were spoken, written and mental terms, and the latter were primary.9
Arnauld and Nicole are not always consistent in their terminology, switching every
now and then from “idea” to “term”. The Port Royal use of “idea” indicates their
view of the priority of thought over language. In the Grammaire, Arnauld and
Lancelot deﬁned words as “distinct and articulate sound which men have made
as signs to signify their thoughts” [Arnauld and Lancelot, 1660, II, 1, 27]. This
deﬁnition was used to give a reason for studying the words and was included in
the Logic (103-4) when parts of the Grammaire were added to the section on
judgments with the aim of clarifying the role of the verb.
The Logic begins with the claim that “the word idea is one of those that are so
clear that they cannot be explained by others, because there are none more clear
and simple” (39). Despite this pronouncement, Arnauld and Nicole immediately
launch into confusions about ideas which they intend to clear up.
They ﬁrst
remark that they do not mean images “painted in the fantasy”, but rather “all
that is in the mind when we can say truthfully we are conceiving something in
whatever manner we conceive it” (41).
Following Descartes, they rejected the
view of Hobbes and Gassendi that ideas are simply derived from sense images.
Like Descartes, again, Arnauld and Nicole give examples of such ideas as that
of a chiliagon or God, which are not associated with an image. In a later work,
On True and False Ideas, Arnauld made it clear that he thought of an idea of
something as the mental perception of that thing.
Like Descartes, he thought
our minds, when used correctly, would correctly grasp the natures of things. The
properties of those things would be contained, in Descartes’ language, objectively
in the ideas. So, for example, omniscience is contained objectively in the idea of
God, and having angles which add up to two right angles is contained objectively
in the idea of a triangle. While these remarks suggest ideas have a propositional
content, Arnauld and Nicole maintained that ideas are prior to judgement and
they identiﬁed propositions with judgements.
An idea can be clear and distinct or obscure and confused. Arnauld and Nicole
again followed Descartes here, although they in fact blur his distinction between
clarity and distinctness in their explanation. Descartes had said a perception was
clear “when it is present and accessible to the attentive mind . . . and stimulates
it with a suﬃcient degree of strength and accessibility”, and distinct when “as
well as being clear, it is so sharply separated from all other perceptions that it
contains within itself only what is clear” [Adam and Tannery, 1964-76, VIII -1, 22;
Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 208]. The example Descartes gives of a clear idea
which is not distinct is of a pain, for the pain is quite strongly present to the mind,
but the idea is obscure because “people commonly confuse this perception with
9See [Loux, 1974, 49–51].

672
Russell Wahl
an obscure judgement they make concerning the nature of something which they
think exists in the painful spot and which they suppose to resemble the sensation
of pain; but in fact it is the sensation alone which they perceive clearly” [Adam
and Tannery, 1964-76, VIII-1, 22; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, I, 208]. Descartes
is known for saying that extension and motion are contained clearly in the idea of
material substance, but that heat, color, etc. are not so contained. An idea (or
perception) of material things which included extension and motion, but didn’t
clearly exclude these other things would be clear but not distinct. One which only
included extension and motion would be clear and distinct. After giving a close
approximation to Descartes’ own account of clarity and distinctness, Arnauld and
Nicole added that the obscurity of ideas arises from their confusion, so in the end,
they take clarity and distinctness to be the same thing (70).
With respect to
Descartes’ example of an idea of pain being clear but not distinct, they say that
the sensation itself is both clear and distinct. “That the sensation is in the hand”,
which was what was not distinct, is also, they said, not clear (70). The obscurity is
a result of the confusion. So what we are concerned with in clarifying ideas really
involves making them distinct. In retrospect this was also Descartes’ concern.
Given Arnauld’s view of an idea as the mental awareness or perception of a
thing, it is the perceiving that is clear or obscure, not what is perceived. This
point is sometimes overlooked, as Arnauld and Nicole occasionally classify ideas
as clear and distinct simply with respect to their objects. Thus they say that “the
idea each person has of himself as a thing that thinks is very clear, and similarly
the ideas of everything dependent on our thought, such as judging, reasoning,
doubting . . . ” (70-1) Presumably the suggestion is that when someone is thinking
of these things, these ideas are clear because what is contained in them will strike
the person having them forcefully. Similarly they say that “confused and obscure
ideas are those we have of sensible qualities such as colors, sounds, odors, tastes,
cold, hot, weight . . . ” (71). Properly speaking whether these ideas are confused
or clear would be relative to the conceiver. Given that they said the idea of pain
conﬁned to the sensation is clear and distinct, it seems possible to have a clear idea
of sensible qualities, provided any bodily location is excluded from them. Similarly,
ideas of external objects can become less obscure by reﬂection. Descartes himself
speaks of a confused idea of the sun and also a clearer one.
Arnauld and Nicole make a distinction between the comprehension of an idea
and its extension. This distinction, roughly corresponding to the present distinc-
tion between intension and extension, is important for the analyses of propositions
and syllogisms given in Parts II and III. The comprehension of an idea consists
of “the attributes that it contains in itself, and that cannot be removed from it
without destroying it . . . ” (59). Those features that Descartes would have said
are contained objectively in the idea will be included in this comprehension. For
example, the comprehension of the idea of a triangle will contain extension, shape,
three lines, three angles, and the equality of these three angles to two right angles.
The extension of the idea are “the subjects to which the idea applies” (59). These
include the lower species as well as the individuals. While some have seen this

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
673
inclusion as a serious confusion, it does not appear to make much diﬀerence in
the application in the Logic.10 It is a mistake, I believe, to read into the Logic a
prelude to set theory. Like Descartes, Arnauld and Nicole were nominalists with
respect to universals, and they did not have a concept of a collection as itself
an abstract object. There were universal ideas, and these were said to extend to
species, which were themselves ideas, but the only non-ideas to which all these ap-
ply are particulars.11 Thus it is fairly harmless when they say that the extension
of the idea of a triangle includes all the species of triangles (59).
It is less harmless that they lump together two methods of narrowing the exten-
sion of an idea. The ﬁrst method is to form a complex idea by adding an attribute
which cuts down the extension, for example adding the attribute of having a ninety
degree angle to the general idea of a triangle and obtaining the complex idea of a
right triangle. The second method of narrowing the extension of an idea is to join
it with the idea of an indeterminate part, which is their analysis of “some triangle”.
This way of understanding the particular quantiﬁer results in some confusion in
the account of propositions.
The distinction between the extension and comprehension of an idea is ﬁrst used
in clarifying the distinction in complex ideas between restrictive and non-restrictive
additions. Arnauld and Nicole point out that when we add to the comprehension
of an idea by including a further property, we can express this by using an adjective
or a relative clause, e.g. “A transparent body” or “a body which is transparent.”
These they call “complex terms”.
Those additions to the comprehension that
do not narrow the extension are called “explications” (i.e. non-restrictive) and
those that do narrow the extension are “determinations”. For example, adding
the idea of the attribute mortal to the idea of man will not narrow the extension
of the idea, while adding the idea of transparent to the idea of body will. In the
case of singular terms, all such additional complexity will simply be explicative,
as in “Alexander, the son of Philip,” or “Aristotle, the prince of philosophers”.
In general it appears that the relation of the comprehension to the extension is
reciprocal in that as attributes are added to the comprehension, the extension is
narrowed. The principle is not universal, though, for in the case of explications
the addition to the comprehension does not further narrow the extension.
One might hold that explications are not really additions, for on the Cartesian
view accepted herem even if I don’t think of it, having angles adding up to two
right angles is included in my idea of a triangle. While this appears to hold of what
Descartes said were ideas of true and immutable natures, it isn’t at all clear that
it should apply in the case of singular terms. For example it isn’t clear whether,
being the teacher of the son of Philip is included in the comprehension of the
idea of Aristotle. Arnauld rejected this view in his correspondence with Leibniz,
although he did agree that God’s knowledge of an individual included all truths
about him.12 In any case, there isn’t any reason to attribute this view to the Port-
10See, for example Norman Kretzman’s discussion in [Kretzman, 1967, 379].
11This is made explicit in the discussion of universals. (I, 7, 60)
12Letter to Leibniz, 13 May 1686, in [Mason, 1967, 25–27].

674
Russell Wahl
Royal Logic, although it is fairly clear that singular terms do have a comprehension
as well as an extension, and this is certainly true of deﬁnite descriptions. It is clear
that the Port-Royal Logic holds the principle that if the comprehension of an idea
A includes the comprehension of an idea B then the extension of B includes the
extension of A, but there isn’t any reason to think Arnauld and Nicole hold the
converse, that if the extension of the idea A is included in the extension of B,
then the comprehension of B is included in the comprehension of A.
Such a
principle would make explications simply a making explicit the comprehension
already contained in an idea. Unfortunately there is one spot where Arnauld and
Nicole come close to expressing this view. In Part III, chapter 10 they discuss a
general method of testing arguments and seeking premises, and are in particular
discussing a syllogism in Disamis,
Some saint is poor.
All saints are friends of God.
Therefore some friend of God is poor.
The general method holds that the conclusion is contained in the major premise
and that the minor premise makes this explicit.
They say that for the major
premise to contain the conclusion, “it is necessary and suﬃcient that the term
some saint contain the term some friend of God.” For this to be the case, they
continue, “it is necessary that friend of God be contained in the comprehension
of the idea saint” (213). What is at issue here is the truth of the minor premise.
Certainly if friend of God is contained within the comprehension of saint, we could
know this, but I don’t think we need to read into this remark the claim that this
must be true for any such A proposition to be true.
Complex terms, and the distinction between explicative and determinative ad-
ditions play an important role in the analysis of propositions, particularly the
discussion of incidental (or subordinate) propositions. This discussion will be im-
portant to the discussion of inference. One tension which arises immediately is
the relation of complex ideas to such incidental propositions. Arnauld and Nicole
follow tradition by holding that ideas are prior to propositions, yet they hold that
“it is the same thing to say ‘a transparent body’ or a ‘body that is transparent”’
(66). Yet the ﬁrst appears to be a complex idea while the second contains, they
hold in Part II, an implicit assertion. As we shall see, the line they wish to draw
between conception, which is of ideas, and judgment, which is of propositions is
not as easy to make as it seems. But to explore this further, as well as other issues
involving terms, it will be useful to look at their account of propositions.
4
PROPOSITIONS
The Logic has a traditional view of propositions as containing two terms and a
copula. One term is the subject term, the other, the predicate; the subject is that
of which one aﬃrms or denies something, and what is aﬃrmed is the predicate

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
675
(called the attribut in the Logic). Arnauld and Nicole go on to say that these
ingredients are not enough to make a proposition, but that the “mind must join
or separate them” (113).
This activity of the mind is signiﬁed by the copula
(est in their example) or by the copula along with negation particles (n’est pas in
their example). As Jill Buroker has pointed out, this treatment of the proposition
appears to leave Arnauld and Nicole no room for the mind’s simply conceiving
of a proposition without aﬃrming or denying it, because on their view it is the
act of the will in either aﬃrming or denying that creates the proposition in the
ﬁrst place. It also leaves them open to Frege’s charge that this kind of analysis of
negation is incoherent.13 Let me deal brieﬂy with both these diﬃculties.
Buroker contrasts the Port-Royal account of propositions with that of Descartes.
On Descartes’ view, there appears to be no sharp line between conceiving ideas
which are non-propositional and thinking a proposition. The understanding can
have before it an idea with a propositional content, and then the faculty of the
will comes in when a person makes a judgement. Aﬃrmation or denial is then
made on a propositional content, and the will can also be suspended, in which
case the proposition will just be considered. Now as Buroker points out, this last
step does not seem to be open to Arnauld and Nicole, for they bring the act of
aﬃrmation or denial into the very building of the proposition; on their view it
appears that without the judgement involved in the aﬃrmation or denial, there is
no proposition to consider.
As Arnauld and Nicole claim that negation involves the mind separating ideas
apart, it may appear that Frege’s argument in “Negation” applies to them. In
that essay14 Frege argued that false propositions, or thoughts, had just as much
being and unity as true ones and that “our act of judgment can in no way alter the
make-up of a thought” [Geach and Black, 1970, 122]. He was especially concerned
with the view that negation was an act of the person making the judgment which
dissolved the proposition or separated it into parts [Geach and Black,1970, 123–
124]. This is just the view that Arnauld and Nicole appear to put forth.
Buroker is right about the Port-Royal characterization of propositions. The
unity of the proposition as a proposition does appear to be the function of the
verb.
Starting with the ﬁfth edition of 1683, Arnauld and Nicole included as
the ﬁrst two chapters of the second part one chapter “of words as related to
propositions” (II, 1) and one “of verbs,” (II, 2) taken pretty much verbatim from
the Grammaire G´en´erale et Raison´ee. The second chapter, taken from Part II,
Chapter 13 of the Grammaire, asserts that the chief function of the verb is its role
in aﬃrming, “to indicate the connection we make in our minds between the two
terms of a proposition” (109). In the Grammaire, Arnauld and Lancelot argued
that participles were not genuine verbs because they contained no assertion, giving
as examples “Peter living” and “Peter is living”, the ﬁrst being merely a complex
idea containing the two ideas, and the second being a genuine assertion.
The
inclusion of this section in Part II of the Logic was to emphasize the role of the
13See [Buroker, 1996a, 9–10].
14The essay was ﬁrst published in 1919 and appears in [Geach and Black, 1970, 117–135].

676
Russell Wahl
asserting verb in propositions. All propositions are either aﬃrmations or denials.
Subordinate clauses which are not aﬃrmed are not propositions on this view, and
so it does not appear to be possible to consider a proposition without aﬃrming it,
since it appears that it is the ingredient of aﬃrmation or denial which creates the
proposition.
It should be noted, though, that despite this view, Arnauld and Nicole do appear
to include in ideas what we would call propositional content. For them, as much as
for Descartes, having angles which add up to two right angles is contained within
the idea triangle. Descartes’ view was that the clear and distinct perception of
this containment would determine the will to make a judgement. The same is
the case for Arnauld and Nicole, although they would deny that prior to assertion
we are considering a proposition. Instead they would say we are contemplating
a complex idea. With respect to relative clauses, Arnauld and Nicole actually
get into a diﬃculty. In Part I, chapter 8 they hold that “a transparent body”
and “a body which is transparent” are the same thing, and are complex terms,
not propositions (65). But in Part II, Chapter 6 they refer to relative clauses as
incidental propositions, but none the less propositions, and thus want to include
an assertion in them (122). They come to the somewhat unsatisfactory position
that in the case of explicative relative clauses the clause as well is asserted, but
in the case of determinative clauses there is a “tacit or virtual” assertion that
combination is possible. Thus if I say that “Alexander, who was the son of Philip,
defeated the Persians” I am asserting that Alexander was the son of Philip (125),
and if I say “A transparent body has weight” on this view I am not asserting that
there are transparent bodies, but that it is possible that there be.
In the Grammaire, the focus is on explicative clauses in the discussion of relative
pronouns. There, Arnauld and Lancelot held that when someone says,
Invisible God created the visible world,
there are “three judgments in my mind contained in this proposition, for I judge
ﬁrst that God is invisible, second that he created the world, third that the world
is visible” [Arnauld and Lancelot, 1660, II, 9, 68]. So while there is only one verb
occurring here, what seem to be complex ideas, invisible God and visible world,
contain judgments.
Probably the best way to understand the Port-Royal view is to see that in
one sense they were more sensitive than Descartes to the diﬀerence between a
proposition and a complex idea. They emphasized the occurrence of what Bertrand
Russell would later call the verb as a verb, as opposed to the verb as term as the
crux of this diﬀerence.15 However, since they thought of assertion and negation
as acts of judging, they ended up with a view which makes the very unity of the
proposition dependent on the act of the judging mind. In fact, they did not have
15See [Russell, 1903, Chapter IV, especially sections 48 to 53].
There are actually many
similarities between the analyses given in the Port-Royal Logic and the Principles of Mathematics
on this point, although Russell is very clear, as was Frege, that the propositions are not formed
by the act of judging.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
677
to do this, since they seem to recognize some unity in complex ideas and this unity
would serve well as what Russell later called propositional concepts or “unasserted
propositions”.16 By their own criteria, there is no assertion when I say simply “the
visible world,” since there is no act of aﬃrming or denying anything. I could, for
example, be contemplating denying its existence. They could then have said that
the act of asserting was the act of judging that the parts of the complex idea go
together, and the act of negating involved judging they did not. The propositional
concepts would then have a unity, i.e. the unity of a complex term, though not one
created by the asserting will. Unfortunately, they did not address this diﬃculty
in this manner.
The Port-Royalists were taken by the fact that the sentence,
Invisible God created the visible world
was equivalent to the sentence,
God, who is invisible, created the world, which is visible.
This last sentence contains verbs occurring as verbs and it seems that someone
who states this is committed to the truth of the claims “God is invisible” and “the
world is visible”. With respect to the proposition “Invisible God created the visible
world,” these other propositions are probably better understood as presupposed
rather than asserted. There is a place in the Logic where Arnauld and Nicole
allow that a proposition can still be true even though the incidental propositions
are false:
. . . the falsity of the incidental proposition does not ordinarily preclude
the truth of the main proposition. For example, “Alexander who was
the son of Philip defeated the Persian.” This proposition should be
considered true even if Alexander was not the son of Philip, because
the aﬃrmation of the principal proposition aﬀects only Alexander, and
what is joined to it incidentally, although false, does not prevent it from
being true that Alexander defeated the Persians. (125)
However, they hold that when the incidental proposition is related as in “Alexan-
der the son of Philip was the grandson of Amintas” the falsity of the incidental
proposition would make the principal proposition false. Unfortunately, they did
not elaborate this example, for it is not clear why, for example, if Amintas had
had two sons, Philip and Hector, and unbeknown to everyone Alexander was the
son of Hector, we would not gloss the example the same as the one above. In the
ﬁrst section, Arnauld and Nicole point out what they call the ambiguity of such
expressions as “the true religion”. They say,
16The example Russell uses is “The death of Caesar” as opposed to “Caesar died”. It is clear
from the Port-Royal discussion in Part II Chapter 2 that the ﬁrst of these would simply be a
complex idea and not a proposition. See especially p.111.

678
Russell Wahl
. . . the words “true religion” signify but a single and unique religion,
which is in truth the Catholic religion, since that is the only true one.
But because each nation and each sect believes that its religion is the
true one, these words are highly equivocal in people’s mouths, although
by error. And if we read in a historian that a prince was zealous about
the true religion, we could not know what was meant unless we knew
this historian’s religion. For if he were a Protestant, it would mean the
Protestant religion; if he were an Arab Moslem who spoke thus about
his prince, it would mean the Moslem religion; and we could judge
that it was the Catholic religion only if we knew that the historian was
Catholic. (67)
Jean-Claude Pariente has noted that Arnauld used this distinction in his contro-
versy over the refusal of the Jansenists to sign the formulary, and says it anticipates
Keith Donnellan’s distinction between referential and attributive uses of descrip-
tions.17 His description of Arnauld’s own account of the distinction, though, sug-
gests a closer connection to the distinction made between speaker’s reference and
semantic reference, although the two are related.18
Given the account of a proposition as either an aﬃrmation or a denial of the
relation of two terms, it is clear that negation will be seen as part of the copula.
However, whether a proposition is universal or particular on this account appears
to be a function of the subject term.
Each idea or term, whether general or
singular, has an extension as well as a comprehension. One way of limiting or
further determining that extension was to form a complex idea which has a greater
comprehension and cuts back the extension. The other way was to join to it “only
an indistinct and indeterminate idea of a part, as when I say, some triangle . . . ”
(59). The view here is that the quantiﬁers ‘all’ and ‘some’ are not part of the
propositional form, but attach to a term as a way of determining its extension.
So that ‘all men’ is a complex term in the proposition “all men are mortal”, as is
“some men” in “some men are over six feet tall”. While this is the oﬃcial view of
the Port-Royal Logic, in practice they treat propositions, and not merely subject
terms as universal or particular.
While each idea has an extension, Arnauld and Nicole mark the distinction of
universal and particular propositions as a distinction of whether the terms are
“taken” throughout their entire extensions or only through an “indeterminate
part” of that extension.19
In fact, the Port-Royal Logic deﬁnes the distinction
17[Pariente, 1985, 206]. The reference is to [Donnellan, 1966].
18Quoting from texts collated by Father Quesnel and reprinted in Volume 22 of [Arnauld,
1775-1783], Pariente marks the distinction between which object is actually determined by the
property and which object is thought of by the person who utters the description. This way of
making the distinction appears closer to the distinction between speaker’s reference and semantic
reference. See [Kripke,1977] and [Donnellan, 1978].
19“. . . les termes universels peuvent ˆetre pris ou selon toute leur ´etendue, en les joignant aux
signes universels exprim´es ou sous-entendus, comme omnis, tout, pour l’aﬃrmation; nullus, nul,
pour la negation, tout homme, nul homme . . . Ou selon une partie ind´etermin´ee de leur ´etendue,
qui est lorsqu’on y joint le mot aliqui, quelque, comme quelque homme, quelque hommes, ou

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
679
between universal and particular propositions on the basis of whether a common
term is taken in its entire extension or whether it is taken as an indeterminate
part (115). Singular propositions are then classiﬁed with universal, even though
their subject is not a common term, because they are always taken through their
entire extensions (115). Despite the fact that the quantiﬁer expressions are seen
grammatically as attaching to the subject terms, there is a sense in which proposi-
tions are to be understood as universal or particular and not simply their subject
terms. The real interest in the Port-Royal Logic is in whether a term in a propo-
sition is taken throughout its entire extension or not. This way of phrasing things
replaces the account of “distributed terms” familiar to students of what is now
taught as syllogistic logic. As we shall see, the Port-Royal analysis of propositions
and inferences relies very heavily on this concept.
Jean-Claude Pariente has suggested that the Port-Royal Logic is best under-
stood as holding an identity theory of the copula. E. A. Moody [Moody, 1953, 36]
characterized two understandings of the copula from mediaeval semantics. The
identity theory holds that in some sense the copula in an aﬃrmative proposition
asserts some kind of identity. Clearly with such cases as “All men are mortal” the
view has to be understood not as identifying the subject term with the predicate
term, but as saying that the proposition asserts an identity of the extension of the
subject term with part of the extension of the predicate. Ockham has been associ-
ated with the identity theory,20 but he made it clear that he does not require that
the subject and predicate be identical, but rather, “that the subject and predicate
supposit for the same thing”.21 The other theory, the inherence theory, did not
take the copula as a sign of identity, but as a sign of the inherence of the prop-
erty signiﬁed by the predicate term into those objects which were supposited by
the subject term. The identity theory was very much motivated by nominalism,
since the earlier theory took the predicate term to refer to a universal or common
nature. Pariente takes some remarks from the Port-Royal Logic concerning con-
version, and a further remark from Arnauld’s La perp´etuit´e de la foi as evidence
that the copula is taken as a symbol of identity.22
It seems on the face of it that the nominalism of Port Royal would not have them
adopt the inherence theory, and the language as Pariente points out, does suggest
the identity theory. However, the situation is a bit more complex, as the discussion
of the function of the copula in aﬃrmative propositions takes into consideration
both the comprehensions and extensions of the ideas.
This discussion is most
explicit in the account of conversion of propositions. There Arnauld and Nicole
give four “indubitable axioms” concerning aﬃrmative propositions:
d’autres selon l’usage des langues. (114)
20See [Moody, 1953, 36–37].
21Ockham, Summa Logicae, II, Ch. 2. See [Freddoso and Shuurman, 1980, 86].
22[Pariente, 1985, 263]. The remark from The Perpetuation of the Faith was “the nature of
all aﬃrmative propositions is to indicate that the subject is the same thing as the attribute
[predicate]” [Arnauld, 1775-1783, III, 167]. In the chapter introducing conversion in the Logic,
Arnauld and Nicole say “. . . it is clear that the nature of aﬃrmation is to unite and to identify
. . . the subject with the attribute, since this is what is signiﬁed by the word is.” (168)

680
Russell Wahl
1. The attribute is put in the subject by an aﬃrmative proposition according
to the entire extension the subject has in the proposition.
2. The attribute of an aﬃrmative proposition is aﬃrmed according to its entire
comprehension.
3. The attribute of an aﬃrmative proposition is not aﬃrmed according to its
entire extension if it is in itself greater than that of the subject.
4. The extension of the attribute is restricted by that of the subject, such that
it does not signify more than the part of its extension which applies to the
subject. (170)23
Thus in the proposition “All F are G”, by (1) and (2) the comprehension of G
is aﬃrmed of all of the extension of F, and by (3) and (4) the extension of G
is not aﬃrmed according to its entire extension, but is restricted to the part of
its extension which is common to F.
It is somewhat diﬃcult to interpret the
last two axioms, but it seems that in some sense the claim is that in aﬃrmative
universal propositions, the whole of the extension of the subject is signiﬁed, but
not the whole of the extension of the predicate. These claims replace the doctrine
of distribution, where the term is distributed when it signiﬁes its entire extension,
and is undistributed when it doesn’t. Pariente takes the second two axioms to
indicate that in the case of an aﬃrmative proposition “All F are G” what is being
asserted is an identity between the extension of F and a part of the extension
of G (namely those G’s that are F, given Axiom 4).
The proposition “Some
F are G” then would assert an identity between an indeterminate part of the
extension of F and an indeterminate part of the extension of G. Now Pariente,
though, also claimed that in the case of “All F are G”, the Port Royal view is
that the comprehension of G is included as a subset of the comprehension of F
[Parient, 1985, 266]. As Jill Buroker has pointed out, this claim does not appear to
follow from these axioms, nor is it plausible in the case of non-necessary universal
aﬃrmatives and even less plausible in the case of particular aﬃrmatives. When I
aﬃrm “All swans are white”, I am claiming that the extension of swan is a subset
of the extension of white. Am I also claiming that the comprehension of white
is contained in the comprehension of swan? This would only be plausible if we
thought of the comprehension of an idea as including all the ideas which apply to
the entire extension. Given the view that the comprehension was essential to the
idea and the extension was not, this position is implausible. Again it seems very
implausible, to use Buroker’s example, that when we say “some bears are white”
we are including the comprehension of white in the comprehension of bear, or in
the comprehension of the idea of some particular bear [Buroker, 1994, 10–11].
While there are places where Arnauld and Nicole seem to hold a theory of
the copula as asserting an identity between the extension of the subject and the
23An important feature of axiom 1 is that the subject of a universal proposition has the entire
extension of the idea, while that of a particular has only an indeterminate part of that extension.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
681
extension of the predicate and this seems most supported by the third and fourth
axioms above, the easiest reading of the ﬁrst two axioms simply is a predicative
view of the copula, where the entire comprehension of the predicate is predicated
of the extension of the subject term — either the entire extension of the idea
in the case of the universal proposition, or an indeterminate part in the case of
the particular. As Buroker has pointed out, these ﬁrst two axioms suggest an
asymmetry between subject and predicate which doesn’t ﬁt well with the identity
theory. However, some remarks at the end of the fourth axiom (“. . . when we say
that humans are animals, the word ‘animal’ no longer signiﬁes all animals, but
only those animals which are human.” (170)) suggest something like the identity
theory and the unfortunate view that the signiﬁcance of the word ‘animal’ when
in predicate position is diﬀerent in diﬀerent universal aﬃrmative statements.
These four axioms were given as a prelude to the account of conversion, the
only immediate inference discussed in the Port-Royal Logic. The rejection of the
conversion of the A proposition is taken as a consequence of these axioms, for in
a proposition such as “all men are animals”, all ideas contained in the compre-
hension of “animals” are asserted of the entire extension of “men,” but by the
third axiom, nothing is claimed about the entire extension of “animals”. Thus
the proposition, “all animals are men” is not contained in “all men are animals”.
Following this analysis, Arnauld and Nicole give two rules for the conversion of
aﬃrmative propositions, the ﬁrst that universal aﬃrmative propositions can be
converted by adding a mark of particularity to the attribute which becomes the
subject, and the second that particular aﬃrmative propositions can be converted
without any change.
Given that in “all men are mortal” the extension of the
term “mortal” that is in question is only a part of the total extension of the idea,
from the fourth axiom, that part of the extension is said to be identical with the
extension of the term “men”, so “some mortals are men” will be true.
As Jean-Claude Pariente has pointed out, the Port-Royal Logic gives a separate
account of negation. The negation of a categorical proposition is not deﬁned in
terms of the truth values of propositions negated, but separately.
It then will
follow from this account that the E proposition will take the opposite truth value
of the I and the O will take the opposite truth value of the A. Again with the
account of negative propositions, there is a part of an identity theory, as the
account opens by saying that the nature of a negative proposition is “to conceive
that one thing is not another” (173). Three further axioms are given speciﬁcally
concerning negative propositions:
1. A negative proposition does not separate all the parts contained in the com-
prehension of the attribute from the subject: but it separates only the total
and complete idea composed of these attributes together.
2. The attribute of a negative proposition is always taken generally [i.e. through-
out the entire extension].
3. Every attribute denied of a subject is denied of everything contained in the
extension of the subject in the proposition [i.e. the entire extension of the

682
Russell Wahl
idea in the case of a universal, and an indeterminate part in the case of a
particular]. (173-4)
The ﬁfth axiom states that if I assert the proposition “No F are G”, and the idea G
contains in its comprehension the ideas H and K, I am not denying that there are
F’s that are H or F’s that are K, but only that there are no F’s which have both
attributes. The sixth axiom, which corresponds to the claim that the predicate
term of negative propositions is distributed, is argued for somewhat awkwardly by
the statement that “if triangle is denied of squares, everything that is a triangle
will be denied of squares”. “Everything that is a triangle” clearly refers to the
extension of “triangle” here. Presumably in “some ﬁgures are not triangles” the
indeterminate part of the extension of “ﬁgures” would not be any of the species
of triangles, and no member of the indeterminate part would be a member of the
extension of “triangle”. From these axioms, Arnauld and Nicole derive a third
rule, that universal negative propositions can be converted.
While they don’t
give a further rule about particular negatives, they argue that given these axioms,
they cannot be converted. The argument for the third rule is that since, given
the sixth and seventh axioms, and the fact that in the universal propositions the
entire extension of the subject is in question, a proposition such as “No F are G”
separates the entire extension of F from the entire extension of G, so this separation
will be “mutual and reciprocal.” This is not the case with the particular negatives,
since in those cases the entire extension of the subject term is not in question, but
only an indeterminate part. So “some person is not a physician” makes an assertion
concerning only an indeterminate part of the extension of “person” while “some
physician is not a person” makes a claim concerning its entire extension.
In a brief section on the square of opposition the Port-Royal Logic gives the tra-
ditional relations of contradictories, subcontraries, contraries and subaltern (117).
Unfortunately, there is no discussion of existential presupposition. It is clear that
Arnauld and Nicole hold that the aﬃrmative propositions carry existential pre-
supposition, but they are not explicit with respect to negative propositions, which
were held by many mediaeval logicians not to have any existential presupposition,
thus preserving all the relations of the square.24
On this view the immediate
inference of obversion doesn’t hold, and there is no mention of this inference in
the Port-Royal Logic. Jean-Claude Pariente has argued that since ideas which
are species of the general ideas are counted in the extension of terms, there is a
sense in which all terms, even those which do not have any existing particulars in
their extensions, do have things in their extension, and he uses this to justify a
claim of existential presupposition for all terms.25 As far as I can tell, the text of
the Logic does not really lend support to this interpretation. There is, though, a
24See [Moody, 1953, 50–51], for a discussion of Buriden on this point, and Freddoso, “Ockham’s
Theory of Truth Conditions”, [Freddoso and Schurrman, 1980, 18], for a discussion of Ockham.
25See [Pariente, 1985, 246]: “These observations explain at least in part the indiﬀerence of Port-
Royal to problems posed for logic by empty terms. When the logic is presented as a calculus
applying to ideas, and more precisely to relations between extensions of ideas, the possibility or
impossibility of applying these ideas to concrete realities has no eﬀect on the calculus itself.”

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
683
discussion in the section on incidental propositions and compound subjects where
the Logic suggests one can aﬃrm an A proposition without asserting the existence
of anything which falls under its subject term.
In any case, the section on the square of opposition is brief, and the section on
modal propositions (130) is also extremely brief. There is no discussion of modal
syllogisms.
5
COMPOUND PROPOSITIONS AND INCIDENTAL OR SUBORDINATE
PROPOSITIONS
The Port-Royal Logic includes a discussion of a variety of propositions which do not
ﬁt easily into the pattern of simple categorical propositions. Arnauld and Nicole
characterize compound propositions as those that have either complex subjects or
complex predicates. In fact, most of their examples are propositions in which just
one or the other terms is complex, such as propositions of the form “either a or
b is F”, or “b is F and G.” However, they allow both terms to be complex as
well, and in their discussion of conditionals include such conditionals as “If the
earth is immovable, the sun revolves”. As they see all conditionals as statements
of inference, these conditionals containing diﬀerent terms and predicates in their
subordinate propositions are said to be statements of “mediate inference”. All
the other cases of compound propositions they discuss involve complex subjects
or predicates, although it is possible to extend their account generally.
Compound propositions are divided into two classes, those in which the composi-
tion is explicit, and those in which it is not, these latter being called “exponibles”.
The explicit ones include copulatives (“P and Q”), disjunctives (“Either P or
Q”), conditionals (“If P then Q”), causals (“P because of Q”), relatives (other
than causal, e.g. “As a person lives, so he dies”) and discretives (“P but Q”).
The original (ﬁrst edition) list of exponibles included exclusives (“Only F is G”),
exceptives (“All F, except G, are H”), comparatives (“A is more F than B”),
inceptives (“Beginning at t, P”), desitives (“P ended at t”), and reduplicatives
(“A, insofar as it is B, is C”). In the later editions, the inceptives and desitives
were treated together, and the reduplicatives simply mentioned under the causals.
These propositions were for the most part not treated as truth-functions, with
the exception of basic conjunctions, or copulatives. With respect to these, Arnauld
and Nicole say “the truth of these propositions depends on the truth of both
parts” (132).26 However, under each of these classiﬁcations there is a discussion
26It is interesting to note that for the example of a copulative with both a complex subject
and a complex predicate Arnauld and Nicole take a negative proposition which in English is
naturally seen as a negation of a disjunction, but which in Latin and French are easily seen as a
conjunction of negations. The line is from Horace:
Non domus & fundus, non aeris acervus et auri, Aegroto Domini deduxit corpore
febres, non animo curas.
Which they translate as Ni les maisons, ni les terres, ni les plus grandes amas d’or & d’argent ne

684
Russell Wahl
of what propositions constitute the contradictory of the given propositions, and
in some of these discussions Arnauld and Nicole appear to be closer to a truth-
functional analysis of the propositions. Disjunctions are not given a simple truth-
functional analysis, as the authors hold that the truth of the disjunction depends
on “the necessary opposition between the parts, which must not permit a middle.”
The contradiction of a disjunction is said simply to be a proposition denying
the disjunction, without further explication.
The truth of discretives, such as
“Happiness depends not on wealth but on knowledge”, is said to depend “on the
truth of both parts and the separation between them”. This suggests a connection
stronger than a mere conjunction. Nevertheless, Arnauld and Nicole do not say
that a discretive proposition without a contrast between the terms is false, but
rather that it is ridiculous [ridicule]. When it comes to stating what contradicts
discretive propositions, they say that such propositions can be contradicted in
three ways:
Happiness depends on wealth and not knowledge
Happiness depends neither on wealth nor knowledge
Happiness depends on both wealth and knowledge.
As they started with a proposition of the sort “Not P but Q,” the propositions
denying the discretive are the three possibilities, “P and not Q,” “Not P and not
Q,” “P and Q.” This gives a nice modern truth table for “Not P and Q.” Such
a list was not given for the denial of copulatives (i.e. conjunctions). Instead of
recognizing that the contradiction of the discretive is equivalent to a disjunction,
they remark that the last two of these alternatives are copulatives and so say,
“Thus we see that copulatives are contradictories of discretives” (137).
With respect to conditionals, Arnauld and Nicole say that to determine their
truth “we consider only the truth of the inference,” stating that even if both
propositions are false, “if the inference from the one to the other is valid, the
proposition insofar as it is conditional is true”. This way of putting things clearly
rules out a simple truth-functional analysis. In their analysis of the denial of “if
you eat the forbidden fruit, you will die” they give “although you eat the forbidden
fruit, you will not die”, which is then seen as equivalent to “It is not true that
if you eat the forbidden fruit, you will die” (135). This may suggest an analysis
closer to modern truth functions, but we should understand that “although” is
not treated simply as a truth function. Unfortunately it isn’t clear whether they
accept their own analysis as a complete account of the denial of a conditional,
since by their account for this proposition to be true the inference has to be valid.
They could conceivably hold that in the case that someone dies after eating the
fruit, the proposition may still be false because the inference from “you eat the
fruit” to “you die” is not valid.
peuvent ni chasser la ﬁ´evre du corps de celui qui les possede, ni d´eelivrer son esprit d’inquietude
et de chagrin. (132)

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
685
The exponibles were thought of as implicit compounds because while they ap-
pear to be categorical propositions, on analysis they are seen to contain at least
two separate assertions. I will just mention two of them, the exclusives and the
exceptives. Exclusive propositions (propositions such as “Only F and G”) tend
to be treated by modern logic books as a variant on the categorical proposition
“All G are F”. The Port-Royal Logic treats exclusives as a conjunction of two
propositions, but it discusses only such propositions which have a singular subject,
such as “Virtue alone is admirable”, or “Only God is worthy of being loved for
his own sake” (138). These propositions are seen as a conjunction of two proposi-
tions, e.g. “Virtue is admirable” and “Nothing else is admirable”. This restriction
to singular subjects is also found in their treatment of exceptives.
The exam-
ple they give, “No ancient philosophers, except the Platonists, recognized God’s
incorporeality” is treated as the compound of “the Platonists recognized God’s
incorporeality”, and “No other ancient philosophers did”. A similar treatment is
given to the proposition, “Except for the sage, all people are truly mad (fous)”
(141). We are not given an explicit treatment of exclusives which do not have a
singular subject, although the suggestion is that these too would be considered as
having compound subjects. “Only the brave deserve the fair”, would presumably
be seen by Arnauld and Nicole as asserting that the brave deserve the fair and no
others do. With respect to the exceptives, the rule given is that in these propo-
sitions we “aﬃrm a thing of an entire subject with the exception of some of the
inferiors of this subject, which we show by an exceptive particle that this thing
does not apply to them . . . ” (140). This account includes propositions such as
“None but the brave deserve the fair,” which would be treated as asserting the
same two claims as above.
6
CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS
The Port-Royal discussion of syllogisms is a mixed bag. On the one hand, Arnauld
and Nicole maintain their skepticism toward formal logic and the importance of
the study of reasoning or inference, saying that “there is reason to doubt whether
it is as useful as is imagined”, and “it happens rarely that we let ourselves be
misled by arguments that are false merely because the conclusion is badly drawn”
(177-178). Yet despite this dismissive attitude, the treatment of syllogisms is fairly
careful and quite clear.
The need for reasoning, they hold, is a consequence of our limited minds. The
suggestion seems to be that a mind which had suﬃciently clear and distinct ideas
would not need any reasoning at all. Reasoning only comes in when we cannot
decide on whether a proposition is true or false by considering the ideas which it
contains. To help determine whether a proposition is true we bring in a third idea,
the middle term, which helps us see the relation between the subject and predicate
of the proposition in question. An important feature of this way of viewing things
is that the inquirer always starts with the conclusion. The premises are sought
as an aid in determining the truth of the conclusion, but arguments do not have

686
Russell Wahl
premises as their intellectual starting points. One consequence of this view is that
in the proper analysis of arguments the conclusion is to remain unchanged. Any
reductions which involved tampering with the conclusion were rejected, and claims
that fourth-ﬁgure syllogisms could be eliminated by reversing the premisses were
also rejected, since the major premise was deﬁned as the premise containing the
predicate term of the conclusion.
Despite their opening discussion of the process of reasoning, which appears to
apply only to categorical syllogisms, the Port-Royal authors also recognize conjunc-
tive syllogisms, which include conditional syllogisms and disjunctive syllogisms.
The simple syllogisms are, paradoxically, divided into those that are complex and
noncomplex. The complex syllogisms are not sorities, but syllogisms which contain
complex terms in subject or predicate position.
Aristotle is often seen as giving a justiﬁcation of all the syllogisms by ﬁrst
displaying syllogisms which were self evident to the mind (those of the ﬁrst ﬁgure)
and then giving arguments which show that the valid moods of the other ﬁgures
can be justiﬁed based on arguments using conversion, contradictory relations and
the ﬁrst ﬁgure valid syllogisms. This system of transformations can be seen as a
formal deductive system. While Arnauld and Nicole were aware of this method of
reducing syllogisms to the ﬁrst ﬁgure, and included in the ﬁrst edition a chapter
(Chapter 9) on how to ﬁgure out what the reduction would be based on the letters
of the “artiﬁcial words,” they generally heaped scorn on this method, beginning
the chapter with the sentence: “This chapter is extremely useless” (203).
Their explanation of the validity of the correct syllogisms is instead a semantic
one. Based on their analyses of aﬃrmative and negative propositions, they give
arguments for rules of syllogisms which capture all the valid syllogisms and exclude
the invalid ones. Given their view that the mind easily grasps the valid syllogisms,
one may wonder why they even bother with this justiﬁcation. In fact, with respect
to simple syllogisms they think that the rules only serve to exercise the mind (178).
However, they also think that such an analysis will lead to general considerations
which will also apply to complex syllogisms (205).
The four axioms from which the rules derive are,
1. Particular propositions are contained in general propositions of the same
nature (quality) and not the general ones in the particular.
2. The subject of a proposition being taken universally or particularly is what
makes the proposition universal or particular.
3. The attribute of an aﬃrmative proposition never having a greater extension
than the subject, is always considered as taken particularly, because it is
only accidental if it is sometimes taken generally.
4. The attribute of a negative proposition is always taken generally. (183)
On the basis of these axioms they argue for the rules of syllogisms: (1) that
the middle term must be taken generally at least once; (2) that the terms of

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
687
the conclusion cannot be taken more universally in the conclusion than in the
premisses; (3) that no conclusion can be drawn from two negative premises, (4)
that a negative conclusion cannot be proved from two aﬃrmative premises (5)
that the conclusion always follows the weaker part, and (6) that nothing follows
from two particular premises. While they say they derive these rules from these
axioms, rules (3), (4) and the part of (5) involving negative propositions (namely,
that an aﬃrmative proposition cannot be drawn from a negative premise) actually
are based on the account of negative propositions mentioned above, namely that
they assert a separation of the subject from the predicate. There is no claim that
this set of rules is in any way minimal. The part of (5) involving particular and
universal propositions (namely that a universal conclusion cannot result if there
is one particular premise), and (6) are derived from previous rules.
With these rules, Arnauld and Nicole come up with a list of 10 “conclusive”
[concluans] moods. Curiously, they arrive at this list prior to the discussion of
the ﬁgures. The four conclusive aﬃrmative moods are AAA, AII, AAI, IAI, the
six negative are EAE, AEE, EAO, AOO, OAO, EIO. (AEO is excluded since
that would only hold if the stronger AEE held, and so is not seen as a separate
syllogism; EAO, though holds in the third and fourth ﬁgure where EAE does not.)
The conclusive moods appear to be those which may be valid in one or the other
ﬁgures. In the actual discussion of ﬁgures, the authors refer to the valid moods
as simply the moods which are possible within that ﬁgure. The list above serves
as an upper bound on the possible valid moods within a ﬁgure, and the authors
then argue for the smaller lists within the ﬁgures by cutting the list further by
means of rules they develop for each ﬁgure. They also give “foundations” for the
ﬁrst three ﬁgures. These foundations appeal to the axioms given above and the
general accounts of aﬃrmative and negative propositions. The foundations given
for the ﬁrst ﬁgure, for example, are,
Principle for aﬃrmative moods: Whatever applies to an idea taken
universally applies also to everything of which this idea is aﬃrmed, or
which is the subject of this idea, or what is included in the extension
of the idea, for these expressions are synonymous.
Principle for negative moods: Whatever is denied of an idea taken
universally is denied of everything of which this idea is aﬃrmed. (193)
These principles are then used to justify the validity of the syllogisms, with Barbara
and Darii seen as illustrating the ﬁrst principle and Celarent and Ferio illustrating
the second.
The principles become more complicated with the other moods. For the second
ﬁgure one foundation is given for Cesare and Festino, and another for Camestres
and Baroco. Cesare and Festino are seen as grounded in the same principle for
negative moods found in ﬁgure 1. Here Arnauld and Nicole point out that these are
variations from the ﬁrst mood with the major premise (E in both cases) converted.
The foundation for Camestres and Baroco is the following principle: Everything

688
Russell Wahl
which is included in the extension of a universal idea applies to none of the subjects
of which the idea is denied, the attribute of a negative proposition being taken
throughout its entire extension . . .
(197). Illustrating this with an instance of
Camestres, they point out that if “All P are M” is true, then P is included in the
extension of M. If “No S are M” is true, then M is denied of each S, and thus P
also will be denied, since the denial, “No S are M,” denies the entire extension of
M to S. While the concern with reduction was dismissed as useless, it is interesting
that a vestige of reduction is included in these sections, for Cesare and Festino are
justiﬁed by pointing out, as Aristotle argued in the Prior Analytics (27a), that
legitimate conversions yield Celarent and Ferio. While the arguments concerning
Camestres and Baroco are not indirect in the manner of the Prior Analytics, the
reasoning is still quite close to Aristotle’s.
With respect to the third ﬁgure, these principles are given for the moods:
Aﬃrmative moods: When two terms can be aﬃrmed of the same thing,
they can also be aﬃrmed of each other, taken particularly.
Negative Moods: When of two terms one can be denied and the other
aﬃrmed of the same thing, they can be denied particularly one of the
other (l’un de l’autre)(199)
While no further explication is given, it is easy to see how the principle grounds
the aﬃrmative moods, for in Darapti, “All M is P” and “All M is S”, both P
and S are aﬃrmed of the entire extension of M, so while there may be further
instances of P and of S, there will at least be instances in common, namely the
M’s. Both conclusions, “Some S is P” and “Some P is S”, are able to be drawn
from these premises, given the rule.
In the case of the negative moods, it is easy to read the principle as suggesting
that S can be denied of P and P can be denied of S. This, of course, is not
the case. Jean-Claude Pariente pointed out that Arnauld and Nicole’s language
inadvertently suggests that they have forgotten that the O propositions are not
convertible [Pariente, 1985, 343].
However, if we understand the line “l’un de
l’autre” not as the usual “of each other” but instead as “the one of the other” we
can read the principle as licensing only that the term denied of the middle term
can be denied of the term aﬃrmed of the middle term, and not the other way
around. In this way the principle would justify Bocardo, that is that from “Some
M is not P” and “All M is S”, I can infer “Some S is not P,” but would not
license the inference from these premises to “Some P is not S”.
Pariente points out that behind the accounts of the third ﬁgure syllogisms is
a method similar to that of the ekthesis (setting out) proofs given by Aristotle
in Prior Analytics for the third ﬁgure syllogisms. The ekthesis proofs of Bocardo
involves choosing the M which is not P as an S which is not P (Prior Analytics
28b 21-22). While the discussion appears to incorporate the reduction so much
scorned by the Logic, it is intended as giving simple rules to help the mind make
the correct inferences.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
689
With the fourth ﬁgure, Arnauld and Nicole give a set of rules, but do not bother
to give any justifying principle, since they hold the fourth ﬁgure to be “unnatural”.
7
A GENERAL METHOD FOR EVALUATING SYLLOGISMS
In their account of complex syllogisms, Arnauld and Nicole do two things. First
they give an account, at least for some speciﬁc examples, of how to rewrite complex
syllogisms into non-complex ones. The examples generally have the middle term
as only part of a complex term. For example in the argument,
Divine law commands us to honor kings
Louis XIV is [a or the] king.
Therefore, divine law commands us to honor Louis XIV. (206)
“kings” is the middle term, but occurs in a part of the predicate of the ﬁrst premiss.
The syllogism is rewritten ultimately as the non-complex syllogism:
Kings ought to be honored
Louis XIV is king.
Therefore, Louis XIV ought to be honored. (207)
This rewriting, though, is governed by the observation that the term king is taken
generally (that is, through its entire extension) in the ﬁrst premiss, along with the
observation that it is not the entire predicate of the ﬁrst proposition.
The second thing they do is to form a general principle from these considera-
tions. Since a valid (bon) argument is one where the conclusion is contained in
the premises, they say that in any syllogism, there will be a proposition, called
the containing proposition, which contains the conclusion, but only implicitly, and
another proposition, called the applicative proposition which shows this. Thus in
the above example, they would hold that the ﬁrst premise, “Divine law commands
us to honor kings,” contains the conclusion, and the second premise shows that it
does. With syllogisms such as Barbara they say that either premise can be taken
to be the containing premise though it is customary to take the major premise as
that one, since it is “more general” (212). In negative syllogisms, though, they
hold that the negative premise is always the containing one. They then argue
that all the rules that governed the syllogisms can be derived from this general
observation. What they argue for, in eﬀect, is that what we call the rules of dis-
tribution follow from this general claim about valid arguments. They argue that
if a syllogism is valid, in order for the conclusion to be contained in the premises
it cannot have a term taken more generally than in the premise, and for the ap-
plicative premise to show the subject of the conclusion can be substituted in the
containing premise, the middle term will have to be taken generally at least once.
It is in the demonstration of this last claim by an example where Arnauld and

690
Russell Wahl
Nicole come close to the claim that in such propositions as “All F are G”, what is
being aﬃrmed is that the extension of F is contained in the extension of G and the
comprehension of G is contained in the comprehension of F. This claim suggests
that there can be no accidental generalizations.
The discussion begins with the task of ﬁnding an additional premiss which will
lead to the conclusion of an I proposition, in this case, the proposition “Some friend
of God is poor”, along with the initial premise that “Some saint is poor”. (This
is given as an example of a proposition where the middle term is not distributed.
Given that the conclusion is aﬃrmative, the only other possible choice would be
“All who are poor are saints” from which the same reasoning as given for this one
would apply, though they would clearly think this premise is less plausible.) What
they argue is that any proposition from which this follows must take the middle
term universally. Their argument is,
For it is obvious that in order for this proposition some saint is poor
to contain the conclusion some friend of God is poor, it is necessary
and suﬃcient that the term some saint, contain the term some friend
of God, since the other term [i.e. poor] they have in common. Now
a particular term doesn’t have any determinate extension and con-
tains certainly only what is included in its comprehension and its idea
. . . And so in order that the term some saint contain the term some
friend of God, it is necessary that some friend of God be contained in
the comprehension of the idea of saint. (213)
What they are arguing is that the premiss containing the middle term must be
universal with the middle term as the subject, which is correct. However, in order
to get to this point, they seem to make a stronger claim, namely that the only
way we could come to such a proposition is if the comprehension of the predicate
be contained in the comprehension of the subject. They then argue that whenever
this is the case, the extension of the subject will be included in the extension
of the predicate, which is the case. Unfortunately this suggestion, that the only
way to obtain the universal proposition “All saints are friends of God” is if the
comprehension of friends of God is included in the comprehension of saints, has
the apparent consequence that in all A propositions, the comprehension of the
predicate is contained in the comprehension of the subject. In other works, they
appear to hold not just the principle,
Whenever the comprehension of B is contained in the comprehension
of A, the extension of A is contained in the extension of B,
but the stronger biconditional. As I pointed out in section IV, this stronger bi-
conditional would seem to make all universal propositions necessary. A charitable
reading here might suggest that in this case, the only way we might be able to
come to the conclusion “Some friend of God is poor” was to recognize as a premiss
“All saints are friends of God”. In this case the only way we might do that is by

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
691
reﬂecting on the comprehensions of the subject and predicate. Arnauld and Nicole
appear to push for the stronger claim to buttress the general principle as the sole
principle for validity.
Even without this example, the general principle needs supplementing. There
is still an explanatory gap between the general claim about containment, and the
other principles. Arnauld and Nicole attempt an account of the two “distribution”
principles, but do not attempt to give an account of the negation rules from this
general claim. The negation rules follow from the account of negative propositions,
not from the general containment principle.
After giving this general account, Arnauld and Nicole go on to give illustrations
of the use of their containment principle both in the case of valid arguments, and
in the case of invalid arguments.
Some of these examples work very well, but
when tackling a famous sophism, it isn’t clear their method works. The sophism
in question,
Whoever says you are an animal speaks the truth.
Whoever says you are a goose says you are an animal.
Thus whoever says you are a goose speaks the truth. (216)
they claim can be solved by pointing out that animal in the ﬁrst premise is not
“taken generally” and so does not contain goose. As Pariente has pointed out, this
doesn’t quite address the problem of the sophism, for they have not yet told us
why we can’t take the middle term as “person who says you are an animal”. Unlike
the other examples, where the actual middle term is embedded in another term
in one of the premises, this case appears to be a straightforward case of Barbara
requiring another analysis [Pariente, 1985, 371]. On the other hand, Arnauld and
Nicole do recognize that this middle term is not ordinary, in that it contains a
subordinate proposition, “You are an animal”.
8
SYLLOGISMS OF PROPOSITIONAL LOGIC
There is a brief discussion of other kinds of syllogisms, including syllogisms in
propositional logic, which the authors call conjunctive syllogisms, and also a dis-
cussion of arguments with just one premise, which have conditional conclusions.
With respect to the conjunctive syllogisms, the Port-Royal authors recognize three
kinds: conditional syllogisms, disjunctive syllogisms and copulative syllogisms.
The conditional syllogisms discussed include modus ponens and modus tollens,
though not with those titles. In their account of conditional syllogisms there is
also a discussion of the fallacies of aﬃrming the consequent and denying the an-
tecedent. The disjunctive syllogism is presented in two forms,
P ∨Q
and
P ∨Q
not ∼P
P
∴Q
∴∼Q

692
Russell Wahl
This is no surprise, given that the disjunction is taken as exclusive. What they
call the “copulative syllogism” actually is a parallel to the disjunctive syllogism,
since it involves a negated conjunction. Here only the one form of argument is
allowed,
∼(P · Q)
P
∴∼Q
The other form,
∼(P · Q)
∼P
∴Q
is explicitly excluded.
Unfortunately there is no further development of these
syllogisms nor attempts to see the connection between disjunction and conjunction.
That insight would have to wait.
Arnauld and Nicole see these syllogisms as syllogisms which contain the entire
conclusion in one premiss, and thus see their general method as covering these
kinds of syllogisms as well.
9
DILEMMAS AND FALLACIES
The remainder of the third part of the Logic focuses on mistakes in reasoning.
This concern is consistent with their account of logic as a tool for distinguishing
truth from falsehood. The authors see not just accounts of correct reasoning but
also various considerations which might lead someone to draw a false conclusion
as part of the subject of logic.
Many of these considerations have to do with
factors quite separate from what would now be considered logical considerations.
In fact, a treatment of informal fallacies ﬁts nicely with the overall view of logic
as propounded by Arnauld and Nicole, and does not ﬁt well with a more formal
account of logic. The brief chapter on dilemmas (Part III, 16) nicely characterizes
dilemma arguments as ones where a whole topic or ﬁeld is divided up, and then
negative or positive conclusions are drawn from each part. The concern is not
with the formal properties of such arguments but with the dangers of dilemma
arguments and the easy fallacies which may occur in these arguments. The ﬁrst
fallacy is what we would call a “false dilemma,” where the alternatives do not
exhaust the ﬁeld.
The second is simply when one of the arguments from one
of the parts does not hold. While they do not use these terms, a response to a
dilemma citing the ﬁrst charge would be “going between the horns” and a response
to one citing the second charge would be “grasping a horn”. The authors mention
a third caution with respect to dilemma arguments, namely that dilemmas which
draw contrasting extremes from the diﬀerent parts can often be turned around
into counter dilemmas.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
693
The account of dilemmas does not involve the form of the argument, but rather
the truth of the premisses, or the diﬃculty with a subordinate argument which
can be seen as a premiss.
Given the account of logic advocated in this work,
especially the second discourse where logic was seen as giving rules for all actions
of the mind, it is no surprise that this concern is included in logic. But it is also
the case that dilemma arguments which have faulty premisses can mask that fact
by having the same form as sound arguments. It is important to remember that
Arnauld and Nicole see the whole purpose of an argument as a process of showing
the truth of the conclusion, and so in some sense starting with the conclusion as
a problem. Right reasoning involves a clear progression from clearer premises to
the problematic conclusion. In the case of the fallacious dilemmas and the other
fallacies discussed in chapters 19 and 20 of the third part, there is a pattern of
reasoning that gives the picture of a correct argument, but does not succeed.
The section on fallacies reviews the standard fallacies mostly taken from Aris-
totle’s Sophistical Refutations: the ignoratio elenchi or proving something other
than what was in question; petition de principe, or supposing for true what is in
question; non causa pro causa or taking for a cause what isn’t a cause; imperfect
enumeration, which here is not so much a hasty generalization, but a failure to con-
sider options; the fallacy of accident; composition and division; the fallacy of taking
something aﬃrmed conditionally to something aﬃrmed unconditionally; and fal-
lacies of ambiguity. A brief remark is then made about incomplete or defective
inductions, postponing that discussion to the section on method. The discussion
of these fallacies is clear and quite lively, but not especially innovative.27 In many
of their examples, Arnauld and Nicole use the discussion to accuse Aristotle of
committing several of the fallacies he himself talks about.
The discussion of these traditional fallacies is supplemented by a section on
fallacies committed in ordinary life and discourse. These are divided into sophisms
of self-love, and sophism arising from the objects themselves.
The section on
sophisms of self-love, which contains some of the more entertaining examples in the
Logic, focuses on reasons other than the truth for which one may hold something.
The opening remarks of this section is similar to much later discussions of what is
sometimes called the fallacy of subjectivism.28 Arnauld and Nicole have in mind
such arguments as the following:
I am from such and such a country, therefore I ought to believe that a
certain saint preached the Gospel there. (262)
27For a further discussion of these fallacies, see [Woods, 2000, 36–38]. Woods calls this ﬁrst
group “scientiﬁc sophisms” because of a remark Arnauld and Nicole make at the beginning of
the next chapter contrasting sophisms of ordinary life and discourse to those involving matters
of science (260).
28See for example, the discussion in Kelley, The Art of Reasoning, which treats subjectivism as
a fallacy [Kelley, 1998, 126–127]. Kelley’s analysis of the pattern of reasoning as I believe/want p
to be true therefore p is true. Compare this with the passage in the Logic (263), where discussing
the “sophisms and illusions of the heart”, Arnauld and Nicole say these consist in transporting
our passions to the objects of our passions and judging them as we want or desire them to be.

694
Russell Wahl
I love him, therefore he is the most able man in the world: I hate him,
therefore he is worthless. (263)
Someone else said it, it is therefore false: it wasn’t I who wrote this
book, therefore it is bad. (266)
These fallacies are attributed to amour propre, or love of self, a sin of great concern
to the Jansenists of Port Royal. It might be thought natural to include in this
section an account of ad hominem arguments or arguments from authority, as the
diﬃculty with these forms of reasoning seem related. However, while some of these
examples border on ad hominem arguments, the concern here is strictly with forms
of thinking which will lead to accepting false conclusions and which come from an
inﬂated sense of self and one’s own situation. Ad hominem arguments are treated
instead in the second section, although not explicitly. That section, concerning
fallacies arising from “the objects themselves”, is where the Port-Royal authors
treat the argument from authority and cases which would best be classiﬁed as ad
hominem. This section also deals with, among other things, weak inductions.
It may seem curious to include examples of ad hominem and arguments from
authority in a section on fallacies arising from “the objects themselves”, but the
connection is their view that such fallacies have as their root a reliance on ap-
pearance. While the Cartesians were always on guard against taking features of
appearance (such as color, heat, etc.) to be features of genuine objects, this is
not the concern of this section, as this problem was addressed in the ﬁrst section,
on ideas. The “object” of concern in most of this section appears to be the very
words or circumstances of an argument or statement. Thus the manner of presen-
tation of something and who is presenting it, will inﬂuence a mind into thinking
the statement true. These are the “objects” whose appearances are in question.
Authority and ad hominem are thus treated in a like manner, and not as a way of
countering an argument but as a way people are lead astray by appearance:
It isn’t that anyone expressly reasons this way: He has a hundred
thousand pounds income, therefore he is right: he is of noble birth,
therefore what he states must be believed as true: this is a man with no
wealth, therefore he is wrong: nevertheless something like this occurs
in the mind of most people and inﬂuences their judgment without them
being aware of it. (284)
We can perhaps characterize the concern here not with simply taking someone who
is not an authority as an authority, but the concern is with what we might call a
circumstantial ad verecundiam to complement the circumstantial ad hominem.29
29There is also a very brief discussion of misplaced authority. The passage quoted here actually
is classiﬁed as a fallacy of manner. [Woods, 2000, 40–41] points out that Locke characterized the
reasoning here as ad verecundiam, although he did not also classify it as a fallacy.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
695
10
METHOD
The discussion of method in the Logic is a curious amalgamation of original mate-
rial and material taken from various works by Descartes and Pascal. To logicians
of the twenty-ﬁrst century the concern with ordering ideas and judgments so as
to obtain systematic knowledge will appear to be a subject better suited to epis-
temology than logic. But if we remember that for Arnauld and Nicole logic is to
give rules for all the operations of the mind with the goal of discerning the true
from the false, the inclusion of this material makes sense. The part on method
includes a criticism of skepticism, a discussion of the Cartesian methods of analysis
and synthesis, and toward the end a discussion of reasoning from less than perfect
information, which includes one of the very early discussions of probability.
With respect to the method of analysis, or resolution, Arnauld and Nicole bor-
row heavily from Descartes, importing directly Rule 13 from Descartes’ Rules for
the Direction of the Mind, which gave examples of the method such as solving the
problem of how a clever statue of Tantalus could have been constructed so that
the water from the cup spilt as soon as it reached the lips of the ﬁgure. Analysis
is best seen as a method of discovery, starting from a problem and proceeding
from the particular problem to the more general principles. This is the method
Descartes himself advocated and used in the Meditations.30 The four rules given in
the Port-Royal Logic for proper conduct of this method are taken from Descartes’
Discourse on Method (306). The method of synthesis or composition Descartes
thought was ill suited to metaphysics, since he thought the ﬁrst principles were the
hardest things to come by epistemologically. Synthesis does not yield ﬁrst prin-
ciples, but demonstrates conclusions from them. Descartes saw analysis, though,
as a method of discovery of these principles. He did state that synthesis may be
“suitable to deploy in geometry as a follow-up to analysis”, [Adam and Tannery,
1964-76, VII, 156; Cottingham et al., 1985-1991, II, 111] but in his own Geometry,
he did not give axioms and deﬁnitions and then proceed to prove theorems, but
approached particular problems using the method of analysis.
In the Port-Royal Logic, though, synthesis is considered the “most important
method” as it is used “to explain all the sciences” (306). The rules given for proper
reasoning and ordering apply to this method, rather than analysis. There is also a
discussion of the dangers of synthesis, a discussion which mirrors earlier discussions
of problems occurring with respect to the activities of clarifying ideas, forming
judgements, and reasoning. Arnauld and Nicole begin by giving ﬁve rules, two for
clarifying terms, involving deﬁnitions, one for axioms, and two for demonstrations
(308). These three groups correspond to the three ﬁrst parts of the Logic. After
a further discussion of the rules and of the dangers of the method, they conclude
with a list of eight rules, 2 for ideas, two for axioms, two for arguments, and two
for method. Here is the list:
For deﬁnitions:
30Analysis is praised by Descartes as being “the best and truest method of instruction” [Cot-
tingham et al., 1985-1991, II, 111; Adam and Tannery, 1964-76, VII, 156].

696
Russell Wahl
1. Leave no term even slightly obscure or equivocal undeﬁned.
2. In deﬁnition use only those terms perfectly known or already explained.
For axioms:
3. Require in axioms only those things which are perfectly evident.
4. Accept as evident that which needs only a little attention to be recognized
as true.
For demonstrations:
5. Prove all propositions which are even a little obscure, employing in the proofs
only prior deﬁnitionsm axioms agreed upon, or propositions which have al-
ready been demonstrated.
6. Never exploit the equivocation of terms by failing to substitute mentally the
deﬁnitions which restrict them and explicate them.
For method:
7. Treat things, as much as possible, in their natural order, beginning with
the most general and simplest and explaining everything that belongs to the
nature of the genus before going on to the particular species.
8. Divide, as much as possible, each genus into all its species, each whole into
all its parts and each diﬃculty into all its cases. (334)
The major diﬀerence between this set of rules and that given for the method of
analysis simply involves the rules for demonstrations, requiring the explicit use
of deﬁnitions and axioms. The rules for method closely follow remarks Descartes
himself made with respect to analysis, and the rules for deﬁnitions and axioms can
be seen as a further explication of Descartes’ ﬁrst rule in the Discourse on Method.
Given the general claim that we need no rules for thinking, these rules are cau-
tionary rules about not paying enough care. This ﬁnal statement of the rules is
formulated after a discussion of the defects, or ﬂaws, of the geometers’ method.
These defects are not said to turn the arguments away from their purpose, but
instead make arguments circuitous and therefore less likely to lead to understand-
ing. The list includes, among other things, proving things that do not need to be
proven, focusing on conviction rather than understanding, and proving things by
reductio ad absurdum (d´emonstrations par l’impossible). This last is criticized for
showing that something is the case without showing why it is so. Arnauld and
Nicole criticize Euclid for using this method of demonstration when things could
be proved positively, but do leave the suggestion that there are things that can be
proved only by this means (329).

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
697
11
PROBABILITY AND CONTINGENT REASONING
At the end of the fourth part of the Logic, there is an interesting discussion of
reasoning about contingent things in a setting of imperfect knowledge. This section
contains one of the ﬁrst discussions of probability involving explicit measuring of
odds.31
There is an awareness that the methods of analysis and synthesis as
set out are designed for inquiry into necessary truths, those concerning geometry
and other true and immutable essences. These are contrasted with those which
“concern existing things, and above all human and contingent events” (339). These
include future contingencies and things which may or may not have happened in
the past. It is clear that these things cannot be decided by a mere contemplation of
a clear and distinct perception, but require weighing of probabilities with respect to
the accompanying circumstances, including human testimony. The circumstances
which belong to the fact itself are called “internal” (340) and those that concern
“the people whose testimony has lead us to believe it” are called “external”.
Arnauld and Nicole apply their account of reasoning in less than ideal circum-
stances to such questions as the belief in particular miracles and the question of
whether one should doubt the correctness of the date of a contract signed by two
notaries. In this discussion they give as background information that out of 1000
contracts so signed, 999 are not antedated. Given this background information,
it could be taken as “very certain” that a contract so signed would not be ante-
dated. But the authors go on to point out that this certainty would be undercut
by further information, about the two notaries, for example (350). There is, then,
a sensitivity to the issues concerning the probability of something on the basis of
evidence.
This discussion ultimately leads the authors to questions of probability, using
games of chance as a model. Here they talk about the rationality of participating in
certain kinds of games of chance. The rudiments of a foundation for a probability
calculus are given very brieﬂy here:
There are games where ten people each put an ecu, there is only one
who wins the whole and the others lose. Thus each has the risk of
losing one ecu and can win nine. If one considers only the gain and
loss itself it would seem that each has an advantage. But it is necessary
to consider as well that if each could win nine ecus and only lose one,
it is nine times more probable with respect to each that he will lose his
ecu and not win the nine. Thus each, himself, has nine ecus to hope
for and one to lose, nine degrees of probability to lose an ecu and one
to win nine. This puts things in a perfect equality. (353)
The authors conclude that it is not reasonable to participate in a lottery where
the manager of the lottery takes a cut (353). The conclusions from this discussion
are then applied to probabilities determined not mathematically, but from past
31Hacking suggests that the ﬁnal chapter of the Port-Royal Logic is the ﬁrst occasion in print
where probability is measured [Hacking, 1975, 77].

698
Russell Wahl
frequencies; as one example, Arnauld and Nicole argue for the irrationality of
fearing thunderstorms. People are rightly impressed by the severity of being struck
by lightning, but need also consider the likelihood of such an occurrence. A rational
decision will then be to avoid small harms, which are more likely.
The book
concludes with an early statement of Pascal’s wager argument for the rationality
in believing in God.32 For even though the above reasoning works with respect
to ﬁnite things like thunderstorms, inﬁnite goods like eternity and salvation can
never be balanced against any temporal advantage (355).
This discussion of probability is indeed brief, but is important, as Ian Hacking
has argued, since it contains the ﬁrst clear statement of the issues and the ﬁrst
use of quantities of probability as a guide to decision making under imperfect
knowledge.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Adam and Tannery, 1964-76] C. Adam and P. Tannery (eds.). Œuvres de Descartes. 11 vol-
umes. Paris: Vrin/CNRS, 1964-76.
[Arnauld, 1775-1783] A. Arnauld. Œuvres de Messire Antoine Arnauld, Docteur de la Masion
et Societ´e de la Sorbonne. Paris: Sigismond d’Arnay & Cie., 1775-1783. 43 volumes.
[Arnauld, 1683] A. Arnauld. On True and False Ideas. Elmer Kremer, translator. Lewiston, NY:
Edwin Mellon Press, 1990.
[Arnauld and Lancelot, 1660] A. Arnauld and C. Lancelot. Grammaire g´en´erale et raison´ee.
Paris: Chez Pierre le Petit, 1660. Reproduction Menston: Scholar Press, 1967.
[Arnauld and Nicole, 1662] A. Arnauld and P. Nicole, La Logique ou l’art de penser. Critical
edition by Clair and Girbal, Paris: PUF, 1965.
[Ashworth, 1970] E. J. Ashworth. Some notes on syllogistic in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
centuries. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 9: 17–33, 1970.
[Ashworth, 1974] E. J. Ashworth. Language and Logic in the Post-Mediaeval Period. Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1974.
[Blanch´e, 1970] R. Blanch´e. La logique et son histoire. Paris: A. Colin, 1970.
[Buroker, 1993] J. V. Buroker. The Port-Royal semantics of terms. Synthese, 96: 455–475, 1993.
[Buroker, 1994] J. V. Buroker. Judgment and predication in the Port-Royal Logic. In Kremer
(ed.) The Great Arnauld and Some of His Philosophical Correspondents. Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 1994.
[Buroker, 1996a] J. V. Buroker. Arnauld on judging and the will. In Kremer (ed.), Interpreting
Arnauld. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1996.
[Buroker, 1996b] J. V. Buroker (ed. and transl.). Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole. Logic or
the Art of Thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[Bochenski, 1961] I. M. Bochenski. A History of Formal Logic. Translated by I. Thomas. Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1961.
[Cottingham et al., 1985-1991] J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoﬀand D. Murdoch (translators). Vol-
ume 3 also translated by A. Kenny. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. 3 volumes.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985-1991.
[Donnellan, 1966] K. Donnellan. Reference and deﬁnite descriptions. Journal of Philosophy, 63.
1966.
32Pascal’s Pens´ees was published (posthumously) eight years after the ﬁrst edition of the Port-
Royal Logic. Pascal died in 1662. [McKenna, 1986, 204–206], suggests that the argument here
was presented in a lecture given by Pascal at Port-Royal in 1658, attended by Nicole. A 1660
manuscript of the Logic contains the chapter on uncertain reasoning (Chapter 13), but not the
ﬁnal chapters which mention the games of chance and the hints of the wager argument.

Port Royal: The Stirrings of Modernity
699
[Donnellan, 1978] K. Donnellan. Speaker reference, descriptions, and anaphora. In French,
Uehling, Wettstein (eds.), Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language. Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pages 28-44, 1978.
[Fredosso and Schuurman, 1980] A. Freddoso and H. Schuurman (translators). Ockham’s The-
ory of Propositions. Part II of the Summa Logicae. Nortre Dame: University of Notre Dame
Press, 1980.
[Gaukroger, 1989] S. Gaukroger. Cartesian Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
[Geach, 1962] P. Geach. Reference and Generality. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1962.
[Geach and Black, 1970] P. Geach and M. Black (translators). Translations for the Philosophical
Writings of Gottlob Frege. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1970.
[Grosholz, 1991] E. Grosholz. Cartesian Method and the Problem of Reduction. Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1991.
[Hacking, 1975] I. Hacking. The Emergence of Probability. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1975.
[Howell, 1961] W. S. Howell. Logic and Rhetoric in England 1500-1700. New York: Russell and
Russell, 1961.
[Howell, 1971] W. S. Howell. Eighteenth Century British Logic and Rhetoric. Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1971.
[Kelley, 1998] D. Kelley. The Art of Reasoning. 3rd edition. New York: Norton, 1998.
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962.
[Kremer, 1994] E. Kremer (ed.). The Great Arnauld and Some of His Philosophical Correspon-
dents. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1994.
[Kremer, 1996] E. Kremer (ed.). Interpreting Arnauld. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1996.
[Kretzman, 1967] N. Kretzman. Semantics, history of. In P. Edwards (ed.). The Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. New York: Macmillan, Vol. 7, pages 359–406, 1967.
[Kripke, 1977] S. Kripke. Speaker’s reference and semantic reference. In French, Uehling,
Wettstein, (eds.), Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, pages 6 - 28, 1977.
[Loux, 1974] M. Loux (translator). Ockham’s Theory of Terms. Part I of the Summa Logicae.
Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1974.
[Mason, 1967] H. T. Mason (ed. and translator). The Leibniz-Arnauld Correspondence. Manch-
ester: Manchester University Press, 1967.
[McKenna, 1986] A. McKenna. La Composition de la “Logique” de Port-Royal. Revue
Philosophique de la France et de l’Etranger, 176: 183–206, 1986.
[Moody, 1953] E. A. Moody, Truth and Consequence in Mediaeval Logic. Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1953.
[Pariente, 1985] J.-C. Pariente. L’Analyse du langage `a Port-Royal. Paris: Les editions de Mi-
nuit, 1985.
[Russell, 1903] B. Russell. Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1903.
[Wahl, 1997] R. Wahl. The Port-Royal Logic. In Walton and Brinton (eds.), Historical Founda-
tions of Informal Logic. Aldershot: Ashgate, 1997.
[Walton and Brinton, 1997] D. Walton and A. Brinton (eds.). Historical Foundations of Infor-
mal Logic. Aldershot: Ashgate, 1997.
[Woods, 2000] J. Woods. Antoine Arnauld (1612-1694). Argumentation, 14: 31–43, 2000.

This page intentionally left blank

INDEX
Abbo of Fleury, 39, 41, 42
Abelard, P., 34, 45, 56, 157, 158, 172,
217, 350, 469, 476, 483, 520,
521, 523, 526, 528, 529, 531–
538, 567, 568
About Univocation, 193
absolute terms, 191, 410, 411
abstract common terms, 429
abstract intention, 378, 381
abstraction, 393, 398
absurd syllogism, 117
Abvelard, 563
accepting, 584
accusative-inﬁnitive, 215, 218
accusative case, 177
actus intellectus, 102
Adam of Balsham, 142
Ars disserendi, 580
Adams, M., 55, 265
adjectives, 174, 175
adverb, 94
aﬃrmative, 159, 160, 164, 178, 179
aﬃrmative proposition, 188, 679
particular, 188
universal, 188
Agricola, R., 625–627, 630–631, 633,
635, 637–639
Albert the Great, 527
Al-Ghˆaalˆı, 506
Alan of Lille, 519
Alassio, F., 512
Alberic of Paris, 142
Albert of Saxony, 195, 225, 261, 263,
434, 436, 445, 446, 450–452,
455, 457, 470, 485, 591
Albert the Great, 20, 512, 517, 531,
540, 545, 546
Alcuin, 22, 23, 25, 29, 48
Dialectic, 23-4, 36
On the Faith of the Holy Trinity,
24
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 9, 13, 521,
529
Alfarbi, 541
ambiguity, 207
Ammonius, 9, 508, 511, 524, 525
ampliation, 416, 417, 419
and restriction, 202
analogy, 366, 368, 369
analysis and synthesis, 695, 696
Andrews, R., 550
Anonymous
Emmeran Treatise, 584, 585
Insolubilia Monacensia, 580, 581,
583, 586
Anselm of Canterbury, 1, 27, 47, 157,
515, 516
De Grammatico, 47, 51–56
De incarnatione Verbi, 56
Monologion, 47–48, 55–56
On Truth, 51
Philosophical Fragments, 47–56
Proslogion, 47–48, 56
Antolic, P., 506
appellata, 416
appellation, 188, 192
appellative terms, 416
applied modal logic, 559, 569
appropriation, 546
Apuleius, 21, 24, 28, 505
Peri Hermeneias, 2–4, 39, 41
Aquinas, see Thomas Aquinas
Archytas, 9
argumentation
types of, 633, 639
argumenti sedes, 123

702
Aristotle, 1, 6, 38, 83, 143, 150, 157–
159, 161, 165, 166, 171, 172,
179, 181, 192, 198, 214, 218,
224, 349, 505–510, 514, 516,
523–525, 529–536, 538–545,
547, 552, 553, 558, 559, 568,
569, 670, 686, 688
Categories, 2, 5–7, 9, 20–22, 28–
30, 34, 36–38, 38–40, 44, 45,
55, 56
On Interpretation, 2, 4–6, 8, 9,
11, 14, 21, 22, 28–31, 34,
36–40, 50, 56, 158, 192
Organon, 610–615, 635
Posterior Analytics, 19, 615
Prior Analytics, 4, 20, 21
Rhetoric, 3
Sophistical Refutations, 20, 172,
579
Topics, 3, 469, 609, 633, 636
commenatary on, 610
commentary on, 615
translations of, 609, 613, 614
Arnauld, A., 165, 667–698
Ars Burana, 178
Ars Emmerana, 178
Ars Meliduna, 142
ascent and descent, 241–248
Ashworth, E. J., 158, 221
assent, 560–561
assertibility, 424
asserting, 582
Augustine, 2, 5, 29, 31, 48, 359, 506,
517, 518, 520, 521, 550, 568
On the Quantity of the Soul, 26
On the Trinity, 24
Ten Categories, 2, 3, 5, 29, 34–
38, 40
Averroes, 506, 512, 513, 515, 527, 530,
540, 541, 544–546, 556, 613,
615
Avicenna, 371, 506, 513, 536, 537,
540, 541, 544
Bacon, R., 351, 353, 358, 385, 531,
532, 538, 540, 541
Bali´c, C., 549
Barbara, 117
Bardout, J.-C., 551
Barney, S., 233, 235
Baroco, 117
Baur, L., 523
Bazzi, P., 515
Becker, O., 509
Becker-Freysing, A., 531
belief, 561–562
belief contexts, 215
Berengar of Tours, 43–45
Biard, J., 221, 521
Bieler, L., 519
Billingham, R., 439, 440, 442, 466,
471, 473, 476, 485
bivalence, 523, 525, 528
Blackwell, R. J., 531
Blaise of Parme, 436, 447, 448
Blank, D., 508
Bobzien, S., 523, 533
Boccardo, 117
Boehner, Ph., 552
Boethius, 1, 2, 31, 34, 36, 38, 39, 48,
83, 158, 171, 192, 349, 353,
366, 408, 505–512, 514, 516,
517, 519, 524–532, 536, 562,
568, 609, 625–626, 633, 640
lgoical commentaries, 9–14, 21,
23, 25, 29–30, 36–41, 43, 45,
49
Consolation of Philosophy, 7, 39,
46
Introduction to Categorical Syl-
logisms, 14–20
On Division, 14
On Hypothetical Syllogisms, 15–
20
On Topical diﬀerentiae, 18–22
On the Categorical Syllogism, 14–
20
Theological Treatises, 7, 30, 48
Index

703
41 30
Boh, I., 552, 560, 561
Bok, N. W. den, 549
Boradie, A., 561
Borgnet, A., 531
Bos, E. P., 249, 534
Bottin, R., 581
Braakhuis, H. A. G., 506, 535, 545,
554, 581
Bradwardine, 594
Bradwardine, T., 433, 439, 580, 586–
593, 596–598, 600, 605
bradwardine, T., 599
Brandt, S., 505
Brinkley, R., 442, 467, 485
Brower, J. E., 529
Brown, S., 552, 554
Brown, St., 560
Buchheim, T., 506, 530, 538
Buchner, H., 518
Bullough, D., 25
Buridan, J., 171, 173–176, 178–181,
188, 191, 193–195, 198, 204,
206, 207, 209, 211, 215, 218,
219, 221, 225, 241–244, 247,
249–255, 257, 259, 261, 263,
266, 269, 270, 358, 389, 403,
433, 434, 436, 444, 445, 448–
452, 458–463, 469, 470, 472,
473, 475, 476, 477, 478, 481,
484, 528, 552–560, 562, 569,
591, 600–604, 617, 623
Summulae de Dialectica, 600
Summulae, 605
Burley, W., 195, 202, 220, 225, 241–
244, 250, 258, 261, 263, 399,
403, 407, 408, 436–438, 440,
443, 450, 458, 467, 473, 479,
480, 482, 484–490, 492–494,
496, 498, 552, 562, 567, 586
Burnett, Ch., 505, 506
Buroker, J., 667, 675, 680
Buser, W., 446, 485
Busse, A., 508
Campsall, R., 542–544, 546–548, 553,
554
cancellatuion, 581
Candidus Wizo, 25
Cantin, A., 518
Caramello, P., 512, 515
Carrier, J., 545
Cassiodorus, 1, 2, 5, 22, 25
Instiutions, 21
Catach-Rosier, I., 521
categorematic, 159, 185
concept, 409, 414
categorical proposition, 159–170, 177
categorical syllogism, 21, 84, 86, 166,
685–689
rules for, 686–689
cause
contingent, 515
higher, 518–519
lower, 518–519
necessary, 514–515
of distribution and confusion, 233
of the modes, 250–253, 269–270,
272–273
Cervantes, M. de, 579
Charlemagne, 22, 23, 27
Charles the Bald, 25
Chatton, W., 384
Cicero, 1, 6, 40, 158, 505
Topics, 2–5, 17, 21, 22, 39, 42
circular reference, 582
Claudianus Mamertus, 25
Clichtoveus, J., 632, 640
Coimbra commentators, 610–614, 624,
630, 635, 636
common concept, 160, 393
common nature, 396, 397, 409
comparative, 201
complete phrase, 126
complete signiﬁcabilia, 403
complex propositions
causals, 171, 683
conditionals, 683, 684
conjunction, 683
Index

704
discretives, 683, 684
disjunction, 683, 684
exceptives, 685
exclusives, 685
exponibles, 683, 685
reduplicatives, 683
complex terms, 180
complexe signiﬁcabile, 404, 427, 438,
444
composite sense, 426
compositional semantics, 404
compossibility, 551, 554, 569
compound conditional, 138
compounded and divided senses, 181
comprehension and extension, 672–
673, 680, 681, 690
conceding, 584
conceivable things, 204
concept, 186, 187, 190, 199, 407
formal or subjective, 396, 397
objective, 396–398
concrete intention, 378, 381
conditional, 116, 171
proof, 593
statements, 639–640
confused, 223–276
confusion in imaging, 90
congruity, 355
Conimbricenses, see Coimbra commen-
tators
conjunction, 134, 171
connexivism, 136
connotation, 366, 409
connotative terms, 190–192, 411, 416
consecutio, 127
conseqeunce, 172, 639–642
modal, 557
consequence, 173, 434, 467
absolute, 472, 473, 477, 478
accidental, 473, 529
ad necessarium rule, 482, 483
as-of-now, 472, 473, 477, 478, 480
deﬁnition of, 468, 471–473, 483
deontic, 563–564
diﬀerent from conditionals, 471,
472, 478, 479
epistemic, 560
ex impossibili rule, 482, 483, 493
formal, 471, 473–478
material, 473–475, 477, 478
modal, 522, 552, 557, 569
natural, 473, 529
rule of, 468, 478–482
consigniﬁcation, 368
constantia, 139
Constantinople, 39
construction, 355
containment, 128
context, 149
contingency, 114
ad utrumlibet, 514–515, 532
alternative, 550–551
contingent matter, 507–509
indeﬁnite, 540
indfeﬁnite, 532
natural, 532, 540, 546
ad utrumlibet, 555
contradiction, 584
contradictories, 162, 605
contraposition, 178
contraries, 132, 162
convention, 359, 360
conversion, 173, 178, 179, 681, 682
simple, 178
conversion by contraposition, 178
conversion per accidens, 164
conversions, 164
copula, 98, 134, 159, 175, 177, 190,
401, 404, 535, 554, 678–681
correspondence condition, 423–425
Corsi, G., 525, 552
counterfactuals, 521, 530, 536, 556
Courtnay, W., 522
Craig, W. L., 520
Cum sit nostra, 199, 235
curriculum
university, 609, 619–621, 625, 627,
629, 636
Index

705
Dal Pra, M., 525
Damian, P., see Peter Damian
De Interpretatione, 179
de dicto and de re (compound and di-
vided), 546–548, 555, 552–
558, 567
de re, 112
de sensu, 112
De Rijk, L. M., 192, 193, 225, 261,
506, 508, 512, 520, 531, 532,
535, 536, 541, 549, 580, 581,
583, 585
declensions, 190
deﬁnition of truth, 422, 423, 425
Dekker, E., 549
demonstrative logic, 372
demonstrative pronouns, 598
denoting phrases, 224
deontic logic, 563–567, 569
conditional obligation, 556–557
norm, 556
obligation, 565, 567
permission, 565, 567
Descartes, R., 668, 669, 672, 673, 675,
676, 695, 696
descent, 231
conjunctive, 453, 455–457
disjunctive, 453, 455, 456
nominal, 453, 455–457
propositional, 453
determinate modality, 114
determinations and explications, 673,
674, 676
determinism, 514–516, 525
diachronicicity, 113
diachronic (prospective) alternatives,
517, 525, 528
dialectic, 158, 372, 633, 634
Dialectica Monacensis, 23–24, 178, 225,
235
Dici de omni et nullo, 546–547, 558
dictio, 355
dictum, 104, 212, 402
Diels, H., 529
diﬀerentia, 123
Diodorus, 512, 513
Dionysius the Areopagite, 30
disjunction, 135, 171
disjunctive conjunction, 134
disjunctive syllogism, 686, 691
disputation, 580, 586, 599
disputational context, 585
divided sense, 426, 427
Dod, B. G., 505, 506
Dolz, J., 622–623
domain of interpretation, 428
Dombart, B., 518
Domingo Soto, 390
Dondaine, H.-F., 532
D¨oring, K., 533
Dorp, J., 265, 448, 464, 465
drawing ﬁgures, 583
Dreyer, M., 550, 551
Drukken, N., 559
Duin, J., 515
Dulong, M., 522
Dunne, M., 527
Dunphy, W., 515
Duns Scotus, J., 363, 369, 370, 380,
385, 517, 548–552, 568
Dutilh Novaes, C., 552, 601
Eadmer, 51
Ebbesen, S., 506, 522, 523, 531
Ebert, T., 533
Eck, J., 614, 617, 621, 639
eliminative deﬁnition, 410
empty, 164
empty terms, 162–164, 248
entailment, 123
enthymeme, 633, 640–642
enuntiabile, 147, 402–404
Enzinas, F. de, 621–623
epistemic logic, 560–563, 569
de dicto vs. de re, 562–563
equipollence, 168–170, 178
equivalence, 605
equivocation, 192, 193, 197, 366, 368
Index

706
essentialism, 513, 521, 529–531, 545,
548, 551, 567–569
evidence, 561
exceptives, 185
Excerpta Norimbergenses, 178
Excerpta Isagogarum, 40
exigere, 127
existence, 402, 405, 409
existentia rei, 104
existential import, 178, 417, 418, 428
existential presupposition, 138, 682,
683
exponibles, 185, 186, 259
expository syllogism, 545, 558
extinctive negation, 108
fact, 105, 126
Fallacie Parvipontane, 150, 193
fallacies, 157, 238–274, 692–694
ad hominem, 694
ad verecundiam, 694
false dilemma, 692
ignoratio elenchi, 693
non causa pro causa, 693
subjectivism, 693
fallacy
form of expression, 224
of univocation, 150
theory, 150
false assumption, 584
falsity, 104
Ferrer, V., 447, 456, 457
Ferrybridge, R., 441, 483
ﬁctum-theory, 408
Fidora, A., 506
ﬁgure, 126
ﬁnite, 179
ﬁrst intention, 373, 376, 381, 382
Fland, R., 442, 471, 476, 485
ﬂatus vocis, 91
Fleury, 38, 41
Fonseca, P., 629–630, 632, 639–640
foreknowledge, 515, 520
formal distinction, 406
forms, 106, 186
Frede, D., 524
free will, 515, 517–518
Frege, G., 675
Friedman, R. L., 528
future contingents, 510–511, 523, 519–
528, 568, 606
future tense, 204
G´al, G., 552, 560
Gabbay, D. M., 506
Galileo Galilei, 586
Gambatese, A., 554
Garland the Computist, 508, 529
Gaskin, R., 524
Gaunilo, 49
Geach, P., 397, 399
Gelber, H., 549
general names, 85
genitive, 182–185, 209, 255
Gerbert of Aurillac, 39, 40
De rationale et ratione uti, 41
Gersonides, 512, 545
Gettier problem, 561
Geyer, B., 520
Gilbert of Poitiers, 34, 142, 521–523
Giraldus Odonis, 443
global quantiﬁcational import, 270–
272
Goris, H., 520, 522
Goris, J. M. G., 515
Gottschalk, 28
Grabmann, M., 512
Grammaire g´en´erale et raisonn´ee, 667,
671, 676
grammatical case, 176
Green, R., 536, 563
Green-Pedersen, N., 506, 562
Gregory of Nyssa, 30
Gregory of Rimini, 403, 438, 444
Guilfoy, K., 529
Gunzo of Novara, 38
H¨aring, N. M., 519
Hacking, I., 697, 698
Index

707
Hagen, C., 529
Hallamaa, O., 565
Helias, P., 353
Henry of Ghent, 520, 549
Henry, D. P., 55
Hervaeus Natalis, 370, 382
Heytesbury, W., 434, 439, 440, 580,
586, 597, 599
Regulae solvendi sophismatta, 597
Hilpinen, R., 567
Hincmar of Rheims, 28
Hintikka, J., 509, 516, 560
Hissestte, R., 515
Holcot, R., 561, 565
Holopainen, T., 49
Honnefelder, L., 550, 551
Hubien, H., 552
Hughes, G. E., 552
Hughes, T. E., 555
humanism, 609–610
hypothetical, 170
syllogism, 21, 121, 469
Iamblichus, 9, 10
ideas, 671–674
clear and distinct, 671
identity theory, 100
of predication, 413, 422
immediate signiﬁcata, 398, 416
immobile, 231
impersonal construction, 111
impossible state of aﬀairs, 603
imposition, 347, 357, 360
impossibility
accidental, 512, 537
impossible hypothesis, 529–530
impossible matter, 507–509, 553–
554
natural, 518, 530
impossible proposition, 603
impossible sentence, 603
impossible things, 204
Inati, S. C., 537
incomplete phrase, 102
indeﬁnite, 94, 160
indirect proof, 529
individualizing factors, 398
inference rules, 533
inferior to a superior, 258, 273
inﬁnite, 179
conversion, 177
negation, 177–179, 254, 420
inherence theory, 100, 413
of predication, 366
inseparable accident, 530, 529–530
insolubilia, 580
insolubilia, 434, 439, 440, 447, 602
insoluble, 581, 583, 599
instantiae technique, 143
intellected intention, 373
intelligible species, 352, 363, 380, 381
intensional transitives, 218
intention, 352, 370, 371, 373, 382,
383, 404
interjection, 94
intransitive verbs, 174, 175
intrinsic/extrinsic middles, 469, 470,
474
Introductiones Parisienses, 178
intuition and deduction, 669
invention and judgement, 625, 628,
635–637, 639
Isidore of Seville, 1, 2, 22, 36, 42
Etymologies, 22,23
Israel Scottus, 36
Iwakuma, Y., 509, 522, 523
Jackson, B. D., 505
Jacobi, K., 534–536
James of Venice, 505
Jerome, 45
John Buridan, see Buridan, J.
John of Holland, 442, 447, 471, 485
John Philoponus, 521
John Duns Scotus, see Duns Scotus,
J.
John Scottus Eriugena, 1, 25–34, 48
Martianus glosses, 27, 32
Index

708
Periphyseon, 28, 25–36
Jolivet, J., 522
judgement, see invention
Jullien, V., 551
Jungius, J. (Junge), 645, 655, 656
Kalb, A., 518
Kaluza, Z., 522
Kantola, I., 562
Karger, E., 185, 192, 240, 265, 554
Keﬀer, H., 584
Kenny, A., 526
Kilvington, R., 434, 439, 440, 485,
580, 586, 595, 596, 601
Sophismata, 595
Kilwardby, R., 353, 362, 375, 507,
529, 531, 532, 539–541, 545–
547, 568
King Charles’s Work against the Synod,
24
King, P., 552, 601, 602
Klima, G., 221, 552, 557, 562
Kluxen, W., 550
Kneale, M., 533
Kneale, W., 533
Knebel, S. K., 551, 562
Kneepkens, C. H., 506, 554
knowledge, 561–562
Knuuttila, S., 509, 516, 517, 522, 530,
550, 551, 552, 556, 564, 565,
567
Kretzmann, B., 563
Kretzmann, N., 167, 232, 234, 258,
508, 510, 512, 514, 524, 526,
531, 535, 536, 538, 562, 563,
595
Kukkonen, T., 506, 518
Laﬂeur, C., 545
Lagerlund, H., 532, 543, 544, 547,
548, 552, 553, 555, 557–559
Lambert of Auxerre, 198, 199, 225,
227, 229–232, 512, 531, 532,
538, 539, 541
Langfranc, 44
Langton, S., 564
language of logic texts, 609, 642–643
Lavenham, R., 441, 471, 476, 485
Leﬀ, G., 347
Leftow, B., 516
Leibniz, G., 673
Leidrad, 30
Leipold, G., 561
Lewis, N., 523, 526
li, 195
Liar paradox, 579–581, 594, 596
Libera, A. de, 522, 531, 532
liberal arts, 353, 372
locality, 232
logic
art vs. science, 372
general and special, 635
informal, 631, 634, 638–639
intentionalistic vs. terminist, 371
in Eastern Europe, 435, 436, 444,
446
in Italy, 435, 436, 439, 441, 443,
447
matter vs.subject, 373
subject, 370
Logica: Cum sit nostra, 178
Logica: Ut dicit, 178
logica nova, 609
logica vetus, 609
logical monograph, 38–42
Lohr, Ch. H., 542
Lombard, P., 518, 520
Looman-Graaskamp, A. H., 549
Lorenz, K., 506
Loux, M. J., 191, 195
Lovejoy, A. O., 509
Luscombe, D. E., 563
Lutz-Bachmann, M., 506
Macarius, 26, 27
Macrobius
commentary on Somnium Scipi-
onis, 36
Magee, J., 505
Index

709
Maggi`olo, M., 515
Maimonides, M., 512, 513
major premise, 165
Mandonnet, P., 515
Manekin, Ch. H., 512
Mangione, C., 525, 552
Marc, P., 515
Marenbon, J., 505, 519, 520, 522, 525,
538
Marius Victorinus, 2, 4–7, 15, 17, 21,
22, 41, 531
On Deﬁnition, 3, 5, 22, 38
Topics, 6
Marmo, C., 530
Marrone, S. P., 551
Marsilius of Inghen, 222, 225, 249,
251, 436, 446, 447, 450, 459,
461, 462, 470, 485
Martianus Capella, 2, 3, 6, 17, 22, 26,
28, 39, 42
De Nuptiis IV, 37
Martin of Alnwick, 466, 485
Martin, C. J., 17, 521, 529, 530, 538,
581
material essence realism, 86
mathematical physics, 586
Maulevelt, T., 266, 444, 454, 455
maximal proposition, 122
Maximus the Confessor, 30, 32
meaning
grammatical vs. semantic, 354
mediate conditional, 141
medieval curriculum, 433
Meiser, C., 505
Melanchthon, P., 627, 632, 638, 640–
641
Melidunenses or Robertini, 142
mental
concept, 193, 219
imaging, 89
language, 189, 190, 192, 415
propositions, 190, 216
word, 198, 352
Merton College, 435, 438, 439
meta-language, 418, 424, 429
metalogic, 645, 647–649
metaphysics, 517, 521–522, 540, 542,
550
method, 638
scientiﬁc, 615–616, 638
middle term, 119, 165
Migne, J.-P., 505, 564
Mignucci, M., 508, 525, 526
Minio-Paluello, L., 38, 505, 520
minor premise, 165
mobile, 231, 232, 234, 262, 267
mobility, 232, 233, 237, 241, 249–250
modal proposition
equipollences and oppositions, 552
structure, 553
modal proposition, 211–214, 434
de dicto and de re (compound
and divided), 512, 520, 532–
539, 542–544
per se vs. per accidens, 537–539
conversion, 538–544, 554–556
determinate vs. simple, 537
equipollences and oppositions, 531–
532, 555, 567
modal matter, 507–554
restricted vs. unrestricted, 554–
559
singular, 555
structure, 535, 540, 558
temporal determination, 536–538
modal
status, 599
syllogism, 119
syllogistics, 537, 544–548, 551
terms
adverbial, 533–535
ampliation, 506, 536, 540–541,
546
categorematic, 535
impersonal, 524
nominal, 533–535
syncategorematic, 535
modal words, 204
Index

710
modality, 231
as alternativeness, 507, 517–518,
521–536, 568–569
diachronic, 516–517, 569
divine, 506, 517–521, 568
extensional interpretation, 507–
513
frequency (statistical) interpre-
tation, 509–510, 512–513, 517,
543, 567
impersonal, 534
potency model, 513–516, 567
temporal, 516–517, 536–538
mode
of signifying (modi signiﬁcandi),
353, 354, 355
of being, 355, 376
of equivocation, 367
essendi, 354
intelligendi, 354
of personal supposition, 401
of understanding, 355
Modists, 353, 376
Mojsisch, B., 538
molecular proposition, 170, 172
Mondadori, F., 528
Montani or Albricani, 142
mood, 127
Moody, E. A., 679
Moore, P. S., 522
moral logic, 645, 650, 651, 653
MS Cologne Dombibliothek 191, 37
MS Leiden Voss. Int. F70, 37
MS Milan Ambrosiana B71, 35
MS Orleans Bib, 38
MS Paris BN 12949, 35, 36
MS Paris BN 2788, 37
MS Paris BNF n. acq. lat, 38
MS Saint Gall 274, 36
Mugnai, M., 525, 552
name, 120
natural sign, 359, 360
nature, 127
necessity, 104
per se vs. per accidens, 512, 529,
538–540, 543–546
conditional, 511, 528, 537
determinate vs. simple, 537
natural, 518
necessary (natural) matter, 507–
545
of the past, 522, 525, 527
of the present, 511, 516–517, 523,
525–528, 543, 548–549
relative, 556–557
simple, 511, 523, 528, 537, 556–
558
temporal, 511, 556
necessity
what nature demands, 521
negating negation, 177, 178
negation, 414, 461–464, 675
negative, 159, 160, 164, 178, 179
proposition, 188, 681, 682
particular, 188
universal, 188
New Logic, 158
Nicole, P., 165, 667–698
Nielsen, L. O., 528
Nifo, A., 615, 617, 632, 641–642
nil dicis, 582
nominal deﬁnition, 191, 192
nominal mode, 111
nominales, 142, 522–523
nominalist ontology, 390
nominative, 177, 184
non-existence, 405, 409
non-extensional contexts, 197, 215–
221
non-relational nouns, 183
non-thing, 217
Normore, C., 526, 551, 552
Notker Labeo, 39–40
Notker of St Gall, 39
Nuchelmans, G., 508, 522
number, 190
Index

711
O’Donnell, J. ., 536
Obertello, L., 505
object language, 418, 424, 429
objective being, 380, 382
objective contents of thought, 384
obligaio, 584
obligation, 484, 581, 583
antiqua responsio, 440, 485, 486,
495
nova responsio, 440, 485, 486, 492,
495, 497
casus, 487
development, 484–486
diﬀerent kinds, 486
game interpretation, 486–489, 496
is dynamic, 490, 491, 495, 496
logic, 506, 530, 536, 549, 562,
567, 569
positum, 486–489, 492–496
response, 487, 493, 496, 497
rules of, 486–489, 493–495
obligational disputations, 595 t
oblique logic, 645, 654, 657, 663
obversion, 178, 179
Ockham, William of, see William of
Ockham
Oesterle, J. T., 507, 508, 513, 528
Old Logic, 158
omnipotence, 517–519, 521
omniscience, 519–522, 526, 550–551,
560
ontological reduction, 392, 409
opponent, 584
oppositeness, 104
oppositions, 161
oratio, 117
positum, 586
Oxford Calculators, 586
Panaccio, C., 410, 411
Panza, S., 579, 606
paradox of self-reference, 581, 583,
587, 595, 596, 597, 604
paradoxes of implication, 529
paradoxical sentence, 597, 598, 603,
604
parasitic terms, 176, 183, 184, 255,
273
Pariente, J.-C., 678–682, 688, 691
Paris, 41
part of speech, 355
participation, 86
participle, 97, 98, 175–177, 183
particular, 160
negative, 163, 178, 222
Parva logicalia, 618
Parvipontani or Adamitae, 142
Pascal’s wager, 698
Pascal, B., 695, 698
past and future tenses, 203, 204
Paul of Venice, 171, 175, 195, 208,
225, 247, 250, 251, 258, 261–
263, 267, 436, 441, 442, 452,
455, 461, 466, 467, 473, 476,
477, 485, 619, 620
Pera, C., 515
Periphyseon, 28, 29
Perler, D., 512
personal constructions, 108
pertaining to the soul, 204
Pession, P. M., 514
Peter Abelard, see Abelard, P.
Peter Aureol, 370, 383, 385, 528
Peter Damian, 45, 50
On Divine Omnipotence, 45–47,
50
Peter Lombard, 523
Peter of Ailly, 190, 439, 447, 561
Peter of Ireland, 527
Peter of Mantua, 561
Peter of Poitiers, 519, 522, 560, 564
Peter of Spain, 159, 165, 167, 171,
175, 179, 185, 188, 198, 205,
222, 224–227, 229, 232, 235,
236, 254, 368, 506, 512, 531,
532, 541, 545, 619, 621, 639
Philoponus, 530
Pinborg, J., 505, 526, 562
Index

712
Pines, Sh., 512
Pinzani, R., 537
Pironet, F., 600
Plato
Cratylus, 9
Sophist, 14
pleonotetic, 400
Plotinus, 8, 518
Pluta, O., 538
Porphyry, 1, 5, 8, 11, 83, 505, 529,
530
Isagoge, 2, 5–7, 12, 14, 15, 20–
22, 25, 28–30, 34, 36–38, 40,
44, 56
commentary on Categories, 10
Porretani or Gilebertini, 142
Port-Royal Logic, 667–698
postium, 584
positing, 584
possibilia, 418
possibility, 104
possibile vs. contingens, 531–532
abstract, 530, 556
alternative, 509, 517–518, 530,
548, 551
determinate vs. simple, 537
implies actuality, 537, 543
logical, 550–551, 569
natural, 519, 568
Philonian, 521
potency, 513–516
prospective, 517
supranatural, 530
synchronic alternatives, 517
what nature permits, 521
possible
sentence, 603
state of aﬀair, 603
things, 203, 213
worlds, 404, 551, 555–556
potency
active, 514, 517
full, 516
improper, 516
passive, 514
proper, 516
supernatural, 514
predicate, 85, 100, 159
predication, 112
as of now, 509
essential (per se), 507–508, 539–
541
identity theory, 553
impossible, 508
natural (necessary), 508
simple, 509
predicative force, 97
prenex forms, 271
preposition, 95
present tense, 204
Priest, G., 264
primary and secondary signiﬁcation,
357, 363
Prior Analytics, 158, 166, 172
Prior, A. N., 601
Priscian, 199
probability, 562, 634, 641, 697, 698
promise, 220
proof of propositions, 434, 440, 442,
466
proper names, 623–624
Properties of Discourse, 225, 235
properties of terms, 391
proportion, 367
proposition, 97, 159
as of now (simpliciter) assertoric,
509
as of now (ut nunc) assertoric,
509, 546–548, 558
matter of modal, 509
semantics of, 622–623
simply (simpliciter) assertoric, 545–
548, 558
temporally assertoric, 545
temporally deﬁnite, 522
temporally indeﬁnite, 509, 512,
522
tensed, 512, 522–523, 553
Index

713
truth conditions, 553
propositional
logic, 533, 554, 593
signiﬁcates, 421, 589, 603
Prudentius of Troyes, 28
Pseudo-Scotus, 406, 470, 473, 476,
477, 478, 481, 484, 552–556,
559
psychologism, 670
putting forward, 582
quantiﬁcation over non-existents, 417
quantiﬁcation theory, 400
quantiﬁer, 120, 413
special, 622
quasi res, 107
quasi-entities, 397
Quine, W. V. O., 405, 418
Quinto, R., 564
quotation, 196
quotation marks, 194, 195, 197
Radulphus Brito, 370, 377, 382
Ram´ee, Pierre de la, see Ramus, P.
Ramus, P., 628, 629, 635, 637, 639
Ratio studiorum, 609, 629
ratio consigniﬁcandi, 354
Ratramnus of Corbie, 30
Read, S., 221, 264–266, 506, 530, 552,
586, 587, 591, 592
real deﬁnition, 191
real propositions, 403
realist, 186, 193
reductio ad impossibile, 558
reduction per impossibile, 167
reference, 365
Reichenau, 38
relational nouns, 183
relative clause, 180, 182, 209
relative pronoun, 181, 182
relevance implication, 128
Remigius of Auxerre, 28
representing ﬁgures, 583
Rescher, N., 537
respondent, 584
restricted variables, 399, 427
restrictions, 180
restrictive relative clauses, 180, 181
Rheims, 40, 41
rhetoric, 630–631, 633, 636–638, 640–
642
Ribaillier, J., 519
Richter, V., 561
Rijk, L. M. De, see De Rijk, L. M.
Robert Grosseteste, 523
Robert of Melun, 142
Roscelin, 83
Roseth, R., 564–567
Roure, M. L., 581, 587
Rudavsky, T., 514, 520
Rudolph, U., 512
rules of inference, 238–259, 274
Russell, B., 676
Saint Anselm, 91
Sanderson, R., 628
Schabel, C., 528
Schmutz, J., 551
scientia sermocinalis, 92
scope, 108, 157, 158
Scott, T. K., 562
Seaton, W. K., 560
secundum quid, 581
second adjacent, 175
second intention, 370, 374, 375, 376,
381, 383
secondary imposition, 362
secondary meaning, 361
secondary signiﬁcate, 363
self-reference, 580, 595, 600
self-referential paradox, 579, 585, 587,
598
semantic
complexity, 414
deﬁnition of validity, 425
signiﬁcation, 357
triangle, 356, 392, 407, 414
values, 404
complexity, 415
Index

714
of propositions, 467
sentence token, 595, 597
separative negation, 109
sequence of tense, 210
Serene, E., 516
sermo, 92
Seton, J., 627–628
Sharples, R. W., 517
Shiel, J., 9
Siger of Brabant, 515
sign, 359
signﬁcation, 93, 187, 192, 204, 215,
591–594, 599, 601
signiﬁcata of propositions, 398, 401
signiﬁcation, 186, 187, 349, 351, 360,
392, 397, 398, 587, 593, 597,
598
signs, 624, 641
signum quantitatis, 413
Simon of Faversham, 370, 375
Simon of Tournai, 519
simple conversion, 164, 174
simple modality, 114
Simplicius, 529
simultaneous (synchronic) alternatives,
511, 516–519, 522, 527, 543,
548, 550, 568
singular, 160
Sophistical Refutations, 192
sophism, 587, 595, 596, 600, 602, 604
sophismata, 434, 439, 448, 485, 489,
595, 618–642
Sorabji, R., 508, 523
sorites, 631, 632
Soto, D. de, 621–624, 632, 634
sound, 355
Southern, R., 51
Spade, P. V., 52, 262, 266, 411, 506,
581, 587, 589, 597
Spath, R. J., 531
Speca, A., 17
species, 360
speculative grammar, 353
Spiazzi, R., 507, 515, 509, 528
square of opposition, 85, 110, 161,
401, 418, 427, 508, 533–535
sentence token, 587
St Gall, 35, 38, 40
state of aﬀairs, 105, 427
status, 89, 106
stoic logic, 3, 4, 6, 15–18
Stoics, 157, 158, 171, 513, 514, 516,
523–524, 533
Street, T., 506, 512, 537, 540, 541
Strode, R., 441, 442, 471, 473, 476,
485, 560, 620
Stump, E., 167, 258, 505, 515, 535,
562
subalternations, 162
subcontraries, 162
subject, 85, 100, 159
of logic, 382
substantivated, 180
adjective, 174, 175
superior to an inferior, 257, 273
superlative, 201
supposit, 189, 204, 602–604
supposita, 395, 402, 428
supposition, 157–276, 399, 434, 448,
449, 621–622, 625, 628, 630
ascent and descent, 452
common, 222
confused distributive material, 461
determinate, 222–276
determinate material, 460
discrete, 222
discrete material, 460
distributive, 222–276
function, 400
material, 187, 193–198, 399, 416,
449–451, 457–461
merely confused, 222–276
merely confused material, 460
modes of: personal, 222–276
modes of: the early view, 222–
241
narrow distributive, 267–276
personal, 187, 193, 194, 197, 399,
Index

715
412, 449–451, 458, 459, 461
personal collective, 446, 455–457
personal confused and distribu-
tive, 453, 456, 457, 461–465
personal determinate, 453, 455,
457, 461–465
personal merely confused, 453,
455, 457, 461–465
simple, 187, 193, 194, 197, 202,
222, 399, 416, 450–452, 458
theory, 157–276, 506, 533–534,
544
wide distributive, 267–276
suppositional
descent, 401
suppositum, 398, 589
Swyneshed, R., 439, 440, 485, 486,
492–498, 580, 597–599
Sylla, E. D., 586, 595
syllables, 93
syllogism, 165, 173, 382
forth ﬁgure of, 616
fourth ﬁgure of, 617
types of, 632–635
with variation in tense, 120
syllogistic, 127, 401
Synan, W. A., 542
syncategoremata, 185, 404, 415
syncategorematic, 159, 177
signs, 185
terms, 411, 414, 461, 462, 469,
475
synchronic, 113
synonyms, 190
Tachau, K., 561
Tarski, A., 423, 424
Tarskian biconditionals, 595
Tarskian truth-scheme, 600
temporal conditional, 139
temporal propositions, 171
tenses, 206–211
term, 90, 190
accidental, 540–541, 544
abstract, 365
concrete, 365
substantial (essential, necessary),
540–545
Themistius, 2, 5, 6, 18
Theodulf of Orl´eans, 22, 24, 25
third adjacent, 175
Thirlkel, W. E., 531
Thom, P., 537, 539–541, 544–546, 552,
559
Thomas Aquinas, 20, 351, 368, 370,
372, 373, 375, 507, 508, 512,
513, 515, 517, 520, 524, 527,
528, 530–532, 556, 562, 564
Thomas of Cleves, 436, 446, 455–457
Thomas of Erfurt, 353
time, 414
timelessness, 519, 523
token-based semantics, 413, 425
Toletus, F., 613, 629, 640
topic, 468, 625–626, 628–629, 631, 637–
638, 640
from an equal, 131
from an integral whole, 130
from antecedent or consequent,
131
from genus, 130
from immediates, 132
from opposites, 132
personal, 638, 641
from substance, 129
topical theory, 123
Tours, 23
Tractatus de Univocatione Monacen-
sis, 192
Tractatus Anagnimi, 178
transitive verbs, 176, 177, 255
translatio, 149
Treatise on Univocation, 192, 193
triangle
semantic, 349
truth, 104, 425
condition, 188, 603
predicate, 579
Index

716
truth-teller, 582
truth-value
changing, 510, 512, 522–523, 548
determinate (deﬁnite) vs. inde-
terminate (indeﬁnite), 524–
528
lacking, 528
unchanging, 510, 512, 522
type, 587, 595, 597
sentence, 595, 596
uc nunc, 171
ultimate signiﬁcata, 397, 402, 416
understanding, 90
universal, 160, 186, 441, 449, 450,
452, 458
aﬃrmative, 163, 178
names, 91
things, 396
University
nations, 435, 445, 446
Oxford, 433, 435–437
Paris, 433, 435–437, 443, 444, 448
univocation, 192
validity, 425
Valla, L., 631–632
value assignment function, 400
van der Lecq, R., 528, 552
variant interpretations of the modes,
260
Veldhuis, H., 549
Verbeke, G., 508
verbs, 177
Veriﬁcation
summary, 422
via antiqua, 389, 392, 399, 406, 407,
412, 421, 428
via moderna, 389, 392, 428, 429
Vio Cajetan, T. de, 398, 403, 404
virtual implication condition, 424, 427
vis inferentiae, 123
Vives, J. L., 208, 622
voice, 96
Von Perger, M., 31
Vos, A., 549
Vuillemin, J., 533
Wadding, L., 552
Wallies, M., 521
Warichez, J., 519
Waterlow, S., 514, 516
whiz deletion, 181
will, 564, 567
William of Auxerre, 519
William of Champeaux, 56, 57, 83,
508, 520
William of Heytesbury, 562
William of Moerbeke, 508
William of Ockham, 20, 171, 184, 187,
188, 190–192, 194, 195, 198,
200–202, 207, 216, 221, 225,
241–244, 248, 251–253, 258–
261, 263–266, 269, 270, 351,
358, 384, 389, 408, 436, 438,
443–445, 449, 451, 458, 461,
463, 465, 467, 469, 470, 472–
475, 481, 551–557, 559–561,
569, 579, 586, 645, 679
Summa Logicae, 586
Mental Language, 411
William of Sherwood, 169–171, 178,
181, 185, 188, 195, 197–199,
201, 225, 227, 229, 231–233,
235–237, 274, 531, 532, 538
Wippel, J. F., 520
Wodeham, A., 217, 403
Wood, R., 550, 551
Woods, J., 506, 693, 694
Wright, G. H. von, 516, 567
Wyclif, J., 220, 441, 442, 450, 452,
467
York, Cathedral School of, 23
Yr¨onsuuri, M., 506, 549, 552, 567,
584
Zabarella, J., 613, 637
Zupko, J., 600
Zycha, I., 518
Index

