Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 1" Greek, Indian and Arabic Logic 

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 1" Greek, Indian and Arabic Logic 

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 1" Greek, Indian and Arabic Logic 
ELSEVIER 
NORTH 
HOLLAND 

Handbook of the History of Logic 
Volume 1" Greek, Indian and Arabic Logic 
Edited by 
Dov M. Gabbay 
Department of Computer Science 
King's College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
and 
John Woods 
Philosophy Department 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver, BC Canada, V6T 1Z 1 
and 
Department of Computer Science 
King's College London 
Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK 
2004 
ELSEVIER 
NORTH 
HOLLAND 
Amsterdam-Boston-Heidelberg-London-New York-Oxford-Paris 
San Diego-San Francisco-Singapore-Sydney-Tokyo 

ELSEVIER B.V. 
ELSEVIER Inc. 
ELSEVIER Ltd 
Sara Burgerhartstraat 25 
525 B Street, Suite 1900 
The Boulevard, Langford Lane 
P.O. Box 211, 1000 AE Amsterdam 
San Diego, CA 92101-4495 Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB 
The Netherlands 
USA 
UK 
ELSEVIER Ltd 
84 Theobalds Road 
London WC 1X 8RR 
UK 
9 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
This work is protected under copyright by Elsevier B.V., and the following terms and conditions apply to its use: 
Photocopying 
Single photocopies of single chapters may be made for personal use as allowed by national copyright laws. Permission of the Publisher 
and payment of a fee is required for all other photocopying, including multiple or systematic copying, copying for advertising or 
promotional purposes, resale, and all forms of document delivery. Special rates are available for educational institutions that wish to make 
photocopies for non-profit educational classroom use. 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Rights Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) 1865 843830, fax (+44) 1865 853333, 
e-mail: 
permissions@elsevier.com. 
Requests 
may 
also 
be 
completed 
on-line 
via 
the 
Elsevier 
homepage 
(http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissions). 
In the USA, users may clear permissions and make payments through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, USA; phone: (+1) (978) 7508400, fax: (+ 1) (978) 7504744, and in the UK through the Copyright Licensing Agency 
Rapid Clearance Service (CLARCS), 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0LP, UK; phone: (+44) 20 7631 5555; fax: (+44) 20 7631 
5500. Other countries may have a local reprographic rights agency for payments. 
Derivative Works 
Tables of contents may be reproduced for internal circulation, but permission of the Publisher is required for external resale or distribution 
of such material. Permission of the Publisher is required for all other derivative works, including compilations and translations. 
Electronic Storage or Usage 
Permission of the Publisher is required to store or use electronically any material contained in this work, including any chapter or part 
of a chapter. 
Except as outlined above, no part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission of the Publisher. 
Address permissions requests to: Elsevier's Rights Department, at the fax and e-mail addresses noted above. 
Notice 
No responsibility is assumed by the Publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, 
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. 
Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. 
First edition 2004 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
A catalog record is available from the Library of Congress. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record is available from the British Library. 
ISBN: 
0-444-50466-4 
ISBN (complete set): 0-444-51596-8 
The paper used in this publication meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (Permanence of Paper). 
Printed in Hungary. 

CONTENTS 
Preface 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods 
List of Contributors 
Logic before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
Julius Moravcsik 
Aristotle's Early Logic 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
George Boger 
Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
Fred Johnson 
Indian Logic 
Jonardon Ganeri 
The Megarians and the Stoics 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Arabic Logic 
Tony Street 
The Translation of Arabic Works on Logic into Latin 
in the Middle Ages and Renaissance 
Charles Burnett 
vii 
ix 
27 
I01 
247 
309 
397 
523 
597 
Index 
607 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

PREFACE 
With the present volume, the Handbook of the History of Logic makes its first appear- 
ance. Members of the research communities in logic, history of logic and philosophy of 
logic, as well as those in kindred areas such as computer science, artificial intelligence, 
cognitive psychology, argumentation theory and history of ideas, have long felt the lack 
of a large and comprehensive history of logic. They have been well-served since the early 
sixties by William and Martha Kneale's single volume The Development of Logic, pub- 
lished by Oxford University Press. But what such a work cannot hope to do, and does 
not try to do, is provide the depth and detail, as well as the interpretive coverage, that 
a multi-volume approach makes possible. This is the driving impetus of the Handbook, 
currently projected to run to several large volumes, which the publisher will issue when 
ready, rather than in strict chronological order. Already in production is the volume The 
Rise of Modern Logic: From Leibniz to Frege. In process are volumes on Mediaeval and 
Renaissance Logic, The Many-Valued Turn in Logic, and British Logic in the Nineteenth 
Century. Others will be announced in due course. 
As with the present volume, the Handbook's authors have been chosen for their capac- 
ity to write authoritative and very substantial chapters on their assigned topics; and they 
have been given the freedom to develop their own interpretations of things. In a number 
of cases, chapters are the equivalents of small monographs, and thus offer researchers and 
other interested readers advantages that only a multi-volume treatment can sustain. 
In offering these volumes to the scholarly public, the Editors do so with the conviction 
that the dominant figures in the already long history of logic are the producers of the- 
ories and proponents of views that are possessed of more than antiquarian interest, and 
are deserving of the philosophical and technical attention of the present-day theorist. The 
Handbook is an earnest of a position developed by the Editors in their Editorial, "Co- 
operate with you logic ancestors", Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 8:iii-v, 
1999. 
The Handbook of the History of Logic aims at being a definitive research work for any 
member of the relevant research communities. The Editors wish to extend their warmest 
thanks to the Handbook's authors. Thanks are also due and happily given to Jane Spurr 
in London and Dawn Collins in Lethbridge for their indispensable production assistance, 
and for invaluable follow-up in Amsterdam to our colleagues at Elsevier, Arjen Sevenster 
and Andy Deelen. The Editors also acknowledge with gratitude the support of Professor 
Bhagwan Dua and Professor Christopher Nicol, Deans of Arts and Science, University of 
Lethbridge, and of Professor Mohan Matthan, Head of Philosophy and Professor Nancy 
Gallini, Dean of Arts, University of British Columbia. Carol Woods gave the project 
her able production support in Vancouver and is the further object of our gratitude. The 

viii 
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council of the United Kingdom also sup- 
ported Woods as Visiting Fellow in 2000-2003, and for this the Editors express their 
warm thanks. 
Dov M. Gabbay 
King's College London 
John Woods 
University of British Columbia 
and 
King's College London 

CONTRIBUTORS 
George Boger 
Department of Philosophy, Canisius College, 2001 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 14208-1098, 
USA 
boger @ canisius.edu 
Charles Burnett 
The Warburg Institute, Woburn Square, London WC1H 0AB, UK 
charles.burnett @ sas.ac.uk 
Dov M. Gabbay 
Department of Computer Science, King's College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, 
UK 
dg@dcs.kcl.ac.uk 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Department of Philosophy, University of Liverpool, 7 Abercromby Square, Liverpool L69 
7WY, UK 
jonardon @ liverpool, ac. uk 
Andrew Irvine 
Philosophy Department, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC Canada, V6T 
IZ1 
andrew.irvine @ubc.ca 
Raymond E. Jennings 
Department of Philosophy, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC Canada, V5A 1S6 
raymond.jennings @sfu.ca 
Fred Johnson 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA 
johnson @ lamar.colostate.edu 
Julius Moravcsik 
Department of Philosophy, Stanford University Stanford, CA 94305-2155, USA 
julius @csli.stanford.edu 
Robert R. O'Toole 
Department of Philosophy, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC Canada, V5A 1S6 
Tony Street 
Faculty of Divinity, University of Cambridge, West Road, Cambridge, UK 
ads46@cam.ac.uk 
John Woods 
Philosophy Department, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC Canada, V6T 
1Z1 
jh woods @ interchange, ubc.ca 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

LOGIC BEFORE 
ARISTOTLE: 
DEVELOPMENT 
OR BIRTH? 
Julius Moravcsik 
INTRODUCTION 
"What is the origin of logic as a distinct discipline?" is a complex and partly con- 
fusing question. It is confusing because some might misinterpret it as asking for 
a date at which people discovered the difference between sound and unsound rea- 
soning. But presumably people have been thinking logically, at least in relatively 
simple contexts, since the origin of humanity. Material elements have behaved 
"physically" much before the rise of physics as a discipline, and people, at times, 
have argued logically much before the first system of logic was presented. There is 
a difference between the two cases. Physics did not start with everything "physi- 
cal" beginning to think about what normal physical functioning is. Humans, with 
a certain sense of detachment, started raising that question. Reason had to be 
applied to natural processes in space and time. In the case of logic, however, 
reason had to be applied to reason. This application required that people reflect 
on their own thought processes and that of others. This reflection then had to be 
coupled with separating the art of logical reasoning from other subjects. However, 
this separation was not like the separating of two natural sciences, e.g., chemistry 
and biology. "Separation" in our case has two aspects. 1 We need to separate logic 
from other disciplines dealing with argumentation and communication, such as 
rhetoric, advertisement generation, and others. But there is also another sense. 
For in the case of logic we need to bring our reflection on language to a new, 
higher level of abstraction. We need to consider language, like mathematics, as 
an abstract system, and then isolate a higher level abstract quality, namely valid 
and invalid inference discriminability. Language in practice is a series of sounds. 
We next abstract from that the phonological, syntactic, and semantic elements. 
We then consider the grammar and semantics, and attempt to impose on some 
of this logical structure. So we delineate the valid inference patterns. To justify 
this effort we need to bring in rules of valid inference. But these do not consist 
of independent elements. Logic emerges when we can relate our rules of inference 
and present them as a coherent system. Finally, we reflect on the abstract features 
of such systems in order to understand what logic itself is. Nobody has come up 
1Netz, R., 1999, The Shaping of Deduction in Greek Mathematics, (Cambridge UP), chapter 1. 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
@ 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

2 
Julius Moravcsik 
with an informative and explanatory definition of what logic is. The same holds 
for mathematics. Logic and mathematics evaluate sequences of elements from a 
completely detached view. By this we mean that the point of view is not influ- 
enced by considerations of utility, pleasure, and other such human interest-relative 
factors. 
It would be misleading to characterize the emergence of the first system of 
logic as either an invention or a discovery. It is not an invention like artifacts, 
such as wheel, car, or less concrete, such as an alphabet. 
On the other hand, 
it is not like the discovery of a mountain nobody knew about, or a chemical 
element. There are elements of both invention and discovery in the formulation 
of a logic. We discover necessary relationships between abstract elements that 
can be characterized linguistically or conceptually. We have, however, options as 
to how to characterize these relationships. At that point, inventiveness enters the 
scene. We cannot credit the discoverer of a river we did not know, with originality. 
Nor do we credit a logician with originality when he first presents the law of non- 
contradiction. But we do credit him with originality in view of the particular ways 
in which he shapes rules for deduction and proofs. 
If we think -- as we should -- of logic as a system of justifiable rules of inference 
that demarcates the valid from the invalid ones, then we should say that Aristotle 
was the first creator of logic in Western culture, and that this achievement came 
spontaneously. As Carl Hempel used to say, it was "a free creation of the human 
mind". It took a special leap in cognition to arrive at this high level of abstractness, 
and to formulate the laws of syllogisms the way Aristotle did. On the basis of these 
considerations one can say that there was no logic in the West before Aristotle, 
and that emergence was spontaneous, not a matter of gradual development. 
Nevertheless, we should not think of the rise of logic as taking place in an 
intellectual vacuum. Logic presupposes a set of concepts that provide its back 
ground and elements. 
These concepts are interrelated. 2 They do not surface 
isolated from each other. Their respective developments need not be interrelated, 
but the final products must be linked that way. 
In the following we shall trace the developments of some of these concepts. We 
must not think that once these concepts are parts of a culture, that logic must 
emerge. The conceptual background we will trace constitutes a necessary but not 
also sufficient background for the kind of ingenious work Aristotle did. 
Thus we divide the question: "was there logic before Aristotle?" into two sub- 
questions. First: "did anyone produce a system of logic comparable to that of 
Aristotle prior to the work of the Stagirite?" and "what, in any, jumps in level of 
abstraction, and development of new concepts were required for the rise of logic?" 
The answer to the first question is negative. To the second question we respond 
by showing what levels of abstraction were needed, and how concepts developed 
that formed the needed background for logic. In the next section we turn to a 
brief sketch of this conceptual background. 
2ibid. chapter 3. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
3 
1 
DEVELOPING THE CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS 
The conceptual foundation has two aspects. One of these is the development of the 
needed detachment and objectivity. One can assess arguments in a number of ways. 
For example, how persuasive these are, how colorfully they are presented, how easy 
it is to understand them and so on. We need to eliminate such considerations when 
we assess something as valid or not. Thus we should trace the development of the 
notions of generality and objectivity. Detailed work in this area is yet to be done. 
We need to trace the move from "this must be right because the gods say so" to 
"this must be a sound deduction because each step can be justified by the rules of 
inference." In general terms, the tracing of this development was started by Bruno 
Snell, with the felicitous title to one of his chapters, "from myth to logic".a 
Before we start on the details, it is worth clarifying where we should look for 
relevant evidence. For example, the Kneales suggests that we should look primarily 
at texts of geometry and the natural sciences that started around that time. 4 They 
suggest that literary sources are less likely to contain logically sound texts. But it 
seems that if we regard the use of logic as a universal human practice that is to be 
codified, then we should look at literary texts as well There are many arguments 
in Homer's Iliad. The problem lies not so much with the deductive links but with 
the premisses; clearly a matter outside the province of logic. Many would not 
accept the premiss that everything that is loved by the gods is necessarily good, 
but whether the other beliefs that surround this one are consistent with it or not is 
a matter of logic. Some discussions involve sketching alternatives among which the 
characters must choose. For example, who should have more prestige and power 
the tribe, the one of royal blood, or the most successful warrior in the tribe? 5 
Some notion of what argument supports what 
apart from what one would like 
to be the case 
seems implicit in the exchanges. Such material can be seen as 
leading to the development of the notion of consistency. Some might be tempted to 
compare agreements, and see something more general and abstract that these have 
in common, even if this cannot be yet articulated as logical consistency. For the 
latter concept to be used, one needs the notion of logical form, more abstract than 
anything we need in other disciplines except mathematics. We have no idea what 
enables humans to discern the same "form" in so many arguments with different 
vocabularies and dealing with different topics, different domains. Some suddenly 
found the similarities, on this abstract level, puzzling. 
This puzzlement need 
be resolved; hence the notion of logical form. To take these conceptual steps may 
seem to many today easy. This would blind us to the difficulty with which different 
cultures sooner or later managed to form the right notion. A good comparison 
would be that with grammar. Logic needs some sort of a grammar for the internal 
analysis of sentences. Yet the first formal complete logic was formulated only in 
3Snell, B., 1953 The Discovery of the Mind, tr. T. Roseuirneyer, (Harvard UP), p. 9. 
4Kneale, W. and M., 1962 The Development of Logic, (Oxford UP), p. 1. 
5Homer, Iliad, Bk.I., lines 180-280. 

4 
Julius Moravcsik 
120 B.C., quite a bit later than Aristotle's activity. 6 Yet Aristotle does rely on 
grammatical distinctions and composition rules. 
The logical form of a sentence explains some of the semantic features of that 
unit. And yet the relation between logical deduction and explanatory power is 
complex. Part of the problem is that there is no complete agreement on what 
explanatory power in general is. Some think that this can be explained within the 
formalisms of today's logic, 7 while others deny that. s So one could point to the 
understanding of a mathematical proof as a holistic cognitive phenomenon, going 
beyond mere understanding of logical relations. 
It is safe to say that not all deductive patterns have explanatory power. Our 
drive towards logic is not based solely on finding sound patterns for explanation. 
Logic is also involved in human efforts to prove something, to sustain an argument 
in debate, and to find an unassailable stand which nobody can legitimately attack. 
There is no one drive for logic. The motivation is pluralistic. 
In Aristotle's way of thinking there is clearly a strong link between explanation 
and demonstration and hence also deduction. All men are mortal, all Greeks are 
men, therefore all Greeks are mortal. The term "men" carries the key explanatory 
power in this. configuration. It is through being human, of having human nature? 
that the Greeks have their mortality. 
Yet Aristotle himself points out that the explanatory power does not come from 
the form alone. As he says, one must select the "middle term" 
"human" in our 
example, very carefully. 9 There will be a number of co-extensive middle term 
candidates; so how do we choose the "right one"? Aristotle thinks that this is 
a matter of insight; we need intuitive understanding of what is puzzling us in a 
context to see what "really" explains. 
So explanation and deduction overlap. Some explanations are not deductions, 
and some deductions are not explanations. But the overlap is important, or at 
least it seemed to Aristotle the most important part of our rational activities. His 
predecessors did not link the two, but Aristotle saw a way in which 
he hoped 
one could. 
One of the expressions the development of which led to the notions of evidence 
and thus also to premiss, is "signs". Signs show in Homer what the gods want, 
signs suggest happiness or tragedy, signs signal to Priam that he can trust, at the 
end, Achilles. 
Once we trust regularities in nature, signs need not be arbitrary. We use these 
in order to predict storms and other weather conditions. Interestingly, both of 
these uses indicate something that will give us 
or so they thought 
certainty, 
but for quite different reasons. In one case the certainty is derived from religious 
thinking. 
The source of the certain, the assurance, is beyond typical rational 
6 Dyonisius Thrax 
rSalmon, W., 1989, "Four Decades of Scientific Explanation" in Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, (Minneapolis University of Minnisota Press) pp. 3-196. 
SManders, K., "Diagram Contents and Representational Granularity", mimeographed paper, 
University of Pittsburgh Philosophy Department. 
9Aristotle, Post. An. Bk II. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
5 
understanding. In the other case the source is the regular observation of general 
truths in nature. In modern times we link the predictability of rain, storm and 
other such phenomena to probabilistic reasoning, but it was not construed that 
way in ancient times. This turned out well in a way, for in this development kinds 
of certainty paved the path for forging the necessity 
and correlated One might 
think that the sciences that promise only probability developed first, and the ones 
bringing certainty only later. But exactly the opposite is the case. Mathematics 
and geometry had their early flowering and the "natural' sciences only later. 
One might think that the development was "from probability to certainty", but 
in fact the reverse took place. Humans reach for what promises certainty and settle 
for the probable only when the methodology and selection of the right domain of 
objects is not at hand. 
We shall now look into the developments, using Bruno Shell's work, the title of 
which we cited already. In the light of the last paragraph we can see now myth 
and logic not only as terminus ab quo and terminus ad quem, but also as sharing 
an important characteristic, namely the promise of certainty. 
There is not enough evidence to trace out the separation between the two sources 
of certainty. In many countries the two live side by side, and in Plato's Timaeus 
the rough equivalent to some of what are today natural sciences is introduced 
within a religious framework. One can speculate about how questioning of a well 
known sort, namely, going from the particular to the general helped to sort out 
different kinds of certainty. In the one case, people presumably started to ask 
questions about the reliability of specific divine commands and alleged forecasts. 
But after that they could ask questions about the nature of these pronouncements 
in general. For example, an important critic, Plato, treats them as a group, but 
here generality is not available. Divine orders, as also divinities, remain particular. 
On the other hand, after we agree on specific rules of deductive inference for some 
patterns, we can ask for more general justifications, and a system of logic will 
provide this for us. 
In our tracing the development of what was necessary background for logic we 
will side-step the question of whether at earlier stages logic was seen as necessary 
rules of thought, or necessary rules about how elements of reality function, or an 
autonomous discipline dealing with its own unique domain. For these are meta- 
physical questions, and do not touch on the nature of early systems of logic as 
general theories about validity. Aristotle's work suggests that he saw logic as hav- 
ing both metaphysical grounding and reflecting necessary features of thought, i~ It 
is reasonable to suppose that the first clear examples of demonstration and proof 
in the Greek world came from geometry, or rather what was then the combined 
subject of mathematics and geometry. Here abstraction and rigor combine and 
reach the same high level that logic does. 11 Nevertheless, we must not make the 
mistake of thinking that logic grew out of the practice of geometry and mathe- 
matics. For one can conceptualize geometrical demonstrations as limited to the 
1~ 
Metaphysics, Bk. Gamma. 
llNetz, R. Op.cit., in general. 

6 
Julius Moravcsik 
particular domain of mathematical and geometrical entities. "He need not look 
at reason having a universal domain in order to do rigorous geometry. This does 
not mean that geometry might not have influenced Aristotle in his construction of 
logic. In fact, there are signs suggesting that Aristotle had an independent con- 
ception of logic, but wanted logical demonstrations to be in some ways analogous 
to geometrical demonstrations. 12 
Thus we can see that neither grammar nor geometry should be interpreted as 
the forerunners of logic. As we say, the first grammar was constructed by Dy- 
onisius Thrax around 120 B.C. 
quite a bit after Aristotle's logic. But apart 
from the temporal issues, we can see why neither of these subjects provide all that 
logic presupposes. Geometry does not because its methodology is not sufficiently 
general, and grammar not, because though it moves on the required level of ab- 
straction, and is sufficiently general, it lacks the rigor at least in earlier times that 
logic requires. 
In the case of geometry the interest in explanatory power and in demonstration 
comes happily together. Furthermore, geometry can be seen also as a paradigm 
for at least some types of deductive reasoning. 
In summary, then, we can interpret the three interests, in explanatory power, in 
proof and deductive reasoning and argument assessment, as stimuli for the devel- 
opment of that set of concepts. Thus the vocabulary that is necessary for a system 
of logic came into being. Analagously we can speculate that the combination of 
these interests would motivate people to work toward the development of the log- 
ical concepts and vocabulary. Thus the three interests can be seen as underlying 
logic, and psychologically, as underlying human efforts, conscious or otherwise for 
formulating logic. 
2 
CONCEPTS AND VOCABULARY PRESUPPOSED BY LOGIC 
We have sketched the salient interests that would lead people towards constructing 
a system of rules generating and assessing logical validity. We now turn to the 
vocabulary that logic requires. 
First we examine the notion of truth. Truth is clearly needed, for without it we 
could not articulate notions like premiss, conclusion, and consequence. We must 
assume that grammar already provided the notion of a sentence, and thus we can 
understand the way in which truth is attached primarily to sentences. Truth is 
also what we need as a contrast to falsehood, a notion to be discussed later. 
Presumably some notion of truth existed since the dawn of human history. It 
may not have been separated from some general notion of what it is to describe 
something correctly. Furthermore, in its early forms truth was not separated from 
what is true in evaluative ways. Something can be a true or genuine diamond, 
friend, a true alumnus, a genuine Egyptian artifact, and so on. The evaluative 
aspect emerges in contexts in which we wonder whether to apply this term to a 
12Aristotle, Prior Analytics. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
7 
friend or mere well-wisher. One can only speculate on whether there was a notion 
of a true sentence as a truly genuine real sentence, i.e. one that did its job and 
gave a good representation of a part of reality in which we are interested. 
In any case, we need to abstract various aspect of this notion of true F, or real 
F, in order to work towards forging the truth that logic wants. First, we need to 
take away the positive evaluative aspect. A true proposition or sentence may be 
bad news, or describing evil doings. Secondly, we need to change the gradational 
aspect of truth into a non-gradational one. 
What is genuine can be a matter 
of degrees, and the same holds for a true friend or true spring weather. But a 
sentence cannot be really true or not really true, or just half-true. If it were of 
that sort, it could not do the job that logic demands of it. 
We need now a further level of abstraction. We use descriptions as good/or 
a certain community. Descriptions function in contexts and with qualifications. 
Some of these are relational, others introduce pragmatic contexts of description. 
All of this applies especially to nouns designating artifacts like 'table'. How much 
damage can an object endure and still qualify to be a table? What is a table for 
a certain community need not serve as such for others. But when the word 'table' 
occurs in a logical construction we abstract from all of this. 
Either there is a 
table or not, and either it functions appropriately in an intended premiss like "all 
tables are..." or should be replaced with another equally context and gradation 
independent term (noun, verb, adjective). 
We are still not quite finished with our account of "assent to truth as used in 
logic". Plato has a characterization of truth in the Sophist, i3 and there are indi- 
cations that the formula comes from earlier times. "the true sentence expresses 
things that are, as they are". The emphasis of the sentence being about and de- 
scribing real things need be taken away if we are to see "true" as a purely logical 
notion. But apart from that, there is the promising but troublesome expression" 
as these are". We need to give this an interpretation that transcends the differ- 
ences between philosophical theories of truth, such as correspondence, coherence, 
pragmatic, redundancy etc, "theories". As Tarski noted the logician's notion of 
truth is independent of all of this. Furthermore, it is a notion that can charac- 
terize sentences in systems the domain of which may turn out later to be seen as 
illusory, i4 
Plato knows that he is not offering a reductionist definition of truth. Nor did 
Aristotle attempt such an account. Once we reached beyond all of the abstractions 
listed above, we van only say: 
"what is left" is the truth required for logical 
constructions and inferences. 
It is interesting to ponder the two very different views that emerged concerning 
this "ascent". According to one view, Platonic in origin, we "purify" language 
and our concept of truth as we reach the level of abstraction needed for logic. 
Purification is no longer a much used concept, but the modern term idealization 
13plato, Sophist, 263b-c 1936. 
i4Tarski, A. "The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages", in Logic, Semantics and Meta- 
mathematics, 1956. pp. 152-278 (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 

8 
Julius Moravcsik 
will do just as well. According to the alternative view, we oversimplify meanings 
and deprive the term of all of its richness when we restrict it to the use needed 
for logic. On the one hand, one can argue that without the restriction no logic, 
no great expressive power. On the other hand, one can argue also that with the 
abstractions we lose a lot of the flexibility, metaphoric power, simple, and other 
such literary devices that enrich languages so much. It is quite wrong to think of 
these devices as just decorative elements. They carry meaning, help to think about 
the more indeterminate aspects of what we talk about, and are very important as 
vehicles for gradual changes of meaning for words either in scientific or everyday 
or literary contexts. It is an interesting peculiarity of natural languages that we 
cannot have it " both ways". Thus in our uses of language we choose to stress in 
some contexts this and in others that aspect of meaning. 
It is natural for us to turn now to another important concept of language with- 
out which logic cannot be conceived, namely that of negation and falsehood. These 
are distinct concepts, but at times their extensions overlap. The notion of truth 
makes no sense without a notion of falsehood. Falsehood could have well origi- 
nated in connection with normative notions like honesty. In Sophocles' Philoctetes, 
Odysseus is trying to persuade the young Neoptolemus to lie to Philoctetes. Lying 
must carry, at least implicitly, the notion of falsehood, for presumably to lie is not 
to tell the truth; "the way real things actually". Successful prediction is also an 
ancient notion, whether in connection with the diumation of priests or weather 
forecasts (these two might overlap). So we can look at various practices such as 
being honest, being good at forecasting weather, or not, and from such notions 
abstract the notion of falsehood. The failures of practices like the ones mentioned 
would 
on detached analysis 
yield the notion of falsehood. It is impossible 
for us to construct what would be by even lax standards reasonable hypotheses as 
to when these abstractions became explicitly the objects of cogitation. Falsehood 
must have been an essential ingredient in the conceptual framework within which 
mathematics and geometry were practiced as sciences and so conceived consciously 
by the practitioner. But even so, it takes an additional step of abstraction and 
generalization to extend the notion of falsehood to assessment of descriptive speech 
in general. 
As we turn to negation, we must draw an important line between that notion 
and some others following in our discussion, and truth and falsehood. For truth 
and falsehood are not conceived at any stage in history as forces of nature. These 
are not metaphysical concepts. But negativity and one thing following another 
are. (If so the one points out that much later for Frege the True and the False are 
objects, one should separate this purely abstract notion of objectification, installed 
as a part of a highly abstract system of semantics from the kind of metaphysical 
or natural posits about which we talk here.) 
In tracing the notion of negation, we should start with the notion of opposites, 
in particular opposing natural forces like fire and water (Heraclitus), or moistness 
and dryness. Was their incompatibility construed as necessary and ~ priori, or as 
just an extreme case of clashing natural forces, is an unanswerable question. 

Logic Before Aristotle" Development or Birth? 
9 
From the notion of opposing natural forces to the logical notion of negation, 
one has to climb a long and steep road. First, opposites need not exclude each 
other completely. The weather maybe "stormy" with what the British call so 
characteristically 
"sunny intervals". Or it could be between stormy and calm. 
With hot and cold, a thing can be hot in some respect, and not hot in others. 
By the time we see opposition illustrated in Plato, we come to examples like tall 
and short. These are what are called later qualities. Furthermore, semantically 
they behave like adverbials. A tall monkey may be a short jungle-living animal. 
The distinction between natural forces and the more quality-oriented classification 
is not an all-or-nothing affair. What about light and darkness? 
Whether one 
regards these as forces or not, depends on one's physics, rudimentary as this may 
be. 
Plato wrestles a lot with the "negative". His thinking about negation is strongly 
influenced by the Parmenidean attack of this as not-being. 
This explains also 
why his first attempt of characterization not in terms of sentence-negation, but 
predicate negation. He is anxious to point out. 15 that the not-fine is as much a 
part of reality as the fine. Fine things and not-fine things are different, but both 
existing. Furthermore, the difference is a special "contrast" that Plato does not 
define any further. Nor has anyone since. Hence the problem is swept under the 
rug. In what consists the negativity of the not-fine? Otherwise? This is ???. 
One cannot insist that we arrive at a completely adequate account of negation 
and falsity only when e.g., negation is completely divorced from metaphysics. For 
example, a constructive step forward is the realization that the completely nega- 
tive (predicationally) entity is conceptually impossible. So the negative concerns 
always some aspect of what we talk about. With negation we indicate in a unique 
way that what we talk about is different from that which the corresponding posi- 
tive description would represent. The early treatments of negation in metaphysical 
and ontological terms is responsible for the early concentration on predicate nega- 
tion, before subsequent consideration of what is logically prior, namely sentence 
negation. 
Some might regard it as a step forward when negation is considered a purely 
logical operation of contrasting what is taken in a language or system as positive 
with the negative. But Aristotle himself can be certainly described of having a 
system of logic. Yet he could assign in the case of predicate negation an important 
difference between the positive and the negative. According to his view a negative 
predicate, e.g., not-human, was indefinite. 16 Given what we know about Aristotle's 
views about unities of predicates and their significance, we can represent this 
Aristotelian view in the following terms. A positive predicate like "is a human" 
(or in term logic "human") has a unity that is seen by considering the conceptually 
related principle of individuation; if we understand what 'human' is then w also 
understand what it is to be 1, 2, 3, etc. 
human(s), even if in some concrete 
15plato, Sophist, 258-259. 
16For a discussion of this notion see Thompson, M. "On Aristotle's Square of Opposition", 
Philosophical Review, 1953 pp. 251-265. 

10 
Julius Moravcsik 
context the counting is difficult to carry out; e.g. battle fields. ~ But the predicate 
"not-human" has no individuation principle attached to it. In principle we should 
be able to answer the question: "how many humans in this room?" but there is 
no correct answer in principle to the question: "how many not-humans in this 
room?" We can count the not-human in an infinite number of ways, each equally 
good or bad. In this respect positive and negative predicates differ. (This does 
not interfere with the logical operation of double negation yielding a positive.) 
We shall now turn to the last of the pillars that is needed in order to have a 
conceptual framework within which logic can be conceived. This is the notion of 
"p following from q" where 'p' and 'q' represent descriptive sentences. In short, we 
need the notion of logical consequence. How does language build up this notion? 
We shall show in terms of the key words used gradual emergence in ancient Greek 
of the needed notion. 
First we shall consider the word "akolouthein". 
In its earlier less abstract uses it means following someone in a general physical 
sense; for example, soldiers following others in rows. The stress from our point 
of view is not merely the concrete domain of application, but also the element of 
order associated with the term. When armies are set up, soldiers and their rows 
are occupying designated places, and traverse designated routes. Thus it is not 
surprising that we find also usages in which the word denotes natural phenomena 
following each other such as cloudy sky followed by rain. 17 Here the notion of order 
has more force. The "following" is a matter of the laws/regularities of nature. 
We find also uses in which the word stands for guidance and obedience. In 
each of these cases, the key force is not just sequencing, but things following each 
other because of natural order or rational human order (the wiser, or in position, 
demanding obedience from the lesser.) 
Finally meaning is raised to an abstract level, and our word designates sequence 
in argument. This is abstract but too wide and not sufficiently structured. Once 
the final stone in the diadem: x following logically from y. In other words, the 
notion of logical consequence. Hence a key cog in justifying inferences. 
The other expression Aristotle uses in this Connection is "sumbainein". This 
means originally "standing with feet together". But other senses emerge, such as 
joining something, and come to agreement. Thus in this case too we see both 
movement towards abstract levels and differentiation of ingredients. Things are 
joined according to a certain order, and their "agreement" signifies harmony of 
elements. We see also the use of this word for consequence, and necessarily joining 
things. Eventually the word denotes inevitable sequences, and thus becomes a fine 
vehicle for Aristotle to designate logical consequence. 
We have, then, key ingredients in the conceptual framework within which Aris- 
totle's syllogistic logic was formulated. We turn now to a basic notion absolutely 
necessary for explicating logical relations, namely predicates or terms (for our 
purposes we will not need to make here fine distinctions.) The basic structure of 
logical formulae in modern symbolic logic is the same as in the logic of Aristotle. 
17Snell, Op.cit., p.212. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
11 
In the premisses and conclusions relations between predicates or terms are rep- 
resented. First let us see on what level of abstraction we need to construe these 
terms. In a sentence like "All A's are B's" the A and the B need be taken as 
having potentially: Universal application; must be independent of subject matter; 
and should be precisely delineated, without polysemy or ambiguity. 
We need to deal with two further factors, if only to lay these aside: First, it is not 
relevant to their employment in schemes of the sort just indicated that our speci- 
fication or of the content of the terms is in most cases dictated by human interest, 
bias of our perceptual system, etc. One can reason logically with pure concepts, 
detached from human interest and with ones reflecting bias. This will not affect 
what is called logical form. Secondly, this characterization of terms/predicates is 
neutral with regard to ontology. The Platonist and the nominalist will have to 
present both an interpretation of "A" and "B" that allows these expressions to 
figure in the purely logical characterizations of "some A" or "no B" 
All of this may sound trivial to a philosophic or mathematical audience, but we 
must make a real effort to try to imagine a world of ideas in which these levels of 
abstractions are not yet present and are not picked up by adequate vocabulary. 
And yet, it is important to stress again that we are not accusing the first humans 
to have had a materialist bias. Rather, they used languages in which many distinc- 
tions fundamental to the delineation of logic have not yet been made. The fact 
that the abstract has not been separated from the non-abstract does not mean 
that each relevant word had only concrete entities in its domain of designation. 
Undoubtedly, there are many ways of sketching speculatively the development 
of the terms of logic. In the following, we rely heavily on the scholarly work of 
Bruno Snell. 
Any natural language with sufficient communicative power to serve as describing 
reasonably vast areas of reality must contains words of general power, and hence 
words describing things with oversimplifications. Thus the meanings of 'lion' or 
'horse' ignore all of the specific differences between specimens within the respective 
species. 
This is governed by two conditions. 
First, separate words for every 
qualitative difference between specimens would create languages with absurdly 
large vocabularies. Secondly, the ignoring of specific differences is dictated by the 
needs of the projected linguistic community. As is well known, some of the tribes 
in northern regions have many words for different kinds of snow. This is because 
these differences play roles in the securing of practical necessities in their daily life. 
Thus modes of life-style at times push towards oversimiplifications and at other 
times towards generating many senses for the same word. 
Snell discusses in the early parts of his "from myth to logic" natural kind terms 
like 'lion' and 'horse'. is That does not mean that he thinks of these as the earliest 
words, but that these are the kind of word (noun) that plays crucial roles in the 
development of the notion of predicate. Brief reflection should show us why this 
is the case. With kind-nouns like "lion" and "horse", application is an either-or 
proposition. We will not say things like "a kind of lionish thing", or "more or less of 
1s Ibid. pp. 201-207. 

12 
Julius Moravcsik 
a horse" (mythical entities excluded). But when we turn to verbs we find a different 
situation. Is someone walking? There are clear cases showing the affirmative, and 
on the other hand, clear cases of being in a stationary position thus deserving 
the negative. But in between there are many cases that can be interpreted either 
way. Furthermore, there are different criteria for walking depending whether it is 
supposed to be an event of walking for a baby, a normal healthy adult, a recovering 
patient, or a moon-walker. Similar cases can be shown for most other verbs raining, 
singing, dividing, melting, boiling, etc. 
In order to use verbs as predicates or subjects in syllogistic logic we must ide- 
alize, and abstract away from in-between cases and relativity to subject. At the 
same time, we must admit that verbs with their cases and argument places provide 
most of the structure of the sentence. Thus what is fundamental from the point 
of view of constructing a logic is not fundamental from the point of view of expli- 
cating what gives the sentence its basic syntactic and thus also partial semantic 
structure. These reflections should not lead us to the conclusion that verbs are 
intrinsically vague and plagued by polysemy, and cannot be sharpened in their 
meanings to serve as terms in syllogistic reasoning. The point is, however, that 
we must do a lot of abstracting before they can serve this way. In the case of the 
types of nouns we considered we need to abstract away from differences between 
individual specimens of a species, but these are all on the most elementary level 
of abstraction, and easy to ignore. 
We do find verbal meanings sharpened in certain contexts in which the verb 
with many others is used within a certain practice, or applied jointly with others 
to illuminate a certain domain of entities. For example, in mathematics, there 
is no room for considering many senses of 'divide'. The relevant meaning is that 
which we use in connection with the mathematical notion of 'division. (The same 
holds for 'addition', subtraction', etc.) 
Thus we can say that one should look 
for certain disciplines or domains with respect to which certain words, or even 
word families, need to have sharpened meanings. Such might be: mathematics, 
geometry, chemistry, and other sciences, or applied fields of the sort we today 
call engineering. But we should not think of precision limited to the sciences. 
Certain financial transactions and other economic exchanges, once precise units 
of what serves in the exchange are determined, require also precise meanings (i.e. 
sharply delineated (ones). So one might conjecture that we build logic once we 
have become accustomed to think within certain fields very precisely. But this 
might not be right. For what logic requires is precisely to think universally, to 
understand logical form regardless of subject matter. 
This contrasts with the 
restricted rigorous thinking of geometry or certain parts of economics. Logic is a 
set of rules of inference which we judge to be within valid patterns, regardless of 
what the "A's" and "B's" stand for. 
Let us, then return to consider the development of other parts of the vocabulary, 
and the devices with which we can raise the semantic content, and thus the thinking 
with these concepts, to higher levels of abstraction. 
It might be thought that the kind concepts we form are based on resemblences 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
13 
we notice. Since there is an infinite number of these in any context, we should add 
"salient" to this proposal. But even with the emmandation it seems weak. For 
what unites our concepts of both human creations and many natural kinds that are 
in some way related to human interest is their functional aspects. We call many 
things that are quite different in shape, material constituents, and aesthetic looks 
houses, because these buildings offer shelter and a place where what in a specific 
context can be regarded as suitable for carrying out usual human functions can 
indeed be carried out. 
The problem is that the more functional a concept is, the more likely it is to 
be subject to vagueness and polysemy. It is no surprise that Aristotle thought 
geometry to be providing good examples of deduction. Abstract generality, no 
vagueness, are inherent in geometrical notions. The problem we are discussing is 
how to carry out high level abstractions in order to have all or most parts of a 
natural language be capable of producing elements that can functions as terms in 
syllogisms. 
There are some kinds of cases where Snell is right and resemblance rules, but 
that is because we supplement similarity with a "built-in similarity space", as 
Quine pointed out. 19 
In the case of terms like 'horse' and 'lion', we are in a fortunate semantic sit- 
uation. On the one hand, the terms by themselves can function well in logical 
inferences, once we abstract the layers of meaning relating to human interest and 
differences between specimens. On the other hand, from an early stage of develop- 
ment on, we used these nouns with the equivalents of '...like' (as in 'lion-like') to 
set up what seemed to the linguistic community salient similarities, with the exact 
nature of the similarity left open. In this way on could use solid "noun-blocks" 
and with the additions give flexibility, room for further development, and beauty 
to language. Consider "white as snow", or "sweet as honey", used in Homeric lit- 
erature. Maybe if they had discovered something sweeter than honey, they would 
have used another comparison to describe the objects under consideration. So the 
development of the descriptive vocabulary moves on from comparisons to simile 
to metaphor, and that, in turn can become "calcified" and turn into a noun or 
adjective with precise meaning. 
Much technical vocabulary develops this way, 
also in philosophy. E.g., Plato uses the Greek equivalent to "partaking" to mark 
the unique indefinable relation between Forms and what modern philosophy calls 
instances. What starts as a metaphor becomes a part of Plato's technical vocab- 
ulary. 
Another important way in which abstract thinking develops even though we 
do not tend to think of it this way is by analogies which, when sharpened, can 
be restated in terms of proportions. We live in cultures in which basic units of 
measurement for length, area, time, and three-dimensional content are taken for 
granted. This separates us sharply from the Greek culture in which such exact 
units were not available for a long time. Thus the basic notion for measurement 
was proportion. For example, 
though it is hard for us to fathom this 
the 
19Quine w.v., Word and Object, (John Wiley, New York) 1960. p. 83. 

14 
Julius Moravcsik 
Parthenon was built using constantly proportional instructions for building. 
In order to raise this mode of thinking to how we would understand mathematics 
proper, and with this the production of the mathematics of exact measurement, 
we need to focus on how proportions can be raised from the purely empirical to 
the mathematized. 
Not all proportional thinking can be handled in this way. For example, as 
Snell notes, in the Gorgias Plato set up the following proportion. 2~ Rhetoric is to 
philosophy as cooking is to medicine. The proportional statement is articulated 
in order to shed light on philosophy. Of course, in this form whatever conception 
of philosophy emerges, it cannot be used in syllogistic thinking. But the problem 
of making the characterization formulated by the proportional statement explicit 
and sharp, fuels the mind sooner or later to try to characterize all of the terms 
in this statement in explicit and unambiguous ways, so that Plato's conception of 
philosophy could play roles in further deductive arguments. One might think that 
in order to shape an acceptable vocabulary for logic, one must take as fundamental 
those attributes that are quantitative in character. But this does not follow. The 
concepts must have principles of individuation. We understand what 'horse' means 
when we know how to count horses. But that does not make the meaning of 'horse' 
quantitative in the sense in which what linguists call "mass terms", such as terms 
for colour, smell, weight, etc., quantitative. 
These reflections show how much work must go into reaching the level of ab- 
straction at which the relevant concepts and terms needed as the background for 
logic, can emerge. As said before, merely having the vocabulary for logic does not 
necessitate the emergence of a system of logic. But in this case a drive for more 
generality in explanations, uniting criteria for good proofs, arguments, and some 
kinds of explanations, forces the mind also towards higher levels of abstractness. 
Hence the idea of a system of logic in which the rules form nets of justification, 
and subsequently, the reflections of what different systems of logic might have in 
common. In this way we arrive at the notion of theory of logic. I do not think that 
Aristotle reached this level, but dealing with that thorny issue is someone else's 
job. 
Before we leave this developmental sketch we need to say something about quan- 
tifiers. These are essential parts of the logical vocabulary. On the other hand, the 
needed words do come from ordinary language, and the changes needed for these 
to turn into technical expression are not formidable. Let us take the existential 
quantifier "some". Most of our everyday uses of this term are contextual; some 
students, some luck, some countries, etc. But even common sense flirts with the 
use of 'some' that is designed to cover all of reality, such as the claim: "there are 
some things money cannot buy." But note that this use requires generality only. 
It does not require a leap to a higher level of abstractness. One might insist that 
the logical use of 'some' entails thinking of the range of application all possible 
entities, abstract or concrete. But such a range is neither officially acknowledged 
nor excluded from the everyday use. 
2~ 
Op.cit., p.221. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
15 
We find the same situation with regard to the universal quantifier. 
Zeus is 
described in one of the Greek dramas as "the all-conquering" one. This hardly 
specifies in a sharp way what 'all' covers, nor does it rule out anything. To obtain 
the logical sense all we need to do is consider the religious sense of 'all' as in 
mythology, and sharpen the delineation of the domain. In this interesting way, 
one can think of aspects of religion as preparing the way to logical vocabulary. 
After this positive sketch of how the background of logic requires development, 
even if the first system of logic does not, we will turn to devices that some historians 
have wrongly taken to be forerunners of logic. 
3 
LOGIC AND DEFINITIONS 
In their influential book on the history of logic the Kneales say about Plato that 
"he is undoubtedly the first great thinker in the field of the philosophy of logic. He 
treats.., three important questions that arise as soon as we begin to reflect on the 
nature of logic...", and he thinks one of these is "what is the nature of definition, 
and what is it that we define? ''21 In this brief section I would like to show that 
this view is mistaken, and that in fact, whatever questions one can raise about 
definitions, the notion of definition itself is independent from logic. We can think 
about the concepts we need for the construction of a system of logic and construct 
a system of logic, without bringing in the notion of definitions at all. 
As our deliberations above have shown, what we require for logic is: clear, 
precise, well understood terms, without spatio-temporal or pragmatic relativity. 
Providing definitions for the terms figuring in a syllogistic inference may be at 
times a good means to achieve the above presupposition, but it is not a necessary 
means, and at times even if we have definition their availability does not entail 
that the presupposition is met. 
The myth that there are serious links between logic and definition is likely 
to have a historical origin. The Kneales report that Aristotle thought Plato to 
be much interested in definitions 22 and that this in turn led Aristotle to think 
much about definitions in relation to logic. This historical reconstruction rests on 
shaky grounds. Historians tend to confuse two questions: "was Plato interested in 
answering 'what is F' questions" where 'F' stands for what we would call today 
an important property such as justice, friendship, insight, etc.? and "was Plato 
primarily interested in finding definitions for important qualities, or properties, be 
these in the ethical or mathematical realm?" (These were not as separate for him 
than for the modern world, for reasons into which we cannot enter here.) In my 
case, the answer is affirmative to the first question and negative to the second. 
There are many ways to answer a question of the form: "what is it to be a 
positive integer? or "what is justice?" For one, a philosopher might give a variety 
~lKneale, W. and M., Op.cit., p.17. 22). 
2'2ibid., p. 21. 

16 
Julius Moravcsik 
of unique and necessary descriptions of one of these concepts, without being able, 
or feel the need for, defining them. 
There are also many ways of leading an 
audience to understand a basic notion without defining it. An obvious example 
is 'language'. There is no general definition for this word, and yet linguists and 
philologists manage quite well (making progress in their disciplines, relying on a 
common understanding within the profession of what language, and a language 
is). Plato never defines 'number', and yet reading the relevant texts one comes to 
grasp what Plato's notion of number was. At other times a notion is basic and 
primitive, or undefinable in a system, but we come to understand it by considering 
its use, and thus how it plays roles in a variety of types of sentences. 
The Kneales stress that for Plato it was possible to come up with definitions 
that are non-arbitrary and informative. But this shows once more how the ques- 
tions about definitions are independent from those concerning logic. As long as 
the presupposition stated above is met, whether the terms used in syllogisms are 
arbitrary or not, and whether their connections are trivial or informative does not 
affect logic at all. One can construct logics while believing that all definitions are 
always arbitrary. Then again, one can do logic with different assumptions. These 
issues do not affect the task of proposing rules of valid inference over a domain 
and a set of sentences. 
What the Kneales might have had in mind, and what should be said, is that 
the issue of arbitrariness will affect, not the potential to generate a logic, but the 
potential of the definitions used to introduce terms to have explanatory power. But 
as we saw earlier, the question of what is a logic and what has explanatory power 
are distinct, though in results there can be an overlap. Some explanations can be 
phrased in terms of inferences, and some, but not all, can have explanatory power. 
E.g., "the larger the state, the more likely a high level of corruption; so-and-so is 
a large state; therefore there is a likelihood of high level of corruption." 
Perhaps those insisting on conceptual connections between definitions and logic 
have in mind that both involve sketching links between concepts. A definition 
typically has the form: "A = B + C". Thus we "carve up" a concept, and hope 
that B and C are sumciently clear, and thus some illumination is fostered by this 
scheme. Likewise, a syllogistic argument reveals certain conceptual relations. But 
this is a very thin common denominator. Many other investigations and enter- 
prises also reveal conceptual relations. For example mere classificatory systems, 
or drawing contrasts. 
Furthermore, the ability to provide adequate definitions 
does not entail having also the ability to reflect on the nature of definitions and 
definition giving. My claim is here, in any case, that neither of these intellectual 
exercises has anything significant to do with logic. 
This defence of the sudden emergence of logic and its preconditions does not 
say that once we have a logic, it cannot be expanded. Surely, that is the way to 
construe the relation between syllogistic logic and modern symbolic logic. The lat- 
ter does not replace the former, but provides a larger framework on the same level 
of abstractness within which the data syllogistic logic explains can be explained 
along with lot more. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
17 
A few more reflections on definitions. Some of these may be covering a "closed" 
domain, but others do not. Perhaps an account of the series of positive integers 
in terms of a starting point and the successor function will generate just the right 
class. But consider the definition of "vehicles for transportation". Given changes 
in technology and modes of transportation, there is no way of delineating a sharply 
specifiable class as the extension that this term and its meaning gather up. Many 
definitions are of this sort. E.g., 'cooking'. Whatever definition we generate, will 
it cover cooking with a microwave oven? And if it does. then why not just any 
mixing of edibles, e.g., cereal with yogurt? Currently we think that cooking should 
involve heating and some transformation of substance; but modes of heating and 
degrees as well as kind of transformation of substance need be left open, given 
developments of skill and technology. 
In summary, definition is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for the 
kind of vocabulary within which a system of syllogistic logic can be formulated. 
Perhaps, the historians' misjudgments arise from a confusion between what it 
takes to have a logic and what it take to have an axiomatic system capturing a 
theory, e.g. Euclidean geometry. The second enterprise demands a lot more than 
the first. We can reflect on validity and have a logic for a set of sentences without 
having an axiomatic system. And as was stressed earlier, having a rigorous way 
of dealing with one specific domain, e.g. geometry, does not yet indicate that 
the researchers have a conception of logical analysis completely regardless of any 
particular domain. 
To conclude this section, let us consider some of the things that Aristotle says 
about definition, and see if these texts suggest any historical dependence of think- 
ing about logic. 
In Post. An. Bk II # 7, Aristotle considers relationships between definition, 
demonstration and essence. His conclusion is that one cannot demonstrate essences 
by definition. His basic point is that a definition is merely a picture of a configu- 
ration of conceptual relations. Thus it is an articulation, but not a demonstration. 
In order for it to be a demonstration it would have to contain inferences. But 
a definition is not a series of inferences, even if its ingredients could 
in some 
other contexts -- serve as terms in syllogistic arguments. Furthermore, definitions 
cannot prove existence, but deductions with explanatory power must end up with 
conclusions about conceptual relations among ingredients that exist. The tone of 
this section does not in any way suggest that Aristotle thought of logical infer- 
ences as a result of thinking about definitions. On the contrary, the comments 
about definitions seem to be directed to those who did think that there was a 
close relationship, perhaps even development. Aristotle's comparison stresses the 
differences, and not the surface similarities. 
The discussion continues and in # 10 new light is shed of the relationship 
between definitions and syllogistic deductions. In 94a ft. he concentrates on "real 
definitions". Unlike the modern interpreters of the real-nominal distinction, for 
Aristotle the key issue is that the real definitions carry existential import. In this 
sense we define kinds that exist in nature and not just verbal expressions. He then 

18 
Julius Moravcsik 
explains what definitions are by contrasting these with deductions. The English 
"demonstration" is sufficiently polysemous so that one can see what disturbed 
Aristotle's audience. On can think of a demonstration is merely drawing a picture 
of conceptual relations, or as a dynamic process that draws out of material initially 
understood other material that we did not think was contained in the premisses. 
Deductions and inferences are not static pictures. 
These represent dynamic 
processes in which new information comes to light, even though we also learn that 
the information was already potentially in the premisses. In this way inferences 
are not subject to what was called much later "the paradox of definitions" ("if 
the definition is informative, it cannot be right; if it just repeats what we knew 
already, it is trivial" .) So in definitions, no inferences; and if no inferences, no logic. 
Aristotle seems to have worked out the theory of what a logic is quite independently 
of definitions; and in the passages briefly surveyed he contrasts deductions with 
definitions, to show how the former are instructive and informative in ways in 
which the latter cannot be, though they may be useful for other purposes. 
4 
LOGIC AND THE METHOD OF DIVISION 
The Kneales say that Plato's Method of Division must have influenced Aristotle's 
thinking about logic. 23 Others too have seen in the past links between the Platonic 
method and Aristotle's logic. We can divide the question into two parts: first, is 
there any conceptual link between the Divisions and syllogistic logic, and second, 
is there any evidence that Aristotle thought there to be such links? The following 
will support negative answers to both of these questions. 
Plato's Method of Division is introduced in Phaedrus 265d-e. In this passage the 
Method is introduced both as collecting the right elements under the appropriate 
genera, and as the correct way of dividing generic Forms into the "right" species. 
In places Plato construes the project as that of coming up with "right namings". 
Clearly any generic Form can be divided into species in an infinite number of ways. 
But Plato thinks that some of these are better at reflecting real differences and 
similarities between Forms than others. As he says in the Politicus, we must cut 
"along the right joints" .24 There seems to be, then, three tasks that the Method 
must fulfill. First, to carve out what in later literature are called "natural" kinds. 
Second to present a correct conceptual anatomies of generic Forms so that the more 
correct subdivisions will mirror the more important conceptual relations under a 
genus, thus vindicating indirectly also the positing of a given genus. Thirdly, by 
dividing genera, and then subdividing the results of the first cut, as well as those 
that follow, to end up with a series of characteristics, with more and more narrow 
extension, all of which can be collected and thus give a "definition" or unique 
necessary characterization of a given item under investigation. Examples include 
statesmanship and sophistry. (See, e.g., Sophist 258c-d). Since, e.g., sophistry is 
23Ibid., p. 10. 
24plato, Politicus, 252 d-263b. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
19 
illuminated by seven different divisions and none of these is declared as fraudulent, 
we can assume that the divisions are not meant to provide one correct account of 
a given element, to the exclusion of all others. On the other hand, the fact that 
much more space is devoted to one of the characterization of sophistry suggests 
that Plato did not regard all divisions to be of equal explanatory value. 
If we are to support the Kneales' conjecture, we would have to argue in the 
following way. In at least one of their employment divisions can lead to definitions. 
But definitions are linked to logic. Therefore, divisions are linked to logic. In 
reply it should be pointed out that, as we saw, no conceptual dependency can be 
established between definitions and logic. We can have a fine syllogistic logic as 
long as the terms used are clear. For this we need not use definitions, though in 
some contexts these can be used to achieve clarity of terms. 
Looking closer at what steps we find in divisions and in logical deductions, we 
see important differences. Suppose someone wants to "divide" the generic form, 
"discipline", ("art"?) into two sub-species, e.g., productive and exchange-oriented. 
How is this cut achieved? There is no way of deducing these two from the genus, 
and more importantly, there is no evidence that Plato thought that the cut is the 
result of deduction. Rather, the cut is a matter of making the "right" conceptual 
divisions. Looking at it one way, repeated cuts along many lines should lead to 
appropriate classifications. 
Once we have these, we can use these as the basis 
for constructing 
with additional premisses--deductions. But we cannot test 
such classifications with deductions. Suppose that we divide humanity into Greeks 
and non-Greeks. As long as we did not leave out any element, the division is, in 
terms of logical form, correct. Whether it gives us insight is then a quite different 
question that mere logical devices will not answer. 
Thus Plato's purpose with his Method is quite different from the purpose of a 
syllogistic logic. It is conceptual clarification, with the criteria for success being 
given by the notoriously intractable notion of insight or wisdom. 
Aristotle's purpose with syllogistic logic is to present ways of argument that re- 
gardless of subject matter will always enable us to see consequences of conceptual 
relations that we assumed at the outset. 
Logic will show us appropriate infer- 
ence patterns, regardless of the nature of the premisses with which we start. The 
premisses may come from any domain, and they may be true or false. Logic is 
concerned with inference (topic-neutral), while Plato's Divisions aim at appropri- 
ate in this or that conceptual domain. (Maybe he saw, by the time he wrote the 
Philebus, that in different domains we need different types of divisions. Some func- 
tion along the genus-species line, others in terms of quantitative and measurable 
difference.) 
So much for one of our two questions. We now ask whether there is any evi- 
dence that Aristotle regarded Plato's Division as either suggesting logical form, or 
.
.
 
functioning as a help in deductive arguments or our checking these. 
The key evidence is supposed to be Post An. 96b25 ft. But in this passage 
Aristotle makes it quite clear that divisions do not prove or demonstrate anything. 
He does want to point out a way in which divisions are nevertheless helpful. But 

20 
Julius Moravcsik 
in the examples he gives all we see is that divisions are useful as a starting point 
for forming definitions. 
They help us in "collecting" all of the attributes that 
will explain the essence of the given concept under investigation. As we saw, this 
does not show either that there is any conceptual relation between definitions and 
logical inferences, or that Aristotle thought so. 
Divisions help to put attributes in the right order, i.e., as attributes with less 
and less extension, says also that divisions are a great way of checking whether 
we got all of the crucial attributes that jointly define the sought essence. But he 
should have added that this is so only if we did the division "appropriately"; i.e. 
not added anything superfluous and not left out key attributes. But what guara- 
tees appropriate dividing? Certainly not anything having to do with deductions. 
No logical proof can be given that element E must be a part of the division. This 
judgment is based on conceptual intuitions, that lead us to view various elements 
as part of essence. Judgments of essentiality may be crucial for certain ways of 
viewing classifications, but these intuitions are quite different from logical intu- 
itions of validity, consistency, or inconsistency. It is true that segments of divisions 
can be explicated in structures on' the basis of which deductions can be formu- 
lated. For example, maybe all As are Bs, and all Bs are Cs. This, so far, has 
nothing to do with inferences. Given this conceptual map, one can infer that all As 
are Cs. In this context the Method of Division can provide data for deduction, but 
lots of other investigations provide data as well. We can draw logical inferences 
on the basis of conceptual relations presented in legal presentations. This hardly 
shows that Aristotle was influenced in his thinking about logic by law. 
In sum, Aristotle's comments on Divisions can be best interpreted as negative 
and defensive. He wants to show how different the purpose and carrying out of 
a division is from drawing logical inferences. His remark that divisions can help 
in checking proposed definitions are only meant to show that there may be some 
intellectual use of these structures. We have evidence that divisions were practised 
a great deal in Plato's Academy. Aristotle says the more or less appreciative things 
about divisions, to suggest that all the people who spent so much time and energy 
in constructing divisions did not wasted a lifetime. 
5 
SUMMARY 
In comparison with other disciplines, logic moves on a higher level of abstraction. 
In physics, for example, there are specific events to account for, then general- 
izations that can stretch into lawlike ones, and after layers of these, a cohesive 
system, or theory. In logic we need to analyze and evaluate individual statements, 
and such analyses are generalized in terms of consistency and validity. Thus we 
have rules of construction and inference. Placed together in a coherent way this 
yields a system of logic. We can then reach a higher level of abstraction and look 
at systems of logic. Hence theorems about completeness, incompleteness, etc. We 
can view the natural sciences as forming theories by talking about entities that 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
21 
give causal or other types of explanation of sensible particulars. Logic obviously 
cannot be viewed this way. Furthermore, logic is not some sort of an abstrac- 
tion from sensory experience, nor can it be defined in terms of other disciplines 
or interest. Logic has 
like mathematics 
autonomy and the highest level of 
abstractness. 
We saw that logic needed a set of terms, vocabulary items, of its own. But we 
must not think that once we have some of these terms like predicate, negation, 
then we automatically have a logic. To rise to the level of logic we need a special 
free creative move of the human mind. Thus logic is not a slow development of 
ideas, though once we have logic, it can be expanded, as we saw in the case of 
modern symbolic logic. 
We need certain linguistic arid thus also. conceptual development in order to 
reach the level at which the vocabulary of logic can be forged. Much of this chapter 
is devoted to a sketch of how the required vocabulary items can be seen as a last 
jump in an otherwise long conceptual and semantic development. 
The Greeks 
reached the required level in one way. Other cultures with other languages might 
reach it in different ways. 
Our main point is that the rise of logic is both a matter of development and the 
matter of instantaneous creation. The required vocabulary must have a historical 
process preceding it. Once that is in place, the possibility of constructing a logic 
is there. Aristotle was the first to understand the autonomy of logic, and the way 
it opens up a magic world of endless explorations of a unique mode of reflection, 
construction, justification, and argument evaluation. 
APPENDIX 1: DID ARISTOTLE BASE LOGIC ON SOLID FOUNDATIONS? 
As we saw, Aristotle's logic is not only syllogistic logic, but in terms of its inter- 
nal anatomy it is a term logic. The premisses and conclusions contain different 
relationships between what one might call today the extensions delineated by the 
terms in the arguments. This entailed regarding predication as a key connecting 
element between the terms within arguments. Thus Aristotelian logic depends for 
its sound foundation on the intelligibility of predication. As long as we construe 
the relations between the terms as presented in an argument as overlaps of differ- 
ent sorts between extensions, predication may not seem problematic. The class of 
all animals contains the class of humans and that class the class of all Greeks, for 
example. Still, Aristotle is concerned with not so much relations between classes 
(if one can call the denotations of the terms that) as with the unity of sentences 
of subject-predicate form. The copula does not merely relate terms, it is also re- 
sponsible for the unity of the relevant sentences. The sentence that we can assess 
as true or false is not merely a collection of parts. It is in some sense more than 
the mere sum of parts. And this "more" is indicated by the copula of predication. 
Then pushed to the limit, Aristotle retreats to metaphor. In Met. Z, 1041biD-20 he 
compares a sentence to a syllable. The syllable is not a mere sum of letters. The 

22 
Julius Moravcsik 
letters in certain juxtapositions yield a syllable, without adding another element 
as the connector. It is clear that Aristotle chooses this metaphor so as to avoid 
infinite regress. If the copula denotes another element, then there must be a con- 
nection between this element and the predicate, and so on. Is this a satisfactory 
answer? Our evaluation depends on what we are willing to take as primitive. 
Predication was also a problem earlier, for Plato. 
But what made predica- 
tion problematic for Plato was different from what puzzled Aristotle. It is worth 
mentioning in this context that it is senseless to ask simply: "is predication a 
sufficiently clear notion?" This question can be raised meaningfully only within a 
conceptual framework. In different frameworks different factors might make pred- 
ication problematic. Is there a framework in which predication can account for 
the facts that it must explain in semantic analysis, and still there are no features 
of the framework that will render predication puzzling? The jury is still out on 
that one. 
Plato's puzzle was different from Aristotle's because his analyses of sentences of 
subject-predicate form were different. There are passages that show without doubt 
that in in modern parlance we must represent Platonic predication as tying sub- 
jects to intensional elements. For example, according to Plato everything partakes 
of Being, Sameness, and Difference, but there are three distinct Forms involved, 
not just one. 25 Thus we cannot take predication as just relating classes. Predica- 
tion, in important contexts., relates spatial particulars to timeless, non-spatial, in 
principle recurrent, entities. Hence the special problem of what partaking is, the 
relation Plato introduces to make the combining of subject and predicate possible. 
Parmenides 131 shows that Plato is concerned with explaining what partaking 
is. Not surprisingly, his descriptions are typically negative. It is not part-whole 
relations, it is not physical engulfing, and so on. The only positive account turns 
out, not surprisingly, to be metaphoric. In the Sophist he introduces the notion 
of a Vowel-Form, and regards Being (in the predicative sense) as a prime exam- 
ple. Thus Being has as its sole function to relate things; it functions like vowels 
connecting consonants. 
So much 
briefly 
for ancient wisdom on the topic.. Do we do better when 
looking at modern proposals? The most profound statement of the worry can be 
found in the writings of Frege. He compares the subject-predicate form to that 
of function and argument. Functions are incomplete, unsaturated, as Frege says, 
and thus their joining with arguments leads to intelligible completeness. Is this a 
better solution than the earlier ones? Is Frege's metaphor better than the earlier 
ones by Plato and Aristotle? Arguments still rage on that issue. 26 In his masterly 
review of twentieth-century proposals Frank Ramsey adds Wittgenstein's proposal 
according to which objects in atomic propositions hang in one another like the links 
of a chain. 27 
Ramsey himself attempts to draw the distinction by viewing the necessity of the 
25plato, Sophist 255b-d.d 
26Essays on Frege, 1968, ed. I. Klemke, (Chicago: University of Illinois Press.) 
27Ramsey, F. 1931, "Universals". in The Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 112-135; p. 129. 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
23 
subject-predicate for as arising only in atomic propositions, and he construes these 
as having an ontological structure of a property being predicated (or universal) of a 
spatio-temporal individual. Thus the issue in Ramsey's analysis boils down to this: 
Is there a non-question-begging way of distinguishing universals from particulars? 
Borrowing an idea from Whitehead, Ramsey sketches in a few pages how one can 
consider a particular "adjectivally" e.g., regard the particular object as adjectival 
to events Needless to say, we can continue this by moving from one type of events 
to others, and so on. 
One could continue and enumerate more recent proposals such as those by 
Strawson and others, but these are basically variations on the same theme and 
Ramsey's application of the Whiteheadian idea remains intact. 
Why, then, should we look at predication in this puzzled way? The origin of 
these puzzles come from the monism of Parmenides who declared predication to 
be incoherent. He claimed that statement of subject-predicate form entail also 
negative statements. To say that x has F, makes sense only if we add to it that 
in virtue of this it is also something negative, a not-G for example. Parmenides 
questions the intelligibility of not being G. Plato responded by saying that in the 
contrast of what is fine and what is not fine two classes (collections?) of existent 
entities are juxtaposed. This hardly answers Parmenides who would question the 
ontological status of the negativity of the not-fine, "not-G", etc. 
One might wave one's hand at other modern treatments of predication. It, and 
with it class membership, or instantiation, are basic primitives, we need then in our 
pluralistic analysis of reality, and as long as employment of predication does not 
lead to formal contradictions it is legitimate to use it. Whether such a complete 
separation of what is to be regarded as legitimate in logic and what are viable 
ontologies underlying the use of logic and language is intellectually conscionable 
or not cannot be discussed here. The fact is that after 2400 years all philosophers 
have come up with as response to the Parmenidean challenge is a bouquet of four 
metaphors. If there is immortality, then Parmenides is right now chortling in his 
coffin. 
APPENDIX 2. LOGIC AND GRAMMAR: EPISTEMI~, TECHNIC, 
EMPEIRIA? 
We can learn about the status of logic by a comparison with grammar, and es- 
pecially the discussions about grammar in the early stages of its establishment in 
the Greek scholarly world. 2s 
Was grammar to be regarded as an epistemg (branch of knowledge) or techng 
(rational discipline) or ere empeiria (set of empirical conjectures)? The difficulty 
surrounding these debates is that these three terms changed their meaning over 
2SSteinthal, H. 1891, Geschichte der Sparchwissenschaften bei den Griechen uncl Roemern, 
Vol. II. (repr. Hildescheim, Germany), pp. 173-178. 

24 
julius Moravcsik 
time. For Plato in the Gorgias the issue was, given a certain putative discipline, is 
it genuine knowledge or mere empirical beliefs? This question cannot be applied 
to grammar in a straightforward way, because the nature and scope of grammar 
was construed by different authors in different ways. On the one extreme one can 
view grammar as a descriptive study that is to record all of the language uses by 
a linguistic community. In this way of looking at it we come up with descriptions 
many of which are not even lawlike. Furthermore, many of the rules of grammar 
and the formulae allowed strike one as arbitrary. 
At the other extreme one can think of grammar as a normative discipline. It 
does not describe how we do speak, but how we ought to speak. The question 
emerging at this stage is: what is the authority underlying the "ought"? Some will 
say the speech of the poets, philosophers, and scientists. Others might accept this 
but add in any case that at the base of grammar we find certain necessary features 
that enable grammar to reflect some of the basic patterns of reality. Needless to 
say, there are many possible positions in between. 
Reflecting the ambivalence is the use of the phrase "epi to polu". For a staunch 
empiricist this means "the usual' or "for the most part" where these notions are 
spelled out probabilistically. For Plato and Aristotle this was not the appropriate 
meaning. For Aristotle the phrase represented what in modern English we call the 
generic use. An animal does something "epi to polu" if in doing so it expresses 
an aspect of its essence; e.g., "beavers build dams". This means, roughly, "the 
normal, healthy beaver." It need not be the majority of beavers (maybe many are 
sick), or the statistically predictable ones. Correspondingly if you want a grammar 
to reflect how people speak "epi to polu", you want to write a purely descriptive 
grammar, or one that tells people what linguistic use in the case of this language 
is at its best. 
Interestingly, the more sparse the grammar, the more plausible the normative 
interpretation seems. Thus Plato in Sophist 258-259 introduces a complex that is 
roughly equivalent to actor/agent vs. action/property as fundamental to sentences 
expressing truth or falsity, and thinks that this reflects the metaphysical relations 
between Forms. Thus the structure posited is both necessary and justified. Need- 
less to say, one cannot call this a complete grammar. Some such structure remains 
necessary and normative in Aristotle's treatment of basic combinations. But as 
Aristotle adds to the "grammar" e.g., endings, the ground for regarding his basic 
structures as based on features of reality seem weaker, and with that, of course, 
also the normativity. 
How does all of this apply to logic? In principle one could start an enterprise of 
discovering and describing how people in fact reason. This is clearly not Aristotle's 
enterprise. The system of logic Aristotle articulates is not a piece of psychology. 
It shows us how we ought to reason, should reason, and not what we in fact do, 
though one might say that in Aristotle the "ought" in this context translates into 
"how humans at their best reason". His teleological conception of reality endowes 
logic at its base with both necessity and normativity. It is interesting thus to note 
that the necessity and normativity of certain combinations of linguistic units have 

Logic Before Aristotle: Development or Birth? 
25 
as their origin Plato's reflection on minimal grammar-like combinations which, in 
turn rest on their alleged isomorphism with some fundamental ontological relations 
among the most basic constituents of reality, namely the Forms. Denuded of the 
Platonistic metaphysics, but keeping some form of the necessary in reality and 
its reflection on language yields these two essential aspects of logic necessity and 
normativity. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

ARISTOTLE'S 
EARLY LOGIC 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
1 
BIOGRAPHICAL BACKGROUND 
Aristotle is generally recognized as the founder of systematic logic, or of what 
he called "analytics." For over two thousand years he was logic's most influential 
writer. 
Although there were precursors, especially with respect to the study of dialectic 
or the art of public argument, Aristotle was the first to systematize universally 
valid logical laws. As Julius Moravcsik points out, "[we do not] credit a logician 
with originality when he first presents the law of contradiction. 1 But we do credit 
him with originality in view of the particular ways he shapes rules for deduction 
and proofs." 2 
Aristotle was also responsible for the remarkable accomplishment of developing 
logic in at least two distinct ways, including his almost complete theory of the 
syllogism and his complex and sophisticated theory of modal logic. In addition, 
he is noted for his work in axiomatics, and there is some evidence that he also 
began investigating what is now called propositional logic, although he did not de- 
velop these investigations systematically. His claim near the end of On Sophistical 
Refutations that he is the primary creator of the discipline of logic is therefore 
quite justified (On Sophistical Refutations, 15, 174 a, 20). 
Aristotle was born in 384 BCE, in Stagira in northern Greece, and it is from 
here that he received his nickname, "the Stagirite." His father, Nicomachus, had 
been court physician to the Macedonian King, Aourntas II, but both his parents 
died when Aristotle was still a boy. In 367 BCE, Aristotle was sent to Athens 
to study under Plato. 
He remained at Plato's school, the Academy, first as a 
student, and later as an instructor, for almost twenty years. Initially, the students 
at the Academy made fun of this new foreigner who spoke with a lisp, but Plato 
himself was impressed and nicknamed Aristotle "the intelligence" of the school. 
Upon Plato's death, Aristotle left Athens, perhaps for political reasons, or perhaps 
because he had not been appointed Plato's successor and was dissatisfied with how 
the Academy was now being directed. After travelling for awhile he married the 
(adopted) daughter of a former classmate who had become an Aegean king and in 
whose court Aristotle for a time served. 
1 Cf. Plato at Republic 436B: "It is obvious that the same thing will never do or suffer opposites 
in the same respect in relation to the same thing at the same time." 
2Moravcsik, this volume, ch. 1. 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
@ 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

28 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
In 342 BCE Aristotle was appointed by Philip II of Macedon to tutor his son, 
the future Alexander the Great. From Aristotle's point of view, the appointment 
could not have been a pleasant one. He was expected to provide guidance to the 
young Alexander in a palace noted for its savagery and debaucheries, and at a time 
when both the father and son were intent upon assassination and conquest. When 
Alexander finally claimed his father's throne in 336 BCE, Aristotle left the court. 
Some reports say that Aristotle left well endowed by Alexander; others say that he 
was lucky to escape with his life. In any event, his influence could not have been 
too great since Alexander soon ordered Aristotle's nephew, Callisthenes, hanged 
for refusing to bow before the new king. 
When Aristotle finally returned to Athens in 335 BCE, he opened his own 
school, the Lyceum, in a grove just northeast of the city. 
At the Lyceum he 
planted a botanical garden, began both a library and a natural history museum, 
and taught philosophy. The school was also known as the Peripatos or "strolling 
school" since, at least occasionally, Aristotle lectured to his students while strolling 
about the school's grounds. It is for this reason that even today Aristotle's follow- 
ers are known as "peripatetics." In 323 BCE, following the death of Alexander, 
anti-Macedonian feeling in Athens increased and, because of Aristotle's ties to 
Alexander's court, the accusation of impiety was raised. 
Recalling the fate of 
Socrates--who had been put to death after being found guilty of similar charges-- 
Aristotle returned to Chalcis, his mother's hometown, saying that he did not want 
Athens to "sin twice against philosophy." He died the following year, in 322 BCE. 
Aristotle's interests were universal. His writings represent an encyclopedic ac- 
count of the scientific and philosophical knowledge of his time, much of which 
originated with Aristotle himself and with his school. His extant writings cover 
logic, rhetoric, linguistics, the physical sciences (including biology, zoology, astron- 
omy and physics), psychology, natural history, metaphysics, aesthetics, ethics and 
politics. 
His logical writings, referred to as the Organon, consist of six books; the Cate- 
gories, De Interpretatione (On Interpretation), the Prior Analytics, the Posterior 
A nalytics, the Topics, and De Sophisticis Elenchis (On Sophistical Refutations). 
Transmitted from the ancient world in large part through Arab scholars, Aristo- 
tle's writings shaped the intellectual development of medieval Europe. His logical 
treatises occupied a central place within the medieval curriculum and it was during 
this time that Aristotle came to be known as the source of all knowledge. Even 
so, the first modern critical edition of Aristotle's writings did not appear until 
1831. The scholarly practice of citing Aristotle's work by a series of numbers and 
letters still refers to the page, column and line numbers of this nineteenth-century 
edition. 
While it has often been claimed that Aristotle's dominating authority over such 
a long period hampered the development of logic (just as it did the development 
of science), such an observation cannot properly be taken as criticism of Aristotle 
himself. Instead, it is a telling incrimination of those of less talent and imagination 
who were to follow his remarkable accomplishments. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
29 
2 
MOTIVATION 
The Greek intellectual revolution can be characterized in large part by its dis- 
covery of a new method of enquiry and demonstration. This new method, called 
lo9os, shared its name with a perceived rational purpose thought to underlie the 
entire universe. Thus in one sense, logos represented the laws and regularities gov- 
erning all of nature. In another, it represented the process of reasoning by which 
these laws and regularities were to be discovered. This new method of reasoning 
originated in physics and, with cosmology as a bridge, soon began to influence 
all branches of knowledge. Eventually, however, it was to collapse into a kind of 
intellectual pathology, typified by the efforts of pre-Socratic philosophers such as 
Heraclitus and Parmenides. Pathological philosophy was logos run amok and, for 
all its quirky theoretical charm, logos was soon being regarded as an intellectual 
disgrace. Left to its own devises, it threatened to destroy science and common 
sense alike. 
It is widely agreed that the destructive arguments of Heraclitus and 
Parmenides, as well as those of many of the most able of the Sophists such as 
Protagoras and Gorgias, turn on the mismanagement of ambiguity. In the case of 
Heraclitus, his repeated equivocations typically take the following form: 
If u is r in one sense and not-r in another sense, then y is both r and 
not-r 
On the other hand, Parmenides' equivocations are typically driven by a mis- 
conception which is the dual of Heraclitus' error: 
If v is r in one sense and not-r in another sense, then v is neither r 
nor not r 
Since Heraclitus and Parmenides both appear to accept a common major pre- 
miss, namely that 
For all v and for all r 
v is r in one sense if and only if v is not-r in 
another sense. 
there arose the two great pathological metaphysics of the ancient world. For Her- 
aclitus, the world turns out to be thoroughly inconsistent (or, as modern logicians 
would say, absolutely inconsistent) while for Parmenides the world turns out to be 
thoroughly indeterminate (or, as modern logicians would say, non-truth-valued). 
No doubt it will strike the modern reader as puzzling that these blunders were 
accorded such high respect by thinkers as able as Plato and Aristotle. How could 
anyone be fooled by such blatant equivocations? In answer, there are two pos- 
sibilities. One is that the predecessors of Plato and Aristotle could not see the 
3Lawrence Powers calls these, respectively, the Heraclitean Rule and the Parmenidean Rule 
[Powers, 1995, ch. 2]. 

30 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
equivocations that they were guilty of. The other is that they indeed had the 
intuition that they somehow had mismanaged ambiguity, but that for some reason 
these intuitions appeared to be untrustworthy. 
Like Plato, Aristotle wrote copiously, and he is at the very height of his intellec- 
tual powers in his discussions of these types of pathological philosophy. According 
to Aristotle, logos had been used in ways that denied both the reality of the empir- 
ical world and the meaningfulness of language. Aristotle saw Plato's forms as an 
important attempt to de-pathologize philosophy but, largely for reasons set out in 
the Parmenides, he also sees Plato's project as a serious failure. Aristotle is thus 
left with the following fundamental question: How can logos be made to behave? 
Aristotle's answer was to invent logic, and to use logic as a constraint upon 
logos. Logic would be a technique, or a set of techniques, for facilitating the use 
of correct reason, for constraining and taming logos. 
It is interesting that the first two monographs of the Organon, 
the 
Categories and On Interpretation, seem not to be about logic at all, never mind 
their occasional references to logical concepts and principles. The Categories con- 
tains an elaborate taxonomy of types of change, and On Interpretation is a theory 
of grammar for the Greek language. In both these works, Aristotle also devotes 
considerable attention to the phenomenon of ambiguity and to the deductive cor- 
ruptions to which it gives rise; but when it is borne in mind that Aristotle is 
taking up the challenge of de-pathologizing philosophy, and that he seeks to do 
this by holding all theoretical reasoning to the standards of a correct logic, it is 
not surprising that he should start with an examination of change and ambigu- 
ity. Heraclitus and Parmenides both emphasize arguments that exploit change 
and ambiguity, and Aristotle is of the view that such arguments turn pivotally 
on errors in the ways in which change and ambiguity are to be analyzed. As a 
result, he begins his great reform of philosophy with an attempt to conceptual- 
ize these matters correctly. Plato had been shrewd enough to see that some of 
these pathological arguments go wrong because of equivocation--the conceptual 
mismanagement of ambiguity; but Plato's own attempts at repair reveal that he 
lacks a competent understanding of equivocation (Republic 479B ft.). So, again, 
it is wholly tempting to see in the works of both Plato and Aristotle a response 
to the Heraclitean-Parmenidean challenge. This is especially true of Aristotle. In 
these first two books he is struggling to produce a theory of ambiguity and a set 
of protocols for its avoidance. 
Following the Categories and On Interpretation come two works of signal 
importance--the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations. These two monographs 
are closely connected; in fact, some scholars are of the view that On Sophistical 
Refutations is either a ninth chapter of, or an appendix to, the Topics. By "topic," 
Aristotle means a "strategy" or "scheme of argument"; so we must not confuse 
this word with our word, which means "subject-matter." The importance of these 
books consists primarily in Aristotle's insight that there exists a model of correct 
argument which has a wholly general application. This model of argument is the 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
31 
syllogism, and with it comes a precise answer to Aristotle's question of how logos 
can be made to behave. 
Showing that all correct reasoning--all legitimate use of logos--conforms to 
Aristotle's theory of the syllogism would be a stunning accomplishment. It would 
establish that errors in reasoning arise solely for reasons other than the use of 
topic-neutral models of argument, to recur to our use of the word "topic." In this, 
Aristotle stands apart from more familiar Socratic denunciations of the teacher- 
generalist. He proposes to make good on the Sophist's central insight, that there 
are correct modes of reasoning and correct ways of arguing about anything and 
everything. 
As we proceed, there will be several ways in which we will be able to judge the 
theoretical fruitfulness of Aristotle's invention of the syllogism. That logic was 
invented by a philosopher is a significant fact. Many a profession could claim the 
indispensability of clear thinking for sound practice. So why was logic not invented 
by an admiral or a general, or by a physician or a physicist? Why indeed was logic 
not invented by a mathematician: why is Aristotle not the Frege of the ancient 
world? 
Logos is nothing if not a corrective to common sense. Logos has an inherent obli- 
gation to surprise. It began with the brilliant speculations of the Pythagoreans-- 
the original neopythagoreans, as one wag has put it--with regard to a number- 
theoretic ontology. Apart from the physicists, the great majority of influential 
practitioners of logos before Plato allowed logos to operate at two removes from 
common sense. The first was the remove at which speculative science itself would 
achieve a degree of theoretical maturity. But the second remove was from sci- 
ence itself. The first philosophers were unique among the practitioners of logos in 
that they created a crisis for logos. In the hands of the sophists, philosophy had 
become its own unique problem. It was unable to contain the unbridled argumen- 
tative and discursive fire-power of logos. In fact, philosophy has had this same sort 
of problem--the problem of trying to salvage itself from its excesses--off and on 
ever since. Thus, logic was invented by a philosopher because it was a philosopher 
who knew best the pathological problematic that philosophy had itself created. 
3 
ORIGINS 
It is widely accepted that Aristotle's main contributions to logic begin--and some 
would say end--with the Prior Analytics. 4 We are of a different view. 
It is 
often remarked that Aristotle may have composed the Organon in the following 
order: the Categories; On Interpretation; Topics I-VII; Posterior Analytics I; 
Topics VIII and On Sophistical Refutations; and Prior A nalytics and Posterior 
4Thus it is with scarcely an exception that many of the leading contemporary commentaries 
concentrate on the Prior Analytics. In these writings one finds little to suggest that Aristotle's 
earlier treatises might warrant detailed critical scrutiny, even as a fledgling venture into logical 
theory. See, for example, [Lukasiewicz, 1957]; [Kneale and Kneale, 1962]; [Patzig, 1968]; [Smiley, 
1973]; [Corcoran, 1974a]; [Kapp, 1975]; [Lear, 1980]; [Thom, 1981]; and [Frede, 1987]. 

32 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Analytics II. 5 Yet if this is so, a certain caution is called for. 6 If, for example, 
Posterior Analytics I does indeed precede not only Topics VIII and On Sophistical 
Refutations but the Prior Analytics as well, it cannot strictly be true that logic 
originates with the Prior Analytics, since book one of the Posterior Analytics 
represents a considerable anticipation of many of the formal structures contained 
within the Prior Analytics. 7 Alternatively, on the chronological ranking of Barnes, 
in which the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations precede the two A nalytics, 
themselves written in fits and starts over a more or less unified later period, 8 
much the same point can be made. Thi si so, even though it remains the dominant 
contemporary view that the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations are treatises on 
dialectic and that, being so, they are not a serious contribution to logical theory. 9 
Concerning On Sophistical Refutations, Hintikka proposes that 
[i]nstead of being mistaken inference-types, the traditional fallacies 
were mistakes or breaches in the knowledge-seeking questioning games 
which were practised in Plato's Academy and later in Aristotle's Lyceum. 
Accordingly, they must not be studied by reference to codifications 
of deductive logic, inductive logic, or informal logic, for these are all 
usually thought of as codifications of inferences [Hintikka, 1987, pp. 
211-238]. 1~ 
5[Forster and Furley, 1955, p. 4]. See also [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, pp. 23-24]; [Rist, 1989, 
pp. 76-82] and [Dorion, 1995, pp. 25-27]. 
6We note, in passing, an interesting contention between Solmsen and Ross. Solmsen holds 
the chronological claim in the form of a priority of dialectic (Topics) and apodeictic (Posterior 
Analytics) over syllogistic (Prior Analytics). This is stoutly resisted by Ross. But contra Ross, 
see [Barnes, 1981]. (Cf. [Solmsen, 1929]; [Ross, 1949]; and [Forster and Furley, 1955].) 
7For example, [Boger, 1998a] holds that Aristotle's work on the fallacies in On Sophistical 
Refutations presupposes the mature theory of the Prior Analytics (cf. [Boger, 1998b]). 
8[Barnes, 1993, p. xv]. It is, however, a mistake to attribute a full-blown chronology to Barnes: 
"Here and there ... we can indeed make chronological claims which have a certain plausibility 
to them; and some of these claims are not without philosophical significance. (For example, 
we believe that the core of the theory of demonstration which is expounded in An. Post was 
developed before the polished theory of syllogistic which is expounded in An. Pr; and we believe 
that this has some bearing on the way we should interpret some of Aristotle's views about the 
nature of science). But claims of this sort will rarely be made with any confidence; they cannot 
yield a chronology of Aristotle's writings; and they will not amount of anything which we could 
call an intellectual biography" [Barnes, 1995, pp. 21-22]. 
9For example, see Corcoran: 
"Aristotle presents [his logical] theory almost completed, 
in chapters 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the first book of Prior Analytics, though it presup- 
poses certain developments in previous works--especially the following two: 
first, a the- 
ory of form and meaning of propositions having an essential component in Categories 
[Corcoran, 1974b, ch. 
5, esp. 
pp. 
234-267]; second, a doctrine of opposition (contra- 
diction) more fully explained in Interpretations (chapter 7). 
Bochenski has called this the- 
ory [of book one of the Prior Analytics] 'Aristotle's second logic,' because it was evidently 
developed after the relatively immature logic of Topics and On Sophistical Refutations ..." 
[Corcoran, 1974a, p. 88], (emphasis added). Modus ponens and modus tollens are recognized at 
Topics 111 b, 17-13 and 112 a, 16-13, and opposition and negation are discussed at Topics 1435, 
15ft. 
l~ 
[Woods and Hansen, 1997]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
33 
Hence, 
in a sense all Aristotelian fallacies are essentially mistakes in question- 
ing games, while some of them are accidentally mistakes in deductive 
... reasoning [Hintikka, 1987, p. 213] (emphasis added). 11 
Yet why should this be so? Hintikka believes that it is because On Sophistical 
Refutations is a dialectical work, not a logical one. 
As against this, Hamblin 
attributes to Aristotle the view that 
[d]ialectic as a mere technique [is] unessential to the pursuit of truth. 12 
At times ... [Aristotle] even thinks of it as a hindrance: he is in the 
process of discovering Logic which, he thinks, enables a man to achieve 
as much by solitary thought as in social intercourse [Hamblin, 1970, p. 
6o]. 
Hence, 
Aristotle's On Sophistical Refutations can then be regarded as a first 
step in constructing the relevant logical theory [Hamblin, 1970, p. 59]. 
Hamblin himself thinks this is a retrograde step, at least when it comes to 
handling the fallacies: 
[I]n our attempt to understand Aristotle's account of fallacies we need 
to give up our [and Aristotle's] tendency to see them as purely logical 
and see them instead as moves in the presentation of a contentious 
argument by one person to another [Hamblin, 1970, pp. 65-66]. 
In contrast, we find this tension between dialectic and logic somewhat miscon- 
ceived. Even apart from Aristotle's work on the fallacies, Hamblin is certainly 
right to say that Aristotle's dialectical works mark the beginning of logical the- 
ory. On Sophistical Refutations has as its primary target an analysis of sophistical 
refutations with which an unrepentant tradition (mis)identifies Aristotle's list of 
thirteen fallacies. 13 Whatever we may think of this identification, a theory of 
sophistical refutation requires a theory of refutation. 
Aristotle obliges with an 
obscure definition: 
11Cf. [Woods and Hansen, 1997, pp. 217-239]. 
12This, en passant, is nothing that Aristotle would have accepted. Dialectic is an indispensable 
instrument of negative knowledge, of the discovery of what is not the truth, itself essential to the 
pursuit of truth. What is true is that Aristotelian dialectic cannot demonstrate positive truth 
with certainty. On the other hand, dialectic is also a kind of induction (epag6g~), a method of 
examining all sides of an issue in ways that sometimes gets inquirers to see the self-evidence of 
first principles. 
13For helpful discouragement, see [Hansen, 1992]. 

34 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
For to refute is to contradict one and the same attribute--not the name, 
but the object and one that is not synonymous but the same--and to 
confute it from the proposition granted, necessarily without including 
in the reckoning the original point to be proved, in the same respect 
and relation and manner and time in which it was asserted ... Some 
people, however, omit one of the said conditions and give a merely 
apparent refutation ... (On Sophistical Refutations, 167 a, 23-29). 
There follows an account of refutations which presupposes an account of syl- 
logisms, and which eventuates in a formal codification, together with something 
tantamount to a completeness proof in the Prior Analytics. 14 What is distinctive 
about the Prior Analytics is thus not the doctrine of the syllogism; rather, it is, 
as we would say today, the discovery of a proof procedure for completeness [Lear, 
1980, ch. 2, pp. 
15-33]. In other words, the project of the Prior Analytics is 
formal and reductive. Aristotle gives two treatments of the syllogism. In the one, 
syllogisms are considered informally, and generally. In the other, they are sub- 
jected to formal constraints by which they are fitted for the particular theoretical 
purposes of the Prior Analytics. 15 
The question of the chronology of the Organon is thus part of the larger issue 
of the extent to which Aristotle's philosophy underwent significant development. 
On the developmental view, Aristotle recognized that certain of his later doctrines 
contradict and displace earlier doctrines. 16 The developmental perspective is re- 
sisted by some scholars, who hold that, by the time they were complete, Aristotle 
saw his writings as forming a consistent and unified whole. 17 Still others hold that 
the developmental and anti-developmental perspectives are reconcilable, is 
For our purposes it is unnecessary to decide these larger questions. We shall say 
that the logical theory of the Prior Analytics presupposes Aristotle's theory of syl- 
logisms (and--tacitly--a theory of validity, too). These theories appear implicitly 
in the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations. (In passing, we note that to say that 
a theory T presupposes a theory T*, is to say that T could not be true without T* 
14Aristotle's own attempt, which does not quite succeed, is to be found at Prior 
Analytics 23. However, [Corcoran, 1972] has shown how to repair Aristotle's proof. 
15"Indeed there is an ambiguity in Aristotle's use of the word 'syllogism' similar to that in 
the modern use of the word 'deduction.' There is first the use of 'syllogism' in the broad sense 
... This corresponds to our use of 'deduction' in the general sense of an informal argument in 
which the conclusion is a logical consequence of the premisses ... Second, there is the use of 
'syllogism' in the narrow sense, used to describe the formal inferences and chains of inferences 
that Aristotle isolated [in the Prior Analytics]" [Lear, 1980, p. 10]. Cf. [Mignucci, 1991, p. 25]: 
"IT]he definition of 'syllogism' at the beginning of the Prior Analytics (24 b, 18-22) refers to the 
generic meaning of the word, and it does not apply to the special inferences of which Aristotle 
offers the theory in the following chapter." It appears that the distinction between syllogisms 
in the broad and narrow sense was not recognized by mediaeval commentators. Thus, "IT]he 
mediaevals never doubt that [Aristotle] means [by 'syllogism'] the same in the Topics as in the 
Prior Analytics ..." [Green-Pederson, 1984, p. 20]. 
16See here [Jaeger, 1923]; English translation in [Robinson, 1948]. 
17See, for example, [Cherniss, 1935]. 
lSSee [Graham, 1987]. See also [Scott, 1971] cited in [van Benthem, 1994, p. 133]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
35 
being true, whereas T* could be true without T being true. The relationship is 
preserved even when T* is repeated in T, as is, to a large extent, the logical theory 
of the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations in the Prior Analytics.) It is well to 
note that the presupposition claim carries no implication of temporal priority. 
The Topics is a handbook of dialectical argument that presupposes a distinction 
between dialectical propositions and dialectical problems. They differ in three 
ways: by way of content, logical form, and function. As to content, "a dialectical 
proposition [or premiss] consists in asking something that is reputable to all men 
or to most men or to the wise" (Topics 104 a, 9-10). Dialectical propositions are 
thus those that are believed to have a prima facie degree of credibility because 
they are universally or widely held, or because they are held by someone whose 
opinion deserves respect. The Greek term for such a proposition is endoxon. In 
contrast, a dialectical problem 
is a subject of inquiry that contributes either to choice and avoidance, 
or to truth and knowledge, and does that either by itself, or as a help 
to the solution of some other such problem. It must, moreover, be 
something on which either people hold no opinion either way, or most 
people hold a contrary opinion to the wise, or the wise to most people, 
or each of them among themselves. (Topics 104 b, 1-6). 
Dialectical problems differ in content from dialectical propositions in that what 
marks them as problems is that their status is unsettled. (We note in passing that, 
being questions, so-called dialectical propositions are not a type of proposition in 
what we are calling Aristotle's technical sense.)General or expert opinion is not 
clear on what the answer to the problem is. Dialectical problems lack the very 
thing that makes a proposition an endoxon. 
The logical form of a dialectical proposition is, "Is A B?'; for example, "Is 
two-footed terrestrial animal the definition of man?" (Topics 101 b, 29-30). All 
dialectical propositions have to have this form, and they must be answerable by 
Yes or No (Topics 158 a, 16-17). 
In contrast, the logical form of a dialectical 
problem is that of a disjunctive proposition, "Is A B or is A not-B?"; for example, 
"Is two-footed terrestrial animal the definition of man or not?" (Topics 101 b, 32- 
33). A question of this form cannot be answered (non-vacuously) by a simple Yes 
or No. The answerer must choose one of the two disjuncts, thereby committing 
to one of two propositions, either "A is B" or "A is not-B." We can see that the 
logical forms of both dialectical propositions and problems determine the logical 
forms of the answers to be given. 
We can also distinguish dialectical problems and propositions by their different 
functions in refutations. The function of a dialectical problem is to give rise to 
a dialectical discussion; in opting for one of the two possible answers, a thesis 
is established that will be the target of a refutation. The function of dialectical 
propositions, to be answered by a Yes or a No, is to provide the grounds for the 
possible refutation of the thesis by being the premises from which the refutation 
is fashioned. 

36 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Aristotle contrasts dialectical arguments with other kinds of arguments in at 
least two places. In On Sophistical Refutations (2, 165 a, 37-165 b, 12) he lists four 
kinds of arguments used in discussion: (1) scientific arguments which reason from 
first principles appropriate to a subject and not from opinions of the answerer; 
(2) dialectical arguments which reason from generally accepted opinions to a con- 
tradiction; (3) examination arguments which reason from opinions held by the 
answerer; and (4) contentious arguments which reason from, or seem to reason 
from, opinions which are, or appear to be, generally accepted. 
The object is then 
to discover some faculty of reasoning about any theme put before us 
from the most reputable premisses that are [endoxa] ... we therefore 
proposed for our tretise not only the aforesaid aim of being able to 
exact an account of any view, but also the aim of ensuring that in 
defending an argument we shall defend our thesis in the same manner 
by means of views as reputable as possible. (On Sophistical Refutations 
183 a, 37-183 b, 6). 
In places Aristotle seems to advance something stronger. His strategies enable 
a reasoner to reason about anything whatever, independent of its subject matter 
(On Sophistical Refutations 170 a, 38; 171 b, 6-7). 19 In other places still, he appears 
to confine himself to arguments from definitions and, thus, to arguments that are 
not entirely topic-neutral (Topics 102 b, 27; 120 b, 10 ft.). This does not cancel 
the claim that the arguments under review are always those that reason about 
reputable opinions. For it is possible that anything about which it is possible to 
argue independently of its content is a possible object of opinion by experts or 
by the many or by the wise, but there is nothing in the Topics or On Sophistical 
Refutations to suggest that the strategies advanced there have application to such 
arguments only on the assumption of some such possibility as this. For example, 
Aristotle explicitly recognizes demonstrative arguments, i.e., arguments from pre- 
misses that are true, primary, appropriate to their subject matter and better 
known, or more intelligible, than the conclusions that they sanction (Topics, 141 a, 
29; 158 a, 36-37; On Sophistical Refutations 165 b, 1 and 172 a, 19). Although it is 
true that Aristotle contrasts demonstrative arguments with dialectical arguments, 
it does not follow that strategies for the engagement of dialectical arguments have 
no application to demonstrations. 
On Sophistical Refutations concerns itself with various ways in which the ends 
of argument can be subverted, sometimes deliberately, and with strategies for 
avoiding and evading these pitfalls. 
The example of refutation dominates this 
work. Aristotle specifies thirteen respects in which a refutation can go wrong, 
ways in which the purported refutation is not really a refutation but only appears 
to be one. These are his sophistical refutations, and here the word "sophistical" 
19cf. [Allen, 1995]: "But dialectic, the faculty of arguing about all matters, remains possible, 
for it falls to the dialectician to know the refutation arising through topoi, which are common 
by bearing all subject matters (On Sophistical Refutations 170 a, 34-170 b, 1)." 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
37 
carries the meaning of "sham" or "counterfeit." Aristotle's list of thirteen is famous 
to this day. Traditionally, his sophistical refutations have been divided into two 
categories, which Latin translators have labelled in dictione and extra dictionem. 
In the first are equivocation, amphiboly, combination of words, division of words, 
accent and forms of expression. The other category comprises accident, secundum 
quid, ignoratio elenchi, consequent, non-cause as cause, begging the question and 
many questions. It is customary for commentators to think of the in dictione cases 
as sophistical refutations that "depend on language," and of the extra dictionem 
as "depending on considerations other than linguistic ones." However, this may 
not be the distinction that Aristotle intends. 
Every putative refutation is an argument of a certain kind, in a sense of ar- 
gument which, for Aristotle, is always a linguistic entity. So it may be said that 
any argument, good or bad, owes its goodness or badness to linguistic factors. 
Thus, what Aristotle has in mind is not a distinction between linguistic and non- 
linguistic considerations, but rather a distinction that turns on whether or not an 
argument is spoken. 
For example, an argument is brought down by the sophism of accent when it 
contains a word which, when pronounced one way has one meaning, and when 
pronounced another way has a second meaning. If the argument in question were 
written down, the ambiguous word might not reveal its intended meaning, since 
it would have only one spelling. But if the argument were spoken, the word would 
be disambiguated by its different pronunciations. 
This is a matter in dictione 
precisely because a problem that might cripple the argument in written form would 
be cleared up in speaking it. 2~ So, whether or not it will bear close scrutiny in 
every case, Aristotle's intention is to capture a class of argument mistakes that 
could be avoided by speaking the arguments in question. In contrast, the category 
extra dictionem would be made up of argument mistakes that cannot be be spotted 
or avoided in this same way, as for example with begging the question. 
It is apparent that not everything falling under any of the thirteen subcategories 
in Aristotle's two lists is a sophistical refutation. A sophistical refutation is an 
argument which appears to be a refutation but, in fact, is not. Many arguments 
that do not even pretend to be refutations are arguments that are made bad by 
their instantiation of one or another of the structures in Aristotle's list. Any such 
argument is a bad argument and Aristotle thinks that it is made bad, and often also 
is made to appear good, by its instantiating one of the thirteen conditions. When 
this happens the argument in question is a paralogismos or a fallacy, and whereas 
it is Aristotle's view that a sophistical refutation is always a fallacy, it is not his 
view, nor is it true, that a fallacy is always a sophistical refutation. As a result, 
we see here, too, that the theoretical apparatus of On Sophistical Refutations has 
an application that extends beyond the kinds of argument denoted by the title of 
that work. 
20A charming example of accent is given by Powers: "The workers were unionized and therefore 
contained no extra electrons," which exploits the fact that "unionized" also means "non-ionized" 
[Powers, 1995, ch. 7]. 

38 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
In its ordinary use in Greek, syllogismos can be translated as "computation" or 
"reckoning." In Aristotle's logical writings, it is given a more technical meaning. 
In its broad or generic conception a syllogism is an argument in which a conclusion 
is derived of necessity from premisses, subject to further conditions to which we 
shall recur. Syllogisms in the narrow sense are triples of categorical propositions 
which are reducible to the first syllogistic figure as, for example, is the following: 
All Greeks are human 
All humans are mortal 
Therefore, all Greeks are mortal. 
Aristotle's programme in the Prior Analytics has an ambitious objective. It is 
to prove that all imperfect syllogistic forms reduce to the first syllogistic figure. 21 
The very coherency of Aristotle's mature programme requires that he have had a 
sufficiently well-articulated conception of syllogisms in the broad sense to enable 
the reductionist strategy to be judged. 
There is, we say, a prior theory of syllogism in the broad sense. The theory is 
presupposed by the Prior Analytics and is found in the Topics and On Sophistical 
Refutations. 22 What is more, we find in the Topics a clear presentation of the 
operation of argumental conversion, a subject to which we shall return in due 
course. Also evident, as we have noted, is a well-managed distinction between the 
relations of contradictoriness and contrariety, and early treatment of modus tollens 
and modus ponens. The output of the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations serves 
as input for the formalizing and metalogical devices of the Prior Analytics. It may 
rightly be said that the inputs to the reductive devices of the Prior Analytics must 
have structural features which enable the devices to engage them. In the Prior 
A nalytics these structural features can be thought of as logical forms. There is 
no reason to suppose that the syllogisms of the early parts of the Organon lack 
logical forms. What is true is that the theory of syllogism in the broad sense is 
not a theory that manipulates those logical forms, at least overtly. We shall say, 
therefore, that the theory of generic syllogisms is a pre-formal theory. 
4 
SYLLOGISMS IN THE GENERIC SENSE 
Whatever else they are, syllogisms are valid arguments, or sequences of proposi- 
tions, meeting certain further conditions: 23 
21Cf. Prior Analytics A1, 24 b, 27; A23, 40 b, 20. 
22In the Topics, syllogisms are discussed at 100 a, 25-27. Cf. On Sophistical Refutations 164 b, 
28 ft., and Rhetoric 13565, 16-17; 1357 a, 8 ft.; 1358 a, 3 ft., among other places. 
23Even this is not quite without controversy. 
Aristotle reserves the term protasis for the 
premisses of syllogisms. In fact, protasis is often translated as "premiss." This leaves the question 
of how to characterize conclusions. In as much as the conclusion of one syllogism might well be 
the premiss of another, there is a reason to hold that a protasis is a proposition irrespective of 
its role in any given syllogism. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
39 
For a deduction [a syllogismos] rests on certain statements such that 
they involve necessarily the assertion of something other than what has 
been stated, through what has been stated (On Sophistical Refutations 
165 a, 1-3). 
In several of the treaties of the Organon--for example in the Categories (see 2 a, 
35-2 b, 7)--Aristotle attempts to bring forth an account of propositions. Inchoate 
as it certainly is, and hardly consistent in all details, Aristotle's treatment imposes 
significant constraints on what is to count as a proposition. The core notion is that 
in a proposition a single thing is predicated of a single thing. For example, in book 
one of the Posterior Analytics a proposition is "one thing said of one thing" (72 a, 
9). Barnes suggests that this "one-one" principle, as we may call it, might have 
been designed to rule out equivocal predications (see Metaphysics 4, 1006 a, 32) or 
multiple predications (see Topics I, 6; On Sophistical Refutations 169 a, 8-9; 14-20; 
181 a, 36-39 and On Interpretation, 18 a, 18-23). At On Interpretation 18 a, 13-14, 
Aristotle also writes that % single affirmation or negation is one which signifies 
one thing about one thing." Barnes then directs us to a later passage (20 b, 12-21) 
where it is suggested that the "one-one" rule is designed to hold subjects and 
predicates to the expression of metaphysical unities. On Sophistical Refutations 
also has it that a proposition "predicates a single thing of a single thing" (169 a, 
7) and requires that "one must not affirm or deny several things of one thing nor 
one thing of many, but [only] one thing of one thing" (181 a, 38). Further, "since 
a deduction starts from propositions and a refutation is a deduction, a refutation, 
too, will start from propositions. If, then, a propoistion predicataes a single thing 
of a singel thing, it is obvious that this fallacy [of Many Questions] too consists 
in ignorance of what a refutation is; for in it what is not a proposition appears to 
be one." (On Sophistical Refutations 169 a, 12-156; emphasis added). In a note to 
Prior Analytics 24 a, 16-24 b, 15, Smith also points out that Aristotle 
developed a theory according to which every such sentence [i.e. propo- 
sition] either affirms or denies one thing of one thing, so that a single 
assertion always contains a single subject and a single predicate. (In 
On Interpretation, he always explains more complex sentences either as 
having complex subjects or predicates or as really equivalent to groups 
of sentences) [Smith, 1989, pp. 106-107]. 
It was not Aristotle's intention to preclude plural propositions. What seems to 
be meant is that declarative sentences cannot be propositions unless they are con- 
nective free, with the exception of something like predicate-negation. So, whereas 
(c~) All men are mortal 
is a proposition, 
(~) All men are mortal or Socrates lives in Athens 
and 

40 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
(~') All men are mortal and Madeleine lives in Vancouver 
are not. On the other hand 
(~) No men are non-animals 
is a proposition. 
There is a significant sense in which arguments such as that from (a) to (/3) 
fail. Their failure does not consist in there being countermodels for them. They 
fail in the theory of syllogisms on a non-deductive technicality. They either de- 
ploy or authorize the derivation of non-propositions, of statements that are not 
propositions in Aristotle's technical sense. Even so, the reason for the failure is 
deductively salient. It permits, even if it does not invite, the conjecture that Aris- 
totle's conception of validity is indistinguishable from our own. On this view, a 
valid argument is any finite sequence of statements whose last member is necessi- 
tated or entailed by those that precede it. Further, since some statements are also 
propositions in Aristotle's sense, an argument is valid when its premisses entail 
its conclusion, even when some of its statements are propositions and others not. 
Where the validity rules fail, when they do, is in the theory of syllogisms. As we 
may now say, a syllogism is a valid argument, all of whose statements are proposi- 
tions. Bearing in mind the translation of protasis as "proposition," we propose to 
call such arguments protaseic arguments. Thus the A-introduction rule fails in the 
sense that no valid argument satisfying it can be a protaseic argument. Unlike va- 
lidity, the property of being a protaseic argument is not closed under the standard 
deduction rules. (We are so using "valid" that an argument is valid just in case 
its premisses necessitate its conclusion; and we are using "necessitate" to mean 
what modern logicians mean by "implies" or "entails," and these conventions will 
remain in force unless otherwise indicated.) 
Aristotle's propositions in the technical sense will strike the modern reader as 
something of a curiosity. What motivates so restricted a conception? On Inter- 
pretation bears directly on this question. There Aristotle advances the semantico- 
grammatical thesis that all statements reduce to simple statements in ways that 
preserve content. Simple statements are those that obey the one-one rule. Thus, 
they are propositions in Aristotle's technical sense. The thesis of On Interpretation 
(17 a, 13; 18 a, 19 ft., 24) is that all statements reduce to propositions (assuming 
reduction to be reflexive), and this we might call the thesis of propositional simplifi- 
cation. Thus "proposition" is a technical term for Aristotle, made so by the daring 
thesis of propositional simplification. If the thesis is true, it is hugely important. 
It isolates a sentential minimum adequate for the expression of all statements of 
Greek. 
Aristotle's requirement that syllogisms be made up of propositions now seems 
to be explicable. It greatly simplifies the task of specifying the class of syllogisms 
and isolating their key properties. On this view, the propositional simplification 
thesis achieves the same economies in the theory of syllogisms as it achieves in the 
theory of grammar. 24 
24cf. [Smith, 1989, p. 35]" "Therefore in studying categorical sentences [Aristotle] took 
himself to be studying what can be said, without qualification. This last point is essential in 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
41 
A 
further 
indication 
of Aristotle's 
motivation 
can 
be 
found 
in 
the 
Topics, as we have said. 
Aristotle's object, also stated at the beginning and 
repeated at the conclusion of On Sophistical Refutations, is to discover a method 
from which we will be able to syllogize about every issue proposed from endoxa, 
i.e., reputable premisses, and, when compelled to defend a position, say nothing 
to contradict ourselves (100 a, 20-22; 183 a, 37-183 b, 6). A position to be defended 
is called by Aristotle a problem, which he divides into four kinds, each correspond- 
ing to a different predicable. The four predictables are genus, accident, (unique) 
property and definition. 
Every investigation of a problem involves determining 
whether a predicable belongs to a subject as genus, as accident, as unique prop- 
erty or by definition. If it is characteristic of such predications that they involve 
the attribution of one thing to one thing, it may be that Aristotle is embedding 
this characteristic in his technical notion of proposition. Whatever the motivation, 
the restriction to propositions is a fact about how Aristotle's syllogisms are to be 
constructed. 
It is possible that Aristotle was influenced in his conception of an elementary 
proposition by Plato's contention (Sophist 252C4 ft.) that a statement has min- 
imally a name (onoma) and a verb (rhema). The function of a name is to refer 
to something; but if we want to "get somewhere" (262D5) we must add to the 
name a verb. Only then do we say (legein) something. The result is a sentence 
(logos) (262D5-6). Modern readers may see this as anticipation of Frege's notion 
of the unsaturatedness of predicates, since here too the utterance of a predicate 
fails to "get somewhere" unless completed by a name or subject expression. In 
On Interpretation Aristotle repeats the view that a logos is composed of an onoma 
and a rhema, and no formula of whatever kind or degree of complexity is a sen- 
tence unless it contains a verb (On Interpretation, 17 a, 11-15). As stated, the 
doctrine puts no obvious a priori limits on the complexity of names and verbs. At 
On Interpretation 17 a, 39, it is implied that a subject term can be either general 
("man") or singular ("Callias")--but cf. 17 b, 3. 
On the other hand, sentences whose predicates are singular terms or proper 
names are not predications strictly speaking. 
They are ungrammatical. 
This 
excludes would-be premisses such as "All wives of Socrates are Xanthippe," even 
though Xanthippe, in fact, is Socrates' one and only wife. Also, names of accidents 
may appear in predicate position but not in subject position. When an accident 
name appears to occur in subject position it serves as the name not of the accident 
but, rather, of the thing in which the accident inheres (Categories 5b). It is not 
red that is coloured, but red things. So adjectives are admitted into the basic 
onoma/ rhema structure. 
It is hard to see that these developments leave the "one thing" predicated of 
"one thing" doctrine with any meaning except this: that propositions in what 
we have been calling Aristotle's technical sense are statements that conform to 
understanding Aristotle's theory of validity. In fact, this is a theory of validity for arguments 
composed of categorical sentences, but since Aristotle thought that all propositions could be 
analyzed as categoricals, he regarded the syllogistic as the theory of validity in general." 

42 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
the onoma/rhema structure of elementary sentences (hence, they have one name 
of whatever degree of complexity and one verb of whatever degree of complex- 
ity). "Whatever degree of complexity" of course is complexity consistent with the 
one name/one verb structure. Thus "If Socrates is wise and Plato is wise, then 
Socrates and Plato are wise" is disqualified, but not because it ~ contains an ad- 
jective. Rather, it is because it contains a connective in virtue of which the one 
name/one verb structure is violated. 
It would be helpful at this point to revisit the claim that in the Topics and 
On Sophistical Refutations syllogisms are inherently dialectical. Aristotle asserts 
that the Topics is a genuinely original piece of work, forwarding conceptions and 
insights that were entirely new. He repeats the point in On SophisticalRefutations: 
Of the present inquiry, on the other hand, it was not the case that 
part of the work had been thoroughly done before while part had not. 
Nothing existed at all .... If, then, it seems to you after inspection that, 
such being the situation as it existed at the start, our investigation is 
in a satisfactory condition compared with the other inquires that have 
been developed by tradition, there must remain for all of you, our 
students, the task of extending us your pardon for the shortcomings 9 
of the inquiry, and for the discoveries thereof your warm thanks. (On 
Sophistical Refutations, 183 b, 34-184 b, 8, emphases added). 
Yet the Topics announces itself as concerned with a method "from which we 
will be able to syllogize about every issue proposed from endoxa," a method, 
therefore, for the construction and presentation of dialectical arguments. Neither 
dialectical nor refutation arguments are anything that originated with Aristotle. 
Where, then, does the vaunted innovation of the Topics lie? Our view is that the 
original contribution is the syllogism, developed in such a way as to elucidate the 
deductive substructure of real-life arguments in their everyday uses as disputes 
about received opinions, as arguments that refute an opponent's claim, and so on. 
If this is right, Aristotle lays claim to being the first systematic developer of applied 
logic. That this is indeed right is suggested by the following considerations. 
It is interesting to ask whether someone might be taught how to perform ar- 
gumentative tasks properly and efficiently, or offered guidance under which his 
performance of them is improved. Aristotle's answer is Yes. The Topics contains 
a catalogue of propositions of possible use, in the sort of argument community that 
Aristotle is addressing, in the derivation of target conclusions. Here the basic idea 
is to find a set of acceptable propositions relevant to the issue under contention, 
and the Topics attempts to give guidance on how to find such sets. There follows 
a catalogue of rules and what might be called set-piece arguments (or schemas 
of arguments) which take acceptable premisses to target conclusions. Bearing in 
mind that Aristotle sometimes claims to be giving this guidance in such a way 
that it can be followed by arguers who have no knowledge of the content or sub- 
ject matter of the disputed question, it is an audacious feature of the Topics that 
it offers advice of a highly abstract nature, of a kind that might be described as 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
43 
"transcommunal," that is, effective in an arbitrary community of arguers. For 
example, let C be any target irrespective of its content; then the task is to find 
premisses, P1,.--, Pn, which, whatever their contents, are acceptable according to 
acceptability criteria K1, ..., Kn, are relevant to C, and are such that C follows 
from them. The employability of such rules for this task presupposes the possi- 
bility of recognizing the properties of premiss-acceptability, premiss-relevance and 
premiss-consequence independently of premiss and conclusion content. If we were 
intent on using such a strategy for the construction of a refutation, it must be 
possible, first, to identify the thesis to be refuted. 
This is done operationally: 
it is some proposition proclaimed by the one party, and which the other party 
challenges. The refuter's premisses in turn are acceptable if and only if they are 
conceded by his opponent. They are relevant to the target conclusion, which is the 
contradictory of his opponent's thesis, if (loosely) they are about the same sort of 
thing as the thesis in dispute. Further, they must satisfy the premiss-consequent 
condition if a subset of those premisses consists of the premisses of a syllogism 
for the negation of the disputed thesis. So there is a content factor here at work. 
Arguers must know enough about the subject matter of their contention to know 
whether a given would-be premiss is a proposition about that same subject mat- 
ter; but if their argument is being conducted in a topic-neutral way, they need not 
understand that content. 
In all cases, whether abstract or concrete, the overall approach of the Topics is 
abductive. It seeks to answer the question, "What is the optimal set of premisses 
from which to conclude a target conclusion?" The minimal answer is that a set of 
optimal premisses is any set, S, from which the target conclusion, C, is derivable. 
The fuller answer not only cuts S down to a relevant and acceptable subset, but 
it also cuts down the consequence relation in ways that we have yet to examine. 
The Topics contains an abundance of (often confusing) instructions about how 
to optimize the derivation of target conclusions. To this end suggestions abound 
for premiss searches, and rules of derivation, as well as sample derivations, are 
provided. Aristotle was scornful of the methods of the Sophists. He says, in effect, 
that all that they offer the would-be arguer is set-piece arguments. Aristotle sees 
nothing wrong with set-piece arguments, but on his view, they cannot constitute 
an adequate methodology of successful argumentation. 
Catalogues of set-piece 
arguments are deficient in two respects. They lack a systematic account of why 
they are successful, if they are. Further, they lack systematic principles of extrap- 
olation to contexts and subjects of disputation for which the catalogue contains 
no set-piece arguments as guides. It is in respect of these two deficiencies that 
Aristotle's claim to originality should be understood. In saying that the Topics 
and On Sophistical Refutations constitute a wholly original innovation, that there 
is something in these monographs that did not exist before, Aristotle invites us 
to consider precisely those features that are absent from the sophist's methodol- 
ogy and present in his own. Of course, there is a great deal in these works that 
had existed before. There is the notion of dialectical argument, and of combative 
or eristic variations of it, concerning which there is a huge preceding literature, 

44 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
not least of which are the deep and detailed discussions of dialectical reasoning in 
several of Plato's dialogues (Meno 86E-89C, Phaedo 95E7-107B, Republic 510D- 
511D, 527A6-B1,533B-534D), and Zeno's celebrated paradoxes, which Aristotle 
took very seriously. 
Then, too, it is a commonplace that when a conclusion is correctly derivable 
from some premisses, there is a relation from premiss to conclusion in the absence 
of which the derivation would not be correct. But it is certainly not true that 
Aristotle was the first to recognize this commonplace. 
So, again, where does 
the innovation lie? When we recall that Aristotle's strategic rules include rules 
for premiss searches and rules for the construction of derivations, it is clear that 
Aristotle sees himself as specifying a type of argument whose conditions blend and 
incorporate these two sets of rules. The type of argument in question Aristotle 
calls syllogisms. The necessitation requirement is a condition on derivation. A 
target conclusion is correctly derived from premisses only if it is necessitated (or 
implied) by them. The requirement that a conclusion must not repeat a premiss is 
a premiss-search (and premiss-eligibility) rule. The requirement that conclusions 
be derived from and through (or because of) its premisses is another premiss- 
eligibility rule, and so on. 
On the face of it, this is not all that exciting. It can scarcely be imagined that 
the definition of the syllogism would have struck any of Aristotle's contemporaries 
as a discovery: a useful tidying up of something commonly employed by disputants 
perhaps, but surely not an original theoretical insight. The received wisdom in 
our own time is that it was certainly not a discovery, or much of one anyhow, and 
that the real innovations in Aristotle's work in logic do not present themselves 
until the Prior Analytics, what with its perfectibility result. But Aristotle was not 
stupid, nor was he given to misplaced self-congratulation. When he says that there 
is a wholly new theoretical twist to the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations it 
would be a little short of insulting to ascribe this innovation to the definition of 
Topics 100 a, 25-27 and On Sophistical Refutations 165 a, 1-3. Far more likely 
is that Aristotle's originality lies in the uses to which he is able to show that 
syllogisms can fruitfully be put. That is, we may suppose that when Aristotle 
wrote these treaties there were, in what might broadly be called the study of 
argument, various open questions which no known account of argument was able 
to handle satisfactorily. These included the following: 
(1) When we refute someone, how can we be sure that our refutation is 
correct, and how can we get the refutation to stick, i.e., at a minimum, 
how can we guarantee our opponent's acquiescence? 
(2) When we argue against a position, how can we be sure not to have 
begged the question against that position in our selection of premisses? 
(3) Some people are of the view that argument is just word play and 
clever self display, and that at bottom arguments do not get us any- 
where; they do not facilitate the realization of deep ends. Is this right 
and, in particular, can argument ever lead to knowledge? 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
45 
(4) As any well-educated Greek knew, arguments abound in which the 
conclusion is an utter violation of commonsense and deep scientific con- 
viction, but which seems with equal conviction to be correctly derived 
from acceptable premisses. How are these paradoxical arguments to be 
answered? How is the problem of pathological philosophy to be solved? 
Aristotle's innovation then consists in this: He is able to marshall, or so he 
claims, the argumentative structures he has dubbed "syllogisms" in such a fashion 
as to enable the satisfactory answering of each of these questions. Furthermore, 
these answers are given in such a way as to reveal that their satisfactoriness de- 
pends indispensibly on features of embedded syllogistic structures. In this, as we 
have said, Aristotle is the first applied logician. He is the first to show how answers 
to these and other practical questions are rooted in what can only be called the 
logical structure of deductive reasoning. For this to be true, it must also be true 
that the definition of syllogisms is in some sense a surprisingly deep one. 
We have said that few of Aristotle's colleagues would have supposed the deft- 
nition to be all that deep, novel or surprising. What sharp contemporary Sophist 
would have been bowled over by it? In fact, this is both right and wrong. It is 
right in so far as the definition would strike the Sophist as intuitive and familiar. 
It is wrong in so far as it turns out to be the case that structures defined by the 
definition of syllogism have certain properties whose significance is not transparent 
in the definition, and other properties whose existence is not transparent in the 
definition. Here is a modern example, and a contentious one. 
Someone might define the entailment relation in the "classically" semantic way: 
entails 9 just in case it is in no sense possible that 9 and r_~ 
are both the case. 
On hearing it, people might say, "Of course," or "Yes, that's what it is all right." 
If the producer of the definition turned expectantly to his colleagues for praise 
as an innovator, he would be disappointed. But suppose he went on to observe, 
"Well, this being so, it follows impeccably that an impossible statement entails 
every statement." "Ah," says a colleague, "your definition has hidden depths!" 
Likewise, our task will not have been completed until it is shown how the syllo- 
gism facilitates Aristotle's programme in applied logic. Without this connection, 
it is open to a critic to complain that exposing the details of syllogistic struc- 
tures is conceptual complexity for its own sake, and that Aristotle has contrived 
his account of syllogisms to no good end. In this context it is not our purpose 
to emphasize Aristotle's doctrine of paralogismoi. (But see [Woods and Hansen, 
1997] and [Woods and Hansen, in progress].) Suffice it here to say that Aristotle 
takes the paralogismoi of On Sophistical Refutations to be arguments that appear 
to be refutations but, in fact, are not. A refutation is a syllogism meeting certain 
specific conditions. Aristotle's view is that in making, or accepting, a sophistical 
refutation one commits the fallacy of mistaking it for such a syllogism. Since syllo- 
gisms are not inherently dialectical structures, and since they do inhere in the very 
concept of a sophistical refutation, and of the fallacy that attaches to the making 
or accepting of a sophistical refutation, the concept of fallacy is not exhausted by 
merely dialectical factors. 

46 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
If we have succeeded in showing that syllogisms are not inherently dialectical 
structures, it is nevertheless left open for someone to claim that fallacies are inher- 
ently dialectical. We do not think that this is so, but if we are right, we face the 
heavy weather of fallacies such as Begging the Question and Many Questions, each 
of which, for the modern reader, is as dialectical as it gets. 25 Even so, except for 
brief remarks in the section to follow we shall not, as we say, be much concerned 
with this question. 
However, before leaving this section, we shall say our piece about the similar- 
ities and dissimilarities between and among syllogisms, fallacies and sophistical 
refutations. A syllogism is a valid argument meeting the additional constraints 
we have already listed, together with others yet to be discussed. Thus the class 
of syllogisms is a nonconservative restriction of the class of valid arguments. A 
fallacy is an argument that appears to be a syllogism but which in fact is not. A 
sophistical refutation is an argument that appears to be a refutation but which 
in fact is not. When an argument merely appears to be a refutation it owes this 
appearance to the fact that it embeds something that appears to be a syllogism 
but is not, or to the fact that it embeds a syllogism whose conclusion appears to 
be, but is not, the contradictory of the original thesis whose refutation is sought. 
Thus an argument is a sophistical refutation when it appears to be a refutation 
but embeds either a fallacy or a non-fallacy with the wrong conclusion. 
Real-life arguments involve more than the production of syllogisms. With refu- 
tations as an example, there are also constraints on how premisses are selected. 
In this case, the refuter must draw his premisses from concessions given by an 
opponent in answer to the refuter's Yes-No questions. Or, as another example, 
demonstrations consist of syllogisms whose premisses must be drawn from the de- 
scendent class of a science's first principles under syllogistic consequence. In both 
cases there is more to the real-life argument than a mere sequence of premisses 
and conclusion. In each case there are additional conditions on premiss-eligibility. 
These are not themselves syllogistic conditions. This enables us to see that an ar- 
gument might be a perfectly good syllogism and yet be a perfectly bad refutation 
or demonstration (or instruction argument or examination argument). If we think 
of the syllogism embedded in a real-life argument as its strictly logical component, 
then it is clear that most real-life arguments also satisfy non-logical constraints. 
It is also clear that in some cases, but not all, these non-logical constraints include 
conditions that can be called dialectical in ways that we have been considering. 
25Thus we have [Hamblin, 1970, pp. 
73-74]: 
"The Fallacies of Begging the Ques- 
tion and Many Questions depend in conception, more than any other kinds, on the con- 
text of contentious argument ... 
The Fallacy of Many Questions can occur only when 
there is actually a questioner who asks two or more questions disguised as one." See also 
[Hintikka, 1987, p. 225]: "[O]ne thing is clear of the so-called fallacy of many questions. It 
cannot by any wildest stretch of the imagination be construed as a mistake in inference. It will 
thus bring home to the most hardened skeptic the impossibility of seriously construing Aris- 
totelian fallacies in the twentieth century sense, i.e., as tempting but invalid inferences." But 
cf.: "It is not clear in Aristotle's writings that the so-called fallacy of many questions is thought 
of by him just as a violation of presuppositions of questions" [Hintikka, 1987, p. 224] (emphasis 
added). 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
47 
5 
WHY THE FALLACIES ARE IMPORTANT 
It may strike some readers as odd that Aristotle develops his generic account of the 
syllogism to stabilize the distinction between good arguments and good-looking 
arguments. In the absence of such a distinction, a general theory of argument 
would certainly be significantly disabled. 
Aristotle's optimism may incline us 
to think that the theory of syllogisms now makes this a usable and principled 
distinction, and that the theory of argument can now proceed apace. Yet clearly 
this would be to misjudge Aristotle's own view of the matter, as is evidenced by 
his very concept of fallacy. 
As we have said, in its broadest sense a fallacy is something that appears to be 
an argument of a certain type but which, in fact, is not an argument of that type. 
In its use in On Sophistical Refutations, a fallacy is an argument that appears 
to be a syllogism but is not, in fact, a syllogism. We see, then, that the concept 
of syllogism is bedevilled by the same uncertainty that affected the more general 
concept of argument. Aristotle thinks that a good argument is one that is, or 
subsumes, or is in some other way intimately related to, a syllogism. But just 
as it is not always possible to distinguish a good argument from a good-looking 
argument, we also have it that it is not always possible to distinguish between a 
syllogism and something that only looks like a syllogism. Syllogisms were to be 
the means of removing the indeterminacy between good and merely good-looking 
arguments. Yet syllogisms are afflicted by this self-same indeterminacy. 
How, 
then, can syllogisms perform their restorative function in the general theory of 
argument? 
Aristotle will overcome this problem in what rightly can be said to be the great- 
est technical achievement of the Prior Analytics, namely, the (almost sound) proof 
of his perfectibility thesis. Aristotle distinguishes between perfect and imperfect 
syllogisms. It is an oddly expressed distinction in as much as it is not the case that 
an imperfect syllogism is any less a syllogism than a perfect one. What Aristotle 
intends to capture with this distinction is the contrast between arguments that 
are obviously syllogisms and arguments that, while they are syllogisms, are not 
obviously so. According to the perfectibility thesis, there is, for any imperfect 
syllogism, a perfect proof that the argument in question is a syllogism. A perfect 
proof is one, all of whose rules are obviously good rules. There are two types of 
perfect rule. One, which Aristotle calls common, are rules such as conversion and 
reductio ad absurdum. The other type of perfect rule, for which we propose the 
name syllogistic rule, is the conditionalization of any perfect syllogism. Finally, 
in a proof of the perfectibility of an imperfect syllogism, the original argument's 
premisses serve as hypotheses of a conditional proof. To these hypotheses, perfect 
rules are applied to generate conclusions which may themselves serve as hypothe- 
ses to which perfect rules may also be applied. The conditional proof terminates 
with the derivation of the original conclusion of the imperfect syllogism. Thus 
a perfectibility proof is a conditional proof of the original argument's conclusion 
from the original argument's premisses by repeated application of perfect rules. 

48 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
According to the perfectibility thesis, the conclusion of any imperfect syllogism is 
in the descendent class of the argument's premisses under the perfect rules. In this 
way, what Aristotle claims to have demonstrated is that for any syllogism that is 
not obviously a syllogism, there exists a perfectly perspicacious way of making it 
obvious that the argument in question is a syllogism. 
The perfectibility thesis is discussed in greater detail in the Prior Analytics. 
We mention it here to make the point that since it was not something that Aris- 
totle could draw on in his earlier writings, the issue of fallacies remains a serious 
difficulty for the earlier logic. This makes it all the more curious that Aristotle's 
treatment of the fallacies is, for the most part, rather thin and fragmentary. As 
long as it remained the case that fallacies could not be recognized in a principled 
way, then the invention of logic itself would exacerbate the very problem it was de- 
signed to solve. For as long as we lack a principled grasp of the distinction between 
syllogism and fallacy, syllogisms can play only an uncertain role in distinguishing 
between good and bad arguments. When we return to a discussion of the fallacies 
in section 12, it will be advisable to keep this point in mind. It helps in attaining 
an understanding of Aristotle's problem-solving methodology. 
Given that Aristotle's problem is to distinguish between syllogisms and fallacies, 
it is clear that Aristotle has two general strategies to consider. One is to produce 
what in fact he never got around to producing, namely, a full account of each of 
the fallacies in the original taxonomy of thirteen, and of those other fallacies (such 
as ad hominem) mentioned elsewhere. 26 But a second possibility is that Aristotle 
would hit upon a way of making syllogisms effectively recognizable, which would 
not require an account of any fallacy, whether fragmentary or full. As we have 
remarked, some writers (e.g., [Boger, 1998a]; c]. chapter 3 of this volume) are 
drawn to the view that the logic of the Prior Analytics was already available to 
Aristotle when he was writing about the fallacies in On Sophistical Refutations. 
We ourselves tend to demur from this opinion largely for reasons set forth in 
[Hitchcock, 2000hi. But it is grist for the mill of this controversy that in what we 
take to be his earlier writings on logic, Aristotle expressly avails himself of neither 
strategy. We could go so far as to say that in On Sophistical Refutations the 
fallacies elude Aristotle's theoretical grasp and, indeed, his theoretical interest. If 
we were to take this latter possibility seriously, we would be left with the necessity 
of trying to explain how it came to pass that having exposed a gaping wound in the 
theory of syllogisms Aristotle had no interest in following this up in a theoretically 
determined way. One possibility is that he was stymied, and did not yet know how 
to proceed with the requisite theoretical articulation. The other is that he already 
had a conception of how he would proceed in the Prior Analytics. If Boger is right, 
he had this conception of how he would proceed in the Analytics because that way 
of proceeding was already an accomplished fact during the writing of Topics and 
On Sophistical Re]utations. 
26Care needs be taken in attributing to Aristotle the view that ad hominem arguments are 
fallacies. In one sense of "proof" they are proofs of no kind; but in another sense of "proof," 
they are proofs of that kind. See, below, section 11 and [Woods, 2003, ch. 1]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
49 
Whichever explanation is favoured, it is worth noting that from the point of 
view of the syllogism, Aristotle's ezamples of sophistical refutations very often do 
not even appear to contain syllogisms. In some places, for example, quantifiers are 
conspicuous by their absence (On Sophistical Refutations 1656, 34-35 and 166 a, 
10-12). 
In others the number of premisses is wrong (e.g., 166 b, 37; 168 a, 12- 
16; 168 b, 11; 180 a, 33-34). In still others, premisses and conclusions are not in 
strict propositional form (e.g., 1656, 38-166 a, 2; 166 a, 9-10; 167 a, 7-9, 29-30; 
1676, 13-17; 177 a, 36-38; 1776, 37-178 a, 2, 11-16; 178 b, 24-27; 179 a, 33; 180 a, 
34-35; 180 b, 9-10, 11-12, 21-23 and 23-26). 27 What these deviations suggest to 
us is that Aristotle's interest in these examples is a good deal more everyday than 
theoretical. He is more interested in getting across the main ideas of his taxonomy 
of fallacies that ruin refutations than showing in strict detail that they instantiate 
non-syllogisms that really do appear to be syllogisms. 
6 
A LOGIC OF GENERIC SYLLOGISMS 
In saying that Aristotle's notion of syllogisms in the broad sense is a contending 
contribution to logical theory, it is necessary to have in mind some fixed star with 
which to box our compass. We shall need to have in mind a conception of what 
a core logic is. It is widely assumed by present-day theorists that the core of 
logic is the study of deducibility relations and that these relations display three 
jointly sufficient structural properties that capture the essentials of the deductive 
transmission of information. 
These three properties are reflexivity, transitivity 
(also called cut), 2s and monotonicity (also called dilution). 29 
By reflexivity any statement is derivable from itself, or (to have an expositionally 
handy converse) yields itself. By transitivity any statement yielding a statement 
which itself yields another also yields that other. By monotonicity any statement 
derivable from a statement is also derivable when that statement is supplemented 
by any others in any finite number. On the view we are examining, a core logic 
is a theory of deducibility in which the deducibility relation satisfies these three 
structural conditions. We call such a logic a Gentzen logic. 
As will become apparent, Aristotle's conception of the syllogism fails the Gentzen 
conditions hands down. This indicates that Aristotle would be sympathetic to a 
distinction which the expression "deducible from" all but obliterates. This is the 
distinction between implication and inference. Concerning inference, it appears to 
be Aristotle's position that while inference may obey (perhaps a restricted form of) 
transitivity, it certainly does not obey either reflexivity or monotonicity. In con- 
27These and other syllogistic deviations are well canvassed in [Hitchcock, 2000a]. 
2SThis is not quite accurate. Transitivity requires that the subordinate argument have only 
one premiss, which is identical to the conclusion of the superordinate argument. Cut permits 
multi-premissed subordinate arguments, where one of the premisses is identical to the conclusion 
of the superordinate argument. 
29These properties are proclaimed in the three structural rules of the same name of Gentzen's 
sequent calculus. See [Gentzen, 1935]; [Szabo, 1969]. See also [Scott, 1971, p. 133]. 

50 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
trast, Aristotle's idea of implication is given by his notion of necessitation, which 
is an unanalyzed primitive in his writings [Lear, 1980, pp. 2, 8]. We will suggest 
in due course that necessitation should be understood as fulfilling the Gentzen 
conditions, hence that Aristotle has, implicitly, a core logic for the implication 
relation. 
Part of what may be truly original about Aristotle's thinking is its apparent 
openness to a twofold fact: first, that inference is not (the converse of) implication 
but, second, that inference can be modelled in a restriction of the core logic of 
implication. So conceived, the inference relation is the converse of the implication 
relation under certain rather powerful constraints. What is more, a valid deduction 
in a Gentzen logic, when subjected to those same constraints, yields a structure of 
a sort that Aristotle called syllogisms. This suggests that what Aristotle wanted 
to do with the concept of syllogism was to "inferentialize" the validity rules of a 
given core logic. That is, he wanted to make rules such as Gentzen's deducibility 
rules more like rules of inference. 
We trust that we will not have to apologize for anachronisms so blatant as to be 
self-announcing. Charity, if nothing else, provides that brazenness alone cancels 
any idea of express attribution to Aristotle. But Aristotle does have an implication 
relation rolling around in his theory of syllogisms, and we should want to know 
what it is. We are saying that if it is the implication relation of a Gentzen logic, 
then we get the result just noted. Of course, it may strike us as obvious that 
getting this result is nowhere close to showing that Aristotle's implication is the 
converse of Gentzen-deducibility and that Aristotle's validity is Gentzen-validity. 
We should think again. Gentzen-deducibility and Gentzen-validity are structures 
of a core logic; i.e., they satisfy the three structural rules of reflexivity, transitivity 
and monotonicity. Of course, in Gentzen's own calculi the structural rules are 
supplemented by what Gentzen called "operational rules," and these are rules 
which, under certain assumptions, characterize the logical constants. What we 
are saying here has nothing to do with operational rules. We are not saying that 
Aristotle's validity is the validity of the full sequent calculus. We are saying only 
that a case can be made for supposing that Aristotle's validity is validity according 
to the core properties, that is, validity as characterized by these three structural 
rules. Here is the case. Whatever its details, the property of being a syllogism, 
or "syllogisity," is some kind of validity, minus the properties of reflexivity and 
monotonicity. 
There is a crucial difference between syllogisity and Aristotle's validity, what- 
ever it is in detail. 
Syllogisms are irreflexive and nonmonotonic. 
Let V be a 
property of arguments that results from the syllogisity property by reimposing the 
conditions of reflexivity and monotonicity. Then V is (core) Gentzen-validity if 
V is also transitive. But it is plausible to suppose that nothing qualifies as valid- 
ity unless it obeys transitivity; so if V is transitive, then since it is also reflexive 
and monotonic it is core Gentzen-validity. And since Aristotle's definition of syllo- 
gisity implies that syllogisms are valid arguments, Aristotle's validity, whatever its 
details, is on this plausible assumption transitive. So there is Aristotle's validity 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
51 
property--call it Va--which, being a validity property, is transitive on our present 
supposition. And there is Aristotle's syllogisity property to which, when reflexivity 
and monotonicity are restored, gives V. But V just is V a. So Aristotle's validity 
is core Gentzen-validity. Thus, syllogisms are Gentzen-valid arguments for which 
the conditions of reflexivity and monotonicity are stipulated to fail; and, equiva- 
lently, syllogistic implication is Gentzen-implication failing those some conditions. 
If this is right, it is important. For in one good sense of the word, syllogisms have 
an underlying core logic. Let us look to this possibility in greater detail. Let us 
attend to syllogisms. 
Aristotle says that "a refutation is a syllogismos" (On Sophistical Refutations 
1, 165 a, 3). 30 This is a view in which he clearly persists, for it is repeated in the 
Prior Analytics: "Both the demonstrator and the dialectician argue syllogistically 
after assuming that something does or does not belong to something" (A1, 24 a, 
26-27), and 
it is altogether absurd to discuss refutation without first discussing 
syllogismos; for a refutation is a syllogismos, so that one ought to 
discuss syllogismos before describing false refutation; for a refutation 
of that kind is a merely apparent syllogismos of the contradictory of a 
thesis (On Sophistical Refutations 10, 171 a, 1-5). 
Let us, then, "first discuss syllogisms": 
A syllogismos rests on certain statements [i.e., propositions] such that 
they involve necessarily the assertion of something other than what has 
been stated, through what has been stated (On Sophistical Refutations 
1, 165 a, 1-3). 
This is very much Aristotle's long-held and settled view. The same conditions are 
laid down at Topics 1,100 a, 25-27, 31 and repeated in the Prior Analytics A1, 24 b, 
19-20: 
A syllogismos is a discourse in which, certain things being stated, some- 
thing other than what is satated follows of necessity from their being 
SO. 
Further, says Aristotle, 
I mean by the last phrase that it follows because of them, and by this, 
that no further term is required from without in order to make the 
consequence necessary (Prior Analytics, 24 b, 20-22). 
3~ 
otherwise noted all translations are from [Barnes, 1984]. An exception is auikAovcttSs 
translated by Barnes as deduction, but for which we have used the transliteration syllogismos. 
31 "A syllogismos is an argument in which certain things being laid down, something other than 
these necessarily comes about through them." 

52 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Syllogisms, here, are what Aristotle calls "direct." They contrast with "hypo- 
thetical syllogisms" ,32 which we shall not be much concerned with in these pages. 
It suffices to remark en passant upon an interesting feature of the distinction 
between direct and non-direct syllogisms. Hypothetical syllogisms, in contradis- 
tinction to those of the direct variety, are arguments construable as indirect proofs 
in modern systems of natural deduction. In typical cases, they are per impossibile 
arguments, that is, arguments such as the following: 
Given: 
(1) All A are B 
(2) Some A are not C 
Premiss 
Premiss 
To prove: (K) Some B are not C. 
(3) All B are C 
(4) All A are C 
(5) (4) contradicts (2) 
Hypothesis, contradicting K 
From (1), (3) 
Thus: (K) Some B are not C. 
A key difference between direct and indirect proofs is reflected in the different 
roles played by propositions introduced as premisses and propoistions introduced 
as hypotheses. Premisses are permanent in all arguments in which they occur. 
Hypotheses have a fugitive role. 
They are introduced, they perform their in- 
tended functions, then they are cancelled. A simple way, therefore, of marking the 
distinction between direct and hypothetical syllogisms is to notice that in direct 
syllogisms all propositions other than the conclusion must be premisses, whereas 
in hypothetical syllogisms at least one such line must be a non-premiss, that is, a 
hypothesis. 
Aristotle concedes that the perfectibility proof of the Prior Analytics applies 
only to direct syllogisms (Prior Analytics, 41 a, 37-416, 1). If so, hypothetical 
syllogisms are truly a breed apart. In a way, this is an ironic twist. As we saw, 
Aristotle's project is to perfect all syllogistical reasoning. Perfection is achieved by 
reduction to the first figure. Aristotle recognizes that in some cases, the reductions 
can be indirect, by way of arguments per impossibile; and he says further that all 
reductions whatever are achievable in this way (Prior Analytics, 626, 29-31; 41 a, 
23-24). But per impossibile arguments are hypothetical syllogisms. Thus some 
of the syllogisms used by Aristotle to show that all syllogisms reduce to the first 
figure are themselves syllogisms which do not reduce to the first figure, aa 
32[Lear, 1980, ch. 3; pp. 34-35]. The last chapter of the Topics is a struggle to get clear about 
hypothetical syllogisms, and the need to do so is evident in the discussion of refutations in On 
Sophistical Refutations. The task is taken up again in the Prior Analytics at 40 b, 22-26; 41 a, 
23-26, 32-37; A44, 50 a, 16-28. 
33Ironic though the twist may be, neither it nor its irony is lost on Aristotle in the Prior 
Analytics. At A2, 25 a, 14-17, there occurs a proof of e-conversion concerning which "all scholars 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
53 
In one respect the analysis of direct syllogisms is a matter of lively controversy. 
Some writers hold that they are irreducibly conditional in form, hence that they are 
a kind of statement. 34 Others are of the view that they are argumental structures, 
hence sequences of statements. 35 Others, still, favour the ecumenical suggestion 
that they can be taken either way and that the two approaches are interderivable 
without significant loss. 36 Not wanting to re-open this debate, let us simply declare 
for the second alternative. 
Aristotle's syllogisms are structures of a sort that a 
modern reader would identify as derivations in a system of natural deduction. 37'3s 
A syllogismos, then, "rests on certain statements such that they involve neces- 
sarily the assertion of something other than what has been stated, through what 
has been stated." As we see, syllogisms are thus valid sequences of propositions, 
distinguished as to premiss and conclusion, which satisfy the following two condi- 
tions: 
agree that Aristotle's argument is ecthetic [i.e., not narrowly syllogistic]" [Mignucci, 1991, p. 11]. 
An argument is ecthetic if Darapti is proved ecthetically (see A6, 28 a, 22-26); and at AS, 30 a, 6- 
14, ecthetic arguments are advanced for Baroco NNN and Bocardo NNN, each a modal syllogism. 
Moreover, the proof of Darapti requires modus ponens [Mignucci, 1991, p. 23] and the proof of 
Baroco NNN requires modus tollens. Aristotle expressly recognizes that neither modus ponens 
nor modus tollens is reducible to syllogisms in the narrow sense (Prior Analytics A23, 41 a, 23 ft.; 
A44, 50 a, 16 ft.). On the other hand, Aristotle also claims that any conclusion sanctioned by a 
per impossibile syllogism can also be derived by a direct syllogism employing the same premisses. 
34See, for example, [Lukasiewicz, 1957, pp. 20-34] and [Patzig, 1968, pp. 3-4]. 
35For example, [Smiley, 1973]; [Corcoran, 1972]; [Lear, 1980, pp. 8-9]; and [Frede, 1987, pp. 
100-116]. 
36Cf. [Thorn, 1981, p. 23]: "Aristotle's syllogistic can ... be presented, either as a system 
of deductions [arguments] (a natural deduction system) or as a system of implicative theses 
[conditionals] (an axiomatic system). [Smiley, 1973] has carried out the former task admirably 
well; we shall attempt the latter. But, for those who remain unconvinced that the syllogism can 
be treated as an implication, we shall provide a way of re-interpreting our system as a natural 
deduction system." 
37Here is Corcoran on the point: 
"My opinion is this: 
if the Lukasiewicz view [that 
Aristotle's logic is an axiom system] is correct then Aristotle cannot be regarded as 
the founder of logic. 
Aristotle would merit the title no more than Euclid, Peano or 
Zermelo insofar as these men are regarded as founders, respectively, of axiomatic geometry, 
axiomatic arithmetic and axiomatic set theory. (Aristotle would merely have been the founder 
of "the axiomatic theory of universals')" [Corcoran, 1974b, p. 98]. 
We note in this connection that Gentzen's structural rules are not by any means exclusive to 
the Gentzen calculi. They hold in Frege's system and in virtually every other logic published 
subsequently. Why do we invoke the name of Gentzen? Why is the core theory of validity not a 
Frege-logic or a Whitehead-Russell-logic? Our answer is that Gentzen was the first (along with 
J~skowski, independently) to break with the axiomatic tradition in modern logic and to show 
that natural deduction systems have all the power of axiomatic set-ups. Because we hold, with 
Corcoran, that Aristotle conceived of logic in natural deduction terms, it is seemly to use the 
honorific "Gentzen" in reconstructing Aristotle's conception of validity. 
38 Terminological Note: We are using the expressions "deducible from," "consequence of" and 
"follows from" without due regard for what logicians have come to admire in a distinction between 
logical syntax and semantics. Even in the absence of a theoretically weighty divide between 
syntax and semantics, there is an intuitive distinction between deriving a conclusion from certain 
premisses and that conclusion following from them. We return to this point at the conclusion of 
the present section. For now we shall only say that any looseness in our usage will be tightened 
by context. 

54 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Min: They are minimal; that is, they contain premisses needed for 
their validity and none other. 
Non-Circ: They are elementarily non-circula~ that is, their conclu- 
sions repeat no premiss. 
Condition Non-Circ comes directly from this characterization of syllogisms. The 
conclusion of a syllogism is something other than what has been stated, that is, its 
premisses. There are two ways in which an argument might violate Non-Circ. Its 
conclusion might repeat a premiss exactly as formulated, "word for word," or its 
conclusion might be a form of words syntactically different from a preceding line 
but synonymous with it. Assuming the reflexivity of synonymity, the two cases sum 
to one in the requirement that the conclusion of a syllogism not be synonymous 
with any premiss. It is sometimes supposed that circularity is a species of question- 
begging. We believe this is not Aristotle's own view. But whether it is or not, 
it is not Aristotle's intention to impose on syllogisms the requirement that they 
not beg questions. Whether an argument begs a question or not arises only in the 
context of further conditions which a syllogism might fulfill, as when it is used 
as a refutation of an opponent's thesis. When it is so used, it is held to a non- 
question-beggingness constraint, but it is a constraint not on syllogisms as such 
but on refutations, i.e., on syllogisms in their use as refutations. We employ in 
Non-Circ the qualification "elementarily" to mark this point. An argument that 
fails to be a syllogism because of its violation of Non-Circ is one in which the 
conclusion is synonymous with some premiss, and hence repeats it. It is clear that 
Non-Circ denies syllogisms the property of reflexivity, as witness the argument 
A I~ A. Even if it is allowed that A necessitates A, it could not be true that 
A I~- A is a syllogism, since the conclusion A repeats the premiss A. So, syllogistic 
implication is not reflexive. 
Premisses will "involve necessarily" propositions other than what has been 
stated by the premisses. "Involve necessarily" has the sense of "following of ne- 
cessity" (Prior Analytics A1, 245, 20-22). From this it can be seen that Aristotle 
requires that syllogisms be protaseic arguments, that is, that their premisses en- 
tail their conclusions. This is given in the basic condition that a syllogism is a 
protaseic argument, that is, a valid argument all of whose statements are propo- 
sitions. Min makes the additional point that if a valid argument is a syllogism it 
cannot contain superfluous premisses. For an argument to be a syllogism it is not 
enough that its conclusion results of necessity from other propositions but, rather, 
that the conclusion results of necessity because of them. 39 It is open to question 
whether premiss-minimality captures all there is of the "because-of-them" require- 
ment. We shall not pursue the matter here, but will return to it later. We see that 
the property of being a syllogism (again, "syllogisity" for short) is not a monotonic 
property. It is consistent to suppose that necessitation is monotonic, but syllo- 
gisity is a restriction on necessitation (or validity). If syllogisity were monotonic 
39Cf. Posterior Analytics 71 b, 22: Premisses must be "causes of the conclusion" [Ross, 1949] 
or "explanatory of the conclusion" [Barnes, 1984]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
55 
then, if A, B IF- C were a syllogism, so too would be A, B, D1,..., Dn iF C, for any 
Di. But A, B, D1, ..., Dn IF C offends against Min. It is not a syllogism even if it 
is a valid argument. Since validity is reflexive, every statement is validly deducible 
from just one premiss, namely, itself. Non-Circ denies this property to syllogisms. 
Various commentators have read off further conditions from our present two. 
Mindful of syntactic niceties, it has been proposed that the plural form "certain 
things being supposed" precludes single-premissed syllogisms, 4~ and that the sin- 
gular form of "thing which results" rules out multiple conclusions. 
Corcoran's 
opinion is that Aristotle did not require of syllogisms as such that they have just 
two premisses. That he did not impose this restriction 
is suggested by the form of his definition of syllogism ([Prior Analytics] 
24 b, 19-21), by his statement that every demonstration is a syllogism 
(25 b, 27-31; cf. 71 b, 17; 72 b, 28; 85 b, 23), by the context of chapter 23 of 
Prior Analytics I and by several other circumstances .... Unmistakable 
evidence that Aristotle applied the term in cases of more than two 
premises is found in Prior Analytics I, 23 (especially 41 a, 17) and in 
Prior Analytics II, 17, 18 and 19 (esp. 655, 17; 66 a, 18 and 665, 2) 
[Corcoran, 1974b, p. 90]. 
Still, it is clear that Aristotle often does reserve the term "syllogism" for two- 
premiss arguments. 
We follow Corcoran in supposing that such a restriction is 
explicable by the fact that Aristotle thought if all two-premiss syllogisms are de- 
ducible in the logic of the Prior Analytics, then all direct syllogisms whatever are 
also deducible. 
On the other hand, evidence from the Topics plainly indicates Aristotle's will- 
ingness to countenance syllogisms of just one premiss containing two terms not 
occurring in the conclusion [Allen, 1995, p. 1]. There is, in any case, little doubt 
that the settled opinion is that syllogisms require at least two premisses. We shall 
tentatively record the consensus in a further condition, viz., 
Prem-/-: They are multi-premissed. 41 
40 See John Maynard Smith, "Notes to Book A," [Smith, 1989, p. 110]. See also [Frede, 1987, 
p. 114]: "The Greek commentators all agree that the plural of 'certain things being laid down' 
has to be taken seriously as referring to a plurality of premises ... and everybody in antiquity 
(except for Anipaster, cf. Sextus Empiricus P.H. II, 167) agreed that arguments have to have at 
least two premises." 
However, as Barnes points out, there is textual evidence that Aristotle plumped for premisses 
greater than two [Barnes, 1975, p. 68]. See Prior Analytics A14, 34 a, 17-18; 23, 40 b, 35; and 
Posterior Analytics I 3, 73 a, 7-11. But see Prior Analytics 42 a, 30-34: "So it is clear that every 
demonstration and every deduction will proceed through three terms only. This being evident, 
it is clear that a conclusion follows from two propositions and not from more than two .... " 
41Against Prem Robin Smith writes: "Aristotle thinks this is worth arguing for; but if, 
as the ancient commentators thought, it is simply part of the definition--implicit in the plural 
'certain things being supposed'--then the point is trivial and the argument redundant" [Smith, 
1995, p. 30]. But this overlooks the fact that it is an open question for Aristotle whether indeed 
definitions can be argued for. This he discusses in the Topics and Prior Analytics (and comes 
up with contradictory answers). 

56 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Also advanced is the view, which we share, that a premiss for a syllogism is 
the result of a distillation from all those contexts [of conversational use] 
of a fundamental core meaning, excluding any epistemic [and semantic] 
properties ... [Smith, 1995, p. 108]. 42 
Thus the premisses of a syllogism are the propositional contents of cognate 
speech acts (e.g., asserting that P, asking whether P, etc.) independently of how 
they are spoken, independently of whether they are true, and independently of 
whether they are known in a certain way, or at all. 43 Syllogistic premisses are, in 
Aristotle's technical sense, propositions. In their turn, syllogisms are sequences of 
these, themselves independent of the pragmatic, semantic and epistemic conditions 
of their production in day-to-day social congress. If this is right, let us again note 
that syllogisms are not inherently dialectical structures; they are inherently logical 
structures. 44 They are protaseic arguments satisfying the restriction-conditions 
Min, Non-Circ and Prem 
We are now launched on the task of discerning an account of syllogisms in 
the broad sense in Aristotle's dialectical treatises. The core conception is set by 
conditions Min, Non-Circ and Prem with Prem admitted on sufferance. They 
seem to follow fairly immediately from a characterization of syllogisms sufficiently 
recurrent in the Organon, and beyond, to warrant the status of a definition. If these 
conditions are taken as our theoretical basis, then the theory of syllogisms will be 
roughly the least class satisfying Min, Non-Circ and Prem 
supplemented here 
and there by various other textual implications. We must proceed to the further 
specification of the theory, and we will do so with an eye on the collateral obligation 
to judge it as a contending theory, i.e., a theory that merits our consideration in 
its own right, apart from its antiquarian importance. But there are other things 
to do first. 
42Cf. [Lear, 1980, p. 51]: "A direct syllogism may be described in an episternic vacuum. One 
may or may not know the premisses and one may or may not use a knowledge of the premisses 
to gain knowledge of the conclusion." See also [Frede, 1987, p. 110]: "But later Peripatetic 
authors, and even Aristotle in the Analytics, no longer thought of the definition [of 'syllogism'] 
as dependent on dialectical context." Cf. Prior Analytics A32, 47 a, 33-35. It is well to note that 
the semantic independence of syllogisms is independence from the truth of their premisses; it is 
not independence from the entailment of their conclusions. 
43if this sounds too Fregean a view for the likes of Aristotle, it suffices to characterize premisses 
as declarative sentences considered in isolation of contexts of their use. 
44The point is sharpened by contrasting Aristotle's definition of "syllogism" with, say, 
Boethius'. Boethius says that a syllogism is an expression (oratio) in which when some things 
have been laid down (positis) and agreed to (concessis), some different things follow necessarily 
by virtue of the things which were agreed to (De Differentus Topicis, ed. Patrologia Latina, vol. 
64, coll. 1173-1216). "[M]ediaeval commentators explain this divergence from Aristotle by saying 
that Boethius defines the dialectical syllogism, and Aristotle the syllogism as such. This cannot 
be historically correct, however, since Boethius makes the same 'addition' in his De Categoricis 
Syllogisms, and there it is certainly the syllogism as such that he defines. Thus it seems that 
Boethius demands that the premises of a syllogism are accepted as true" [Green-Pederson, 1984, 
pp. 44-45], emphasis added. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
57 
For example, we want here to revisit briefly the claim that syllogisms are not 
inherently dialectical structures. 
If this is so, then Aristotle's fallacies are not 
inherently dialectical either. In its most general sense, Aristotle thinks of a fallacy 
as something which appears to be a good argument of a certain kind, but which is 
not in fact a good argument of that kind. So understood, there are several ways 
in which an argument could be a fallacy. Its premisses might not necessitate its 
conclusion, though they appear to. It might contain an inapparent redundancy 
in its premiss set. 
Its conclusion may be identical to one of its premisses in 
camouflage. It may be an argument that appears, but fails, to be a demonstration, 
i.e., a syllogism from first principles; and so on. 
If a fallacy is something which appears to be a good argument of a certain 
kind, but is not, there might be (and are) fallacies which merely appear to be 
good dialectical arguments. 
Aristotle understands dialectical arguments to be 
arguments from dialectical premisses, and he understands dialectical premisses to 
express opinions either widely held, or supported by experts, or endorsed by "the 
wise" (i.e., endoza). One way, then, for an argument to be a fallacy is by being a 
syllogism from premisses which appear to be endoza but are not. Were it the case 
that fallacies as such are dialectical, it would have to be true that all arguments 
that merely appear to be good do so because they contain premisses that merely 
appear to be reputable. But this was never Aristotle's own view (cf. Topics 101 a 
ft.). By this same reasoning we should also resist the idea that the thirteen types 
of sophistical refutation listed in the treatise of the same name are inherently 
dialectical. In strictness, the thirteen are types of fallacies, hence types of ways in 
which arguments can be sophistical refutations; but an argument is a sophistical 
refutation when it merely appears to be a refutation, and this clearly can happen 
even when its premisses appear to be, and are, expressions of reputable opinion. 
There is value in having made this aside, for it highlights a touchy ambiguity 
in the concept of dialectical argument. 
The idea of dialectic is in fact multi- 
ply ambiguous in Aristotle's thought, and in Greek philosophy generally. What 
matters here is an ambiguity that straddles Aristotle's thinking and that of his 
present-day successors. For writers such as Hintikka and Hamblin, an argument 
is a multi-agent interchange of speech acts 45 over which, however inchoately, the 
idea of a challenge is definable. In some sense, parties to a dialectical exchange 
are each other's opponents. Typical is the question-answer dialogue in which one 
party seeks to refute a claim of another party. Here the notion of challenge is 
overtly applicable, but we may also find it in muted form in the interrogative 
exchange between teacher and pupil, in which there are presumptive challenges 
to teach and to learn. 
Even a specific enquiry could be seen as an interroga- 
tive engagement between an enquirer and Mother Nature herself [Hintikka, 1989; 
Hintikka, 1987]. Suffice it to say that for our purposes, an argument can be said to 
be dialectical when it is an interchange of speech acts under conditions of challenge 
or test. Let us think of such arguments as dialectical in a generic sense. When 
it is recalled that our word "dialectic" comes from the verb dialegestha, meaning 
45See also [van Eemeren and Grootendorst, 1992] and [Walton, 1989]. Cf. [Hansen, undated]. 

58 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
"argue" or "discuss," then generically dialectical arguments are a natural fit and 
certainly were recognized by Aristotle. 
From this it is apparent that there are at least two senses of "dialectical argu- 
ment" and that they do not coincide. An argument from reputable premisses can 
be transacted solo, on a lonely speech-writer's lap-top late at night, but if it is 
dialectical in the generic sense it cannot. For it to be true, as some modern com- 
mentators suggest, that a fallacy is an inherently dialectical structure, it must be 
true that its false apparent goodness inheres in the conditions in virtue of which 
the argument is an interchange of speech acts under conditions of challenge or 
trial. Yet this would imply that the argument 
All men are mortal 
Some dogs are not men 
Therefore, some dogs are not mortal 
could not be a fallacy unless it arose in some actual give-and-take between real-life 
disputants. 
Some critics may not like our example of the lonely speech writer working 
the solitary night shift in Ottawa or Hong Kong. They will say, and it will be 
true, that in crafting the speech, the writer will be mindful of how it will play 
in Parliament or at the next day's news conference. He will attempt to marshal 
premisses attractive to those whom the speech is meant to convince. This is very 
often true, but it is also the sheerest nonsense that he could not be crafting an 
argument which simply records the position of his beleaguered boss who is intent 
on resigning honorably the next morning and intent only on declaring himself 
honestly from premisses which others will not accept, and not caring whether 
they do. Arguments composed solo are always the sorts of things that could be 
transacted interpersonally, but that makes them no more intrinsically dialectical 
in the generic sense than the fact that a boat can always be used for fishing makes 
a corvette intrinsically a trawler. It is not even true that when spoken a solo 
argument is dialectical in the present sense, for it might be spoken into a tape 
recorder. It is, we suppose, perfectly open to the would-be theorist to constrain 
the world "fallacy" in this generically dialectical way, but this is not Aristotle's 
way. 
Necessitation, as we have said, is primitive in Aristotle's logic. If we adopt 
the idea that an argument is valid if and only if its premisses necessitate, or 
imply, its conclusion, we put ourselves in a position to wonder whether there are 
properties of validity that Aristotle might be brought to acknowledge, if only we 
could ask him. It is clear that Aristotle understands the class of syllogisms to 
be a restriction of the class of valid arguments. We have already said that it is 
consistent with the constraints on syllogisms that validity itself could satisfy the 
conditions that qualify it as having a Gentzen-logic. If Aristotle had views about 
this possibility, he did not state them. But we are left, all the same, with two things 
to theorize about: validity and syllogisity, which are linked, latter to former, by 
the relation "is a restriction of." It is hardly wayward, therefore, to think of there 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
59 
being two theories awaiting proclamation, a theory O, of validity, together with 
its restriction, Os, a theory of syllogisity, and that it is only concerning the latter 
that Aristotle offers an account. 
Concerning O~, we shall proceed conservatively. We adopt, on Aristotle's behalf, 
the common lexical stipulation that an argument is valid just when its premisses 
necessitate, or entail, its conclusion. 
The task of O s is to give an account of 
syllogisms. Validity abets the task. Aristotle requires a conception of validity that 
enables syllogisms to be specifiable as a proper subset of protaseic arguments. A 
methodological principle of interpretation now drops out: 
Meth: Keep the account of validity as simple as is consistent with its 
obligations in the theory of syllogisms. 
We take Meth to commit us to what we might, with some looseness, call the re- 
ceived contemporary view of validity. It is nearly enough the conception of validity 
fashioned in the metatheory of first-order logic, or for those whose tastes run that 
way, in systems of strict implication such as $4 or $5 and their quantificational 
extensions. 
It might be wondered whether there is any need to be speaking of O~ at all. 
Why do we need a subtheory of validity if it has already been decided that Aris- 
totle's validity is core Gentzen-validity? The answer is that a core Gentzen-logic 
gives rise to different and incompatible full logics. If, for example, we restrict 
Gentzen's structural rules in such a way that deductions can have only single con- 
clusions (or only unit sets as conclusion), then such a logic is intuitionistic (a point 
we return to later). Similarly, Gentzen's structural rules (which define the core) 
lay no constraints other than consistency on the theorist's choice of operational 
rules (which complete the specification of the full logic). So it is left open that a 
given theorist, including Aristotle (if only we could consult him), might plump for 
operational rules that make the full logic significantly non-classical. 
In speaking, just now, of the subtheory, 0,, we were speaking not of the core 
logic but rather of a full logic of validity. There are several obvious questions to ask 
about this full logic. One of them is whether it is classical. We have done nothing 
so far to prove that it is classical. Perhaps no such attempt will succeed, given 
that Aristotle himself has so little to say about validity. Perhaps the saner course 
is to abandon any serious effort to pin a particular O, on Aristotle himself, but 
it is still open to us to wonder whether some O, might be assumed on Aristotle's 
behalf. We ourselves think that this is a reasonable thing to try to do. For this we 
want the comforts of Meth. It encourages the attribution, however tentative, of 
what we think is the best full logic of validity. Others will disagree about "best," 
and as we proceed it is possible that we will unearth textual reasons for revising 
the classical attribution which Meth defensibly calls for. Both these points are 
taken up in what follows, but as a point of departure, we allow Meth to tell us 
that O, is a classical theory of validity. 46 
46 Terminological Note: We follow the convention by which classical logic is, of course, the 
dominant part of modern logic. Who says that logicians have no sense of humour? 

60 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
There is a further reason to want Meth. If we examine the case for saying that 
Aristotle's validity is (at least) core Gentzen-validity, we see that it depends upon 
the assumption that syllogisms are non-vacuous, or proper restrictions of valid 
arguments. But we have not shown that this is Aristotle's express view. Were it not 
Aristotle's view, or were it not attributable to him on the basis of considerations 
which are at least textually based, our case would be badly damaged. We want 
some reason, in the absence of textual evidence to the contrary, to persist in our 
attribution of a core Gentzen-logic; and this is what Meth gives us. 
Meth bids us to attribute to Aristotle such a conception of validity so long as 
doing so does not impede the development of O s, and provided also that the at- 
tribution is not contradicted or contra-indicated by Aristotle's text. 
Our three 
conditions warm us to this task in a particular way. If we propose as a plausible 
assumption that Aristotle intended conditions Min, Non-Circ, and Prem+ to be 
independent of one another, and of the necessitation condition, it follows immedi- 
ately that validity is not syllogisity and that it cannot be that an argument is valid 
if and only if it satisfies conditions Min, Non-Circ and Prem+. We thus detach 
ourselves from the view that "Aristotle's conception of 'following necessarily' is 
very different from the classical one. ''47 
How plausible is the independence assumption? Suppose it were not true. Then 
necessitation (or entailment) would satisfy all or some of the other conditions. If 
it satisfied some but not others, this would leave the question of why. 
About 
this Aristotle has nothing whatsoever to say. However, if entailment itself were re- 
quired to satisfy all the remaining conditions, there would be no difference between 
entailment and, as we might say, syllogistic entailment, or between validity and 
syllogistic validity. This is possible, but it cannot be Aristotle's view. In as much 
as syllogisms in the broad sense are only a proper subset of logically correct deduc- 
tions which Aristotle clearly recognizes to be so (e.g., impossibility proofs, ecthetic 
proofs, conjunctive modus ponens arguments, immediate inferences), it must be 
said that Aristotle acknowledges a conception of entailment other than syllogistic 
entailment. It does not follow that non-syllogistic entailment is entailment in the 
modern sense (although it is just this that Meth suggests). 
If we go with Meth, the independence of Min, Non-Circ and Prern+ from the 
necessitation condition is more directly established. It suffices to specify a valid 
argument that fails all three conditions. Such an argument exists: 
All A are A 
Therefore, all A are A. 
Valid by modern lights, this argument's conclusion repeats a premiss, of which 
47 Normore supports this claim by observing that Aristotle would not accept as a syllogism the 
argument {"No animal is a human," "Every human is an animal"} I~- "No human is a human", 
presumably "because it does not contain three terms" [Normore, 1993, p. 447-448]. This is a 
correct assessment by the formal lights of the Prior Analytics; but there is a chronologically and 
conceptually prior reason to complain. It is that the argument contains inconsistent premisses, 
which for Aristotle also rules out its syllogisity. It does not follow, of course, that the argument 
is made invalid by a condition that denies it the status of syllogism. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
61 
there is only one, and being a logical truth, its conclusion also follows from a 
proper subset of its premisses, namely, the empty set. 
This leaves the question of whether Min, Non-Circ and Prem+ are independent 
of one another in their application to valid arguments. We proceed by constructing 
a satisfaction-failure matrix for Min, Non-Circ and Prem+. The plus sign "+" in 
the 
matrix 
denotes 
satisfaction 
of 
the 
condition, 
and 
"-" its failure. Given that satisfaction-failure is a bimodal pair, the number of to- 
tal satisfaction-failure combinations with respect to the three-membered set Min, 
Non-Circ, Prem+ is 2 3 = 8. The full matrix is given in Table 1. 
Row 1 
Row 2 
Row 3 
Row 4 
Row 5 
Row 6 
Row 7 
Row 8 
Min 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Table 1. 
Non- Circ 
Prem-/- 
+ 
t 
t 
t 
t 
t 
+ 
+ 
Now recall that we are seeking an answer to the question whether conditions 
Min, Non-Circ and Prem+ are independent. To show that they are, we need to 
find a valid argument that satisfies each condition, but that also fails to satisfy the 
other two, or a valid argument that fails to satisfy each condition, even though it 
satisfies the other two. In other words, we need to find a series of valid arguments 
corresponding to rows four, six and seven, and rows two, three and five. 
We 
attempt to do so as follows: 
Row ~: What is required for this row is the specification of a valid argument 
which satisfies Prem+ but fails Min and Non-Circ. There is such an argument, 
viz.~ 
All men are mortal 
All ducks are quackers 
Therefore, all men are mortal. 
It is multi-premissed and hence satisfies Prem+. But its conclusion repeats a 
premiss and its second premiss is superfluous. Hence Non-Circ and Min fail. 
Row 6: Here we require a valid argument whose conclusion does not repeat a 
premiss, but which both has a superfluous premiss and does not have more than 
one premiss. It is plain that such an argument does not exist, unless we allow as 
valid those arguments whose conclusions are logical truths, and hence follow from 
the empty set of premisses. Suppose that E is an argument of this kind. Add to 

62 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
E any premiss other than its conclusion. We call the resulting argument E*. Now 
E* satisfies Non-Circ and fails Min and Prem 
It fails Min because E* is valid 
without its premiss, and it fails Prem because it has only one premiss. 
The issue of logical truths as the possible conclusions of syllogisms is an inter- 
esting one to which we shall return shortly. For the present we simply remark that 
the independence question motivates our attention with respect to the status of 
logical truths as conclusions of the empty set of premisses. 
Row 7." What is needed here is a valid argument free of superfluous premisses 
but which repeats a premiss as conclusion and has only one premiss. There are 
such arguments, for example, the argument A i~- A. Let E be a valid argument 
without superfluous premisses. 
If E's conclusion both repeated a premiss and 
had more than one premiss, E would have a valid proper sub-argument, which is 
contrary to the original assumption. 
Row 2: Here we require a valid argument that satisfies both Non-Circ and 
Prem but that fails to satisfy Min. 
Such arguments exist, and can be eas- 
ily constructed simply by adding a redundant premiss to any valid, non-circular, 
multi-premissed argument, for example as follows: 
All men are mortal 
All Greeks are men 
All Romans are Europeans 
Therefore, all Greeks are mortal. 
Row 5: In this case, we need to find a valid argument that satisfies both Min 
and Non-Circ but that fails to satisfy Prem and again, such arguments are easy 
to find: 
All men are mortal 
Therefore, some men are mortal. 
Row 3: Finally, we come to Row 3, the case in which we need to find a valid 
argument that satisfies both Min and Prem+, but that fails to satisfy Non-Circ. 
However, such arguments cannot be constructed. The reason is that any argu- 
meat that fails to satisfy Non-Circ will be one in which a premiss is repeated as 
conclusion. 
At the same time, if the premiss is repeated as the conclusion, and if the argu- 
meat contains premisses in addition to that premiss, it follows that those additional 
premisses will be reduandant and that Min will not be satisfied, contrary to our 
requirement. 
What this shows is that although the set of Min, Non-Circ and Prem+ is inde- 
pendent of the validity condition, Min, Non-Circ and Prem+ are not independent 
of each other. 
Why should we be interested in whether a syllogism's defining conditions are 
independent? To answer this question, let us call a definition clean if its defining 
conditions are independent of one another, and muddy otherwise. Muddiness is 
evidently a matter of degree. By the proofs just above, we see that the proferred 
definition of syllogisity is somewhat muddy. Why should we care about this? In 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
63 
a quite general way, muddy definitions obscure the net impact of their defining 
conditions. A muddy definition presents us with two tasks instead of one. The first 
task is the more important one. It is the task of producing conditions necessary and 
sufficient for the definiendum. Though less important, the second task imposed by 
a muddy definition is no mere call upon the theorist's discretion. It is the task of 
elucidating the interconnections among the defining conditions in virtue of which 
indepedence is lost. 
If simplicity were allowed to rule in such cases, we should be prepared to con- 
sider dropping a condition in favour of the independency of those that remain. 
Supose that we dropped Prem+. Then, as it turns out, the other two are indeed 
independent. What is more, this independence requires that validity be classical 
enough to permit valid arguments from the empty set of premisses. But since this 
is what Meth already bids us say about validity, the independence of Min and 
Non-Circ is an attractive bonus. 
The independence of Min and Non-Circ is exhibited by the satisfaction-failure 
matrix in Table 2: 
Table 2. 
Min 
Non- Circ 
Row 1 
+ 
+ 
Row 2 
+ 
Row 3 
+ 
Row 4 
Independence is established by specification of valid arguments, one or more, 
displaying the satisfaction-failure profiles of rows two and three. 
Row 2: It suffices to find a valid argument in which the conclusion repeats no 
premiss but which contains a superfluous premiss. Such an argument exists: 
All men are mortal 
All ducks are quackers 
Therefore, some men are mortal. 
Row 3: It suffices to specify a valid argument which contains no superfluous 
premiss but whose conclusion repeats a premiss. Such an argument exists: 
All men are Greeks 
Therefore, all men are Greeks. 
We have it then, that Min and Non-Circ are independent conditions. Indepen- 
dence is lost by the addition of Prern+. So why add it? One reason for doing so 
is that Prern+ is a condition expressly proclaimed in the Prior Analytics. This 
leaves us with two options to think about. 
Option one: Withhold Prem+ as a 

64 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
condition on syllogisms in the broad sense and reserve it for syllogisms in the 
narrow sense. By these lights, it may be that Aristotle changed his mind about 
syllogisms and came to apply Prem+ to facilitate the reductive programme in the 
Prior Analytics, even at the cost of definitional muddiness. Option two: Impose 
Prem+ as a condition on all direct syllogisms, broad or narrow, and deal with the 
ensuing muddiness. This matter is discussed in greater detail in [Woods, 2001]. 4s 
7 
INFERENTIALIZING THE CONSEQUENCE RELATION 
It is interesting to note similarities between Aristotle's account of syllogisms and 
Bolzano's logic of deducibility (Ableitbarkeit), which in turn is widely seen as a 
precursor of Tarski's account of logical consequence [Corcoran, 1975; Thompson, 
1981]. 
Bolzano requires deductions to have mutually consistent premisses [Bolzano, 
1973]. Thus where, for Tarski, every sentence is a logical consequence of an incon- 
sistent set of sentences, for Bolzano inconsistent premisses bear the Ableitbarkeit- 
relation to nothing whatsoever. Bolzano also requires that if a sentence is deducible 
from a given set of sentences, it not also be deducible from any proper subset of 
that set. Tarski, on the other hand, imposes no such constraint. Bolzano's condi- 
tion makes his deducibility relation nonmonotonic. Tarksi's consequence relation, 
of course, is monotonic. 
Bolzano's two constraints on deducibility have exact counterparts in Aristotle's 
logic of the syllogism. Bolzano's requirement that no proper subset of a set proving 
a sentence prove that same sentence is simply Aristotle's condition Min, adjusted 
from a condition on syllogisity to a condition on deducibility. Bolzano's require- 
ment that there be no deductions from inconsistent premisses can also be found in 
Aristotle. It is directly provable from Aristotle's condition Non-Circ with the aid 
of the principle of (argumental) conversion, which is one of Aristotle's common 
rules of logic. Let 
A 
B 
Therefore, C 
be any syllogism. Then, by argumental conversion, the following is also a syllogism: 
4sit is noteworthy that On Sophistical Refutations contains several examples of fallacies as 
single-premiss arguments that are valid without premissory supplementation, i.e. examples which 
are not enthymemes. David Hitchcock points out that this form of argument is prominently on 
display in Aristotle's fifteen examples of what he would later call the secundum quid fallacy. See, 
for example, 166 b, 37; 167 a, 1, 7-9; 168 b, 11; 180 a, 23-24, 31-32, 33-34, 34-35, 35-36; 180 b, 
9-10, 11-12, 14-16, 18-19, 20-21, 21-23. Other one-premiss arguments instantiate the fallacies 
of equivocation (165 b, 31-32), illicit conversion of an A proposition (168 b, 35-169 a, 3), and so 
on. As Hitchcock says, "... twenty-six of Aristotle's sixty-five fully detailed examples consist 
wholly or partly of one-premiss arguments" [Hitchcock, 2000a, p. 214]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
65 
A 
-,C 
Therefore, -lB. 
Thus the rule of argumental conversion is syllogisity-preserving and non-syllogisity- 
preserving. Consider now the non-syllogism 
A 
B 
Therefore, A. 
This argument fails to be a syllogism because it violates Non-Circ, the rule that 
forbids circular syllogisms. Applying the rule of argumental conversion to this 
non-syllogism gives us 
A 
-~A 
Therefore, -~B 
an argument in which the premiss set is expressly inconsistent. Since argumental 
conversion is non-syllogisty-preserving, no argument of this form is a syllogism. 
The 
minimality 
requirement 
makes 
for 
the 
nonmonotonicity 
of 
Aristotle's syllogisity just 
as it does for Bolzano's 
Ableitbarkeit. 
Non- 
monotonicity is not a nineteenth-century discovery, still less one of twentieth- 
century computer science. It was imposed at the very beginning of logic, by the 
discipline's founder. In making for the nonmonotonicity of syllogisity, Min also 
endows syllogisms with two other modern-looking features. A logic is linear when 
each premiss is used exactly once. It is easy to see that a linear logic is thus also 
a relevant logic for that sense of relevance in which something follows relevantly 
from a set of premisses if there exists a deduction of that sentence in which all 
those premisses are used. We have it, then, that although Min imposes additional 
constraints as well, in imposing Min Aristotle is producing the first linear, hence 
relevant, logic in this subject's long history. 
The consistent-premisses condition is also consequential. It expressly provides 
for an implication relation (syllogistic implication, as we might say) which fails 
the condition ex falso quodlibet, according to which everything is deducible from 
an inconsistent set of sentences. Aristotle constrains syllogisms in such a way that 
nothing syllogistically follows from an inconsistency. In so doing Aristotle provides 
that the logic of syllogisms is the first paraconsistent logic. 
The requirement that syllogisms be constructed solely of propositions also bears 
thinking about, quite apart from the audacity of the claim that anything stateable 
is stateable without relevant loss in the language of propositions. Recall that a 
proposition in Aristotle's sense is a statement in which one thing is said of one 
thing. With the exception of negation, they are also statements free of connectives. 
Syllogisms are sequences of propositions. Each line of a syllogism is occupied by 
one and only one proposition. Were it otherwise, were it the case that a line was 

66 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
occupied by more than one proposition, then it would be a line in which more than 
one thing is said of more than one thing. To see how the propositional constraint 
works as a construction rule for syllogisms, it is essential that we see syllogisms as 
sequences in which at each line one thing (only) is said of one thing (only). This 
being so, syllogisms cannot have multiple conclusions. It might here be noted that 
any logic in which dilution fails and in which the standard operational rules are 
upheld (e.g., the introduction rules) is an intuitionistic logic. To generate from 
such conditions a classical logic, multiple conclusions must be admitted. 49 Thus 
the first logic was at least in the spirit of an intuitionistic logic. 
The theory of syllogisms was the first linear (hence relevant and nonmonotonic), 
paraconsistent and intuitionistic-like logic ever known. Syllogisms are classically 
valid arguments constrained in ways that make them very different from the clas- 
sical validities that they would be if left unconstrained. There are worlds of dif- 
ference between consequence relations that do (and do not) permit closure under 
the proper subset relation on premiss sets, that do (and do not) permit multiple 
conclusions. The very fact that Aristotle did not labour to bring forth a theory of 
unadorned validity indicates that, while essential to his purposes, validity deliv- 
ers none of the special goods for which these truly encumbering constraints were 
needed. As we have seen, corresponding to any syllogism is its conditional state- 
ment, and corresponding to it is a rule of inference (so-called). Aristotle wanted a 
logic whose rules of inference--or at least the syllogistic rules--were not given the 
free flight of classical rules. 
Why did Aristotle think it so important to constrain his rules? The answer 
appears to be that he wanted the rules of his logic of syllogisms to be usable 
in systematic accounts of real-life argument and thinking. Left without all this 
baggage, the validity rules regulate a content-free notion of consequence, which is 
defined simply for sequences of linguistic, truth-valuable entities, and whose pri- 
mary function is truth preservation. But no rules that deliver on these objectives 
and none other are at all realistic as rules of real-life thinking and debate. It is 
one thing to say that inconsistent statements imply any statement; it is another 
thing entirely to say that when real-life reasoners are faced (in real time) with an 
inconsistency in their belief sets or commitment sets they do (or should) accept 
or commit to every statement whatever. Similarly, it is one thing to say that any 
truth preserving argument remains truth-preserving under arbitrary supplemen- 
tation of premisses arbitrarily many times; but it is another thing altogether to 
say that when one has a truth-preserving argument at hand, it is always good 
argumentational strategy to make any supplementation of it that preserves truth. 
Such would be the course of risk aversion taken to ludicrous extremes. 
Aristotle is essaying a bold experiment. He is taking seriously the idea that 
usable real-life rules for the conduct of argument and thinking can be got from 
context-free truth conditions on a purely propositional relation, provided the right 
constraints are imposed. In their unconstrained form, whether one proposition 
logically implies another tells us virtually nothing about whether it would be ap- 
49[Shoesmith and Smiley, 1978, p. 4] 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
67 
propriate, helpful, realistic or possible to conform one's argumentative or cognitive 
strategies to that bare fact of logical consequence. Aristotle's gamble is that facts 
about logical consequence do give the requisite guidance for argument and reason- 
ing when constrained in the right ways. 
Aristotle's example serves to remind us that the kind of logic a logician thinks 
up is, unless he is simply being playful, more or less directly the product of what 
the logic is wanted for. In a celebrated quip, W.V. Quine proposed that logic 
is an ancient discipline, and that since 1879 it has been a great one. The year 
1879 marks a momentous event in the history of logic: the publication of Frege's 
Begriffsschrifft. 
It takes no disparagement of Frege's great accomplishment to 
make the point that Quine has judged Aristotle and Frege on the wrong basis. 
Frege needed a streamlined second-order predicate logic, coupled with something 
resembling set theory, as the analytical home for arithmetic. Frege was a logicist. 
He thought that it was possible to prove that the truths of arithmetic were analytic. 
This he sought to do by finding an analytic discipline to which the truths of 
arithmetic could be reduced without relevant loss. This host theory for arithmetic 
was second-order logic plus set theory (nearly enough), to which Frege himself 
made utterly seminal contributions. But it is absurd to abjure Aristotle's logic 
for failing Frege's objectives. 
Given Frege's purposes there was nothing to be 
said for making the consequence relation linear, nonmonotonic, paraconsistent and 
intuitionisitic-like. Doing so would not have advanced Frege's logicist ambitions 
one jot and would, in fact, have impeded their realization in various ways. In 
contrast, Aristotle had very different objectives, none of them bearing on the 
epistemology of arithmetic. 
Given the objectives that he had, the constraints 
imposed by Aristotle on the consequence relation were very much in the right 
direction. 
Aristotle's project, then, was to "inferentialize" truth conditions on 
a consequence relation purpose built for service in a realistic account of human 
cognitive and argumentative practice. Much of the so-called nonstandard logic of 
the present day is in various ways a continuation of this project to inferentialize the 
consequence relation, to retrofit it for work that is psychologically real or some 
approximation thereto. 
Opinion is divided as to whether the desired goods in 
theories of cognition and argument can in fact be delivered by inferentializing the 
consequence relation (see e.g., [Woods, 1994] and [Woods, 2003]). It is a question 
for those nonstandard logics, no less than for Aristotle's original logic. 
8 
ARISTOTLE'S VALIDITY 
We have proposed that Aristotle holds what modern logicians call a classical con- 
ception of validity and, correspondingly, a classical conception of logical implica- 
tion or entailment. We make this proposal in the face of the fact that Aristotle 
gives no account of these things anywhere in his writings. We have grounded our 
proposal on two basic facts. One is that Aristotle's logic does not require that 
validity be non-classical and is in no discernible way improved by assuming so. 
The other is that, if we assume that the syllogisity conditions are non-redundant, 

68 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
then Aristotle's validity must fail to be everything that syllogisity is required to be, 
validity itself excepted. So there is good reason to believe that Aristotle's validity 
is not nonmonotonic, not relevant, not paraconsistent and not intuitionistic. Of 
course, it does not strictly follow from these facts that validity is not non-classical; 
but it does make the nonclassicality assumption highly implausible. 
Against this is Aristotle's Thesis, so-called by Storrs McCall. Aristotle advances 
this thesis at Prior Analytics B4 57 b, 4-7; so strictly speaking it does not fall within 
the ambit of Aristotle's earlier logic. Even so, Aristotle's Thesis matters for certain 
things we wish to say about this logic. In particular, it matters for the claim that 
in his early writings Aristotle's concept of validity is classical. Whether it is or 
not is complicated by the fact that different scholars read the thesis in different 
ways. A further complication is the uncertainty that attends the question as to 
what Aristotle's Thesis is a thesis about. Aristotle writes, 
But it is impossible that the same thing should be necessitated by the 
being and by the not-being of the same thing. I mean, for example, 
that it is impossible that B should necessarily be great if A is white 
and that B should necessarily be great if A is not white. 
McCall takes this passage to assert that 
i.e., that no proposition entails its own negation (see [McCall, 1996]). This is also 
the interpretation of [Routley et al., 1982, pp. 132, 343]. McCall also interprets 
the passage as denying the validity of each of the arguments (I) Ik r_,(~ and 
r_,~7 Ik ~. Woods, on the other hand, reads the passage as asserting that of the 
pair of arguments 
Therefore, 9 
Therefore, 
at most one can be valid [Woods, 2001, pp. 55 ff]. Despite their important dif- 
ferences, these conflicting interpretations have common features of consequence 
for our claim that Aristotle's validity is classical. On the McCall-Routley inter- 
pretation it cannot be true either that a necessary truth is entailed by any set of 
premisses or that an inconsistency entails any consequent whatever. On the Woods 
interpretation, the same is true. Necessary propositions are not consequences of 
arbitrary premisses; and if transposition holds true, neither is it the case that 
inconsistencies entail any consequent whatever. Note, however, that these conse- 
quences follow only if Aristotle's Thesis is a thesis about validity. Also required 
is a strong interpretation of invalidity, which we shall call counter-validity. An 
argument form is counter-valid when all its instantiations are invalid. 
We will not here attempt to settle the question of how best to interpret Aris- 
totle's words. It suffices for our purposes that if the thesis is understood to be 
attributing counter-validity, then on either interpretation, whether that of McCall 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
69 
and Routley or of Woods, there will arise difficulties for the claim that Aristo- 
tle has a classical conception of validity. In what remains of this section we will 
thus concentrate on showing that if Aristotle's validity accepts just three classical 
principles, viz., A-elimination, V-introduction and transitivity, it is easily shown 
that Aristotle's Thesis is false or, if true, that at least it cannot be a theory 
about validity. Bearing in mind (we say) that the thesis is for no 9 and 9 is 
it the case that both 9 Ik ~ and r_,O Ik ~n are valid, it suffices to instantiate 
and 9 to opposite effect. Let ro = CV~C n and r~ = CV-~CVD n, for 
arbitrary C and D. Then 9 Ik ~, by V-introduction. Since r-~(I)n is -~C A C, 
then r_~o Ik C n, by A-elimination. But C Ik C V ~C V D, by V-introduction. 
Hence r_~ Ik C V -~C V D n (i.e., ~), by transitivity. So 9 Ik ~ and r~o Ik ~7: 
for some 9 and ~, both 9 Ik ~ and r_~O Ik ~n are valid arguments. (A similarly 
strong argument can be given in the case of the McCall/Routley interptation.) 
Thus Aristotle's Thesis is false if these three principles hold for validity. If 
Aristotle's Thesis is indeed incompatible with ez falso, the incompatibility is now 
a technicality. No claim is over turned by false propositions incompatible with it. 
Perhaps we should try to imagine whether Aristotle would himself have acquiesced 
to our three rules. We think it exceedingly likely that he would have. But right or 
wrong, it can also be shown that ez falso is true using only the following principles: 
reflexivity, monotonicity, transitivity, "conversion," and modus ponens. We do so 
as follows: for all ~, ~, and X, 
(1) (I)Ik ~ is valid 
(2) ~,~lk~isvalid 
(3) -~q), 9 Ik -~ is valid 
(4) If (I)Ik ~ is valid, so is -~(I), (I)Ik -~ 
(5) ~(I), ~ Ik-~ is valid 
Reflexivity 
Monotonicity, 1 
Conversion, 2 
Transivitity, 1, 2, 3 
Modus ponens, 1, 4. 
Since 9 is arbitrary, it covers all negations r-~xT. Hence all X; are validly 
deducible from any { r ~-1 (I) }. 
If the proof is good, it suffices to topple Aristotle's Thesis if it is indeed incom- 
patible with ez Salso (or more directly, with its dual, which sanctions the derivation 
of logical truths from arbitrary premiss-sets, including the null set). 5~ 
Aristotle himself endorses modus ponens and conversion, and he allows tran- 
sitivity for hypothetical reasoning and, apparently, for chains of syllogisms. 51 It 
remains to wonder what he may have thought about reflexivity and monotonicity 
considered not as conditions on syllogisity (in which case they both fail), but as 
conditions on validity. It is well to note in passing our all but complete surrender 
to Meth: given that the syllogisity conditions are independent of the validity con- 
dition, make it your point of departure concerning any property not a property 
5~ 
toppled is McCall's Aristotle's Thesis, as witness the validity of r_,(q) V -~) Ik q) V -~(I) 7. 
The importance of this turns on whether we have independent reason to attribute to Aristotle 
the derivation principles which sanction such arguments. 
51 There is a problem with chains. Although championed in the Scholastic tradition and beyond, 
it is hard to find passages in which chains of syllogisms are given syllogistic recognition in the 
Prior Analytics. However, Topics 100 a, 27 offers some encouragement. 

70 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
of syllogisms but which could be a property of valid arguments to ascribe to it 
validity until you have found good reason not to. 
What, then, about reflexivity? If reflexivity holds in Or, we must say that 
every statement necessitates itself. On one interpretation this is nonsense. It is 
nonsense if self-necessitation is so understood that every statement makes itself 
true. We take it without further ado that there is nothing to be said for the view 
in which every statement is its own verification. What makes the self-necessitation 
claim sound wrong is a misinterpretation of "necessitation." Aristotle means by 
r'I' necessitates ~7 that it is guaranteed that 9 is the case if 9 is. Reflexivity 
or self-necessitation is just a special case of this: 9 is the case if 9 is the case. 
That this is so is encouraged by remarks at Posterior Analytics 73 ~, 4-6, where 
Aristotle derides an imaginary opponent for complaining that all demonstrations 
are circular. Aristotle claims that the complainant is saying "nothing but that 
if A is the case A is the case," and he adds not that this is untrue but, rather, 
that "it is easy to prove everything in this way." For our present purposes it is 
enough that Aristotle does not here disallow reflexivity, but it is interesting to 
note that his objection against the complainant is that the purported proof that 
demonstrations are circular is an argument grossly in the form 
(1) 
(2) 
Demonstrations are circular 
Therefore, demonstrations are circular. 
He adds, ironically, that of course it is easy to prove everything in this way. This 
is irony twice over. Aristotle means that whereas (1) I~ (2) is a valid argument, the 
last thing it is, is a proof (for if it were, everything could be proved). Aristotle is 
also lampooning his critic by so representing the critic's own argument as to make 
it a case of the thing he is objecting to. So we conclude that we lack sufficient 
cause to make Aristotle's validity irreflexive. 
What of monotonicity? It is helpful to bear in mind the sort of thing that 
condition Min is supposed to provide. In syllogisms, conclusions follow not only 
from their premisses but also because of them. In introducing Min, Aristotle takes 
pains to mark a contrast. It is a contrast between necessitation from and neces- 
sitation because of. It is important that Aristotle does not say that there are no 
necessitations-from. In fact, every syllogism is a necessitation-from. A syllogism is 
also something more; it is a necessitation-because-of. If the distinction is to have 
a point, there must be properties of necessitations-because-of that necessitations- 
from do not have. 
One such is the property of being causative of conclusions 
of syllogisms. In mere necessitations-from there will be premisses that are not 
causative of conclusions. These fairly enough can be said to be irrelevant to those 
conclusions. But if necessitations-because-of banish irrelevant premisses, it can 
only be expected that, in contrast, necessitations-from allow them. That is what 
monotonicity allows, too. Let ~1,..., (I)~ I~ ~ be any valid argument with relevant 
premisses. Let X be any statement irrelevant to ~ (and to all the O i, for that 
matter). Monotonicity nevertheless sanctions the validity of X, ~1,..., On IF- ~. It 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
71 
sanctions what Aristotle himself appears also to sanction. So we conclude that 
Aristotle would have no occasion to refuse the monotonicity principle for validity. 
Against this it might be argued that monotonicity goes further than anything 
portended by Aristotle's distinction between necessitation-from and necessitation- 
because-of, and that it is this additional feature that Aristotle might well have been 
minded not to accept. Monotonicity expressly allows what the contrast between 
"from" and "because of" certainly does not expressly allow, viz., that it is always 
all right to supplement the premisses of a valid argument in such a way that 
the resulting argument is valid and inconsistently prernissed. 52 So let us turn to 
inconsistency. Inconsistency is not much discussed by Aristotle. It is difficult to see 
a stable policy on inconsistency and difficult therefore to see why the present point 
should persuade us to make Aristotle's validity nonmonotonic. We have already 
argued that Aristotle's validity is captured by the core Gentzen conditions, one of 
which is monotonicity. It will take the heft of substantial evidence to shift us from 
this view. 
9 
NECESSITIES 
The theorems of the earlier logic and of the Prior Analytics register essential truths 
about direct syllogisms. These are Aristotle's "truths of logic." Either these truths 
of logic are themselves logical truths or they are not. If they are, the reasoning 
which underwrites them cannot be the reasoning which they themselves describe. 
If they are not, then presumably they are nonlogical necessary truths, and the same 
conclusion follows. No truth about direct syllogisms is the conclusion of a direct 
syllogism. As we saw earlier, this comes as no shock to Aristotle. Hypothetical 
syllogisms, such as reductio per impossibile arguments and ecthetic proofs, are not 
direct, and yet they are indispensable to the story that Aristotle wishes to tell 
about those that are direct. 
Even so, it is somewhat unsettling that in direct 
syllogisms no logical or necessary truths may appear as conclusions. This excludes 
too many cases that would appear to be paradigms of perfect syllogisms, as witness 
All squares are rectangles 
All rectangles are four-sided 
Therefore, all squares are four-sided. 
The exclusion of syllogisms such as these is so implausible that, Meth aside, we 
might consider rethinking our decision to attribute to Aristotle a classical notion 
of validity. 
52Let it be noted that monotonicity does not give ex falso. It provides only that whenever 
there is a valid argument there is a valid superargument of it with inconsistent premisses, and 
whose conclusion is the conclusion of the original. Ex falso is stronger. It provides that an 
inconsistent set of premisses endorses everything as conclusion. An equivalent difference is this. 
Let 9 be valid from inconsistent premisses by monotonicity alone; then it follows that qJ is valid 
from a proper subset of those premisses. On the other hand if, by ex falso alone, qJ is valid from 
inconsistent premisses it does not follow that 9 is valid from a proper subset of them. 

72 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Necessary truths are a disaster for syllogisms. They are a disaster, that is, if 
counter-ex/also is true. We have said why counter- ex /also appears to be true 
and we have said why it is likely that Aristotle himself would have acknowledged 
its truth. If this is right, then the disaster that necessary truths produce is that, 
for reasons that Aristotle would not dispute, they wreck the project of laying a 
deductive substructure for the sciences. It is true that purely formal necessities 
such as "All A are A" are spared the embarrassment of failing the Min condition 
on syllogisms, but they are spared only by being victimized by a different em- 
barrassment; for they cannot even be expressed, never mind proved, in Aristotle's 
theory of syllogisms. 
It might be said that no logical theory has ever had success in dealing with 
nonlogical semantic necessities such as "All red things are coloured." So why should 
we impose on Aristotle's theory an expectation that no one else has met? There is 
little to recommend this leniency. It overlooks semantic necessities of precisely the 
sort that an Aristotelian apparatus is designed to capture, namely, statements such 
as "All bachelors are unmarried" and "All squares are rectangles" that are true 
by definition. What makes "All red things are coloured" a problem for logicians is 
that "red" appears not to have a definition. Its problem, at least in part, is that 
"All red things are coloured" is necessarily true, but not a truth of logic and not 
a definitional truth. 53 
A related difficulty attaches to semantically valid but formally invalid arguments 
such as 
All Granny Smiths are apples 
All apples are red 
Therefore, all Granny Smiths are coloured. 
Formally invalid, this argument commits the fallacy of four terms. Yet it is also 
true that given the meanings of "red" and "coloured," the argument cannot have 
a false conclusion if its premisses are true. Perhaps we could remedy the situation 
by relaxing the prohibition on extra terms. We might say that an argument 
Q (A, B) 
Q (B, C) 
Therefore, Q (A, D) 
commits the fallacy of four terms except where the Qs are, in this order: 
All-All-All, or Some-All-Some, or All-All-Some and C semantically entails D; or 
All-No-No, or No-All-No, or Some-No-Some ... not, and C is semantically entailed 
by D. 
But even if this is a complete rule, covering all the right cases, it still leaves 
the fact that there is no rule that tells us how to determine in the general case 
whether 7r semantically entails 7r' or is semantically entailed by it. 
Whatever we decide to say about semantic necessities, the necessary truths of 
mathematics cry out for rescue. In such an extremity it is permissible to clutch 
53See [Searle, 1959]; cf. [Woods, 1967] and [Woods, 1974]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
73 
at straws. Aristotle recognizes different grades of necessity. Corcoran says that in 
Aristotle's modal logic there are up to five different and apparently incompatible 
systems competing for theoretical disclosure. 54 A straw presents itself: suppose 
that we granted to mathematical truths an attenuated necessity, a necessity of 
lesser grade than such full-blown semantic truths as "All bachelors are unmar- 
ried" and "Everything red is coloured." To this end, we could appropriate the 
expression "mathematically necessary" and contrast it with semantic necessity by 
stipulating that it is a grade (perhaps the strongest grade) of non-formal necessity 
for which counter-ex falso fails. In saying so, we would be adopting for the truths 
of mathematics a kind of nomological necessity that lacks full generality. Scientific 
laws are sometimes held to be nomologically necessary. By this is meant that they 
are unfalsifiable in their own domains, i.e., their necessity is discipline specific; but 
they fail, perhaps vacuously, in other domains. This suggests that mathematical 
necessities might be reconciled to this conception. It cannot be said that their not 
being true is in no sense possible, but rather that their falsehood is in no sense 
possible within the domain of plane figures, or natural numbers, or topological 
spaces, or whatever else. In contrast, we might expect to find full-blown semantic 
necessities to be true in all domains. Unlike "Every triangle has the 2R property," 
whose failure is not possible in plane geometry, we would have "Every bachelor is 
unmarried" whose failure is not possible in any domain. 
Yet this will still not work. If "Every triangle has the 2R property" fails out- 
side of geometry, say in metallurgy, it does so vacuously. It is not a statement 
formulable in metallurgy, so its negation also fails. Another way of saying this is 
that the terms "triangle" and "has the 2R property" carry no metallurgical refer- 
ence; they are empty terms in metallurgy. It is the same way with necessities of 
full-blown purport. "Every bachelor is unmarried" also fails in metallurgy, since 
"bachelor" and "unmarried" are empty terms there. Aristotle requires terms to be 
non-empty--and this is the source of his infamous doctrine of existential import. 
There is little doubt that Aristotle would welcome the suggestion that mathemat- 
ical necessities fail in domains in which their embedded terms are empty. Admit- 
tedly, saying so leaves open the problem of how the quantitative sciences are to 
be understood; but Aristotle has this problem anyway. It instantiates the gen- 
eral prohibition of statements from one discipline serving as premisses in another 
discipline. So the present suggestion does not create a new problem for Aristo- 
tle; it simply exemplifies a problem that was already there. So, for good or ill, 
Aristotle would welcome the suggestion that "Every triangle has the 2R property" 
fails in metallurgy; but he would not welcome, nor should he, the suggestion that 
full-blown necessities fare any differently. 
It seems best to give up the notion of full-blown semantic necessities; that is, 
nonformal truths of a grade of necessity strong enough to satisfy counter-ez falso. 
On this suggestion, we evade the problematic provisions of counter-ex falso by 
pleading that there is no grade of necessity attaching to nonformal truths suffi- 
54See again [Corcoran, 1974c, p. 202]. This is also McCall's view. See [McCall, 1963] and 
[Patterson, 1995]. 

74 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
ciently strong to trigger the metatheorem. For let 9 be any nonformal necessity. 
Then its failure is guaranteed in all alien domains. Thus there will be some state- 
ments ~1, ..., ~n from which 9 does not follow. These will be statements true or 
false in any domain in which 9 fails on account of alienation, and these will be 
precisely the domains in which the necessity of 9 fails to satisfy counter-ex ]also. 
Still, this is too much to hope for. In the shady glades of watered-down ne- 
cessity, one hand washes the other. Our current speculation provides that if 
is a nonformal necessary truth, there will be a domain in which its negation is 
impossible and which, in alien domains, it is neither possible nor impossible. (In 
fact, it turns out not to be a proposition there.) Correspondingly, r~7 
will have 
a necessary negation in the home discipline and in all others it will be neither 
possible nor impossible. Consider, then, the argument 
~2 
Therefore, 
in which, for some discipline D, 9 is a necessary truth. Then r~l A q~2 A ~7 
will 
be impossible in D. Beyond D, the argument vanishes, owing to what might now 
be called reference failure. So we will say that our argument is D-valid; and if it 
meets the other conditions on syllogisity, it is a D-syllogism. Let us suppose that 
it does meet these conditions. Let OD be the empty set of premisses from D. Then 
OD 
Therefore, 
is a D-valid argument since r_~7 is impossible in D and r~7 
is already conjoined 
with the putative membership of OD. But OD I~" iX/ is a D-valid sub-argument of 
~1, ~2 I~- ~, which is itself D-valid. Hence ~1, (~2 IF 9 is not a syllogism, contrary 
to our hypothesis. 
We have not found a way of attenuating mathematical and other nonformal 
necessities in ways that avert the problem they pose for syllogisms. The disas- 
ter they occasion recurs. Aristotle thinks that every science is (or contains) the 
demonstrative closure of first principles, that first principles are necessary, and 
that their necessity is preserved in their closures. 55 Either those necessities are 
full-blown, i.e., they hold in every domain including the null domain, or they are 
domain- or discipline-relative. That is, they hold in their own domains but fail for 
want of reference in every other, including the null domain. If the first possibility 
holds, there will be no sciences since there will be no demonstrative syllogisms. 
In every putative science for which there are full-blown necessary truths, they will 
follow from the null set of premisses. If the second possibility holds, the same 
unwelcome result awaits: once again there will be no sciences since there will be 
no scientific syllogisms. For, again, let 9 be a proposition necessary in D and 
only in D. Then 9 follows from OD the empty set of premisses in D. ~0 I~ ~ is a 
55Thus to have scientific knowledge of something is to know the cause or reason why it must 
be as it is and why it cannot be otherwise (Posterior Analytics 715, 17-33). 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
75 
valid proper sub-argument of any D-valid premissed argument for 9. Yet no such 
argument is a syllogism. It follows that there are no demonstrations in D. So D is 
not a science. 
We have been taking Min to preclude syllogisms with valid sub-arguments. As 
things have developed, Min and counter-ex falso collide with one another mo- 
mentously. For together they make science impossible. This is a consequence 
sufficiently disagreeable to call Non-Circ and counter-ex ]also both into question. 
There are plenty of logicians, e.g., those of the Anderson-Belnap persuasion, who 
would think that counter-ex falso is the obvious choice for rejection. Counting for 
this, in an indirect sort of way, is that there is something that obviously counts 
against the rejection of Min. What counts against rejecting it is that Aristotle 
seems expressly to proclaim it. His commitment, if such exists at all, to counter- 
ex/also is nothing that Aristotle ever expressed; and given the seriousness of its 
conflict with a principle Aristotle does express, there appears to be nothing to be 
said for its retention. 
We lack the space here to reflect further on how best to adjudicate the tension 
between Min and counter-ex falso, since doing so is highly conjuctural. However, 
interested readers may consult [Woods, 2001, ch. 7]. 
10 
REFUTATIONS 
An important precursor of the Aristotelian refutation argument is the eristic ar- 
gument, prominently on display in Plato's Euthydemus. Eristic argument, in turn, 
is a refinement of the Socratic elenchus, found in such dialogues as the Euthyphro, 
Laches, Charmides and Lysis. Bonitz identifies twenty-one different eristic argu- 
ments in the Euthydemus. 56 Each begins with the assertion of a thesis. A second 
party (either Euthydemus or Dionysodorus, depending upon the particular case) 
presses the first with questions. Most of these are Yes-No questions, to which 
the expected answer is nearly always in the affirmative. In some cases, the ques- 
tions have an Either-Or structure, and the answerer responds by picking one of 
the disjuncts. 57 The questioner attempts to draw conclusions from the answerer's 
responses. Usually this is done deductively. "The refutation is successful when the 
questioner is able to draw from his interlocutor's admissions either some conclu- 
sion incompatible with the original thesis (not necessarily its direct contractory) 
or some absurdity whose derivation used the thesis as a premiss. ''ss 
The 
form 
of 
the 
interplay 
between 
Euthydemus and 
his 
brother 
Dionysodorus is very similar to that of the Socratic elenchus, except that tougher 
constraints are imposed on what the answerer is permitted to say. Thus an eristic 
argument is an elenchus with stiffer rules. 
5SSee [Bonitz, 1968] 
57In argument 19 there are three examples of information-solicitation questions, e.g., "Can you 
name three types of craftsmen by the work that they do?" Again, see [Bonitz, 1968]. 
5S[Hitchcock, 2000b, p. 60]. 

76 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Eristic arguments are not problem free, something that Aristotle would attend 
to in his On Sophistical Refutations. As Hitchcock says, 
The most probable origin of professional eristic ... is Socrates himself. 
This is not to say that the brothers got their repertoire of fallacious 
tricks from Socrates, but that they practised the type of refutation in 
which Socrates engaged, and inserted into it the trickery which subse- 
quently earned the name 'sophistry' [Hitchcock, 2000b, p. 63]. 
The distinction between syllogisms-as-such and syllogisms-in-use affects Aris- 
totle's conception of refutation in an interesting way. The distinction is exem- 
plified by those arguments (syllogisms-as-such) that are the core of refutations 
(syllogisms-in-use). How, then, do refutations work? As with eristic arguments, 
Aristotle provides that there are two participants, Q, a questioner, and A, an an- 
swerer. A proposes a thesis T. 59 Q's role is to question (erotan) A, putting ques- 
tions to him, answers to which are formatted as simple (non-compound) declarative 
sentences, or propositions (protaseis) in Aristotle's technical sense of the term. A's 
answers are thus available to Q as premisses of a syllogism, (let's call it Re]), which 
it is Q's role to construct. If Ref is constructed and if its conclusion is the con- 
tradictory, -~T, of A's original thesis, then Q's argument is a refutation of T. In 
this we see the pure form of Locke's ad horninem, for Refs premisses are A's own 
principles and concessions (and nothing else); and Refs conclusion, the contradic- 
tory of A's thesis, is got by pressing those concessions with their consequences. 
For concreteness, we now imagine a simple case of refutation. A's thesis is T. Q's 
refutation is 
C 
B 
Therefore, ~T 
in which C and B are A's concessions and -7 Tis syllogistically derived from these. It 
is a noteworthy feature of our case--a feature which generalizes to all refutations-- 
that A's thesis T cannot be a premiss of Ref. Here is why. Suppose that 
T 
A 
-~T 
were a valid argument. As it stands, it has the appearance of a reductio, provided 
that we understand T as a hypothesis rather than as a premiss. But reductios are 
not refutations. If our present argument is to make the grade as a refutation, it 
must be a syllogism. Since it is a valid argument, the set of its premisses, together 
with the negation of its conclusion, is inconsistent. This is the set {T, A, T}, which 
is the same set as the set of the argument's premisses alone. But syllogisms cannot 
59A word of caution: in Aristotle's usage a thesis is a paradoxical claim. This is not here its 
intended sense. Aristotle's word is problema. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
77 
have inconsistent premiss sets. Hence our argument is not a syllogism, and not a 
refutation. 
Since Ref is a syllogism, { C, B, T} is an inconsistent set. Hence at least one 
sentence of the three is false. Because Ref is a refutation of T, it is attractive to 
suppose that Ref establishes that it is T that is false (for what else would Refs 
refutation of T consist in but showing that T is false?) Yet this will not do. Saying 
so is fallacious. It is the fallacy of distributing negation through conjunction, said 
by some to be Aristotle's fallacy of Noncause as Cause. (It is not, but let that 
pass; see [Woods and Hansen, 2003].) What we require is some principled reason 
to pick out T, rather than C or B, as the unique proposition refuted by Ref. How 
are we to do this? 6~ There are two possible answers to consider. The first will 
prove attractive to people who favour a broadly dialectical conception of fallacies. 
The second will commend itself to those who think of fallacies as having a rather 
more logical character. We examine these two possibilities in turn. 
First Answer (Dialectical): The first answer proposes that question-and-answer 
games of the sort played by Q and A are subject to the following pair of linked 
dialectical rules: 
Premiss-Selection Rule: In any dispute between Q and A in which 
Q constructs a refutation of A's thesis T, Q may use as a premiss of 
his refutation any affirmation of A provided that it is subject to the 
no-retraction rule. 
No-Retraction Rule: In any such dispute as above, no answer given by 
A to a question of Q may be given up by A. 
It is entirely straightforward that among A's affirmations, germane to his de- 
fence of T, T itself is uniquely placed in not being subject to the No-Retraction 
rule. If it were, then once affirmed it could not be retracted. But if it couldn't 
be retracted, it couldn't be refuted (or, more carefully, couldn't be given up for 
having been refuted). This would leave refutations oddly positioned. The rules 
of the game being what they are, a refuted proposition would be precisely what 
the refutation could not make (or allow) A to abandon. Thus it may be said that, 
according to our first answer, if our refutation game is a procedurally coherent 
enterprize, then, of all of A's relevant affirmations, T alone stands out. It is the 
only affirmation that A can retract and it thus qualifies for the proposition which 
Q's refutation, Ref, refutes. 
It may be thought, even so, that it is unrealistically harsh to hold all of A's 
other affirmations to the satisfaction of the No-Retraction rule. A little reflection 
will discourage the complaint. In the give-and-take of real life argument some 
latitude is given to A. He is allowed to retract some affirmations some of the time. 
There are limits to such sufferance. If there were not, then any thesis would be 
made immune to any refutation of it. If A always had the option of cancelling one 
6~ 
same problem visits the idea of counterevidence to a scientific theory construed holisti- 
cally. 

78 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
of Q's premisses, rather than giving up his own T, then T would be made strictly 
irrefutable by any Q whose opponent were prepared to exercise the option. Thus 
the No-Retraction rule can be considered an idealization of this limit. 
Second Answer (Logical): According to our second answer, that Tis the uniquely 
positioned proposition that Q's Refrefutes can be explained with greater economy 
as follows. Looking again at Re f, 
C 
B 
Therefore, ~ T 
we see that T is distinguished as the proposition refuted by Ref precisely because 
it satisfies a certain condition. Before stating the condition, it is necessary to 
introduce a further fact about syllogisms. Aristotle requires that syllogisms always 
have consistent premiss sets. For suppose that they did not, and let 
A 
-~A 
Therefore, B 
be a syllogism. Then since syllogisms obey the argument-conversion operation, 
and since conversion preserves syllogisity, our imaginary syllogism converts to 
A 
-,B 
Therefore, A 
in which the conclusion repeats a premiss. This is explicitly forbidden by Aristo- 
tle's definition: 
A syllogismos rests on certain statements such that they involve neces- 
sarily the assertion of something other than what has been stated (On 
Sophistical Refutations, 1,165a,1-3). 
Whereupon, since the second argument is not a syllogism and yet is an argument 
converse of the first, neither is the first a syllogism. (This ends our current aside.) 
The condition proposed by the second answer to our question is now given as 
follows: 
C1: Since Ref is a syllogism, its premiss set is consistent. 
Let Aft 
be the set of A's affirmations with respect to Ref. Thus Aft is the 
set { T, C, B}. Since Re] is valid Aft is inconsistent. 
It is easy to 
see that Aft possesses exactly three maximal consistent subsets: {C, 
B}, {C, T}, {B, T}. We will say that a maximal consistent subset of 
Aft is excluded by Ref if and only if it does not syllogistically imply 
Refs conclusion,-~T. Thus { C, T} and {B, T} are excluded by Ref, 
and { T} is their intersection. Thus T is the proposition refuted by 
Ref precisely because it is the sole member of the intersection of all 
maximal consistent subsets of Aft excluded by Ref. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
79 
It is worth noting that the requirement that syllogisms be consistently premissed 
bears directly on our present question9 T is dignified as the proposition which Ref 
refutes by virtue also of the requirement that Refhave consistent premisses. Since 
Ref is a syllogism then { 6', B, T} is inconsistent and { 6', B} is consistent. So, 
too, are { C, T} and {B, T}, since if they were not, C would entail ~ T and B 
would entail -7 T, a happenstance precluded, each time, by ReJ's syllogisity. Thus 
three ideas cohere: (1) the idea that T is unique in Aft precisely because it is T 
that cannot be a premiss of Ref;, (2) the idea that syllogisms must be consistently- 
premissed; and (3) the idea that { T} is the intersection of all maximal consistent 
subsets of Aft excluded by Ref. 
Just how narrowly "logical" is this characterization? Or, more carefully, how 
non-dialectical is it? Suppose that we said that the idea of the proposition that a 
refutation refutes could be analyzed without any reference to dialectical procedure. 
Then any syllogism whatever would count as the refutation of the contradictory 
of its own conclusion. Every syllogism would be a refutation, and a great many 
refutations would be refutations of propositions no one has ever proposed or will. 
There is no great harm (in fact, there is considerable economy) in speaking this 
way. But it is not Aristotle's way. Taken his way, refutations can arise only in 
question-and-answer games of the sort that we have been considering. We may 
say, then, that refutations have a dialectically minimal characterization. That is, 
(a) their premisses must be answers given by A to Q, and (b) what they refute 
must be theses advanced by A. Nothing further is needed beyond this dialectical 
minimum. In particular, there is no need to invoke the dialectical rules, Premiss- 
Selection and No-Retraction. Premiss-Selection is unneeded in as much as there 
is an entirely non-dialectical reason for excluding T as a premiss of any refutation 
of T. As we have seen, no argument of the form 
Ai 
Ai 
An 
Therefore, ~Ai 
is a syllogism9 
Nor, as we have also seen, is the No-Retraction Rule needed to enable the 
specification of T as the unique proposition refuted by a refutation. Thus the idea 
of refutations as refutations of some unique T can be specified without exceeding 
what we have been calling the dialectical minimum. It is in precisely this sense 
that our target notion is a "broadly logical" matter. 
Whether we find ourselves drifting toward a dialectical explication of that which 
a refutation refutes or to a more narrowly syllogistic specification of it, it is fun- 
damentally important that on neither construal is a refutation of T definitively 
probative for T. Refutations do not in the general case falsify what they refute. In 

80 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
contrast to this, reductio ad impossible arguments are probative, but they are not 
refutations in the present sense. They lack the requisite forms. 61 It is not that 
refutations fail to falsify something. They always falsify the conjunction of the 
members of Aft. And it is not that refutations are indeterminate. They always 
refute some unique single proposition. What refutations do not manage to do in 
the general case is to bring what they falsify into alignment with what they refute. 
What they falsify and what they refute are different propositions. We have said 
that refutations do not falsify what they refute, in the general case. We must ask 
whether there might be exceptions to this. There are. Sometimes the premisses of 
a refutation, Ref t, are (known to be) true. If so, Re/t constitutes a proof of the 
falsity of T, when T is the proposition that Re/t refutes. Does it not follow from 
this that although refutations do not in general demonstrate the falsity of what 
they refute, sometimes they do? 
Suppose that Re/t is 
X 
Y 
Therefore, -~ T 
in which X and Y are (known to be) true. As before, {X, Y, T} is an inconsistent 
set, but there is a difference. Ref t falsifies T. This makes for a curious dialectical 
symmetry between A and Q. A's obligation to answer honestly is the obligation 
to offer to Q premisses which he (i.e., A) believes to be true. Thus for any rule- 
compliant answerer against whom there is a successful refutation, Re/t, given what 
A is required to believe, he must also believe that Re/t falsifies his own thesis T. 
Though this is what, in all consistency, A is required to believe, it does not follow 
that it is true, nor need A himself believe that its truth follows from what he is 
required to believe. 
Q, on the other hand, is differently positioned. Q has no role to play in the 
semantic characterization of A's answers, hence in judging the truth values of his 
(i.e., Q's) premisses. Of course, Q will often have his own opinions about the truth 
or falsity of A's replies, hence about the truth or falsity of his (Q's) own premisses. 
Whatever such opinions are, they have no role to play in the construction of Q's 
refutation. There is in this a strategic point. Since the success or failure of Q's 
refutation of A's thesis, T, is independent of the truth values of the refutation's 
premisses, it might be thought that the most appropriate stance for Q to take 
toward those premisses is the one that shows A to best advantage. In fact, there is 
no semantic stance which Q can take towards A's answers, because there is none 
which shows A to best advantage. 
61For one thing, reductio arguments allow for a special class of non-premisses as lines in the 
proof, i.e., assumptions. For another, the conclusion of a reductio is a pair {O,r_,O7}, which, 
though a contradiction, is not the contradictory of the proof's assumption. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
81 
11 
AD HOMINEM PROOF 
In several passages in On Sophistical Refutations, Aristotle seems to think that 
refutations are proofs, but in a looser sense of "proof' than reductio arguments. 62 
In other places, refutations appear to be proofs in no sense of the word. 63 For 
I mean, 'proving by way of refutation' to differ from 'proving' in that, in 
proving, one might seem to beg the question, but where someone else is 
responsible for this, there will be a refutation, not a proof (Metaphysics, 
1006 a, 15-18). 64 
Thus 
In such matters there is no proof simply, but against a particular per- 
son, there is (Metaphysics, K5, 1062 a, 2-3). 65 
This is Ross. In Barnes' version we have it that 
About such matters there is no proof in the full sense, though there is 
proof ad hominem. 66 
It is hardly imaginable that there should be any contention about the origins of 
the phrase "ad hominem" to characterize a particular class of arguments. We owe 
the concept not to Locke (as Locke himself expressly said), not to Galileo, not to 
Boethius, but to Aristotle himself. It is clear that Aristotle is of two minds about 
the ad horninem. He is tempted to think of ad hominem arguments both as proofs 
of no kind and as proofs of some kind. Aristotle expressly contrasts arguments 
"against the man" with arguments against the man's position, and the former are 
considered substandard in some way, as witness On Sophistical Refutations 20, 
1775, 31-34, and 22, 1785, 16-23. 
At times (see e.g., On Sophistical Refutations, 8, 170 a, 12-19), Aristotle tries 
to draw a distinction within the class of refutations between those that turn on 
ad hominem moves and those that do not. The former he condemns outright as 
sophistical refutations. 67 
620n Sophistical Refutations 167 b, 8-9 ft. Cf. Prior Analytics B27, 70 a, 6-7 and Rhetoric 
T13, 1414 a, 31-37. 
63See On Interpretation 11, 21 a, 5 ft. Cf. Metaphysics A5, 1015 b, 8, and Posterior Analytics 
A9, 76 a, 13-15. 
64This is the Ross translation [Ross, 1984]. [Barnes, 1984] has it this way: "Now negative 
demonstration I distinguish from demonstration proper, because in a demonstration one might 
be thought to be assuming what is at issue, but if another person is responsible for the assumption 
we shall have negative-proof, not demonstration." 
65Cf. Metaphysics K5, 1062 a, 30-31 and F4, 1006 a, 25-26. 
66Cf. On Sophistical Refutations, 170 a, 13, 17-18, 20; 177 b, 33-34; 178 b, 8-17; 183 a, 22, 24; 
and Topics, (I)11, 161 a, 21. 
67Cf. On Sophistical Refutations, 1, 164 a, 20ft. 

82 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
Thus we have two contrasts to keep track of, and whose confusion is ruinous 
for a correct understanding of Aristotle's position. There is the contrast, 6s first, 
between a proof "simply" and a refutation or argument ad hominem. In relation 
to this contrast, the following things can be said: first, ad hominem arguments are 
not sophistical or fallacious; and, second, ad hominem arguments are refutations, 
hence not proofs "simply." What is it to fail to be a proof simply? There are two 
possibilities, and Aristotle anticipates them both. One way of not being a proof 
simply is being what we have called a non-falsifying refutation. 
Non-falsifying 
refutations are in no sense proofs against the propositions they refute. Another 
way of not being a proof simply is being what we have called a falsifying refutation. 
Falsifying refutations are proofs in some sense, but they are not proofs in every 
sense. For example, they are not demonstrations in which there is a strict epistemic 
priority rating on the premisses of the refuting syllogism. 
That is the story of the first contrast. The second contrast is another matter. 
It is a contrast between ad hominems in two separate senses. In the first sense, 
an argument is ad hominem just in case it qualifies as a refutation. Arguments 
that are ad hominem in the second sense are defective would-be ad hominems in 
the first sense and, as such, reasonably can be regarded as fallacious. Aristotle 
does not list the ad hominem in his catalogue of thirteen fallacies, as set out 
in On Sophistical Refutations; at least he does not give any of the thirteen the 
name "ad hominem." Even so, the account that he does give, such as it is, leaves 
plenty of room to accommodate ad hominems in the second sense in the category 
of ignoratio elenchi. Also possible in principle is accommodation of ad hominem 
fallacies known to a much later tradition as "circumstantial," "abusive" and "tu 
quoque." 
This does not change the fact that, for Aristotle, the dominant notion of ad 
hominem argument is Lockean (if the anachornism may be forgiven). 
It is a 
concept of ad hominem that is nicely captured by the structure of refutation. With 
refutations as such there is no question of fallaciousness. The problem rather is 
how closely refutations resemble proofs. Aristotle has two answers: refutations 
resemble proofs not at all; and refutations resemble proofs loosely. As we see, 
this is a distinction nicely preserved by the distinction between non-falsifying and 
falsifying refutations. 
12 
SOPHISTICAL REFUTATIONS 
We have already made the point that there is nothing in On Sophistical Refutations 
that would qualify as a full and mature theory of any fallacy there discussed. We 
have conjectured that Aristotle's apparent theoretical indifference to the fallacies 
might be an adumbration of the perfectibility thesis of Prior A nalytics. For recall 
that if the perfectibility thesis is true, then syllogisms turn out to be effectively 
recognizable. 
If this is so, the distinction between genuine and only apparent 
6s Metaphysics K5. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
83 
syllogisms (i.e., fallacies) becomes wholly transparent, thus making it unnecessary 
to have accounts of the thirteen fallacies in which they are effectively recognizable. 
Even so, Aristotle does write at some length about the fallacies. He does so in 
the context of a particular kind of argument, of which refutations are a notable 
subcase. (We note in passing that fallacies are also discussed in the A nalytics and 
Rhetoric in the context of different kinds of arguments than those discussed in On 
Sophistical Refutations, viz., demonstrations and enthymemes, respectively.) In On 
Sophistical Refutations Aristotle gives fairly full accounts of sixty four 69 examples 
of sophistical refutations which are only apparently syllogisms. Of these, forty- 
nine have, by the lights of Prior A nalytics, the wrong number of premisses, or 
premisses or conclusions of the wrong sort. 
Aristotle's account of sophistical refutations begins with a discussion of "con- 
tentious arguments," a sort of intellectual contest commonly performed in the 
Greek academies, courts and councils. It is quite clear that at one level On So- 
phistical Refutations is a practical manual in which types of manoeuvres that result 
in unsatisfactory resolutions of contentious arguments are identified, and methods 
for spotting and blocking them are suggested; but at another level Aristotle is less 
interested in the practical question of how to train people to win argumentative 
contests than he is in developing a theory of objectively good reasoning. 
At On Sophistical Refutations 16, 175 a, 5-17, Aristotle explains the importance 
of a theory of contentious argument: 
The use of [contentious arguments], then, is for philosophy, two-fold. 
For in the first place, since for the most part they depend upon the 
expression, they put us in a better condition for seeing in how many 
ways any term is used, and what kind of resemblances and what kind 
of differences occur between things and between their names. In the 
second place they are useful for one's own personal researches; for the 
man who is easily committed to a fallacy by someone else, and does not 
perceive it, is likely to incur this fate himself also on many occasions. 
Thirdly [sic] and lastly, they further contribute to one's reputation, viz., 
the reputation of being well trained in everything, and not experienced 
in anything: for that a party to arguments should find fault with them 
and yet cannot definitely point out their weakness, creates a suspicion, 
making it seem as though it were not the truth of the matter but 
inexperience that put him out of temper. 
Aristotle is concerned to set out various ways in which a would-be refutation 
fails. He classifies failed refutations into those that depend on language and those 
that depend on factors external to language, although it may be closer to Aris- 
totle's intentions here to understand the word "language" as "speech." Aristotle 
is aware that some fallacies arise because a given word may be used ambiguously. 
However, when the argument in question is spoken, the offending word is given 
a different pronunciation at different occurrences. Thus hearing the argument, 
69A further fifty-five examples are alluded to more briefly; see [Dorion, 1995, p. 93]. 

84 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
rather than reading it, sometimes flags the ambiguous term and makes it easy for 
the arguer to avoid the ambiguity. For such fallacies, the mediaevals used the term 
in dictione, and it would appear that what is meant are fallacies whose commis- 
sion is evident by speaking the argument. Not all fallacies can be identified just 
through speaking the arguments in which they occur. The mediaevals translated 
Aristotle's classification of these as extra dictionern fallacies, that is, as not being 
identifiable by speaking them. On the other hand, Aristotle also says that there 
are exactly six ways of producing a "false illusion in connection with language" 
(165 b, 26), (emphasis added), and his list includes precisely six cases. Further, 
Aristotle occasionally notices that some of his extra dictionem fallacies also qual- 
ify for consideration as language dependent, for example, ignoratio elenchi (167 a, 
35) and many questions (175 b, 39). So the modern day practice of taking the in 
dictione fallacies to be language-dependent and the extra dictionem fallacies to be 
language-independent finds a certain justification in Aristotle's text. The following 
schema presents itself: 
Table 3. Sophistical Refutations 
In Dictione 
Extra Dictionem 
(1) equivocation 
(7) accident 
(2) amphiboly 
(8) secundum quid 
(3) combination of words 
(9) ignoratio elenchi 
(4) division of words 
(10) consequent 
(5) accent 
(11) non-cause as cause 
(6) form of expression 
(12) begging the question 
(13) many questions 
It is immediately evident that Aristotle's placement of these sophistries does 
not fit especially well with the "discernible in speech versus not discernible in 
speech" distinction. For example, equivocation involves the exploitation of a term's 
ambiguity, and can be illustrated by the following argument: 
The end of life is death 
Happiness is the end of life 
Therefore, happiness is death. 
But this is a mistake that is not necessarily made evident just by speaking the 
argument. It is interesting that in this example a certain logical form is discernible, 
viz., 
TisD 
HisE 
Therefore, H is D 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
85 
in which H stands for "happiness," E for "the end of life" in the sense of the goal 
or purpose of life, T for "the end of life" in the sense of the termination of life, 
and D for "death." The form is certainly invalid; it commits what later writers 
would call the "fallacy of four terms." It does not however commit the fallacy of 
ambiguity, since in it the term "end" is fully disambiguated. 
In contrast, amphiboly arises from what today is called syntactic (as opposed 
to lexical) ambiguity, as in the sentence "Visiting relatives can be boring," which 
is ambiguous between (1) "Relatives who visit can be bores" and (2) "It can be 
boring to visit relatives." To see how amphiboly can wreck an argument, consider, 
Visiting relatives can be boring 
Oscar Wilde is a visiting relative 
Therefore, Oscar Wilde can be boring. 
If the first premiss is taken to have the meaning of (1), the argument is a syllogism. 
If it is taken to have the meaning of (2), the argument is not a syllogism but a par- 
alogismos, a piece of "false reasoning." Even so, our case seems to collapse into an 
ambiguity fallacy, with "visiting relatives" the offending term--ambiguous between 
"the visiting of relatives" and "relatives who visit." Here, too, an amphibolous ar- 
gument seems not to be one that an arguer would be alerted to automatically just 
by speaking it, although with sufficient oral emphasis the appropriate distinctions 
might be made: "VISITING relatives can be boring" may mean something quite 
different than "visiting RELATIVES can be boring." 
The next two types of sophistical refutation, combination and division o/words, 
can be illustrated with the example of Socrates walking while sitting. Depending 
on whether the words "can walk while sitting" are taken in their combined or their 
divided sense, the following is true or not: 
Socrates can walk while sitting. 
Taken as combined, the claim is false, since it means that 
Socrates has the power to walk-and-sit at the same time. 
However, in their divided sense, these words express the true proposition that 
Socrates, who is now sitting, has the power to stop sitting and to start 
walking. 
This is a better example of an in dictione fallacy. 
"Socrates, while sitting, 
CAN WALK" sounds significantly different from "Socrates can WALK WHILE 
SITTING." In this context, it is worth noting that composition and division fal- 
lacies of the present day are not treated as fallacies in dictione [Copi and Cohen, 
1990, pp. 17-20]. Rather they are understood to be fallacies that result from mis- 
managing the part-whole relationship. Thus the modern fallacy of composition is 
exemplified by 

86 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
All the members of the Oakland As are excellent players 
Therefore, the Oakland As are an excellent team. 
Division fallacies make the same mistake, but in the reverse direction, so to 
speak: 
The As are a top-ranked team 
Therefore, all the As players are top-ranked players. 
We see, then, that combination and division of words is an in dictione fallacy 
for Aristotle, whereas composition and division is an extra dictionem fallacy for 
later writers. 
Accent and form of expression, are perhaps rather difficult for the reader of 
English to understand, since English is not accented in the way, for example, that 
French is. It is troublesome that the Greek of Aristotle's time was not accented 
either; that is, that there were no syntactic markers of accent such as "~" (acute); 
"~" (grave); and "E' (circumflex). Even so, Aristotle introduces accents in his 
discussion of Homer's poetry. Conceding that "an argument depending upon ac- 
cent is not easy to construct in unwritten discussion; in written discussion and in 
poetry it is easier" ( Sophistical Refutation, 166 b, 1-2), Aristotle notes that 
some people emend Homer against those who criticize as absurd his 
expression xb M~v o5  
5M~3p~. For they solve the difficulty 
by a change of accent, pronouncing the Ov with an acute accent (166 b, 
2-6). 
The emendation changes the passage from "Part of which decays in the rain" to 
"It does not decay in the rain," a significant alteration to say the least. 
Form of expression is meant in the sense of "shape of expression" and involves 
a kind of ambiguity. Explains Aristotle, 
Thus (e.g.,) 'flourishing' is a word which in the form of its expression is 
like 'cutting' or 'building'; yet the one denotes a certain quality--i.e., 
a certain condition--while the other denotes a certain action (1665, 
16-19). 
Hamblin avers with a certain pungency that "[i]t was given to J.S. Mill to make 
the greatest of modern contributions to this Fallacy by perpetrating a serious 
example of it himself .... He said ... 
The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that 
people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that 
people hear it; and so of the other sources of our experience. In like 
manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that 
anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. 
But to say something is visible or audible is to say that people can see or hear it, 
whereas to say that something is desirable is to say that it is worthy of desire or, 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
87 
plainly, a good thing. Mill is misled by the termination '-able' " [Hamblin, 1970, 
p. 26]. Unfortunately here, too, we seem not to have an especially convincing 
example of a fallacy discernible in speech. 
Turning 
now to 
extra 
dictionem 
fallacies, 
accident 
also 
presents 
the 
present-day reader with a certain difficulty. The basic idea is that what can be 
predicated of a given subject may not be predicable of its attributes. Aristotle 
points out that although the individual named Coriscus is different from Socrates, 
and although Socrates is a man, it would be an error to conclude that Coriscus is 
different from a man. This hardly seems so, at least when in the conclusion "is 
different from a man" is taken to mean "is not a man." The clue to the example is 
given by the name of the fallacy, "accident." Part of what Aristotle wants to say is 
that when individual X is different from individual Y, and where Y has the acci- 
dental or non-essential property P (e.g., being six feet tall), it does not follow that 
X is not six feet tall, too. But this insight is obscured by two details of Aristotle's 
example. The first is that "is a man" would seem to be an essential property of 
man. Here, however, Aristotle restricts the notion of an essential property to a 
synonymous property, such as "is a rational animal." The other obscuring feature 
of the case is that Aristotle also wants to emphasize that what is predicable of an 
individual is not necessarily predicable of its properties. If we take "Coriscus is 
different from" as predicable of Socrates, it does not follow that it is predicable of 
the property man, which Socrates has. But why should this be so if no individual 
(Coriscus included) is identical to any property (including the property of being 
a man)? Perhaps it is possible to clarify the case by differentiating two meanings 
of "is different from a man." In the one meaning, "different from a man" is the 
one-place negative predicate "is not a man"; and in its second meaning it is the 
negative relational predicate "is not identical to the property of being a man." 
Thus, from the fact that Coriscus and Socrates are different men, it does not fol- 
low that Coriscus is not a man. But it does follow that Coriscus is not identical 
to the property of being any man. Little of this treatment survives in present day 
accounts. For example, in [Carney and Scheer, 1980, p. 72], the fallacy of accident 
is just a matter of misapplying a general principle, that is, of applying it to cases 
"to which they are not meant to apply." 
Secundum quid is easier to make out. "Secundum quid" means "in a certain re- 
spect." In this sense, the error that Aristotle is trying to identify involves confusing 
the sense of a term in a qualified sense with its use in its absolute, or unqualified, 
sense. Thus from the fact that this black man is a white-haired man, it does not 
follow that he is a white man. Similarly, from the fact that something exists in 
thought it does not follow that it exists in reality (Santa Claus, for example). 
In its most general form, the secundum quid fallacy is the mistake of violating 
the rule that, when reasoning or arguing, our claims and counterclaims about 
things must honour significant similarities and must not over exploit differences. 
If one party asserts "All A are B," it is not enough for the second party to attempt 
to confuse this opponent with the statement "Some A are not B," even if it is true. 
Also required is that his use of the terms "A" and "B" must agree with those of his 

88 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
opponents with regard to meaning, respects in which the term is applied, temporal 
factors, and so on. Thus if the one party's "All A are B" were "All bachelors are 
unmarried" and his opponent's "Some A are not B" were "Some holders of a first 
university degree are married (eventually)," it would be ludicrous to suppose that, 
even if true, it damages the first claim in any way. 
Ignoratio elenchi, or "ignorance of what makes for a refutation," results from 
violating any of the conditions on what constitutes a proper refutation. As we 
have pointed out, a refutation is genuine when one party, the questioner, is able 
to fashion from the other party's (the answerer's) answers a syllogism whose con- 
clusion is the contradictory, not-T, of the answerer's original thesis, T. There are 
thus two ways in which the questioner might be guilty of ignoratio elenchi. He 
might have made the syllogistic-mistake of supposing that not-T follows from the 
premisses when it does not or, although it does follow from those premisses, one or 
more of them is syllogistically impermissible. For example, Aristotle requires that 
all premisses of a syllogism be propositions and, as we have pointed out, proposi- 
tions are statements in which just one thing is predicated of just one thing (On 
Sophistical Refutations 169 a, 8). Thus the statement, "Bob and Sally are going to 
the dance," is not a proposition, even though it clearly implies "Bob is going to 
the dance," which is a proposition. As we have seen, Aristotle has technical rea- 
sons for restricting the premisses of syllogisms to propositions; and it is clear that 
he thinks that if a questioner derives a conclusion from non-propositions which 
imply it, he has not constructed a syllogism. Accordingly, he has not constructed 
a refutation. In fact, he has committed the fallacy of many questions (see below). 
The second way in which a questioner can be guilty of ignorance of what makes 
for a (genuine) refutation is when he constructs from his opponent's answers a 
faultless syllogism, but its conclusion is not the contradictory of his opponent's 
thesis, T. It thus is the mistake of supposing that a pair of propositions {P, Q} are 
one another's contradictories when they are in fact not. If the first type of error can 
be called a syllogistic error, the second can be called a contradiction error [Hansen 
and Pinto, 1995, p. 321]. This has a bearing on how Aristotle understands the 
relationship of fallacies to sophistical refutations. Some commentators hold that 
fallacies and sophistical refutations are the same thing. Others are of the view that 
a refutation is sophistical just because it contains a fallacy, i.e., when the would- 
be syllogism that constitutes the would-be refutation commits either a syllogistic 
error or a contradiction error--a logical error in each case. Aristotle even goes so 
far as to suggest a precise coincidence between the in dictione--extra-dictionem 
distinction and the distinction between contradiction errors and syllogistic errors: 
All the types of fallacy, then, fall under ignorance of what a refutation 
is, those dependent on language because the contradiction, which is the 
proper mark of a refutation, is merely apparent, and the rest because of 
the definition of syllogism (On Sophistical Refutations 6, 169 a, 19-21; 
emphasis added; cf. [Hansen and Pinto, 1995, p. 321].) 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
89 
In present-day treatments (e.g., [Copi and Cohen, 1990, pp. 
105-107]), the 
ignoratio elenchi is the fallacy of an argument which appears to establish a certain 
conclusion, when in fact it is an argument for a different conclusion. 
There is 
some resemblance here to Aristotle's contradiction-error, which can be considered 
a special case. 
Aristotle says (On Sophistical Refutations 168 a, 27; 169 b, 6) that the fallacy 
of consequent is an instance of the fallacy of accident. 
Bearing in mind that 
Aristotle thinks that consequent involves a conversion error, perhaps we can get a 
clearer picture of accident. As noted above, accident is exemplified by a confusing 
argument about Coriscus and Socrates. We might now represent that argument 
as follows: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Socrates is a man 
Coriscus is non-identical to Socrates 
Therefore, Coriscus is non-identical to a man. 
In line (1), the word "is" occurs as the is-of-predication. Suppose that line (1) 
were in fact convertible, that is, that (1) itself implied 
(1') A man is Socrates. 
In that case, the "is" of (1) would be the is-of-identity, not the is-of-predication, 
and the argument in question would have the valid form 
(1') 
S=M 
(2') Cr 
(3') 
Therefore, C 5r M. 
Thus the idea that (1) is convertible and the idea that its "is" is the is-of- 
identity come to the same thing and this is the source of the error. For the only 
interpretation under which 
Socrates is a man 
is true, is when "is" is taken non-convertibly, i.e., not as the is-of-identity, but as 
the is-of-predication. 
Consequent is an early version of what has come to be known as the fallacy 
of affirming the consequent [Copi and Cohen, 1990, pp. 211, 282]. In present- 
day treatments this is the mistake of concluding that P on the basis of the two 
premisses, "If P then Q," and Q. Where P is the antecedent and Q the consequent 
of the first premiss, the fallacy is that of accepting P on the basis of having affirmed 
the consequent Q. Aristotle seems to have this kind of case firmly in mind; but he 
also thinks of consequent as a conversion fallacy, that is, as the mistake of inferring 
"All P are S" ("All mortal things are men") from "All S are P" ("All men are 
mortal"). 
Non-cause as Cause also appears to have been given two different analyses. 
In the Rhetoric it is the error that later writers call the fallacy of post hoc, ergo 

90 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
propter hoc, the error of inferring that event e is the efficient cause of event e' just 
because the occurrence of e ~ followed upon (temporally speaking) the occurrence 
of e. In On Sophistical Refutations, however, it is clear that Aristotle means by 
"cause" something like "reason for." In this case, the non-cause as cause error is 
exemplified by the following type of case. Suppose that 
P 
Q 
Therefore, --T 
is a refutation of the thesis T. Then the argument in question is a syllogism, hence 
a valid argument. As any reader of modern logic knows, if the argument at hand 
is valid, then so too is the second argument, 
R 
P 
Q 
Therefore, ~T 
no matter what premiss R expresses. But this second argument is not a syllogism 
since a proper subset of its premisses, namely, {P, Q}, also entails its conclusion. 
Hence our second argument cannot be a refutation. This matters in the following 
way: Aristotle thinks of the premisses of a refutation as reasons for ("causes of') 
its conclusion; but since our second argument is not a refutation of T, R cannot 
be a reason for not-T. 
In the course of real-life contentions, an answerer will often supply the questioner 
with many more answers than the questioner can use as premisses of his would-be 
refutation. Aristotle requires that syllogisms have no idle premisses. Thus the 
questioner is obliged to select from the set of his opponents' answers just those 
propositions, no more and no fewer, than non-circularly necessitate the required 
conclusion. 
In this sense, the fallacy of non-cause as cause is clearly the mistake of using an 
idle premiss, but it may not be clear as to why Aristotle speaks of this as the error 
in which a non-cause masquerades as a cause. Something of Aristotle's intention 
may be inferred from a passage in the Physics (195 a, 15), in which it is suggested 
that in syllogisms premisses are the material causes (the stuff) of their conclusions, 
i.e., that premisses stand to conclusions as parts to wholes, and hence are causes 
of the whole. Idle premisses fail to qualify as material causes; they can be removed 
from an argument without damaging the residual sub-argument. Real premisses 
are different. Take any syllogism and remove from it any (real) premisses and the 
whole (i.e., the syllogism itself) is destroyed. In other places, Aristotle suggests 
a less technical interpretation of the fallacy, in which the trouble with R would 
simply be its falsity, and the trouble with the argument accordingly would be the 
derivation of not-T from a falsehood--a false cause (On Sophistical Refutations 
1675 , 21). 70 
7~ 
is discussed in greater detail and is given a somewhat different emphasis in [Woods 
and Hansen, 2003]. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
91 
Aristotle provides several different treatments of begging the question, or petitio 
principii. In On Sophistical Refutations it is a flat-out violation of the definition 
of "syllogism" (hence of "refutation"). If what is to be proved is also assumed as 
a premiss, then that premiss is repeated as the conclusion, and the argument in 
question fails to be a syllogism. Hence it cannot be a refutation. On the other 
hand, in the Posterior Analytics 86 a, 21, begging the question is a demonstration 
error. Demonstrations are deductions from first principles. First principles are 
themselves indemonstrable, and in any demonstration every succeeding step is less 
certain than preceding steps; but if one inserts the proposition to be demonstrated 
among the premisses, it cannot be the case that all premisses are more certain than 
the conclusion. Hence the argument in question is a failed demonstration. 
Aristotle recognizes five ways in which a question can be begged (Topics 162 b, 
34-163 a, 2)" 
People appear to beg their original question in five ways: the first 
and most obvious being if anyone begs the actual point requiring to 
be proved: this is easily detected when put in so many words; but it 
is more apt to escape detection in the case of synonyms, and where a 
name and an account mean the same thing. A second way occurs when- 
ever anyone begs universally something which he has to demonstrate 
in a particular case ... 
The third way is to beg a particular case of what should be shown universally; 
the fourth is begging "a conjunctive conclusion piecemeal" [Hamblin, 1970, p. 74]; 
and the fifth is begging a proposition from a proposition equivalent to it. 
Contemporary readers are likely to find the expression "begging the question" 
rather obscure (and oddly dramatic). There is no beggary to begging the ques- 
tion, other than the questioner's soliciting a premiss for his evolving syllogism by 
putting to his opponent a Yes-No question. Further, Aristotle actually collapses 
the intuitive distinction between the question that produces the answer and the 
premiss that that answer is eligible to be. That is, what Aristotle calls a question 
is in this context the premiss produced by the answer to it. Strictly speaking, 
then, begging such a question is using it as a premiss in a would-be syllogism. The 
"original question" of the two parties is the answerer's thesis, T. An opponent 
would beg the question in the first way if he begged the point required to be shown, 
i.e., not-T. But if not-T were indeed a premiss of any deduction whose conclusion 
were also not-T, the deduction would be circular, as we have said; hence it would 
be neither a syllogism nor a refutation. Aristotle rightly notices that such cases 
are unlikely to fool actual reasoners, but he reminds us that if a synonym of not-T 
were used as a premiss, then the premiss would look different from the conclu- 
sion, and the circularity might go undetected. In fact, this seems also to be what 
Aristotle has against the fifth way, i.e., deducing a proposition from one equivalent 
to it. 

92 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
In the second way of begging the question, Aristotle has in mind a certain 
form of what came to be called "immediate inference." It is exemplified by the 
subalternation argument 
Since all A are B, some A are B. 
i 
Aside from the fact that single-premiss arguments seem not to qualify as syl- 
logisms, it is difficult to make out a logical fault here. 
Bearing in mind that 
the fault is the questioner's (i.e., premiss selector's) fault, not the answerer's, 
one might wonder what is wrong with a questioner 's asking a question which, if 
answered affirmatively, would give him a desired conclusion in just one step. Ev- 
idently Aristotle thinks that a refutation is worth having only if every premiss 
(individually) is consistent with the answerer's thesis. Such is Ross' view of the 
matter: 
And syllogism is distinguished from petitio principii in this, that while 
in the former both premises together imply the conclusion in the latter 
one premise alone does so [Ross, 1953, p. 38]. 
Thus in a good refutation, the thesis is refuted, never mind that the thesis is 
consistent with each separate answer given. (See [Woods, 2001, ch. 9].) 
The third way of begging seems quite straightforward. It is illustrated by the 
plainly invalid form of argument 
Since some A are B, all A are B. 
Even so, as the example makes clear, begging the question is fundamentally an 
error of premiss selection, given that the answerer's job is to elicit premisses that 
syllogistically imply its contradictory, "All A are B." Again, begging the question 
is selecting a premiss, and in the present case, the questioner has begged the wrong 
question, i.e., he has selected the wrong premiss. It is a premiss which does the 
answerer's thesis no damage; and in any extension of this continuing argument in 
which damage were to be done, this premiss "Some A are B," would prove idle. 
Genuinely perplexing is the fourth way of begging the question. By the require- 
ment that syllogisms be constructed from propositions, it would appear that no 
competent syllogizer would ever wish to conclude his argument with a conjunctive 
statement (since these are not propositions). However, consider the argument 
P 
Q 
Therefore, P and Q. 
It is clearly valid. What Aristotle appears to have in mind is that it is useless for 
the questioner first to beg for P, then for Q, if his intention is to conclude "P and 
Q." The manifest validity of the argument might deceive someone into thinking 
he had produced a syllogism, but the fault lies less with his premiss selection than 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
93 
with his choice of target conclusion. Once begged, those questions will assuredly 
"get" him that conclusion, but it is a statement of a type that guarantees that his 
argumentnevertheless is not a syllogism. 
The problem of would-be refutations that derive their targets in one step from 
a single premiss is, according to Aristotle, the problem that the argument 
All A are B 
Therefore, some A are B 
begs the question. The contradictory of its conclusion is inconsistent with each 
of the premisses (of which there happens to be only one). If it is correct to say 
that the contradictory of a syllogism's conclusion must be consistent with each 
premiss, then our argument is not a syllogism. On the other hand, Aristotle in 
places appears to accept subalternative arguments (e.g., at Topics 119 a, 32-36). 
Some writers interpret Aristotle in a different way, as claiming an epistemic fallacy: 
one could not know the premiss to be true without knowing the conclusion to be 
true. 
This raises a further matter as to whether, e.g., 
All A are B 
All C are A 
Therefore, all C are B 
does not also beg the question. Mill is often said to have held that this is precisely 
the case with all syllogisms. This was not, in fact, Mill's view, but Aristotle seems 
to consider (and reject) the possibility (Posterior Analytics 72 b, 5-73 a, 20). If the 
first interpretation is correct, then were syllogisms fallaciously question-begging 
as such, it could not be for the reason that affects subalternation arguments. For 
All A are B 
All C are A 
Therefore, all C are B 
cannot be a syllogism unless its premisses fail individually to derive its conclusion; 
and it cannot commit a petitio of the subalternation variety unless one of its 
premisses does indeed yield the conclusion on its own. 
As was said in the above discussion of ignoratio elenchi, Aristotle's fallacy of 
many questions is a very different thing from that presented in present day logic 
textbooks e.g., [Copi and Cohen, 1990, pp. 96-97]. In such treatments, the fallacy 
is typified by such questions as, "Have you stopped beating your dog?," in which 
there is a unconceded presupposition, namely, "The addressee has been a beater 
of his dog in the past." Aristotle intended something quite different by the many 
questions fallacy. It is the error of admitting to the premiss set of a would-be 
syllogism a statement that is not a proposition, in Aristotle's technical sense of 
"one thing predicated of one thing." It was mentioned above that Aristotle had 
technical reasons for requiring syllogisms to be made up of propositions. This can 

94 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
be explained as follows. In the Topics (100 a, 18-21) and On Sophistical Refutations 
(183 a, 37-36), Aristotle declares that his aim is to discover a method (or faculty of 
reasoning) from which we will be able to reason [syllogistically] about every issue 
from endoxa, i.e., reputable premisses, and when compelled to defend a position, 
we say nothing to contradict ourselves. 
In other places, 
his aims are forwarded more ambitiously. 
At 
On 
Sophistical Refutations 170 a, 38 and 171 b, 6-7, Aristotle says that the strate- 
gies he has worked out will enable a person to reason correctly about anything 
whatever, independently of knowledge of its subject matter. This is precisely what 
the Sophists also claimed to be able to do. Aristotle scorns their claim, not be- 
cause it is unrealizable, but because the Sophists lack the theoretical wherewithal 
to bring it off. The requisite theoretical wherewithal Aristotle took to be the 
logic of syllogisms. In various respects Aristotle's boast seems incredible. For one 
thing, are there not far too many arguments, some of considerable complexity, 
for any one theory to capture in their totality? Part of Aristotle's answer lies in 
a claim advanced in On Interpretation (e.g., 16 a, 19-26; 16 b, 6-10, 19-25; 16 b, 
26-17 a, 2). There he asserts that anything stateable in any natural language such 
as Greek, can be expressed without relevant loss in a proper sublanguage made 
up exclusively of propositions, i.e., statements that say one thing of one thing. 
Propositions may be said to be statements whose only logical particles are at most 
the quantifier expressions "all," "some," "no," "some--not," and the connective 
"not." In particular, compound statements held together by connectives such as 
"and," "or" and "if ... then," fail to qualify. Aristotle in effect is confining the class 
of propositions to the class of categorical statements: "All A are B," "Some A are 
B," "Some A are not B," and "No A are B." Suppose that a theorist wanted to 
produce a complete grammar for all the declarative sentences of Greek. If Aristo- 
tle's claim in On Interpretation is true, the theorist would succeed in his task if he 
could produce a complete theory of these four categorical forms. This very striking 
economy is also passed on to the claim that a theory of all good deductive reason- 
ing is possible. By deductive reasoning, Aristotle means reasoning expressible in 
syllogisms, and syllogisms are made up of just three propositions, two premisses 
and a conclusion. Further, in every syllogism, there occurs exactly one more term 
than there are premisses. Thus any would-be syllogism will be made up of just 
two premisses and just three terms, say, "A," "B," and "C." There are just four 
propositional forms, and for each of the three terms only a low finite number of 
distributions of them in triples of those forms. Hence a complete theory of good 
reasoning (syllogismos) is possible because its domain is, as we now see, low finite, 
i.e., it permits exhaustive examination. 
In present-day treatments, the many questions fallacy is committed by asking a 
certain type of question, e.g., "Have you stopped beating your dog?" In Aristotle's 
view, the fallacy is that of using an answer to the question as a premiss. Suppose 
that answer is "No." This is equivalent to 
It is not the case that (I have beaten my dog in the past and I do so 
at present) 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
95 
or 
Either I have not beaten my dog in the past or I do not do so at present. 
In each case, the answer contains a connective other than "not"-- "and" in the first 
instance, and "or" in the second. In neither case, then is the answer a proposition 
in which "one thing is said of one thing," so it is inadmissible as a premiss of a 
syllogism. Where the modern theorist sees the fallacy as an interrogative fallacy 
[Hintikka, 1987], for Aristotle it is a syllogistic error. 
Although On Sophistical Refutations is the primary source of what people have 
come to call Aristotle's fallacies, Aristotle gives them a somewhat different char- 
acterization in his other writings. In the Topics, we read that an argument (not 
necessarily a refutation) is fallacious in four different ways: (1) when it appears 
valid but is invalid in fact; (2) when it is valid but reaches "the wrong conclusion"; 
(3) when it is valid but the conclusion is derived from "inappropriate" premisses; 
and (4) when, although valid, the conclusion is reached from false premisses. Case 
(1) might well be exemplified by the fallacy of affirming the consequent. Case (2) 
might be thought of in this way: let the premisses all be drawn from the discipline 
of economics, and let the conclusion be the logical truth, "Either it will rain today 
or it will not." Although that conclusion does follow validly from those premisses-- 
at least by modern lights--it might be objected that it is the "wrong thing" to 
conclude from those premisses. Case (3) is similar. Aristotle's own example is 
one in which it is concluded that walking after a meal is not good for one's health 
(a conclusion from the art or discipline of medicine) from the premiss, proposed 
by Zeno, that motion (hence walking after a meal) is impossible. Even if Zeno's 
paradoxical proposition were true, Aristotle would claim it to be an inappropriate 
premiss for a medical argument, since it is not a medical premiss. Case (4) is ob- 
vious: though true conclusions are often compatible with false premisses, no true 
conclusion can be established by false premisses. 
The following is a list, taken from [Hansen and Pinto, 1995, p. 9] of where in 
Aristotle's writings the individual fallacies are discussed: 
9 Equivocation: Soph. Re]'., 4 (1655, 31-166 a, 7); 6 (168 a, 24); 7 (169 a, 22-25); 
17 (175 a, 36-175 b, 8); 19; 23 (179 ~, 15-19); Rhetoric II, 24 (1401 ~, 13-23). 
9 Amphiboly: Soph. Ref., 4 (166 a, 7-22); 7 (169 a, 22-25); 17 (175 a, 36-175 b, 
19); 23 (179 a, 19-25). 
9 Combination of words: Soph. Ref., 4 (166 a, 23-32); 6 (168 a, 22-25); 7 (169 a, 
25-27); 20; 23 (179 a, 12-13); Rhet. II 24 (1401 a, 24-1401 b, 3). 
9 Division of words: Soph. Ref., 4 (166 a, 33-39); 6 (166 a, 27); 7 (169 a, 25-27); 
20; 23 (179 a, 12-13); Rhet. II, 24 (1401 a, 24-1401 b, 3). 
9 Accent: Soph. 
(179 a, 13-14). 
Ref., 4 (1665 , 1-9); 6 (168 a, 27); 7 (169 a, 27-29); 21; 23 

96 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
9 Forms of expression: Soph. Re]., 4 (166 b, 10-19); 6 (168 a, 25); 7 (169 a, 
30-169 b, 3), 22; 23 (179 a, 20-25). 
9 Accident: Soph. Ref., 5 (166 b, 28-37); 6 (168 a, 34-168 b, 10; 168 b, 26-169 a, 
5); 7 (169 b, 3-6); 24; Rhet. II, 24 (1401 b, 5-19). 
9 Secundum Quid: Soph. Ref., 5 (1665, 38-167 a, 20); 6 (1685, 11-16); 7 (1695, 
9-13); 25; Rhet. II, 24 (1401 b, 35-1402 ~, 28). 
9 Ignoratio Elenchi: Soph. Ref. 
9-13); 26. 
5 (167 ~, 21-36); 6 (168 b, 17-21); 7 (169 b, 
9 Consequent: Soph. Re]., 5 (167 b, 1-20); 6 (168 b, 26-169 ~, 5); 7 (169 b, 3-9); 
Pr. Anal. B, 16 (645, 33); Rhet. H 24 (1401 b, 10-14, 20-29). 
9 Non-cause: Soph. Ref., 5 (167 b, 21-37); 6 (168 b, 22-26); 7 (169 b, 13-17); 29; 
Pr. Anal. B II 17; Rhet. II 24, (1401 b, 30-34). 
9 Begging the Question: Soph. Ref., 5 (167 a, 37-40); 6 (168 b, 25-27); 7 (169 b, 
13-17); 17 (176 a, 27-32); 27; Topics, 8 (161 b, 11-18); (162 b, 34-163 a, 13); 
13 (162 b, 34-163 a, 28); Pr. Anal., 24 (41 b, 9); Pr. Anal. B, 16 (64 b, 28-65 a, 
37). 
9 Many Questions: Soph. Ref., 5 (167 b, 38-168 a, 17); 6 (169 a, 6-18); 7 (1695, 
13-17); 17 (175 b, 39-176 a, 19); 30. 
In bringing this chapter to a close, we revisit Hamblin's harsh remarks on what 
he calls the Standard Treatment of the fallacies in which 
a writer throws away all logic and keeps the reader's attention, if at all, 
only by retailing the traditional puns, anecdotes, and witless examples 
of his forebears. 'Everything that runs has feet; the river runs; there- 
fore, the river has feet'--this is a medieval example, but the modern 
ones are no better [Hamblin, 1970, p. 12]. 
Such treatments, says Hamblin, are useless and they leave us in a situation in 
which "[w]e have no theory of fallacies at all .... " [Hamblin, 1970, p. 11]. Whatever 
one thinks of these complaints, it seems that Hamblin would have been entirely 
happy to put Aristotle at the very top of the list of those whose views disappoint 
him so. In fact, this is not what Hamblin does. Instead he excoriates many a 
later writer for failing to pay due attention to Aristotle. 
In fairness, Hamblin 
does not think uniformly well of Aristotle's analyses. Certainly there is in these 
writings no wholly developed theory of fallacies, and some of the examples are 
rather silly. Even so, Hamblin thinks that Aristotle was on to something genuinely 
important in two respects. 
First, Aristotle was, in On Sophistical Refutations, 
attempting to work his way through the old subject of dialectics to the genuinely 
new discipline of logic. But, secondly and rather strangely, Hamblin commends 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
97 
us to Aristotle's example in treating the fallacies as inherently dialectical entities 
(although Hamblin also thinks that on this point Aristotle showed signs of wavering 
[Hamblin, 1970, pp. 65-66]). It is worth noting that Aristotle has an answer to 
the objection that his examples of the fallacies are silly, and that they would fool 
no one. For if a fallacy is an inapparently bad argument, then it is hard to see 
how one could give convincing examples of such things. Presumably a good or 
non-silly example would have to be one which the reader would not recognize as 
a fallacy, and so in one clear sense of the term would also be a bad example. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Parts of this chapter draw upon or are adapted from John Woods' monograph 
Aristotle's Earlier Logic, published by Hermes Science in 2001, and his entry 
"Aristotle" in the File of Fallacies section of Argumentation, 13 (1999), 317-334. 
We are grateful for permission to republish. We also wish to thank for their sup- 
port and sage advice, Julius Moravcsik, Hans Hansen, Lawrence Powers, David 
Hitchcock, Erik Krabbe, George Boger and Dov Gabbay. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Allen, 1995] James Allen. The development of Aristotle's logic: Part of an account in outline. 
Proceedings of the Boston Area Colloquium in Ancient Philosophy, 11:177-205, 1995. 
[Barnes, 1975] Jonathan Barnes. Aristotle's theory of demonstration. In J. Barnes, M. Schofield 
and R. Sorabji, editors, Articles on Aristotle, Vol. I: Science, pages 65-87. London: Duck- 
worth, 1975. 
[Barnes, 1981] Jonathan Barnes. Proof and syllogism. In E. Berti, editor, Aristotle on Science: 
The Posterior Analytics, pages 17-59. Padova: Editrice Antenore, 1981. Proceedings of the 
eighth Symposium Aristotelicum held in Padua from September 7 to 15, 1978. 
[Barnes, 1984] Jonathan Barnes, editor. 
The Complete Works of Aristotle. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1984. In 2 volumes. Translation by Jonathan Barnes. 
[Barnes, 1993] Jonathan Barnes. Aristotle: Posterior Analytics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2nd 
edition, 1993. 
[Barnes, 1995] Jonathan Barnes, editor. The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
[Boger, 1998a] George Boger. Completion, reduction and analysis: Three proof-theoretic pro- 
cesses in Aristotle's Prior Analytics. History and Philosophy of Logic, 19:187-226, 1998. 
[Boger, 1998b] George Boger. Aristotle on fallacious reasoning in Sophistical Refutations and 
Prior Analytics. In Hans V. Hansen, Christopher W. Tindale, and Athena V. Colman, ed- 
itors, Argumentation and Rhetoric. St. Catharines ON: Ontario Society for the Study of 
Argumentation (CD-ROM), 1998. 
[Bolzano, 1973] Bernard Bolzano. Wissenschaftslehre, Sulzbach: Seidel Buchhandlung. Dor- 
drecht: Reidel, 1973. Title is translated as Theory of Science. Edited by J. Berg. 
[Bonitz, 1968] Hermann Bonitz. Platonische Studien. Hildeschiem: Olms, 1968. Reproduction 
of the 3rd Berlin edition, 1886. 
[Carney and Scheer, 1980] James D. Carney and Richard K. Scheer. Fundamentals of Logic. 
New York: Macmillan, 3rd edition, 1980. 
[Cherniss, 1935] Harold Cherniss. Review of Werner Jaeger, Aristotle. American Journal of 
Philosophy, 56:261-271, 1935. 
[Copi and Cohen, 1990] Irving Copi and Carl Cohen. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmil- 
lan, 8th edition, 1990. 

98 
John Woods and Andrew Irvine 
[Corcoran, 1972] John Corcoran. Completeness of an ancient logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
37:696-702, 1972. 
[Corcoran, 1974a] John Corcoran, editor. Ancient Logic and Its Modern Interpretation. Dor- 
drecht: Reidel, 1974. 
[Corcoran, 1974b] John Corcoran. Aristotle's natural deduction system. In John Corcoran, 
editor, Ancient Logic and Its Modern Interpretation, pages 85-132. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974. 
[Corcoran, 1974c] John Corcoran. A panel discussion on future research in ancient logical the- 
ory. In John Corcoran, editor, Ancient Logic and Its Modern Interpretation, pages 189-208. 
Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974. 
[Corcoran, 1975] John Corcoran. Meanings of implication. Dialogos, 9:59-76, 1975. 
[Dorion, 1995] Louis-Andru)Dorion, editor. Aristotle. Paris: J. Vrin and Qu@bec: Presses de 
l'Universit@ Laval, 1995. Aristotle's original work On Sophistical Refutations. 
[Frede, 1987] Michael Frede. Stoic and Aristotelian syllogistic. In Michael Frede, editor, Essays 
in Ancient Philosophy, pages 99-124. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987. 
[Forster and Furley, 1955] E.S. Forster and D.J. Furley, editors. 
On Sophistical Refutations, 
and On-Coming-to-be and Passing Away and On the Cosmos (Pseudo-Aristotle). London: 
Loeb, 1955. 
[Gabbay and Woods, 2004] Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods. The Reach of Abduction. To 
appear as volume two of their A Practical Lgoic of Cognitive Systems. Amsterdam: North- 
Holland, 2004. 
[Gentzen, 1935] Gerhard Gentzen. Untersuchungen fiber das logische schliessen. Mathematis- 
ches Zeitschrift, 39:176-210; 405-431, 1935. 
[Graham, 1987] Daniel W. Graham. Aristotle's Two Systems. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987. 
[Green-Pederson, 1984] Niels J. Green-Pederson. 
The Tradition of the ~opics in the Middle 
Ages. Mfinich: Philosophia Verlag, 1984. 
j 
[Hamblin, 1970] C.L. Hamblin. Fallacies. London: Methuen, 1970. 
[Hansen, undated] Hans V. Hansen. From dialogue to logic: Aristotle on the fallacies. Unpub- 
lished manuscript, 
t 
[Hansen, 1992] Hans V. Hansen. Aristotle's discovery of the fallacies. Unpublished manuscript, 
1992. 
[Hansen and Pinto, 1995] Hans V. Hansen and Robert C. Pinto, editors. Fallacies: Classical 
and Contemporary Readings. University Park: Pennslyvania State University Press, 1995. 
[Hintikka, 1987] Jaakko Hintikka. The fallacy of fallacies. Argumentation, 1:211-238, 1987. 
[Hintikka, 1989] Jaakko Hintikka. The role of logic in argumentation. Monist, 72:3-24, 1989. 
[Hitchcock, 2000a] David Hitchcock. Fallacies and formal logic in Aristotle. History and Phi- 
losophy of Logic, 21:207-221, 2000. 
[Hitchcock, 2000b] David Hitchcock. The origin of professional eristic. In Thomas M. Robin- 
son and Luc Brisson, editors, Plato: Euthydemus, Lysis, Charmides: Proceedings of the V 
Symposium Platonicum, pages 59-67. Saint Augustin: Academia Verlag, 2000. 
[Jaeger, 1923] Werner Jaeger. 
Aristotle's: Grundlegung einer Geschite seiner Entwicklung. 
Berlin: Weidmann, 1923. 
[Kapp, 1975] E. Kapp. Syllogistic. In Jonathan Barnes, Malcolm Schofield, and Richard Sorabji, 
editors, Articles on Aristotle, Vol. I: Science, pages 35-49. London: Duckworth, 1975. 
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] William Kneale and Martha Kneale. 
The Development of Logic. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962. 
[Lear, 1980] Jonathan Lear. Aristotle and Logical Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1980. 
[Lukasiewicz, 1957] Jan Lukasiewicz. 
Aristotle's Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern 
Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2nd edition, 1957. 
[McCall, 1963] Storrs McCall. Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1963. 
[McCall, 1996] Storrs McCall. Connexive implication. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 31:415-433, 
1996. 
[Mignucci, 1991] Mario Mignucci. Expository proofs in Aristotle's syllogistic. In Julia Annas, 
editor, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, volume Supplementary, pages 20-28. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1991. 
[Normore, 1993] Calvin Normore. The necessity in deduction: Cartesian inference and its me- 
dieval background. Synthese, 96:437-454, 1993. 
[Patterson, 1995] Richard Patterson. Aristotle's Modal Logic. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press, 1995. 

Aristotle's Early Logic 
99 
[Patzig, 1968] Gfinther Patzig. Aristotle's Theory of the Syllogism. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1968. 
[Powers, 1995] Lawrence Powers. Non-contradition. Unpublished manuscript c. 1995. 
[Rist, 1989] John 1V[. Rist. The Mind of Aristotle: A Study in Philosophical Growth. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1989. 
[Robinson, 1948] Richard Robinson. Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of His Develop- 
ment. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2nd edition, 1948. 
[Ross, 1949] W.D. Ross. Aristotle's Prior and Posterior Analytics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1949. 
[Ross, 1953] W.D. Ross. Aristotle. London: h4ethuen, 1953. 
[Ross, 1984] W.D. Ross. Aristotle's Metaphysics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984. 
In 2 volumes. 
[Routley et al., 1982] Richard Routley, Val Plumwood, Robert K. Meyer, and Ross T. Brady. 
Relevant Logics and Their Rivals, I. Acascadero CA: Ridgeview, 1982. 
[Scott, 1971] Dana Scott. On engendering illusion of understanding. Journal of Philosophy, 
68:787-807, 1971. 
[Searle, 1959] J. Searle. On determinables and resemblance. Aristotelian Society, Supplemental 
33:141-158, 1959. 
[Shoesmith and Smiley, 1978] D.J. Shoesmith and T.J. Smiley. Multiple-conclusion Logic. New 
York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978. 
[Smiley, 1973] Timothy J. Smiley. What is a syllogism? Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2:136- 
154, 1973. 
[Smith, 1989] John Maynard Smith. 
Evolutionary Genetics. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1989. 
[Smith, 1995] Robin Smith. Logic. In Jonathan Barnes, editor, The Cambridge Companion to 
Aristotle, pages 27-65. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
[Solmsen, 1929] F. Solmsen. Die Entwichlung der Aristotelischen Logick und Rhetorick. Berlin: 
Weidman, 1929. 
[Szabo, 1969] h/I.W. Szabo. Investigations into logical deduction. In The Collected Papers of 
Gerhard Gentzen, pages 68-131. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1969. Translation. 
[Thorn, 1981] Paul Thorn. The Syllogism. Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1981. 
[Thompson, 1981] P. Thompson. Bolzano's deducibility and Tarski's logical consequence. His- 
tory and Philosophy of Logic, 2:11-20, 1981. 
Ivan Benthem, 1994] Johan van Benthem. General dynamic logic. In D.h/i. Gabbay, editor, 
What Is A Logical System?, pages 107-140. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
[van Eemeren and Grootendorst, 1992] Frans H. van Eemeren and Rob Grootendorst. Argu- 
mentation, Communication, and Fallacies: A Pragma-Dialectical Perspective. Hillsdale, NJ 
and London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992. 
[Walton, 1989] Douglas N. Walton. Question-Reply Argumentation. Westport, CN: Greenwood, 
1989. 
[Woods, 1967] John Woods. Is there a relation of intensional conjunction? Mind, 76:357-368, 
1967. 
[Woods, 1974] John Woods. Semantic kinds. Philosophia, 3:117-151, 1974. 
[Woods, 1994] John Woods. John Locke on arguments ad. Inquiry, 13:1 and 41-46, 2002. 
[Woods, 2001] John Woods. Aristotle's Earlier Logic. Oxford: Hermes Science, 2001. 
[Woods, 2003] John Woods. Paradox and Paraconsistency: Conflict Resolution in the Abstract 
Sciences. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
[Woods and Hansen, 1997] John Woods and Hans V. Hansen. Hintikka on Aristotle's fallacies. 
Synthese, 113:217-239, 1997. 
[Woods and Hansen, 2003] John Woods and Hans V. Hansen. The subtleties of Aristotle's non- 
cause. Logique et Analyse, 2003. To appear. 
[Woods and Hansen, in progress] John Woods and Hans V. Hansen. From dialogue to axiom: 
The logic of Sophistical Refutations. In progress. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

ARISTOTLE'S 
UNDERLYING 
LOGIC 
George Boger 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 
Aristotle's commitment to reason and scientific understanding 
The enlightenment thinkers of the ancient fifth century were natural heirs to the 
earlier thinkers who had aimed to replace mythopoeic and religious explanation 
of material phenomena with extensive observation and naturalistic explanation. 
With the advent of democracy and an increasing market economy there came a 
new spirit of inquiry, a new reliance on reasoned argumentation, and a new com- 
mitment to understanding nature. The aspirations of the enlightenment activists 
blossomed in the humanist ideals of scientific rationalism and political liberty, in 
profound philosophical inquiry into metaphysics, epistemology and ethics, and in 
artistic and cultural works of enduring value. These ancients condemned super- 
stition in a way that recalls Hume's exhortation to employ philosophy as "the 
sovereign antidote.., 
against that pestilent distemper ... 
to restore men to 
their native liberty". We might recall Heraclitus's own exhortation to listen to 
the logos, the aims of the Pythagorean math&natikoi, the nous of Anaxagoras, 
and the condemnation of superstition by Hippocrates in The Sacred Disease and 
Ancient Medicine. Sophocles especially captured this spirit in Antigone (332-375) 
where he has the Chorus sing that "there are many wonders, but nothing is more 
wonderful than a human being". Indeed, Prometheus might well have been their 
patron saint, because, in providing humans with various technai, he affirmed opti- 
mism about their future. A principle underlying this optimism holds that human 
beings can understand themselves and nature sufficiently to govern their own des- 
tinies without the external and apparently capricious interventions of supernatural 
beings. These ancients embraced Kant's dictum, expressed many centuries later, 
"Sapere aude!" 
"Dare to know!". Their steady strides in the second half of the 
fifth century toward consolidating and rationally organizing the sciences helped to 
bring the earlier inquiries to fruition and prepared the way for the enduring ac- 
complishments of the later philosophers, scientists, and political theorists. Many 
high points mark the achievements of this enlightenment, but two stand out for 
their progressive humanist ambition. As Protagoras in relation to the social world 
developed a political techng that affirmed the teachability of virtue and citizenship 
and thus promoted an empowering democratic activism, so Hippocrates in relation 
to the natural world developed a medical techn~ that affirmed the intelligence of 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
9 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

102 
George Boger 
human beings to intervene in the workings of nature to preserve health and to 
prevent disease. 
Aristotle, interestingly himself the son of a physician, is an exemplary fourth 
century heir to enlightenment trends in science and philosophy. He affirmed the 
principle that nature in its diversity and human beings in their complexity are 
comprehensible. In Metaphysics 1.2 he openly avows a humanist ideal kindred to 
that of Hippocrates in Ancient Medicine. 1 
The acquisition of this knowledge [~xtoz@r} (epist6m6)]... [has been] 
regarded as not suited for man .... God alone may have this prerog- 
ative, and it is fitting that a man should seek only such knowledge as 
becomes him [and not, as the poets say, arouse the gods' jealousy]. But 
we should not believe in divine jealousy; for it is proverbial that bards 
tell many lies, and we ought to regard nothing more worthy of honor 
than such knowledge. 2 (982b28-983a7) 
Aristotle in the fourth century embraced the earlier enlightenment's daring to know 
and its optimistic confidence in reason's ability to establish objective knowledge. 
We can thus appreciate his exhortation in Nicomachean Ethics 10.7 that "we not 
follow the proverb-writers to 'think mortal thoughts' ... 
Rather, as far as we 
can, we ought to strive to be immortal and to go to all lengths to live a life that 
expresses our supreme element" (1177b31-34). 
This supreme element consists 
precisely in the capacity of intellect by which human beings make both themselves 
and nature objects of contemplation. 
Aristotle boldly began Metaphysics by affirming that "all men naturally desire 
to know". He then traced the acquisition of knowledge from sensation through 
memory of the same thing and finally to art and science (epist6m6), which are 
produced through extensive experience. 
Art [x~Xv~] is born when out of many bits of information derived from 
experience there emerges a grasp of those similarities in view of which 
they are a unified whole. Thus, a man is experienced who knows that 
1Consider a typical passage from Ancient Medicine (AM) on the scientific spirit and from 
The Sacred Disease (SD) against superstition. "Some physicians and scientists say that it would 
be impossible for anyone to know medicine who does not know what species-man consists of, 
this knowledge being essential for giving patients correct medical treatment. The question that 
they raise, however, is... [wholly an abstract] matter [fit only] for [the likes of] 'philosophy'... I 
consider, first, that all that has been said or written by scientist or physician about natural science 
has less to do with medicine than it has with the art of writing [or painting]. Next, I consider 
that clear knowledge of nature can be derived from no other source except from medicine" (AM 
20). "[The so-called sacred disease] is not any more divine or more sacred than other diseases, 
but has a natural cause, and its supposed divine origin is due to men's inexperience, and to 
their wonder at its peculiar character .... Men continue to believe in its divine origin because 
they are at a loss to understand it ... 
But if it is to be considered divine just because it is 
wonderful, there will be not one sacred disease but many ... other diseases are no less wonderful 
and portentous" (SD 1, 2-14). Similar passages in The Art express this same spirit. 
2We use R. Hope's 1960 translation of Metaphysics with modification. All emphases in 
Aristotle's texts cited here and below are added unless otherwise indicated. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
103 
when Callias was ill of this disease he was helped by this medicine, and 
so for Socrates and for many others, one by one; but to have art is to 
grasp that all members of the group of those who are ill of this disease 
have been helped by this medicine. 
Now experience [@xstp[a] seems in no respect inferior to art in a situ- 
ation in which something is to be done .... The reason is that experi- 
ence, like action or production, deals with things severally as concrete 
individuals, whereas art deals with them generally. Thus, a physician 
does not cure species-man (except incidentally), but he cures Callias, 
Socrates, or some other individual with a proper name, each of whom 
happens to be a man. If, then, someone lacking experience, but know- 
ing the general principles of the art, sizes up a situation as a whole, he 
will often, because he is ignorant of the individuals within that whole, 
miss the mark and fail to cure; for it is the individual that must be 
cured. 
Nevertheless, we believe that knowing and understanding [xd ys ~t~~ 
 
xb ~[st~] characterize art rather than experience. 
And so we 
take experts [xob~ xsX,[x~ ] in an art to be wiser than men of mere 
experience; because wisdom presumably comes only with knowledge, 
and we believe that the experts can analyze and explain, whereas others 
cannot. Men of experience discern the fact "that", but not the reason 
"why". Hence we also hold master workmen [xob~ &pXtx~ 
in 
each craft to be more valuable and discerning and wise than manual 
laborers [xcS,  
because the former can discriminate the 
various factors relevant to the various effects produced; whereas the 
latter, like inanimate objects, produce effects, as fire burns, without 
knowing what they are doing. Inanimate objects produce their effects 
somehow by nature; and manual workers, by habit. Master workers 
are presumably wiser, then, not because they are practical, but because 
they have their reasons and can explain what they are doing [&XX& x~ 
9 b Xdyov ~Xstv ~O~oOg x~[ ~r ~[~[~r yvcop[~stv]. (981a5-981b6) 
Notwithstanding a class supremacy expressed here, it is evident that Aristotle 
was animated by a firm commitment to the centrality of reason in human life. 
Indeed, his many treatises on natural science, metaphysics, ethics and politics give 
expression to his commanding commitments to discovering truth and establishing 
knowledge. Thus, in spite of his frequent complaints about Socrates, Aristotle 
nevertheless embraced his teaching in Phaedo (89d) that "there is no worse sin 
than misology" and in Apology (38a) that "the unexamined life is not worth living 
for a human being". The lessons of Nicornachean Ethics require a life of reason 
for realizing one's humanity and achieving happiness. Human virtue consists in 
making excellent the soul's deliberative and scientific faculties: practical wisdom 
(q)pdv~at~) "is a state grasping the truth, involving reason [~sx~ Xdyou], concerned 
with action about what is good and bad for a human being" (NE 6.5: 1140b4-6); 

104 
George Boger 
and wisdom (~o~[~) "is understanding plus scientific knowledge [voSq  
~xtox~B] 
of the most honorable things" (NE 6.7: 1141a18-20; cf. Meta. 982a4-6). Human 
happiness requires a philosophic life. When we consider Aristotle's bold statements 
in On the Soul 3.5 and 3.7 that "actual knowledge is identical with its object [xb ~' 
~6~6 ~o~t~ f}  
~v~py~t~v ~nto~f~p~ ~(o npdyp~t]" (430a19-20 & 431ai-2), we can 
more fully appreciate his exhortation in Nicomachean Ethics 10.7 that reaffirms 
the spirit of his inquiry in Metaphysics 1.2 not to bow to ignorance and inability, 
but always "to live a life that expresses our supreme dement". Prometheus may 
have stolen for us fire from the hearth of the Olympians, but Aristotle aimed to 
secure for us a place at their table. In this connection, then, Aristotle's logical 
investigations are among his enduring accomplishments toward realizing this end. 
1.2 
Previous interpretations 
Until recently the difference between traditional or 'Aristotelian' logic and Aristo- 
tle's own ancient logic had been blurred. This is similar to the blurring of a similar 
distinction between Christian religion and the teachings of Jesus, or the difference 
between various 'Marxian' philosophies and the teachings of Karl Marx. It is re- 
marl<able, for example, that for Aristotle in every syllogism the conclusion follows 
logically from the premisses. This contrasts with the usage of traditional logicians, 
who continue to speak of invalid syllogisms. For Aristotle this is a contradiction in 
terms, an oxymoron. In addition, Aristotle would never have tested the validity or 
invalidity of a syllogism according to rules of quality, quantity, and distribution. 
He had his own methods for establishing validity and invalidity. However, it was 
really not possible meaningfully to distinguish the historical logic of Aristotle from 
its later accretions and compare the two until modern logicians examined Aris- 
totle's syllogistic through the lens of mathematical logic 
that is, until modern 
logicians turned their attention specifically to the formal aspects of deductive dis- 
courses apart from their subject matters. As a result, studies of Aristotle's logic 
since the early 20 th century have established his genius as a logician of considerable 
originality and insight. Indeed, we can now recognize many aspects of his logical 
investigations that are themselves modern, in the sense that modern logicians are 
making discoveries that Aristotle had already made or had anticipated. Perhaps 
the longevity of this oversight about the nature and accomplishments of his logi- 
cal investigations is attributable to scholars not having recognized that Aristotle 
expressly treated the deduction process itself. 
Jan Lukasiewicz initiated the reassessment of Aristotle's syllogistic in the 1920s. 
He was followed by James W. Miller, I. M. Bochenski, and Gfinther Patzig among 
others. This reassessment culminated in the 1970s and 1980s with the works of 
John Corcoran, Timothy Smiley, and Robin Smith. These modern logicians used 
mathematical logic to model Aristotle's logic and discovered a logical sophisti- 
cation long overlooked by traditionalist logicians such as R. Whately, H. W. B. 
Joseph, J. N. Keynes, W. D. Ross, and R. M. Eaton. These traditionalists, whose 
modern origin can be traced to the Port Royal Logic, believe that Aristotle com- 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
105 
posed Prior Analytics as a logic manual for studying categorical arguments or 
syllogisms. They take a syllogism to be a fully interpreted premiss-conclusion 
argument whose validity or invalidity is determined by applying rules of quality, 
quantity, and distribution, all of which really only help to define a syllogism. How- 
ever, traditionalists tend to conflate this sense of a syllogism with another sense 
when they take a syllogism also to be a relatively uninterpreted argument pattern 
whose instances are valid or invalid arguments. 
Now, in spite of their equally criticizing traditionalist interpreters, mathemati- 
cal logicians themselves tend to fall into two camps concerning Aristotle's project 
in Prior Analytics. In fact, when modern logicians mathematically modeled Aris- 
totle's logic, they tacitly distinguished two tendencies in the traditionalist inter- 
pretation, the one treating what it believed were Aristotle's axiomatic interests, 
the other treating Aristotle's argumental interests. The axiomaticist interpreta- 
tion by Lukasiewicz, Bochenski, Miller, and Patzig takes a syllogism to be a single, 
logically true conditional proposition, some of which are taken to be axioms. On 
this interpretation Prior Analytics contains an axiomatized deductive system with 
an implicit underlying propositional logic. Euclid's Elements is an ancient ana- 
logue. The axiomaticists examine Aristotle's syllogistic mathematically from a 
Frege-Russell view of logic as formal ontology. On the other hand, deductionists 
examine Aristotle's logic mathematically from a Quinian view of logic as formal 
epistemology. 3 The deductionist interpretation of Corcoran, Smiley, and Smith 
takes a syllogism to be a deduction, that is, to be a fully interpreted argumenta- 
tion having a cogent chain of reasoning in addition to premisses and a conclusion. 
On this interpretation the number of premisses is not restricted to two. This in- 
terpretation sees Prior Analytics as having proof-theoretic interests relating to a 
natural deduction system. Interpretive lines, then, are drawn along what each view 
considers a syllogism to be and what each takes to be Aristotle's accomplishment 
in Prior A nalytics. 
However, notwithstanding significant differences among modern interpretations, 
there are two striking similarities. (1) All three interpretations consider the pro- 
cess of reduction (&~ycoy~; &~yct~) treated in Prior Analytics A7 in virtually 
the same way. The various interpreters hold that reduction amounts to deduction 
of some syllogisms, taken as derived, from others, taken as primitive, to form a 
deductive system. In addition, they do not distinguish reduction from analysis 
(&9~Xu~tr &~Xu~). Aristotle, though, distinguished deduction from reduction 
and each of these from analysis. (2) The axiomaticists and deductionists equally 
consider Aristotle to have employed the method of counterargument to establish 
knowledge of invalidity in his treatment of syllogisms in Prior Analytics AJ-6. 
However, Aristotle there used neither the method of counterargument nor the 
3j. Corcoran (1994) clarifies two approaches to logic that have been the vantage points of 
modern interpretations using the theoretical apparatus of mathematical logic. From the view- 
point of formal ontology, logic investigates certain general aspects of reality, and so Aristotle is 
seen to deduce laws of logic from axiomatic origins; he is concerned with logical truths. From the 
viewpoint of formal epistemology, logic amounts to an investigation of deductive reasoning 
per se, and so Aristotle is seen to describe deductions and the process of deduction. 

106 
George Boger 
method of counterinterpretation. It is astonishing that such different interpreta- 
tions of a syllogism could produce such similar views about the logical relationships 
among the syllogisms. 
In great measure, interpretive problems are attributable to scholars not having 
sufficiently recognized Aristotle's acumen in distinguishing logicaland metalogical 
discourses. Deductions are equally performed in different languages: (1) in an 
object language about a given subject matter and (2) in a metalanguage, which is 
used to model formal aspects of object language discourses relating to sentences, 
arguments, argumentations and deductions. Discourses in these categorially dif- 
ferent languages may or may not use the same deduction system or the same logic 
terms with the same or different denotations. We distinguish an object language 
deduction from a metalogical deduction. Aristotle understood his syllogistic de- 
duction system to function at both levels. In Prior A nalytics he both studied his 
syllogistic logic and its applications and he used this logic in that study. Tradi- 
tionalists, however, altogether missed Aristotle's making this distinction by their 
conflating two senses of a syllogism and, consequently, they overlooked a syllogis- 
tic deduction process. Axiomaticists mistook a conditional sentence corresponding 
to a syllogism for the syllogism itself to confuse the two levels of discourse and 
thereby they lost sight of Aristotle's principal concern with deduction. Still, they 
were correct to focus on his metalogical treatment of 'syllogistic forms', even if in 
their enthusiasm to apply mathematical logic to Aristotle's work they mistakenly 
saw an axiomatized deductive system in Prior Analytics. Deductionists correctly 
focused attention on Aristotle's concern with the process of deduction and a natu- 
ral deduction system. However, in reacting to the axiomaticists, they did not take 
Aristotle as himself modeling object language discourses by means of a metalogical 
discourse. Nor, then, did they consider his metalogical discourse to be sufficiently 
formal for his having distinguished logical syntax from semantics. Deductionists 
modeled Aristotle's logic but did not recognize Aristotle as himself providing an 
ancient model of an underlying logic with a formal language. 
1.3 
Aristotle's project: to establish an underlying logic 
Aristotle would have agreed with Alonzo Church that "(formal) logic is concerned 
with the analysis of sentences or of propositions and of proof with attention to 
the form in abstraction from the matter" (1956: 1; author's emphasis). Thus, 
for Church the science of logic is a metalogical study of underlying logics (1956: 
57-58). 
The difference between logic and metalogic is drawn between using a 
logic to process information about a given subject matter with a given object 
language and studying a logic or an underlying logic, which involves a language, 
a semantics, and a deduction system. 
Logicians use a metalanguage to study 
the formal aspects of an object language apart from its subject matter, often to 
study an underlying logic's deduction system. Aristotle undertook just such a 
study in Prior Analytics. Indeed, part of Aristotle's philosophical genius is to 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
107 
have established a formal logic, while at the same time making the study of logic 
scientific. He recognized that deductions about a given subject matter are topic 
specific and pertain to a given domain, say to geometry or to arithmetic or to 
biology, but that such deductions employ a topic neutral deduction system to 
establish knowledge of logical consequence. 
In having a keen interest in epistemics, Aristotle shares with modern logicians 
the notion that central to the study of logic is examining the formal conditions 
for establishing knowledge of logical consequence 
that logic, then, is a part of 
epistemology. He composed Prior Analytics and Posterior Analytics to establish a 
firm theoretical and methodological foundation for &~o~t 
~to~f}~ (apodeik- 
tik~ epist~m~), or demonstrative knowledge (24a10-11). In Nicomachean Ethics 
6, where he treated the intellectual excellences, Aristotle indicated the importance 
he attributed to demonstration (~5~t~t~ [apodeixis]): "scientific knowledge, then, 
is a demonstrative state [~tq &~o~t215 
that constitutes an appropriate confi- 
dence in the results of deductive reasoning (1139b18-36; cf. Po.An.A2: 71b18-22). 
He saw his purpose in Prior Analytics precisely to establish confidence in the de- 
duction process and particularly in his syllogistic deduction system. To accomplish 
this project he especially studied the formal or syntactic matter of deducibility. 
Aristotle thought of deduction as a kind of computational process. Indeed, the 
verb 'ou;~),oy[~o0c~t' (sullogizesthai) used by Aristotle to denote the special kind 
of deduction process treated in Prior Analytics derives from mathematical calcu- 
lation. His special concern, then, was to develop a deduction apparatus by which 
someone could decide in a strictly mechanical, or computational, manner which 
sentences are logical consequences of other sentences. 
Aristotle's promethean contribution to science and philosophy, then, concerns 
his study of the deduction process itself. He knew that a given sentence is either 
true or false; and he recognized this to be the case independent of a participant. 
He also knew from his familiarity with mathematical argumentation and dialec- 
tical reasoning that a given sentence either follows necessarily or does not follow 
necessarily from other given sentences; likewise, he recognized this to be the case 
independent of a participant. These are ontic matters having to do with being. 
In addition, Aristotle knew that the truth or falsity of a given sentence or the 
validity or invalidity of a given argument might not be known to one or another 
participant. Now, a given axiomatic science aims to establish knowledge about its 
proper subject matter (Po. An. AI: 71a1-11 & A3: 72b19-22). Since Aristotle 
took such a science to consist principally in the collection of sentences 
defini- 
tions, axioms, theorems 
of its extended discourse, the project of such a science 
is to decide which sentences pertaining to its subject matter are true, or theorems, 
and which sentences, for that matter, are false and not theorems. 
Procedures 
for deciding a sentence's truth or falsity are epistemic matters having to do with 
knowing. 
In respect of epistemics Aristotle recognized two ways to establish the truth of 
a given sentence: (1) by induction (~x~y~y~) and (2) by deduction (Po.An.A1-2, 
EN 6.3 & Meta. 1.9: 992b30-993a1). In respect of an axiomatic science, while 

108 
George Boger 
definitions and axioms, or first principles, are determined inductively and are not 
the result of a deductive process, 4 its theorems are decided deductively. In the 
works of the Organon, particularly in Prior Analytics and Posterior Analytics, 
Aristotle treated the deductive method for establishing knowledge that a given 
sentence is true. This project requires two steps (Pr. An. AI: 25b28-31), which 
he treated separately in Prior Analytics and Posterior Analytics. In Posterior An- 
alytics Aristotle treated the requirements for demonstrative science, a constituent 
part of which is demonstration. He writes in Posterior Analytics A2: 
By a demonstration [&x6~t~] I mean a scientific deduction [auXXo- 
yta~ab~ ~xtGx~ao~t 
and by scientific I mean a deduction by possess- 
ing which we understand something ... demonstrative understanding 
[x~, &xo~txxtx~, ~XtGT~a~v] in particular must proceed from items 
that are true and primitive and immediate and more familiar than and 
prior to and explanatory of the conclusions. There can be a deduction 
[au),XoytG~ab~ (sullogisrnos)]even if these conditions are not met, but 
there cannot be a demonstration [&xd~et~t~] 
for it will not bring 
about understanding [~tax~g~,]; in respect of a given subject matter]. 
(71b17-25; cf. Top. AI: 100a27-29) 
Aristotle 
early 
distinguished 
deduction 
(sullogismos) 
from 
demonstration 
(apodeixis). In Prior Analytics A~ he stated that he would treat deduction before 
demonstration because it is more universal: "for [every] demonstration is a kind of 
deduction, but not every deduction is a demonstration" (25b30-31). In Posterior 
Analytics A2 (cf. Pr. An. B2-~) he determined this universality to consist in a 
deduction's being possible even when the premiss sentences are not antecedently 
known to be true or even when they are false. Thus, one can know that the con- 
clusion sentence of a given demonstration is true because (1) its premiss sentences 
are all true and (2) it is a deduction. 
A deduction per se, then, establishes knowledge, not that the sentence that is 
the conclusion of a given argument is true, but only that it follows necessarily, or 
logically, from the sentences in a premiss-set. Aristotle made an important distinc- 
tion in his logical investigations between epistemic concerns and ontic concerns. 
This is especially evident in Prior Analytics BI-~ where he treated the deducibil- 
ity of true and false sentences from various combinations of true and false sentences 
taken as premisses. This distinction indicates an understanding of logical conse- 
quence that modern logicians will recognize. The confidence one acquires from a 
demonstration derives from knowing, as Aristotle often pointed out, that it is im- 
possible for true sentences to imply a false sentence (Pr. An. B2-~). Given true 
4A science's first principles are part of the premiss-set in an extended deductive discourse. 
Aristotle referred to these as "unmiddled" (~a~oo~), immediate or indemonstrable, that is, not 
themselves products of demonstration; their truth is established independently. See Po.An.A3 
on the notion that not every categorical sentence is demonstrable. In an extended deductive 
discourse the derived theorems are added to the original principles as additional premisses for 
subsequent derivations. Euclid's Elements serves as an ancient example. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
109 
sentences as premisses, established (initially) by means independent of deduction, 
one can be certain that the conclusion sentence of a demonstration also is true 5 
precisely because it is shown to be a logical consequence of other true sentences. In 
Prior A nalytics Aristotle was especially concerned to determine which formal pat- 
terns of argumentation might be used to establish knowledge that a given sentence 
necessarily follows from other given sentences. In particular, he saw his project as 
determining "how every syllogism is generated" (25b26-31) by identifying which 
elementary argument patterns could serve as rules analogous to such patterns as 
modus ponens, modus tollens, and disjunctive syllogism for modern propositional 
logic. 
Looking back, we see that mathematicians of the fourth century had been as- 
siduously attending to axiomatizing geometry. This activity principally concerned 
condensing the entire wealth of geometric knowledge into small sets of definitions 
and axioms from which the theorems of geometry could be derived and set out as 
a long, extended discourse. Euclid's Elements is an extant fruit of this activity. 
Except for identifying a small set of common notions (xot~[ ~pX~[ or x~ xot~), 
these mathematicians were not concerned with studying the epistemic process 
underlying geometric discourse. They took geometry intuitively as an informal 
axiomatic system (Church 1956: 57) with an implicit underlying logic. The an- 
cient mathematicians may have formalized the truths of geometry, but they hardly 
formalized the deductive method for processing the information already contained 
in its definitions and axioms. 
Undoubtedly Aristotle had participated in discussions, in the Academy and 
elsewhere, about axiomatizing geometry. 
He may have asked about deduction 
rules used to establish geometric theorems. Indications that he did include his 
attention to various proofs such as that of the incommensurability of the diagonal 
with the side of a square and those related to properties of triangles, and his 
frequent attention to the common notions of the mathematical sciences; there is 
also his curious mention of the middle term and syllogistic reasoning in connection 
with geometric demonstration (Po. An. Ag: 76a4-10; A12: 77b27-28; cf. Pr. An. 
A35 & A2~). Aristotle surely wondered how one could be assured in geometric 
demonstrations that a conclusion necessarily follows from premisses. This matter 
is all the more interesting in the case of longer, more involved demonstrations. 
Still, we cannot say that he undertook a metalogical study of geometric proof. 
Perhaps it was Aristotle's own insight or an implicit part of the philosophical 
discussion of the time that the axiomatization of geometry could serve in some 
way as a model for formalizing the non-mathematical sciences such as botany 
and zoology. Some such notion seems to have animated his scientific and logical 
investigations. 6 Now, the actual project of establishing a given science's definitions 
5Aristotle recognized two necessities in a demonstration when he remarked about that which 
"it is impossible for it to be otherwise" (Po. An. A2: 71b15-16): (1) that having to do with 
the subject matter of a demonstration -- that about which; (2) that having to do with logical 
consequence 
that following necessarily. See below Section 5.3 on Aristotle's notion of logical 
consequence. 
6See, for example, on the matter of Aristotle's application, or lack of application, of his 

110 
George Boger 
and axioms and then its theorems, which would conform to the criteria set out in 
Posterior Analytics A2, did not concern Aristotle in the Organon. This project 
lies outside the scope of logic. Rather, his preeminent concern there was to study 
deduction and demonstration per se: not with, that is, one or another distinct 
subject matter, but with the formal deduction process that has no similar subject 
matter. Aristotle in his logical investigations subordinated a concern with the what 
or the why and wherefore to focus on the that and the how. Thus, presupposing 
various axiomatic sciences with distinct domains, he took up the narrower and 
more poignant questions about the epistemic process of deriving theorems from 
axioms. Aristotle especially examined the deductive foundations of demonstration, 
that is, of demonstrative knowledge or axiomatic science. 
The first chapters of Metaphysics 1 reveal Aristotle's intellectual disposition 
toward scientific knowledge and signal the importance he attributed to metalogi- 
cal study of deduction. In fact, Aristotle identified this task as a province proper 
only to philosophy. In Metaphysics 2.1 he writes that "philosophy is the science of 
truth [z~v q~tXo(~oq0[~ ~tozY]~lv zf N ~XT}0~[c~]" (993b20). And since "status in be- 
ing governs status in truth [~5o0' ~x~ozov d)~ ~X~t zoo ~twt, oSzc0  
zfl~ &X~0~[~]" 
(Meta. 2.1: 993b30-31), the philosopher's project includes studying, not a par- 
ticular part of being, but being-qua-being (zb 6v ~ 5v; Meta. #.1" 1003a21-26). 
"The philosopher must have within his province the first principles [z&~ &px~] and 
primary factors of primary beings" (Meta. #.2: 1003b17-19) and "be able to view 
things in a total way" (1004a34-1004b1). Accordingly, "it is not the geometer's 
[nor any other specialist's] business to answer questions about what contrariety is, 
or perfection, or being, or unity, or sameness, or diversity [or even, for that mat- 
ter, about deduction rules]; for him these remain postulates [~ 5~o0~G~co~]" (Meta. 
4.2: 1005a11-13; cf. 1005a31). Later in Metaphysics 4.3 Aristotle addressed the 
philosopher's responsibility to examine certain axioms precisely because they refer 
to all of being- being-qua-being 
and not just a part of being (1005a21-22). 
But it is clear that the axioms extend to all things as being (since they 
all have being in common); hence the theory of axioms [xep[ zo6zcov 
(&~bS~aczz~v) ~z[v/l Os~p[~] also belongs to him who knows being as 
being. (1005a27-29) 
He is not writing about axioms special to a particular science, but about ontic 
principles that apply alike to all domains. 
After indicating the limitations of the special sciences for examining these ax- 
ioms, Aristotle writes that 
the philosopher, who examines the most general features of primary 
being, must investigate also the principles of deductive reasoning [zC~v 
auXXoytGztxcSv &p;(cSv] .... So that he who gets the best grasp of be- 
ings as beings must be able to discuss the basic principles of all being 
syllogistic to the actual project of axiomatizing a natural science: J. Lennox 1987, R. Bolton 
1987, J. Hintikka 1996, W. Wians 1996, D. K. W. Modrak 1996, J. J. Cleary 1996, and Graham 
1987. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
111 
[-~&q xdv~:(o~ [3s[3~oxdx~q], and he is the philosopher. (1005b5-6-11; cf. 
Meta. 11.~ ) 
Immediately Aristotle cites the principle of non-contradiction as one of the princi- 
ples "about which it is impossible to be mistaken" and writes, moreover, that such 
a principle that is "[necessary] in order to understand anything whatever cannot 
be an assumption [xoSxo o0 X bnS0sot~]" (1005b11-12 & 15-16): "It is impossible 
for the same thing at the same time to belong and not to belong [bndpXs~ x[ 
 
p~ bndt~XS~V ] to the same thing and in the same respect" (1005b19-22). He 
states the principle here as an ontic principle, ~ but he immediately relates it to 
demonstration, implicitly reminding us that being governs truth. 
Hence, if contraries cannot at the same time belong to the same thing 
... 
and if an opinion [~6~] stated in opposition to another opinion 
is directly contrary to it, then it is evidently absurd for the same man 
at the same time to believe the same thing to be and not to be; for 
whoever denies this would at the same time hold contrary opinions 
[x&~ ~x[~ 
~6~]. 
It is for this reason that all who carry out a 
demonstration rest it on this as on an ultimate belief [~c~XdXr}~ ~6~v]; 
for this is naturally a foundation also of all other axioms [q%or yhp 
This passage ends Metaphysics ~.3. Much of the remainder of Metaphysics ~ is de- 
voted to establishing the absurdity of rejecting the principle of non-contradiction 
for intelligible discourse. It is evident that Aristotle understood a philosopher's 
responsibilities to include examining the principles of deductive reasoning. 
For 
Aristotle, studying the principles of being is simultaneously a study of the princi- 
ples of thought. Logic, which he took to be a part of epistemology, is nevertheless 
grounded in the nature of being. Perhaps Aristotle appropriated Parmenides' dic- 
tum that "thought and being are the same [xb u 
~6xb ~o~ ~xtv x~  
~t~t]", 
taking this to mean that truth and logical consequence, as they appear in thought, 
follow being. 
Now, Aristotle writes in Metaphysics 11.~ that "taking equals from equals leaves 
equal remainders" is an example of a notion common to all quantitative being 
(1061b20-21). He had recognized that the common notions belonging to the math- 
ematical sciences belonged equally to all and specially to none. s And, although 
7Aristotle provides both ontic and epistemic expressions of this principle in Meta. 4. Here he 
provides an ontic expression, but in Meta. ~.~ he expresses this law in the following way: "If 
when an affirmation [q~otq] is true its denial [&x6q~uotq] is false, or when the denial is true its 
affirmation [ 
false, then it will not be possible at the same time to assert [q~vctt] and 
to deny [&noq~vctt] the same thing truly" (1008a34-1008bl). See w 
8Consider Po. An. A5: 74a17-25. "Again, it might be thought that proportion alternates 
for items as numbers and as lines and as solids and as times. In the past this used to be proved 
separately, although it is possible to prove it of all cases by a single demonstration: because 
all these items 
numbers, lengths, times, solids -- do not constitute a single named item and 
differ in form from one another, they used to be taken separately. Now, however, it is proved 

112 
George Boger 
he never articulated a complete list of common notions for the non-mathematical 
sciences, nor for that matter in any systematic way for the mathematical sciences, 
he stated in Metaphysics ~ that the principles of contradiction and of the excluded 
middle are among the common notions applicable to all rational discourse. Aristo- 
tle noticed thatthe common notions relating to different branches of mathematics, 
while stipulative of magnitudes in general, do not stipulate any one domain, such 
as arithmetic or geometry, in particular. They generally do not specify any content 
however much they anticipate establishing relationships among magnitudes special 
to a mathematical science. They are topic neutral in this circumscribed sense, and, 
thus, they have a relative independence unlike lines, angles, or numbers. They are 
neither embedded in nor mentally inextricable from the objects of a particular 
science. This is not the case with a science's principles. The common notions, 
then, may be taken in abstractum and treated on their own account irrespective 
of the subject matter of a given quantitative science. 
These common notions, moreover, generally express formal relationships among 
magnitudes within a quantitative science and accordingly apply equally to a vari- 
ety of different, quantitative domains. Because of their relative formality and their 
special universality, the common notions were applied as inference rules across the 
mathematical sciences. Their use in this epistemic manner is evident in Euclid's 
Elements. 9 Aristotle's having recognized the common notions as principles of 
reasoning had profound consequences for the development of ancient logic. Un- 
derstanding this and that Aristotle took a syllogism to fit an elementary argument 
pattern with only valid instances help to confirm the rule-nature of his statements 
in Prior A nalytics Ad-6 relating to when a syllogism comes about. In the case 
of Euclid's common notions, two magnitudes remain incommensurable without 
there being a third, or middle, that unites them as extremes in a particular way 
using a common notion makes this evident. An exactly analogous relationship 
applies in the case of the patterns of perfect or complete syllogisms, the x~),~tot 
(~uXXoyt(~[adt (teleioi sullogismoi), in Prior Analytics A~ in respect of relating 
substantive terms and making evident their connections. 
Aristotle's manner of 
expressing the patterns of the syllogisms in sentences beginning with '~v' and 'd' 
comports exactly with Euclid's expressions of the common notions and suggests 
their similar rule-nature, i~ Aristotle went on to express his rules using schematic 
letters where Euclid did not. Scholars have overlooked Aristotle's written state- 
ments of the rules to see only their schematic representations. Consequently, they 
have not recognized this as part of his effort to model a logic. Accordingly, they 
universally: what they suppose to hold of them universally does not hold of them as lines or 
as numbers but as this." We use J. Barnes's (1994) translation of Posterior Analytics with 
modification. 
9I. Mueller (1981: 32-38), following T. Heath (1956: 117-124, 221-226), maintains that 
Euclid's common notions serve as deduction rules in his proofs. He believes this is the case even 
allowing that Euclid did not treat the matter of deducibility. Cf. B. Einarson 1936:42-49 and 
H. D. P. Lee 1935: 114-115. 
i~ 
T. Heath 1956:120-122 on ancient ideas of the common notions. Also see Heath 1956: 
221-232 on Euclid's treatment of the common notions. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
113 
missed this link to mathematics and thus they missed an important part of his 
theory of deduction. 
Finally in this connection, besides stating syllogistic deduction rules and his 
actually using the patterns of the teleioi sullogismoi as rules in Prior Analytics, 
Aristotle virtually stated his taking them formally as rules in Prior A nalytics A30 
(46a10-12/15). There he used the expression 'the principles of deduction' 
"oti 
~c5~ (~uXXoyt(~(5~ ~pX~ '' 
that we also encounter in Metaphysics ~.3 (1005b7). 
Aristotle did not refer here in Prior Analytics to the principles or axioms of a 
given science, but to the most general principles of all being as they are grasped in 
thought. And again, in this same connection, he used the expression 'the principles 
of demonstrations'-- "~i ~cSv &~o~t 
&pX~[ '' -- in Metaphysics 3.2 (996b26). 
Indeed, throughout Metaphysics Aristotle used the following expressions as syn- 
onyms in referring to common notions, including the laws of non-contradiction and 
the excluded middle: 'x~  
(1061b18), '&pX~[ ' (996b26, 997a13), '~td)g~x~' 
(997a11, 13), and 'xot~t ~d~c~[' (996b28, 997a21; see esp. Po. An. A10-11). 
Thus, we can see that a pattern of a syllogism is a relatively uninterpreted object. 
In fact, Aristotle treated each pattern exactly as a topic neutral rule of deduction 
in Prior Analytics A~-Tanalogous to Euclid's use of common notions in Elements. 
Perhaps the patterns of the four teleioi sullogismoi are Aristotle's adaptation to 
the non-mathematical sciences of the common notions employed as deduction rules 
in the mathematical sciences. 
1.~ 
The scope of this study 
Our concern here is to present Aristotle's system of logic while also revealing the 
mathematical sophistication of his logical investigations. Modern logicians believe 
that the possibility of mathematical logic, an important part of which involves 
generating models, consists in making a clear distinction between syntax and se- 
mantics. They also believe that the clear distinction between syntax and semantics 
resulted from borrowing symbolic notations from mathematical practice and then 
applying them to studies of deductive logics, but that earlier thinkers, lacking such 
notations, could not have made such distinctions. However, mathematical logic, 
considered as a discipline in general, has a formal and a material aspect. Its for- 
mal aspect has principally to do with the symbolic notations that have helped to 
illuminate underlying structural, or logical, features of deductive discourses. Yet, 
the substance of mathematical logic does not consist in its sophisticated notations, 
but in the problems logicians consider when studying underlying logics 
that is, 
in particular, when they distinguish a logic's syntax and its semantics and then ask 
questions about their relationships. Principal in this respect have been questions 
about a logic's consistency, soundness, and completeness, which involve determin- 
ing relationships between deducibility and logical consequence. A distinguishing 
feature of mathematical logic, then, consists precisely in these substantive mat- 

114 
George Boger 
ters. 11 Remarkably, with only a rudimentary notation Aristotle considered just 
such mathematical matters in his concern to establish the practical, epistemic 
power of his logic for establishing scientific knowledge. In this connection we can 
grasp the revolution in the history and philosophy of logic 
the "hypostatiza- 
tion of proof' 
consolidated by Aristotle's works on logic. "Prior Analytics is 
the earliest known work which treats proofs as timeless abstractions amenable to 
investigation similar to the investigations already directed toward numbers and 
geometrical figures" (Corcoran: personal communication). Thus, Prior Analytics 
is a proof-theoretic treatise on the deduction system of an underlying logic. Aris- 
totle recognized the epistemic efficacy of certain elementary argument patterns, to 
wit, those of the syllogisms, and he formulated them as rules of natural deduc- 
tion. Having raised important metalogical questions about the properties of his 
syllogistic deduction system, he successfully established a set of formal, epistemic 
conditions for recognizing logical necessity, and in this way he became the founder 
of formal logic. 
Below we set out Aristotle's underlying logic much as he himself did in the 
works of the Organon. We include Metaphysics among the treatises of his logical 
investigations. It is natural and not surprising that modern logicians and commen- 
tators, when treating Aristotle's logic, focus principally on Prior Analytics: Prior 
Analytics is the most 'logical' of the treatises. In truth, the attraction of Prior An- 
alytics has consisted in a scholar's implicit recognition that Aristotle there treated 
the deduction system of an ancient underlying logic. We say 'implicit' because 
it was not until the studies of J. Corcoran and T. Smiley, and later those of R. 
Smith, that there is a growing explicit recognition that this is so. In any case, a 
deduction system is only one part of an underlying logic, which also contains a 
11 While the initial impetus of modern logic involved axiomatizing geometry and number theory 
and attempting to reduce mathematics to logic, it was David Hilbert in the 1920s who turned 
attention specifically to the formal deduction process and made it an object of mathematical 
investigation. He worked on devising an algorithm or decision procedure. Moreover, he noted 
that the semantic concepts of validity and satisfiability coincide with the syntactic concepts of 
derivability and consistency. Hilbert emphasized the study of such syntactic questions as those 
of consistency and completeness, which he considered to fall under what he called "metamath- 
ematics", or "proof theory". We take this attention on deduction systems to be a substantive 
concern of mathematical logic, whatever formal systems mathematical logicians may devise. Of 
course, modern mathematical logic far surpasses the accomplishments of Aristotle, particularly 
in respect of devising and studying uninterpreted formal systems. We need only mention here 
the developments of genuine variables, functions, quantification, set theory, highly formal lan- 
guages, recursion theory, and model theory. Nevertheless, if we take logic principally to treat 
underlying logics as A. Church, then we see that mathematical logic fundamentally addresses 
foundational questions about deduction systems. In addition, the origin of modern mathematical 
logic involved axiomatic systems, both in respect of ontic subject matter and epistemic formal 
matters. This was just the kind of concern that occupied Aristotle himself, whom we detect as 
distinguishing the content of an axiomatic science from the deduction apparatus used to establish 
its theorems. Aristotle came to address similar foundational questions, although likely he did not 
come to them as modern logicians initially did by way of attempting to reduce mathematics to 
logic. On Aristotle's having proof-theoretic interests, see R. Smith 1984: 594-596, 1986: 55-61, 
and 1991: 48-50. J. Corcoran (1974, 1994) and R. Smith (1989) have generally made Aristotle's 
case in this respect. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
115 
grammar and a semantics. Our contribution takes this recognition a little farther 
to hold that Aristotle intentionally aimed to develop an underlying logic along the 
lines of modernist thinking. This means that Aristotle invented a formal language 
to model his logic. However, since Aristotle did not set out his underlying logic in 
as systematic a manner as a modern logician, while, nevertheless, accomplishing 
much the same result, we employ the theoretical apparatus of modern mathe- 
matical logic to structure his account. With the aid of this template we show in 
Aristotle's own words that he was concerned with exactly similar matters as a 
modern logician. We begin by presenting Aristotle's treatment of the syntax and 
semantics of natural language in Categories, On Interpretation, and Metaphysics. 
These studies laid a foundation for his developing the formal language found in 
Prior Analytics for modeling axiomatic discourse. We then proceed to extract the 
syntax of sentence transformations leading to his establishing a set of deduction 
rules in Prior Analytics. Next we treat the logical methodology by which Aristotle 
established his deduction rules. We conclude with a statement of his understand- 
ings of "formal deducibility" and "logical consequence" and with a final section 
that summarizes four proof-theoretic accomplishments of his logical investigations. 
1.5 
Logic terminology 
The following terminology assists in our study of Aristotle's logic. We use Aris- 
totle's own terminology wherever it exists, which, interestingly, often corresponds 
exactly to ours. An argument is a two part system consisting in a set of sentences 
in the role of premisses and a single sentence in the role of conclusion; an argu- 
ment is either valid or invalid. A sentence is either true or false. We sometimes 
use 'conclusion' elliptically for 'sentence in the role of conclusion' or 'conclusion 
sentence', and similarly for 'premiss'. An argumentation is a three part system 
consisting in a chain of reasoning in addition to premisses and conclusion; an argu- 
mentation is either cogent, in which case it is a deduction, or fallacious, a fallacy. 
A sentence, an argument, and an argumentation are object language phenomena 
and domain specific. An argument pattern is a two part system consisting in a 
set of sentence patterns in the role of a premiss-set and a single sentence pattern in 
the role of a conclusion. A pattern is a metalinguistic object distinguishable from 
a form and is commonly represented schematically. An argument is said to fit, or 
to be an instance of, one or more argument patterns. 12 A given argument pattern 
may have all valid instances, all invalid instances, or some valid and some invalid 
instances. An argument pattern is not properly valid or invalid, although logicians 
have used 'valid' in this connection, but we distinguish these category differences. 
An argument pattern with all valid instances is panvalid, that with all invalid 
12We use "pattern" and "form", following J. Corcoran (1993: xxxi-xxxvii) as, e.g., Irving 
Copi (1986: 288-291) uses "form" and "specific form" and as Willard O. Quine (1982: 44) uses 
"general [logical] schema" and "special case [logical schema]". Cf. W. O. Quine 1970: 47-51. 
We can express this difference in the following way: while a given argument has only one form, 
it might fit more than one pattern. See also Corcoran 1989. 

116 
George Boger 
instances is paninvalid, and that having instances of both is neutrovalid. We 
add that an elementary 
panvalid argument 
pattern is one having a simple 
premiss-set pattern whose epistemic value consists, in many cases, in its being 
quickly evident, or 'evident through itself', that its conclusion follows necessarily. 
An elementary argument pattern may be formulated in a corresponding sentence 
to express a rule of deduction. In addition, we follow G. Patzig (1968; cf. Rose 
1968) to distinguish in Aristotle's logic a concludent pattern of two sentences in 
the role of premisses, or a premiss-pair pattern, from an inconcludent premiss- 
pair pattern. A concludent pattern has a necessary result, that is, it results in 
a panvalid pattern all of whose instances are syllogisms, while an inconcludent 
pattern has no necessary result, that is, it cannot result in a panvalid pattern but 
only in a paninvalid pattern with only invalid argument instances. 
In addition, we understand Aristotle to have considered a uuXXoyt(~[ad~ (sullo- 
gismos), which we translate by 'syllogism', to be a valid argument with only two 
premiss sentences, having only three terms, in one of three figures. 13 A syllo- 
gism, then, is an elementary argument fitting a panvalid pattern. No syllogism is 
invalid. Aristotle saw his project in Prior Analytics to identify all such patterns, 
precisely because of their epistemic efficacy in the deduction process. We use the 
traditional names of the 'syllogisms' 
'Barbara', 'Celarent', etc. 14 
to name 
patterns of syllogisms, just as 'modus ponens' names a kind of familiar pattern in 
propositional logic used in a deduction process. Still, these names do not signify 
instances of such patterns. Of course, 'Barbara' and 'modus ponens' also name de- 
duction rules. However, in some cases 
especially those pertaining to the teleioi 
sullogismoi, those in Sophistical Refutations, and those in Prior A nalytics when 
Aristotle refers to a sullogismos as proving something- we translate 'sullogismos' 
by 'deduction'. In these cases Aristotle recognized an epistemic process to occur 
in the mind of a participant who grasps that a given sentence is a logical conse- 
quence of other given sentences. Still, when he writes, in relation to a deduction 
process, that a syllogism arises (u 
we understand him not to mean that a 
syllogism per se is a deduction, but that one's arising during a deductive chain of 
reasoning signals making logical consequence evident, just as when a participant 
links given propositions and produces an instance of modus ponens signals logical 
consequence in propositional logic. 
Finally, we take treating patterns of sentences, patterns of arguments, and pat- 
terns of argumentations to constitute a large part of modeling a logic. Thus, for 
13In Boger 1998 I used 'sullogisrnos' rather than translate 'oukkoyto~adq' better to objectify 
its meaning. I argued that a sullogisrnos, as Aristotle treats it in Pr. An. Ad-7, 23, & ~5, is 
a panvalid argument pattern and neither an argument nor a deduction. However, Prof. David 
Hitchcock of McMaster University, while agreeing that Aristotle treated patterns in Pr. An., has 
convinced me that he did not call them 'sullogisrnoi' but reserved the word for valid arguments 
fitting such patterns. 
14The traditional names of the syllogisms in the first figure are Barbara, Celarent, Darii, and 
Ferio. The traditional names of second figure syllogisms are Camestres, Cesare, Festino, and 
Baroco and of the third figure Darapti, Datisi, Disamis, Felapton, Ferison, and Bocardo. See W. 
T. Parry (1991: 282) for a short explanation of their origin and meaning. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
117 
example, while there are numerous simple sentences in a given object language, 
each of them, nevertheless, consists in a subject and a predicate. Extracting this 
elementary pattern and representing it abstractly, or metalinguistically, is model- 
ing a simple sentence 
either by means of another sentence, using the language 
of the given object language (but, nevertheless, in the metalanguage), or by means 
of mathematical notation. In either case, a sentence is modeled and becomes an 
object of logical investigation. Thus, we take a formal language to be a model of 
one or another object language, with one or another degree of precision. In this 
way a logician can model arguments, deductions, and deduction systems better to 
study their respective properties and logical relationships. 
2 
ARISTOTLE'S ANCIENT MODEL OF AN UNDERLYING LOGIC 
Aristotle knew that deductions about geometric objects are topic specific and that 
they employ a topic neutral deduction system, even if a participant uses that sys- 
tem implicitly. In Prior A nalytics he turned his attention not to geometric or 
biological objects, nor even to geometric or biological discourses, but to the deduc- 
tion apparatus used to make evident that a given categorical sentence necessarily 
follows from other given categorical sentences. 15 Aristotle had observed a num- 
ber of elementary argument patterns used in various object language discourses, 
some of which he recognized in their use always to result in something following 
necessarily, others of which he recognized in their use never to result in something 
following necessarily. He subsequently extracted these patterns for systematic ex- 
amination. In Prior Analytics Aristotle modeled his syllogistic logic and presented 
the results of his investigating these patterns. In this connection, then, Prior Ana- 
lytics is a scientific study of the syllogistic deduction system, which, taken together 
with Categories, On Interpretation, and parts of Metaphysics, comprises Aristotle's 
treatment of an underlying logic. 
The logic underlying cogent object language discourse accounts for that dis- 
course's coherence. While this discourse is itself topic specific as it treats objects 
of a given domain, its underlying logic is topic neutral and not bound to any one 
subject matter. The science of logic is devoted in great measure to modeling these 
underlying logics and consists in their study. To accomplish this study, a logician 
must not only model the deduction system of such discourse, but he/she must also 
model the object language itself, often with an aim to make such a language more 
precise. A logician's principal concern is to extract and formalize (1) a grammar 
for the formation of sentences and their relationships and (2) a deduction system 
for sentence transformations. These are formal, syntactic concerns. A logician 
constructs a formal language to model one or more object language in respect 
of its structure. Such a formal language is taken to be uninterpreted, although 
15While Aristotle named the parts of a categorical sentence 
subject term and predicate 
terms, and the logical constants -- he did not use the expression 'categorical sentence'. This 
expression is a later invention that nevertheless captures his meaning and distinguishes this kind 
of sentence from those of, for example, natural Greek, or natural language. 

118 
George Boger 
hardly is such a formal language purely uninterpreted -- often its logical constants 
are interpreted or have an implicit intended interpretation, as are what count as 
a sentence and an argument, etc. In any case, the 'formulas' or patterns for con- 
structing and transforming sentences are relatively uninterpreted, as evidenced 
by the impossibility of assigning them meanings and truth-values (save for logics 
with identity and tautology). Thus, in modeling an underlying logic a logician also 
treats the semantics of sentences -- establishing meaning and truth conditions 
and of sentence transformations 
establishing conditions of logical consequence. 
Aristotle, then, invented an artificial language for two closely related purposes 
that embrace a modernist concern for modeling a logic. First, he wanted to develop 
a language (1) that conformed to his ontology of substance, a core of which is 
presented in Categories, and (2) that promoted a precision in scientific knowledge, 
a concern that he forcefully expressed in Metaphysics. Second, he wanted to model 
the underlying logic he developed as an epistemic instrument for scientific discourse 
both (1) to facilitate determining the properties of his logic and (2) to represent 
his logic for instructing others in its use. It is doubtful that Aristotle developed 
this artificial language to model natural language and more likely that he aimed 
to standardize scientific discourse and to model his logic. Aristotle invented four 
categorical sentence patterns, and he treated them as formal objects in order to 
establish certain of their properties and logical relationships. And while he did 
not represent his logic with a modern rigor and system, we can easily organize 
his own discourses according to a mathematical template without distortion to his 
meaning and intention. In this section we first consider Aristotle's treatment of 
the grammars of natural language and his artificial language (w 
second, the 
semantics of his language (w 
and, third, the syntax of his deduction system 
(w 
While Aristotle treated the syntax of sentences in close relation to their 
semantics, he nevertheless sufficiently distinguished them so that we can treat 
them separately. 
2.1 
Aristotle's metalinguistic study of grammar 
To extract and represent his deduction system for analysis in Prior Analytics, and 
to prepare for its application to the various axiomatic sciences as a science is con- 
strued in Posterior Analytics, Aristotle undertook a systematic study of language. 
While the Sophists are perhaps his more immediate predecessors in this connection, 
Aristotle's contributions firmly consolidated the early stages of linguistics as a spe- 
cial branch of learning. Efforts in this area are especially evident in Categories, On 
Interpretation, Metaphysics, Topics, Sophistical Refutations, and Rhetoric. In On 
Interpretation Aristotle treated the complexity of Greek grammar only generally 
as suited the purpose of his logical investigations. There he identified the simple 
sentence that predicates one thing of another thing as a proper object of logical 
analysis. By studying a natural language in these treatises Aristotle prepared 
the way to inventing the artificial language in Prior Analytics, perhaps the first 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
119 
artificial, or formal, language in the history of philosophy. And he accomplished 
this task without the aid of a sophisticated system of symbolic or mathematical 
notation. With his treatment of predication in Categories and Metaphysics in the 
background, ~ we turn now to a part of the elementary grammar examined in On 
Interpretation. 
The grammar of a natural language 
In On Interpretation 1-~ Aristotle writes about sentence formation in a natural 
language, in this case in his own natural language. There he uses Greek to mention 
and to illustrate his observations about intelligible discourse that might apply in 
principle to any language (16a5-6). In this connection he intuitively takes Greek to 
be what modern logicians call a fully interpreted language. Nevertheless, he care- 
fully focuses attention on its structural aspects apart from any meanings, except 
for purposes of illustration, that sentences might express about a subject mat- 
ter. Indeed, although he does not have expressions for 'natural language', 'object 
language', and 'metalanguage', it is evident that in On Interpretation Aristotle 
intentionally objectifies aspects of language in general and does not study only 
the Greek language in particular. On Interpretation is a metalinguistic treatise 
in which Aristotle consciously examines certain syntactic and semantic aspects of 
language. 
Aristotle treats sentence formation in a natural language as essentially consist- 
ing in combining (abv0~at~) a noun (bvo}J~) and a verb (~~; 
i.e., a predicate 
[16 9-1s]) 
to produce meaningful expression 
r 
thought. Every sentence necessarily has these two basic components, neither of 
which by itself is sufficient. 
Every affirmative sentence [xba~ x~xO~(~t~] consists in a noun and a 
verb, whether [determinate or] indeterminate. Unless there is also a 
verb, there is neither an affirmation nor a denial [o5~s}2~  
o0~' ~6~ot~]. (On Int. 10: 19b10-12; cf. Cat. 2: la16-19) i7 
In addition, Aristotle recognizes that the words making up a sentence must be 
concatenated or strung together in certain ways so as to bear meaning: 
"that 
Z6perhaps Categories (K~x~lyop[c~t) would better be named "On predication" or "On predi- 
cating properties of substance". Categories is a metalinguistic treatise on sentence formation, 
which, moreover, aims at precision and truth in the sciences. This treatise avows Aristotle's 
subscription to a correspondence notion of truth, as does On Interpretation as well as to a mate- 
rialist theory of nature, or substance. While much has been said about Categories, we here only 
provide a brief reference to Aristotle's theory of substance. Of the ten categories (listed in Cat. 
3) -- viz. substance (o6~[~), quantity (xoo6~), quality (xotdv), relation (xpdg xt), place (xo6), 
time (xo~), position (x~c0~t), condition (~X~tv), action (xo~v), and affection (x~ 
sub- 
stance is predicated of nothing but the others are predicated of a substance, a 'this'. Substance 
is treated in Cat. 5, quantity in Cat. 6, relation in Cat. 7, quality in Cat. 8, and the others in 
Cat. 9. 
17For translations of Categories and On Interpretation we work with H. P. Cooke's (1938) and 
J. L. Ackrill's (1984) translations and make significant modifications, e.g., translating '&xdq)uwtq' 
by 'sentence' and by neither 'proposition' as Cooke nor 'statement' as Ackrill. 

120 
George Boger 
the words are pronounced [merely] in succession [G0vayyu~] ] does not make them 
a unity [~[~]" (17a14). 18 In On Interpretation ~ Aristotle defines 'sentence' as 
follows: 
A sentence [Xdyoq] is meaningful speech [qo~v~ (~][a~vxt 
the parts 
of which, as expressed [separately] mean something as an expression 
but not as an affirmation [d)q q0datq, ~XX' o0 X d)q  
I mean, 
for example, that 'man' means something, but [by itself] not that it is 
or is not; there will be an affirmation or a denial [only] if something is 
added [xt xpoax~0~]. (16b26-28; cf. 10: 19b10-12) 
A noun and a verb by themselves may possess meaning, but by themselves they 
do not constitute a sentence, nor do they constitute a sentence merely by being 
strung together arbitrarily. Thus, from his notion of sentence in On Interpretation, 
we can extract Aristotle's rule for the formation of a generic sentence in a natural 
language and express it as follows: 
SFR1 
A sentence in a given natural language consists in combining a noun and 
a verb (i.e., a predicate) in certain ways so as to produce a meaningful 
expression. 
This rule identifies the broadest pattern of a sentence in a natural language. Aris- 
totle's syntax language specifies, abstractly, only nouns and verbs as its vocabu- 
lary, which are combined to form sentences according to this elementary rule. We 
might wish that Aristotle had expressed this rule with at least the modest precision 
here. However, Aristotle has neither a complete nor a complex set of syntax rules 
of sentence formation in On Interpretation. Still, it is evident from his treatment 
of this topic in his logical investigations that his understanding of the grammar of 
a natural language is richer than his lack of rigorously stated rules would indicate. 
And while this syntax rule is mixed with semantic notions, he nevertheless has 
identified here the basic pattern of a sentence in a natural language. 
Aristotle continues his discussion of grammar in On Interpretation ~ by focusing 
his principal attention on the kinds of sentence that are subject to logical analysis. 
He excludes, for example, prayers; and we take him also to exclude imperatives, 
interrogatives, and exclamations (17a3-4). In Metaphysics 9.10, for example, he 
makes this point rather emphatically: "for an affirmation and a sentence are not 
the same [o0 u 
~o~O~b xo~d~o~ot~ xo~. cpdot~]" (1051b24-25). Accordingly, Aristo- 
tle considers only those kinds of sentence that are either true (axY]0~g [aleth~s]) or 
false (~u~flq [pseud~s]); or, as we express this nowadays, he considers only those 
sentences that have a truth-value (16a9-13). 
His explicit interest is only with 
the kind of sentence that expresses a proposition, namely, with the declarative 
sentence. He writes: 
18Aristotle then drops this matter and remarks that it be treated at another place. He com- 
ments briefly on forming words in On Int. 2-3. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
121 
While every sentence [kdyoq] has meaning [~p~w~xd~], though not 
by nature but, as we observed, by convention [ouv0~ 
not every 
sentence is a declarative sentence [~noq)~vz~xb~ ~ 06 n~], but [only 
those] to which being true or false belongs [&kk' ~v ~ zb &),~O~5~v 
@O~o0~ On@X~ ]. (16b33-17a3) 
Aristotle uses '&ndq~votq' (apophansis) or '~no~c~vz~xbq X6yoq' (apophantikos lo- 
gos) to denote the declarative sentence. A little later in his discussion he uses 
' 
(kataphasis) and '&ndq~otq' (apophasis) to denote two species of declar- 
ative sentence, namely, affirmation and denial, respectively. He uses 'kdyoq' (lo- 
gos), and sometimes 'q~atq' (phasis), to denote the genus sentence, but he often 
uses 'logos' (among its other uses) interchangeably with 'apophansis' Thus, while 
a sentence consists in a noun and a verb, both of which are themselves meaningful 
sounds or expressions established by convention and not by nature, 19 they do not 
necessarily express something true or false. Truth and falsity involve predication 
(16b7, 9-10), in particular for Aristotle, predicating one thing of another one thing 
by combining (aSv0~m~) or dividing (~p~(~t~). Thus, with his discussion in On 
Interpretation together with his fuller discussion of predication in Categories, Aris- 
totle names as genuine objects of logical investigation only those sentences that 
involve predication so as to express a proposition. ~~ 
Aristotle also recognizes a natural language to consist in both simple and com- 
pound sentences. Again, his logical investigation focuses on the simple sentence, 
and in On Interpretation 5 he anticipates his treatment of sentences in Prior 
Analytics. 
One kind of declarative sentence [&ndq~wt~] is simple [&nk~], that is, 
it affirms or denies some one thing of another [~ xa~& ztvb~ ~ -d &~b 
ztv6~], while the other is composite [ouu215 
that is, a sentence 
compounded [kdyog... (%v0ezog] of [such] simple sentences. And [such] 
a simple sentence is a meaningful expression, concerning something be- 
longing or not belonging [~(~zt 5' ~ [a~ d~nkf~ &ndq)c~votg q)c0v~ o~c(vztx~q 
~r 
zo5 ~t 6n&pX~ z~ ~ ~ 6~:&pX~ ] in the different tenses. (17a20-24) 
He 
states that 
"an affirmation 
and 
a denial 
are simple 
when 
they 
denote 
[cl~[a~[vouclcz] some one thing of one other, whether 
or not universally or of some- 
thing universal [[a[~ ~ ~o~t xc~z&q)c~otg x~i. &ndq~ot~ ~ ~v xc~0' ~vbg o~[ac([vouoc(, 
x~0dXou 5vzo~  
)} ~ 6~o[~] (18a12-13). Again: 
19That for Aristotle words and sentences have meaning 
by convention 
and not by nature see On 
Int. 16a5-8, 16a26-28, and 16b33-17a2. 
Aristotle takes combining 
(o6v0~otq) to be conventional. 
Moreover, since he was aware that Greek was one language among 
others, it seems likely that he 
understood 
his metalinguistic 
posture toward language. 
2~ 
in Cat. 
4~: 2a4-I0 
complements 
what 
he writes here in On Int. 
"None 
of these 
things mentioned 
[i.e., things said without combination] 
in itself is an affirmation; an affirmation 
comes about in combination 
with other things. Every affirmation, it seems, is either true or false, 
but of things said with no combination 
none is either true or false, for example, 
'man', 'white', 
'runs' or 'wins'." Cf. On Int. 10: 20a34. 

122 
George Boger 
An affirmation [x~q)~a~g] is one that denotes [a~la~[vouac~ ] something 
of something. The subject [~o5~o] is either a noun or a something not 
having a name [an indefinite noun], and what is affirmed must be one 
thing about one thing. (19b5-7) 
Thus, in On Interpretation Aristotle recognizes two kinds of sentence (logos), in 
particular, two species of declarative sentence, that express a proposition and that 
are, accordingly, proper subjects of logical analysis (Figure 1). 
Declarative sentence 
&;~6q)~vat~ or 16yo~ ~xoq)~vxtx6q [17a23-24] 
Affirmation 
~~~'Denial 
x~x~q)~at~ [17a25] 
&;~6q)~at~ [17a25-26; cf. 17b37-18al] 
x~x~q)~xtxbq Idyo~ [12b6-7] 
&xoq)~x~xbq 
Xdyoq [12b8-9] 
Figure 1. 
Aristotle succinctly defines each of these in On Interpretation 6: "an affirmation 
is a sentence affirming one thing of another; a denial a sentence denying one 
thing of another [xocrci~cxat~ ~: ~:ar~v ~.~:6~o~vatr ~tvb~, &~:d~o~at~ ~f ~artv ~:n:dr.pocvat~ 
~tvbq ~b ~t,~b~]" (17a25-26). In this connection we can extract a second sentence 
formation rule for Aristotle, one pertaining especially to discursive discourse in 
a natural language and, following Aristotle, we restrict this rule to the simple 
sentence because it prepares us for his treatment of categorical sentences in Prior 
Analytics. 
SFR2 
A simple declarative sentence in a given natural language is a sentence 
that predicates one thing of another one thing, either attributively or 
privatively, soas to have a truth-value. 
Attributive (215 
predication produces an affirmation, privative (ax~p- 
~xtx6~) predication a denial, and such a denial always involves a negative operator 
(Pr. An. 51b31-35). We can represent the pattern of such a sentence graphically 
as follows (Figure 2). 21 
2iIn On Int. 
5:17a13-15 Aristotle remarks that 'two-footed land animal' is one thing and 
not many, but then refers this topic to another discussion. In any case, he here acknowledges 
that a term (or non-logical constant) need not be a single word. He briefly takes up this topic 
again in On Int. 11. There he claims that it is appropriate to combine predicates and subject 
terms when the predicates are not accidental to the subject. His example is "for two-footed and 
animal are contained in [~vun&pXCt ~'&p ~v] man" (21a17-18). Aristotle always has his language 
follow his theory of substance. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
123 
Pattern of a generic natural language simple sentence 
i Simple noun I 
+ 
I Simple verb (predicate) I 
Figure 2. 
Aristotle notes in On Interpretation 10:20b1-12 that the general word order in 
natural Greek does not affect meaning: "nouns [subjects] and verbs [predicates] are 
interchangeable [p~z~xt0~p~w] and express the same meaning [x~0xbv a~tve~]" 
(20bl-2). He provides some examples to establish that interchanging the place of 
a noun and a verb does not generate two contradictions for a given sentence. He 
concludes by reaffirming his meaning: "Thus, by interchanging the noun and the 
verb an affirmation and a denial remain the same" (20b10-11), or, that is, express 
the same proposition. 22 
In Sophistical Refutations Aristotle poignantly emphasizes this point about the 
kind of predication specifically relating to the kind of discourse subject to logical 
analysis. 
There he focuses on sentences used in argumentation particularly as 
premisses. He writes in Sophistical Refutations 6, in connection with reducing all 
fallacies to ignoratio elenchi: 
And since deduction is based on [declarative] sentences [taken as pre- 
misses] [~x~[ ~' 6 auXXoyta{a6~ ~x ~poz~o~cov], and refutation [6 ~' 
~Xeyxo; ] is a deduction [ouXXoyta~b~], refutation will also be based 
on [such] sentences [@x xpox~c~ec0v]. If, therefore, [such] a sentence [f? 
~pdz~c~t~] is a single predication about a single thing [~v  
~vo~], 
clearly this fallacy [viz., treating many questions as one] also depends 
on ignorance of the nature of refutation; for what is not [such] a 
sentence appears to be one [q0~tv~zc~t y~p ~v~ ~pdz~o~ ~q oOx o6~ 
~pdzc~otr 
(169a12-16) 
Of course, here Aristotle uses '~p6x~at~' (protasis) to denote a sentence (logos, 
apophansis) used as the starting point for argumentation, that is, to denote a 
sentence in the role of a premiss. His discussion here comports exactly with his 
practice in Prior Analytics and with his definition of 'protasis' there. 
A premiss, then, is a sentence affirming or denying something about 
something [IIpd~ot~ ~v o~v ~o~ ),6u 
x~z~q0~xtx6~ ~ &~oqo~tx6~ 
"Ct~)O~ XO['C~ "~t'90~]. 23 (Pr. An. AI: 24a16-17; cf. On Int. 11: 20b22- 
25) 
22 All this, of course, is easier for classical Greek than for, say, modern English, because Greek 
is a highly inflected language. 
2awe use R. Smith's (1989) translation of Prior Analytics with some modifications, notably 
translating 'sullogisrnos' by 'syllogism' and not by 'deduction' in all cases. 

124 
George Boger 
He also notes in Prior Analytics A1 that "a syllogistic premiss without quali- 
fication will be either the affirmation or the denial of one thing about another 
[{~ ~uXXou 
~ ~o6~~ ~x~5~ x~~m~ ~ ~6~m~ ~o~ x~ ~o~]- 
(24a28-30). In Posterior Analytics A22 he writes that "one thing is predicated of 
one thing [~v  
~vb~ x~x~yop~tc~0~t]" (83b17-18; cf. Po.An. A2: 72a5-14). 
While in On Interpretation Aristotle provides rules for sentence formation in 
a natural language in a rather intuitive and, by modern standards, non-rigorous 
manner, he nevertheless is especially concerned there with syntactic matters. He 
even provides definitions of denial and affirmation that have a syntactic character, 
although, again, they are mixed with semantic notions, and he cites examples to 
bear out his meaning. He writes: 
Whatever someone may affirm, it is possible as well to deny, and what- 
ever someone may deny, it is possible as well to affirm. Thus, it is ev- 
ident that each affirmative sentence has an opposite denial [~xdq)~ot~ 
&v~tx~t~vfi], just as each denial has an [opposite] affirmative. (17a30- 
an) 
Here Aristotle is particularly concerned with contradictories and not with con- 
traries. 
In this connection Aristotle provides in On Interpretation a rather syntactic 
rule for forming the negation, or contradictory, of a given affirmation. 
This rule 
is similar to that for forming an indefinite noun by prefixing 'o0' (ou, ouk, oux) 
to the common noun. 24 His example of negating a common noun is the following 
(16a29-30): 
~v0pco~oq (man) 
oOx ~v0pc0;:oq (non-man or not-man) 
In On Interpretation 10:20a7-9 he states that the 'ouk' is attached to the noun 
and is not a part of the verb: "but the 'not' must be added to 'man' [&ll& xb 
o0, x~v &~dq)~otv, x~ ~v0pc0~o~ xpoo0~x~ov]". Table 1 provides two sets of his 
examples of contradictories from On Interpretation 10, each having its one negation 
(contradictory) matched with its one given affirmation (19b14-19; cf. 19b27-29 & 
19b38-20al). 
It is interesting to notice that Aristotle does not cite a partial privative sentence 
as the negation of a universal attributive sentence as is his customary practice when 
he treats contradictories in Prior Analytics. Here he prefixes an entire sentence 
with 'ou' in a syntactic way, and he does this both with the verb 'to be' and with 
transitive and intransitive verbs. Thus, for "II~ ~(~xt~ ~v0pc0~o~ ~[ 
("Every 
man is just") in the above examples he could have used "Ttq ~v0pco~o~ o0x gaxt 
24In On Int. 2 (16a29-32; cf. On Int. 10: 19b7-10) Aristotle coined an expression for a noun 
prefixed by 'o6' (o6 o6 
'gvo~a~ &dptoxov. This is usually translated as 'indefinite noun' or 
'indeterminate noun'. He also named indeterminate verbs (On Int. 3: 16b11-15) with a similar 
prefix: '15~tc~ &dpt~ov'. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
125 
Table 1. 
Affirmation 
Negation 
EcEtv ~v0pco~tor 
[Man is.] 
Eozw oOx ~iv0pco~tor 
[Man is not.] 
Eozt ;t~r ~v0pcoxor 
[Every man is.] 
Eozt ;t~r oOx ~v0pco~tor 
[Every man is not.] 
OOx ~ozw ~v0pcoxor 
[Not- man is.] 
OOx ~o~tv oOx ~vOpco~:or 
[Not - man is not.] 
O0x ~o~t x~r Ev0p~xoq. 
[Not - every man is.] 
OOx ~o~t ~r oOx ~v0pc0xor 
[Not - every man is not.] 
Also consider the following from 19b32-35 and 20a5-7: 
II~r ~o~tv ~vOpcoxor 8[x~tor 
[Every man is just.] 
[Every man is non-just.] 
Tytdwst ~r ~vOp~or 
[every man fares.] 
Tyt~w~t ~r oOx-~vOp~rcor 
[Every non-man hres.] 
OG x~r {uv.w Ev0pcoxor ~[x~tor 
[Not - every man is just.] 
[Not - every man is non-just.] 
061 6ytdwgt x~r ~v0p~xor 
[Not - every man fares.] 
06 X 6ytd~wet xO.r oOx-8vOpc0xor 
[Not - every non-man fares.] 
~[x~tor 
("Some man is not just") as its specific negation, but he did not. 25 In 
this connection, then, we can formulate another rule of sentence formation having 
to do with negation as follows (Table 1): 
SFR3 
The negation of a given affirmation in a natural language is formed by 
prefixing 'not' to the entire sentence. 
Prefixing 'ou' in this way to form the negation, or contradictory, of a given sentence 
does not comport with ordinary Greek syntax, and thus it indicates an artifice on 
Aristotle's part in his treatment of sentences in On Interpretation. 
We can take 
'not' here to mean 'it is not the case that ... '. 
25A strong test of Aristotle's having conceived of negation in a syntactic way would be to find 
instances of double negation, which we have yet to find. Another test would be to find instances 
of his prefixing a sentence with 'it is false that ...' or 'it is not the case that ... '. Here there 
seem to be ample cases. There is at least a kind of double negation of a term, i.e., of a simple 
noun, in Po.An.All" 77a17 & 18. Aristotle writes "~a~ ~Qov 8~ ~ai'l" and "~a~ ~Qov g' dS", which 
J. Barnes translates as "not not an animal" (1994:17). Consider also On Int. 9: 18b11-14. 

126 
George Boger 
Although Aristotle only addressed sentence formation in a natural language in 
On Interpretation, we can see him there having already anticipated the formal 
language found in Prior Analytics. 
Aristotle on proposition 
Whether Aristotle had taken a philosophical position, vis-h-vis the modern discus- 
sion, on whether or not propositions exist as ideal objects need not concern us here. 
Given his anti-platonic, materialist tendency this seems unlikely. However, if we 
take 'proposition' more loosely to denote the meaning of a declarative sentence, 
we can easily see that Aristotle made and worked with a distinction between a 
sentence, which is a linguistic object, and the meaning or proposition it expresses, 
which is a non-linguistic object. Both of these, of course, he distinguished from 
what a sentence denotes, which is a state of affairs [np~y~c~], that is, something 
that obtains or does not obtain in the world. This is evident from his treatment 
of sentences in On Interpretation and in Prior Analytics, when he used 'apophan- 
sis', and 'logos apophantikos', as well as 'kataphasis', 'apophasis', and 'protasis'. 
None of these words properly translates as 'proposition' per se; but each can be 
understood to convey what 'sentence expressing a proposition' means. Aristotle 
recognized that two or more different sentences, whether of one's own natural lan- 
guage or of different natural languages, might express the same proposition, as 
well as that the same sentence might express more than one proposition or have 
more than one meaning. In On Interpretation 1 he writes that words are "symbols 
of affections in the soul" (z(Sv ~v z~ dduX~ ~O~~cov ~6p~3o),~), that speech, and 
thus writing, is not the same for all peoples (16a3-6; el. n19 above). He continues: 
But all the mental affections themselves [~5~ 
n~(~t x~O@~ 
~ 
q0uX~], of which these words are primarily signs [c~Y)[a~t~], are the same 
for everyone, [just] as are the objects [npciyp~z~] of which those affec- 
tions are likenesses [6got~5~z~]. (16a6-8) 
Perhaps his claim here about the whole of mankind is a bit sweeping. Neverthe- 
less, he clearly indicates here his distinguishing very different linguistic objects as 
expressing the same meaning or expressing the same proposition -- that peculiar, 
non-linguistic thing that is grasped by a human being in thought. 26 
26Aristotle makes an analogous remark in Po.An.AIO about demonstration: "Deductions, and 
therefore demonstrations, are not addressed to external argument [o5 ,(&p npb~ cbv ~r Xdyov] 
but rather to argument in the soul [&XX& npb~ Tbv ~v ~ q~u 
since you can always object to 
external argument, but not always to internal argument" (76b24-27). There is another similar 
remark in Meta. ~.5 in connection with his arguing against those who disparage the law of non- 
contradiction: "For those who hold such opinions because they are confused by real difficulties, 
can easily be cured of their ignorance by someone who addresses himself not to their arguments, 
but to their meaning [o5 V&p xpb~ ~bv Xdvov &),X& xpb~ "r~v 5t~vot~v]; whereas those who argue 
for argument's sake can be cured only by refuting each of their explicit arguments verbally by 
other arguments" (1009a18-22). Also consider On the Soul 3.3-8 and SR 10 where Aristotle 
treats the distinction some make between an argument in thought and an argument in words. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
127 
Aristotle makes much the same point in On Interpretation 1~, although there 
in relation to considering what count as genuine contraries. 
Is an affirmation [~  
contrary to a denial [x~ ~oqo&o~t] 
or contrary to another affirmation [~ x~x~q)~o~ x~ x~x~qo~o~t]? Is 
the sentence [6 Xdyo~] "Every man is just" contrary to "No man is 
just"? or to "Every man is unjust"? For example, "Callias is just", 
"Not - Callias is just", "Callias is unjust". Which of these sentences 
are contraries? 
For if the expression corresponds with things in the mind, and it is the 
opinion of the contrary that is contrary, for example, that "Every man 
is just" [is contrary to] "Every man is unjust", then the same thing 
must hold of our expressed affirmations as well [~t y~p ~:~ [a~ ~v x~ 
... x~[ ~[ ~c5~ ~ ~,~ 9c0~ x~9~o~ 
~v~yx~ 6[ao[c0~ ~X~v]. But if 
it is not the case that the opinion of the contrary is not the contrary, 
then neither will one affirmation be the contrary to another [~ 6~ [aq6~ 
~axG~ ~G~x[G]; but the above mentioned denial will be the contrary 
[&X),' ~ ~tp~[a~ &xdp~a~g ]. And so, one must inquire which opinion 
is contrary to a false opinion, whether the opinion of the true denial 
or the contrary opinion. [On taking 'good' and 'bad' in sentences and 
thought.] (23a27-2362) 
Aristotle here fusses with a notion of logical equivalence while considering different 
sentences and their meanings. He takes up this matter in virtually the same way 
in Prior Analytics A~6. In any case, this shows that he distinguished a sentence, 
here taken as a formal object, from its meaning or content. 
Aristotle specifically addresses the topic of a given sentence having more than 
one meaning in On Interpretation 8. To establish a point of contrast he first 
mentions some sentences in which each word has only one meaning (18a12-17). He 
then cites an instance of a sentence in which a given word is artificially designated 
as having more than one meaning. He writes: 
If one word [~v 5vo[a~] has two meanings, which do not combine to make 
one, the affirmation itself is not one [o6 [a[~  
If, for instance, 
you give the name 'garment' alike to a horse and a man, then it follows 
that "garment is white" would not be one but two affirmations, nor 
would "garment is not white" be one denial but two. (18a18-21) 
Surely this treatment of the topic not only indicates his making a clear distinction 
between a sentence and the proposition it expresses, but it also strikingly rings of 
his experimenting with a notion of reinterpretation familiar to modern logicians. 
This is not to claim that Aristotle is a model-theoretic logician. Still, it is evident 
that in this case Aristotle has retained the word 'garment' but reinterpreted it 
twice. And while his example is elementary and serves as an illustration, he might 

128 
George Boger 
just as easily have reinterpreted an entire sentence. In this connection it is worth 
noticing that Aristotle regularly used the definite neuter article 'xd' (inflected as 
appropriate in the context of his exposition) as moderns use quotation marks to 
mention a word or an expression or even to mention an entire sentence. 
The matter of a given sentence expressing more than one proposition occupied 
Aristotle's attention in Sophistical Refutations, where his discussion is consider- 
ably more developed than has customarily been acknowledged. Surely recognizing 
a given sentence as having more than one meaning is evidence of making a dis- 
tinction between its syntax and its semantics. Sophistical Refutations is replete 
with such examples, especially, for instance, where Aristotle treated ambiguity and 
equivocation. 27 
We can now turn to Aristotle's model of the grammar of the formal language 
of the underlying logic depicted in Prior Analytics. His notation there is quite 
elementary: he employed only upper case Greek letters as schematic placeholders 
for terms in categorical sentences. And he never provided abbreviations for his 
logical constants. Nevertheless, he specifically treated sentence patterns and their 
logical relationships in a genuinely syntactic manner. 
The grammar of Aristotle's formal language 
In respect of the theory of predicating of substance outlined in Categories, as 
treated also in Metaphysics and Topics, and that underlies his notion of predication 
in Prior A nalytics, Aristotle understood there to be four ways that an attribute or 
property- 
~tov, ~0o~, ~otdv (see Top. 1.5:102a18-30 on ~tov) --can be related 
(or belong) to a substance or subject 
oSa[~ or 5~o 
(Table 2). 
Table 2. 
Kinds of substance attribution 
1. 
Every individual of a given kind has a given property. 
2. 
No individual of a given kind has a given property. 
3. 
Some individual of a given kind has a given property. 
4. 
Some individual of a given kind does not have a given property. 
These attributions involve ontic relationships that exist independent of a knower: 
they obtain or they do not obtain. Aristotle referred to such matters generally 
27In SR Aristotle treated the syllogistic deductive process as well, but there his focus was on 
semantic matters. In particular, he treated the fallacies as though they formally violate what 
a deduction (sullogismos) is as this topic is treated in Pr. An. For example, in the case of 
ambiguity, while a given argument with an ambiguity has one grammatical pattern, which helps 
to make it appear to be a deduction, it really has two underlying logical patterns. And in the 
case of equivocation, while an argument with an equivocal expression has a given grammatical 
pattern that makes it appear to be a deduction, it really has, with the addition of a fourth term 
(in relation to a standard three term deduction), an underlying logical pattern different than a 
deduction. Nothing results necessarily in these cases. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
129 
as ~p~u 
(pragmata; singular pragma), or states of affairs, facts, and he used 
'xb e~vat' 
"to be [the case]" 
and 'x6 ta~ s{vczt' 
"not to be [the case]" 
to qualify them (cf. on his using '&Xrl0~g' and '@uSr~g' in this connection). 
From these facts about existence Aristotle conceived four ways that a human 
being could express- that is, predicate ( 
-- these substance/attribute 
relationships linguistically. In the process he invented four logical constants to 
capture these relationships 
and he explicitly named each, although without 
an expression for 'logical constant', in Prior Analytics A~: 26b30-33 (cf. A23: 
40b23-26). Thus, corresponding to the four ontic relationships above, there are 
four possible predications of a subject by a participant (3). 
Table 3. 
Aristotle's four logical constants 
Logical Constant 
1. Tb xaw[ b~:@XSt~ 
(belongs to every) 
(belongsto no) 
3. Tb 
~tv[ O~:@Xsc~ 
(belongs to some) 
4. Tb [a~ ~tv[ Ox~.pxst~ 
(does not belong to 
some) 
Tb 
ta~ 
rvc,~x[ 
O~,pXs~,~ (belongs 
not to every) 
Predication 
A given property is pred- 
icated of [is said to be- 
long to] every member of 
a given kind. 
A given property is pred- 
icated of [is said to be- 
long to] no member of a 
given kind. 
A given property is pred- 
icate of [is said to be- 
long to] some member of 
a given kind. 
A given property is not 
predicated of [is said not 
to belong to] some mem- 
ber of a given kind. 
Modern 
Abbreviation 
Correspondingly, there are four categorical sentence patterns that Aristotle used 
throughout his logical investigations in Prior Analytics. His most commonly used 
schematic representations of the four categorical sentences are represented in Ta- 
ble 4. 
Concerning any categorical sentence AB, then, A can be taken, or predicated, 
of B in four ways. 'A' and 'B' here are schematic letters that hold places for 
terms, or non-logical constants. The four kinds of sentence involve the four kinds 

130 
George Boger 
Table 4. 
Aristotle's model for each kind of categorical sentence 
Sentence pattern 
1. xb A r~avz[ ~:& B 
t 
0x@Xzt (A belongs to 
every B) 
2. xb A btrlS~vi, q:~ B 
6ndXet (A belongs to 
no B) 
3. zb A I:M z~ B O=dXet 
(A belongs to some 
B) 
4. zb A ztv[ t 0 B ~ 
0xdXet (A does not 
belong to some B) 
Kind of categorial 
sentence 
Universal attributive 
Universal privative 
Partial attributive 
Partial privative 
Modern expression 
AaB 
AeB 
AiB 
AoB 
of predication, which themselves reflect the four ontic relationships. 2s Aristotle 
thought of a categorical sentence as having a special pattern that distinguishes it 
from other kinds of sentence, namely, from those of natural Greek. Moreover, he 
thought of each of the four kinds of categorical sentence as itself fitting a special 
pattern. This is most evident in his treating the syllogisms and non-syllogisms in 
Prior Analytics A~-6. Thus, we can extract Aristotle's syntax rule, according to 
his formal grammar, for forming a simple categorical sentence in a given object 
language pertaining to a given domain and express it as follows. 
CSFR1 A categorical sentence in a given language consists in combining a non- 
logical constant with any one of the four logical constants with another 
non-logical constant in this order. 
This rule identifies the pattern of a categorical sentence in Aristotle's formal lan- 
guage. Aristotle's expression for 'non-logical constant' is 'Spot', or 'term'. The 
term in the first position is called the predicate term (xb  
or 5pog 
 
the term in the second position is called the subject term (xb 
5~oxs[~vov or 5pog 5xox~[~svog). In natural Greek it is customary, but not a 
strict practice (On Int. 20b1-12), to place the subject of a sentence before the 
predicate/verb. But in Prior Analytics we see that Aristotle quite deliberately 
placed the predicate term before the logical constant, which acts as a verb, and 
28Aristotle takes the following expressions to amount to the same thing: 'A belongs to every 
B' and 'A holds of every B'; 'A follows all B'; and 'A is predicated of every B'. While Aristotle 
used 'b~pX~tV' (huparchein), '&xoXou0~v' and 'x~Vop~[a0~t' respectively, his preference to use 
'huparchein' for the logical constants was not accidental but an important reflex of his theory of 
substance. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
131 
then place the subject term after the logical constant. In addition, the logical con- 
stants themselves are rather artificial constructions aimed to reproduce linguisti- 
cally what he took to be conditions of being, as in Categories and Metaphysics. It is 
evident that Aristotle thought of a categorical sentence as formally constructed by 
concatenating, stringing or combining, a predicate term (or non-logical constant) 
with a logical constant with a subject term (or non-logical constant) strictly in 
this order. 
We might also extract two additional categorical sentence formation rules that 
have a rather more semantic character, but which nevertheless bear on the logical 
pattern of a sentence. 
CSFR2 The two non-logical constants in every categorical sentence are not iden- 
tical. 29 
CSFR3 The two non-logical constants in every categorical sentence are homo- 
geneous with respect to grammatical category, that is, both non-logical 
constants are substantives. 
This seems to be Aristotle's practice, at least, for the most part. There is a passage 
in Prior Analytics A36 that confirms this (CSFR3). 
For we state this without qualification about them all: that terms 
must always be put in accordance with the cases of the nouns [x~x& 
9 ~  
~6v 6~o[a~co~] ... (48b40-41; see 48b39-49a2; cf. Pr. An. 
A39-40). 
Conversion otherwise would seem unintelligible. According to modern standards, 
we might also formulate a fourth rule, which is surely implicit in Aristotle's think- 
ing. 
CSFR4 Nothing is a categorical sentence except in virtue of these rules. 
29This is a restriction on the language that anticipates its use in scientific discourse. However, 
Aristotle does recognise identity in his formal logic per se (see, e.g. Pr. An. A~I and B15). There 
is an interesting instance of Aristotle's treating this matter in Po. An. A3 where he establishes 
the inadequacy of circular reasoning for demonstration (but not its invalidity). He writes, after 
remarking that he can accomplish this demonstration by using three or even two terms: "When 
if A is the case, of necessity B is, and if B then C, then if A is the case C will be the case. Thus, 
given that if A is the case it is necessary that B is the case and if B is the case that A is the 
case (this is what is to proceed in a circle [however long the loop]), let A be C. Hence, to say 
that if B is the case A is the case is to say that C is the case; and to say this is to say that if 
A is the case C is the case. But C is the same as A. Hence, it follows that those who declare 
that demonstrations may proceed in a circle say nothing more than that if A is the case A is the 
case. And it is easy to prove everything in this way" (72b37-73a6). Surely Aristotle considered 
such sentences as "Every horse is a horse", or, metalogically, "Every A is an A". However, since 
he was preeminently concerned with 'deriving something other' (which requirement appears in 
his definition of 'sullogismos') for the proposes of extending knowledge in the sciences, such a 
restriction on the language makes perfect sense and does not do violence to his logical acumen. 

132 
George Boger 
There is no analogous, strong syntax rule for forming the negation, or contradic- 
tory, of a given affirmative sentence in Prior A nalytics as there is at places in On 
Interpretation. However, in Prior Analytics A~6 he holds that denials require the 
use of a negative operator. 
Consequently, it is evident that 'is not-good' is not the denial [&xdq)aatg] 
of 'is good'. If, therefore, 'affirmation' or 'denial' [~ q0~at~ ~ &xdq)aGt~] 
is true about every single <predicate>, then if 'is not-good' is not a de- 
nial, it is evident that it must be a sort of affirmation [ 
But 
there is a denial of every affirmation [x~9~o~c0~ ~ ~~ 
&~dg~ot~ 
garry], and, therefore, the denial of this affirmation is 'is not not-good'. 
(51b31-35). 
For Aristotle a genuine denial, as distinguished from an affirmation, involves a 
negative operator, whether as an adverb attached to a verb (predicate), or as a 
pronominal adjective attached to a non-logical constant (or as part of the logical 
constant). 3~ 
We can represent Aristotle's thinking on sentence formation as prescribed in his 
formal language as follows (Figure 3): 
Generic categorical sentence pattern 
non-logical con- 
stant: predicate 
term 
-l-Ilogicalconstant 
] 
-[- 
non-logical con- 
stant: 
subject 
term 
Figure 3. 
Now, in Prior Analytics, as contrasted with his treatment of sentence formation in 
On Interpretation, Aristotle fixed the word order in a sentence. The order of the 
constituent parts of a categorical sentence does not change as it might in a natural 
language. The syntax of a categorical sentence is strict since its use is anticipated 
in the syllogistic deduction process, and this process requires precision. 
In connection with treating language formally, Aristotle frequently writes of 
'taking' (X~taf3~v~t~) or 'not taking' A of B in one of four ways. He writes, for 
example, about predicating in general that it is necessary to take something of 
something: &v~y 
X@~b x~  
xt~o~ (Pr. An. A23: 40b31). He often uses 'AB', 
or similar expressions, to indicate any categorical sentence (Pr. An. A25: 42b6). 
This way of addressing predication tends to treat a sentence as uninterpreted, 
although, of course for Aristotle, not completely. A categorical sentence may be 
3~ 
below this section on Aristotle's distinguishing an opposite sentence from an affirmation 
and a denial. In short, while contraries are opposites (as are contradictories), each contrary 
sentence might be an affirmation, that is, designating attribution and not privation, as in "Every 
man is good" and "Every man is bad". 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
133 
understood 
to express taking one term about another term as a formal matter. 
This is especially the case in Prior Analytics A23, which is an especially proof- 
theoretic chapter (w 
Moreover, he often writes in the same manner 
about 
taking sentences of one or another pattern, for example, 
as starting points of 
argumentation. 
In addition, he often uses the word 'xpd~)~q~' (probl~ma) to 
indicate, not a particular sentence with a particular meaning, but to refer to each 
of the four kinds of categorical sentence. 
Consider in Prior Analytics A~ where 
he uses 'probl~ma' to indicate a sentence pattern: 
All the probl~mata are proved through this figure [x~[ 5xt x~vx~ ~po~)~M~x~ 
~tx~ux~t ~t~ xo0xou zoo GX~xog 
]. (26b30-31; cf. A27: 
43a16-19, 
A28: 44a36-37, & A29: 45a36-38) 
'Probl~mata' here does not refer to problems in a given domain 
as he uses this 
word in, for example, Problems and elsewhere, but to the four kinds of categorical 
sentence: it is used purely in reference to a formal object. We see that Aristotle's 
formal language, at least in respect of sentences, while not a purely uninterpreted 
object (as in string theory), is nevertheless sufficiently formal to exemplify the 
defining structures or patterns of categorical sentences. 3i This indicates that Aris- 
totle took his logical (formal or artificial) language represented in Prior Analytics 
to be a syntactic object for the purpose of defining an underlying logic. 
Aristotle also considered the relationship of negation in a somewhat 
syntactic 
manner, notwithstanding 
that his semantics is just below the surface. He writes 
in On Interpretation that whatever can be affirmed can also be denied, whatever 
denied can be affirmed, and that each attributive sentence and each privative sen- 
tence has its own opposite (17a30-33). This is all formal. In On Interpretation 9' 
he recognized two kinds of sentence that are opposites (~ &vxt 
contradic- 
tories (~t ~xt~~tg) 
and contraries (x~ ~v~vx[~). This corresponds exactly with 
what he writes in Metaphysics 5.10 on contrariety in things. In On Interpretation 
he defines contradictories in a loosely syntactic manner as follows: 
Now, I call an affirmation [xcrc~cpc~o~v] contradictorily opposed [c~v-c~cpcrc~x&g 
&vz~x~o0c~] to a denial [&xdgc~mv ] when what the one denotes [~qbl~tvouoc,~] 
universally and the other not universally. (17b16-18) 
And then he provides some examples 
"Every man is white" [to] "Not every man is white" [x~r ~iv0pc0xor 
X~ux6g 
oG ~g 51vOpc0xog X~ux6~] and "No man is white" [to] "Some 
3i In addition, Aristotle uses three sets of schematic letters to mark places for terms, one set 
for each figure: for the first ABF (ABC), the second MNS (MNX), and the third IIR~7 (PRS). 
He names terms by their schematic positions ~ first (or major), middle, last (or minor) -- and he 
calls the first and last ~ 
(extremes). His use of the terms 'aX~t~a' (figure or arrangement) and 
'Bt4axr~t~a' (interval) are further indications. In addition, in his practice of substituting actual 
terms for schematic letters when determining that a premiss-pair pattern is inconcludent, he sets 
out such terms according to the schematic order for each figure's schematic letters: first figure 
PMS; second figure- MPS; third figure- PSM. 

134 
George Boger 
man is white" [o0~[~ ~v0pc0xo; ),~ux6q 
(17b18-20) 
This definition is used throughout Prior Analytics. Aristotle models these sen- 
tences as shown in Table 5. 
Table 5. 
Contradictories 
Aristotle's text 
Modern 
notation 
1. A belongs to every B-- 
2. A belongs to no B 
A does not belong to some B. 
A belongs to some B. 
AaB uo AoB 
AeB-- AiB 
The following two syntactic relationships hold between these different sentences: 
1. Whenever a sentence fitting the pattern A aB is taken, then a sentence fit- 
ting the pattern AoB cannot be taken; and whenever a sentence fitting the 
pattern A oB is taken, then a sentence fitting the pattern A aB cannot be 
taken. 
2. Whenever a sentence fitting the pattern AeB is taken, then a sentence fitting 
the pattern AiB cannot be taken; and whenever a sentence fitting the pattern 
AiB is taken, then a sentence fitting the pattern AeB cannot be taken. 
Here Aristotle leaves the schematic letters uninterpreted 
or unsubstituted 
and asserts the formal, logical relationships that exist between sentences fitting 
such patterns. 
In fact, from his text on contradictories (cited above), we can 
extract Aristotle'.s rule for their formation and express it as follows. 
Contradictory formation rule 
The contradictory of a given sentence, whether attributive or privative, is 
formed by retaining the predicate and subject terms (non-logical constants) 
as given and replacing the logical constants as follows- 
1. In the case of a universal attributive sentence, the universal attributive log- 
ical constant is replaced by the partial privative logical constant. 
2. In the case of a universal privative sentence, the universal privative logical 
constant is replaced by the partial attributive logical constant. 
3. In the case of a partial attributive sentence, the partial attributive logical 
constant is replaced by the universal privative logical constant. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
135 
4. In the case of a partial privative sentence, the partial privative logical con- 
stant is replaced by the universal attributive logical constant. 
In On Interpretation 7 Aristotle defines contraries in a loosely syntactic manner 
in the following way: 
I call a universal affirmation and a universal denial contrarily op- 
posed [~vc~vz(~ <&vzt 
~ z~v zoo x~O6F, ou  
xc~L z%v 
zoo xc~OdXou &~dcpc~a~v] (17b20-21) 
His example is the following: 
"Every man is just" [to] "No man is just" [~ 
~v0pc0~o~ g[x~toq 
oG~[~ ~v0pc0~o~ ~[xc~to~]. (17b21-22) 
Of course, in both contradictory sentences and contrary sentences, the subject 
terms and the predicate terms in the one are the same in the other. Aristotle 
indicated this a little earlier in On Interpretation 7: 
Now if someone states universally of a universal that something belongs 
or does not belong [hzt 0~@X~t ~ u~], there will be contraries. (1753-5) 
Perhaps he states this more emphatically in On Interpretation 1~: "for contraries 
are among things that differ most in respect of the same thing [x~p[ Tb ~0z5]" 
(23b22-23); and again in Categories 11: "the nature of contraries is to belong to 
the same thing, either in species or in genus [x~p[ z~0zb~ ~ ~t~t ~ $~t]" (14a15- 
16). In On Interpretation 6:17a33-37 (34-35) he writes on contradictories that: 
"I mean opposites [&,ztx~a0c~t] that [affirm and deny] the same thing of the same 
thing [z~9 zoo ~0zo5 x~z~ zo5 ~0zoh] and not ambiguously [~% 5~6~c0~]" 
This 
definition is also used throughout Prior A nalytics. Aristotle models these sentences 
as in Table 6. 
Table 6. 
Contraries 
Aristotle's text 
A belongs to every B 
A belongs to no B. ModernAaB 
notatiOnAeB ] 
The following syntactic relationships hold between the different sentences: 
1. Whenever a sentence fitting the pattern A aB is taken, then a sentence fitting 
the pattern A eB cannot be taken. 
2. And whenever a sentence fitting the pattern AeB is taken, then a sentence 
fitting the pattern A aB cannot be taken. 

136 
George Boger 
We can extract a formation rule for contraries analogous to that for contradictories 
from Aristotle's text (cited above) and express it as follows. 
Contrary formation rule: 
The contrary of a given sentence, whether attributive or privative, is formed 
by retaining the predicate and subject terms as given and replacing the 
universal logical constants as follows: 
1. In the case of a universal attributive sentence by replacing the universal at- 
tributive logical constant with the universal privative logical constant. 
2. In the case of a universal privative sentence by replacing the universal pri- 
vative logical constant with the universal attributive logical constant. 
What Aristotle writes in On Interpretation and in Categories corresponds exactly 
with what he does and with what he writes in Prior Analytics B15 about the 
formal relationships among categorical sentences. 
I say that verbally [ 
~ 
k~tv] there are four (pairs of) oppo- 
site sentences [~po~r 
to wit: 'to every' [~[] 
(is opposed> to 
'to no' [oS~v[]; and 'to every' [x~vx[] (is opposed) to 'not to every' 
[o5 x~vx[]; and 'to some' [xtv[] (is opposed) to 'to no' [6v~v[]; and 'to 
some' [xtv[] (is opposed) to 'not to some' [o5 xtv[]. In truth, however, 
there are three, for 'to some' and 'not to some' are only opposites ver- 
bally. Of these, I call the universal sentences contraries ('to every' is 
contrary to 'to none', as, for example, 'every science is good' [x5a~v 
~taf~r)v ~tv~t o~ov~dt~v] is contrary to 'no science is good' [~~t~v 
~t~t oxou~t~]) and the other pairs of sentences opposites [sc., con- 
tradictories]. (63b23-30) 
Aristotle's concern for argumentational skill and logical syntax 
The syntactic character of Aristotle's treatment of opposition is all the more as- 
sured when we place his logical investigations in the context of his concern with 
argumentation, as it pertains to both axiomatic discourse and disputational dis- 
course. Aristotle was eminently occupied in Sophistical Refutations and Topics 
with equipping his students with argumentational skills that they could employ 
quickly and with facility and keenness. These two treatises surely served as student 
handbooks. Perhaps his introduction to Topics exemplifies this concern. 
The purpose of the present treatise is to discover a method [~0o~o~] 
by which we shall be able to reason deductively [a~)l),oy[~c~0~t] from 
generally accepted opinions about any problem set before us and shall 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
137 
ourselves, when sustaining an argumentation, avoid saying anything 
self-contradictory [5x~v~vx[ov]. a2 (100a18-21; cf. Top.1. 2) 
Aristotle did not have his students memorize certain texts -- a set of specific, stock 
speeches 
to acquire this skill, as was a common practice at the time. Rather, 
he expected them to become familiar with the structural- formal or syntactic- 
aspects of cogent and fallacious reasoning. In effect, Aristotle aimed to have his 
students become accomplished logicians. His formal interests are especially evident 
in his closing remarks in Sophistical Refutations 3~. He writes, in connection with 
remarking that his logical investigations are entirely new: 
For the training given by the paid teachers of eristic argumentation 
resembled the pedagogy of Gorgias. For some of them required their 
students to learn by heart speeches that were either rhetorical or con- 
sisted of questions and answers, in which both sides thought that the 
rival argumentations were for the most part included. Hence the teach- 
ing that they gave to their students was rapid but unscientific [~x~XVOr 
for they conceived that they could train their students by imparting to 
them not an art but the results of an art ... he has helped to supply 
his need but has not imparted an art [x~XW)~] to him .... [While there 
was much information available having to do with rhetoric] whereas 
regarding deductive reasoning [xo5 GuXXoy[~o0~] we had absolutely 
no earlier work to quote but were for a long time laboring at tentative 
researches. (183b36-184b3) 33 
Aristotle also took up developing argumentational skills in Prior Analytics, es- 
pecially at A2~,-~6, the chapters that follow the formal representation of his de- 
duction system. He was particularly concerned in these chapters with developing 
an individual's ability to establish (215 
or to destroy (&vc~o 
an argumentation. 34 This theme is wholly consonant with his treatment of ar- 
gumentation in Sophistical Refutations and Topics. Indeed, the title of his works 
on formal logic, '~ &v~ku~t 
a topic specially treated in Prior Analytics 
Ad5 
signifies his concern with the formal aspects of argumentation. Analysis 
(&v~Xuo~r &v~),u~tv) is a process of transforming one syllogism in any one figure 
into another syllogism of another figure if both syllogisms prove the same problgma 
32We use E. S. Forster's (1960) translation of Topics and below his (1955) translation of So- 
phistical Refutations with significant modifications. Cf. L.-A. Dorion's (1995) French translation 
of Sophistical Refutations. 
33This passage continues and ends the treatise with the following remark that might have been 
addressed to modern critical readers. "If, therefore, on consideration, it appears to you that, in 
view of such original conditions, our system is adequate when compared with the other methods 
which have been built up in the course of tradition, then the only thing which would remain for 
all of you, or those who follow our instruction, is that you should pardon the lack of completeness 
of our system and be heartily grateful for our discoveries" (184b3-8). 
34See Pr. An. A26-28 and summary at A30: 46a3-10. For example, Aristotle writes (A26): 
"... a universal positive problima is most difficult to establish [215162 
but easiest to 
refute [~ox~uao~t]" (43al-2). 

138 
George Boger 
(w 
Aristotle aimed to promote his students' facility with reasoning syllogis- 
tically to establish and to refute arguments by studying the logical relationships 
among sentence patterns and among patterns of elementary arguments. This is 
analogous to a modern logician's studying the formal relationships among the rules 
of propositional logic. 
Aristotle's mathematical disposition toward the study of grammar 
In On Interpretation Aristotle treated sentences in natural languages metalinguis- 
tically. His practice there is much the same, although without the complexity, 
as that of a modern grammarian whose natural language is, say, English, and 
who writes an English grammar. Aristotle used Greek to mention Greek as this 
grammarian would use English to mention English. However, Aristotle went con- 
siderably farther than a grammarian in his treating the syntactic aspects of a 
language because he thought of his linguistic investigations as laying an epistemo- 
logical 
or formal -- foundation for various axiomatic sciences, the apodeiktikai 
epist~mai. As a logician formalizing a deduction system, Aristotle continued in 
Prior A nalytics to develop a formal grammar where a grammarian of a natural 
language might leave off in On Interpretation. 
Aristotle always took Greek, whether explicitly or implicitly, as the background 
language for discourse in any specialized domain. In this connection, we might say 
that Aristotle took Greek as his master language, although he never formulated the 
matter using just such an expression. Still, he recognized that each of the special 
axiomatic sciences was equipped, or ought to be equipped, with its own specialized 
terminology, or vocabulary, appropriate to its domain. 
Aristotle indicated his 
having a notion of a specialized vocabulary in Metaphysics ~.2. There he wrote 
about using terminology across sciences and thus indicated, albeit negatively, that 
each science has its own terminology. 
For a term belongs to different sciences, not merely because it is used in 
many ways, but when its definition can be referred neither to a single 
subject matter nor to a common ground. (1004a24-25) 
That Aristotle had a clear notion of universe of discourse, although, again, without 
an equivalent expression in Greek, is evident from his treatment of the genus of a 
given science in Posterior Analytics A 7, 9-10, 28. 35 This notion is poignantly ex- 
pressed also in Metaphysics 10.4: "a single science covers a single genus and there- 
fore deals with the complete differences in that genus" (1055a31-32). 36 Perhaps 
Posterior Analytics A7 (cf. A8-10) expresses his notion of universe of discourse 
most plainly. 
35cf. Aristotle's treatment of different discourses in the various branches of mathematics in 
Po. An. A5. 
36Cf. what Aristotle writes in Meta. 4.2:1003b12-15 when considering the subject of phi- 
losophy and being qua being: "so whatever is said of one subject matter belongs to one science. 
Accordingly, whatever is said in reference to a single nature is a single science; for such state- 
ments, too, in some way or other, refer to a single subject matter". Cf. Pr. An. A30: 46a15-22. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
139 
Thus you cannot prove anything by crossing from another kind 
for example, something geometrical by arithmetic. 
There are three 
things involved in demonstrations: one, what is being demonstrated, 
or the conclusion [xb oug~p~op~] (this is what holds of some kind in 
itself); one, the axioms [x~ ~t05p~T~] (axioms are the items from which 
the demonstrations proceed); third, the underlying kind [xb y~o; xb 
5~ox~[p~vov] whose attributes [x& x~O~] 
that is, the items incidental 
to it in itself 
the demonstrations make plain. 
Now the items from which the demonstrations proceed may be the 
same [~& ~6~&]; but where the kinds are different [~b y~vog ~x~pov], as 
with arithmetic and geometry, you cannot attach arithmetical demon- 
strations to what is incidental to magnitudes 
unless magnitudes 
are numbers .... Arithmetical demonstrations always contain the kind 
with which the demonstrations are concerned, and so too do all other 
demonstrations. Hence the kind must be the same, either simpliciter 
or in some respect, if a demonstration is to cross [~Sc~z' ~ &~Xgg &v~yx~ 
9 6 c~O~6 ~tvat u 
~ ~, ~t ~kk~t ~ &~d~t~t~ ~a~3a~v~v]. That it is 
impossible otherwise is plain; for the eztremes and the middle terms 
must come from the same kind [~x u 
xo5 ~0xo5 u 
&v~u 
x& 
~xp~ x&t x& g~(~ ~wt], since if they do not hold in themselves, they 
will be incidentals, a7 
For this reason you cannot prove by geometry that there is a single sci- 
ence of contraries, nor even that two cubes make a cube. (Nor can you 
prove by any other science what pertains to a different science, except 
when they are so related to one another that the one falls under the 
other 
as, for example, optics is related to geometry and harmonics 
to arithmetic.) Nor indeed anything that holds of lines not as lines 
and as depending on the principles proper to them 
for example, 
whether straight lines are the most beautiful of lines, or whether they 
are contrarily related to curved lines; for these things hold of lines 
not in virtue of their proper kind but rather in virtue of something 
common. (75a38-75b20) 
Not only has Aristotle indicated his notion of universe of discourse in relation to a 
genus, but he has also indicated that he worked with a notion of category mistake. 
This matter also is treated in Sophistical Refutations. 
That different scientific domains are distinguished in one or another discourse 
is an important part of Aristotle's discussion of fallacious reasoning in Sophisti- 
cal Refutations. There he treats a kind of fallacious reasoning that violates the 
boundaries of different domains. In Sophistical Refutations 8:169b20-23 he re- 
marks that a sophistical refutation, while it is usually a spurious deduction of the 
a7In Po. An. A6: 74b27-33, for example, Aristotle made this point about the different genera 
in an interesting way by stating that when the middle term of a deduction is necessary the 
conclusion must be necessary and thus germane to one science and not to another. 'Necessary' 
here is used in its modal sense. 

140 
George Boger 
contradictory of a given sentence, might, nevertheless, be a genuine deduction (i.e., 
a refutation) but one that is not germane to the subject matter under discussion. 
The deductive reasoning while genuine "only seems to be, but is really not, ger- 
mane to the subject at hand [&XX& x~[ ~b~ 6v~ ~v 9~t~d~vov ~ 6tx~tov zo5 
xp&yg~Tog]". In Sophistical Refutations 9 Aristotle draws a distinction between 
the function of a scientist and that of a dialectician, or, that is, of a logician. In 
this connection he writes about demonstrations and refutations special to a given 
science. 
So we shall need to have scientific knowledge of everything; for some 
refutations will depend on the principles of geometry and their con- 
clusions, others on those of medicine, and others on those of the other 
sciences. Moreover, spurious refutations for @u~t~ ~),~y 
also are 
among things which are infinite [as are, perhaps, the sciences and their 
demonstrations (170a22-23)]; for every art has a spurious proof pecu- 
liar to it, geometry a geometrical proof and medicine a medical proof. 
By 'peculiar to an art' [~b xc~& ~v ~XV~V] I mean 'in accordance with 
the principles of that art' [x6 xo~x~ x&~ ~:x~.v-q~ &px~]. (170a27-34) 
Aristotle returns to this matter in force in Sophistical Refutations 11, where he 
treats the discipline of logic as the dialectical art of the deductive principles com- 
mon to all intelligible, cogent discourse. He also distinguishes the sophist from the 
eristic in respect of their motives (171b29-34). In this connection he establishes a 
clear notion of universe of discourse. 
Then there are those spurious deductions that do not accord with the 
method of inquiry peculiar to the subject yet seem to accord with the 
art concerned. For false geometrical figures are not contentious (for the 
resultant fallacies accord with the subject-matter of the art), and the 
same is the case with any figure illustrating something which is true, for 
example, Hippocrates' figure or the squaring of the circle by means of 
lunules .... [Bryson's method of squaring is sophistical because it does 
not accord with the subject-matter.] ... And so any merely apparent 
deduction on these topics is a contentious argumentation, and any 
deduction that merely appears to accord with the subject-matter [ 
Tb xp~ygc~], even though it be a genuine deduction, is a contentious 
argumentation [because it only appears to accord with the subject- 
matter]. (171b11-22) 
A little later in this discussion Aristotle provides some examples to illustrate his 
meaning. 
For example, the squaring of the circle by means of lunules is not con- 
tentious, whereas Bryson's method is contentious. It is not proper to 
transfer the former outside the sphere of geometry because it is based on 
principles that are special to geometry [x~t cbv [a~:v oGx ~u~:t ~-c~v~yx~tv 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
141 
&XX' ij ~pb~ u 
p6vov, ~t~ xb ~ xcSv "~t0~v ~t~t &p?((5~], whereas 
the latter can be used against many disputants, namely, all those who 
do not know what is possible and what impossible in any particular 
case; for it will always be applicable. And the same is true of the way 
in which Antiphon used to square the circle. Or, again, if someone 
were to deny that it is better to take a walk after dinner because of 
Zeno's argumentation, it would not be a medical argument; for it is of 
a general application. (172a2-9) 
It is evident, then, that Aristotle recognized there to be any number of special 
sciences, each with its own domain and topical sub-language, each of which is a 
fragment of a whole, or master, language. 
Aristotle's focus shifts from a general concern with grammar, as in On Inter- 
pretation, to a more specialized concern with language and grammar in Prior 
Analytics and Posterior Analytics and in Metaphysics. There language is treated 
(1) as modified from natural language according as its universe of discourse is 
delimited and specialized and (2) as more rigorously formalized for the purposes 
of precision and deduction. 
Aristotle's emphasis on the simple sentence in On 
Interpretation repays him well in Prior A nalytics where he treats his deduction 
system with more rigor. His linguistic and argumentational analyses in On Inter- 
pretation, and in Sophistical Refutations and Topics, provided the foundation for 
his formulating the simple grammar of the artificial language in Prior Analytics. 
Now, while Aristotle seemed always to have natural language in the background 
when he undertook his logical investigations, his thinking was surely disposed to- 
ward constructing an artificial language. And while he surely did not work with a 
fully uninterpreted calculus, he nevertheless had already moved toward developing 
a notion of a precise scientific language for extended deductive discourse in each 
of the special axiomatic sciences. And here he developed some stringent require- 
ments for intelligible discourse. In particular, in Metaphysics 11.5 he expressed a 
requirement that in scientific discourse one word have one meaning, and if it were 
to have more than one meaning this should be made patently clear. He treats 
this topic there in conjunction with treating the law of non-contradiction in the 
following way: 
Those, therefore, who are to communicate with one another by way 
of argumentation [Xdyou] must have some common understanding. 
...Each word must therefore be intelligible [yvcSptgov gv] and indi- 
cate something definite, not many things, but only one [ 
~ ~oXX~, 
gdvov 8~ ~v]; and if it has more than one meaning it must be made 
plain in which of these the word is being used. He, therefore, who says 
that "this is and is not" denies what he affirms, with the consequence 
that he declares the word to signify what it does not signify; but this 
is absurd. Consequently, if "this is" signifies something, it is absurd to 
assert truly its contradictory. 

142 
George Boger 
Accordingly, if a word signifies something, and this is truly asserted, 
this [connection] must be necessary; but what necessarily is cannot ever 
not be; and so opposite sentences concerning the same thing cannot be 
true together ... [again] opposite sentences concerning the same thing 
can never be true together. (1062a11-23) 3s 
Aristotle's scientific languages eschew the ambiguity that abounds in natural lan- 
guages. Surely his concern for a precise syntax is a reflex of his concern for scientific 
precision. Again, we have the testimony of Sophistical Refutations to make Aris- 
totle's case; this point is especially evident there when Aristotle treats fallacious 
reasoning involving ambiguity and equivocation as well as making many questions 
into one. 
In connection with his study of logic, then, what he writes in Metaphysics and 
in Sophistical Refutations can be taken as a move toward developing a logically 
perfect language, albeit restricted in its scope to a specific, delimited domain. Nev- 
ertheless, Aristotle's impulse and that of a modern logician are correspondingly 
the same when their respective focuses are on the deduction process. Now, of 
course, each of these scientific languages is a topical sub-language of a given mas- 
ter language, in this case Greek, and as such each is an object, if not a natural, 
language. We might think of this as natural Greek departmentalized; or, rather, 
that the languages of mathematics and biology, for example, are specialized topi- 
cal sub-languages with a tailored Greek as their mode of expression. In any case, 
Aristotle's requirements for scientific discourse, in connection with his syllogistic 
logic, indicate that his treatment of language in On Interpretation, Prior Analyt- 
ics, Metaphysics, Sophistical Refutations, and even Categories is (1) thoroughly 
metalinguistic and, thus, (2) especially occupied with syntax. Aristotle aimed to 
formalize scientific discourse, not only with a polished deduction system, but also 
with precisely formulated linguistic requirements concerning both its syntactic and 
semantic dimensions. 
Aristotle's formal language is not strictly an uninterpreted calculus awaiting 
an interpretation as a modern logician understands this matter. Its vocabulary 
consists only in (1) four fully interpreted logical constants and (2) a number of 
schematic (upper case Greek) letters that function purely as metalinguistic place- 
holders for terms in categorical (or predicationaI) sentences. These schematic let- 
ters, however, are generally uninterpreted in a way familiar to modern logicians; 
but they are not variables. 39 There are no genuine variables, whether bound or 
free, ranging over individuals in a given domain in Aristotle's formal language. 
Indeed, there is no need for variables, since the system lacks quantification theory 
and works with patterns appropriate to a term logic. Nor, then, are there any non- 
3SSee Cat. 1 on equivocal (6tao3vu~aoq) and univocaI (c~uvcS~u~to~) names; cf. Cat. 5: 3b7-9. 
Also cf. Meta. 4.4:1006a28-1006b20 in the context of defining 'having a meaning'. 
39j. Corcoran (1974: 100) has called these "metalinguistic variables"; cf. R. Smith (1984: 590, 
595) who refers to them as "syntactic variables for terms". We believe that Aristotle takes his 
letters to be schematic letters in a way similar to W. O. Quine's meaning of "dummy" letters 
(1970:12; 1982: 33, 145-146, 160-162, 289, 300-301). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
143 
logical constants in his formal language. Non-logical constants pertain to a given 
universe of discourse along with its object language. Again, there is no need for 
any non-logical constants. His formal language does not anticipate quantification 
and the existence of variables in a given object language. 
It may be that considerations of natural language underlay Aristotle's thinking 
when he constructed his artificial language. However that may be, where a natural 
language has sentences, and this holds of an interpreted language or an interpreta- 
tion of a formal language, Aristotle's formal language does not have sentences per 
se, but only formalized sentence patterns. A sentence possesses a truth-value; a 
sentence pattern does not. Indeed, just as with a modern formal language, Aristo- 
tle's artificial language is not strictly a language, since it contains no true or false 
sentences. So, while his language is interpreted in respect of its logical constants, 
it is not a fully interpreted object in respect of (1) its not being bound to a par- 
ticular universe of discourse and (2) its having schematic letters holding places for 
terms that anticipate a given universe of discourse. In respect of the first point, 
his language is formally applicable to every domain but is itself specific to none n 
it is topic neutral. And in respect of the second point, 'term' is a metalinguistic 
name for a formal part of a categorical sentence, that part which is filled by a 
non-logical constant, a name or substantive. Aristotle's definition of 'term' (St~o~) 
in Prior Analytics A1 is consonant with his practice. 
I call that a term into which a premiss may be broken up, that is, both 
that which is predicated and that of which it is predicated (whether or 
not 'is' or 'is not' is added or divides them). (24b16-18) 
There are no terms in Aristotle's formal language, only schematic letters holding 
places for non-logical constants (terms); and, of course, a schematic letter is not 
itself a term. The word 'term' (Spot) exists in Aristotle's metalanguage. In addi- 
tion, there are no logically true sentences in Aristotle's syntax language. 4~ Thus, 
there are absolutely no truth-conditions for sentence patterns in Aristotle's for- 
mal language. In principle, this is exactly the case with modern logics, save for a 
logic involving identity and tautology. Aristotle had genuinely syntactic concerns, 
although, again, without the sophistication and rigor of a modern mathematical 
logician, but, nevertheless, with an intelligence sufficient for having accomplished 
many of the same results as a modern logician. 
Aristotle's formal language is 
entirely a metalogical (metalinguistic) device used to objectify and exemplify, to 
explicate, and to study his logic, and, moreover, it was conceived by him to be 
applicable equally to all the axiomatic or axiomatizable sciences. 41 
4~ 
might make one exception to this. While Aristotle's syllogistic system seems to eschew 
identity, he does cite some instances of categorical sentences with the same subject and predicate 
terms. Surely Aristotle would recognize that in these cases it is impossible for such sentences to 
be false, just as he recognized the impossibility of the compound sentence expressing the law of 
the excluded middle, and any sentence expressing an instance of this law, being false. But such 
sentences do not serve his scientific interests, and thus his logic is accordingly restricted. Cf. 
n29. 
41Even a modern mathematical logician, when constructing a formal language, has some in- 

144 
George Boger 
2.2 
Truth conditions for object language sentences 
In relation to establishing truth conditions for sentences, it is customary for a 
modern logician to speak about 'giving an interpretation' of a formal language. 
In this respect, then, a modern logician would (1) specify a non-empty domain 
as a universe of discourse, (2) specify the meanings of all logical constants, (3) 
establish definitions of 'true' and 'false', and (4) establish conditions under which 
a given interpreted sentence is either true or false. However, in connection with 
truth conditions, Aristotle did not employ a modern system of interpretations and 
reinterpretations; he seemed not to work with model-theoretic notions. Thus, we 
do not find him saying that "a given sentence is true under a given interpretation". 
Aristotle, however, does use a method of substituting non-logical constants for 
schematic letters in categorical sentence patterns. And we do witness him establish 
meanings for his logical constants and truth conditions for sentences, categorical 
or otherwise. Above we treated their syntax and now we treat their semantics, 
principally focussing on categorical sentences. 
Since the four categorical sentence patterns are not themselves sentences pos- 
sessing a truth-value, we might wonder what conditions Aristotle required to pro- 
duce a categorical sentence according to his definition of'logos' or 'apophansis', 
that is, beyond his sentence formation rules. It is immediately apparent that he 
would specify a universe of discourse 
that is, he would introduce genuine non- 
logical constants, or, what amounts to the same thing, he would apply his formal 
language to a given domain. The following passage from Posterior Analytics AIO 
establishes that this is so. 
Every demonstrative science [x~u~ &xo~txxtx~ ~ttuTfl~rl] is concerned 
with three things: [1] what it posits to exist [5~ x~ ~t~t x[0~xc~t] (these 
items constitute the kind [xb $~oq] of which it studies the attributes 
[Ttc~0~xc0~] which hold of it in itself); [2] the so-called common axioms 
[T& xotv~ X~yd~a~ ~t6~a~T~], that is, the primitives from which its 
demonstrations proceed; and [3] thirdly, the attributes [x~ x~0~] where 
it assumes what each of them means [x[ o~p~tv~t ~x~oTov]. (76b11-16) 
Aristotle also provided meanings for his logical constants. In addition, he defined 
'truth' and 'falsity', which he understood to pertain to sentences, and he provided 
the conditions under which a given sentence is true or false. We can take his dis- 
cussions, particularly in Posterior Analytics, on the genus of a science as evidence 
tended interpretation in mind as pertains to variables, logical constants, and non-logical con- 
stants. When a logician identifies a notation designating variables, logical constants, non-logical 
constants, he/she already has in mind sentence, derivation, and the meanings of the logical 
constants. A logician never escapes language and indeed invents a formal language always an- 
ticipating its interpretations. Moreover, the distinction between logical syntax and semantics 
is one that exists for the most part in thought only, and even in thought the distinction is not 
complete. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
145 
of the requirement that a non-empty domain be specified. In this section we exam- 
ine his definitions of the logical constants, his definitions of 'true' and 'false', and 
the conditions under which a sentence is true or false. There also is a section on 
Aristotle's notion of existential import and a final note on his intensional notion 
of truth. We begin with a brief statement on the importance he attributed to 
meaning. 
Aristotle on meaning in general 
Aristotle gave special attention to the matter of meaning in various treatises. 
In connection with semantics in general, he defined 'having a meaning' in rela- 
tion to intelligible discourse in Metaphysics 4.4, concerning the principle of non- 
contradiction, in the following, rather stipulative, way: 
Suppose 'man' has the meaning 'two-footed animal'. 
By 'having a 
meaning' [~6 ~ oq~dt~t] I mean this" if 'man' is 'two-footed animal', 
then if anything is a man, its 'being two-footed' will be what its 'being 
a man' is. (1006a31-34) 
Aristotle recognized that the meanings assigned to words, and the words, or mean- 
ingful sounds themselves, are conventions. Accordingly, he expected those engaged 
in intelligible discourse to agree that one word have one meaning, or if many mean- 
ings that this be made clear: "let us suppose ... that a word has a meaning and one 
specific meaning [oqg~tv6~ -ct ~6 6vobtc, xStt oqb,~tvov ~v]" (Meta. ~.~: 1006b12-13; 
cf. Meta. 
11.5: 1062a11-23). Moreover, he made absolutely clear that we not 
confuse a word with its denotation. 
As to having a meaning, what we insist on is that the meaning is 
not the object referred to [itself] (since then 'musical' and 'white' and 
'man' could have a single meaning or referent, and all would be one, 
and those terms would be synonymous). [What we mean is that] it will 
not be possible to be and not to be the same thing [~b c,C)~b], except 
ambiguously; for example, if we call a 'man' what others were to call 
a 'non-man'. 
The question is not whether the same thing can at the 
same time be and not be a man in name, but in fact [~6 8' &~opoSia~ov 
o6 ~o5~6 ~(~t~, ~t ~X~-~at ~6 a6~6 6ibta ~tvat  
~ ~tvat ~v0pc0~o~ x6 
5yoga, dX)& x6 =p~u 
(1006b15-22) 
Aristotle took up this matter throughout most of Metaphysics ~.~, where he was 
careful to state the necessity for clear definition and meaning in connection with 
the law of non-contradiction. He wrote that "to signify its being means that its 
being is not something else" (1007a26-27); and "there must, accordingly, be some 
meaning in the sense of indicating a thing's being" (1007b16-17). 
Here again 
Aristotle expected that words be used carefully and precisely in order better to 
reflect in thought what exists independently of thought. Then, later in Metaphysics 
~. 7 he wrote that 

146 
George Boger 
basic to all these argumentations [viz., eristic argumentations] are def- 
initions. And definition [6tzto[abq ] arises out of the necessity of stating 
what we mean; for the sentence of which the word is a sign becomes a 
definition [6 y&p k6yo~ o6 ~b 6vo~ o~tov 
6pto~b~ ~ax~t]. (1012a21- 
24) 
Then, in connection with meaning in relation to truth and falsity, Aristotle wrote 
in Metaphysics ~.8: 
Against all such argumentations, however, it must be asked [as at Meta. 
4-4: 1006a18-22] ... not that something is or is not, but that something 
has meaning [o6x[ ~v~[ ~t ~] [a~ ~wt ~)~I~ c~[a~tv~tv ~t]; so that we must 
converse on the basis of definition [~ 5ptopoh] by grasping what falsity 
and truth mean. (1012b5-8) 
We shall treat truth and falsity more fully below, but note here that Aristotle is 
quite clear about the importance of establishing meaning 42 and about the rela- 
tionship between meaning and existence. 43 
Defining the logical constants 
Aristotle provides some explicit definitions of his logical constants in Prior Ana- 
lytics and elsewhere. On 'belonging to every' and 'belonging to no' he writes in 
Prior Analytics AI: "I call 'belonging to every' or 'to none' universal" (24a18). 
He adds: 
For one thing to be in another as a whole is the same as for one thing 
to be predicated of every one of another. We use the expression 'pred- 
icated of every' when none of the subject can be taken of which the 
other term cannot be said, and we use 'predicated of none' likewise. 
(24526-30) 
In Posterior Analytics A~ he writes on universal predication in much the same 
way: 
42On meaning, see Top. 1.5 & 7.2-5 and Po. An. B13-14. 
43Cf. SR on confusing a word with an object it denotes. At the outset of SR1, where Aris- 
totle introduces the subject matter of fallacious argumentation, just after defining 'refutation' 
(~),sYXoq), he remarks that argumentations might appear to be cogent when they are not. He 
then writes, setting the tone for what follows, that this might be due to "several causes, of 
which the most fertile and widespread is the argumentation that depends on names. For, since 
it is impossible to argue by introducing the actual things under discussion, but we use names as 
symbols in the place of things, we think that what happens in the case of names happens also 
in the case of the things, just as people who are counting think in the case of their counters" 
(165a4-10). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
147 
I say that something holds of every case if it does not hold of some cases 
and not of others, nor at some times and not at others. For example, 
if animal holds of every man, then if it is true to call this a man, it is 
true to call him an animal too; and if he is now the former, he is the 
latter too. (73a28-31; cf. A~ : 73b25-?4a3 on 'holding universally' ['~5 
x~0dXou]) 
In On Interpretation 7 he defines 'predicating universally 
identifies some sentences as indeterminate. He writes: 
' indirectly, when he 
It is necessary when asserting [&xoq~[~so0~t] as either belonging or 
not belonging [d)~ bx~pxe~ xt ~ gf]] sometimes to something universal 
[ 
sometimes to an individual [ 
g 
Now, if someone 
states universally of a universal that something belongs or does not 
belong, there will be contrary sentences [~,c~x[~t ~oq~ast~]. I mean 
by stating universally of the universal, for example, "Every man is 
white" and "No man is white". (17bl-6) 
In Prior Analytics A1 when he treats 'belonging to some' and 'not belonging to 
some' Aristotle writes in a rather eclipsed manner: "I call 'belonging to some', 
'belonging not to some', or 'belonging not to every' partial [~v ~p~t]" (24a18-19). 
He seems to have taken their meanings as evident to his audience. In addition, 
Aristotle takes 'belonging to some' in two ways, implicitly in On Interpretation 7 
but rather more explicitly in Prior Analytics. (1) In its determinate (~tc0p[og~vo~) 
meaning, 'some' means, as in 'A belongs to some B', that 'some Bs are A' and 
'some Bs are not A' but not that 'possibly all Bs are A'. The determinateness of a 
sentence pertains to its having only one meaning. A participant knows that, of a 
given kind, some indeed have and some indeed do not have a given property. (2) In 
its indeterminate (&~tdpt~o~) meaning, 'some' means 'at least one, possibly all'. 
Here a participant does not know, in the case of 'A belongs to some B', whether 
some Bs are not A or every B is an A. He writes in Prior Analytics A1 that 
I call belonging or not belonging without a universal or partial indeter- 
minate [&~tdpt(~o~] as, for example, "The science of contraries is the 
same" or "Pleasure is not a good". (24a19-22) 
Again, an indeterminate sentence is ambiguous. Aristotle does not usually cite 
a partial sentence, that is, one specifically using a partial logical constant, to 
identify indeterminateness. Rather, he usually cites a general sentence, such as 
"Men are white" or "Pleasure is good". In such cases he remarks that while 'men' 
is used universally, the sentence is indeterminate: it could mean "Some men are 
white" and "Some men are not white" or "All men are white" (On Int. 7: 17a38- 
17b16). There he indicates the indeterminateness of "Man is white" and "Man is 
not white". He notes that 

148 
George Boger 
the universal 'man' is not used universally in the sentence. For the word 
'every' does not signify the universal but that it is taken universally 
['~() y~p ~:(~ O~) ~() X(205~,OU O~t0([VEt ~,' 
5-~t X(205~,OD]. 44 (17b11-12) 
This matter is clearly stated in Prior A nalytics A27 where he counterposes a 
sentence being determinate to its being indeterminate. There Aristotle comments 
on developing argumentational skills and instructs his students to select things that 
follow the subject as a whole since "a syllogism is through universal premisses". 
He continues this thought and thereby clarifies the meaning of 'indeterminate': 
Now, if it is indeterminate [&~top[o~ou], it is unclear [~Io~] whether 
the premiss is universal [ 
whereas if it is determinate this is 
evident [~tc0ptop~vou ~ ~v~p6~]. (43b14-15; cf. Pr. An. A~: 26b21- 
25) 
He also reveals his understanding when he establishes the inconcludence of a few 
patterns of premiss pairs by "proving it from the indeterminate" . In Prior An- 
alytics A~, in connection with showing that a pair of premisses 
the major a 
universal attributive or privative, the minor a partial privative 
does not result 
in a syllogism, Aristotle notes that this must be established from the indetermi- 
nate. He writes: 
Moreover, since "B does not belong to some C" is indeterminate, that 
is, it is true if B belongs to none as well as if it does not belong to 
every (because it does not belong to some),... (26b14-16; cf. Pr. An. 
A5: 27b16-23) 
In this way, then, Aristotle defined his logical constants. 
Finally, in this connection, Aristotle distinguishes variously between kinds of 
declarative sentence (apophansis). There are, first, the affirmation (kataphasis) 
and the denial (apophasis). Using Aristotle's terminology developed in Prior An- 
alytics, we can take a kataphasis to be a positive, or attributive (215 
sentence and an apophasis as a negative, or privative (ox~p~xtxd~), sentence that 
uses a negative operator. Second, a sentence can be singular ( 
~ 
par- 
tial, or particular (~v ~p~;  
~po~), or universal ( 
The first of these 
determinations usually captures the quality of a sentence, the second its quantity. 
Third, a sentence can be either determinate (~t~0pt(~o~ or ~toptox5~) or inde- 
terminate (&~tdpt(~xo~), as we noted above. These distinctions are more sharply 
defined in Prior Analytics than they are in On Interpretation, but the two works 
are generally in accord on these sentential determinations. 45 We shall examine the 
kinds of sentence more fully when we treat their truth-values in relation to the 
matter of existential import. 
44In On Int. 
17b12-16 Aristotle rules out such sentences as "Every man is every animal". 
Aristotle takes a universal to be a secondary substance and not an individual. Later logicians 
considered 'taking a term universally' to mean taking a term to be distributed. 
45Interestingly, Aristotle used 'huparchein' in both works, but formalizes its use in Pr. An. In 
any case, we take his practice in both treatises as a reflex of his theory of substance. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
149 
Defining truth and falsity 
In On Interpretation 9 Aristotle treats the notions of truth and falsity especially 
in relation to examining contrary and contradictory sentences. There he provides 
definitions of 'true' [&kr~0/E] and 'false' [~/E] 
that accord exactly with Alfred 
Tarski's treatment of the topic in "The concept of truth in formalized languages" .46 
Aristotle writes: 
For, if it is true to assert [~[ u 
&krl0~ ~[n~b] that something is white 
or not white, then it is necessarily [&v~yx~ ~)twt] white or not white. 
And if it is [x~[ ~t ~oxt] white or not white, it was true to affirm or 
deny it [&kr~0~q ~v ~v~t ~ ~noq~v~t]. And, if it is not [in fact] white [~t 
~ 6n@X~t], then to say that it is will be false [~6~x~t]; if to say that 
it is will be false [x~[ ~[ ~6~z~], then it is not white [o0 X bx@X~t ]. 
And so, it is necessary that the affirmation or the denial be true [6Gz' 
&v~yx~] zf)~ x~x~q~otv ~ z~v &nd~otv ~X~]Of] ~v~t]. (18a39-1854) 
The upshot of this discussion is to affirm that every declarative sentence is either 
true or false and that "the truth of sentences consists in corresponding with states 
of affairs [5ozz, ~nr 6[ao[6)q o[ k6yot &krl0~q 6on~p zh np~y~t~za]" (19a32-33). 
In Categories 12 Aristotle writes in much the same vein, but he states the case 
somewhat more strongly when he addresses various meanings of 'prior'. 
The existence of a man is reciprocal in relation to the true sentence 
about him as it follows from there being [such] a man [zb u 
Kv~ 
~vOp~onov &~ztuzp~q)~t xocr& z~ zo5 ~tvo~t &xokoOO~utv ~tpb~ zbv&X~]Of] 
n~p[ ~0zo5 X6yov]. For if a man exists, then the sentence asserting 
[6 k6yo~ ~ k~yopav] that a man exists will be true [&k~0~]. 
And 
conversely, if the sentence asserting [6 k6yo~ ~ k~yopav] that a man 
exists is true [&k~0~q], then the man exists. The true sentence [6 pkv 
&k~0~q k6yo~], however, is in no way the cause of the [given] state 
of affairs [&~ztoq zo5 ~tv~t zb np~y~]; and yet the state of affairs [zb 
~p~yp~] seems somehow to be the cause of the truth of the sentence 
[n~o~ &[z~ov zo5 ~tv~t &kr}0~ zbv k6yov]. For a sentence is called true 
or false as the state of affairs exists or does not exist [z6 y&p }trot xb 
=p~yp~ ~ p~ &kr~0~< 6 k6yoq i~ ~a~%< k~yaz~t]. (14b14-22) 
Aristotle is quite clear about distinguishing a sentence pattern from a sentence, 
and a sentence from its denotation, or state of affairs, or even from its sense or 
meaning. Again, we have ample evidence of this topic treated more fully through- 
out Sophistical Refutations and Rhetoric. 
We can supplement what Aristotle writes on truth and falsity in these works 
with what he writes in Metaphysics ~. 7-8 in connection with his discussion of the 
laws of non-contradiction and excluded middle. 
46 Tarski states his semantic definition in relation to natural language as follows: "a true 
sentence is one which says that the state of affairs is so and so, and the state of affairs indeed is 
so and so" (in Corcoran 1990: 155; cf. 154-165). 

150 
George Boger 
And the possibility of a middle between contradictories is excluded; for 
it is necessary either to assert or to deny one thing of another [&kk' 
&vdyx~ ~ (p~vcz~ ~ &~oc~dvc~ ~v xc~0' ~vbr 6x~oSv]. This is clear from the 
definition of truth and falsity [~Xov ~ xp~5~o~ ~a~v 6p~oc~[a~o~r ~[ ~b 
dX~0~r  
~5~or 
to deny what is or to affirm what is not is false, 
whereas to affirm what is and to deny what is not are true; so that any 
sentence that anything is or is not states either what is true or what 
is false [xb ~t~v y&p X~y~w xb 5v ~t~ ~w~ ~ xb g~l 5v ~w~t @5~or xb 
x6 g~ 6~]. Hence, either what is is affirmed or denied, or else what 
is not is affirmed or denied. There can be no middle ground. (g.7: 
1011b23-29 & 11.6" 1063b15-18; cf. On Int. ld" 23b29-30) 
We shall return to this matter in connection with Aristotle's notion of existential 
import. 
Aristotle, then, is quite clear about 'truth' and 'falsity' applying to sentences 
(logoi) and not to states of affairs (pragmata), which he characterized using '~[~', 
or 'being [the case]', and '[a~ ~', 
or 'not being [the case]'. However, Aristotle 
sometimes uses the words 'al~th~s' and 'pseudos' in relation to pragmata where we 
would prefer using 'is the case' and 'is not the case' and thus would avoid making 
a category mistake. Consider, for example, what he writes in Metaphysics 5.12 
where he defines 'possibility' [~uwxdv] and 'impossibility' [&~6v~xov]. (Here we 
transliterate, rather than translate, and mark in bold face, the Greek for 'true' 
and 'false' to objectify Aristotle's meanings.) 
[In the case where 'impossibility' means the opposite of 'possibility', the 
impossible is] the contrary of what is necessarily al~th~s [T5 ~vx[o~ 
~ &vdyxr)r &kr}0~r that the diagonal of a square is commensurable 
with its side is impossible, because that is something pseudos [6xt 
@5~or x5 xomSxov], and its direct contrary, incommensurability, is 
not only al~th~s [~kr)0~r but also necessary; that it is commensurable 
is, therefore, not only pseudos [@5~or but also necessarily pseu- 
dos [~ &~dyxr)r @5~or 
On the other hand, the contrary of this, 
the "possible", holds when it is not necessary for its contrary to be 
pseudos [@5~or 
it is possible for a man to be seated, for it is not of 
necessity pseudos [@5~or that he is not seated. The possible, then, 
means: (1) what is not of necessity pseudos [xb ~ ~ &v~yxrlr @5~or 
(~r~ta~[~t]; (2) what is al~th~s [~b &kr)0~r (3) what may be al~th~s 
[~6 ~,~x6~,o, ax~o~g ~t,~t]. (i0i9b23-33) 
It is not uncommon for Aristotle, and he suggests that it is a common practice, to 
use 'al~th~s' and 'pseud~s' to refer to both sentences (logoi) and states of affairs 
(pragmata). In fact, he explicitly makes this point in Metaphysics 9.10 where he 
remarks that being and nonbeing are commonly assessed according to the 'true' 
or the 'false', that is, by using the words 'al~th~s' and 'pseud~s'. He writes: 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
151 
This use depends on things being combined or dissociated [TOOTO 8' 
~[ ~v xp~y~&T{o~ ~{~x[ ~ 
ouy 
}~ 8~p~o0~]; so that he who 
thinks that what is dissociated is dissociated, and what is combined is 
combined, holds the truth, whereas he whose thought is contrary to the 
state of affairs is in error [~box~ &X~10c6~t ~2~ 6 x6 8t~p~2~o~ &6~2cvor 
T& ~p&y~tc~Tc~]. When, therefore, is there or is there not what is called 
truth or falsity? 
We must inquire into what we mean by this. 
For it is not because 
we truly [&Xrl0~)q ] hold you to be white that you are white; but it is 
because you are white that we who assert this speak truly [&Xrl0~6o~cv ]. 
(105152-9) 
Here he uses 'al~th~s' and 'pseud~s' to mean true and false in relation to sentences. 
He also frequently uses, as he does here, the verbs '&X~10~6cw' and '~c68~o0~t'. 
Continuing later in this same passage he writes: 
As to "being" [xb ~c~t] in the sense of the true [r 
x6 cD~rl0~q] and 
"not being" [xb [a~ ~t] 
in the sense of the false [r 
xb ~c58oq], there 
are two cases: in one case there is truth [&),rl0~q ] if the combination [~ 
u6y 
[of subject and attribute] exists, and falsity [~c58oq] if there 
is a dissociation [xb 8' ~ [a~ u6y 
in the other case, however, 
whatever is, is as it is, or it is not at all. Here truth is the knowledge 
of these things [~6 8~ &X~0~ ~6 ,~o~ ~bT~]. (1051b33-1052a2) 
Aristotle also makes much the same point succinctly in Metaphysics 5.29. 
The "false" [~6 ~08o~] refers (1) to a state of affairs as not the case 
[d)~ ~p~y~tcr ~58o~]: and this, on the one hand, because it is not put 
together or cannot be put together .... States of affairs [xp&y[ac~Tc~] then 
are said to be not the case [~b~uaf}] whether because they themselves are 
not or because the appearance derived from them is of something that 
is not. 
Next, (2) a false account, in so far as it is false, is the account of 
things that are not. Hence, every account is false which is an account 
of something other than that o/which it is true [k6yoq 8~ ~ua~)~ 6 x{Bv 
for example, an account of a circle is false of a triangle. 47 (1024b17-19, 
24-28) 
47Aristotle later writes that "just as we declare states of affairs to be 'false' which occasion a 
'false' appearance" (1025a5-6). He refers in this passage to when the diagonal of the square is 
said to be commensurate with the side as a 'sense in which a state of affairs is not' (1024b21). 
We translate 'adunaton' in relation to ontic matters by 'impossible', in relation to sentences by 
'absurd'. 

152 
George Boger 
We encounter an analogue of this ambiguity in English, where 'true' and 'false' 
have a range of meanings, including the genuine and the spurious. We might be 
inclined to accuse Aristotle of making a category mistake, and perhaps there are 
cases where he slips. However, it is obvious here that Aristotle does not commit a 
category mistake, but that he uses the same word with two meanings corresponding 
to the two contexts. He does not confuse a sentence (logos or apophansis) with 
a corresponding state of affairs (pragma), although we might wish that he had 
always used different expressions to distinguish their being or not being. Thus, in 
relation to states of affairs (pragmata), we could properly translate 'al~th~s' by 'is 
the case' and 'pseud~s' by 'is not the case'. 
Again, Aristotle is quite clear about pragmata either being or not being, oh- 
taining or not obtaining. This is something ontic. He affirms, in one sense, that 
combination and division are mental acts, in particular, acts of predicating one 
thing of another either attributively or privatively, which are participant relative. 
In Metaphysics 6.~ he writes: 
Now, being [x6 B~ d)~ ~kYl0~ 6v] in the sense of being true and nonbeing 
[xht ta/1 6v d0~ ~r 
in the sense of being false are concerned with 
union [o0v0r 
and division [~t~tpr 
and, taken together, with the 
relation of contradictories [~vxtq~Gr162 
For there is truth when an 
affirmation corresponds to a combination in beings and when a denial 
corresponds to a dissociation among beings; whereas there is error [or 
nonbeing] when the opposite relations hold [xb ta~v yhp ~kY10~ x/Iv 
x~.-:~,..pcrt.v ~:~i...:g.), o-u.y.x~v.14~v ~ ~ 
,S' ~6q~mv ~i. -~ ,~.qF,~vg, -:6 
A little later in this same passage he remarks that "the false and the true are not in 
things [o6 Y&9 ~ 
xb ~SBoq x~[ ~b &k~10~r ~v -~c~s xpdyta~o~v], as if the good were 
true and the bad were forthwith false; but they are in thought [&XX' ~v Btczvo[~]" 
(1027b25-27). We could not ask him to be more clear. He adds, nevertheless: 
However, since unification and separation are in thought and not in 
things, 'being' in this sense differs from 'being' in the chief sense. For 
to predicate or deny what something is, or that it is of some sort, or 
that it is so much, or the like requires thinking [f) B~.4.vo~.o~]. (1027b29-33) 
And thoughts become 'materialized', or expressed, by means of sentences. Aristo- 
tle makes this point at Metaphysics ~. 7 as follows" 
Still, every concept and thought is expressed either as an affirmation 
or a negation [~ ~v ~b ~voq~bv x~[ roll,by ~1 ~czvo[~ ~ xczz~q~o~v 
&x6qxzc~v]; this is clear from the definition [~ 6p~atao5 ] of truth and 
falsity. When a sentence either asserts or denies, it expresses either 
truly or falsely [6x~v ~.XqO~6,q ~ q)r 
48 (1012a2-4). 
48This passage continues" "Whenever a sentence either asserts or denies [q~a~ ~ &xog~aa], it 
expresses either truly [&X~10~6~t] or falsely [Sx~v B~ &B[, ~br 
(1012a4-5). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
153 
The distinctions that modern logicians believe themselves to have invented were 
surely anticipated, if not invented, by Aristotle in ancient times. Categories helps 
to make this even more evident. 
Aristotle's treatment of truth conditions in Categories 
In Categories, as he sharpens the distinction between a sentence and its deno- 
tation, Aristotle defines truth and falsity by affirming that a sentence is not a 
substance (ousia). In Metaphysics he makes it clear that a substance, or a subject 
(hupokeimenon), maintains the same identity and yet admits of contrary qualities. 
In this connection he defines contraries, or contrariety, in Metaphysics 10.~ as 
they pertain to substance. 49 
Since things which differ may be more or less different, there is a great- 
est difference; this I call contrariety [~~[c0ot~]. We can show induc- 
tively that contrariety is the greatest difference .... Hence the distance 
between extremes is a maximum, and this constitutes the relation of 
contrariety .... 
From these considerations, then, it is clear that con- 
trariety is perfect difference. 5~ (1055a3-6, 9-10, 16-17) 
A given individual, then, at one time might be warm or good and at another 
time cold or bad, but he/she cannot be both warm and cold or good and bad at 
the same time in the same respect. For Aristotle a substance has a capacity for 
contraries, but does not itself change identity. In Categories 5 he discusses the 
mistake of thinking that a sentence (logos) or an opinion (~d~ [doxa]), which is 
expressed by a sentence, admits of contrariety. He writes that 
the same sentence [6 aO~bg Xdu 
appears to be both true and false. 
For example, if the sentence "Someone sits" is true, but if he rises, 
the same sentence becomes false. And likewise with opinions [~[ ~f~g 
86~qg]. For if someone believes truly the sentence "Someone sits", then 
upon the person rising he will believe falsely if he still holds the same 
opinion about him [~p[ ~6~o5 ~6~v]. (4a23-28) 
49In Meta. 5.10 Aristotle also writes that: "'contrary' means [1] attributes whose genera are 
different and which cannot at the same time be present in the same thing; [2] things which differ 
most in the same genus; [3] attributes which differ most in the same subject; [4] things which 
diverge most from the same potentiality; and [5] things that differ widely either in themselves, 
in genus or in form" (1018a25-31). 
5~ 
Meta. 10.3 Aristotle continues by writing that: "all this being so, it is evident that one 
thing can have only one direct contrary; a difference separates two things; therefore contrariety, 
being complete difference, is a relation between two things .... 
hence, a complete difference 
between different things in the same genus is the greatest possible. We have shown also that 
such complete difference is contrariety; for a complete difference is one that separates the species 
of the same genus .... 
for a single science covers a single genus and therefore deals with the 
complete differences in that genus" (1055a19-20, 22-23, 26-29, 31-33). Cf. On Int. 1~: 23b22- 
23. See also above w 
on Aristotle's notion of universe of discourse. 

154 
George Boger 
Aristotle continues here to remark that whenever a substance admits of contrary 
qualities it is due to a change within itself. However, in the case of a sentence 
(logos) and an opinion (doza) each 
remains in itself unaltered in any and every respect; but it is because of 
a change in the fact [xo0 ~ ~p~yg~xo~ xwoug~ou] that the contrary 
applies to them. For the sentence "Someone sits" remains the same; 
but according to changing conditions [xou ~ ~p~yp~xo~ xtv~10~xo~ ] it 
becomes at one time true and at another time false. As with sentences, 
so too with opinions [~M z~ ~36~qcj]. (4a34-4b2) 
At 4b2-6 Aristotle asserts that it is the special property ('~tov) of substance to 
admit of changes (p~xc~3oXf~) within itself, but that opinions and sentences do not 
admit of such changes. He next forcefully states that anyone maintaining that a 
sentence admits of contrary qualifications is speaking nonsense. 
It is not because a sentence and an opinion [6 y&p ),6yo~ x~[/1 ~6~] 
take on contrary qualities that they are said to take on contraries, but 
because of what has happened to something else. For it is because 
the fact is or is not that case [~ y~p zb ~p~y~ ~tv~t ~ ~1 ~w~t] that 
a sentence [Xdyo~] is called true or false, and not that it can itself 
receive contrary qualities. For absolutely nothing [&xXcS~ y&p o0~v 0n' 
o~5~vbq] can alter either a sentence or an opinion, and so, since they 
cannot receive contraries nothing changes in them. (4b6-13) 
Only substances can admit of such changes (4b13-14). Here again Aristotle affirms 
the difference between a sentence and the state of affairs denoted by the sentence 
as he treats truth and falsity. In Categories 10 he develops this distinction with 
even more precision. 
Nor is what underlies [x6 0~6] an affirmation and a denial an affirmation 
and a denial. An affirmation [ 
is an Mfirmative sentence 
[Xdyor x~q0~txb~], a denial [&xdq0~c~t~] is a denying sentence [Xdyo~ 
&xoq0~xtxb~]. But what underlies [0xb] either an affirmation or a denial 
is not a sentence [o0~ ~ax~ X6u 
Still, these things are said to 
be opposed to each other as affirmation and denial; there is the same 
manner of opposition. For just as an affirmation is opposed to a denial 
for example, "Someone sits" and "Someone does not sit" 
so 
are opposed the things that underlie each sentence [xb 0q~' ~ 
~payg~] 
the sitting and the not sitting. (12b5-16) 
As Aristotle had distinguished a word and its object, here he distinguishes a sen- 
tence from what it expresses. He clearly grasps the difference between a sentence 
and its denotation. Later in this same discussion in Categories 10 he turns to a 
position he treats in On Interpretation 7: 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
155 
It is evident that affirmations and denials are opposed in none of those 
ways we have already treated. For only in relation to [contradictory] 
sentences is it always necessary for one to be true the other to be 
false. With contraries it is not always necessary for one to be true the 
other false, nor with relatives, nor with possession, nor with privation. 
For example, health and sickness are contraries, but neither the one 
nor the other is either true or false; likewise with the relatives the 
double and the half. Nor are privation and possession such as sight 
and blindness. Generally, nothing that is said without combination is 
either true or false [6Xcog 8~ ~(Sv xc,~& btr~bt[c,v ougxXox~v ),~yobL~vc0v 
o68~v oS~e &Xq0~ oS~e @586~ ~tv]. 
All the opposites just treated 
are said without combination [elveu o%L:v)vo 
(13a37-13b12) 
Thus, Aristotle distinguishes a sentence from its denotation, and he establishes 
that the truth or falsity of a given sentence, which are ontic determinations, de- 
pends upon correspondence with the states of affairs or facts, which also are ontic 
matters, denoted by the sentence as being the case (xb ~tvat) or not being the case 
(~b g~ ~tvat). 51 
Truth-values of contradictory and contrary sentences 
In Metaphysics 5.10 Aristotle defines 'opposite' (antikeimenon) as having a va- 
riety of meanings: contradiction, contrariety, correlation, privation, possession. 
What he writes there about being corresponds exactly with what he writes in 
On Interpretation 7 having to do with contradictory and contrary sentences. In 
Metaphysics 10.~ he states of substance that "the primary form of contrariety 
[r~p~5~r} ~ ~vc, v~tcac~tg] is that between a positive state and a privation [~tg x~[ 
oxepqok eoxtv]" (1055a33-34). 52 He continues there to distinguish contradiction 
from contrariety as follows: 
Opposition 
[&w[ 
may 
take 
the 
form 
of 
contradiction 
[&w[q)aotg] or of privation [o~pqotg] or of contrariety [~vcw~t6~rN] or 
of relation [r~p6g Tt]. The first of these is contradiction, and contradic- 
tion admits of no intermediate, whereas contraries do; it is clear that 
contradictories and contraries are not the same. (1055aa8-1055b3) 
Aristotle 
defines 
'contrary' 
and 
'contradictory' 
in 
Prior Analytics 
B15: 
63b23-30 in a way that exactly comports with what he writes in On Interpre- 
tation, but in Prior A nalytics in relation to the logical constants. 
5i Below this section we take up whether meaning is an extensional or an intensional determi- 
nation according to Aristotle. 
52In Meta. 10.5 Aristotle writes on contraries that "it is rather an extreme which has something 
between it and its opposite. In that case it must be an opposite either as a denial or as a privation. 
It cannot be the denial or privation, for why would it be of the greater rather than of the less? 
Hence, it must be the privative denial of both" (1056a14-18). 

156 
George Boger 
I say that verbally there are four <pairs of> opposite sentences [xpox~o~tr 
to wit: [1] 'to every' and 'to no', [2] 'to every' and 'not to every', [3] 'to 
some' and 'to no', and [4] 'to some' and 'not to some'. In truth, how- 
ever, there are three, for 'to some' and 'not to some' are only opposites 
verbally. Of these, I call the universal sentences contraries [~vT[~r 
H~v x&~  
('to every' is contrary to 'to none', as, for example, 
"Every science is good" is contrary to "No science is good") and the 
other pairs of sentences opposites [x~q 5' 5~IX~ ~vxt162 
(63b23- 
30) 
Only opposites cannot belong to the same thing at the same time. According to 
the principle of opposition, both opposites obtaining at the same time is impossible 
(Meta. 10.5: 1055b37-1056a3). When he turns in On Interpretation 7 to treat 
sentences, he states that "the denial ... must deny the same thing the affirmation 
affirms of the same thing" (17b39-40). 53 And there also he makes this point about 
contraries: "but what constitutes sentences as contrary is having two contrary 
meanings, not having two contrary subjects" (23b6-7). And, "it is impossible for 
opposite sentences [~ 
&vTtxet~v~ q)~c~etg] to be true about the same thing" 
(21b17-18). 
In fact, when one of a pair of contradictories is true the other is 
necessarily false. This is not the case with contraries where both might be false, 
but not both true. In On Interpretation 7 he writes: 
But I call the universal affirmation [x~lv xo5 xc~06Xou  
and 
the universal denial [x~[ ally xo5 x~0dXou &xdq)~Gt~] contrarily opposite 
... Hence, these cannot be true together, but it is possible that their 
opposites [i.e., sub-contraries] can be true of the same thing. (17b20- 
26) 
Among the relationships Aristotle understands to exist between categorical sen- 
tences are two pairs of contradictories and one pair of contraries, all of which 
he employs in his deduction system. Now, rather than grasping some syntactic 
relationships among categorical sentences as taking a given sentence and then as 
a result being able or not able to take another sentence, Aristotle treats their 
semantic relationships as follows. 
For contradictories : 
1. If a sentence fitting the pattern AaB is true, then a sentence fitting the pat- 
tern AoB is necessarily false; if a sentence fitting the pattern AaB is false, 
then a sentence fitting the pattern A oB is necessarily true. 
If a sentence fitting the pattern AoB is true, then a sentence fitting the pat- 
tern AaB is necessarily false; if a sentence fitting the pattern AoB is false, 
then a sentence fitting the pattern AaB is necessarily true. 
53This passage continues: "whether of something partial or universal, taken as universal or as 
not universal" (17b40-18al). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
157 
2. If a sentence fitting the pattern A eB is true, then a sentence fitting the 
pattern AiB is necessarily false; if a sentence fitting the pattern AeB is 
false, then a sentence fitting the pattern A iB is necessarily true. 
If a sentence fitting the pattern A iB is true, then a sentence fitting the 
pattern AeB is necessarily false; if a sentence fitting the pattern AiB is 
false, then a sentence fitting the pattern A eB is necessarily true. 
For contraries: 
1. If a sentence fitting the pattern A aB is true, then a sentence fitting the 
pattern AeB is necessarily false; but if a sentence fitting the pattern AaB 
is false, then a sentence fitting the pattern A eB is not necessarily true but 
might be false. 
2. If a sentence fitting the pattern AeB is true, then a sentence fitting the 
pattern AaB is necessarily false; but if a sentence fitting the pattern AeB 
is false, then a sentence fitting the pattern A aB is not necessarily true but 
might be false. 
Aristotle states all this in so many words, although not as rigorously, and it is 
obviously an important part of his treatment of sentences in Prior Analytics. This 
position is explicitly treated in On Interpretation and it is used throughout his 
analyses in Prior Analytics, notably there in relation to conversion (A2: 25a17-19) 
and to his treating reductio proofs (e.g., those of Baroco in A5:27a30-27b3 and 
of Bocardo in A 6: 28b17-20). 
Aristotle on existential import 
Aristotle noticed some difficulty concerning the semantics of some sentences, par- 
ticularly indeterminate sentences and those having to do with future events (On. 
Int. 9). 54 Still, his considerations of these matters in On Interpretation (6, 7-8, 
9-11, 12, 13) seem well resolved. He reaffirms that every sentence is either true or 
false, although determining this in one or another case may be difficult or some- 
times impossible. Modern logicians, however, seem more puzzled by considerations 
of existence, and they fear that Aristotle's logic leads to peculiar violations of the 
54There has been much discussion about 'the sea-battle episode' in On Int. 9, where Aristotle 
seems to question the truth that every sentence is either true or false. In truth Aristotle refutes 
a sophistic argumentation - one that aims to establish an ontology of predestination as following 
from the truth of the law of excluded middle as applied to both sentences and states of affairs - 
by reaffirming that "it does not make any difference whether any people made the contradictory 
statements or not. For clearly this is how the actual things are even if someone did not affirm it 
and another deny it. For it is not because of the affirming or denying that it will be or will not 
be the case, nor is it a question of ten thousand years beforehand rather than any other time" 
(18b36-19al). Here again Aristotle distinguishes between what is the case and knowing what is 
the case. Thus, he always preserves the principle that a given sentence is either true or false. 

158 
George Boger 
square of opposition, particularly in relation to contradictories. 55 However, this 
matter was not especially troubling to Aristotle. In Categories 10 he addresses 
this matter in the following way. 
It is evident that affirmations and denials are opposed in none of those 
ways we have already treated. For only in relation to [contradictory] 
sentences is it always necessary for one to be true the other to be 
false. With contraries it is not always necessary for one to be true the 
other false, nor with relatives, nor with possession, nor with privation. 
For example, health and sickness are contraries, but neither the one 
nor the other is either true or false; likewise with the relatives the 
double and the half. Nor are privation and possession such as sight 
and blindness. Generally, nothing that is said without combination is 
either true or false [6X~c; ~: ~b'v xo~& ~'q~(.o~v ou~Xox~}v :X.~you~:v~v 
ob~v obT~ &k~0~ obT~ @585q ~tv]. 
All the opposites just treated 
are said without combination [~veo c~u#xXox~]. 
However, it might seem that some such thing follows in the case of con- 
traries said with combination [x~x& ou#xXox~v] 
[as in] the sentence 
"Socrates is ill" is contrary to "Socrates is well". Yet, even in these 
cases it is not always necessary that one sentence be true and the other 
be false. For, if Socrates exists, one is true and the other is false; but if 
Socrates does not exist, both [sentences] are false. For neither will the 
sentence "Socrates is ill" nor the sentence "Socrates is well" be true if 
Socrates himself does not exist. 
As for affirmations and denials [~x[ ~ y~ xf% x~c~q)d~s~ xc~[ ~ 
&xoq)d~~], if [the subject] does not exist, then neither sentence is 
true. But if [the subject] exists, even then one or the other will not al- 
ways be true. The sentence "Socrates has sight" is the opposite of the 
sentence "Socrates is blind" [in the sense in which 'opposite' is applied] 
to privation and possession. For, if he [viz., Socrates] exists, it is not 
necessary that the one sentence be true and the other false (since until 
the time when it is natural for him to have sight both sentences are 
false). While if Socrates does not exist then both sentences are false: 
both "He has sight" and "He is blind". 
However, concerning affirmation and negation [i.e., contradictories] the 
one will always be false the other true whether or not [the subject] ex- 
ists. For take the sentence "Socrates is ill" and the sentence "Socrates 
is not ill", if he exists it is evident that the one or the other must be 
true or false. It is the same if he does not exist. If Socrates exists, 
the sentence [expressing] that he is sick is false, but the sentence [ex- 
pressing] that he is not sick is true. Thus, it is characteristic ['i~tov] of 
55On the topic of existential import and related matters see: A. Church 1964; R. M. Eaton 
1959: 157-234; Kneale and Kneale 1962: 45-67; Cohen and Nagel (Corcoran 1993): 41-68; W. T. 
Parry & E. Hacker 1991: 179-185; W. T. Parry 1966; I. Copi 1986: 177-193; and J. Lukasiewicz 
1958: 59-67. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
159 
these only -- sentences opposed as affirmation and denial [viz., contra- 
dictories] 
that the one is always true and the other always false in 
all cases will hold of those opposites only which are in the same sense 
opposed as affirmative and negative sentences. (13a37-13b35) 
We cite here again a passage from Categories 12 where he writes about truth and 
falsity. 
The existence of a man is reciprocal in relation to the true sentence 
about him as it follows from there being [such] a man [x5 u 
~t 
5.vOpc0rco'v &v'c~.crcp/:cp~. xcrc& 'c~v 'coo ~.'vcz~. &xoXoGO'qo~:v rcp6~ rb'v &X'qOf') 
~s9[ ~0~o5 X6yov]. For if a man exists, then the sentence [6 Xdyo~] 
asserting that a man exists will be true. And conversely, if the sentence 
asserting that a man exists is true, then the man exists. 
The true 
sentence, however, is in no way the cause of the [given] state of affairs 
[~5 ~p~y[a~]; and yet the state of affairs [~5 ~pay~] seems somehow to 
be the cause of the truth of the sentence. For a sentence is called true 
or false as the state of affairs ezists or does not ezist. (14b14-22) 
Aristotle affirms that the truth or falsity of a given sentence depends, first and 
foremost, upon whether what it expresses corresponds to a given state of affairs. 
In this connection, then, it depends upon whether the objects denoted by the 
subject exist or do not exist, whether what is asserted is the case or is not the 
case. The cause, or ground, of the truth of a sentence is the state of affairs it 
denotes. This notion is underwritten by his notion of substance. "Were there no 
individuals existing of whom it could thus be affirmed, it could not be affirmed of 
the species; and were there no primary substance, nothing else could so much as 
exist" (Cat. 5: 2a38-2b1). Aristotle has remarked in what way existence is the 
cause of a sentence being true (Meta. ~.7: 1011b23-29). 
With what he writes in Categories 10 and 12 and elsewhere on truth and falsity, 
we can make sense of the semantics of the various sentences that Aristotle treats 
concerning their existential import. In general, in the case of existence, a sentence 
is true or false as, respectively, the state of affairs denoted by the sentence is the 
case or is not the case; in these cases there are no empty classes. In the case of 
non-existence, no affirmation is true because it affirms something to be the case 
that is not the case, and every privative, that is, every sentence with a negative 
operator, is true because it truly expresses what is not the case. 
Below we set out Aristotle's semantics according as he considers sentences to 
be: (1) singular (xc~0' gx~oxov), universal ( 
or partial (~v p~p~t;  
~u~po~); (2) attributive (xc~yoptx6~; g~t~) or privative (o~p~tx6~) 
affirma- 
tive [positive] or negative: an affirmation ( 
or a denial (&~dq~c~at~); 
(3) determinate (~topt(~xdq) or indeterminate (&~tdptc~xoq); (4) having a subject 
that exists or having a subject that does not exist. Aristotle understands an op- 
posite (&,xt 
of a given affirmative sentence to be either (1) a contrary 
(~v~vx[ov), which may or may not involve a negative operator, or (2) a contradic- 
tory (&~x[q)~atq), which always involves a negative operator. In our treatment of 

160 
George Boger 
sentences below we always take a sentence to be a simple sentence according to 
Aristotle's stipulation in his formal language. 
The singular sentence 
A singular sentence predicates, attributively or privatively, one thing of a particular 
this, a primary substance (xp(Sx~ oScd~), and this particular is not predicable 
of anything else (On Int. 
7: 17a38-17bl; Cat. 
5: 2a11-14; Pr. 
An. 
A27: 
43a25-29, 39-40). Every singular sentence is determinate. The opposite of a given 
attributive singular sentence is either its contrary or its contradictory. A contrary 
of an attributive singular sentence does not have a negative operator and is always 
another attributive singular sentence (sc. an affirmation). Since, for Aristotle, 
every denial involves a negative operator, there are no privative contraries in the 
case of singular sentences. Using a negative operator ('[Jf}' or '05') in the case of an 
attributive singular sentence, either adverbially as attached to a verb, or logical 
constant, or as prefixing an entire sentence, always results in the contradictory 
of the given singular sentence. 
Prior A nalytics treats singular sentences only 
incidentally. Moreover, Prior Analytics does not prefix a given sentence with 'ou' 
to produce its negation. Table 7 represents Aristotle's thinking on the semantics 
of singular sentences. 56 
The universal sentence 
A universal sentence predicates, attributively or privatively, one thing of every 
or of no member of a given kind, a secondary substance (~ST~p~ o5~[~). Every 
universal sentence is determinate. The opposite of a given attributive universal 
sentence is either its contrary or its contradictory. A contrary of an attributive 
universal sentence might or might not involve a negative operator, as in both On 
Interpretation and Prior Analytics. The negative operator in these cases appears 
as a pronominal adjective modifying the subject (or as part of the logical constant, 
which nevertheless modifies the subject). The contradictory of a given universal 
attributive sentence involves a negative operator in both On Interpretation and 
Prior Analytics. The negative operator in these cases might appear as prefixing an 
entire sentence, as in On Interpretation but not in Prior Analytics, or adverbially 
as attached to a verb as part of the logical constant. Table 8 represents Aristotle's 
thinking on the semantics of universal sentences. 
The partial sentence 
A partial sentence predicates, attributively or privatively, one thing of some or of 
not every member of a given kind. Here there are instances of both determinate 
and indeterminate sentences. 
General sentences, for example, "Man is white" 
or "Pleasure is good", lack a universal quantifier and thus can be interpreted as 
denoting both some and all; their meaning is not determinate but ambiguous. 
56In Tables 7-9 the '1' pertains to On Interpretation and the '2' to Prior Analytics; 'T' = 
true and 'F'-- false. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
161 
Table 7. 
Semantics of Singluar Sentences 
Given affirmation 
Opposites 
Contrary 
Contradictory 
1. Socrates ails. 
2. Ailing 
belongs 
to 
Socrates. 
Corresponding 
truth values 
Existent subject 
When an affirmation is 
W 
. . . 
When an affirmation is 
F 
. . . 
Non-existent 
sub- 
ject 
No affirmation is T. 
Every affirmation is F. 
When an affirmation is 
F . . .  
1. Socrates fares. 
2 Faring 
belongs 
Socrates 
to 
its contrary is F. 
its contrary may be T 
or F. 
No affirmation is T. 
Every affirmation is 
F. 
its contrary is F. 
1. Socrates does not ail. 
Not- Socrates ails. 
2. Ailing does not be- 
long to Socrates. 
its contradictory is F. 
its contradictory is 
T. 
But every denial is T. 
its contradictory is 
T. 
The opposite of a given determinate partial attributive sentence is either its sub- 
contrary (as modern logicians name it) or its contradictory. A sub-contrary of a 
given partial attributive sentence might, as in both On Interpretation and Prior 
Analytics, or it might not involve a negative operator. The negative operator in 
the case of a sub-contrary appears adverbially as attached to a verb, or as part of a 
logical constant. The contradictory of a given partial attributive sentence involves 
a negative operator in both On Interpretation and Prior Analytics. The negative 
operator in the case of a contradictory may appear as a pronominal adjective as 
part of the logical constant, or as merely modifying the subject, or as prefixing an 
entire sentence as in On Interpretation. Table 9 represents Aristotle's thinking on 
the semantics of partial sentences. 57 
Denying a given privative sentence does not seem to have been treated by Aris- 
totle in either On Interpretation or Prior Analytics, although there are suggestions 
in On Interpretation. Because he lacks a notion of double negation, or, at least, 
it seems, a strong notion of double negation, Aristotle does not treat denying a 
privative sentence save for reverting to its already given affirmation. This is par- 
ticularly true in Prior Analytics, where he does not negate an entire sentence with 
'ou' as in On Interpretation. Rather, there he begins with an affirmation, then 
sTWhile Aristotle does not have an expression for 'sub-contrary', he does recognise their exis- 
tence: On Int. 10 at 20a16-23. In Table 9 we interpolate to complete Aristotle's thinking. 

162 
George Boger 
Table 8. 
Semantics of Universal Sentences 
Given affirmation 
Opposites 
Contrary 
Contradictory 
1. Every man is good. 
2. Good belongs to every 
man. 
Corresponding 
truth values 
Existent subject 
When an affirmation is 
T 
. . . 
When an affirmation is 
F 
, . . 
Non-existent 
sub- 
ject 
No affirmation is T. 
Every affirmation is F. 
When an affirmation is 
F... 
1. Every man is bad. 
No man is good. 
2. Bad belongs to every 
man. 
Good belongs to no 
man. 
its contrary is F. 
its contrary may be T 
or F. 
No affirmation is T. 
Every affirmation is 
F. 
But every denial is T. 
its contrary may be T 
or 
F. 
1. Not- 
every man is 
good. 
2. Good does not be- 
long to some man. 
Good does not be- 
long to every man. 
its contradictory is F. 
its contradictory is 
T. 
But every denial is T. 
its contradictory is 
T. 
provides its contradictory, and then looks back at the original affirmation to ob- 
tain the contradictory of the negation: he does not, then, negate the negation to 
obtain its own contradictory. As he remarked at different places, each affirmation 
has its own, one negation, each negation its own, one affirmation 
and he takes 
them as pairs. 
Finally, in respect of existential import, according to his definitions of true 
and false, Aristotle holds that "to deny what is or to aifirm what is not is false, 
whereas to affirm what is and to deny what is not are true; so that any sentence 
that anything is or is not states either truly or falsely" (Meta. ~.7: 1011b26-28). 
This notion is again poignantly expressed in Metaphysics 5.7: 
'Being' [xb ~t~t] means [a~t~t] 
the 'true' when something is the 
case and 'not being' [xb ~rl ~tv~t] <means> the 'not true' but the 
'false' when something is not the case; likewise for amrmation and 
denial [~x[ x~z~9~0~ 
x~[ &~o~(~]; 
for example, that "Socrates is 
musical" means that this is the case <but we know that this sentence 
is false>, or that "Socrates is non-white" means that this is the case 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
163 
Table 9. 
Semantics of Partial sentences 
Given affirmation 
Opposites 
[Sub-Contraries] 
Contradictory 
1. Some man is good. 
2. Good belongs to some 
man. 
Corresponding truth 
values 
Existent subject 
When an affirmation is T 
9 . 
. 
When an affirmation is F 
9 . 
. 
Non-existent subject 
No affirmation is T. 
Every affirmation is F. 
When an affirmation is 
F
.
.
.
 
1. Some man is bad. 
Some 
man 
is 
not 
good. 
2. Good does not be- 
long to some man. 
Bad belongs to some 
m
a
n

9
 
its sub-contrary may 
be T or F. 
its sub-contrary is T. 
No affirmation is T. 
Every affirmation is 
F. 
Every denial is T. 
Every affirmation is 
F. 
Every denial is T. 
1. Not - some man is 
good9 
No man is good 
2. Good belongs to no 
man. 
its contradictory is F. 
its contradictory is 
T. 
But every denial is T. 
its contradictory is 
T. 
<but, again, we know that this state of affairs is not the case>. But 
that "the diagonal <of the square> is not commensurate <with the 
side>" means that this is not the case <and this, of course, is not the 
case, and so the sentence is true>. (1017a31-35) 
Thus, for Aristotle, every sentence affirming something of a non-existent subject is 
false because it affirms, incorrectly, something to be the case that is not the case. In 
addition, every sentence denying ~ that is, using a negative operator- 
something 
of a non-existent subject is true because it affirms, correctly, something not to be 
the case that indeed is not the case. The correspondence, or non-correspondence 
as the case may be, of thought to being is foundational in Aristotle's thinking 
about truth and falsity. Now, when we turn back to On Interpretation 6, just 
after where he writes that an affirmation states something of something, a denial 
denies something of something, we can better understand Aristotle's meaning. 

164 
George Boger 
Now it is possible to state of what does belong that it does not belong, 
of what does not belong that it does belong, of what does belong that 
it does belong, and of what does not belong that it does not belong 
6~XOV ~r O=~pxov  
zb 6x~pxov (or O=~pxov  
zb ~'~ Ox~pxov ~r 
When someone asserts of what does not belong, or is not the case, that it does 
not belong, or is not the case, he/she speaks truly. 
Truth-value: an extensional or intensional determination? 
Considering the meanings Aristotle assigns to his logical constants might lead one 
to believe that the truth-value of a categorical sentence is determined extensionally. 
Recall, for example, that he defines 'belonging to every' by writing that "for one 
thing to be in another as a whole ...". This suggests his taking the application of 
the universal attributive logical constant extensionally with respect to non-empty 
domains. However, Aristotle continues this statement by writing that "... is the 
same as for one thing to be predicated of every one of another", or "to hold in 
every case". His writing here seems shy of an extensional determination. 
Now, while interpreting the relationship of terms in a categorical sentence as 
that between classes, or even of sets, has been fruitful, this interpretation, never- 
theless, does not reproduce Aristotle's own understanding. It has become a com- 
mon practice to define the truth of a categorical sentence in this way as follows 
(using traditional expressions; 'A' and 'B' are placeholders). 
"Every A is a B" is true iff the extension of A is entirely included in 
the extension of B. 
"No A is B" is true iff the extension of A is disjoint with the extension 
of B. 
"Some A is B" is true iff the extension of A intersects with the exten- 
sion of B. 
"Some A is not B" is true iff the extension of A is not entirely included 
in the extension of B. 
Perhaps in some cases Aristotle did envisage terms to relate extensionally as 
classes. Nevertheless, this interpretation does not take into account Aristotle's 
notions of attribution and privation, which pertain to things (pragmata), and his 
notions of predicating of and not predicating of, which pertain to sentences (apo- 
phanseis). Underlying his theory of predication in Categories, On Interpretation, 
and in Prior Analytics is his theory of substance in Categories and Metaphysics. 
Briefly, for Aristotle attribution is ontic and independent of a participant, while 
predication is intentional or linguistic and participant dependent. Predicating is 
an activity of a human being reflecting in thought what exists or does not exist 
outside of thought. For Aristotle, insofar as he considers matters of logic, thought 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
165 
follows being. And his notion of substance (ousia) is precisely that in which prop- 
erties (path~mata) inhere or do not inhere. 
A substance, whether primary or 
secondary, has or does not have one or another property. This explains Aristotle's 
use of 'huparchein' in the logical constants. 
In order better to grasp term relationships and to see Aristotle as not deter- 
mining truth extensionally, we might consider his objection to platonic forms. For 
Plato, an individual person's being two-footed, for example, is just his participa- 
tion in the transcendent form 'two-footedness' 
Aristotle, rejecting the reality of 
such transcendent forms and their putative explanatory value, rather thought of 
an individual person's being two-footed as his having this property or attribute 
as this characteristic inhering in, or as immanent in, a subject. A sentence ex- 
pressing this relationship would be attributive. To express the notion of a horse, 
on the other hand, as not having rationality would be privative. Aristotle treats 
attribution, in so far as a human expresses attribution in thought by means of 
sentences, rather fully in Categories as well as at places in Metaphysics. 
Since his theory of substance underlies his theory of predication, we ought rather 
to say that truth for Aristotle is determined intensionally (or, perhaps, 'posses- 
sionally'), remembering his correspondence notion of knowledge. Thus, (using his 
sentential expressions) we have the following (see nlT): 
"A belongs to every B" is true iff every individual B has property A. 
"A belongs to no B" is true if] no individual B has property A. 
"A belongs to some B" is true iff some individual B has property A. 
"A does not belong to some B" is true iff some individual B does not 
have property A. 
Aristotle uses 'hupokeimenon' to refer to the subject of a categorical sentence, 
and he uses 'pathS' or 'idion' to refer to a property attributable or not attributable 
to a subject. 'PathS' contains a notion of 'affect', and surely not a notion of 'class', 
but of something 'happening to' an individual this. Indeed, again, this is just his 
meaning of the categories (Cat. ~). If we add, as Aristotle sometimes did, that 
property A is essential and not accidental to subject B, then we understand him 
to mean that having property A, or being A, is just what it means to be B. We 
again cite a passage from Metaphysics tersely to illustrate his thinking. 
Suppose 'man' has the meaning 'two-footed animal'. 
By 'having a 
meaning' I mean this: if 'man' is 'two-footed animal', then if any- 
thing is a man, its 'being two-footed' will be what its 'being a man' is. 
(1006a31-34) 
Thus, we can take the following expressions of the universal attributive logical 
constant (and the corresponding sentence patterns) to be generally equivalent in 
meaning for Aristotle. 
"A belongs to every B." "A holds of every B." "Having property A 
belongs to every B." "Being A is a property of every B." 

166 
George Boger 
2.3 
The deduction system of Aristotle's underlying logic 
In Prior Analytics Aristotle turned his attention away from object language dis- 
courses and toward objectifying the formal deduction apparatus used to establish 
scientific theorems. He was especially concerned to determine "how every syllogism 
is generated" (25b26-31). He refers here to the elements of syllogistic reasoning, 
which consist in elementary two-premiss valid arguments -- the syllogisms -- that, 
when chained together, make up longer syllogistic (deductive) discourses. Aristo- 
tle's project was to identify all the panvalid patterns of such elementary arguments. 
In this way he explicitly treated deduction rules and their logical relationships in 
Prior Analytics. These rules include both the one-premiss conversion rules and 
the two-premiss syllogism rules. He accomplished this by exhaustively treating 
each and every possible argument pattern relating to both the one-premiss and 
two-premiss rules: (1) those patterns of arguments having a premiss-set of just 
one categorical sentence with only two different terms 
the conversions; and 
(2) those patterns of arguments having a premiss-set of just two categorical sen- 
tences with only three different terms -- the syllogisms. Aristotle limited his study 
of multi-premiss arguments to their two-premiss patterns because two categorical 
sentences, taken together, have 'the fewest number of terms and premisses through 
which something different than what was initially taken follows necessarily'. 5s The 
syllogisms, then, are the building blocks of longer deductive discourses. 
We have thus far examined the grammar of categorical sentences as Aristotle 
treated this matter with the artifice of his formal language. We have also treated 
their semantics. We turn now to the syntactic matter of generating, or transform- 
ing, sentences from given categorical sentences according to stipulated rules. This 
defines the deduction system of Aristotle's underlying logic. Briefly, the deduction 
system as presented in Prior Analytics A1-2, ~-6 consists in the following (Table 
10: 
Table 10. 
Aristotle's deduction system 
1. 
Four kinds of categorical sentence. 
2. 
Two pairs of contradictories. 
3. 
One pair of contraries. 
4. 
Three one-premiss deduction rules: the conversion rules. 
5. 
14 two-premiss deduction rules; the syllogism rules. 
6. 
Two kinds of deduction: direct, or probative deduction, and 
indirect, or reductio, deduction. 
Below we extract the rules Aristotle used for forming one-premiss arguments and 
the three corresponding conversion rules and his rules for forming two-premiss 
arguments and the corresponding syllogism rules. 
5SThe text here is a gloss. See Pr. An. B2: 53b18-20 and Po. An. A3: 73a7-11 Bl1: B2~-27. 
Also see the definition of 'sullogismos' in Pr. An. AI: 24b18-20. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
167 
The one-premiss conversion rules 
In Prior Analytics A2 Aristotle treats converting (xb ~vxtoxp~etv; conversion: 
&vxtGxpo(pf}) the predicate and subject terms of categorical sentences to extract 
certain deduction rules. To do this he treats each of the four kinds of categorical 
sentence metalogically; that is, he treats at one time, say, all universal privative 
sentences, by treating the one sentence pattern that they all fit. Aristotle models 
an object language conversion as an elementary one-premiss argument pattern 
where a given sentence is in the role of premiss and its conversion is in the role 
of conclusion. In this way, without considering object language arguments but 
only their patterns, he determines which sentences logically convert with respect 
to terms and which do not by establishing that the argument pattern that they 
fit is panvalid. Aristotle determines that of the four kinds of categorical sentence 
three logically convert and thus their panvalid argument patterns can serve as 
deduction rules. Interestingly, he first states each of the three conversion rules in 
a sentence (25a5-13), as we would expect a rule to be expressed. Moreover, he 
treats the conversions in Prior A nalytics A2 exactly as he does the syllogism rules 
in Prior Analytics A4-6 (w 
and n68). Aristotle assumes his reader's familiarity 
with converting, since he does not define conversion per se: he takes it as obvious 
that conversion involves changing the places of the subject and predicate terms 
in a given categorical sentence while leaving its logical constant unchanged (save 
for per accidens conversion). 
Aristotle considers these formal transformations 
to be deduction rules because something different than what is initially taken is 
established to follow necessarily in each instance. Their being universal in this 
respect underlies their rule nature. 
Aristotle does not explicitly state any general syntax rules for forming premiss- 
sets or for forming premiss-conclusion arguments. Still, in this connection he tends 
to be more explicit in the case of the syllogisms than in the case of the conversions. 
In any case, we can easily extract from his practice of treating conversion in Prior 
Analytics the following conversion premiss formation rules. 
CPFR1 A conversion premiss-set consists in one and only one of any of the four 
categorical sentences. 
This rule could be generalized for any one-premiss argument. 
CPFR2 The two non-logical constants in the categorical sentence in a conversion 
premiss-set are not identical. 
CPFR3 Nothing is a conversion premiss-set except in virtue of these rules. 
The following are one-premiss argument formation rules implicit in Aristotle's 
treatment of conversion. 
CAFR1 A one-premiss conversion argument consists in one and only one cate- 
gorical sentence in the role of premiss and one and only one categorical 
sentence in the role of conclusion. 

168 
George Boger 
CAFR2 The logical constant in the conclusion sentence is the same as the logical 
constant in the premiss sentence. 59 
CAFR3 The non-logical constant in the predicate position in the conclusion sen- 
tence is the same as the non-logical constant in the subject position in 
the premiss sentence, and the non-logical constant in the subject position 
in the conclusion sentence is the same as the non-logical constant in the 
predicate position in the premiss sentence. 
CAFR4 Nothing is a one-premiss conversion argument except in virtue of these 
rules. 
We can now turn to the three conversion rules Aristotle established in Prior A n- 
alytics A2. 
CR1-CR3 below are Aristotle's statements of the three deduction rules involving 
conversion. Our formulations of his statements using a modern notation exactly 
reproduce Aristotle's meaning, both in his manner of expression in Prior Ana- 
lytics and in his using them there. In the boxes below, the texts of Aristotle's 
models appear on the left, our modern representation of the panvalid argument 
patterns on the right. 6~ We treat Aristotle's logical methodology for establishing 
the conversion rules below (w 
CR1 
"It is necessary for a universal privative premiss of belonging to convert 
with respect to its terms" (25a5-6). 
"First, then, let premiss AB be universally privative" 
(25a14): 
"Now, if A belongs to none of the Bs, then neither will 
B belong to any of the As." (25a15-16) 
e simple 
conversion 
1. AeB 
.'. BeA 
This can be expressed syntactically as: whenever AeB is taken then BeA can be 
taken. 
Thus, a sentence fitting the pattern BeA logically follows from a given 
sentence fitting the pattern A eB. Aristotle treats the e conversion first. 
CR2 
"And the attributive (x~ 215 
premiss necessarily converts [with 
respect to its terms], though not universally but in part" (25a7-9). 
59This rule, of course, applies to simple conversion, which likely was the beginning point for 
ancient study of categorical sentence transformations. Here we witness Aristotle's recording the 
results of his study. Strictly, an a sentence does not convert, although he does not say as much. 
Although he recognized that an o sentence is implied by its e counterpart, he did not provide an 
e conversion per accidens. Aristotle noted that an o sentence does not convert, and he provided 
a counterexample to establish this. Interestingly, since an e sentence converts simply, both an 
o sentence and its converse are deducible; this, of course, does not establish that the one is a 
logical consequence of the other. 
6~ 
here have gathered from his text relating to the e conversion something of his thinking 
about premiss formation and argument formation that our statements of rules below capture. 
This manner of writing does not characterize the texts for the a and i conversions, which he 
treats rather summarily; rather it is appropriately taken as given. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
169 
On the universal attributive: 
"And if A belongs to every B, then B will [necessarily] 
belong to some A" (25a17-18) 
a conversion 
per accidens 
1. AaB 
.. BiA 
This can be expressed syntactically as: whenever AaB is taken then BiA can be 
taken. 
Thus, a sentence fitting the pattern B iA logically follows from a given 
sentence fitting the pattern A aB. 
CR3 
"The affirmative (~v x~x~q)~t 
) must convert partially [with respect 
to its terms]" (25a10-11). 
On the partial attributive: 
"And similarly if the premiss is partial: if A belongs to 
some of the Bs, then necessarily B belongs to some of 
the As" (25a20-21) 
i simple 
conversion 
1. AiB 
.. BiA 
This can be expressed syntactically as: whenever AiB is taken then BiA can be 
taken. Thus, a sentence fitting the pattern B iA logically follows from a given sen- 
tence fitting the pattern A iB. Aristotle remarks that the partial privative sentence 
does not convert: "... but the privative premiss need not [convert]" (25a12-13). 
We might wish that Aristotle had stated each rule more rigorously. Nevertheless, 
it is evident that he construes these conversions to be rules and that he treats them 
syntactically. And, although he is quick to provide an example to help illustrate 
his thinking in each case, 61 his doing so no more subverts his syntactic analysis and 
configuration than does providing a counterargument subvert this for a modern 
logician. Moreover, as we show below in relation to the syllogisms (w 
it is 
evident from his discourse in A2 that Aristotle thinks of these transformations as 
metalogical patterns of arguments whose premiss-sets are single sentences. 
The two-premiss syllogism rules 
Aristotle noted that two premisses with three different terms is the fewest number 
by which someone could deduce a sentence that is neither (1) a repetition nor (2) 
a conversion. Accordingly, to fulfill his principal concern in Prior Analytics, he 
demonstrated which of these elementary two-premiss argument patterns have only 
valid argument instances and which elementary patterns have only invalid argu- 
ment instances. 
The results of his study, particularly in Prior Analytics Ad-7, 
serve as elements, or principles 
in particular, as deduction rules 
in his de- 
duction system. Aristotle thought of syllogistic reasoning as progressively linking 
61We cite here Aristotle's examples in the case of each rule. CRI: "For instance, if no pleasure 
is a good, neither will any good be a pleasure" (25a6-7). CR2: "For instance, if every pleasure 
is a good, then some good will be a pleasure" (25a9-10). CR3: "for if some pleasure is a good 
then some good will be a pleasure" (25a11-12). 

170 
George Boger 
the conclusions of two premiss arguments -- to wit, the syllogisms -- until a final 
conclusion (theorem) is reached. Here again we extract his syntactic two-premiss 
deduction rules before taking up his logical methodology (w 
In order systematically to extract all possible panvalid patterns of two-premiss 
categorical arguments, Aristotle considered in Prior Analytics A~,6 every possible 
arrangement of any two of the four kinds of categorical sentence with three different 
terms. Working with a notion of 'form' of argument that is genuinely syntactic, 
he systematically treated patterns of two protaseis (sentences), or premiss-pair 
patterns, and their corresponding argument patterns, and he treated neither pre- 
misses nor arguments per se. To do this he treated each premiss-pair pattern 
metalogically; that is, he treated at one time, say, all such patterns of two univer- 
sal attributive sentences in a given figure, by treating the one premiss-pair pattern 
that they all fit in that figure. Aristotle modeled an object language syllogism 
as an elementary two-premiss argument pattern 
where two given sentences are 
in the role of premises and one sentence is in the role of conclusion. In this way, 
without considering object language arguments but only their patterns, he deter- 
~hined which argument patterns are panvalid and which are not panvalid. Thus, 
any argument fitting a panvalid pattern is valid; its validity might be recognized by 
virtue of its fitting such a pattern. Aristotle determined that 14 such premise-pair 
patterns are concludent and thus that at least one corresponding argument pattern 
is panvalid and can thereby serve as a deduction rule. Aristotle first states each 
of the syllogism rules in a sentence, as we would expect a rule to be expressed, He 
then treats each of the argument patterns schematically, that is, he models each 
as a two-premiss argument pattern to determine its panvalidity. Arguments are 
introduced (1) to establish that certain premise-pair patterns are inconcludent and 
(2) to serve as instances of panvalid argument patterns or of paninvalid argument 
patterns. 
We take Aristotle at his word when he states, on numerous occasions in both 
Prior A nalytics and Posterior A nalytics, that "every demonstration [x~o~ &~6~L~tg] 
and every deduction [x~ ouXkoy~o~b~] will be through only three terms ... it will 
also be from two premisses [or intervals] and no more, for three terms are two 
premises" (Pr. An. A25: 42a30-33; cf. Pr. An. A25:41b36-37 and Po. An. 
A19:81b10 ~: A25:86b7-8 among many other passages). From this statement 
and his practice throughout, we can extract his rules for syllogistic 62 premise-pair 
formation as follows. 
SPFR1 
A syllogism premiss-set consists in two and only two of the four kinds of 
categorical sentence. 
Aristotle provides additional text in Prior Analytics A23 that confirms our taking 
him to have such a rigid rule. We shall refer to this text again when we treat 
62We use 'syllogistic' in this section, and sometimes elsewhere, to refer to the syntax relations 
among categorical sentences and not strictly to refer to consistent sets of categorical sentences 
or valid categorical arguments. Cf. his definition of 'sullogismos' in Pr. An. AI: 24b18-20; see 
below w 
n93. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
171 
Aristotle's notion of deducibility (w 
Now, if someone should have to deduce A of B, either as belonging or 
as not belonging, then it is necessary for him to take something about 
something. If, then, A should be taken about B, then the initial thing 
will have been taken. But if A should be taken about C, and C about 
nothing nor anything else about it, nor some other thing about A, then 
there will be no syllogism, for nothing results of necessity through a 
single thing having been taken about one other. Consequently, another 
premiss must be taken in addition. If, then, A is taken about something 
else, or something else about it or about C, then nothing prevents 
there being a syllogism, but it will not be in relation to B through the 
premisses taken. Nor when C is taken to belong to something else, that 
to another thing, and this to something else, but it is not connected 
to B: there will not be a syllogism in relation to B in this way either. 
(40b30-41a2) 
Aristotle makes it abundantly clear that taking three terms in two sentences is 
possible in only three ways. He established this implicitly in Prior Analytics A~-6, 
but he makes this explicitly part of his argumentation in A23 where he effectively 
treats deducibility and the completeness of his logic. He writes there that "every 
demonstration and every deduction must necessarily come about through the three 
figures" (41b1-3; cf. 40b19-22 & A28: 44b6-8, 19-20). His fuller statement at A23 
follows: 
For, in general, we said that there cannot ever be any syllogism of 
one thing about another without some middle term having been taken 
which is related in some way to each according to the kinds of pred- 
ications. For a syllogism, without qualification, is from premises; a 
syllogism in relation to this term is from premisses in relation to this 
term; and a syllogism of this term in relation to that is through pre- 
misses of this term in relation to that. And it is impossible to take 
a premiss in relation to B without either predicating or rejecting any- 
thing of it, or again to get a syllogism of A in relation to B without 
taking any common term, but <only> predicating or rejecting certain 
things separately of each of them. 
As a result, something must be 
taken as a middle term for both which will connect the predications, 
since the syllogism will be of the term in relation to that. If, then, it 
is necessary to take some common term in relation to both, and if this 
is possible in three ways (for it is possible to do so by predicating A of 
C and C of B, or by predicating C of both A and B, or by predicating 
both A and B of C), and these ways are the figures stated, then it 
is evident that every syllogism must come about through some one of 
these figures. (41a2-18) 
Thus, we can extract three additional syllogistic premiss formation rules. 

172 
George Boger 
SPFR2 The two categorical sentences in a syllogistic premiss-set consist in three 
different non-logical constants (terms). 
SPFR3 None of the three non-logical constants in a syllogistic premiss-set appears 
twice in the same categorical sentence. Thus, the one categorical sentence 
in a syllogistic premiss-set has a non-logical constant in common with the 
other sentence in the premiss-set. 
SPFR4 
Any of the four logical constants may appear in each of the two categorical 
sentences in a syllogistic premiss-set. 
Aristotle nowhere states SPFR4 in rule fashion, but it is evident from his treatment 
of the premise-pair patterns throughout Prior Analytics Ad-6 that he consciously 
works with such a rule of premiss formation. 
The salient feature of his exposition in this connection is the crucial role he 
attributes to the middle term. He makes this quite emphatic in Prior Analytics 
A28: 
It is also clear that one must take things which are the same, not 
things which are different or contrary, as the terms selected for the 
investigation. This is because, in the first place, the examination is for 
the sake of the middle term, and one must take as middle something 
the same, not something different. (44b38-45al; cf. A29: 45b36-46a2) 
Again, there is a rule of the middle term for taking pairs of sentences as premisses 
to form syllogistic arguments: "there cannot ever be any syllogism of one thing 
about another without some middle term having been taken which is related in 
some way to each according to the kinds of predications" (A23: 41a2-4). This, 
of course, is a theme highly resonant in Posterior Analytics A & B, and this 
might best be captured as follows from Posterior Analytics B~: "A deduction 
proves something of something through the middle term [5 ~ 
y&p ou),Xoytopb~ 
x[  
xtvb~ ~t 
~t~ ~o5 p~oou]" (91a14-15). 
Aristotle recognized three 
possible positions for the term shared by each of the categorical sentences in a 
syllogistic premise-set. He called this the middle term, and he named three figures, 
"first", "second", and "third". Accordingly, he had three rules for constructing 
a syllogistic premise-set for each of the three figures (oX~p~x~; singular oX}pc~). 
While he names the first figure at the end of Prior Analytics A~ (26b33) Aristotle 
defines it at the beginning. And thus we have his rule for forming a first figure 
syllogistic premise-set. 
SPFR5 
I call the middle [term] which both is itself in another and has another 
in it 
this is also the middle in position 
and call both that which is 
itself in another and that which has another in it extremes [or extreme 
terms]. (25635-37) 
Aristotle's rule for forming a second figure syllogistic premiss-set is the following: 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
173 
SPFR6 When the same thing belongs to all of one term and to none of the other, 
or to all of each or none of each, I call such a figure the second. In it, 
I call that term the middle which is predicated of both and call those 
of which this is predicated extremes; the major extreme is the one lying 
next to the middle, while the minor extreme is the one farther from the 
middle. The middle is placed outside the extremes and is first in position. 
(26b34-39) 
Aristotle's rule for forming a third figure syllogistic premiss-set is the following: 
SPFR7 If one term belongs to all and another to none of the same thing, or if 
they both belong to all or none of it, I call such a figure the third. By 
the middle in it I mean that term of which they are both predicated, 
and by extremes the things predicated; by major extreme I mean the 
one farther from the middle and by minor the one closer. The middle is 
placed outside the extremes and is last in position. (28a10-15) 
Thus, there are only three syntactic arrangements of middle (or common) terms, 
called the three figures: "[1] by predicating A of C and C of B, or [2] by predicating 
C of both A and B, or [3] by predicating both A and B of C" (41a15-16). In the 
context of his logical investigations in Prior Analytics A~-6, we can state a rule 
implicit in his treatment of the syllogisms. 
SPFR8 Nothing is a syllogistic premiss-set except in virtue of these rules. 
Thus far we have represented Aristotle's rules for forming premise-sets of syl- 
logistic arguments. 
He also has syntax rules for forming syllogistic premise- 
conclusion (P-c) arguments, that is, in particular, rules concerning the relation- 
ships of terms (1) to each other in the conclusion of a syllogistic argument in 
relation to (2) those in the premise-set in connection with each figure. His rules 
involve taking sentences to form P-c arguments consisting of a set of two sen- 
tences 
call them protaseis (premises) 
and a single sentence 
call this the 
ou~a~pc~op~ (sumperasma), or conclusion. These rules anticipate the rules of syl- 
logistic inference. 
SAFR1 A two-premiss syllogistic argument consists in two and only two categor- 
ical sentences in the role of premisses and one and only one categorical 
sentence in the role of conclusion. 
SAFR2 Any of the four logical constants can appear in each of the three categor- 
ical sentences composing a syllogistic argument. 
SAFR3 Each syllogistic argument consists in three and only three different non- 
logical constants (terms); no non-logical constant appears twice in a cat- 
egorical sentence in a syllogistic argument. 

174 
George Boger 
SAFR4 
Of the two different non-logical constants in the conclusion sentence, the 
one appears once in one of the two premiss sentences, the other once in 
the other premiss sentence. 
SAFR5 
In the first figure the predicate term of the conclusion is the term pred- 
icated of the middle term in the premiss-set; the subject term of the 
conclusion is the term in the premiss-set of which the middle term is 
predicated. 
SAFR6 
In the second figure the predicate term of the conclusion is the subject 
term of the first or major premiss; the subject term in the conclusion is 
the subject term of the second or minor premiss. 
SAFR7 In the third figure the predlcate term of the conclusion is the predicate 
term of the first or major premiss; the subject term in the conclusion is 
the predicate term of the second or minor premiss. 
SAFR8 
Nothing is a two-premiss syllogistic argument except in virtue of these 
rules. 
In each figure, the predicate term of the conclusion both is the major term and its 
presence identifies the major premiss of a syllogistic argument; the subject term 
of the conclusion both is the minor term and its presence identifies the minor 
premiss of a syllogistic argument. These rules compass syllogistic P-c argument 
formation for Aristotle in Prior A nalytics. Thus, we can set out the patterns of 
the three figures as follows, using our abbreviations of Aristotle's logical constants 
for convenience (Table 11. 63 
Aristotle understood that the order of a given set of two categorical sentences 
taken as premisses does not affect their implying a given categorical sentence taken 
as a conclusion. Premiss order is not important for logical consequence. On occa- 
sion he reversed the order in which he presented the two sentence patterns in the 
63Explanation of Table 11. In Pr. An. A4-6 Aristotle established the syntax of the syllo- 
gisms or, more generally, of elementary syllogistic arguments. Throughout A4-6 he worked with 
schematic letters for three terms in various premiss-pair patterns according to three figures. He 
used, respectively, ABF, MN-Z, IIPE (ABC, MNX, PRS). In each case, whether he stated first 
the major or the minor premiss pattern, he always understood the predicate term (P) of the 
conclusion pattern (PS or PxS) to be the first, or major, term 
and to identify the major 
premiss- in the premiss-pair pattern and the subject term (S) of the conclusion pattern to be 
the last, or minor, term and to identify the minor premiss. We use 'x', 'y', and 'z'as placeholders 
for any of the four logical constants. The term repeated in the premisses is the middle term 
(M). This syntax is strict. Aristotle always considered the conclusion of an argument to fit the 
sentence pattern PS (or PxS) and not its converse. (He did not, however, specifically show how 
a given premiss-pair pattern does not result in a syllogism when the conclusion is converted, say, 
in the case of Barbara, which we know to have no valid instances. But see Pr. An. B22.) In 
this connection, when he treated Camestres and Disamis, he specifically converted the derived 
sentence pattern to preserve this syntax. We have set out this syntax with our modern notation, 
which exactly reproduces Aristotle's meaning. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
175 
Table 11. 
Synopsis of Aristotle's syllogistic argument patterns 
First figure" 
PMS" (ABF) 
PxM, MySIPzS 
AB 
1. 
PxM 
BF 
2. 
MyS 
AF 
? 
PzS 
Second figure: 
MPS: (MN~) 
MxP, MySIPzS 
MN 
1. 
MxP 
MZ 
2. 
MyS 
NE 
? 
PzS 
Third figure- 
PSM" (HPE) 
PxM, SyMIPzS 
HE 
1. 
PxM 
PE 
2. 
SyM 
liP 
? 
PzS 
premisses when he considered them in Prior Analytics A4-6. 64 This shows that he 
understood this to be so. Nevertheless, in order to treat his premise-pair patterns 
systematically, he treated them as ordered pairs in the framework of his strict 
syllogistic syntax. Here the premiss order matters significantly (1) for systemati- 
cally treating all possible combinations (sc. patterns) of two categorical sentences 
in the role of premisses and (2) for relating terms in the conclusion to those in 
the premises. In general, he first treated the universal sentences as premises, then 
combinations of universal and partial sentences, and finally combinations of partial 
sentences. 
Now, of the 192 possible combinations of syllogistic premises, Aristotle identified 
14 that result in syllogisms when terms are substituted for the placeholders. 65 
As he did with the one-premiss conversion rules, he did with the two-premiss 
syllogistic rules. He first provided a sentence stating the rule before he represented 
it schematically, and then he provided a metalogical proof of its panvalidity. Below 
we provide Aristotle's texts in Prior Analytics that model his 14 two-premiss 
syllogism rules, our modern notation to the right. 66 
SR1 
Whenever, then, three terms are so related to each other that the last is 
in the middle as a whole and the middle is either in or not in the first 
as a whole, it is necessary for there to be a complete syllogism of the 
extremes. (25b32-35) laa 
Barbara (25b37-39) 
For if A is predicated of every B and B of every C, it is 
necessary for A to be predicated of every C. 
1. AaB 
2. BaC 
9 AaC 
64This is the case, for example, when Aristotle treats third figure patterns. See Pr. An A6: 
28a26-36, which includes Felapton, and A6: 28b5-31, which treats Disamis, Datisis, and Bocardo. 
For Aristotle, as for modern logicians, premiss order is independent of implication. 
65On there not being a fourth figure see below w 
66The 'laa', for example, after Aristotle's statement of a rule, refers to the figure and the 
patterns of each premiss sentence. In addition, rather than compose two statements for each of 
two of Aristotle's rule but which are expressed in one sentence, we have cited the passage twice, 
as, for example, with the statement covering both Barbara and Celarent (SR1 & SR2). 

176 
George Boger 
SR2 
Whenever, 
then, three terms are so related to each other that the last is 
in the middle as a whole and the middle is either in or not in the first 
as a whole, it is necessary for there to be a complete syllogism of the 
extremes. 
(25b32-35) lea 
Celarent (25b40-26a2) 
Similarly, if A is predicated of no B and B of every C, 
it is necessary that A will belong to no C. 
1. AeB 
2. BaC 
.'. AeC 
SR3 
If one of the terms is universal and the other is partial in relation to 
the remaining term, then when the universal is put in relation to the 
major extreme (whether this is positive or privative) and the partial is 
put in relation to the minor extreme (which is positive), then there will 
necessarily be a complete syllogism. (26a17-20) l ai 
Darii (26a23-25) 
For let A belong to every B and B to some C .... it is 
necessary for A to belong to some C. 
1. AaB 
2. BiC 
.'. AiC 
SR4 
If one of the terms is universal and the other is partial in relation to 
the remaining term, then when the universal is put in relation to the 
major extreme (whether this is positive or privative) and the partial is 
put in relation to the minor extreme (which is positive), then there will 
necessarily be a complete syllogism. (26a17-20) 1el 
Ferio (26a25-27) 
And if A belongs to no B and B to some C, then it is 
necessary for A not to belong to some C. 
1. AeB 
2. BiC 
.'. AoC 
SR5 
When the terms are universal, there will be a syllogism when the middle 
belongs to all of one term and none of the other, no matter which one 
the privative is in relation to. (27a3-5) 2ea 
Cesare (27a5-9) 
For let M be predicated of no N but to every X .... so 
that N belongs to no X. 
1. MeN 
2. MaX 
.'. NeX 
SR6 
When the terms are universal, there will be a syllogism when the middle 
belongs to all of one term and none of the other, no matter which one 
the privative is in relation to. (27a3-5) 2ae 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
177 
Camestres (27a9-14) 
Next, if M belongs to every N but to no X, then neither 
will N belong to any X. 
1. MaN 
2. MeX 
.'. NeX 
SR7 
If the middle is universal only in relation to one term, then when it is uni- 
versal in relation to the major extreme (whether positively or privatively) 
but partially with respect to the minor and oppositely to the universal 
... then it is necessary for the privative partial syllogism to come about. 
(27a26-32) 2el 
Festino (27a32-36) 
For if M belongs to no N and to some X, it is necessary 
for N not to belong to some X. 
1. MeN 
2. MiX 
.'. NoX 
SR8 
If the middle is universal only in relation to one term, then when it is uni- 
versal in relation to the major extreme (whether positively or privatively) 
but partially with respect to the minor and oppositely to the universal 
... then it is necessary for the privative partial syllogism to come about. 
(27a26-32) 2ao 
Baroco (27a36-27b1) 
Next, if M belongs to every N but does not belong to 
some X, it is necessary for N not to belong to some X. 
1. MaN 
2. MoX 
.'. NoX 
SR9 
For when both terms are positive [and universal], then there will be a 
syllogism that one extreme belongs to some of the other extreme. (28a37- 
39) 3aa 
Darapti (27a17-26) 
When both P and R belong to every S, it results of 
necessity that P will belong to some R. 
1. PaS 
2. RaS 
.'. PiR 
SR10 
And when one term is privative and the other affirmative [both universal], 
then if the major term should be privative and the other term affirmative, 
there will be a syllogism that one extreme does not belong to some of the 
other. (28bl-3) 3ca 
Felapton (28a26-30) 
And if R belongs to every S but P to none, then there 
will be a deduction that P of necessity does not belong 
to some R. 
1. PeS 
2. RaS 
.'. PoR 

178 
George Boger 
SRll 
If one term is universal in relation to the middle and the other term is 
partial then when both terms are positive it is necessary for a syllogism 
to come about, no matter which of the terms is universal. (28b5-7) 3ia 
Disamis (28b7-11) 
For if R belongs to every S and P to some, then it is 
necessary for P to belong to some R. 
1. PiS 
2. RaS 
.'. PiR 
SR12 
If one term is universal in relation to the middle and the other term is 
partial then when both terms are positive it is necessary for a syllogism 
to come about, no matter which of the terms is universal. (28b5-7) 3ai 
Datisis (28b11-15) 
Next, if R belongs to some S and P to every S, then it 
is necessary for P to belong to some R. 
1. PaS 
2. RiS 
9 PiR 
SR13 
But if one term is positive, the other privative, and the positive term is 
universal, then when the minor term is positive, there will be a syllogism. 
(28b15-17) 3oa 
Bocardo (28b17-20) 
For if R belongs to every S and P does not belong to 
some, then it is necessary for P not to belong to some 
R. 
1. PoS 
2. RaS 
.'. PoR 
SR14 
If the privative term is universal, then when the major term is privative 
and the minor positive there will be a syllogism. (28b31-33) 3el 
Ferison (28b33-35) 
For if P belongs to no S and R belongs to some S, then 
P will not belong to some R. 
1. PeS 
2. RiS 
.'. PoR 
Having now set out Aristotle's deduction system, we turn to examine the logical, 
or metalogical, methodology by which he established these deduction rules. 
ARISTOTLE'S LOGICAL METHODOLOGY FOR ESTABLISHING 
DEDUCTION RULES 
In this section we examine the methods by which Aristotle established the rules of 
his syllogistic deduction system. We also consider his methods for establishing that 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
179 
certain elementary argument patterns cannot serve as rules. To fulfill a principal 
purpose in Prior Analytics, Aristotle demonstrated (1) which premiss patterns of 
one sentence are concludent and which inconcludent when the terms of the given 
sentence are converted in the conclusion. He also demonstrated (2) which premiss 
patterns of two sentences are concludent and which inconcludent 
that is, which 
patterns when 'interpreted' result in a syllogism and which patterns do not result 
in a syllogism. The results of his study, particularly in Prior Analytics A2, and 
~-7, serve as rules in his deduction system. 
To separate the elementary two-premiss argument patterns with only valid in- 
stances from the elementary two-premiss argument patterns with only invalid in- 
stances, Aristotle used two decision procedures in his metalogic: (1) the method 
of completion, which he so named, and (2) the method of contrasted instances, 67 
which itself has three modes. There are no elementary argument patterns with 
both valid and invalid instances: none is neutrovalid. In the case of the two-premiss 
patterns, Aristotle's method is deductive, but not axiomatic, and enumerative. In 
the case of the one-premiss patterns, his method is deductive but not a process of 
completion per se. 
Aristotle treated each conversion at Prior Analytics A2 in exactly the same 
fashion as he treated the syllogisms at Ad-6, namely, not as deductions per se 
but as elementary argument patterns having only valid instances. He performs 
metalogical deductions of the conversions at A2 just as he does for the syllogisms 
at A5-6. 6s The points of similarity between his treatments of the one- and two- 
premiss argument patterns show that when he examined the formal properties 
of his logic, he treated the elementary panvalid argument patterns for syllogisms 
and conversions as deduction rules. In this respect they are equally species of a 
given genus. Moreover, Aristotle recognized there to exist valid arguments that are 
instances of these patterns. Again, in respect of a given genus, these instances are 
the same, namely, valid arguments. However, he never considered an instance of a 
conversion to be an instance of a syllogism, and vice versa, just as a modern logician 
would not consider an instance of a simplification to be an instance of an addition 
in propositional logic. 
Below we first treat Aristotle's logical methodology for 
establishing the conversion rules (w 
and then his methodology for establishing 
the syllogism rules (w 
67We follow W. D. Ross (1949: 302) in using the expression 'contrasted instances' to name 
Aristotle's method of establishing inconcludence. 
6SAristotle uses the same expressions in treating conversions and syllogisms in Pr. 
An.: 
'~pd~a~' (premiss); '&v~u 
(it is necessary that .. [25a6, 10, 21]) and obx ~u 
(it is 
not necessary that ... [(25a23]); '&vcr215 
(necessarily [25a8]) and 06 &~V 
(not neces- 
sarily [25a12]). Some corresponding examples from Pr. An. A~ to indicate this are: &v&yx~ 
(25b38); &~y 
(26a4); for the negation Aristotle writes "o6 ~x~t ~uXkoyt~dg" (26a7-8). 
He uses schematic letters ('A' and 'B') in exactly the same fashion. He equally treats the con- 
versions as rules of deduction for syllogistic reasoning as he does the syllogisms at A5-6. Of the 
four possible conversions Aristotle treats each exactly, in principle, as he does when establishing 
and reducing the two-premiss syllogism rules. 

180 
George Boger 
3.1 
Establishing the conversion rules 
Aristotle treats converting the predicate and subject terms of each of the four kinds 
of categorical sentence in Prior Analytics A2. After expressing each conversion 
rule in a sentence (25a5-13), he then treats each schematically. He models each as 
a one-premiss argument pattern and provides a deduction in the metalanguage of 
Prior Analytics (25a14-26) to establish each conversion pattern to be a panvalid 
argument pattern. This establishes its suitability as a rule. Then, in A4-6 he 
employs these conversions as rules in his metalogical deductions to establish the 
panvalid patterns relating to the syllogisms. 
Since there are only three conversions we treat each of them below. Aristotle 
first treats establishing the panvalidity of the e conversion: 69 
Now, if [~t] A belongs to none of the Bs, then neither will B belong to 
any of the As. For if it [B] does belong to some [A], for instance to C, 
it will not be true that A belongs to none of the Bs, since C is one of 
the Bs. [But it was taken to belong to none.] (25a15-17) 
According to this text, then, we can represent Aristotle's rather 'intuitionist' de- 
duction in the following familiar manner (Table 12). 70 
Aristotle next provides a proof of the panvalidity of the a conversion per acci- 
dens: 
And if [~t] A belongs to every B, then B will belong to some A. For if 
it [B] belongs to none [A], neither will a belong to any B; but it [A] 
was assumed to belong to every one [B]. (25a17-19) 
Again, we can represent what he writes here in the following manner (Table 13). 
On the proof of the panvalidity of the i conversion rule (Table 14): 
If [~t] A belongs to some of the Bs, then necessarily B belongs to some 
of the As. (For if it [B] belongs to none [A], then neither will A belong 
to any of the Bs [but it (A) was assumed to belong to some (B}].) 
(25 20-22) 
Finally, in a fashion less analogous to his methods of establishing inconcludence 
of premise-pair patterns, Aristotle provides a counterexample to show that an o 
sentence does not convert (25a22-26; cf. 25a12-13). The result does not follow 
necessarily (o5 &~u 
at 25a23 and o5 &,~u215 
at 25a12). His proof of the 
paninvalidity of the o conversion follows: 
69Some logicians take this to be an instance of ekthesis early in Pr. An.; a later, more fully 
presented instance appears in Pr. An. A6: 28a23-26. 
7~ 
have aimed to represent something of Aristotle's own thinking, although we have simpli- 
fied it here. Strictly, 'C=A' might not represent Aristotle's thinking. Surely he would recognize 
that some Cs might not be As, but the Cs Aristotle picks out are those of A to which B belongs, 
as a Venn diagram might easily show. Cf. Smith, 1989, xxiii-xxv on 'setting out' and Smith, 
1982 on ekthesis. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
181 
Table 12. 
Establishing the e conversion rule 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. AeB 
1. A belongs to none of the 
Bs 
? neither will B belong to 
any of the As 
2. it [B] does belong to some 
[A] 
3. for instance [B belongs] to 
[every] C [to which A be- 
longs] 
4. C is one of the Bs 
5. it will not be true that A 
belongs to none of the Bs 
[or, that is, A will belong 
to some B] 
6. [But it [A] was taken to 
belong to none [B].] 
7. neither will B belong to 
any of the As 
? BeA 
2. BiA 
assume 
3. C=A 
basis of assumption 
4. BiC 
basis of assumption 
5.-(AeB) 
3,4 logic 
[A/B] 
6. AeB & -(AeB) 
1,5 conj & contra 
[A/B] 
7. BeA 
2-6 reductio 
Table 13. 
Establishing the a conversion per accidens rule 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. A belongs to every B 
? B will belong to some A 
2. it [B] belongs to none [A] 
3. neither will A belong to 
any B 
4. it was assumed [A] to be- 
long to every one [B] 
5. [B will belong to some A] 
1. AaB 
? BiA 
2. BeA 
3. AeB 
assume 
2 e-conversion 
4. AeB & AaB 
3,1 conj & contra 
5. BiA 
2-4 reductio 

182 
George Boger 
Table 14. 
Establishing the i conversion rule 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. 
1. AiB 
A belongs to some of the 
Bs 
? B belongs to some of the 
As 
2. it [B] belongs to none [A] 
3. neither will A belong to 
any of the Bs 
4. [it <A> was assumed] to 
belong to some <B>] 
5. [B belongs to some of the 
As] 
? BiA 
2. BeA 
assume 
3. AeB 
2 e-conversion 
4. AeB & AiB 
3 conj & contra 
5. BiA 
2-4 reductio 
But if [~t] A does not belong to some B, it is not necessary for B also 
not to belong to some A (for example if B is animal and A man: for 
man does not belong to every animal, but animal belongs to every 
man). (25a22-26) 
"Man does not belong to some animal", which is obviously true, does not convert 
to "Animal does not belong to some man", which is obviously false. We can set 
this out in the following way (Table 15). 
Table 15. 
Establishing that converting an o sentence 
does not produce a necessary result 
Aristotle's text 
1. A does not belong to some B 
? B also does not belong to 
some A 
Aristotle's 
counterexample 
1. Man does not belong to some 
T 
animal 
? [Animal does not belong to 
F 
every man.] 
[But animal belongs to every 
man.] 
T. 
This proof uses an instance of the method of fact, which itself uses the principle 
that no false sentence is implied by a true sentence. It is evident that Aristotle's 
notion of logical consequence is the same in each case and comports with that of 
modern logicians (w 
His treatment of the conversion of categorical sentences 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
183 
was aimed to establish rules. The three one-premiss conversion rules can be rep- 
resented in the following schematic way with a modern notation that preserves 
exactly what Aristotle accomplished in Prior Analytics A2 (Table 16): 
Table 16. 
Aristotle's one-premiss conversion rules 
a conversion 
per accidens 
1. 
AaB 
.. 
BiA 
e simple conversion 
1. 
AeB 
.'. 
BeA 
i simple conversion 
1. 
AiB 
.-. 
BiA 
3.2 
Establishing the syllogism rules" deciding concludence of premiss- 
pair patterns 
Each syllogism fitting one of the four first figure panvalid patterns is x~X~toq 
(teleios), perfect or complete. This means that the necessity of its result following 
from the things initially taken, its being valid, is obvious, or evident through itself, 
to a participant (w 
nothing additional need be taken for this evidency (AI: 
24b18-24, A~: 26b28-33). While Aristotle did not prove 71 the panvalidity of the 
teleioi sullogismoi patterns, he did think of the syllogisms fitting these patterns 
as proving certain kinds of conclusion, that is, in particular, as each proving a 
sentence in one of the four sentence patterns, or probl~rnata: AaB, AeB, AiB, 
and A oB. 72 And, moreover, while evidency of following necessarily is epistemic, 
Aristotle understood a teleios sullogismos to be grounded in a corresponding ontic 
reality that causes or makes this evidency possible, analogous to the truth-value 
of a sentence, and thus also its panvalid pattern. 
Each syllogism fitting a second and third figure pattern is &x~Xf~g (atel~s), im- 
perfect or incomplete. The necessity of their conclusions is not obviously evident to 
someone but ~u~xdq, or potentially evident. Consequently, an epistemic process is 
required to make the validity of an atel~s sullogismos evident, namely, a deduction. 
This distinction exactly characterizes the significant difference between Aristotle's 
treatment of second and third figure patterns from those of the first figure. Now, 
just as an atel~s sullogismos needs a deduction to establish its validity, so does its 
71W. D. Ross (1949: 22-28, 29), and other traditionalists such as J. N. Keynes (1906: 301) 
and R. M. Eaton (1959: 86, 120), maintain that the first figure syllogisms are not primitive but 
derived from the dictum de ornni et nullo, which is variously conceived to be the "principle" 
or the "axiom" of Aristotle's system. On the other hand, J. Lukasiewicz (1958: 45, 46-47), J. 
Corcoran (1974: 109), and J. Lear (1980: 2-3), for example, consider them to be given without 
proof as self-evidently valid. Corcoran agrees with Lukasiewicz (1958: 46-47) to consider the 
passage cited in Pr. An. (24b26-30; cf. Cat. lb10-12) that states the dictum de omni et nullo 
to be definitional; cf. J. W. Miller (1938: 26-27). 
72He indicates this by writing, for example, of the first figure syllogisms that "all the problems 
are proved by means of this figure [~dv~ ~& r~po~3),~tac~x~ 5~tx~u~t St& ~o6~ou ~o5 ~X~xo~]" 
(26b31), or by noting that the same results had been proved earlier (e.g., at 26b20-21). 

184 
George Boger 
pattern need a metalogical deduction to establish its panvalidity. 73 In each case 
of a second figure and a third figure panvalid pattern, Aristotle showed by means 
of a metalogical deduction that a given premise-pair pattern is concludent, that is, 
moreover, that such a premiss pattern results in an argument pattern such that an 
arbitrary argument fitting this pattern is a syllogism. Aristotle used the method 
of completion, x~X~toSa0~t or x~X~[~atq (teleiousthai or teleiSsis), which here is 
a deduction process carried out in the metalanguage of Prior Analytics. TM Along 
with the three conversion rules, this process explicitly employs the four panvalid 
patterns of the first figure as deduction rules to establish which second and third 
figure argument patterns are panvalid and could themselves, then, serve as rules. 
Aristotle's interest here was to establish which elementary argument patterns have 
only valid argument instances. Every argument with semantically precise terms 
fitting one of these patterns is valid. In this way he identified 14 panvalid patterns 
in three figures. 75 Aristotle treated each pattern individually and not axiomat- 
ically; his metasystematic treatment of the panvalid patterns involves induction 
and is not strictly deductive. 76 What follows relates to the process of establish- 
ing, then, not the validity of object language arguments (sc. syllogisms), but the 
panvalidity of their patterns corresponding to concludent premise-pair patterns in 
the second and third figures. 
The text concerning Camestres in the second figure illustrates that Aristotle 
used a deduction in his metalanguage to establish that a given argument pattern 
is in fact a panvalid pattern and not to establish that Camestres is itself a deduction 
or itself derived from another 'syllogism-axiom'. 
If [~t] M belongs to every N but to no X, then neither will N belong 
to any X. For if M belongs to no X, neither does X belong to any M; 
but M belonged to every N; therefore [~p~], X will belong to no N (for 
the first figure has again been generated [y~y~wlx~t u 
xdlt~ ~b ~p~xo~ 
(~Xfl~u]). And since the privative converts, neither will N belong to any 
X. (27a9-14) 
We can express exactly what Aristotle writes here in the manner of a deduction 
with which we are familiar. Notice that Aristotle converts the conclusion to main- 
tain strict syllogistic syntax (Table 17). 
73See Pr. An. AI: 24b24-26; A5: 27al-3, 27a15-18, 28a4-7; A6: 28a15-17, 29a14-16. 
74The process of completion is, of course, also carried out in one or another object language. 
75 
Aristotle recognized 14 syllogisms in three figures, where traditionalist logicians, or 
logicians referring to traditional logic, consider there to be 24 syllogisms in four figures. A good 
recent reference for this information is William T. Parry & Edward A. Hacker 1991; an excellent, 
older source is H. W. B. Joseph 1906. 
76The following analogy helps to explain Aristotle's procedure. As a geologist might use a 
hammer to break open a given rock to determine whether it is or is not a geode, and, upon 
making the determination, place the object in one of two piles, so Aristotle used a metalogical 
deduction to determine whether a given elementary argument pattern belongs in the set of 
panvalid patterns and he used the method of contrasted instances to determine whether in the 
set of paninvalid patterns. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
185 
Table 17. 
Establishing the panvalidity of a second 
figure pattern: Camestres 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. M belongs to every N 
2. but [M] to no X 
? neither will N belong to any X 
3. M belongs to no X 
4. neither does X belong to any M 
5. M belonged to every N 
6. X will belong to no N 
7. neither will N belong to any X 
1. MaN 
2. MeX 
? NeX 
3. MeX 
2 repetition 
4. XeM 
3 e-conversion 
5. MaN 
1 repetition 
6. XeN 
4,5 Clearent 
7. NeX 
6 e-conversion 
The panvalidity of each second and each third figure pattern is determined in 
just this manner, whether by direct (probative) or indirect (reductio) deduction 
using the conversion and teleioi sullogismoi rules. Table 18 indicates what first 
figure pattern Aristotle used in the deduction process to establish the panvalidity 
of patterns in the three figures. 
Table 19 expresses in schematic notation exactly what Aristotle writes concern- 
ing each proof of the panvalidity of the patterns in Prior Analytics A5-6 ('X' = 
contradiction). 
It is important to understand that in Prior Analytics A5-6 Aristotle used his 
syllogistic deduction system as part of his metalinguistic discourse to establish 
certain features of the system itself. By this means he demonstrated 77 that a given 
second or third figure argument pattern is panvalid since its conclusion pattern 
follows logically from a given premise-pair pattern, which is thus understood to 
be concludent. 
Proving that a given argument pattern is panvalid establishes 
knowledge that the pattern can serve as a rule, since its extension is universal: 
an arbitrary argument fitting this pattern is valid. 7s Establishing this is strictly 
a metalogical process. Moreover, he demonstrated this by using the four patterns 
of the teleioi sullogismoi; this is indicated by his saying that "the first figure is 
again generated" (27a12-13; cf. 27a8-9, 36). Aristotle intentionally used the first 
figure patterns as deduction rules in A 5-6, and he explicitly mentioned their use in 
77Aristotle,s "showings" are demonstrations as he remarks at 27b3 (on Baroco), 28a22-23 (on 
Darapti), 28a28-29 (on Felapton), and at 28b13-14 (on Datisi). His using the verb '5~[ 
at 
27a8-9 (on Cesare), 27a14-15 (on Camestres and on Baroco), 28a29-30 (on Felapton), 28b14-15 
(on Datisi), and at 28b20-21 (on Bocardo) confirms his intention. 
7Sperhaps we see Aristotle here apply to the study of logic his requirement, expressed in Po. 
An. A~, that something is proved universally of a kind when it is proved of an arbitrary instance 
of that kind. He writes: "something holds universally when it is proved of an arbitrary and 
primitive case .... Thus, if an arbitrary primitive case is proved to have two right angles (or 
whatever else), then it holds universally of this primitive item, and the demonstration applies to 
it universally in itself' (73b32-33, 73b39-74a2). 

186 
George Boger 
Table 18. 
Summary of Aristotle's texts 
on completing each panvalid pattern 
Pattern 
Manner of proof: syllogism 
considered 
completed ... 
Syllogism 
used in the 
completion 
process 
Barbara 
(Barbara) 
Celarent 
(Celarent) 
Darii 
(Darii) 
Ferio 
(Ferio) 
by means of (~th [dia]) the things 
initially taken or through itself 
(~ ~O~oO) 
dia the things initally taken or 
through itself 
dia the things initally taken or 
through itself 
dia the things initally taken or 
through itself 
Cesare 
probatively dia... 
Celarent 
Camestres 
probatively dia... 
Celarent 
Festino 
probatively dia... 
Ferio 
Baroco 
by reducto ad impossibile dia... 
Barbara 
Darapti 
probatively dia... 
Darii 
Felapton 
probatively dia... 
Ferio 
Disamis 
probatively dia... 
Darii 
Datisi 
probatively dia... 
Darii 
Bocardo 
by reductio ad impossibile dia... 
Barbara 
Ferison 
. probatively dia.., 
k Ferio 
this respect in his proofs concerning Cesare (27a12-13), Festino (27a36), Darapti 
(28a22), and Ferison (28b34-35). Aristotle's summary of A~-6 at A7 highlights 
this point. 
All 
the 
incomplete 
syllogisms 
are 
completed 
by 
means 
of 
[x~l~toS~x~t ~t~] the first figure. For they all come to a conclusion 
[x~p~tvovx~, i.e., are deduced] either probatively or through an absur- 
dity, 
and 
in 
both 
ways 
the 
first 
figure 
is 
generated 
[u 
(29a30-36; cf. A5:28a4-7 and A6: 29a14-16) 
As he expressly stated he would, Aristotle determined in A~-6 "how every syllo- 
gism is generated". We complete Aristotle's model of his logic by schematically 
setting out his 14 syllogism rules using our abbreviations of Aristotle's long form 
to express the logical constants. Table 20 summarizes all the panvalid patterns 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
187 
Table 19. 
Aristotle's metalogical deductions 
for each second and third figure panvalid pattern 
Cesare (27a5-9) 
1. 
MeN 
2. 
MaX 
? 
NeX 
3. 
NeM 1 
e-con 
4. 
MaX 2 
rep 
5. 
NeX 3,4 Celar 
Darapti (28a19-22) 
1. 
PaS 
2. 
RaS 
? 
PiR 
3. 
PaS 
1 
rep 
4. 
SiR 
2 
a-con 
5. 
PiR 
3,4 Darii 
Camestres (27a9-14) 
1. MaN 
2. MeX 
? NeX 
3. XeM 2 
e-con 
4. MaN 1 
rep 
5 XeN 3,4 Celar 
6. NeX 5 
e-con 
Felapton (28a26-30) 
1. PeS 
2. RaS 
? PoR 
3. PeS 
1 
rep 
4. SiR 
2 
a-con 
5. PoR 
3,4 Ferio 
Festino (27a32-36) 
1. MeN 
2. MiX 
? NoX 
3. Nem 
1 
e-con 
4. MiX 
2 
rep 
5. NoX 
3,4 Ferio 
Baroco (27a36-27b3) 
1. MaN 
2. MoX 
3. NoX 
3. NaX 
assume 
4. MaN 
1 
rep 
5. NaX 
3 
rep 
6. MaX 
4,5 Barb 
7. MaX & 
MoX 
6,2 conj; X 
8. NoX 
3-7 reduct 
Disamis (28b7-11) 
1. PiS 
2. RaS 
? PiR 
3. SiP 
1 
/-con 
4. RaS 
2 
rep 
5. SiP 
3 
rep 
6. RiP 
4,5 Darii 
7. PiR 
6 
/-con 
Datisi (28b11-13) 
1. 
PaS 
2. 
RiS 
? 
PiR 
3. 
SiR 
2 
/-con 
4. 
PaS 
1 
rep 
5. 
SiR 
3 
rep 
6. 
PiR 
4,5 Darii 
Bocarado (28b17-20) 
1. PoS 
2. RaS 
? PoR 
3. PaR 
assume 
4. RaS 
2 
rep 
5. PaS 
3,4 Barb 
6. PaS 
PoS 
5,1 conj;X 
7. PoR 
3-6 reduct 
Ferison (28b33-35) 
1. PeS 
2. RiS 
? PoR 
3. PeS 
1 
rep 
4. SiR 
2 
/-con 
5. PoR 
3,4 Ferio 

188 
George Boger 
that might serve as rules in Aristotle's deduction system. 
Table 20. 
First 
Figure 
Second 
Figure 
Third 
Figure 
Summary 
of Aristotle's 
two-premiss 
syllogism 
deduction 
rules using modern 
notation 
Barbara 
1. AaB 
2. BaC 
.'. AaC 
Cesare 
1. MeN 
2. MaX 
.'. NeX 
Darapti 
1. PaS 
2. RaS 
.'. PiR 
Celarent 
1. AeB 
2. BaC 
9 AeC 
Camestres 
1. MaN 
2. MeX 
9 NeX 
Felapton 
1. PeS 
2. RaS 
9 
PoR 
Darii 
Ferio 
1. AaB 
1. AeB 
2. BiC 
2. BiC 
.'. AiC 
.'. AoC 
Festino 
Baroco 
1. MeN 
1. MaN 
2. MiX 
2. MoX 
.'. NoX 
.'. NoX 
Disamis 
Datisi 
1. PiS 
1. PaS 
2. RaS 
2. RiS 
." PiR 
" PiR 
Bocardo 
Ferison 
1. PoS 
1. PeS 
2. RaS 
2. RiS 
9 
PoR 
". PoR 
When we treat Aristotle's notion of deducibility (w 
we treat the process of 
completion more fully than here. Nevertheless, we here briefly explain his meaning 
of 'teleios'. It is common to translate 'teleios' by 'complete', or even 'perfect', as 
in 'complete deduction'. However, taking a syllogism not to be a deduction but 
a valid argument, we see that Aristotle would have taken a teleios sullogismos 
to be an argument whose validity is obviously evident to a participant. Thus, 
perhaps, a better translation of 'teleios sullogismos', albeit a bit cumbersome but 
more faithful to Aristotle's meaning, would be 'valid argument whose validity 
is obviously apparent'; an ateles sullogismos would then be translated by 'valid 
argument whose validity is not obviously apparent'. Following this interpretation, 
then, 'teleiousthai', which has been translated by 'to be completed', as in 'all the 
ateleis sullogismoi are completed by means of the first figure', would mean 'the 
validity of those valid arguments whose validity is not apparent is made evident by 
means of the first figure'. Aristotle used only the verbs 'x~l~toSa0ut' (teleiousthai) 
and '~tx~X~a0at' (epiteleisthai) in connection with using the patterns of the first 
figure. Thus, in the deduction process, the validity of a valid argument becomes 
evident when during the process a teleios sullogismos appears, or 'is generated'. 
Such an appearance in a chain of reasoning signals to a participant the cogency of 
the chain of inferences that links the conclusion sentence to the premiss sentences 
as a logical consequence. 
3.3 
Establishing inconcludence of premiss-pair patterns 
Aristotle used the method of contrasted instances in Prior Analytics A4-6 to 
show that a given premiss-pair pattern is inconcludent, that it does not result 
in a panvalid pattern 
that no substitution of terms produces a syllogism, or 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
189 
valid argument. Consequently, at one stroke this method establishes the paninva- 
lidity of each of the four corresponding elementary argument patterns relating to 
each premiss-pair pattern. Aristotle devised three processes for establishing the 
inconcludence of a given premiss-pair pattern. Moreover, his method is signifi- 
cantly different than the method of counterargument. In this way he was able to 
determine each case in which no syllogism is possible. His purpose was to elim- 
inate every elementary two-premiss argument pattern that could not serve as a 
deduction rule. Below we treat each of the three related processes, establish the 
conditions for concludence and inconcludence, and extract some semantic princi- 
ples underlying Aristotle's methods (w 
We also address two possible objections 
to interpreting Aristotle as treating premiss-pair patterns (w 
The method of contrasted instances 
Aristotle introduced his most commonly used method, the method of contrasted 
instances, for deciding inconcludence at Prior Analytics A~ and used it throughout 
A~-6. He writes, in relation to the premiss-pair pattern l ae: 
However, if [~t]the first extreme follows [i.e., belongs to] all the middle 
and the middle belongs to none of the last, there will not be a syllogism 
of the extremes, for nothing necessarily results in virtue of these things 
being so. (26a2-5) 
This sentence states a set of formal relationships of three terms in two universal 
sentences in the role of premisses for not generating a syllogism in the first figure. 
This passage states the conditions concerning the pattern PaM, M eS I for which 
no categorical sentence is a logical consequence of two other categorical sentences 
fitting this pattern. Thus, Aristotle eliminates four elementary argument patterns 
in the standard syntax as possible syllogisms by establishing their premiss pattern 
to be inconcludent. He continues: 
For it is possible [~vS~X~x~t] for the first extreme to belong to all as well 
as to none of the last. Consequently, neither a partial nor a universal 
conclusion results necessarily [u 
&v~yxStov]; and, since nothing 
is necessary because of these, there will not be a syllogism. Terms 
for belonging to every are animal, man, horse; for belonging to none, 
animal, man, stone. (26a5-9) 
We can express what he writes here as follows (truth-values to the right) (Table 
21): 
For Aristotle this demonstrates 79 that "nothing necessarily results", that no 
valid argument (syllogism) is possible from sentences fitting this premiss-pair pat- 
79He considers himself to demonstrate the inconcludence of certain premiss-pair patterns as 
is indicated by his writing, for example, that some results must be proved (get 
in another 
way (see Pr. An. A5: 27b20-21, 28; A6: 29a6). 

190 
George Boger 
Table 21. 
Establishing inconcludence by 
the method of contrasted instances 
Pattern: PaM, MeS 
PaS 
1 
Animal [A] belongs to every man [M]. 
2 
Man belongs to no horse [H]. 
? 
Animal belongs to every horse. 
Pattern:PaM, MeSIPeS 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every man [M]. 
2. 
Man belongs to no stone [S]. 
? 
Animal belongs to no stone. 
AaM 
MeH 
AaH 
T 
T 
T 
AaM 
T 
MeS 
T 
AeS 
T 
tern since, as he shows, the results "could be otherwise". Aristotle clearly uses nei- 
ther the method of counterargument nor the method of counterinterpretation, s~ 
each of which requires finding an instance of an argument having true premisses 
and a false conclusion in the same form as a given argument. Rather, by substitut- 
ing two sets of three terms for the schematic letters, he constructs two arguments 
each of whose premisses are known to be true sentences fitting the same premiss- 
pair pattern and whose conclusions also are known to be true sentences, but in 
the one argument it is an a sentence, in the other an e sentence. It is not possible 
to do this with a concludent pair, since every similar substitution that produces 
true sentences as premisses will result in at least one false sentence, either the 
a or the e sentence, in the conclusion. Thus, any two sentences of three terms 
fitting this premiss-pair pattern are shown never to result together in a valid ar- 
gument. This premiss-pair pattern is inconcludent. 
No syllogism is possible in 
this case. It is evident, moreover, that Aristotle treats at one time in this way 
four argument patterns in the standard syntax for each premiss-pair pattern; he 
does not show that each of the four patterns is paninvalid by using counterargu- 
ments. With 26a5-9 Aristotle establishes a practice that he uses throughout A4-6 
to demonstrate inconcludence. This method of deciding inconcludence works for 
almost every premiss-pair pattern, noticeably failing in some instances when the 
minor premiss is a partial, and usually a privative, sentence. 
This method of deciding inconcludence, while different than, is nevertheless 
easily adapted to the method of counterargument, but adapted at the metalogical 
level. Both methods achieve the same results. We can apply Aristotle's two sets 
of three terms to the two argument patterns but switch the terms for belonging to 
none to belonging to every and vice versa, and then make the substitutions in the 
argument patterns accordingly. Thus (Table 22): 
8~ counterargument is an argument in the same form as a given argument (whose invalidity 
is to be established) but has premisses that are true and a conclusion that is false. A counter- 
interpretation is an argument in the same form as a given argument (whose invalidity is to be 
established) but a model of the premiss-set is not a model of the conclusion. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
191 
Table 22. 
Method of counterargument 
for establishing invalidity 
Pattern: PaM, MeSIPaS 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every man [M]. 
2. 
Man e stone [S]. 
? 
Animal belongs to every stone. 
? 
Animal belongs to some stone 
Is atterni PaM, MeSIPeS 
. 
2. 
Animal [A] belongs to every man [M]. 
Man belongs to no horse [HI. 
? 
Animal belongs to no horse. 
? 
Animal does not belong to some horse. 
AaM 
MeS 
AaS 
AiS 
T 
T 
F 
F 
AaM 
T 
MeH 
T 
AeH 
F 
AoH 
F 
In these cases each sentence of the premiss-set is true and the respective conclu- 
sion sentences are false. Here, then, are counterarguments for the arguments pro- 
vided by Aristotle, which may serve as modern counterparts to Aristotle's ancient 
method. The method of counterargument could also establish that a given pattern 
is paninvalid, insofar as no syllogistic pattern is neutrovalid, on the principle that 
two arguments in the same pattern are either both valid or both invalid. 
It is apparent that Aristotle did not use the method of counterargument in 
A~-6. Moreover, Aristotle did not establish arguments to be invalid but argument 
patterns to be paninvalid, and, more specifically, he established the inconcludence 
of certain premiss patterns of two categorical sentences with places for three dif- 
ferent terms in his search for syllogistic rules. He knew this procedure to establish 
the paninvalidity at one time of four elementary argument patterns. 
Conditions of concludence and inconcludence 
Aristotle did not invent a name for his method of deciding inconcludence, nor 
did he invent expressions that denote features or principles of his method. Nev- 
ertheless, it is apparent that he consciously worked with a notion of contrariety 
that pertains to two categorical sentences each of which is the conclusion of a 
different categorical argument whose premiss sentences fit the same premiss-pair 
pattern. Here we describe two conditions 81 that underlie Aristotle's two decision 
procedures, the one pertaining to concludent patterns the other to inconcludent 
patterns. 
In the context of Prior Analytics A~-6 "to be otherwise" or "it is possible to 
be otherwise" involves a notion of contrariety according to which it is logically 
81Concerning these two conditions, the expression 'condition I' is an abbreviation for the 
four points under it; likewise for 'condition II'. This simplifies treating the semantic principles 
underlying Aristotle's thinking treated in w 

192 
George Boger 
Condition I: pertaining to concludent patterns resulting in a 
syllogism 
Of two sentences: 
1. 
Each sentence is the conclusion of a categorical argument, each argument 
has the same premiss-pair pattern into which are substutited different sets 
of three terms that produce true sentences. 
2. 
Each sentnece has a different set of predicate and subject terms 
3. 
Each sentence is a universal categorical sentence: the one at an a sentence, 
the other an e sentence 
4. 
It is logically impossible for both sentences to be true. 
Condition II: pertaining to inconcludent patterns not resulting 
in a syllogism 
Of two sentences: 
1. 
Each sentence is the conclusion of a categorical argument, each argument 
has the same premiss-pair pattern into which are substutited different sets 
of three terms that produce true sentences. 
2. 
Each sentence has a different set of predicate and subject terms 
3. 
Each sentence is a universal categorical sentence: the one an a sentence, 
the other an e sentence 
4. 
It is logically possible for both sentences to be true. 
possible for substitution instances for a given premiss-pair pattern to produce 
conclusion sentences that satisfy condition II. Were a given premiss-pair pattern 
concludent, it would be logically impossible for an arbitrary substitution instance 
to produce conclusion sentences not satisfying condition I. 
The modified method of contrasted instances 
Aristotle uses a modified method of contrasted instances for deciding inconcludence 
in Prior Analytics A~ for treating only two premiss-pair patterns, P aM, MoS i 
and PeM, MoS i (26a39-b14), both of which are then immediately treated by 
his third (or second most used) method, that of deducing inconcludence from the 
indeterminate. We cite 26a39-b14 in its entirety to examine his modified method. 
Nor will there be a syllogism whenever [Sxc~v] the term in relation to 
the major extreme is universally either attributive or privative, and the 
term in relation to the minor is partially privative .... (26a39-26b3) 
This sentence refers to two sets of necessary relationships of three terms in two 
premiss sentences, the one universal, whether attributive or privative, the other 
partially privative, for not generating a syllogism in the first figure. The sentence in 
the minor premiss in each case is an o sentence. This passage states the conditions 
under which substituting sets of three terms into the premiss-pair patterns PaM, 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
193 
MoS I and P eM, MoS I, covering eight argument patterns in the standard syntax, 
never results in a syllogism, and, accordingly, it asserts the paninvalidity of these 
eight argument patterns. Here, however, Aristotle noticeably uses a variant of his 
most commonly used method for deciding inconcludence. The passage continues: 
... as, for instance, if A belongs to every B and B does not belong to 
some C, or if it does not belong to every C. For whatever part <of the 
last extreme> it may be that the middle does not belong to, the first 
extreme could follow [&xoXou0/IG~ ] all as well as none of this part. For 
let the terms animal, man, and white be assumed, and next let swan 
and snow also be selected from among those white things of which man 
is not predicated. Then, animal is predicated of all of one but of none 
of the other, so that there will not be a syllogism. (26b3-10) 
We can express what he writes here concerning P aM, M oS I as we did above for 
PaM, M eS I (Table 23). 
. 
2. 
Table 23. 
Establishing inconcludence by 
the modified method of contrasted instances 
Pattern: PaM, MoSIPaS 
Animal [A] belongs to every man [M] 
Man does not belong to some 
white [selecting swan] [W/S] 
AaM 
T 
MoW/S 
T 
? 
Animal belongs to every swan 
AaW/S 
Pattern: PaM, MoSIPeS 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every man [M]. 
2. 
Man does not belong to some white 
[selecting snow] [W/S]. 
AaM 
BoW/S 
? 
Animal belongs to no snow 
AeW/S 
T 
T 
T 
T 
The difference here consists in his "selecting from among white things" to which 
"man" does not belong. Aristotle here takes his substances to exist, that they 
are members of non-empty classes. Moreover, he takes 'some' in its determinate 
sense. Still, condition II is satisfied for these conclusion sentences as in the case 
for P aM, M eS I and the others. Aristotle next turns to PeM, M oS I in the same 
fashion. He writes: 
Next, let A belong to no B and B not belong to some C, and let the 
terms be inanimate, man, white. Then, let swan and snow be selected 
from among those white things of which man is not predicated (for 
inanimate is predicated of all of one and of none of the other). (26b10- 
14) 

194 
George Boger 
Table 24. 
Establishing inconcludence by the 
modified method of contrasted instances 
Pattern: PaM, MoSIPaS 
Inanimate [I] belongs to no man [M] 
Man does not belong to some 
white [selecting snow] [W/S] 
IeM 
MoW/S 
? 
Inanimate belongs to every snow 
IaW/S 
Pattern: PeM, MoSIPeS 
1. 
Inanimate [I] belongs to no man [M]. 
2. 
Man does not belong to some 
white [selecting swan] [W/S]. 
? 
Inanimate belongs to no swan 
IeM 
T 
MoW/S 
T 
IeW/S 
T 
We can set this out as follows (Table 24). 
This is similar to his most commonly used method of deciding inconcludence, and 
we can easily grasp Aristotle's application. The conclusion sentences again satisfy 
condition II. 
The method of deducing inconcludence from the indeterminate 
Finally, Aristotle uses a method of establishing that a given premiss-pair pattern 
is inconcludent by deciding its inconcludence from another pattern already deter- 
mined to be inconcludent. This method is introduced at 26b14-21 in relation to 
the premiss-pair patterns PaM, MoS I and PeM, MoS I- Two matters are note- 
worthy: (1) Aristotle distinguishes an indeterminate (~t6pt(~xo;) sentence from a 
(determinate) partial (~po~) sentence; and (2) he alludes to his having shown the 
pattern P aM, M eS I (at 26a2-9) not to generate a syllogism. His method may be 
designated, as he himself virtually does, as the method of deducing inconcludence 
from the indeterminate. We cite the passage from A~{, where he first introduces 
this method, but we examine the method more fully below in connection with 
another passage from Prior Analytics A 5. 
Moreover, since "B does not belong to some C" is indeterminate, that 
is, it is true if B belongs to none as well as if it does not belong to every 
(because it does not belong to some), and since a syllogism does not 
come about when terms are taken such that B belongs to none (this 
was said earlier [at 26a2-9]), then it is evident that there will not be a 
syllogism on account of the terms being in this relationship either (for 
there would also be one in the case of these terms). It may <also> be 
proved similarly if the universal is put as privative. (26b14-21) 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
195 
Since (1) BoC is indeterminate, BoC is true if BeC is true, and (2) PaM, MeS I 
has already been shown to result in nothing necessarily, then PaM, M oS I cannot 
result in anything necessarily. PaM, MoS I is a weaker form of PaM, MeS I, which 
had been shown to be inconcludent. When B oC is partial and indeterminate, that 
B does not belong to some Cs and possibly to no Cs, then, since nothing has 
been specified about those Cs that are B, we are lead back to the aspect just 
treated. In other words, it is possible either (1) that a substitution instance could 
result in sentences fitting AaC and AeC both being true or (2) that a substitution 
instance produces true premiss sentences and a false conclusion sentence. The 
sets of substitution terms in the premiss-pair pattern PaM, M oS I generate no 
necessary result. The proof is the same for the pattern PeM, M oS {. 
This method of deciding inconcludence is perhaps better portrayed in the fol- 
lowing passage from A 5 where Aristotle treats premiss-pair patterns of the second 
figure. Again, we cite the passage in its entirety. 
But whenever[Sx~v] the premisses are the same in form (that is, both 
are privative or both attributive), then in no way will there be a syllo- 
gism. (27b10-12) 
This sentence refers to four sets of necessary relationships of three terms in two 
premiss sentences, the one universal, the other partial, whether minor or major, 
and both sentences having the same quality, for not generating a syllogism in the 
second figure. This passage states conditions of inconcludence covering the four 
premiss-pair patterns MeP, MoS--, MaP, M/S--, MoP, MeS--, and M/P, MaS-- 
Accordingly, it establishes the paninvalidity of sixteen argument patterns in the 
standard syntax. The passage continues: 
For let the premisses first be privative, and let the universal be put in 
relation to the major extreme (that is, let M belong to no N and not 
to some X). It is then possible [~,~?(~x~t] for N to belong to every X 
as well as to none. Terms for not belonging are black, snow, animal. 
(27b12-16) 
Here Aristotle shows that the premiss-pair pattern MeP, MoS-- is inconcludent. 
The usual practice would be to produce two arguments whose premiss sentences fit 
the same premiss-pair pattern and whose conclusion sentences satisfy condition II. 
He is able to get terms for belonging to none, but he cannot get terms for belonging 
to every to satisfy condition II. We can illustrate what he writes here as follows 
(Table 25): 
This is all familiar. Aristotle then continues to treat the argument pattern M eP, 
M oS I PaS using the method of deducing from the indeterminate. He writes: 
We cannot get [o6x ~oxt ),~3~tv] terms for belonging if M belongs to 
some X and does not belong to some (for if N belongs to every X and 
M to no N, then M will belong to no X: but it was assumed to belong 

196 
George Boger 
Table 25. 
Establishing inconcludence by the 
method of proving from the indeterminate 
Pattern" PaM, MoS[PaS 
1. 
MeN 
2. 
MoX 
? 
MoX 
Pattern" MeP, MoS[PeS 
1. 
Black [B] belongs to no snow [S]. 
2. 
Black does not belong to some animal 
white [selecting swan] [W/S]. 
? 
Snow belongs to no animal 
BeS 
T 
BoA 
T 
SeA 
T 
to some). It is not possible to get [o6x #u 
Xc,~3~v] terms in this 
way, then, but it must be proved from the indeterminate [~ ~k xo5 
&~tdptaxou gk 
For since "M does not belong to some X" is also 
true even if M belongs to no X and there was not a syllogism when it 
belonged to none [27a20-25], then it is evident that there will not be 
one in the present case either. (27b16-23) 
Aristotle does not use his modified method of deciding inconcludence in this case 
because he could not get terms for belonging to every for the argument pattern 
MeP, MoS [ PaS when the minor premiss is an o sentence. Every set of term 
substitutions exhibiting true premiss sentences results in producing a false con- 
clusion sentence 
a situation that could, in fact, establish the paninvalidity of 
this argument pattern by the method of fact. However, he aims to establish the 
inconcludence of premiss-pair patterns and thereby the paninvalidity of their cor- 
responding argument patterns. Accordingly, he takes the o sentence to be indeter- 
minate and refers back to his determining, by the method of contrasted instances, 
that the premiss-pair pattern M eP, M eS [ does not generate a syllogism. Since 
(1) the minor premiss sentence in M eP, M oS [ is a weaker privative of the minor 
premiss sentence in MeP, MeS I, and (2) the truth-value of a partial follows its 
corresponding universal (when true), then, since (3) MeP, MeS I is a stronger 
premiss-pair pattern than MeP, MoS ] and (4) MeP, MeS [ has been shown to be 
an inconcludent pattern, (5) what is true of MeP, MeS I is also true of MeP, MoS 
[; thus, MeP, MoS [ is an inconcludent premiss-pair pattern. Aristotle's reasoning 
can be expressed as follows: 
1. 
MeP, MeSI 
Premiss-pair pattern known to 
be inconcludent 
2. 
MeP, MoSI 
e premiss weakening: 
Premiss-pair pattern to be estab- 
lished as inconcludent 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
197 
Again, he takes his terms here to relate to non-empty classes. 
This method, 
of course, depends for its success upon a prior use of the method of contrasted 
instances for deciding inconcludence. Tables 26-28 below catalogue each instance 
of Aristotle's deciding inconcludence, s2 
3.4 
Semantic principles underlying Aristotle's method of deciding in- 
validity 
Aristotle considered the following expressions to be synonymous: "the results could 
be otherwise" or "it is [logically] possible for the results to be otherwise"; "nothing 
results necessarily"; "nothing follows necessarily"; "the results are not [logically] 
necessary"; and, in the case of the syllogisms, "there is not a syllogism of the 
extremes". These expressions, of course, relate to invalidity and paninvalidity and 
have their counterparts for validity and panvalidity. And, moreover, in relation to 
our topic, they all involve a notion of contrariety special to categorical sentences 
in the role of conclusions in categorical arguments. 
Aristotle recognized and worked with syntactic and semantic principles by which 
he established that a given premiss-pair pattern is concludent and another in- 
concludent. This pertains to satisfying condition I and condition II respectively. 
Adapting Aristotle's method of establishing invalidity to the method of counterar- 
gument indicates the correctness of his method. However, our doing this does not 
provide insight into the principles underlying his method, which principally aims 
at premiss-pair patterns and consequently their corresponding argument patterns. 
These principles were unexpressed by Aristotle as others have been expressed by 
modern logicians respecting the method of counterargument. 
All the following 
principles pertain to premiss-pair patterns and to their corresponding categorical 
argument patterns and arguments. We believe these principles represent Aristo- 
tle's own thinking about deciding invalidity. Moreover, they provide an interesting 
insight into an ancient logic that might shed light on modern logics. 
82In Tables 26-28, 'PP' refers to the various premiss-pair patterns Aristotle treats, and 'SL' 
refers to his providing schematic letters in treating a given pattern. Aristotle sets out terms 
according to the schematic order for each figure's schematic letters: first figure-PMS, second- 
MPS, third-PSM. 

Table 26. Catalogue of premiss-pair patterns not generating a syllogism in the first figure (A4) 
PP Treatment 
Covering 
SL 
Statement 
ae 26a5-9 
ee 26a11-13 
ia 
26a33-36 
oa 26a33-36 
ie 
26a36-39 
oe 26a36-39 
ao 26b3-10 
26b14-20 
eo 26b10-14 
26b20-21 
ii 
26b24'25 
oo 26b24-25 
io 
26b24'25 
oi 
26b24-25 
26a2-4 
26a9-II 
26a30-33 
Contrasted instances 
Method of Establishing Inconcludence 
Modified contrasted instances 
Deduction from 
the Indeterminate 
Terms for belonging 
Terms for not belonging 
Terms for not 
PMS 
PMS 
belonging 
no 
animal-man-horse 
no 
science-line-medicine 
yes good-condition-wisdom 
26a30-33 
26a30-33 
yes 
26a30-33 
yes 
26a39-26b3 
yes 
26a39-26b3 
yes 
26b21'24 
no 
26b21-24 
no 
yes good-condition-wisdom 
animal-man-stone 
science-line' unit 
good-condition-ignorance 
good-condition-ignorance ~ 
white-horse-swan 
white-horse-raven 
white-horse-swan 
white-horse-raven 
animal-man-white 
From lae 
/snow 
26b14-20 
animal-man-white 
From lee 
/ swan 
26b(14- 20) 20- 21 
animal-white-horse 
animal-white-stone 
animal-white-horse 
animal-white-stone 
animal-white-horse 
animal-white-stone 
,, 
animal-white-horse 
animal-white-stone 
Terms for belonging 
animal-man-white 
/swan 
(26b3-10) 
inanimate-man-white 
/snow 
(26b10-14) 
26b21-24 
no 
26b21-24 
no 
O 
% 
~J 
9 
0~ 

PP 
aa 
ee 
oa 
ze 
eo 
a~ 
oe 
~a 
~Z 
oo 
ZO 
O~ 
Table 27. Catalogue of premiss-pair patterns not generating a syllogism in the second figure (A5) 
Treatment 
27a18-20 
27a20-23 
27b4-6 
27b6-8 
27b12-23 
,27b23-28 
27b28-32 
27b32-34 
27b38-39 
27b38-39 
27b38-39 
27b38-39 
Covering 
Statement 
27a23-25 
27a23-25 
27b9-10 
27b9-10 
27b10-12 
(27b34-36) 
27b10-12 
(27b34-36) 
27b10-12 
(27b34-36) 
27b10-12 
(27b34-36) 
27b36-38 
27b36--38 
27b36-38 
27b36-38 
SL 
yes 
Method of Establishing Inconcludence 
Contrasted instances 
Terms for belonging 
MPS 
substance-animal-man 
yes 
line-animal-man 
animal- man-raven 
animal-substance-unit 
white-animal-raven 
white-animal-swan 
white-animal-man 
white-animal-man 
wite-animal-man 
white-animal-man 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Terms for not belonging 
MPS 
substance-animal-number 
line-animal-stone 
animal-white-raven 
animal-subst ance-science 
black-snow-animal 
white-swan-stone 
white-stone-raven 
white-animal-snow 
white-animal-inanimate 
white-animal-inanimate 
white-animal-inanimate 
white-animal-inanimate 
Modified contrasted instances 
Terms for belonging Terms for not 
belonging 
Deduction from 
the Indeterminate 
From 2ee 
27b16-23 
From 2aa 
27b27-28 
> 
9 
~o 
0~ 
9 
~o 

Table 28. Catalogue of premiss-pair patterns not generating a syllogism in the third figure (A6) 
PP Treatment 
ae 28a30-33 
Covering 
SL 
Statement 
Method of Establishing Inconcludence 
Contrasted 
instances 
ee 28a33-36 
ao 28b22-31 
ie 
28b36-38 
oe 28b39-29a2 
eo 29a2-6 
ii 
29a9-10 
oo 29a9-10 
io 
29a9-10 
oi 
29a9-10 
Terms for belonging 
PSM 
(28bl-3) 
yes 
animal-horse-man 
28b3-4 
(28a37-39) 
no animal-horse-inanimate 
28a39-28bl 
28b22-23 
28b36 
28b38-39 
28b38-39 
yes 
animate-man-animal 
no 
no 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Terms for not belonging 
PSM 
animal-inanimate-man 
29a6-9 
29a6-9 
29a6-9 
29a6-9 
man-horse-inanimaate 
animal-man-wild 
animal-science-wild 
animal-science-wild 
animal-man-wild 
raven-snow-white 
animal-man-white 
animal-inanimate-white 
animal-man-white 
animal-inanimate-white 
animal-man-white 
animal-inanimate-white 
animal-man-white 
animal-inanimate-white 
Modified contrasted instances 
Terms for belonging Terms for not 
belonging 
Deduction from 
the Indeterminate 
From 3ae 
28b24-31 
From 3ee 
29a3-6 
O 
gq 
~J 
9 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
201 
1. A given premiss-pair pattern is concludent if and only if every set of term 
substitutions satisfies condition I. 
2. A given premiss-pair pattern is inconcludent if and only if no set of term 
substitutions satisfies condition I (or every set of term substitutions satisfies 
condition II). 
3. Two arguments having sentences that fit the same premiss-pair pattern and 
sentences whose conclusions satisfy condition I cannot both be valid (but, of 
course, both may be invalid as with Darii). 
4. Two arguments having sentences that fit the same premiss-pair pattern and 
sentences whose conclusions satisfy condition II are both invalid. 
5. No argument having all true premisses and a false conclusion is valid. 
6. A given argument pattern is panvalid if and only if it is logically impossible 
for an arbitrary argument fitting the given pattern to have true premisses 
and a false conclusion. 
7. A given argument pattern is paninvalid if and only if it is logically impossible 
for an arbitrary argument fitting the given pattern to be valid. 
8. A given argument is valid if it fits a panvalid argument pattern. The sen- 
tence in the conclusion follows necessarily (it cannot be otherwise) from the 
sentences comprising the premiss-set. 
9. A given argument is invalid if it fits a paninvalid argument pattern. No sen- 
tence follows necessarily (the results can be otherwise) from other sentences 
in a premiss-set. 
Of course, in respect of numbers 8 and 9, a pattern does not make a given argument 
valid or invalid. 
Rather an argument is valid just in case all the information 
contained in the conclusion sentence is already contained in the premiss sentences, 
invalid if more information is in the conclusion than in the premisss. Again, just 
as Aristotle believes that truth follows being, so does he believe that validity, 
or following necessarily, follows being: there is an ontic underpinning for a valid 
argument's validity just as there is for a true sentence's truth. 
Some epistemic principles relating to the semantic principles listed above include 
the following: 
1. It is sufficient for knowledge of the concludence of a given premiss-pair 
pattern to produce two arguments whose conclusion sentences satisfy condi- 
tion I. 
2. It is sufficient for knowledge of the inconcludence of a given premiss-pair 
pattern to produce two arguments whose conclusion sentences satisfy condi- 
tion II. 

202 
George Boger 
In some cases, when the minor premiss is an indeterminate sentence, it is 
sufficient to demonstrate that the given pattern is a weaker form of a premiss- 
pair pattern already established to be inconcludent. 
3. It is sufficient for knowledge of the panvalidity of a given argument pattern 
to produce either a direct or reductio deduction of its conclusion sentence 
pattern. 
4. It is sufficient for knowledge of the paninvalidity of a given argument pattern 
to show that its premiss-pair pattern is inconcludent, or in some cases (w 
to show that a given argument pattern fits an argument pattern rejected in 
the case of a concludent premiss-pair pattern. 
5. It is sufficient for knowledge of the validity of a given argument to show that 
it fits a panvalid argument pattern. 
6. It is sufficient for knowledge of the invalidity of a given argument to show 
that it fits a paninvalid argument pattern, or to show that the sentences of 
its premiss-set fit an inconcludent premiss-pair pattern. 
3.5 
Determining the paninvalid argument patterns of concludent pre- 
miss patterns 
Two problems seem to arise were it true that Aristotle exclusively treated patterns 
of premisses and argument patterns in Prior Analytics A4-6 rather than directly 
treating arguments. Consider the following two arguments, A1 and A2, both of 
which are invalid, however, both of which also have a premiss pattern established 
to be concludent (i.e., relating to Barbara). 
Table 29. 
A1 Pattern: PaM, MaSIPeS 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every mammal [M]. 
AaM 
T 
2. 
Mammal belongs to every human [H]. 
MqH 
T 
? 
Animal belongs to no human 
AeH 
F 
A2 Pattern: PaM, MaSISaP 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every mammal [M]. 
2. 
Mammal belongs to every human [HI. 
? 
Human belongs to every animal. 
AaM 
T 
Mall 
T 
HaA 
F 
These two arguments are obviously invalid on the principle that no argument is 
valid having true premisses and a false conclusion. We cite two other arguments 
that perhaps better illustrate the problems because their invalidity may not be 
immediately evident. Note that each premiss-pair pattern is concludent: Darii 
results from that in A3, Baroco in A4. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
203 
Table 30. 
A3 Pattern: PaM, MiSIPaS 
1. 
Surface IS] belongs to every table IT]. 
SaT 
T 
2. 
Table belongs to some furniture IF]. 
TiF 
T 
? 
Surface belongs to every furniture. 
SaF 
F 
A4 Pattern: MaP, MoSISoP 
1. 
Container [C] belongs to every bottle [B] 
CaB 
T 
2. 
Container belongs not to every plastic [P]. 
CoP 
T 
? 
Plastic belongs not to every bottle. 
PoB 
F 
These arguments represent the two basic concerns that a modern logician might 
have. (1) Since not every argument relating to a concludent pattern is valid, how 
are the paninvalid argument patterns of a given concludent premiss-pair pattern 
identified when the given syllogistic syntax is standard? (2) Similarly, how are the 
paninvalid argument patterns of a given concludent premiss-pair pattern deter- 
mined when the syllogistic syntax is converted in the conclusion? These questions 
pertain to every paninvalid pattern associated with a concludent premiss-pair pat- 
tern in any of the three figures, whether the pattern's conclusion is a universal 
or a partial sentence. Arguments A1 and A3 correspond to the first concern and 
arguments A2 and A4 to the second concern. All paninvalid argument patterns 
of the kind treated in Prior Analytics fall into one or other of these two classes. 
These two concerns are treated in turn immediately below. 
Paninvalid patterns relating to a concludent pattern in the standard syntax 
Looking back at Aristotle's treatment of Barbara (P aM, MaS I P aS) in Prior 
Analytics A4 we notice that (1) he did not demonstrate its panvalidity but posited 
this pattern as obviously panvalid and (2) he did not demonstrate the paninvalidity 
of the argument pattern P aM, MaS I P eS, which has the same premiss-pair pattern 
as Barbara. Nor, for that matter, did he show that PaM, MaS I PiS is panvalid 
and that PaM, MaS I PoS is paninvalid. All these argument patterns have the 
same concludent premiss-pair pattern. Since Aristotle does not specially take up 
these concerns, we interpolate from the text to illuminate his thinking. We first 
consider the premiss-pair pattern represented in argument A1 from which Barbara 
results and then consider the premiss-pair pattern represented in argument A3 
from which Darii results. 
Take the following two arguments in the first figure, the one substituting 'ani- 
mal', 'mammal', 'human' for belonging to every, the other 'animal', 'reptile', 'snake' 
for belonging to none. 
Since "Animal belongs to every man" is recognized to be a necessary result, 
Aristotle understood that 'no other syllogistic result is logically possible'. Thus, 
PaM, M aS I is a concludent premiss-pair pattern. Having posited that an a sen- 

204 
George Boger 
Table 31. 
Pattern: PaM, MaSlPaS 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every mammal [M]. 
AaM 
T 
2. 
Mammal belongs to every human [H]. 
Mall 
T 
? 
Animal belongs to every human. 
AaH 
F 
Pattern: PaM, MaSIPeS 
1. 
Animal [A] belongs to every reptile [R]. 
AaR 
T 
2. 
Reptile belongs to every snake IS]. 
RaS 
T 
? 
Animal belongs to no snake. 
AeS 
F 
tence is a necessary result of sentences in the given pattern P aM, M aS I (A4: 
25b37-40), Aristotle would have immediately recognized that an e sentence could 
never follow logically: this satisfies Condition I 
granting the one sentence ex- 
cludes the other. It is logically impossible to find terms for P aM, M aS I P eS 
where both the premisses and the conclusion are true sentences. He might have 
added that it is logically impossible to derive something not belonging universally 
from something belonging universally. In the case of Celarent (PeM, MaS I PeS) 
it would be impossible to have a true a sentence as a conclusion when its corre- 
sponding e sentence is true. 83 Recognizing that for Aristotle it is trivially true that 
a partial sentence follows logically from a universal sentence of the same quality, 
we see that he would have determined that PaM, MaSt PiS is panvalid and that, 
likewise, P aM, M aS I PoS is paninvalid. Aristotle recognized that what happens 
here is similar to what happens in applying the method of deducing inconcludence 
from the indeterminate. The reasoning is the same for any syllogistic pattern in 
each figure whose conclusion pattern is universal. 
Next consider the case when the result in the first figure is partial. The following 
two arguments illustrate that the premiss-pair pattern P aM, MiS i is concludent; 
substitute 'surface', 'table', 'furniture' for belonging to every, 'container', 'bottle', 
'plastic' for belonging to none. 
It is logically impossible not to satisfy Condition I for this premiss-pair pattern 
even though the necessary result is a partial sentence. Again, take the second 
figure pair pattern MeP, MiS If tom which Aristotle gets Festino, MeP, MiS I 
PoS, and substitute terms for belonging to every and belonging to none as below. 
It is logically impossible to satisfy Condition II for this pattern. 
However, in a concludent pattern where the necessary conclusion is partial, con- 
trary to a concludent pattern whose necessary result is universal, it is possible to 
exhibit two arguments each with true premisses and a false conclusion. For MeP, 
MiS I PaS take the instance cited immediately above and for MeP, MiS I PeS 
take the following instance (Table 34): 
83Applying the method of fact in this instance, a method surely known to Aristotle (see B2), 
we can demonstrate for ourselves that PaM, MaS I PeS is a paninvalid argument pattern, as 
also is the pattern with a weakened conclusion (PaM, MaS I PoS). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
205 
Table 32. 
Pattern: 
PaM, MiSlPaS 
1. 
Surface [S] belongs to every table [T]. 
SaT 
T 
2. 
Table belongs to some furniture IF]. 
TiF 
T 
? 
Surface belongs to every furniture. 
SaF 
F 
Pattern: 
PaM, MiSlPeS 
1. 
Container [C] belongs to every bottle [B] 
CaB 
T 
2. 
Container belongs to some plastic [P]. 
BiP 
T 
? 
Container belongs to no plastic. 
CeP 
F 
Table 33. 
Pattern: 
MeP, MiSlPaS 
1. 
Bi-pedal [B] belongs to no turtle IT]. 
BeT 
T 
2. 
Bi-pedal beongs to some animal [A]. 
BiA 
T 
? 
Turtle belongs to every animal. 
TaA 
F 
Pattern: 
MeP, MiSlPeS 
1. 
Intelligence [If belongs to no building [B] 
IeB 
T 
2. 
Intelligence belongs to some animal [A]. 
IiA 
T 
? 
Building belongs to no animal. 
CeP 
F 
This signals that both a universal privative and a universal affirmative sentence 
cannot result from the concludent pattern MeP, MiS I- Here again we recognize 
Aristotle's familiarity with the method of fact (Pr. An. B2-~). Moreover, it is 
logically impossible to generate a true attributive sentence from a true privative 
sentence and a true universal from a true partial sentence. Having eliminated a and 
e sentences as possible results, Aristotle would have turned to i and o sentences to 
determine which is necessary. We know that Aristotle established the panvalidity 
of Festino by a metalogical deduction using Ferio (27a32-36). Recognizing that 
nothing affirmative can result from something privative, he would eliminate an 
i result. 
This leaves M eP, M iS I P oS as the only possible logically necessary 
result. 84 
Paninvalid patterns from a concludent pattern with conclusion conversion 
This concern relates to altering the standard syllogistic syntax by converting the 
conclusion pattern 
from P zS to SzP 
while retaining the syntax of the 
premiss-pair pattern. Thus we have: 
84perhaps Aristotle reasoned in this way. This seems likely from his using the method of 
deducing inconcludence from the indeterminate. Perhaps, he deduced the panvalidity of MeP, 
MiS I PoS from the panvalidity of MeP, MaS I PeS (Cesare), a strong pattern, which was itself 
likely established by fiddling with conversions and premiss transposition of Celarent (PeM, MaS 
[ P eS). 

206 
George Boger 
Table 34. 
Pattern: MeP, MiSlPaS 
1. 
Bi-pedal [B] belongs to no turtle [T]. 
BeT 
T 
2. 
Bi-pedal beongs to some animal [A]. 
BiA 
T 
? 
Turtle belongs to every animal. 
TaA 
F 
Pattern: MeP, MiSIPeS 
1. 
Good [G] belongs to no danger [D] 
GeD 
T 
2. 
Good belongs to some house [H]. 
Gill 
T 
? 
Danger belongs to no house. 
Dell 
F 
1. 
PxM 
2. 
MyS 
? 
SzP 
1. 
MxP 
2. 
MyS 
? 
SzP 
1. 
PxM 
2. 
SyM 
? 
SzP 
This appears to double the possible results of premiss-pair patterns. If Aristotle 
specifically treated premiss-pair patterns and not arbitrary arguments- and thus 
did not use the method of counterargument -- how would he have established the 
paninvalidity of an argument pattern whose premiss pattern has been determined 
to be concludent but whose conclusion is the converse of the standard syntax? 
Moreover, do any panvalid argument patterns emerge from inconcludent premiss- 
pair patterns when the conclusion is converted? 
First, we may easily dispense with all concludent patterns whose necessary re- 
sults are either e or i sentences because, involving simple conversion, panvalidity 
is preserved. This, of course, also applies to inconcludent patterns with e or i con- 
clusions; paninvalidity in such cases is preserved. But what happens in the cases 
of an a or an o conclusion, say, in an argument fitting the premiss pattern of Bar- 
bara but with a converted conclusion, PaM, MaS I SaP, or one fitting the premiss 
pattern of Bocardo, PoM, SaM I SoP? In each of these two cases, representative 
of a and o sentences, panvalidity is ruled out. Neither an a sentence nor an o 
sentence admits of simple conversion: the a converts per acciclens, the o does not 
convert. Thus, if either an a or an o sentence is a necessary result of a given con- 
cludent premiss-pair pattern, then, since neither kind of sentence converts simply, 
no argument fitting a concludent pattern whose conclusion is a conversion of the 
standard syntax is valid. These argument patterns are accordingly determined 
necessarily to be paninvalid. We need only refer to Prior Analytics A2 on the 
conversion rules to grasp Aristotle's reasoning, s5 
Finally, it is not possible, by altering the standard syllogistic syntax by convert- 
ing the conclusion pattern, to generate a panvalid argument pattern, that is, that 
a given inconcludent pattern become concludent. A given premiss-pair pattern is 
SbIn Pr. An. B22 Aristotle treats the matter of conversions but in a confusing way. R. Smith 
(1989: 216-219) is not happy with Aristotle's treatment of the matter and notes that in some 
ways he repeats what he accomplishes at B5-7. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
207 
either concludent or inconcludent. Notice that Aristotle encounters this matter 
with Camestres in the second and with Disamis in the third figure where in each 
instance he converts the derivation to re-establish the standard syntax. This indi- 
cates that for second and third figure argument patterns a conclusion conversion 
amounts to transposing the premisses and converting the major to the minor and 
the minor to the major term to re-establish the standard syllogistic syntax. In 
truth, doing this for second and third figure argument patterns amounts to treat- 
ing every possible arrangement of two categorical sentences taken as premisses in 
those two figures. Consider, for example, the relationship between Cesare and 
Camestres and that between Disamis and Dimaris. 
The same reasoning applies to the first figure in relation to the purported ex- 
istence of a fourth, or indirect first, figure. Examining why this is so might help 
to reveal why Aristotle considers there to be only three figures. Each so-called 
fourth figure argument pattern with at least one convertible sentence pattern as 
a premiss is analyzable (Pr. An. A~5) into a second or third figure pattern: into 
the second figure when the convertible sentence pattern is the minor premiss; into 
the third figure when the convertible sentence pattern is the major premiss. This 
accounts for 12 of the 16 possible premiss-pair patterns in the first figure. The 
patterns among these combinations are: Dimaris [Disamis (2)]; Fresison [Festino 
(2) or Ferison (3) or even Ferio (1)]; Camenes [Camestres (2) and with a weakened 
conclusion Camenop (Camestrop [2])]; and Fesapo [Felapton (3)] (see Parry 1991: 
282-287). This leaves MaP, SaM I, MaP, SoM I, MoP, SaM I, MoP, SoM I- We 
treated MaP, SaM I above (this section) and saw that this pattern amounts to 
a simple conversion of the conclusion of Barbara, which is not logically possible. 
However, converting the conclusion of Barbara per accidens, which is logically 
possible, and transposing premisses produces Bramantip (similar to Darapti) 
Barbarix is its counterpart in the first figure. Finally, it is clear to Aristotle that 
MaP, SoM I, MoP, SaM I, and MoP, SoM I amount to a premiss transposition re- 
quired by converting the conclusions of first figure patterns. The most that might 
be obtained, then, is an o sentence. However, since an o sentence is not obtainable 
from the counterpart of these premiss-pair patterns in the first figure, these con- 
clusion conversions, with their concomitant premiss transpositions, would also not 
be logically possible. Thus, seeing that Aristotle considers premiss-pair patterns, 
as discussed above, we can grasp his considering there to be only three figures, s6 
4 
REFINING THE SET OF SYLLOGISM RULES 
~.1 
Establishing independence among deduction rules 
As we remarked at the outset of this study (w 
the three different interpre- 
tations of Aristotle's logic are in significant agreement about the place of reduc- 
tion in his system. In fact, they tend to consider the processes of completion 
86L. Rose's discussion (1968: 57-79) of the fourth figure is very instructive. 

208 
George Boger 
(telei6sis, teleiousthai), reduction (&v~y~)y~ [anagSg~], ~vOy~tv [anagein]), and 
analysis (&v~Xv(~tq [analusis], &v~Xu~tv [analuein]) to be virtually identical. 87 It 
is peculiar that such different interpretations of a syllogism could produce such 
similar views about the logical relationships among them. 
If we allow for con- 
flating an argument pattern or form (one traditionalist sense of 'syllogism') and 
a corresponding conditional sentence expressing such a pattern (the axiomaticist 
position), the similarity becomes more apparent, ss The various interpreters hold 
that reduction amounts to deduction of some syllogisms, taken as derived, from 
others, taken as primitive, to form a deductive system. The traditionalist R. M. 
Eaton, for example, holds that reduction shows that "the validity of these [sec- 
ond and third figure] moods is deducible from that of moods in the first figure" 
(Eaton 1959: 123; author's emphasis) and that in general reduction is a process 
of transforming syllogisms (Eaton 1959: 86, 90, 126). J. Lukasiewicz (1958: 76; 
cf. 43-44) expresses an axiomaticist view that "reduction here means proof or 
deduction of a theorem from the axioms"; reduction is an indispensable process 
of deriving syllogistic theorems from axioms using an implicit propositional logic. 
J. Corcoran, a deductionist, writes in a similar vein that "'reduce to' here means 
'deduce by means of'" (1974: 114; author's emphasis), s9 
However, when we consider Aristotle's treatment of reduction at Prior Ana- 
lytics A 7 we discover that he distinguishes the process of completion from that 
of reduction: "it is also [x&t] possible to reduce all the syllogisms to [&v~y~y~tv 
x~x~ 
~ob~ ~uXXoyt~[ao6~ ~t~] the universal syllogisms in the first figure" (29bl-2; 
el. 29a30-29b2). Aristotle expressed the distinction more forcefully at A23. 
It is clear from what has been said, then, that the syllogisms in these 
figures [viz. the second and third figures] are both completed by means 
s7j. Lukasiewicz, for example, explicitly considers 'anagein' (to reduce) and 'analuein' (to 
analyze) to be synonyms (1958: 44), and this is the case also with R. Smith (1989: 161), J. 
Corcoran (1981: 6), J. W. Miller (1938: 25), and L. Rose (1968: 55). It has been customary in 
all three interpretations to conflate analysis, reduction, and completion. Consider, for example, 
W. D. Ross' commentary on A7 in relation to A4-6 (1949: 314-315) and on A45 (1949: 417- 
418); J. N. Keynes' (1906: 318-325) and R. M. Eaton's (1959: 86, 90, 122-124, 128-131) remarks 
that transforming and deducing syllogisms amount to reduction; and G. Patzig's (1968: 134-137) 
similar position. Both Patzig (1968: 135) and Eaton (1959: 109) refer to the second and third 
figure syllogisms as being "disguised" first figure syllogisms. See also Smith's commentaries on 
A7 (1989: 118-119; of. 1986: 58-59), on A23 (1989: 141), and on A45 (1989: 177). 
SSConsider A. N. Prior's assessment of J. Lukasiewicz's thinking (1955: 116-117) and J. W. 
Miller's treatment of the system (1938: oh. 3; el. 11-14). Miller, in fact, writes (1938: 14, 
25, 28) that he is applying the postulational method of Aristotle himself and "merely carr[ying] 
to its completion an undertaking which Aristotle himself began". Also consider W. T. Parry's 
treatment of Aristotle's "deductive system" (1991: ch. 20; cf. 520n2, 521n9) and J. Corcoran's 
remarks (1983) on a connection between a Gentzen-sequent natural deduction system and J. 
Lukasiewicz's axiomatic system. 
sgj. Corcoran refers to Pr. An. A7:29bl-2 and cites it as follows (1974: 114): "It is possible 
also to reduce all syllogisms to the universal syllogisms in the first figure". Note Corcoran's 
change of position on the matter of reduction as expressed in 1974 and later in 1981 and 1983. 
His earlier position did not especially vary from either the traditionalists' or T. Smiley's views. 
Later he considered reduction to be "heuristically perverse" insofar as determining validity is 
concerned (1981: 4-5). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
209 
of [x~XEtoSvT~t x~ ~t~] the universal syllogisms in the first figure and 
reduced to them [x~t ~t~ ~o6~ou~ dvdyow~t]. (40b17-19) 
The topic of reduction is introduced and concluded at A7 by using the verb 
'anagein', which we translate by 'to reduce'. What seems to have confused in- 
terpreters is Aristotle's treating the reduction of syllogisms by using the verbs 
'teleiousthai', 'epiteleisthai', and '~t 
(deiknusthai), but not 'sullogizesthai' 
exactly as he treats the syllogisms at A5-6. Here is what he writes in A 7, for ex- 
ample, about second figure reduction. 
It is evident that those in the second figure are completed [x~X~toSvx~t] 
by means of these [universal first figure] syllogisms, although not all 
in the same way; the universal syllogisms are completed when the 
privative premiss is converted, but each of the partial syllogisms is 
completed through leading away to an absurdity. (29b2-6; see 29b6-8 
for the first figure and 29b19-24 for the third figure) 
Indeed, Aristotle provides only two actual illustrations of reduction, those of Darii 
(29b8-11) and Ferio (29b11-15), and these reductions are expressed in exactly the 
same manner as the deductions in A5-6, even using the language of completion. 
Thus, some logicians have taken him not to distinguish two processes but to du- 
plicate in A7 the project of A~-6. However, Aristotle is not here concerned to 
demonstrate the truth or falsity of a given sentence nor the validity or invalidity of 
a given argument. Nor is he concerned here to show that a given argument pattern 
is panvalid as at A5-6. Rather, he is now concerned to demonstrate that any sen- 
tence fitting any one of the four categorical sentence patterns (i.e., any probl~ma) 
can be established to be a logical consequence (conclusion) of other categorical 
sentences by using only the two patterns of the universal teleioi sullogismoi as 
deduction rules. To do this, it is true, he performs deductions as he does at A5-6, 
or he refers to those already performed there. But now he has a different objective 
in examining the relationships among the patterns which are used by him as rules: 
namely, to simplify his deduction system. 9~ 
Aristotle first treats the reduction of the four second figure panvalid patterns, 
and he treats them in a manner that suggests his readers' familiarity (29b2-6). 
Again, he does not perform deductions here but refers us to A5 where he had 
already established their panvalidity by using the first figure teleioi sullogismoi 
9~ 
for example: On Generation and Corruption 330a24-25 on reduction of contraries 
to two pairs, hot-cold, dry-moist (cf. Physics 189b26-27, Meta. 1004b27-1005a5, 1036b21- 
22, 1061a1-2, 13-14); Movement of Animals 700b18-19 on reducing to thought and desire such 
sources of movement as intellect, imagination, appetite, etc. We can illuminate Aristotle's use of 
'anagein' at A 7 by citing a rather exact analogue in his discussion of locomotion in Physics 7'.2. 
There Aristotle writes that all forms of locomotion caused by something other than the object 
in motion are reducible to (&v~yovx=r ~[q) four kinds, namely, to pulling, pushing, carrying, and 
twirling (243a16-18); and he even reduces (~v~v~tv) carrying and twirling to pulling and pushing 
(243b15-17). There are numerous instances of similar usage in Aristotle's writings, all of which 
concern identifying what amount to the special principles (~St~t &pXcr of a given subject matter. 

210 
George Boger 
patterns, Barbara and Celarent, as rules in the completion process. 
only that: 
He writes 
It is evident that those in the second figure are completed through these 
syllogisms, although not all in the same way; the universal syllogisms 
are completed when the privative premiss is converted, but each of the 
partial syllogisms is completed through leading away to an absurdity. 
(2952-6) 
At A7 both Festino and Baroco are completed using reductio proof, where in A5 
only Baroco was treated this way. With this established he could proceed to the 
two partial patterns of the first figure, Darii and Ferio, which are reduced through 
second figure patterns. Since, in order to show that only the two universal first 
figure patterns are sufficient, he spends considerably more time on the reduction 
of the two partial patterns (29b6-19) of the first figure. He concludes (29b19- 
25) with the reduction of the six third figure patterns in the same manner as he 
treated the second figure patterns. Table 36 summarizes what Aristotle writes 
about reduction. Table 35 provides their deductions (completions). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
211 
Table 35. Summary of Aristotle's texts on each panvalid pattern in his treatment 
of reduction 
Pattern con- 
sidered 
Manner of the completion 
Pattern 
used in the 
completion 
Barbara: 
Celarent: 
Camestres: 
Cesare: 
Festino: 
Baroco: 
Darii: 
Ferio: 
Darapti: 
Datisi: 
Disamis: 
Felapton: 
Ferison: 
Bocardo: 
[completed 
(teleiousthai) 
probatively 
through itself ~ ~bxdu]. 
[completed probatively through itself]. 
completed probatively dia Celarent (29b2- 
6; cf. A5, 27a9-14). 
completed probatively dia Celarent (19b2- 
6; cf. A5, 27a5-9). 
completed by leading to an impossibility 
(reductio) dia Celarent (19b2-6; cf. A5, 
27a32-36). 
completed by reductio dia Barbara (29b8- 
11, 15-19) 
proved 
( deiknusthai) 
by 
reductio 
dia 
Camestres; 
Camestres 
completed 
probatively 
dia 
Celarent (19b11-15, 15-19). 
proved by reductio dia Cesare; 
Cesare completed probatively dia Celarent 
(29b11-15, 15-19). 
Completed probatively dia Darii; 
Darii proved by reductio dia Camestres; 
Camestres 
completed 
probatively 
dia 
Celarent (19b21-25; cf. A6, 28a17-22). 
same as Darapti (19b21-25; cf. A6, 28b11- 
15). 
same as Darapti (19b21-25; cf. A6, 28b11- 
15). 
completely probatively dia Ferio; 
Ferio proved by reductio dia Cesare; Ce- 
sate completed probatively dia Celarent 
(19b21-25); cf. A6, 28a26-30). 
same as Felapton (29b21-25; cf. 
A6, 
28b33-35). 
completed by reductio dia Barbara (29b21- 
25; cf. A6, 28b17-20). 
Barbara 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Barbara 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Celarent 
Barbara 

Table 36. Completions relating to Aristotle's reduced deduction system 
Barbara 
1. AaB 
2. BaC 
? AaC 
3. AaC 
1,2 Barb 
Celarent 
1. AeB 
2. BaC 
? AeC 
3. AeC 
1,2 Celar 
Darii 29b6-19 
Ferio 29b6-19 
1. AaB 
1. AeB 
2. BiC 
2. BiC 
? AiC 
? AoC 
3. AeC 
assume 
3. AaC 
4. CeA 
3e-con 
4. BeA 
5. AaB 
1 rep 
5. AaC 
6. CeB 
4,5 Celar 
6. BeC 
7. BeC 
6 e-con 
7. BeC & BiC 
8. BeC & BiC 
7,2 conj; X 
8. AoC 
9. AiC 
3-8 reduct 
Camestres 
Cesare 
Festino 
Baroco 
assume 
1 e-con 
3 rep 
4,5 Celar 
6,2 conj; X 
3-7 reduct 
0 
% 
9 % 
1. BaA 
2. BeC 
? AeC 
3. CeB 
4. BaA 
5. CeA 
6. AeC 
2 e-con 
1 rep 
3,4 Celar 
5 e-con 
1. BeA 
2. BaC 
?AeC 
3. AeB 
4. BaC 
5. AeC 
1 e-con 
2 rep 
3,4Celar 
1. BeA 
1. BaA 
2. BiC 
2. BoC 
? AoC 
?AoC 
3. AaC 
assume 
3. AaC 
4. BeA 
1 rep 
4. BaA 
5. AaC 
3 rep 
5. AaC 
6. BeC 
4,5 Celar 
6. BaC 
7. BeC & BiC 
6,2 conj; X 
BaC& BoC 
3-7 reduct 
8. AoC 
8. AoC 
assume 
1 rep 
3 rep 
4,5 Barb 
6,2 conj; X 
3-7 reduct 

Darapti 
1. AaB 
2. CaB 
? AiC 
3. AeC 
4. CeA 
5. AaB 
6. CeB 
7. CeB& CaB 
8. AiC 
assume 
3 e-con 
1 rep 
4,5 Celar 
6,2 conj; X 
3-7 reduct 
Datisi 
1. AaB 
2. CiB 
? AiC 
3. AeC 
4. CeA 
5. AaB 
6. CeB 
7. CeB & CiB 
8. AiC 
assume 
ee-con 
1 rep 
4,5 Celar 
6,2 conj; X 
3-7 reduct 
Disamis 
1. AiB 
2. CaB 
? AiC 
3. AeC 
4. CaB 
5. AeB 
6. AeB & AiB 
7. AiC 
Ferison 
1. AeB 
2. CiB 
? AoC 
3. AaC 
4. BeA 
5. AaC 
6. BeC 
8. CeB ~ CiB 
9. AoC 
assume 
2 rep 
3,4 Celar 
5,1 conj; X 
3-6 reduct 
assume 
1 e-con 
3 rep 
4,5 Celar 
7,2 conj; X 
3-8 reduct 
Felapton 
1. AeB 
2. CaB 
? AoC 
3. AaC 
4. BeA 
5. AaC 
6. BeC 
7. CeB 
8. CeB ~ CaB 
9. AoC 
Bocardo 
1. AoB 
2. CaB 
? AoC 
3. AaC 
4. CaB 
5. AaB 
6. AaB & AoB 
assume 
1 e-con 
3 rep 
4,5 Celar 
6 e-con 
7.2 conj; X 
3-8 reduct 
assume 
2 rep 
3,4 Barb 
5,1 conj; X 
ct~ 
9 
ct~ 
ffq 
9 
~~ 

214 
George Boger 
By treating each case of a panvalid pattern 
and this amounts to treating all 
possible combinations of concludent premiss-pair patterns -- Aristotle established 
the deductive preeminence of the patterns of the two universal syllogisms, Barbara 
and Celarent, as the only syllogism rules necessary in his deduction system. He 
demonstrated not only that second and third figure patterns are redundant de- 
duction rules, which was implicitly established at Prior Analytics Ad-6, but also 
that the two partial patterns of the first figure are equally redundant. The same 
deductive results are accomplished using only the universal patterns of the first 
figure. Thus, Aristotle's reduction of syllogistic patterns at A"7 is not a substitute 
for syllogistic deduction nor a process for axiomatizing a system of logic as ax- 
iomaticists hold, but a metalogical process for establishing the independence of a 
small set of deduction rules. 
4.2 
Analysis distinct from reduction 
Aristotle treated analysis at Prior Analytics A45. At the outset of A45 he used 
'anagein' as a synonym for 'analuein' (50b5-9) in a way apparently inconsistent 
with what he wrote at A 7 and A23: "not all syllogisms can be reduced ... but only 
some [o5 X 5~x~w~ B~ &XX' ~v[ou~]". Recall that at A 7 he showed that all the syllo- 
gisms could be reduced. We are thus struck by an apparent limitation announced 
here. However, while Aristotle treated the analyses of first into second and second 
into first figure syllogisms (50b5-30) by using 'anagein', he abruptly switched at 
50b30-32 (re Baroco) to use 'analuein' and continued to do so throughout A45 
respecting all the other possible analyses (50b30-51a39). In addition, Aristotle 
clearly distinguished analysis from reduction at A45 as he distinguished reduction 
from completion at A 7: "... it is evident how one must reduce syllogisms [x(5~ 
la~v oSv B~ ~ob~ uuXXoytc~[ao5~ ~v~y~tv], and that the figures are analyzed into one 
another [x~[ 5~t ~v~Xu~t ~ uX~[ac~ ~t~ ~XXrlX~]" (51b3-4). 
Aristotle established the scope of analysis in the following way. While every syl- 
logism is reducible (to) (29bl-2), not every syllogism is analyzable (into). Passages 
in A{5 where Aristotle specifically stated that no analysis of one syllogism into 
another is possible include: 50b8-9, 50b18, 50b30-32, 50b33-34, 51al-3, 51a18-19, 
51a27, 51a31-32, 51a37-39, and 51a40-41. This is sufficient to establish a difference 
between the two processes. By examining each case, we can extract Aristotle's two 
rules for analyzing syllogisms. 
1. A given syllogism in one figure is analyzed into a syllogism in another figure 
whenever both syllogisms prove the same probl~ma, that is, each syllogism 
proves a sentence fitting the same pattern, whether an a, e, i, or o sentence 
pattern (50b5-8). 
Aristotle is writing metalogically here. Thus, for example, there is no analysis of 
a syllogism fitting Barbara into a syllogism fitting a pattern in any other figure, 
nor is there of one fitting Darii into one fitting a second figure pattern. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
215 
2. A given syllogism fitting a pattern in one figure is analyzed into a syllogism 
fitting a pattern in another figure by using only conversion and premiss 
transposition (5 la22-25). 
Thus, for example, neither a syllogism fitting Baroco nor one fitting Bocardo can 
be analyzed. 
Aristotle treated the possible analysis of almost every syllogism and he identified 
which are not analyzable, either because conversion does not produce a syllogism 
or because the same probl~ma is not proved in each figure. Table 37 summarizes 
Aristotle's results at Prior Analytics A~5. 91 
Table 37. 
Summary of the analyses treated in Prior Analtyics A45 
Barbara 
No analysis possible 
Celarent 
Into Cesare (50b9-13) 
nto Camestres (not treated) c 
Darii 
Into Disamis (not treated) c 
Into Datisi (50b33-38 
Ferio 
Into Festino (50b13-16) 
Into Ferison (50638-40) 
Cesare 
Into Celarent (50b 17-21) 
Camestres 
Into Celarent (50b21-25) c 
Festino 
Into Ferio (50b25-30) 
Into Ferison (51a26-30) 
Baroco 
No analysis possible 
Darapti 
Into Darii (51a3-7 
Felapton 
Into Ferio (51a12-15) 
Into Festino (51a34-37) 
Disamis 
Into Darii (51a8-12) c 
hline Datisi 
Into Darii (51a7-8) 
Boardo 
No analysis possible 
,,, 
Ferison 
Into Ferio (51a15-18) 
Into Festino (51a34-37) 
Aristotle treated analysis in Prior Analytics A45 quite differently from reduc- 
tion in A 7 and from completion at A 5-6, both of which involve a deduction process. 
Here there is no direct concern with a process of deduction to show that a given 
premiss-pair generates a syllogism nor that a conclusion follows from premisses 
91Table 37 uses the following notation: superscript c = premiss transposition and conclusion 
conversion. 
Aristotle treats neither analyzing Darii and Disamis into each other nor Celarent and Camestres 
into each other. This is simply an oversight. 

216 
George Boger 
nor that some patterns are redundant as deduction rules. Neither probative nor 
reductio proofs are cited in relation to analysis, although Aristotle always pre- 
served strict syllogistic syntax through conversion in the case of some conclusion 
patterns. 
Characteristically Aristotle conceived of analysis as one syllogism being trans- 
formed into another. In fact, he referred to the process of analysis as a ~x@~(~tq, 
a transition or transformation (51a24-25). Analyses of syllogisms occur between 
any of the figures. Thus, no syllogistic pattern nor any figure has preeminence in 
relation to analysis as is the case with completion and reduction. That Aristotle 
used 'anagein' in an apparently contrary way at the outset of A~5 is mitigated 
when once we view the texts of A 7 and A~5 more globally. Aristotle unequivocally 
distinguished the process of reduction from that of analysis. 92 
5 
CONCEPTS IN ARISTOTLE'S LOGIC 
While modern logicians believe that Aristotle developed a logic that contains a 
notion of formal deducibility ~ and their mathematical models establish that this 
is so- 
they do not believe that he explicitly formulated this notion, either in 
general of deductive systems or specifically of his syllogistic system. 
In addi- 
tion, it might seem that Aristotle did not define 'following from necessity', xb ~ 
&~yx~ ~u~t~tv, 
his expression for logical consequence, and then show that the 
syllogisms are true to it. Previous interpreters believed that he only posited the 
four teleioi sullogismoi and then 'reduced' the validity of the others to them as 
'principles'. However, modern interpreters have tended not to place Aristotle's 
logical investigations in Prior Analytics into the larger context of his other works 
relating to logic. Surely what he wrote in Prior Analytics is the product of con- 
siderable intellectual exploration. Accordingly, then, we might expect to find his 
thinking about logical consequence elsewhere in the larger corpus and then piece 
together an account that accommodates modern logicians. In particular, what 
Aristotle expressed about logical necessity in Metaphysics and in Prior Analytics 
comports exactly with his treatment of deducibility in Prior Analytics. Below we 
first extract Aristotle's syntactic notion of formal deducibility (w 
and then his 
semantic notion of logical consequence (w 
Two kinds of deduction also are 
represented (w 
5.1 
Aristotle's notion of formal deducibility 
The modern notion of formal deducibility, or formal derivability, can be stated as 
follows: 
92While it may seem unbecoming to take Aristotle's expression at 50b5-30 as a lapse in precision 
not later amended, we believe this to be so and that our interpretation does not do violence to 
Aristotle's meaning. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
217 
A given sentence c is formally deducible from a given set of sentences 
P when there exists a finite sequence of sentences that ends with c and 
begins with P such that each sentence in the sequence from P is either 
a member of P or a sentence generated from earlier sentences solely by 
means of stipulated deduction rules. 
The salient features of this notion pertain to a chain of reasoning from premisses to 
conclusion such that the chain sequence (1) is finite and (2) might use (a) repetition 
and (b) stipulated deduction rules. In addition such a chain is cogent in context. 
Now, it is evident from his discussions in Prior Analytics and Posterior Analytics 
that Aristotle subscribed to a notion of formal deducibility remarkably similar to 
this modern formulation. Moreover, while Aristotle did not express this notion 
in one rigorously constructed sentence, he nevertheless provided many statements 
in Prior Analytics and in Posterior Analytics from which we can extract his own 
understanding. 
Here again we take his several statements and organize them 
according to a modern practice. 
Some logicians believe that the closest Aristotle came to defining 'deduction' 
per se is his definition of 'syllogism' at the outset of Prior Analytics. He writes 
that a syllogism (sullogismos) is 
a discourse D,6yo;] in which, certain things having been supposed 
[posited or taken], something different from the things supposed [posited 
or taken] follows of necessity because these things are so [gT~p6v xt ~r 
x~tpt~v~v ~ &v~yx~q ou~tv~ 
T~ zo~OTo~ ~tv0~t.]. (24b18-20) 93 
Aristotle immediately continues by defining certain aspects of this definition. 
By 'because these things are so' I mean 'resulting through them [T6 8t~ 
TaOzc~ cmg~34tvetv]', and by 'resulting through them' I mean 'needing 
no further term from outside in order for the necessity to come about 
[z6 p.rlS~v6r ~r 
5pou ~:po,JS~tv ~:p6r T6 u 
~6 &vcxyxcxbv]' 
(24b20-22) 
However, Aristotle seems here rather more to define 'valid argument' than 'deduc- 
tion'; there is no strong indication of an epistemic process present in a syllogism. 
We have already seen that he understood his project in Prior A nalytics A5-6 
as establishing which patterns of two categorical sentences when taken together 
as premisses result in a syllogism. Aristotle's logical methodology is to perform 
deductions in the metalanguage of Prior Analytics to establish that certain argu- 
ment patterns are panvalid patterns. 94 He then proceeds to use these patterns in 
a deduction process. This being so, we conclude that a syllogism, at least in this 
93Aristotle defines 'syllogism' in much the same way at three other places: Top. 100a25-27, 
SR 164b27-165a2, and Rh. 1356b16-18. 
94In this connection, consider the following passages: in Pr. An. A5" 27a12-13, 14, 14-15, 
16-18, 36, 27b3, 28a2-7; in A6" 28a22, 22-23, 28-30, 28b13-15, 20-21, 34-35, 29a15-16. 

218 
George Boger 
discussion, is a valid argument, one that might, to be sure, be used in a deduction 
process, but which is not itself a deduction. Again, we understand him as securing 
a set of deduction rules. The corroborating evidence for this interpretation is Aris- 
totle's distinguishing syllogisms into those that are teleios, usually translated by 
'complete' or 'perfect', and those that are atel~s, usually translated by 'incomplete' 
or 'imperfect'; ' dunatos', translated by 'potential', serves as a synonym for ' atel~s'. 
His definitions of 'teleios' and 'atel~s' in Prior Analytics A1 and his references to 
the teleioi sullogismoi help to secure our interpretation. 
I call a syllogism complete [-c~Xeto~] if it stands in need of nothing else 
besides the things taken in order for the necessity to be evident [xpb~ 
-cb q0c~v~lv~t ~b &wTx~ov]; I call it incomplete [&~),~] if it still needs 
either one or several additional things which are necessary because of 
the terms assumed, but yet were not taken as premisses. (24b22-26) 
Of course, 'teleios' and 'atel~s' are epistemic notions and refer to evidency of va- 
lidity. From Prior Analytics A~, A5-6, and AT, then, we notice that Aristotle, 
besides using two formal processes of deduction (direct and indirect; w 
also 
identifies two degrees of someone's recognizing validity, that is, in connection with 
the syllogisms, of experiencing a mental act by which someone grasps that ex- 
treme terms are mediated by a middle term. (1) A syllogism being atel~s means 
that a participant has to go through a number of deductive steps, more than one, 
to recognize its validity. Being dunatos means that it is possible to recognize its 
validity. (2) A syllogism being teleios means that a participant has to go through 
only one step to recognize the validity. At places Aristotle helps us to understand 
the meaning of 'teleios' by referring to the evidency of the necessity of the conclu- 
sion following logically from the premisses of a first figure syllogism as '8[ ~5xo5', 
or through itself. In Prior A nalytics A7 he writes of the two partial syllogisms 
of the first figure (viz., Darii and Ferio), and we interpolate to include the two 
universal syllogisms (Barbara and Celarent) as well: " the partial syllogisms in 
the first figure are brought to completion through themselves [oi 8' ~v x~ xp(hxo, ol 
x0cc& [a@oq, ~t-~Xoh~o(t ~v xc([ ~. c~O-c(hv]" (29b6-7) 95 
Recognizing validity in the case of a first figure syllogism requires only one step, 
more steps in the case of a second or third figure syllogism, and, of course, even 
more steps in a case of a valid argument with more than two premisses. Thus, 
the manner of Aristotle's discussion in Prior Analytics A5-6 and A7 shows that 
he understands the process of deduction to establish, or to make evident in the 
mind of a participant, that a given argument is valid 
or, as the case may be, 
that a given argument pattern is panvalid. And, moreover, he uses the syllogism 
95In contrast, consider: "all [second figure syllogisms] are completed [~xtxcXohvx~t] by taking 
in addition certain things"(Pr. An. Ah: 28a5-6); "all [third figure syllogisms] are completed 
[xc),r 
by taking certain things in addition"(A6: 29a15-16); and "all [first figure syllogisms] 
are completed by means of the things initially taken [x~,~q u 
~xtx~),ohv~cr ~t& Tr 
~ &PX~q 
X~q00e,~xo,0]"(Pr. An. Ad: 26b28-33)] or "are completed through themselves" (Pr. An. AT: 
29b6-8). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
219 
patterns in this process. We can illuminate this with the following illustrations 
(Table 38). We refer to two-premiss arguments, but this applies mutatis mutandis 
to one-premiss arguments. 
Table 38. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1. 
1. 
AaM 
1. 
PaM 
1. 
AaM 
2. 
2. 
MaD 
2. 
MaS 
2. 
MaD 
? 
? 
AaD 
." 
PaS 
? 
AaD 
Animal [A] be- 
longs to every 
mammal [M]. 
Mammal 
be- 
i 
longs to every! 
dog [D]. 
Animal belongs 
to every dog. 
3. 
AaD 1, 2 
Barbara 
5 
6 
7 
8 
1. 
1. 
AaM 
1. 
MaP 
1. 
AaM 
2. 
2. 
AeL 
2. 
MeS 
2 
AeL 
? 
? 
MeL 
". 
PeS 
? 
MeL 
Animal [A] be- 
longs to every 
mammal [M] 
Animal belongs 
to no line [L]. 
Mammal 
be- 
longs 
to 
no 
line. 
(Camestres) 
3. 
LeA 
2e-conversion 
4. 
Aa 
M 1, repetition 
5. 
LeM 
3, 4 Celarent 
6. 
MeL 
5e-conversion 
Item 1 is an object language argument (premisses numbered and the conclusion 
indicated by '?') whose validity, while perhaps obvious, let us take as unknown. 
Item 2 is the same object language argument but whose non-logical constants 
(terms) have been abbreviated with letters to facilitate recognizing the pattern 
of and working with the argument. Item 3 is a metalogical object, in this case 
a schematic representation of the panvalid argument pattern named 'Barbara'. 96 
96Here the letters are schematic letters and the line for the 'conclusion' is indicated by the '.'.', 
which signals that a sentence fitting a conclusion pattern has been established always to follow 
logically from sentences fitting the premiss pattern. Any semantically precise instance of this 

220 
George Boger 
Item 4 is an object language deduction, albeit quite simple. 
In this case, the 
conclusion of the original argument (item 1) has been established to follow logically, 
or to be valid; this is indicated by the fourth line (numbered '3') with the reasoning, 
or explanation, provided to the right. Using Aristotle's nomenclature, item 1 is a 
teleios sullogismos. Likewise in this respect, item 5 is an atel~s sullogismos and, 
thus, accordingly, it requires a deduction to establish its validity (item 8). 
Of course, a conversion is not a syllogism according to Aristotle because it 
consists in only one premiss. Still, he understood a conversion necessarily to result 
in something different. In Prior Analytics B1, for example, he writes that each 
syllogism, save for that whose conclusion is an o sentence, has several different 
results: 
If A has been proved to belong to every B or to some, then it is also 
necessary for B to belong to some A; and if A has been proved to belong 
to no B, then neither does B belong to any A (and this conclusion is 
different [gx~po~] from the previous one). (53a10-12) 
This, of course, applies also to the subalterns. His taking the conclusions of con- 
versions as different in Prior Analytics A is obvious, if not stated as directly as it 
is here. In any case, it is evident that Aristotle took a conversion and a syllogism 
equally as species of the same genus, namely, as instances of valid arguments. His 
purpose in Prior Analytics is to identify the panvalid argument patterns relating 
to converting two terms in a single sentence and to those relating three terms 
in two sentences because he recognized the epistemic efficacy of such elementary 
patterns in the deduction process 
namely, he recognized the rule nature of such 
patterns. 
We now have some notion of Aristotle's understanding of deduction, but we 
seem to lack his word for 'deduction' 
Jonathan Barnes (1981: 21-25) has sug- 
gested '&~u215 
(anankaion). While Aristotle frequently uses 'anankaion' as 
an adverb, translated by 'necessarily', he also often uses it as a substantive, '-cb 
~v~y163 
as in the following passage in Prior Analytics A32, rendered according 
to Barnes. 
... that the syllogism is also a deduction [6~t x~[ 6 c~u),Xoytc~[ab~ 
&v~yx~(dv ~ox~v] since deduction is more extensive than syllogism [~[ 
~X~o~ ~ ~b &~yx~s 
~ 6 ouXXoyt~[a6r 
for every syllogism is a de- 
duction, but not every deduction is a syllogism [6 g~ y&p ouXXoyto[ab~ 
~ 
&vc~yx~to~, ~b ~' &wy 
o6 ~ 
ouX),oyto~6~]. (47a32-35; see 
47a31-40) 
His use of'to anankaion' here seems to indicate that a conversion and a syllogism 
are both valid arguments, and perhaps that syllogistic reasoning is only one among 
other kinds of deductive reasoning. 
argument pattern is a valid argument. This universality, along with its elementary nature, is 
why such patterns are employed as rules in a deduction process. Cf. above w 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
221 
Grasping Aristotle's understanding of deduction can be enhanced by examining 
instances of his performing deductions and by studying the verbs he used to charac- 
terize the deduction process, in particular, the verbs 'epiteleisthai' or 'teleiousthai', 
as well as 'n~p~v~o0~t' (perainesthai), and even 'deiknusthai'. Examining parts 
of Prior Analytics A7 helps in this connection. Consider the following passage 
(underscoring for comparison). 
It is furthermore evident that all [1] the incomplete deductions [2] 
are completed 
through 
the 
first 
figure. 
For 
they 
all 
[3] 
come to a conclusion either probatively or through an impossibility, 
and in both ways the first figure [4] results. For those [5] completed pro- 
batively, this results because they all [6] come to a conclusion through 
conversion, and conversion [7] produces the first figure. And for those 
[8] proved through an impossibility, it results because, when a false- 
hood is supposed, the [9] deduction [10] comes about through the first 
figure. (29a30-36) 
This is R. Smith's (1989) translation, which has considerably contributed to rais- 
ing respect for Aristotle's acumen as a logician. Here is the complete Greek of 
Aristotle's text. 
~I, avsp6v 8~ xal. 5q:t rulw:sr [1] ot &-cskss162 
uuXkoytobtol. [2] ~:sXstoOv-~at 
nsp4tvovc~t n4vcsc;. 
&~q0o"c~pcoc; B~: [4] ",((,vsr~t ~6 np&cov oxF")[,..to~ , B, stx- 
xav~er h ~' ~wto~pogh ~6 ~p~ov [7] e=6tet oxf~ta~, 8t~ ~ ~o0 d~Buva-cou 
[8] 8etxvugev~v, &:t zeO{vzor -coo @O~our [9] 6 ouXXoytog6r [10] yCve~at 
at& -too ~tpoMou oXfl[aa~o~. 
Now, in light of our comments above, we gloss the text to provide a more faithful 
translation, even if awkward, to render Aristotle's meaning. 
It is also clear that all [1] the valid syllogistic arguments whose validity 
is not apparent [2] are shown to be valid by means of the first figure. 
For, either probatively or by means of reductio, they are all [3] drawn to 
a conclusion <by means of a deduction process>. In both cases, <a 
m 
syllogism in> the first figure [4] arises <in the deduction process to 
establish validity>. 
Of those whose [5] evidency of validity is estab- 
lished probatively, because they all are [6] drawn to a conclusion 
<through a deduction process> by means of conversion, and conver- 
sion [7] produces <a syllogism in> the first figure; of those [8] proved 
by means of reductio, because [5] <evidency of validity is established> 
by assuming a falsehood [9] a syllogism in the first figure [10] arises 
<in the deduction process>. 

222 
George Boger 
In Prior Analytics AT: 29bl-8, as well as in A5-6, Aristotle used 'teleiousthai' 
and 'epiteleisthai' in exactly the same way: namely, to indicate making evident the 
validity of a valid argument specifically by means of generating a teleios sullogismos 
in a chain of reasoning. This signals in the mind of a participant, equally today 
as then, that the chain of reasoning in which a teleios sullogismos arises is cogent 
in context, and thus it links the conclusion sentence as following logically, or 
necessarily, from the premiss sentences. It is obvious that Aristotle used the first 
figure panvalid patterns as rules in the deduction process to establish knowledge 
of validity. While a syllogism is a valid elementary argument, its panvalid pattern 
can serve as a deduction rule since every instance is valid. The same thinking 
applies to the conversion rules established in Prior Analytics A2: a conversion is 
a valid one-premiss argument, its panvalid pattern serves as a deduction rule. 
The elements of syllogistic deductive reasoning, then, consist in three one- 
premiss conversion rules and 14 two-premiss syllogism rules, reduced to two in 
Prior A nalytics A 7. Thus, in respect of his syllogistic deduction system, a de- 
duction preeminently involves a chain of reasoning in the mind of a participant 
that establishes a conclusion sentence to be a logical consequence of a set of pre- 
miss sentences 
a deduction makes validity, or following necessarily, evident. In 
the deduction process a participant might use any of the conversion and syllogism 
rules as well as repetition, an implicit and often used rule. 97 This is what Aristotle 
means in Prior Analytics A25:42a35-36 by '6 15yo~ ~ulloyt~[JS~', a syllogistic 
argumentation, or reasoning syllogistically (oukkoy~oxt162 
In fact, Aristotle is 
rather emphatic about this. While it is true that every syllogism has only three 
terms and two protaseis, it is just as true that a syllogistic argumentation is not 
restricted to two premisses. Rather a syllogistic argumentation consists in chaining 
syllogisms that are instances of the rules Aristotle articulated in Prior A nalytics 
A~-6. Aristotle used 'auaxotx[~' (sustoichia) to capture the notion of 'chaining' 
syllogisms. 98 And so, just at the places where he restricts a syllogism to two 
premisses and three terms, he also writes: 
... unless the same conclusion comes about [xb c~6xb au~x~p~alJ~ y[yvrlx~t ] 
through different groups of premisses. (Pr. An. A25: 41b37-38) 
... unless something should be taken in addition for the purpose of 
completing the deductions [xpb~ T~v ~l~t~Jatv x~v aulloyt~v]. 
(Pr. 
An. A25: 42a33-35) 
Aristotle explicitly took up chaining syllogisms in Prior Analytics A25: 42bl- 
26, and he provided many examples of this process in both Prior Analytics and 
Posterior Analytics. 
At Prior Analytics A25 he wrote about "counting syllo- 
gisms" and "prior syllogisms" (xpooulloyto[Jo[), about counting terms (6pot), 
97See, e.g., in Pr. An. A5: 27a7-8, 11 and in A6: 28a20-21. 
98LSJ cites 'series' and 'column' as definitions of 'au~zotx[~'. J. Barnes (1994) translates 
'auaxotx[~' by 'chain': e.g., Po.An. 79b7, 8-9, 10, 11, 80b27, and 81a21. Also consider Aristotle's 
using '~uv~x~6q', which LSJ defines as 'joined together' or 'linked together'. R. Smith (1989) 
translates this by 'connected' and '&a6vc~xxoq' by 'unconnected" e.g., Pr. An. 41al, 19, 42a21, 
65b14, 33, and 66b27. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
223 
counting premisses and intervals (~pox~t~ and ~t~oxfl[a~x~), and counting con- 
clusions (au[ax~p~(~[a~x~). We cite Posterior Analytics A25, where Aristotle treats 
the superiority of a demonstration having fewer rather than more terms, as an 
example of his providing an instance of chaining syllogisms. 
... then let one demonstration show that A holds of E through the 
middle terms B, C, D, and let the other show that A holds of E through 
F, G. Thus that A holds of D and that A holds of E are on a level. But 
that A holds of D is prior to and more familiar than that A holds of 
E; for the latter is demonstrated through the former, and that through 
which something is demonstrated is more convincing than it. (86a39- 
86b4; cf., e.g., in Pr. An. A25:41b36-42a5 & A28: 44all-44b20) 
Thus, we understand that central to syllogistic deductive reasoning is generating 
syllogisms as part of an epistemic process. Aristotle summarizes this notion in 
Prior Analytics A29. 
It is evident from what has been said, then, not only that it is possible 
for all syllogisms to come about through this route, but also that this is 
impossible through any other. For every syllogism has been proved to 
come about through some one of the [three] figures stated previously, 
and these cannot be constructed except through the things each term 
follows or is followed by (for the premisses and the selection of a middle 
is from these, so that it is not even possible for a syllogism to come 
about through other things). 99 (45b36-46a2) 
It is useful at this juncture, in connection with the syntactic foundations of 
syllogistic deduction, to refer back to Prior Analytics A~-6 where Aristotle estab- 
lished all the panvalid two-premiss patterns. This helps to amplify textually his 
notion of formal deducibility. Respecting the two-premiss syllogism rules, from 
which all extended deductive discourses are constructed, Aristotle summarized a 
constituent part of his notion of deducibility five times in Prior Analytics A~-6, 
in respect of each of the three figures. 
Thus, it is clear when there will and when there will not be a syllogism 
in this [the first] figure if the terms are universal; and it is also clear 
both that if there is a syllogism, then the terms must necessarily be 
related as we have said, and that if they are related in this way, then 
there will be a syllogism. (A~: 26a13-16) 
99Aristotle had already expressed this in Pr. An. A27: "From what had been said, then, 
it is clear how every syllogism is generated, both through how many terms and premisses and 
what relationships they are in to one another, and furthermore what sort of problem is proved 
in each figure, and what sort in more and what in fewer figures .... For surely one ought not only 
study the origin of syllogisms [43a22-23; cf. 47a2-4], but also have the power to produce them" 
(43a16-24). 

224 
George Boger 
It is evident from what has been said, then, that if there is a partial 
syllogism in this [the first] figure, then it is necessary for the terms to 
be related as we have said (for when they are otherwise, a syllogism 
comes about in no way). (A~: 26b26-28) 
It is evident, then, that if there is a syllogism with the terms universal 
[in the second figure], then it is necessary for the terms to be related as 
we said in the beginning. For if they are otherwise, a necessary result 
does not come about. (AS: 27a23-25). 
From what has been said, then, it is evident both that a syllogism 
comes about of necessity if the terms are related to one another as 
was stated, and that if there is a syllogism, then it is necessary for the 
terms to be so related [in the second figure]. (AS: 28al-3) 
It is evident in this [the third] figure, then, when there will and when 
there will not be a syllogism, and it is evident both that if the terms 
are related as was said, then a syllogism comes about of necessity, and 
that if there is a syllogism, then it is necessary for the terms to be so 
related. (A6: 29a11-14) 
In each case Aristotle refers his readers to the necessary and sufficient syntac- 
tic conditions for a syllogism. He alludes to the panvalid patterns that he has 
identified as deduction rules. 
Perhaps the best treatment of deducibility per se in Aristotle's logical inves- 
tigations is contained in Prior A nalytics A23, a chapter some logicians believe 
contains Aristotle's attempt at a completeness proof. 1~176 He begins this chapter 
by affirming that 
every demonstration, and every deduction, must prove something ei- 
ther to belong or not to belong [dvdyx~ ~ x~o~v &xd~t~tv  
ndv~ 
ouXXoyto[abv ~ O~dpXov ~t ~ [a~ OxdpXov ~t 
and this either 
universally or partially ... either probatively or through an absurdity. 
(40b23-25) 
Sometimes he writes, in this connection, that every syllogism establishes one or 
another probl~ma. In any case, he then proceeds to describe the deduction process, 
and his description, while not strictly a definition, amounts, nevertheless, to a kind 
of stipulative definition of deducibility. We cite this passage at length to provide 
his complete thinking on this matter. 
His syntactic treatment of the topic is 
evident. 
Now, if someone should have to syllogize [ouXXoy[ac~oO~t] A of B, either 
as belonging or as not belonging, then it is necessary for him to take 
1~176 
modern logicians believe that what Aristotle writes just preceding this passage (40b23- 
25) is suggestive of his interest in a completeness proof: "But it will now be evident that this 
holds for every syllogism without qualification, when every one has been proved to come about 
through some one of these figures" (40b20-22). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
225 
something about something [X@~b xt xax~ ztvog]. If, then, A should 
be taken about B, then the initial thing will have been taken. But if A 
should be taken about C, and C about nothing nor anything else about 
it, nor some other thing about A, then there will be no syllogism [6u~[g 
~zat auXXoyt~p6r (for nothing follows of necessity [o6~,~ aug~3~t~t ~ 
&v~y 
through a single thing having been taken about one other). 
Consequently, another premiss [~p6zaatv] must be taken in addition. 
If, then, A is taken about something else, or something else about it or 
about C, then nothing prevents there being a syllogism [(~uXXoytapdv], 
but it will not be in relation to B through the premisses taken. Nor 
when C is taken to belong to something else, that to another thing, 
and this to something else, but it is not connected to B [~ auv~x~ ~k 
xpbg ~b B]" there will not be a syllogism [auX),oytap6~] in relation to 
B in this way either. For, in general, we said that there cannot ever be 
any syllogism [auXXoytagb~] of one thing about another without some 
middle term having been taken which is related in some way to each 
accordin9 to the kinds of predications [z~g  
For a syllo- 
gism, without qualification, is from prernisses [b pkv y~p au),koytapbg 
&~kcSg ~x ~poz~a~0v ~aztv]; a syllogism [aukkoy~bg] in relation to 
this term is from premisses in relation to this term; and a syllo9ism of 
this term in relation to that is throu9h prernisses of this term in rela- 
tion to that. And it is impossible to take a premiss in relation to B 
without either predicating or rejecting anything of it, or again to get 
a syllogism of A in relation to B without taking any common term, 
but (only} predicating or rejecting certain things separately of each of 
them. As a result, something must be taken as a middle term for both 
which will connect the predications, since the syllogism [auXXoy~a~6~] 
will be of this term in relation to that. If, then, it is necessary to take 
some common term in relation to both, and if this is possible in three 
ways (for it is possible to do so by predicating A of C and C of B, 
or by predicating C of both A and B, or by predicating both A and 
B of C), and these ways are the figures stated, then it is evident that 
every syllogism must come about through some one of these figures 
[cpc~v~pbv 5z~ ~:ci'~-cc~ 
ou;k),.oy~o~bv &vciyx~ y[v~oOcz~ ~ -co6zc0v -ctv6~ zcSv 
oXWcizc0v ]. (40b30-41a18) 
Here Aristotle refers to the epistemic value of syllogisms in the deduction process. 
This passage clearly indicates that a deduction of a conclusion sentence must come 
from a set of sentences taken as premisses, and, moreover, that the derivation must 
happen according to prescribed syntactic rules. Thus, according to Aristotle's 
formal system, there is a derivation of a categorical sentence from other given 
categorical sentences, either directly or indirectly, whenever "[1] the middle is 
predicated and a subject of predication, or if it is predicated and something else is 
denied of it ... [or 2] if it is both predicated of something and denied of something 

226 
George Boger 
... [or 3] if others are predicated of it, or one is denied and another is predicated" 
(A32: 47bl-5). 
In Posterior Analytics B~ he writes that "a deduction proves something of 
something through a middle term [6 p~ u 
uukkoytopb~ ~[ x~& ~t~b~ ~txvu~t 
~t& zo5 [a~uou]" (91a14-15; cf. Pr. 
An. 
A32: 47b7-9). 
Again, consider the 
following passages from Posterior A nalytics B2: 
Thus it results that in all our searches we seek either if there is a 
middle term or what the middle term is. For the middle term is the 
explanation [&~[o~], and in all cases it is the explanation that is being 
sought. (90a5-7, 24) 
Again, "it is plain, then, that whatever is sought, it is a search for a middle term" 
(Po. An. B3: 90a35-36). And from Prior Analytics A28 we read: 
This is because, in the first place, the examination is for the sake of the 
middle term, and one must take something the same, not something 
different. (44b38-45al) 
The linchpin, then, in Aristotle's notion of formal deducibility, a concept inde- 
pendent of an intended interpretation, albeit anticipating one for Aristotle, is his 
notion of the middle term. There is no syllogism of one thing about another with- 
out taking a term in common, the sine qua non of syllogistic inference. In fact, 
as we have seen (w 
positioning the middle term is a syntactic formation rule 
of syllogistic argumentation. A careful reading of Prior Analytics and Posterior 
Analytics reveals Aristotle's preoccupation with the middle term in the deduction 
process. 
Finally, in Posterior Analytics A19-23, where he argues that not everything is 
demonstrable and against reasoning in a circle (cf. Po. An. A3, B12 and Pr. An. 
B5-7, B16), Aristotle shows that a deduction cannot contain an infinite chain of 
reasoning. This position is most strongly argued in Posterior A nalytics A22. 
Hence if it were possible for this to go on ad infinitum, it would be pos- 
sible for there to be infinitely many middle terms between two terms. 
But this is impossible if the predicates come to a stop in the upward 
and the downward directions. And that they do come to a stop we 
have proved generally earlier and analytically just now. (84a37-84b2) 
There Aristotle shows that "one cannot survey infinitely many items in thought" 
(83b6-7); "there must therefore be some term of which something is predicated 
primitively, and something else of this" (83b28-29). Again, if demonstration is 
possible, the predicates in between must be finite (83b38-84a6). 
Thus, we see that Aristotle's notion of formal deducibility corresponds exactly 
with that of a modern logician, point for point. We can now restate a notion of 
formal deducibility, this time more tailored to Aristotle's system. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
227 
A given categorical sentence c is formally deducible from a given set of 
categorical sentences P when there exists a finite sequence of categorical 
sentences that ends with c and begins with P such that each categorical 
sentence in the sequence from P is either a member of P or a categorical 
sentence generated from earlier sentences solely by means of stipulated 
deduction rules such that the terms in c are linked through a series of 
common terms from P. 
Aristotle at no one place expressed this notion in just this manner, but his inten- 
tionally subscribing to such a notion, even making statements close to this effect, 
is unmistakable. 
5.2 
Two methods of deduction in Aristotle's system 
Aristotle identified and used two methods of deduction in Prior Analytics: (1) 
direct, or probative, deduction and (2) indirect, or reductio (leading to an absurdity 
or per impossibile), deduction. He makes this explicit in A23. 
Now, every demonstration, and every deduction [n~a~v hn6~~ 
xc~L 
nd,;zc~ ou),Xoy~opb~], must prove [&~dyxr} ... ~x~O~c~] something either 
to belong or not to belong, and this either universally or partially, and 
in addition either probatively [~txztx~5;] or from an assumption [~ 
6noO~o~0;] (for (deduction) through an absurdity [~h zoo h~u~6zou] 
is a part of (deduction} from an assumption). (40b23-26) 
A direct proof begins a deduction without making an assumption, and an indi- 
rect proof begins by assuming the contradictory opposite of the conclusion as an 
additional premiss and then it deduces a contradiction. Aristotle understood this 
in exactly the same way as a modern logician, indeed, himself having formulated 
them for us in ancient times. Here follow two passages from Prior Analytics that 
make this clear, the first is from A23. 
For all those which come to a conclusion through an absurdity deduce 
the falsehood, but prove the original thing from an assumption when 
something absurd results when its contradiction is supposed [~,z~ 
u 
ol ~t~ zoo ~uv~zou ~sp~t~o~z~ z6 p~ @0~o~ ouXXoy~o~z~t, z6 
&vztq)hoec0; zeO#torl;], (proving,) for example, that the diagonal is in- 
commensurable because if it is put as commensurable, then odd num- 
bers become equal to even ones. It deduces [ouk),oy[~ez~] that odd 
numbers become equal to even ones, then, but it proves [34tx~uotv] 
the diagonal to be incommensurable from an assumption since a false- 
hood results by means of its contradiction [4n~[ @O~o; oubt~c~N~t ~h 
z~ &vz[qx~o~v]. For this is what deducing [oukkou 
through an 
absurdity was: proving something impossible by means of the initial 

228 
George Boger 
assumption [xb g~s 
~ &~uv~Tov ~t& x~tv ~ &pXfN 6xd0~atv]. Conse- 
quently, since a probative deduction of the falsehood comes about [~5ax' 
~[ 
~o5 @6~ou~ y[v~t uukkoyto~b~ ~stx~txb~] in those cases which 
lead away to an absurdity (while the original thing is proved [~xvu~] 
from an assumption) ... (41a23-34; cf. Po.An. Al1: 77a22-25, A26: 
87a6-12) 
The second is from Prior Analytics BI~. 
A demonstration (leading} into an absurdity differs from a probative 
demonstration in that it puts as a premiss what it wants to reject by 
leading away into an agreed falsehood, while a probative demonstration 
begins from agreed positions. More precisely, both demonstrations take 
two agreed premisses, but one takes the premisses that the deduction [b 
au),Xoyto~6~] is from, while the other takes one of these premisses and, 
as the other premiss, the contradictory of the conclusion [xf?v ~w[q)~otv 
xo5 ou~x~p~ag~xo~]. Also, in the former case it is not necessary for the 
conclusions to be familiar or to believe in advance that it is so or not, 
while in the latter case it is necessary to believe in advance that it is 
not so. It makes no difference whether the conclusion is an affirmation 
or a denial [q)~otv ~ &xdq)~atv], but rather it is similar concerning both 
kinds of conclusion. (62b29-38) i~ 
Aristotle, in fact, treated reductio rather fully in Prior Analytics Bl1-13, treating 
indirect proof in each of the three figures consecutively. 
We illustrate each of the two kinds of deduction here by providing an instance 
of Aristotle's own use of each kind in the metalanguage of Prior Analytics. First, 
in connection with the method of direct deduction, there is Aristotle's text for 
Camestres in the second figure. 
Next, if M belongs to every N but to no X, then neither will N belong 
to any X. For if M belongs to no X, neither does X belong to any M; 
but M belonged to every N; therefore, X will belong to no N (for the 
first figure has again come about). And since the privative converts, 
neither will N belong to any X, so that there will be the same syllogism. 
(It is also possible to prove these results by leading to an impossibility.) 
(27a9-15) 
We provide Aristotle's text for Camestres, organized just as with Aristotle and 
according to a modern sequencing on the left, and on the right we provide our 
modern notation that exactly reproduces his meaning (Table 39). 
101 Aristotle continues as follows: "Everything concluded probatively can also be proved through 
an absurdity, and whatever is proved through an absurdity concluded probatively, through the 
same terms" (62b38-41). He concludes Pr. An. BI~ with this statement: "it is clear, then, that 
every problem can be proved in both ways, through an absurdity as well as probatively, and that 
it is not possible for one of the ways to be separated off" (63b18-21). 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
229 
Table 39. 
An instance of direct deduction 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. 
M belongs to every N 
2. 
M belongs to no X 
? 
neither will N belong to any X 
3. 
M belongs to no X 
4. 
neither does X belong to any M 
5. 
M belonged to every N 
6. 
X will belong to no N 
7. 
neither will N belong to any X 
1. 
MaN 
2. 
MeX 
? 
NeX 
3. 
MeX 
4. 
XeM 
5. 
MaN 
6. 
XeN 
7. 
NeX 
2 
repetition 
2 
e-conversion 
1 
repetition 
4,5 
Celarent 
6 
3 e-conversion 
Next, we have Aristotle's text for Baroco in the second figure, followed, again, 
by a table that organizes this text according to his sequencing on the left and on 
the right by our modern notation that reproduces his meaning (Table 40). 
Next, if M belongs to every N but does not belong to some X, it is 
necessary for N not to belong to some X. (For if it belongs to every 
X and M is also predicated of every N, then it is necessary for M to 
belong to every X; but it was assumed not to belong to some.) And if 
M belongs to every N but not to every X, then there will be a deduction 
that N does not belong to every X. (The demonstration is the same.) 
(27a36-27b3) 
Table 40. 
An instance of indirect deduction 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. 
M belongs to every N 
2. 
M does not belong to some X 
? 
N not to belong to some X 
3. 
N belongs to every X 
4. 
M is also predicated of every N 
5. 
M to belong to every X 
6. 
M not to belong to every X 
7. 
N does not belong to every X 
1. 
MaN 
2. 
MoX 
? 
NoX 
3. 
NaX 
4. 
MaN 
1 
5. 
MaN 
4,3 
6. 
MoX & 2,5 
MaX 
7. 
NoX 
3-6 
assume 
repetition 
Barbara 
conjunction & 
contradiction 
reductio 

230 
George Boger 
5.3 
Aristotle's notion of logical consequence 
Aristotle defines "necessary" in Metaphysics, where he defines many philosophical 
concepts, precisely as he uses the concept in Prior Analytics in relation to de- 
ciding the concludence and inconcludence of premiss-pair patterns. Our grasping 
his notion of logical consequence 
following from necessity, or xb ~ &v~',tx'q~ 
Gupt~d:tv~tv 
in Prior A nalytics can be informed by what he writes in Meta- 
physics 5.5" "that which is necessary is that having no other relationship possible 
[~-ct zb ~ ~vB~xdpt~vov ~k),~ ~X~tv &vo~yx~tdv qooqa~v o5zc0r ~Z~tv]" (1015a33-35). 
In Metaphysics ~.5 he writes much the same" "for it is not possible for what is 
necessary to be one way and another way, and so if something is of necessity, it 
cannot be so and not so [xb y&p &v~yxc~ov oO ~v~Xs~t ~kk~ x~[ ~Xka)~ ~Xstv, 
~5(~z' ~t ~ ~ztv ~ &v~yx~q, o0 X ~@t oSzco ~ x~[ o6 X o~J~co~" (1010b28-30). And, 
thus, in respect of sentences, "opposed statements cannot [both] be true [at the 
same time] [xb ~a/? ~v~t &kh0~; ~{a~ x~ &vxtxsqa~vc~; q)~s~;]" (1011b13-14). 
Aristotle also affirms in this connection a principle of consistency in Prior An- 
alytics A32" "for all that is true must in all ways be in agreement with itself [$~s 
y&p n~v xb &krlO~ ~Ozb ~ux~ 6~4okoyo@~vov ~twt n~vx~]" (47a8-9). A statement 
of this principle concludes On Interpretation in the following way: 
It is evident also that it is not possible either for a true opinion or a true 
contradictory to be contrary to another true opinion. For contraries 
relate to their opposites, and concerning these it is possible to assert 
truly of the same thing, but it is not possible that contraries hold of 
the same thing [at the same time]. (24b6-9) 
And Aristotle expressed this principle somewhat concisely in On Interpretation 
ld a few passages before the one just cited: "a true opinion is never contrary to 
another true opinion [oO~noz~ ~ &XnO~q (~6~u) &k~}O~ ~vuvz(~]" (23b37-38). 
Returning to his notion of necessity, we find that Aristotle also makes an explicit 
reference to demonstration at Metaphysics 5.5, in connection with the passage cited 
above, that conforms well with his conception of consistency: 
Demonstration is of necessary things [~z~ ~ &x6~r 
z~v &v~yxc~c0v], 
because, if there is a demonstration proper, it is not possible for there 
to be any other relations [oOx /:v(3~X~ZO~. 51),Xc0~ ~X~v]; the reason for 
this is the premisses [zo0xou B' 51~ x& xp~5x~], for if there is a syllogism 
it is [logically] impossible for there to be another relationship among 
them [~ &BOv~zov ~XXc0~ ~X~V ~ cSv 6 auXXoy~{46~]. (1015b6-9) 1~ 
Thus, a premiss-pair that results in a syllogism is such that no other result is 
possible. 1~ Aristotle had established in Prior Analytics A~-6 that for a syllogism 
l~ 
Po. An. A6 on demonstration of that which is necessary. Consider that for Aristotle 
scientific knowledge, apodeiktikg epist~mg, is that which cannot be otherwise. 
Z~ 
holds notwithstanding that a weakened a or e sentence, i.e., an i or o sentence, is a 
different sentence; this is a trivial truth for Aristotle. 'To be otherwise' refers to contrariety and 
contradiction. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
231 
to arise it is necessary and sufficient that the terms be related as he stated in 
a number of syntax rules (w 
Likewise, for there not to be a syllogism, it is 
necessary and sufficient that terms be related in the other ways he covered there 
(w 
As we have seen, Aristotle established a set of formal rules, relating to 
syllogistic argumentation, for deciding logical consequence. 
Another indication of Aristotle's sophistication in respect of logical consequence 
concerns his discussion of the most certain principle of all, the law of non-contra- 
diction, one statement of which is expressed in Metaphysics ~.3:1005b19-20 (~.3-8; 
cf. 11.5-6). He then writes that "someone who denies [this principle] would at the 
same time hold contrary opinions. Hence, everyone who performs a demonstration 
establishes it on this ultimate principle" (1005b30-33; cf. 1005b22-34). On at least 
two occasions Aristotle refers to someone not subscribing to this principle as being 
"no better than a plant" because nothing meaningful can be asserted and rational 
discourse (logos) is destroyed (100665-11, 1008b7-9). 
It is evident, 
moreover, 
from his treatment 
of the principle of non- 
contradiction that Aristotle understands every sentence to be a logical consequence 
of a contradiction. The following passage from Metaphysics ~.~ illustrates that 
his grasp of logical consequence in this connection is much the same as that of 
modern logicians. 
If all contradictories [&wt~o~tg] were true at the same time of the same 
thing, it is evident that everything would be one. For the same thing 
would be a trireme, a wall, and a man, if it is possible either to affirm 
or to deny something of everything [~t x~x~ ~vxdg xt ~ xax~f~oat 
~o~floc~t ~X~X~t] ... For if someone thinks that a man is not a 
trireme, then clearly he is not a trireme. But if the contradictory is 
[just as] true, then he is also a trireme .... 
[Such persons are really 
describing non-being] ... 
But [then] one must assert an affirmation 
and a denial about every single thing. For it is absurd that the denial 
holds of itself and yet excludes other denials that do not belong to it. 
I mean, for example, that if it were true to say that a man is not a 
man, it is evident also that he is a trireme and not a trireme. Now, 
on the one hand, if the affirmation [x~x~(~otg] is admitted, it is also 
necessary that the denial [&~6~otg] be admitted; on the other hand, 
if the affirmation does not belong, then the denial will belong more 
than the denial of itself. Now, if this denial holds, then also the denial 
of the trireme will belong. And if this, also the affirmation .... 
[If 
this situation holds then again] any assertion whatever may be denied 
and any denial whatever may be asserted [~ ~ r~p[ rc~oo~q, rc~),,t'v, ~q:ot 
(lO07b18-1008a13) 
At Metaphysics ~.5 Aristotle reiterates his thinking: "for if all opinions and ap- 
pearances are true, it is necessary that every one is true and false at the same 
time ... and so it is necessary that the same thing must both be and not be [&oz' 

232 
George Boger 
&~yxq ~b ~6~b r 
~k x~[ ~ r 
And if this is so, every opinion must be 
true" (1009a7-13). That every sentence follows from a contradiction is a truth for 
Aristotle. 1~ 
In addition to these discussions in Metaphysics there is a passage in Prior 
Analytics B2 where Aristotle treats "following necessarily" in much the way that 
modern logicians tend to deny he could if he had not defined "logical consequence". 
It is worthwhile citing this passage in its entirety, since he states his notion of 
logical consequence most clearly. He writes: 
First, then, it is clear from the following that it is not possible to deduce 
[ouk),,oy[o0~oOcxt] a falsehood from truths. For if it is necessary for B to 
be when A is, then when B is not it is necessary for A not to be. Thus, 
if A is true, then it is necessary for B to be true, or else it will result 
that the same thing both is and is not at the same time [Gup~iloax~t 
9 b ~6xb 5~}J~ ~tvm x~ x~[ 06 ~tv~t]; but this is absurd. (53b11-16) 
This passage continues: 
But let it not be believed, because A is set out as a single term, that it is 
possible for something to result of necessity [~ &vdyxT N xt au}l~&tv~v] 
when a single thing is, for that cannot happen: for what results of ne- 
cessity is a conclusion [xb ~a~v y&p ou{a~3~tvov ~ &vdyxq~ xb ou~dpc~o~d 
~ezt], and the fewest through which this comes about are three terms 
and two intervals or premisses. (53b16-20) 
Aristotle explains his use of schematic letters here in the continuation of this 
passage, where he addresses logical consequence in connection with syllogistic rea- 
soning by means of a syllogistic discourse. But Aristotle here immediately provides 
a terse metalogical discourse on syllogistic logical consequence, but using proposi- 
tional logic. He treats a syllogism as fitting a single conditional sentence pattern. 
First, he conjoins the two sentences in the premiss-set of a syllogism and takes 
them as a single sentence pattern, A, which is itself the antecedent of a con- 
ditional sentence whose consequent is the conclusion pattern, B, of a syllogism: 
thus, "if A then B". He then affirms that if this is the case, then so must "if not-B 
then not-A" be the case, otherwise something true would imply something false, 
and this is absurd. Aristotle affirms the consistency of the following three sentence 
patterns (Table 41). 
Second, he affirms that "if A is true, then it is necessary for B to be true, or 
else it will result that the same thing both is and is not at the same time; but 
this is absurd". We take the "or else" to refer to taking "if A is [the case] then B 
is not [the case]", or "A D -B". Aristotle's test of the consistency of the original 
three sentence patterns is to substitute "A D -B" for "A D B" in the original set 
and then to deduce a contradiction. We can represent his thinking with a familiar 
notation of propositional logic as follows (Table 42). 
l~ 
G. Priest does not take Aristotle in Meta. $ as treating 'explosion'; see, e.g., G. 
Priest 1998 & 2000. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
233 
Table 41. 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. 
If A is [the case], then B is [the case] 
2. 
A is [the case] 
3. 
If B is not [the case], then A is not [the case] 
1. 
ADB 
2. 
A 
3. 
-B D-A 
Table 42. 
Original set 
of sentences 
1. 
If A is [the case], 
then B is [the 
case] 
2. 
If B is not [the 
. 
Modern 
notation 
1. ADB 
Given 
2.-B D-A Given 
Test of 
consistency 
1. A D-B Substitute 
2.-BD-A Given 
case] then A is 
not [the case]. 
A is [the case]. 
3. A 
Given 
3. A 
Given 
4. -B 
1,3 detachment 
5.-A 
2,4 detachment 
6. A & -A 3,5 conjunction, 
contradiction 
This seems to capture Aristotle's thinking, which is regrettably terse. He states 
that is impossible for a set of true sentences to imply a false sentence without 
contradiction. His method is not that of providing a model of model sets, but one 
similar to the method of reductio proof. He deduces a contradiction from a set 
of sentence patterns, one of which has been substituted for one in the original set 
whose consistency is to be demonstrated. The substituted sentence pattern is the 
contradictory or contrary of the original sentence pattern, in this case, where 'A 
is the case', or 'is true'. Thus, if A is true, then for A to imply B, B must also be 
true; thus, A implying not-B cannot be the case, or is false. 
Aristotle continues the quotation cited above from Prior Analytics B2, and 
he now represents the same notion of logical consequence, but this time with 
syllogistic expressions. He writes: 
But let it not be believed, because A is set out as a single term, that it 
is possible for something to result of necessity when a single thing is, 
for that cannot happen: for what results of necessity is a conclusion, 
and the fewest through which this comes about are three terms and two 
intervals or premisses. If it is true, then, that A belongs to everything 
to which B belongs, and B to what C belongs, then it is necessary for 
A to belong <to what C belongs to>, and this cannot be false (for the 
same thing would belong and not belong at the same time). Therefore, 

234 
George Boger 
A is put as if a single thing, the two premisses being taken together. 
And similarly also in the case of privative deductions. 
For it is not 
possible to prove a falsehood from truths [05 y&p ~(~tv ~ &X~0~Sv ~t~c~ 
~5~o~]. (53516-25) 
This, in fact, is a treatment of Barbara to illustrate the truth thut true sentences 
can not imply a false sentence, and, thus, it proves the logical impossibility of an 
invalid argument fitting this teleios sullogismos pattern. We can illustrate rather 
exactly his thinking, although tersely expressed in this passage, using his schematic 
letters, his method of deduction (from Pr. An. A5-6), and interpolating the steps 
in his deduction, to set it out in a familiar manner (Table 43). 
Table 43. 
Aristotle's test of consistency 
Aristotle's text 
Modern notation 
1. 
1. AaB 
. 
[3-s] 
A belongs to every- 
thin~ to which B 
belongs 
B to [everything to 
which] what C be- 
longs 
A 
to 
belong 
<to 
what C belongs to> 
this cannot be false 
(for the same thing 
would belong and 
not belong at the 
same time) 
2. BaC 
[1 & 2- 
A (53b11-16)] 
? AaC 
[B (53b11-16)] 
3. AoC 
Assume 
4. AaB 
5. AoC 
6. BoC 
7. BaC &BoC 2,6 conj, contradiction 
8. AaC 
3-7 reductio 
1 repetition 
3 repetition 
4,5 Baroco 
It is evident that Aristotle works with a notion of logical consequence much like 
Tarski's, with which modern logicians are familiar, namely- 
A given sentence c is a logical consequence of a given set of sentences 
P when every true interpretation of P is a true interpretation of c. 1~ 
We can express Aristotle's thinking on this matter as follows: 
l~ 
writes in "On the concept of logical consequence" (Corcoran 1990 417)" "The sen- 
tence X follows logically from the sentences of the class K if and only if every model of the class 
K is also a model of the sentence X". 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
235 
A given categorical sentence c follows necessarily from a given set of 
categorical sentences P when every set of term substitutions 1~ that 
makes each sentence in P true makes the sentence in c true. 
Now, again, Aristotle does not compose such a sentence, yet it is clear that he 
formulates other statements that make his understanding clear, especially, for 
example, those relating to proving inconcludence. 
We can now be confident that Aristotle's notion of "following necessarily" ex- 
presses his notion of "logical consequence", and that he established that it is log- 
ically impossible for true sentences to imply a false sentence. Aristotle frequently 
writes that it is impossible to deduce a falsehood from truths; this is the theme 
of Prior Analytics B2-~. There he shows that any combination of truth-values for 
premisses and conclusion can result in a valid argument except in the case of an 
argument with all true premisses and a false conclusion. In Prior Analytics B2 he 
explicitly writes: 
Now, it is possible for circumstances to be such that the premisses by 
means of which the syllogism comes about are true, or that they are 
false, or that one premiss is true and the other false. The conclusion, 
however, is either true or false of necessity. It is not possible, then, 
to deduce [(~k)~ou 
a falsehood from true premisses, but it is 
possible to deduce a truth from false ones (except that it is not a 
deduction of the 'why' but of the 'that', for a deduction [o~kkoytopb~] 
of the 'why' is not possible from false premisses). (53b4-10) 
This translates into affirming that no argument is valid that has true premiss 
sentences and a false conclusion sentence. Aristotle then follows this passage to 
provide his reasoning for this condition, which we have treated just above (Pr. 
An. B2: 53b11-25). 
SUMMARY OF ARISTOTLE'S ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN PRIOR 
ANAL Y TICS 
By the end of Prior Analytics A6 Aristotle had systematically worked through all 
possible patterns of two categorical sentences that could serve in the role of pre- 
misses to discover "how every syllogism comes about". He established that among 
these possible patterns there are 14 that result, in their application to an object 
language, in something following necessarily, that is, that result in syllogisms. To 
accomplish this project, Aristotle invented a formal language to devise a rudimen- 
tary model of his logic in Prior Analytic. In this way he was able to describe a 
deduction system and demonstrate certain logical relationships among syllogistic 
rules, not the least of which accomplishment was establishing the independence 
1~ 
substitution and reinterpretation are distinct logical concepts, their application 
amounts to the same thing. 

236 
George Boger 
of a small set of deduction rules (A 7). The formal language used in Prior A n- 
alytics built upon the foundation of his linguistic studies in Categories and On 
Interpretation. Strictly speaking, Aristotle's formal language does not consist in 
sentences, as 'sentence' is defined in On Interpretation and as 'protasis' is used in 
Prior Analytics. Rather, his formal language consists in relatively uninterpreted 
sentence patterns. By substituting non-logical constants- a predicate term and a 
subject term -- for schematic letters, Aristotle could produce any number of object 
language sentences. We could easily call such sentences interpretations without 
distortion, as a modern logician understands this notion. This, however, would 
misrepresent Aristotle's logic. Nevertheless, this closeness to modern practice is 
not a superficial resemblance, but an indication of Aristotle's genius and original- 
ity. Here we summarize some of his accomplishments and insights into logic with a 
synopsis of his model (w 
and with a summary of four proof-theoretic processes 
he employed in Prior Analytics (w 
6.1 
Synopsis of Aristotle's model 
Aristotle invented his formal language with an aim to model scientific discourse. 
Such discourse, then, might be taken as its 'intended interpretation'. In any case, 
using a modern mathematical template, we can re-present Aristotle's own model 
in the following way (Table 44). 
6.2 
Four proof-theoretic processes in Prior Analytics 
Aristotle did not describe deductions in Prior Analytics A4-6 but showed how ev- 
ery syllogism comes about. He also explained how syllogisms do not come about 
and he refined his system. He described a natural deduction system of an underly- 
ing logic in ways suggestive of modern methods, and he proved certain properties 
of this deduction system. His treatment of his logic is thoroughly metalogical. 
Here we briefly summarize four proof-theoretic processes used in Prior Analytics. 
All four processes have their counterparts in one or another object language. 
Deciding concludence: the method of completion 
Completion (telei6sis, teleiousthai) is a proof-theoretic, deductive process that 
establishes knowledge that a given argument pattern with places for two premisses 
having places for three different terms is panvalid by using the patterns of the 
teleioi sullogismoi as deduction rules. 
Completion is an epistemic process. In 
Prior Analytics A~-6 Aristotle established the preeminence of the patterns of 
the teleioi sullogismoi among the panvalid patterns or, conversely, he implicitly 
established that the patterns of the ateleis sullogismoi are redundant rules in 
his deduction system. The process of completion per se does not establish that 
any rule of deduction is redundant. Nor does completion involve transforming a 
given argument pattern into another argument pattern, since in the process of 
deduction a given argument pattern is not itself transformed but shown to be 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
237 
panvalid through a chain of reasoning cogent in context, which chain of reasoning 
is generated by means of specified deduction rules. Aristotle's metalogical theorem 
concerning completion is that "all the ateleis sullogismoi are completed by means 
of the first figure syllogisms using probative and reductio proofs" (A 7: 29a30- 
33). Aristotle reserved using the verb 'teleiousthai' specifically in relation to a 
process by which a valid argument, whose validity is not evident, is made evident 
by performing a deduction during which a teleios sullogismos, one whose validity 
is obviously evident, is generated; this signals cogency in the deduction process 
from premisses to conclusion. 
Deciding inconcludence: the method of contrasted instances 
The method of contrasted instances used in Prior Analytics A~-6 is the comple- 
ment of the process of completion. The purpose of this method is to establish which 
elementary argument patterns are not panvalid. This proof-theoretic method is 
different from the method of counterargument, since (1) it treats patterns of pre- 
misses and argument patterns and not arguments and, thus, it establishes panin- 
validity and not invalidity, and (2) it does not produce an argument in the same 
form as a given argument but with true premisses and a false conclusion. Rather, 
this method constructs two arguments, each of whose premisses are true sentences 
fitting the same premiss-pair pattern and whose conclusions also are true sen- 
tences, but in the one argument the conclusion is an a sentence, in the other an 
e sentence. This establishes that a given premiss pair pattern is inconcludent and 
that consequently its corresponding four argument patterns are paninvalid. No 
syllogism is possible in such a case. It is not possible to construct such arguments 
with a concludent premiss pair pattern: in that case every similar construction 
that produces true sentences as premisses results in at least one false sentence 
among the conclusions. Thus, any two sentences of three terms fitting a given 
inconcludent premiss-pair pattern are shown never to result together in a valid at- 
gument. In this way Aristotle was able to eliminate would-be syllogistic deduction 
rules. 

238 
George Boger 
Table 44. 
An ancient model of an underlying logic 
Aristotle's own model 
Aristotle's model 
LANGUAGE 
Vocabulary 
1. 
Four fully interpreted logical 
constants 
belongs to every 
belongs to no 
belongs to some 
belongs not to every 
2. 
n schematic (upper case) let- 
ters intended to hold places for 
non-logical constants (terms) 
A, B, C; M, N, X; P, R, 
S .  
o 
9 
Grammar 
1. 
Sentences are the elements of 
a language. A categorical sen- 
tence is formed by concatenat- 
ing a non-logical constant with 
a logical constant with a differ- 
ent non-logical constant. 
A belongs to every B. 
A belongs to no B. 
A belongs to some B 
A belongs not to every B. 
2. 
Relationships of opposite sen- 
tences 
Contradictories 
A belongs to every B 
to 
A belongs not to every B. 
A belongs to no B 
to 
A 
belongs to some B 
Contraries 
A belongs to every B 
to 
A belongs to no B. 
expressed by a 
modern notation 
LANGUAGE 
Vocabulary 
1. 
Logical constants 
. 
a 
e 
i 
o 
n schematic letters 
A, B, C... 
Grammar 
1. 
Categorical 
patterns 
sentence 
. 
AaB 
AeB 
AiB 
AoB 
Sentential relationships 
Contradictories 
AaB -- to 
AoB 
AeB 
to 
AiB 
Contraries 
AaB 
to 
AeB 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
239 
3. 
Premiss formation 
One-premiss argument 
Take any one of the four cate- 
gorical sentences 
AB 
Two-premiss argument 
Take any two of the four cat- 
egorical sentences with three 
different terms, one in common 
First figure:PMS 
1. PM 
2. MS 
Second figure:MPS 
1. MP 
2. MS 
Third figure: PSM 
1. PM 
2. SM 
4. 
P-c argument formation 
One-premiss (conversion) ar- 
gument 
1. AB 
?. BA 
Two-premiss argument 
First figure:PMS 
1. PM 
2. MS 
?. PS 
Second figure:MPS 
1. MP 
2. MS 
?. PS 
Third figure: PSM 
1. PM 
2. SM 
?. PS 
. 
. 
Premiss formation 
One-premiss argument 
AxB 
Two-premiss argument 
First figure:PMS 
1. PxM 
2. MyS 
Second figure:MPS 
1. MxP 
2. MyS 
Third figure: PSM 
1. PxM 
2. SyM 
P-c argument formation 
One-premiss argument 
1. AzB 
?. ByA 
Two-premiss argument 
First figure:PMS 
1. PxM 
2. MyS 
?. PzS 
Second figure: MPS 
1. MxP 
2. MyS 
?. PzS 
Third figure: PSM 
1. PxM 
2. SyM 
?. PzS 

240 
George Boger 
DEDUCTION 
SYSTEM 
1. 
Deduction rules 
One-premiss conversion rules 
If A belongs to every B, then 
B belongs to some A. 
If A belongs to some B, then 
B belongs to some A. 
If A belongs to no B, then B 
belongs to no A. 
Two-premiss syllogism rules 
(reduced system) 
If A belongs to every B and 
B belongs to every C, then A 
belongs to every C. 
If A belongs to no B and B be- 
longs to every C, then A be- 
longs to no C. 
. 
Types of deduction 
Direct deduction 
[See section 5.2] 
Indirect deduction 
[See Section 5.2] 
DEDUCTION 
SYSTEM 
1. 
Deduction rules 
One-premiss rules 
1. AaB 1. AiB 1. AeB 
.'. BiA .'. BiA .'. BeA 
Two-premiss rules 
1. AaB 1. AeB 
2. BaC 2. BaC 
.'. AaC .'. AeC 
Types of deduction 
Direct deduction 
P 
Step 1 
step n- 1 
step n = c 
Indirect deduction 
P 
Step 1: contra of c 
step n- 1 : X[conj & contr 
step n = c 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
241 
SEMANTICS 
1. 
Meanings of sentences 
AaB: 
universal 
attributive: 
Every B has property A 
AeB: universal privative: No B 
has property A. 
A/B: partial attributive: Some 
B has property A 
AoB: partial privative: Some B 
does not have property A. 
2. 
Truth-values of sentences 
. 
AaB is true iff every B has 
property A. 
AeB is true iff no B has prop- 
erty A. 
Aib is true iff some B has prop- 
erty A. 
AoB is true iff some B does not 
have property A. 
Logical Consequence 
It is impossible that a false sen- 
tence follows necessarily from 
true sentences. 
SEMANTICS 
1. 
Meanings of sentences 
[Same] 
Truth-values of sentences 
[Same] 
. 
Logical consequence 
[Same] 
Transforming patterns: analysis 
Analysis (analusis, analuein) is a proof-theoretic process that transforms one syl- 
logistic pattern in any one figure into another syllogistic pattern of another figure 
only if both patterns 'prove' the same probl~ma. Analyses are performed through 
conversion and premiss transposition. 
Analysis is not directly concerned with 
making validity or panvalidity evident, not with a deduction process, nor with es- 
tablishing whether a given syllogistic pattern is a redundant rule. Rather, Aristotle 
aimed to promote his students' facility with reasoning syllogistically to establish 
(zb xc~z~x~u~tv) and to refute (zb &w(Jxsu~tv) arguments by studying the 
logical relationships among their patterns, l~ 
This is analogous to how modern 
logicians have studied the relationships among the rules of propositional logic. 
Aristotle's theorem concerning analysis is that 'the syllogisms in the different fig- 
ures that prove the same probl~ma are analyzable into each' (see A45: 50b5-7). 
l~ 
Pr. An. A26-28 and summary at A30: 46a3-10. For example, Aristotle writes (A26): 
"... a universal positive probl~ma is most difficult to establish [162215 
but easiest to 
refute [&w~x~u~(~c(~]" (43al-2). Cf. Aristotle's projects in writing SR and Top. 

242 
George Boger 
7 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
We have represented Aristotle as having modelled his syllogistic as an underlying 
logic according to the practice of a modern mathematical logician. In Prior An- 
alytics he especially articulated the logical syntax of his syllogistic system while, 
nevertheless, always presupposing its applicability to various axiomatic sciences. 
Aristotle conceived of his system as a formal calculus, akin to mathematical cal- 
culi, since his aim was to establish a reliable deduction instrument for epist~m~ 
apodeiktik& Some modern logicians believe that, since Aristotle did not specif- 
ically refer to alternative interpretations or perform operations that suggest his 
recognizing this, he must have taken his ideal language to be fully interpreted. In 
this connection, then, they believe that Aristotle could not have conceived of a 
language apart from its intended interpretation, that Aristotle did not distinguish 
logical syntax from semantics. However, when we consider Aristotle's accomplish- 
meats in Prior Analytics along with his other accomplishments in Categories, On 
Interpretation, and Metaphysics, this interpretation seems not to accord with his 
having invented a formal language. 
One way sufficient for determining whether or not a logician distinguishes logi- 
cal syntax from semantics is to ascertain whether a logician works with notions of 
interpretation and reinterpretation. In a reinterpretation one leaves the language 
fixed but changes its meaning. It is thought that Aristotle's having notions of 
interpretation and reinterpretation was precluded by his not having distinguished 
syntax and semantics in his logic. Perhaps, however, it is rather that his dis- 
tinguishing syntax and semantics is thought to have been precluded by his not 
having notions of interpretation and reinterpretation because he did not work 
with model-theoretic and set-theoretic notions. In this connection, then, we can 
recognize that another equally sufficient way for determining whether or not a logi- 
cian distinguishes logical syntax from semantics is to ascertain whether a logician 
works with a notion of substitution. In a substitution one changes the language, or 
the content words and phrases in a given language, while leaving their meanings 
and the logical form fixed. While we might agree that Aristotle did not have nor 
work with fully modern notions of interpretation and reinterpretation per se, he 
has nevertheless quite ably distinguished syntax and semantics as is evidenced by 
his inventing and using a formal language that contains only sentence patterns. 
And we have already witnessed an instance of Aristotle experimenting with rein- 
terpreting a word in much the same way as a modern logician. While substitution 
and reinterpretation are distinct logical concepts, their application amounts to the 
same thing. In this light, observing Aristotle's pervasive use of schematic letters 
and his common practice of substitution for establishing inconcludence, we rec- 
ognize his making a more determinate distinction between semantics and syntax 
than previous interpreters have allowed. By substituting terms for schematic let- 
ters, Aristotle was able to produce an unlimited number of sentences according 
to his definition in On Interpretation and his formal grammar in Prior A nalytics. 
This method of producing sentences from patterns surely amounts to 'giving an 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
243 
interpretation', while not itself, of course, strictly an interpretation. 
Moreover, 
there are much the same results in relation to recognizing the underlying struc- 
tures of natural languages and logical languages. 
Again, he might easily have 
construed these as interpretations of his formal language. Thus, we believe that 
there are sufficient textual grounds for imputing to Aristotle a belief not only in 
argument 'forms', but also, then, in distinguishing syntax and semantics, indeed, 
in a way familiar to A. Church, A. Tarski, and other modern logicians. While it is 
doubtful that Aristotle had a modern theory of language, and surely not himself 
a string-theorist, it is nevertheless evident that he recognized different patterns 
to underlie sentences involving, for example, ambiguity and equivocation. Indeed, 
identifying these forms or patterns and establishing their logical relationships were 
precisely the focus of his project in Prior Analytics A~-6, 7, and ~5. 
Aristotle's notion of substitution, then, was sufficiently strong for his distin- 
guishing logical syntax and semantics. 
In this connection he was also able to 
distinguish validity from deducibility sufficiently to note the completeness of his 
logic in Prior A nalytics A30. Consider the following passage: 
Consequently, if the facts concerning any subject have been grasped, 
we are already prepared to bring the demonstrations readily to light. 
For if nothing that truly belongs to the subjects has been left out of our 
collection of facts, then concerning every fact, if a demonstration for it 
exists, we will be able to find that demonstration and demonstrate it, 
while if it does not naturally have a demonstration, we will be able to 
make that evident. (46a22-27) 
This statement surely indicates that he believed his deduction system sufficiently 
strong to deduce every logical consequence of a given set of sentences. And always 
underpinning his thinking lay his taking such sentences to be the first principles of 
axiomatizable sciences and his aspiration that his deductive sciences would be uni- 
versally complete. In Prior Analytics Aristotle turned his attention toward objec- 
tifying the formal deduction apparatus used to establish scientific theorems. Since 
the process of deduction is topic neutral and formal, Aristotle was concerned with 
matters of syntax and deducibility: he treated these matters especially in Prior 
Analytics A. Since Aristotle was concerned with logical consequence and truth, he 
was occupied also with semantic matters: he treated these matters especially in 
Prior Analytics B among the other places we have examined. 
A CKN OWLED G EMENTS 
Some parts of this study were treated earlier in Boger [1998] and Boger [2001]. I 
wish especially to express my sincere gratitude to Canisius College for granting 
me a Sabbatical Leave for Fall 2000 that enabled me to accomplish this study. 
Professor John Corcoran of the University at Buffalo provided invaluable critical 
comments and encouragement. 

244 
George Boger 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Barnes, 1981] J. Barnes. Proof and the syllogism. In: E. Berti (ed.). Aristotle on Science: the 
"Posterior Analytics". pp. 17-59. Padua: Antenore, 1981. 
[Barnes, 1994] J. Barnes (tr). Aristotle: Posterior Analytics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994. 
[Bolton and Smith, 1994] R. Bolton and R. Smith, eds. Logic, dialectic, and science in Aristotle. 
Ancient Philosophy, 14, (special issue), 1994. 
[Bochenski, 1957] I. M. Bochenski. Ancient Formal Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publish- 
ing Co, 1957. 
[Bochenski, 1961] I.M. Bochenski. A History of Formal Logic. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1961. 
[Boger, 1993] G. Boger. The logical sense of x~p&5o~ov in Aristotle's Sophistical Refutations. 
Ancient Philosophy, 13, 55-78, 1993. 
[Boger, 1998] G. Boger. Completion, reduction, and analysis: three proof-theoretic processes in 
Aristotle's Prior Analytics. History and Philosophy of Logic, 19, 187-226, 1998. 
[Boger, 2001] G. Boger. The modernity of Aristotle's logic. In Aristotle and Contemporary Sci- 
ence, vol. 2. D. Sfendoni-Mentzou, ed. pp. 97-112. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc., 
2001. 
[Church, 1956] A. Church. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1956. 
[Copi, 1986] I. Copi. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986. 
[Corcoran, 1972] J. Corcoran. Completeness of an ancient logic. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 
37, 696-702, 1972. 
[Corcoran, 1974] J. Corcoran. Aristotle's natural deduction system. In: J. Corcoran (ed.). An- 
cient Logic and Its Modern Interpretations, pp. 85-132. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dor- 
drecht, 1974. 
[Corcoran, 1981] J. Corcoran. Deduction and reduction: two proof-theoretic processes in Prior 
Analytics I. Unpublished paper, 1981. 
[Corcoran, 1983] J. Corcoran. Deduction and reduction: two proof-theoretic processes in Prior 
Analytics L Journal of Symbolic Logic, 48,906, 1983. 
[Corcoran, 1989] J. Corcoran. Argumentations and logic. Argumentation, 3, 17-43, 1989. 
[Corcoran, 1992] J. Corcoran. Logical methodology: Aristotle and Tarski. Journal of Symbolic 
Logic, 57, 374, 1992. 
[Corcoran, 1993] J. Corcoran. Editor's introduction. In: M. R. Cohen &: E. Nagel, An Introduc- 
tion to Logic, pp. xvii-xlvi. Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, 1993. 
[Corcoran, 1994] J. Corcoran. The founding of logic. In: Bolton, R. & R. Smith, pp. 9-24, 1994. 
[Corcoran and Scanlan, 1982] J. Corcoran and M. Scanlan. The contemporary relevance of an- 
cient logical theory. The Philosophical Quarterly, 32, 76-86, 1982. 
[de Morgan, 1926] A. de Morgan. Formal Logic. The Open Court Company, London, 1926. 
[Dorion, 1995] L.-A. Dorion, (tr). Aristote: Les rdfutations sophistique. Presses de l'Universit6 
Laval, 1995. 
[Eaton, 1959] R. M. Eaton. General Logic. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1959. 
[Etchemendy, 1990] J. Etchemendy. The Concept of Logical Consequence. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1990 
[Einarson, 1936] B. Einarson. On certain mathematical terms in Aristotle's logic. American 
Journal of Philology, 57, 33-54, 151-172, 1936. 
[Forster, 1965] E. S. Forster. Aristotle: On Sophistical Refutations. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1965. 
[Frede, 1974] M. Frede. Stoic vs. Aristotelian syllogistic. In: M. Frede. 1987. Essays in Ancient 
Philosophy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 99-124. 
[Gasser, 1991] J. Gasser. Aristotle's logic for the modern reader. History and Philosophy of 
Logic, 12,235-240, 1991. 
[Heath, 1956] T. Heath. The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements (vol 1). Dover, New York, 
1956. 
[Hope, 1960] R. Hope, (tr.). Aristotle: Metaphysics. The University of Michigan Press, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 1960. 

Aristotle's Underlying Logic 
245 
[Jones, 1946] W. H. S. Jones. Philosophy and Medicine in Ancient Greece: With an Edition of 
Ilcpl d~Za~V; ~Vv~ 
Supplement to the Bulletin of the History of Medicine No. 8. Baltimore- 
The Johns Hopkins Press, 1946. 
[Joseph, 1906] H. W. B. Joseph. An Introduction to Logic. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1906. 
[Keynes, 1906] J. N. Keynes. Studies and Exercises in Formal Logic. Macmillan, London, 1906. 
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W. Kneale and M. Kneale. The Development of Logic. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford, 1962. 
[Lear, 1980] J. Lear. Aristotle and Logical Theory. Cambridge University Press, 1980. 
[Lee, 1935] H.D.P. Lee. Geometrical method and Aristotle's account of first principles. Classical 
Quarterly, 29, 113-124, 1935. 
[Lejewski, 1967] C. Lejewski. Ancient logic. In: P. Edwards (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Philos- 
ophy, vol 4, pp. 513-520. Macmillan, New York, 1967. 
[Lukasiewicz, 1958] J. Lukasiewicz. Aristotle's Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal 
Logic. Oxford University Press, 1958. 
[Mates, 1965] B. Mates. Elementary Logic. Oxford University Press, New York, 1965. 
[Mendelson, 1964] E. Mendelson. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. D. Van Nostrand Com- 
pany, Inc., Princeton, NJ. 1964. 
[Miller, 1938] J. W. Miller. The Structure of Aristotelian Logic. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner 
& Co., Ltd., London, 1938. 
[Minio-Paluello, 1992] L. Minio-Paluello. Aristotelis Categoriae et Liber de Interpretatione. Ox- 
ford University Press, 1992. 
[Mueller, 1981] I. Mueller. Philosophy of Mathematics and Deductive Structure in Euclid's El- 
ements. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1981. 
[Parry and Hacker, 1991] W. T. Parry and E. A. Hacker. Aristotelian Logic. State University of 
New York Press, Albany, 1991. 
[Patzig, 1968] G. Patzig. Aristotle's Theory of the Syllogism: A Logico-Philological Study of 
Book A of the Prior Analytics. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1968. 
[Pickard-Cambridge, 1928] W. A. Pickard-Cambridge, (tr). Sophistical Refutations. In J. Barnes 
(ed). 1984. The Collected Works of Aristotle, vol 1. pp. 278-314. Princeton University Press, 
1928. 
[Prior, 1955] A. N. Prior. Formal Logic. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1955. 
[Quine, 1970] W. V. O. Quine. Philosophy of Logic. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1970. 
[Quine, 1982] W. V. O. Quine. Methods of Logic. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 
1982. 
[Rose, 1968] L. Rose. Aristotle's Syllogistic. Charles C. Thomas, Springfiled, 1968. 
[Ross, 1949] W. D. Ross. Aristotle's Prior and Posterior Analytics. Oxford University Press, 
1949. 
[Ross, 1953] W. D. Ross. Aristotle's Metaphysics: A Revised Text with Introduction and Com- 
mentary (2 vols.). Oxford University Press, 1953. 
[Ross, 1989a] W. D. Ross. Aristotelis Analytica Priora et Posteriora. Oxford University Press, 
1989. 
[Ross, 1989b] W. D. Ross. Aristotelis Topica et Sophistici Elenchi. Oxford University Press, 
1989. 
[Smiley, 1973] T. Smiley. What is a syllogism?. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2,136-154, 1973. 
[Smiley, 1994] T. Smiley. Aristotle's completeness proof. In: Bolton, R. & R. Smith. 1994, pp. 
25-38. 
[Smith, 1982] R. Smith. What is Aristotelian ecthesis? History and Philosophy of Logic, 3, 
113-127, 1982. 
[Smith, 1984] R. Smith. Aristotle as proof theorist. Philosophia Naturalis, 21,590-597, 1984. 
[Smith, 1986] R. Smith. Immediate propositions and Aristotle's proof theory. Ancient Philoso- 
phy, 6, 47-68, 1986. 
[Smith, 1989] R. Smith. Aristotle: Prior Analytics. Hackett, Indianapolis, 1989. 
[Smith, 1991] R. Smith. Predication and deduction in Aristotle: aspirations to completeness. 
Topoi, 10, 43-52, 1991. 
[Smith, 1994] R. Smith. Dialectic and the syllogism. In: Bolton, R. & R. Smith. 1994, pp. 
133-151. 
[Striker, 1996] G. Striker. Perfection and reduction in Aristotle's Prior Analytics. In: Frede, M. 
& G. Striker (eds). 1996. Rationality in Greek Thought, pp. 203-219. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1996. 

246 
George Boger 
[Tarski, 1936] A. Tarski. (J. H. Woodger, tr 1956). On the concept of logical consequence. In 
A. Tarski (J. Corcoran, ed). 1983. Logic, Semantics, Metarnathemataics: Papers from 1923- 
1938, pp. 409-420. Hackett Publishing Co., Indianapolis, 1936. 
[Whately, 1873] R. Whately. Elements of Logic. Longmans, Green, Reader, & Dyer, London, 
1873. 

ARISTOTLE'S MODAL SYLLOGISMS 
Fred Johnson 
Considering Aristotle's discussion of syllogisms as a whole, the most striking point is 
that its focus is the modal syllogisms - This is the point on which the logical tradition 
has diverged most completely from Aristotle, as a rule giving no attention to modal 
syllogisms .... 
Paul Henle 
Aristotle's system of modal syllogisms, to be found in chapters 3 and 8-22 of the first 
book of the Prior Analytics, has been open to public inspection for over 2300 years. 
And yet perhaps no other piece of philosophical writing has had such consistently bad 
reviews. 
Storrs McCall 
... by raising the [completeness] problem, Aristotle earns the fight to be considered 
not only the father of logic, but also the (grand)father of meta- logic. Jonathan Lear 
Storrs McCall [ 1963] developed the first formal system, the L-X-M calculus, for which 
a decision procedure for assertion or rejection of formal sentences is given that has any 
chance of matching Aristotle's judgments about which of the n-premised (for n > 2) 
"apodeictic syllogisms" are valid or invalid. McCall's remarkable results were achieved 
by extending Jan Lukasiewicz's [1957] decision procedure for assertion or rejection of 
expressions in his formal system, LA, that is designed to capture Aristotle's judgments 
about which of the "assertoric (or plain 1) syllogisms" are valid or invalid. 
Lukasiewicz also considers using his four-valued modal system, the LM system, to 
present Aristotle's syllogistic but finds that the match is not very good. Peter Geach also 
proposes a system for dealing with the apodeictics. But, again, the match is not very 
good. After examining McCall's L-X-M system and work related to it we shall turn to his 
work on the "contingent syllogisms". His purely syntactic system, Q-L-X-M, has some 
unAristotelian features that lead us to develop a modified system, QLXM'. A semantics 
for QLXM' is developed that enables us to provide formal countermodels for a large 
percentage of the assertoric, apodeictic or contingent syllogisms that Aristotle explicitly 
considered to be invalid. 
1 
LUKASIEWICZ'S ASSERTORIC SYSTEM, LA 
For Lukasiewicz, Aristotle's syllogisms are "implicational" rather than "inferential". He 
says in [i957, p. 21]: 
l In [ 1964] P. T. Geach prefers 'plain' over 'assertoric'. 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
(~) 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

248 
Fred Johnson 
Syllogisms of the form: 
All B is A; 
all C is B; 
therefore 
all C is A 
are not Aristotelian. We do not meet them until Alexander. This transference 
of the Aristotelian syllogisms from the implicational form into the inferential 
is probably due to the Stoics. 
So, Lukasiewicz claims Aristotle construed the above syllogism, with traditional name 
'Barbara', as a conditional claim: 
If all B are A then if all C are B then all C are A. 
Robin Smith's [1989, p.4] translation of Barbara at Prior Analytics 25b37-40 seems to 
conform with Lukasiewicz's view: 
... if A is predicated of every B and B of every C, it is necessary for A to be 
predicated of every C .... 
But see [Corcoran, 1972] and [Smiley, 1973] for the view that Aristotle developed natural 
deduction systems rather than the axiomatic systems of the sort Lukasiewicz envisages. 
Lukasiewicz uses Polish notation, a parenthesis-free notation, to express the well- 
formed formulas (wffs) in his formal system, which we refer to as LA. We replace his 
notation with current "standard" notation when giving the basis for it. 2 So, for example, 
his Cpq ('If p then q') is our (p --+ q). His Np ('not p') and Kpq ('p and q') are our ~p 
and (p A q), respectively. 
Lukasiewicz's assertions and rejections are marked by ~ and 4, respectively. The sys- 
tem that is essentially Lukasiewicz's will be called LA. 
So, for example, ~ (Aba --+ (Acb --+ Aca)) says that Barbara is asserted in LA, which 
is true. -~ Aba says that Aba is rejected in LA, which is true. Assertions and rejections are 
relative to systems. We shall avoid using ~LA, say, and rely on the context to indicate 
that the assertion is relative to system LA. 
Primitive symbols 
term variables 
a, b, c,... (with or without subscripts) 
monadic operator 
-~ 
dyadic operator 
--+ 
quantifiers 
A, I 
parentheses 
(,) 
2The manner of presentation of this system is heavily influenced by Hughes and Cresswell's presentations 
of various systems in [1996]. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
249 
Formation rules 
FR1 If Qu is a quantifier and x and y are term variables then Quxy is a wff. 
FR2 If p and q are wffs then -~p and (p --+ q) are wffs. 
FR3 The only wffs are those in virtue of FR1 and FR2. 
So, for example, Aab, Iab and (Abe --+ -~Ibc) are wffs. Read them as 'All a are b', 
'Some a are b' and 'If all b are c then it is not true that some b are c', respectively. 
Definitions 
Def A 
Def ++ 
DefE 
Def O 
(p/x q) 
(p 
q) 
((p 
q) A (q 
p)) 
Exy =elf -,Ixy 
Oxy =dr ~Axy 
Eab and Oab may be read as 'No a are b' and 'Some a are not b', respectively. 
Lukasiewicz's LA contains theses that are "assertions" (indicated by ~-) as well as the- 
ses that are "rejections"(indicated by -~). We begin with the former, which are generated 
by assertion axioms and assertion rules. 
Assertion axioms 
A0 (PC). 
If p is a wff that is valid in virtue of the propositional calculus (PC) then 
~p (that is, p is asserted). (So, for example, ~- (Aab --+ Aab) since it is not 
possible that the antecedent Aab is true and the consequent Aab is false. 
And ~ ((Aab --+ Iab) -~ (-~Iab --+ -~Aab)) since it is not possible that all 
of these conditions are met: (Aab --+ Iab) is true, -~Iab is true and -~Aab 
is false.) 
A1 
~-Aaa 
A2 
~- Iaa 
A3 (Barbara) w (Abc -+ (Aab --+ Aac)) 
A4 (Datisi) 
~ (Abc -+ (Iba -+ Iac)) 
Transformation rules for assertions 
AR1 (Uniform substitution for assertions, US) From ~p infer ~-q (that is, from the as- 
sertion of p infer the assertion of q) provided q is obtained from p by uniformly 
substituting variables for variables. (So, for example, from ~ (Aab -+ Iba) we may 
infer ~- (Acb --+ Ibc) and e (Abb --+ Ibb), by rule US. But rule US does not permit us 
to infer that ~ (Aab ~ Iba) given that ~ (Abb -+ Ibb). 
AP,2 (Modus Ponens, MP) From ~- (p -+ q) and e p infer ~ q. 
AR3 (Definiens 
and 
definiendum 
interchange 
for 
assertions, 
DDI) 
From 
(... c~...) and o~ =aI fl infer ~- (.../3...), and vice versa. (So, for example, from 
(~Iab -~ --,Aab) infer ~- (Eab --+ Oab) by two uses of DDI, given definitions Def 
E and Def O. Typically a use of DDI will be indicated by simply referring to a def- 
inition that is used. So, from (~Iab --+ ~Aab) infer v (Eab --+ ~Aab) by Def E. It 
is to be understood that DDI is also used.) 

250 
Fred Johnson 
Given the assertion portion of the basis for LA, we shall give some "assertion deduc- 
tions" -- sequences of wffs such that each member of the sequence is either an assertion 
axiom or is entered from a prior member of the sequence by using a transformation rule 
for assertions- that capture some Aristotelian principles involving conversions, subor- 
dinations, and oppositions. 
Theorem 1.1. (Assertoric conversions, Con) ~ (Iab --+ Iba) and ~ (Eab ~ Eba). 
Proof. 
1. ~- (Abc ~ (Iba ~ Iac)) (by A4) 
2. ~ (Abb ~ (Iba -+ lab))(from 1 by US) 
3. ~-Abb (by A1 and US) 
4. ~- (Iba --+ Iab) (from 2 and 3 by MP) 
5. ~- (Iab --+ Iba) (from 4 by US) 
6. ~-((Iba ~ Iab) ~ (-Iab-+ ~Iba)) (by A0) 
7. ~- (~Iab --+ ~Iba) (from 6 and 4 by MP) 
8. ~- (Eab -+ Eba) (from 7 by Def E, using DDI) 
m 
The above reasoning may be presented more succinctly by using the following derived 
rule for assertions. 
DR1 
(Reversal, RV)i) From ~ (p --+ q) infer ~- (-~q --+ --T)" ii) from ~ (p --+ (q --+ r)) 
infer e (p --+ (~r --+ ~q)); and iii) from e (p --+ (q --+ r)) infer ~ (~r --+ (p --+ 
~q)). 
Proof. i) Suppose ~ (p -+ q). By AO ~((p -+ q) --4 (~q -+ ~p)). By MP ~ (~q -+ ~p). 
ii) Suppose ~ (p --+ (q --+ r)). By A0 ~- ((p --+ (q --+ r)) --+ (p --+ (~r --+ ~q))). By MP 
(p --+ (~r --+ -~q))). Use similar reasoning for iii). 
m 
So, the annotation for line 7 in the above deduction may read: '(from 4 by RV)'. Line 
6 may be deleted. 
The following derived rules are useful in generating other principles. 
DR2 
(Assertion by antecedent interchange, AI) From ~- (p --+ (q --+ r)) infer e (q --+ 
(p ~ ~)). 
Proof. Assume ~- (p --+ (q ~ r)). By A0 e ((p --+ (q -+ r)) --+ (q -+ (p -+ r))). By MP 
(q -+ (p ~ ~)). 
m 
DR3 
(Assertion by antecedent strengthening (or equivalence), AS) From ~ (p --+(q --+r)) 
and ~-(s -+q) infer e (p --+(s --+r )); and from e (p --+(q --+r)) and ~- (s --+p) infer e (s 
-+(q --+r )).3 
3,Cut, is also used to refer to these rules. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
251 
DR4 
(Assertion by consequent weakening (or equivalence), CW) From ~-(p --+q) and 
(q --+r) infer ~ (p --+r); and from ~ (p ~(q --+r)) and ~ (r --+s) infer ~- (p --+(q --+s )).4 
To prove DR3 and DR4 use A0 and MR 
Theorem 1.2. (Assertoric subalternations, Sub-a) i) ~- (Aab --+ lab); and ii) e (Eab -+ 
Oab). 
Proof. 
1. ~- (Abc --+ (Iba --+ Iac)) (by A4) 
2. ~- (Iba --+ (Abc -+ Iac)) (from 1 by AI) 
3. ~- (Iaa --+ (Aac -+ Iac)) (from 2 by US) 
4. ~ Iaa (by A2) 
5. ~- (Aac --+ Iac) (from 3 and 4 by MP) 
6. ~ (Aab ~ Iab) (i, from 5 by US) 
7. ~- (--,Iab -+ ~Aab) (from 6 by RV) 
8. ~- (Eab --+ Oab) (ii) from 7 by DDI, using Def E and Def O) 
m 
Theorem 1.3. (Assertoric conversion per accidens, Con(pa)) i) ~- (Aab --+ Iba), and ii) 
~- (Eab --+ Oba). 5 
Proof. 
1. (Aab -+ Iab) (by Sub-a) 
2. (Iab --+ Iba) (by Con) 
3. (Aab --+ Iba) (i, from 1 and 2 by CW) 
4. (Eab --+ Eba) (by Con) 
5. (Eba --+ Oba) (from 4 by Sub-a and US) 
6. (Eab --+ Oba) (ii, from 4 and 5 by CW) 
n 
The following derived rule, proven by using AO and MR is useful in proving the next 
theorem. 
DR5 
(Biconditional rule, BIC) From e (p --+ q) and e (q --+ p) infer ~ (p ++ q).6 
Proof. Suppose ~ (p -+ q) and ~- (q --+ p). By A0, ~- ((p --+ q) -+ ((q -+ p) --+ (p ~ q))). 
By two uses of MR ~ (p ~ q). 
n 
Theorem 1.4. (Assertoric oppositions, Opp) i) ~ (~Aab ++ Oab); ii) ~ (~Eab ++ lab); 
iii) (-~Iab ++ Eab); and iv) (-,Oab ++ Aab). 
4,Transitivity, and 'Hypothetical syllogism' are also used to refer to the first of these two rules. 
5I. M. Bochefiski, on p. 212 of [1963], states that the "law of accidental conversion of the universal negative 
is not in Aristotle". He is not saying that Aristotle considered inference ii) to be invalid. 
6This rule is discussed, but not named, on p. 29 of [Hughes and Cresswell, 1996]. 

252 
Fred Johnson 
Proof 
1. ~ (~Aab --+ ~Aab) (by A0) 
2. ~ (~Aab --+ Oab) (from 1 by Def O) 
3. ~ (Oab --+ ~Aab) (from 1 by Def O) 
4. ~- (~Aab ~ Oab) (i, from 2 and 3 by BIC) 
5. ~ (~Eab ~ ~Eab) (by A0) 
6. ~ (~Eab --+ ~--,Iab) (by Def E) 
7. ~- (~---,Iab --+ Iab) (by A0) 
8. ~- (~Eab --+ Iab) (from 6 and 7 by CW) 
9. ~- (~Iab ~ ~Eab) (from 5 by Def E) 
10. ~- (Iab --+ ~Iab) (by A0) 
11. ~- (Iab --+ ~Eab) (from 10 and 9 by CW) 
12. ~ (~Eab ++ Iab) (ii, from 11 by BIC) 
13. ~- ( (~Aab ~ Oab) --+ (~Oab ~ Aab) ) (by A0) 
14. ~ (~Oab ++ Aab) (iv, from 4 and 13 by MP) 
15. e ((~Eab ++ lab) --+ (-,lab ++ Eab)) (by A0) 
16. ~- (~Iab ++ Eab) (iii, from 12 and 15 by MP) 
m 
The following derived rule is useful in conjunction with the assertoric oppositions. 
DR6 
(Substitution of equivalents, SE) From ~ (p ++ q) and ~- (... p...) infer ~ (... q...). 
Proofi Use mathematical induction. 
II 
So, for example, from ~- (Aab ~ (Abc ~ (-~Aad ~ -~Acd))) infer ~ (Aab ~ (Abc 
(Oad -40cd))) by SE, given the oppositions Opp. 
On table 1 assertions corresponding to the familiar two-premised syllogisms are listed. 
In the right column a method of deducing the assertion is given. So, for example, Barbara 
is trivially asserted by using axiom A3. Celarent is asserted since the assertion of 11 
(Disamis) may be transformed into ~ (-.Iac --+ (Aba --+ -.Ibc)) (by RV), which may 
be transformed into ~ (Eac --+ (Aba --+ Ebc)) (by SE, since ~ (Eac ++ -.Iac) and 
~-(Ebc ++ -.Ibc)), which may be transformed into 2 (by US, putting 'b' in place of 'a' 
and 'a' in place of 'b'). Darii is asserted since the assertion of 12 may be transformed into 
~-(Abc --+ (Iab -~ Iac)) (by AS, since (Iab --+ Iba)). 
1.1 
Rejection in LA 
Lukasiewicz uses the notion of "rejection" to develop his formal system. 7 He shows that 
the invalid syllogistic forms expressed by "elementary wffs" may be rejected by augment- 
ing his formal system for assertions by adding one rejection axiom and four transforma- 
tion rules that generate rejections. We shall illustrate this claim but not give a full account 
7Smiley, in his influential article [1996], points out that Carnap and Lukasiewicz were the first logicians to 
formalize the notion of rejection. Smiley attributes the shunning of rejection by most logicians to Frege's [ 1960]. 
Smiley effectively argues that Frege's rejection of rejection, using Occam's razor, was unfortunate, and Smiley 
shows how rejection may be put to good use in ways other than those envisioned by Carnap or Lukasiewicz. For 
recent work on rejection that is stimulated by Smiley's article see [Rumfitt, 1997] and [Johnson, 1999b]. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
253 
Table 1. Deductions in system LA 
Figure 1 
Barbara (1) 
~-(Abc --+ (Aab--+ Aac)) 
A3 
Celarent (2) 
~ (Ebc --+ (Aab --+ Eac)) 
l l,RV, SE,US 
Darii (3) 
~-(Abe --+ (Iab--+ Iac)) 
12,AS 
Ferio (4) 
~-(Ebc --+ (Iab --+ Oac)) 
12,RV, SE,US 
Figure 2 
Cesare (5) 
~-(Ecb ~ (Aab --+ Eac)) 
12,RV, SE,AIIOS 
Camestres (6) 
~-(Aeb --+ (Eab --+ Eac)) 
3,RV, SE,US 
Festino (7) 
~- (Ecb --+ (Iab --+ Oat)) 
11,RV, SE,AI,US 
Baroco (8) 
~-(Acb -+ (Oab --+ Oac)) 
1,RV, SE,US 
Figure 3 
Darapti (9) 
~-(Abc --+ (Aba --+ Iac)) 
12,AS 
Felapton (10) 
~-(Ebc --+ (Aba --+ Oac)) 
20,RV, SE,US 
Disamis (11) 
~-(Ibc -+ (Aba --+ Iac)) 
12,AI,US,CW 
Datisi (12) 
~-(Abc -+ (Iba --+ Iac)) 
A4 
Bocardo (13) 
~-(Obc --+ (Aba --+ Oac)) 
1,RV, SE,US 
Ferison (14) 
k- (Ebc -+ (Iba -+ Oat)) 
3,RV, SE,US 
Figure 4 
Bramantip (15) 
~-(Acb--+ (Aba -+ Iac)) 
20,AI,US,CW 
Camenes (16) 
k-(Acb--+ (Eba --+ Eac)) 
17,RV, SE,AI,US 
Dimaris (17) 
~-(Icb-+ (Aba ~ Zac)) 
3,AI,US,CW 
Fresison (18) 
~-(Ecb --+ (Iba --+ Oac)) 
17,RV, SE,AI,US 
Fesapo (19) 
~-(Ecb --+ (Aba --+ Oat)) 
15,RV, SE,AI,US 
. . . .  
Subalterns 
Barbari (20) 
~-(Abc --+ (Aab--+ Iac)) 
1,CW 
Celaront (21) 
~ (Ebc --+ (Aab --+ Oat)) 
9,RV, SE,US 
Cesaro (22) 
~-(Ecb ~ (Aab --+ Oat)) 
9,RV, SE,AI,US 
Camestrop (23) 
~ (Acb --+ (Eab --+ Oac)) 
20,RV, SE,US 
Camenop (24) 
~-(Acb --+ (Eba ~ Oac)) 
15,RV, SE,AI,US 
of Lukasiewicz's work on rejections, which would require showing that all wffs may be 
"reduced" to sets of elementary wffs. 
Definition 1.5. (elementary wff and simple wff) x is an elementary wff iff x has form 
(Xl -+ (x2 --+ (x3 --+ ... xn)...), where each xi is a simple wff, a wff of form Apq, Ipq, 
Opq or Epq. 
Rejection axioms for LA 
R1 -~ (Acb -~ (Aab -~ Iac)) 
Rejection transformation rules for LA 
RR1 (Rejection by uniform substitution, R-US)If-~x and x is obtained from y by uniform 
substitution of terms for terms, then -~y. 
RR2 (Rejection by detachment (or Modus Tollens), R-D) From ~ (x --+ y) and ~y infer 
-qX. 

254 
Fred Johnson 
RR3 (Stupecki's 
rejection 
rule, 
R-S) 
From 
~(x 
--+z) and 
-~(y -+z) 
infer 
-~(x -+(y -+z)) provided: i) x and y have form -,Apq or ~Ipq; and ii) z has form 
(xl -+ (x2 --+ (x3 --+ ... Xn)...) where each xi is a simple sentence. 
RR4 (Definiens and 
definiendum interchange 
for 
rejections, 
R-DDI) 
From 
4(... a...) and a =af/3 infer -~(.../3...), and vice versa. (So, for example, from 
~(--,Aab -~ --,lab) infer -~(Eab --+ Oab) by two uses of R-DDI, given definitions 
Def O and Def E.) 
The following derived rules for rejections, which are counterparts of derived rules for 
assertions, are useful in simplifying presentations of rejection deductions m sequences of 
wffs in which each member of the sequence is either an (assertion or rejection) axiom or 
is entered by an (assertion or rejection) transformation rule, where the last member of the 
sequence is a rejection. 
R-DR1 
(Rejection by reversal, R-RV) i) From -~(p --+ q) infer -~(-q ~ --,p); ii) from 
-~(p --+ (q --+ r)) infer q(p ~ (-r -+ ~q)); and iii) from -~(p --+ (q --+ r)) infer 
-+ (p 
Proof. i) Suppose q (p -~ q). By A0 (or PC) v ((-~q -+ -p) -~ (p -+ q)). By R-D 
-~(--q -+ ~p). ii) Suppose q(p -+ (q -+ r)). By A0 ~ ((p -+ (-,r -~ --q)) -+ (p -+ (q -+ 
r))). By R-D ~ (p --+ (~r --+ --,q)). Use similar reasoning for iii). 
II 
R-DR2 
(Rejection by antecedent interchange, R-AI) From -~(p --+ (q --+ r)) infer 
Proof. Assume ~(p -+ (q -+ r)). By A0 e ((q -+ (p -+ r)) -+ (p -+ (q -+ r))). By R-D 
~(q -+ (p--+ r)). 
II 
R-DR3 
(Rejection by antecedent weakening (or equivalence), R-AW) i) From -~(p --+ 
(q --+ r)) and ~ (q -+ s) infer ~(p --+ (s --+ r)) ;and ii) from ~(p --+ (q --+ r)) 
and ~ (p--+ s)infer ~ (s --+ (q --+ r)). 
Proof. Suppose ~(p --+ (q ~ r)) and e(q --+ s). By AO ~((q --+ s) --+ ((p --+ (s --+ 
r)) --+ (p --+ (q --+ r)))). By MP ~((p --+ (s -+ r)) --+ (p --+ (q --+ r))). By R-D 
-~ (p -+ (s --+ r)). Use similar reasoning for ii). 
II 
Proofs for the following two derived rules are easily constructed and will be omitted. 
R-DR4 
(Rejection by consequent strengthening (or equivalence), R-CS) From ~(p --+q) 
and 
~(r 
--+q) infer 
-~(p --+r ); 
and 
from 
-~(p ~(q 
--+r)) 
and 
~(s --+r) infer ~(p --+(q --+s)). 
R-DR5 
(Rejection by substitution of equivalents, R-SE) From ~(p 
~ 
q) and 
-~(...p...) infer ~(...q...). 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
255 
R-DR6 
(Rejection by implication introduction, 
R-II) From ~-p and q 
q). 
q infer 
Proof. Suppose ~p and ~q. By A0 ~ (p -+ ((p --+ q) -+ q)). By MP ~ ((p -+ q) -+ q). By 
R-D -~(p -+ q). 
II 
Given the above apparatus we are able to show how the four syllogisms referred to at 
Prior Analytics 26a2-9 are rejected in LA. This is Lukasiewicz's translation from [1957, 
p. 67]. 
If the first term belongs to all the middle [Aba], but the middle to none of the 
last [Ecb], there will be no syllogism of the extremes; for nothing necessary 
follows from the terms being so related; for it is possible that the first should 
belong to all as well as to none of the last, so that neither a particular nor a 
universal conclusion is necessary. But if there is no necessary consequence 
by means of these premises, there cannot be a syllogism. Terms of belong to 
all: animal, man, horse; to none: animal, man, stone. 
The four syllogisms are (Aba ~ (Ecb -+ x)), where x is Ica, Oca, Aca or Eca. 
We shall give rejection deductions to establish the rejection of the first two (AEI-1 and 
AEO-1) and then use derived rule R-CS to show the last two (AEA-1 and AEE-1) are 
rejected, s 
Theorem 1.6. (Rejection of AEI-1)~(Aba -~ (Ecb ~ Ica)). 
Proofi 
1. ~(Acb -+ (Aab -~ Iac)) (by R1) 
2. ~ (Iac -~ (Acb--+ (Aab-+ Iac))) (by A0) 
3. -~Iac (from 1 and 2 by R-D) 
4. ~- Acc (by A1 and US) 
5. -~(Acc --+ Iac) (from 3 and 4 by R-II) 
6. -~(Acb -+ Iab) (from 5 by R-US) 
7. -~(Eab -+ Ocb) (from 6 by R-RV and R-SE) 
8. -~(Acb --~ Iac) (from 5 by R-US) 
9. -~(Eac -+ Ocb) (from 8 by R-RV and R-SE) 
10. -~(Eab --+ (Eac -+ Ocb)) (from 7 and 9 by R-S) 
11. ~(Acb -~ (Eac -+ lab))(from I0 by R-RV) 
12. ~(Aba -+ (Ecb -+ Ica)) (from 11 by R-US) 
II 
Sin the above passage Aristotle uses the semantic counterpart of this two-stage syntactic process. First, 
he shows by his counterexample that {Aba, Ecb, Aca} and {Aba, Ecb, Eca} are semantically consistent, 
from which it follows that neither of the particulars Oca and Ica is a semantic consequence of {Aba, Ecb}. 
Secondly, since the universal claims Eca and Aca are stronger than Oca and Ica, respectively, they cannot 
be a semantic consequence of {Aba, Ecb}. Aristotle is using what W. D. Ross [1949, p. 302] calls a "proof 
by contrasted instances," to show a pair of premises is, in Jonathan Lear's [1980, p. 54] terms, "semantically 
sterile". 

256 
Fred Johnson 
Theorem 1.7. (Rejection of AEO-1) -~(Aba --+(Ecb --+Oca)). 
Proof. 
1. ~ (Acb --+ (Aab ~ Iac)) (By R1) 
2. q((Acb -4 (Eac ~ Oab)) (from 1 by R-RV and SE) 
3. ~(Aba --+ (Ecb -40ca)) 
(from 2 by R-US) 
m 
Theorem 1.8. (Rejection of AEA-1 and AEE-1) i) -~(Aba --+ (Ecb -4 Aca)); and ii) 
-~(Aba --+ (Ecb--+ Eca)). 
Proof. 
1. -~(Aba --~ (Ecb --+ Ice)) 
(by theorem 1.6) 
2. ~- (Aca --+ Ica) 
(by Sub-a, US) 
3. -~ (Aba --~ (Ecb --+ Aca)). 
(i, from 1 and 2 by R-CS) 
4. ~(Aba ~ (Ecb --+ Oca)) (by theorem 1.7) 
5. ~- (Eca --+ Oca) (by Sub-a, US) 
6. -~(Aba --+ (Ecb --+ Eca)) 
(ii, from 4 and 5 by R-CS) 
m 
The following passage clearly shows that Ross favors Lukasiewicz's method of reject- 
ing the AEx-ls over Aristotle's. On p. 302 of [1949] Ross says: 
... [Aristotle] gives no reason (my italics) for this [claim that no conclusion is 
yielded by the premises of AEx-1 ], e.g. by pointing out that an undistributed 
middle or an illicit process is involved; but he often points to an empirical 
fact .... instead of giving the reason why All B are A, No C is B yields 
no conclusion, he simply points to one set of values for A, B, C (animal, 
man, horse) for which, all B being A and no C being B, all C is in fact A, 
and to another set of values (animal, man, stone) for which, all B being A 
and no C being B, no C is in fact A. Since in the one case all C is A, a 
negative conclusion cannot be valid; and since in the other case no C is A, an 
affirmative conclusion cannot be valid. Therefore there is no valid conclusion 
(with C as subject and A as predicate). 
Aristotle is reasoning as follows. It is true that all men are animals, it is true that no 
horses are men, and it is true that all horses are animals (and thus false that no horses are 
animals and false that some horses are not animals). So neither Eca nor Oca is a logical 
consequence of Aba together with Ecb. Since it is true that all men are animals, it is true 
that no stones are men, and it is true that no stones are animals (and thus false that all 
stones are animals and false that some stones are not animals), it follows that neither Aca 
nor Ica is a logical consequence of Aba together with Ecb. 
Lukasiewicz also objects to Aristotle's reasoning, claiming in [1957, p. 72] that it: 
introduces into logic terms and propositions not germane to it. 'Man' and 
'animal' are not logical terms, and the proposition 'All men are animals' is 
not a logical thesis. Logic cannot depend on concrete terms and statements. 
If we want to avoid this difficulty, we must reject some forms axiomatically. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
257 
But Aristotle's procedures have support among modern logicians. 
Robin Smith 
[1989, p. 114] regards Aristotle's reference to animals, men and horses as a reference to 
a "countermodel" and says "countermodels are the paradigmatic means of proving inva- 
lidity for modern logicians." In the surrounding text Smith refers to Jonathan Lear [ 1980, 
pp. 
54-61 and pp. 70-75] who defends Aristotle's techniques against criticisms by 
Lukasiewicz and Geach [1972]. In the following sections we shall make extensive use 
of formal countermodels to show the invalidity of apodeictic and contingent syllogisms. 
Such models may also be used to show the invalidity of assertoric syllogisms. 
The following passage from the Prior Analytics 27b12-23, quoted and discussed by 
Lukasiewicz on p. 70 of [1957], illustrates another method Aristotle uses to reject in- 
ferences. Ross [ 1949, p. 304] calls it an argument "from the ambiguity of a particular 
proposition." A better name for the reasoning is "rejection by premise weakening". Ross 
points out that this method of rejection is also used by Aristotle at 26b 14-20, 27b27-28, 
28b28-31,29a6 and 35b 11. 
Let M belong to no N, and not to some X. It is possible then for N to belong 
either to all X or to no X. Terms of belonging to none: black, snow, animal. 
Terms of belonging to all cannot be found, if M belongs to some X, and does 
not belong to some X. For if N belonged to all X, and M to no N, then M 
would belong to no X; but it is assumed that it belongs to some X. In this 
way, then, it is not possible to take terms, and the proof must start from the 
indefinite nature of the particular premise. For since it is true that M does 
not belong to some X, even if it belongs to no X, and since if it belongs to 
no X a syllogism is not possible, clearly it will not be possible either. 
Given the semantic consistency of {No snow is black, Some animals are not black, 
No animal is snow } we know by half of the "contrasted instances" argument that neither 
'Some animal is snow' nor 'All animals are snow' is a logical consequence of 'No snow 
is black' together with 'Some animals are not black.' So, a "countermodel" is given for 
the inferences from Enm and Oxm to Ixn or Axn. To show that neither Oxn nor Exn 
is a semantic consequence of Enm and Oxm, Aristotle relies on two facts: i) neither 
Oxn nor Exn is a semantic consequence of Enm and Exm; and ii) Oxm is a semantic 
consequence of Exm. 
InLA a purely syntactic rejection of the "implicational syllogisms" (Enm --+ (Oxm --+ 
Oxn)) and (Enm --+ (Oxm --+ Exn)) is given by using R-AW. 
Theorem 1.9. (Rejection of EOO-2 and EOE-2) i) -~(Enm --+ (Exm --+ Oxn)); and ii) 
Proofi 
1. -~(Aba -+ (Ecb -+ Ica)) (by theorem 1.6 ) 
2. -~(Eca -+ (Ecb -+ Oba)) (from 1 by R-RV and R-SE) 
3. ~ (Ecb --+ Obc) (by Con(pa) and US) 
4. -~(Eca -+ (Obc -+ Oba)) (from 2 and 3 by R-AW) 
5. ~- (Eca -~ Eac) (by Con and US) 

258 
Fred Johnson 
6. -~(Eac --+ (Obc -+ Oba)) (from 4 and 5 by R-AW) 
7. -~(Enm ~ (Oxm --+ Oxn)) (i, from 4 by R-US) 
8. ~ (Exn -+ Oxn) (by Sub-a and US) 
9. -~(Enm -+ (Oxm -+ Exn)) (ii, from 7 and 8 by R-CS) 
II 
Up to this point we have rejected elementary wffs of form (Xl 
--4 (X2 ~ 
... (Xn 
y) ...) where n < 2. For Lukasiewicz's system to be fully Aristotelian he must show how 
elementary sentences, where n > 2, are rejected. We illustrate such a rejection. 
Theorem 1.10. (Rejection of an AAAA mood) -~(Aab --+(Abc --+(Adc --+Aad))). 
Proof. 
1. -~ (Acb ~ (Aab --+ Iac)) (by R 1) 
2. ~- (Acb--+ (Aba --+ Iac)) (by Bramantip) 
3. -~((Acb --+ (Aba -+ Iac))mc(Acb --+ (Aab --+ Iac)) (from 2 and 1 by R-II) 
4. ~- ((Aba -+ Aab) --+ ((Acb ~ (Aba --+ Iac))mc(Acb ~ (Aab --+ Iac))) (by A0) 
5. ~(Aba ~ Aab) (from 3 and 4 by R-D) 
6. ~- Aaa (by A l) 
7. ~(Aaa --+ (Aba -+ Aab)) (from 6 and 5 by R-II) 
8. -~(Aaa ~ (Aaa -+ (Aba --> Aab))) (from 7 and 5 by R-II) 
9. -~(Aaa ~ (Aaa --+ (Ada ~ Aad))) (from 8 by R-US) 
10. -~(Aaa ~ (Aac --+ (Adc --+ Aad))) (from 9 by R-US) 
11. ~(Aab -~ (Abc --+ (Adc --+ Aad))) (from 10 by R-US) 
II 
Lukasiewicz's system for the assertoric syllogistic has "100% Aristotelicity", to use 
McCall's expression. This means that every 2-premised syllogism deemed valid by Aris- 
totle is asserted in Lukasiewicz's system, and every 2-premised syllogism deemed invalid 
by Aristotle is rejected in Lukasiewicz's system. We shall see below that McCall's L-X-M 
calculus also has 100% Aristotelicity though his Q-L-X-M calculus does not. 
2 
LUKASIEWICZ'S MODAL SYSTEM, LM 
Lukasiewicz developed his system for the assertoric syllogistic by using the non-modal 
propositional calculus, what he calls the "theory of deduction" as a "base logic". Fol- 
lowing the procedure used in Hughes and Cresswell's [1968] and [1996], we simplified 
Lukasiewicz's presentation of his system by simply using axiom A0 to provide his "ba- 
sis". Lukasiewicz's approach to Aristotle's modal logic is to develop a modal proposi- 
tional logic (with quantifiers), which we refer to as the "LM system", that will enable him 
to present Aristotle's work on the modal syllogisms. 9 
The following sentences are tautologies in LM, modifying Lukasiewicz's notation in a 
natural way: 1) ((p --+ q) --+ (Mp --+ Mq)) and 2) ((p --+ q) --+ (Lp --+ Lq)), reading M 
and L as 'it is possible that' and 'it is necessary that', respectively. The following passages 
on p. 138 of [Lukasiewicz, 1957] attempt to show that the "M-law of extensionality" (1) 
and the "L-law of extensionality" (2) are endorsed by Aristotle. 
9See [ 1961] for Smiley's extensions of Lukasiewicz's work on LM. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
259 
First it has to be said that if (if o~ is, fl must be), then (if c~ is possible, fl must 
be possible too). 
[34a5-7] 
If one should denote the premises by o~, and the conclusion by fl, it would 
not only result that if c~ is necessary, then fl is necessary, but also that if c~ is 
possible, then fl is possible. 
[34a22-24] 
It has been proved that if (if c~ is, fl is), then (if o~ is possible, then fl is 
possible). 
[34a29-31 ] 
A more natural reading of these passages is that they show that Aristotle endorsed both 
3) (L(p--+ q) --+ (Mp--+ Mq)) and 4)(L(p--+ q) ~ (Lp--+ Lq)). 1~ 
That l) - 4) are tautologies in LM is seen by considering the following four-valued 
truth tables. 
Table 2. Four-valued truth tables for ~, --1, L and M 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
1 
3 
3 
1 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
M 
1 
1 
3 
3 
Among the four truth values 1 to 4, 1 is the only designated value, marked with an 
asterisk in its entry in the first column on the table. A sentence x in the LM-system is a 
tautology iff for every input of values the output value is always the designated value 1. 
Theorem 2.1. (L-law of extensionality) ((p -+ q) -+ (Lp -+ Lq)) is a tautology. 
Proof. Suppose ((p --+ q) --+ (Lp -+ Lq)) is assigned a value other than 1. Then i) 
(p -+ q) is not assigned 4 and ii) (Lp --+ Lq) is not assigned 1, and iii) the value assigned 
to (p -+ q) is not the value assigned to (Lp -+ Lq). By i) p is not assigned 1 and q is not 
assigned 4. By ii) Lp is not assigned 4 and thus p is assigned neither 3 nor 4. And by ii) 
Lp is not assigned the same value as Lq. So p is assigned the value 2 and q is assigned 
the value 3. Then (p --+ q) and (Lp --+ Lq) are assigned the same value, which conflicts 
with iii). 
II 
Proofs that 1), 3) and 4) are tautologies are not required for our purposes, and we omit 
the straightforward proofs. 
McCall [1963, pp. 31-32] points out that Lukasiewicz's use of the L-law of exten- 
sionality yields highly unAristotelian results. 
For example, using McCall's notation, 
Camestres LXL ('Necessarily all c are b; no a are b; so (necessarily) necessarily no a 
1~ 
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, pp. 29-30] for a discussion of this sentence, an axiom in Robert Feys's 
System T. 

260 
Fred Johnson 
are c'), Baroco LXL ('Necessarily all c are b; some a are not b; so necessarily some a 
are not c'), Barbara XLL ('All b are c; necessarily a are b; so necessarily all a are c') and 
Ferio XLL ('No b are c; necessarily some a are b; so necessarily some b are c'), when con- 
strued as "implicational syllogisms", are asserted in Lukasiewicz's L-system even though 
Aristotle rejects all of them. 
Following McCall we use 'XXX' after the name of a syllogism to indicate that the 
syllogism is a plain, assertoric syllogism. So, for example, Camestres XXX has form 
'All c are b; no a are b; so no a are c'. Camestres XXX, Baroco XXX, Barbara XXX 
and Ferio XXX are asserted in Lukasiewicz's assertoric system. So, given the following 
theorem, Camestres LXL, Baroco LXL, Barbara XLL and Ferio XLL are asserted in 
Lukasiewicz's L-system. 
Theorem 2.2. i) ~-((p --+ (q ~ r)) --+ (p --+ (Lq --+ Lr))); and ii) ~((p ~ (q -+ r)) 
(Lp--+ (q --+ Lr))). 
Proofi 
1. ~ ((q -+ r) -+ (Lq -+ Lr)) 
(by theorem 2.1) 
2. ~ ( ( ( q --~ r) -+ ( L q -+ L r ) ) -+ ( ( p -~ ( q -+ r ) ) -+ ( p -+ ( L q -+ L r ) ) ) (by A0) 
3. e ((p -~ (q -+ r)) -+ (p -+ (Lq -+ Lr))) 
(i, from 1 and 2 by MP) 
4. ~- ( ( (p --+ (q --+ r) ) --+ (p --+ ( Lq --+ Lr) ) --+ ( ( q --+ (p --+ r) ) -+ ( Lq --+ (p --+ 
Lr))) 
(by A0) 
5. ~ ((q --+ (p --+ r)) ~ (Lq --+ (p --+ Lr))) 
(from 3 and 4 by MP) 
6. ~- ((p -+(q --+r)) --+(Lp --+(q -+Lr))) (ii, from 5 by US) 
II 
One of the virtues of McCall's L-X-M calculus, discussed below, is that Camestres 
LXL, Baroco LXL, Barbara XLL and Ferio XLL are rejected in it. But before we examine 
McCall's system we look briefly at some recent systems of modal predicate logic that have 
been used to attempt to understand Aristotle's work on the modal syllogisms. 
3 
MODERN MODAL PREDICATE LOGIC 
It is natural to try to view Aristotle's modal logic through the eyes of modern modal 
monadic first order predicate logic. 11 On pp. 18-22 McCall refers to Albrecht Becker's 
[1933] 12 and works by others who have tried to do this. On pp. 176-181 Patterson dis- 
cusses Ulrich Nortmann's [ 1990] attempt to do this. Patterson points out that the Kripkean 
"possible worlds semantics" used by Nortmann does not conform with Aristotle's onto- 
logical principles. I agree. McCall argues that all uniform readings of Aristotle's modal 
propositions as sentences in a modal first order predicate logic will make some valid Aris- 
totelian syllogisms invalid or will make some invalid Aristotelian syllogisms valid. I also 
agree with McCall and will give some examples that support his position. 
11 For recent books that contain sections on modal predicate logic see [Hughes and Cresswell, 1996], [Fitting 
and Mendelsohn, 1998], [Girle, 2000] and [Bell et al., 2001]. 
IZSee [Bochefiski, 1963, pp. 57-62] for a useful discussion of Becker's work. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
261 
To illustrate how invalid Aristotelian inferences may be made valid consider 
Bocardo LXL, (that is, 'LObe, Aba; so LOac', using McCall's notation). Suppose we 
translate it into modal predicate logic as: '3z(Bz/X rn--,Cz); Vz(Bz ~ Az); so 3z(Az A 
n--,Cz)' (that is, 'There is an z such that z is a B and z is necessarily not a C; for all x 
if z is a B then :r is an A; so there is an z such that z is an A and z is necessarily not 
a C'). We are using one of Becker's two methods for translating LO sentences. Using 
"singular sentences" such as Bm (read as m is a B, for 'Max is a bear', for example) 
and familiar rules such as Existential Instantiation (EI) 13, Universal Instantiation (UI) and 
Existenti~il Generalization (EG) together with propositional calculus (PC) inferences we 
may construct a deduction for Bocardo LXL, which Aristotle considered to be invalid. 14 
Proof. 
1. 3z(Bz /X n-~Cz) (premise) 
2. Vz(Bz ~ Az) 
(premise) 
3. (Bin A EI-~Cz) (from 1 by EI) 
4. (Bin -+ Am) 
(from 2 by UI) 
5. (Am/~ [::]-,Cz) (from 3 and 4 by PC) 
6. 3x(Ax A n-~Cx) (from 5 by EG) 
II 
To illustrate how valid Aristotelian inferences may be made invalid, consider Bo- 
cardo LLL, (that is, 'LObc; LAba; so LOac', using McCall's notation). Using another 
Becker translation of LO sentences and a Becker translation of L A sentences the argu- 
ment amounts to this: 'Vz(Cx --40Bx); 3x([:]Ax A [:]-,Bx); so 3x(t:]Ax A ~-~Cx), 
call it the "the MPredC argument". Aristotle at [30a6-14] gives a proof by ecthesis to 
show that Bocardo LLL is valid. But using the semantics for the modal system, $5, the 
translated argument is S5-invalid. For suppose there are only two possible worlds Wl and 
w2, where each world "sees" each world (including itself). If "the MPredC argument" 
is S5-valid then the following modal propositional calculus argument is S5-valid, call it 
the "the MPropC argument": '((Cm --+ OBm) A (Cn ~ OBn)); ((oAm A rn-,Bm) V 
(t3An A [::l-~Bn)); so ((OAm A D-,Cm) V (mAn A [::]-~Cn))'. But then a countermodel 
is constructed by: i) letting Am, Bn and Cn be true in world wl; ii) letting Bin, Cm and 
An be false in Wl; iii) letting Am, Cm and Bn be true in world w2; and iv) letting Bin, 
An and Cn be false in world w2. Then in w~ (Cm -+ DBm) is true, (Cn --+ [::]Bn) is 
true, (DAm A D-~Bm) is true, ISlAm A E]-~Cm) is false, and ([3An A [:]-~Cn) is false. 
So "the MPropC argument" is S5-invalid. So "the MPredC argument" is invalid. 
The same countermodel may be used to invalidate the argument that results by replac- 
ing the premise Vx(Cx -+ OBx) in "the MPredC" argument with Vz(Cz ~ [3Bx). 
Geach [1964, p. 202] makes the following remarks about McCall's comments list of 
seven "Becker-type interpretations": 
13In [Johnson, 1993] Aristotle's proofs by ecthesis are treated as essentially proofs by Existential Instantia- 
tion. For alternative accounts of proofs by ecthesis see [Thom, 1993] and [Smith, 1982]. 
14paul Thom in [1991] argues that Aristotle made a mistake in regarding Bocardo LXL as valid. Thorn 
contrasts his views with those in [Johnson, 1989], [Patterson, 1989], [Patterson, 1990] and [van Rijen, 1989]. 

262 
Fred Johnson 
Here McCall has not proved what he claims: namely that no Becker-type in- 
terpretation will secure simultaneously the validity of Barbara LLL and LXL, 
the invalidity of Barbara XLL, and the simple conversion of LI propositions 
(C Llab Llba). For all of these results are obtained if we combine reading (i) 
of LA from McCall's list with reading (iii) or equivalently (iv) of LI. 
McCall's list on p. 21 of Becker type interpretations is given on table 3. 
Table 3. Seven Becker-type interpretations 
Universal 
Particular 
(i) 
Vx(Ax --+ rnBx) 
3x(Ax /x nBx) 
(ii) 
rnVx(Ax ~ Bx) 
~3x(Ax/x Bx) 
(iii) 
Vxrn(Ax -+ Bx) 
qxn(Ax A Bx) 
(iv) 
Vx(~Ax + [::lBx) 
3x([:3Ax A DBx) 
(v) 
Vx(~Ax + nBx) 
3x(t::IAx /x nBx) 
(vi) 
Vx(OAz ~ Bx) 
3x(OAx /x DBx) 
(vii) 
Vx(DAx ~ Bx) 
3x(C:]Ax/~ 
Bx) 
McCall finds interpretations (i) and (ii) in [Becker-Freyseng, 1933], (ii) in [von Wright, 
1951], (i) to (v) in [Sugihara, 1957a] and [Sugihara, 1957b], and all but (v) in [Rescher, 
1963]. 
This is what McCall says about these seven interpretations: 
None of these interpretations does justice to Aristotle's system. Not one of 
them even simultaneously provides for the validity of Barbaras LLL, the 
invalidity of Barbara X LL, and the convertibility of the particular premise 
'Some A is necessarily B' into 'Some B is necessarily A'. 
And McCall is correct. Geach is in effect proposing two more interpretations in ad- 
dition to the seven on the list. Let us call one of them (viii), where LAab is translated 
as Vx(Ax --+ [::]Bx) and Llab is translated as 3xO(Ax/~ Bx). As Geach says, the 
other one is essentially the same as it. But interpretation (viii) produces results that 
are not Aristotelian. For example, if Darii-LXL, valid for Aristotle, is translated using 
interpretation (viii) the resulting argument is S5-invalid. McCall is looking for an in- 
terpretation that provides "100% Aristotelicity". Geach (p. 202) invites the reader to 
consider an interpretation of McCall's LAab and LOab as sentences of an extended as- 
sertoric syllogistic, call it the "G-system", that allows sentences to be formed by using 
complex terms, terms of form )~p (necessarily p) and #p (possibly p), where p is a simple 
term. McCall's LAab, LEab, LIab and LOab are translated into the G-system as Aa)~b, 
Eapb, I)~a)~b and Oapb respectively. Geach (p. 202) says: 
A decision procedure for this calculus can easily be devised: write every 
formula so that )~-terms and p-terms appear instead of categoricals prefaced 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
263 
Figure 1. The invalidity of Darii LXL in the G-system 
Ac 
a 
with L, add an antecedent of the form CAAaa [that is, (AAaa --+] for each 
A-term and one of the form CAapa [that is, (Aapa --+] for each p-term, 
and apply Lukasiewicz's decision procedure for the plain syllogistic to the 
resulting formula. 
So, for example, to determine whether Bocardo LXL (that is, 'LObc; Aba; so LOac') 
is syntactically accepted or syntactically rejected we form the following sentence in the 
G-system: (Acpc --+ (Obpc --+ (Aba ~ Oapc))). Following 
Lukasiewicz's decision procedure on pp. 121-126 of [1957], we form an elementary 
sentence consisting of affirmative simple sentences that is deductively equivalent to it: 
(Acpc --+ (Aapc --+ (Aba --+ Abpc))) or (by interchanging terms) (Abpb --+ (Acpb -+ 
(Aac ~ Aapb))). The latter sentence fits subcase (d) of the fifth case (p. 124): 
The consequent is Aab, and there are antecedents of the type Aaf with f 
different from a. If there is a chain leading from a to b the expression is 
asserted on the ground of axiom 3 [our A3, above], the mood Barbara; if 
there is no such chain, the expression is rejected. 
Since a is linked to b by the chain {Aae, Aepb}, (Abpb --+ (Ae#b --+ (Aac --+ 
Aapb))) is accepted. So Bocardo LXL is accepted in the G-system. But for Aristotle 
Bocardo LXL is valid. 
Since questions of validity in the G-system are reduced to questions of validity in the 
assertoric syllogistic, the familiar Euler diagrams provide a technique for determining 
whether or not arguments are valid. So, for example, the diagram in figure 1 displays the 
invalidity ofDarii LXL, (LAbc --+ (Iab -+ LIac)). Since circle b is included in circle Ac, 
LAbc is true. Since circle a overlaps circle b, Iab is true. Since circle Aa does not overlap 
Ac, LIac is false. When constructing such diagrams these conditions must be met: for 
every term x, the Az circle is included in or equal to the x circle, which is included in or 
equal to the pz circle. These conditions are natural since whatever is necessarily x is x, 
and whatever is x is possibly x. 
The diagram in figure 2 displays the invalidity of Cesare LLL, (LEcb 
(LAab --+ LEac)). LEcb is true since circle c does not overlap circle pb; LAab is 
true since circle a is included in circle Ab, which is identical to circle pb; and LEac is 
false since circle a overlaps circle pc. 

264 
Fred Johnson 
Figure 2. The invalidity of Cesare LLL in the G-system 
#c 
#b, )~b 
Geach does not claim that his G-system has "100 percent Aristotelicity". He says on p. 
203 of [ 1964] that it "can fit in most of Aristotle's results about syllogisms de necessario 
". But table 4 shows that the G-system does not get high marks. "V" occurs in a cell if and 
only if the relevant syllogism is valid for Aristotle, and "Gc" occurs in a cell if and only 
if the G-system's judgment about the acceptance or rejection of the relevant syllogism 
is in conflict with Aristotle's. So, for example, the "Gc" in the Darii/LXL cell means 
that Darii LXL is rejected in the G-system though Aristotle accepts it. The "Gc" in the 
Bocardo/LXL cell means that Bocardo LXL is accepted in the G-system though Aristotle 
rejects it. The G-system's Aristotelicity is ((3  14) - 13) - (3  14) or about 69%. 
Table 4. Aristotle's system vs. the G-system 
Figure 1 
LLL 
LXL 
Barbara 
V 
V 
Celarent 
V 
V 
Darii 
V 
V, Gc 
Ferio 
V 
V 
XLL 
Figure 2 
Cesare 
V, Gc 
V, Gc 
Camestres 
V, Gc 
Festino 
V, Gc 
V, Gc 
Baroco 
V, Gc 
V, Gc 
Figure 3 
Darapti 
V 
V, Gc 
V, Gc 
Felapton 
V 
V 
Disamis 
V 
V, Gc 
Datisi 
V 
V, Gc 
Bocardo 
V 
Gc 
Ferison 
V 
V 
Geach's G-system and Lukasiewicz's LM illustrate two approaches to understanding 
Aristotle's work on modal logic. Martha Kneale on p. 91 of [Kneale and Kneale, 1962] 
poses a dilemma for students of Aristotle given her belief that there are only two ap- 
proaches to Aristotle's work. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
265 
If modal words modify predicates [Geach's de re approach is taken], there is 
no need for a special theory of modal syllogisms. For these are only ordinary 
assertoric syllogisms of which the premises have peculiar predicates. On the 
other hand, if modal words modify the whole statements to which they are 
attached [Lukasiewicz's de dicto approach is taken], there is no need for a 
special modal syllogistic since the rules determining the logical relations be- 
tween modal statements are independent of the character of the propositions 
governed by the modal words. 
McCall agrees with Kneale that the two approaches described above are inadequate. 
And he devises a third approach that is designed to "catch the fine distinctions Aristotle 
makes between valid and invalid syllogisms (p. 96)". 
4 
MCCALL'S L-X-M SYSTEM 
The basis for L-X-M includes that of LA together with the following primitive symbols, 
formation rules, definitions, axioms and transformation rules. Only some of the rejection 
axioms are given here. The partial list is big enough to illustrate how rejection deductions 
are constructed in L-X-M. For the full list of rejection axioms see [McCall, 1963] or 
[Johnson, 1989]. 
Primitive symbols 
monadic operator 
L 
Formation rules 
FR1 t If Q~, is a quantifier and x and y are term variables then Quxy is a categorical 
expression. 
FRU If p is a categorical expression then ~p is a categorical expression and Lp is a wff. 
FR3' Categorical expressions are wffs. 
FR4' If p and q are wffs then ~p and (p --+ q) are wffs. 
FR5' The only wffs are those in virtue of FR1 ~ to FR4 ~. 
So, for example, Aab is a categorical expression by FRI', so ~Aab is a categorical 
expression by FR2', so -,-~Aab is a categorical expression by FRU, so L-~-~Aab is a wff 
by FR2', so -~L-~-~Aab is a wff by FR4'. Note that LLAab is not a wff. 
Definitions 
Def M 
Mp =dy -~L-~p 
Assertion axioms 
Use A0, A1, A3 and A4 from system LA. Change A2 for LA from ~- Iaa to e LIaa. Then 
add the following axioms. 

266 
Fred Johnson 
A5 (Barbara LXL) 
A6 (Cesare LXL) 
A7 (Darii LXL) 
A8 (Ferio LXL) 
A9 (Baroco LLL) 
A10 (Bocardo LLL) 
A11 (LI conversion) 
~-(LAbc --+ (Aab -+ LAac)) 
~-(LEcb ~ (Aab ~ LEac)) 
~-(LAbc ~ (Iab--+ LIac)) 
~-(LEbc--+ (lab--+ LOac)) 
~ (LAcb ~ (LOeb ~ LOac)) 
~-(LObc ~ (LAba ~ LOac)) 
(LIab --+ LIba) 
A12 (LA subordination) ~- (LAab --+ Aab) 
A13 (LI subordination) ~- (Llab --+ lab) 
A 14 (LO subordination) ~ (LOeb -+ Oab) 
Assertion transformation rules 
Use the assertion transformation rules AR 1 to AR3 from LA and add the following rule. 
AR4 (Assertions involving doubly negated categorical expressions, DN) From ~- (... p...) 
infer ~- (... --'--T---) and vice versa, if p is a categorical expression. (So, for exam- 
ple, from ~ (LAab --+ LAab) infer ~ (LAab --+ L~--Aab) by DN. By using SE we 
may infer that ~ (LAab --+ -~--LAab) given e (LAab --+ LAab).) 
Rejection axioms 
Use R1 from system LA and add the following rejection axioms. 
R2 ('5.21, p. 58) 
-~(LAbb --+(MAab -+(Aac --+(LAce -+(LAbc -+LAac))))) 
R3 (*5.3, p. 58) 
-~(LAaa -+(LAcc -+(MAac --+(LAce -+Aac)))) 15 
R4 (*5.6, p. 64) 
-~(LAaa --+(LAbb -+(LAcc --+(LAab "+(MAba -+ 
(MAbc --+(LAcb --+Iac))))))) 
Page references are to McCall's [1963]. McCall uses asterisks to refer to rejections. 
Rejection transformation rules 
Use rejection transformation rules RR 1-RR4 as well as the following rule. 
RR5 (Rejections involving doubly negated categorical expressions, R-DN) From 
-~(... p...) infer ~(... --'--T-- .) and vice versa, if p is a categorical expression. (So, 
for example, from ~L-~Iab infer ~LIab.) 
We imitate the discussion of Lukasiewicz's LA system by proving various "immediate 
inferences". Oppositions, conversions, subalternations and subordinations are listed. 
Theorem 
4.1. (Apodeictic oppositions, 
Ap-opp) i) ~(-,LAab 
++ 
MOab); 
ii) ~(-,MOab ~ LAab); iii) ~-(--LEab ++ MIab); iv) ~(--MIab ++ LEab); v) 
15Correction: on p. 273 of [1989] change -+ LAac in *5.3 to -+ Aac. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
267 
e(--,LIab ++ MEab)" vi)~-(~MEab ++ LIab)" vii)e(~LOab ++ MAab)" and viii) 
(~MAab ++ LOab). 
Proof. 
1. ~- (~LAab ++ -~LAab) (by A0) 
2. ~ (~LAab ++ ~L---,~Aab) (from 1 by DN) 
3. ~- (--,LAab ++ MOab) (i, from 2 by DDI, given Def M and Def O) 
4. F-(~MOab ++ ~LAab) (from 3 by RV) 
5. e(--,~LAab ~ LAab) (by A0) 
6. ~- (--,MOab ~ LAab) (ii, from 4 and 5 by SE) 
7. e(--,LEab ++ ~LEab) (by A0) 
8. ~-(~LEab ~ ~L--,~Eab) (from 7 by DN) 
9. e(~LEab ~ ~L~Iab) 
(from 8 by DDI, given DefE) 
10. e(~LEab ++ ~L~Iab) (from 9 by DN) 
11. ~(~LEab ++ MIab) (iii, from 10 by DDI, given DefM) 
12. e (~MIab ++ --~LEab) (from 11 by RV) 
13. e(~LEab ++ LEab) (by A0) 
14. ~- (~MIab ++ LEab) (iv, from 12 and 13 by SE) 
Use similar reasoning for the other four asserted biconditionals. 
Theorem 
4.2. (Apodeictic 
conversions, 
Ap-con) 
i) 
~- (LEab 
--+ 
ii) ~ (LIab --+ LIba); iii) ~ (MEab --+ MEba); and iv) ~ (MIab -+ MIba). 
m 
LEba)" 
Proof. 
1. ~ (LIab ~ LIba) (ii, by A11) 
2. ~ (~LIba --+ ~LIab) (from 1 by RV) 
3. ~ (MEba --+ MEab) (from 2 by SE, Ap-opp) 
4. ~ (MEab -+ MEba) (iii, from 3 by US) 
5. ~ (LEcb -+ (Aab -+ LEac)) (A6) 
6. eAaa (A1) 
7. ~- (LEca --+ LEac) (from 5 and 6 by AI, US, MP) 
8. ~- (LEab --+ LEba) (i, from 7 by US) 
9. ~- (MIab --+ MIba) (iv, from 8 by RV, SE, US) 
II 
Theorem 4.3. (Apodeictic subalternations, Ap-sub-a) i) ~-(LAab 
ii) ~ (LEab --+ LOab); iii) ~- (MAab -+ mIab); and iv) ~- (MEab -+MOab). 
.--+ 
Llab); 
Proof. 
1. ~ (LAab -+ LIba) (by A11) 
2. ~ (LIba ---+ LIab) (by Ap-con, US) 
3. ~- (LAab --~ LIab) (i, from 1 and 2 by CW) 

268 
Fred Johnson 
4. ~- (MEab --+ MOab) (iv, from 3 by RV, SE) 
5. ~- (LEbc --+ (Iab --+ LOac)) (by AS) 
6. ~- (LEac --+ (Iaa --+ LOac)) (from 5 by US) 
7. ~- (LEab --+ LOab) (ii, from 6 by AI, ME US) 
8. ~ (MAab --+ MIab) (iii, from 7 by RV, SE) 
II 
Theorem 4.4. (Apodeictic conversions per accidens, Ap-con(pa)) i) ~-(LAab 
LIba); ii) ~ (MAab -~ MIba); iii) ~- (LEab --+ LOba); and iv) ~ (MEab --+ MOba). 
Proof. 
1. ~- (LAab -+ LIab) (by Ap-sub-a) 
2. ~ (LIab ~ LIba) (by Ap-con) 
3. ~ (LAab --+ LIba) (i, from 1 and 2 by CW) 
4. ~- (LEab ~ LEba) (by Ap-con) 
5. ~- (LEba --+ LOba) (by Ap-sub-a, US) 
6. ~ (LEab ~ LOba) (iii, from 4 and 5 by CW) 
7. ~ (MAab ~ MIba) (ii, from 6 by RV, SE, US) 
8. ~ (MEab --+ MOba) (iv, from 3 by RV, SE, US) 
1 
Theorem 4.5. (Subordinations, Sub-o) i) ~ (LAab -+ Aab); ii) ~ (Aab -+ MAab); iii) 
(LEab --+ Eab); iv) ~- (Eab --+ MEab); v) ~- (Llab --+ lab)" vi) ~ (Iab --+ Mlab); vii) 
(LOab ~ Oab)" and viii) ~ (Oab ~ MOab). 
Proof. 
1. ~- (LOab --+ Oab) (vii, by A14) 
2. ~ (Aab --+ MAab) (ii, from 1 by RV, SE) 
3. ~- (Aaa --+ MAaa) (from 2 by US) 
4. ~- Aaa (by A 1) 
5. ~- MAaa (from 3 and 4 by MP) 
6. ~- (LEbc --+ (Iab ~ LOac)) (by A8) 
7. ~- (mAac -+ (Iab --+ mIbc)) (from 6 by RV, SE) 
8. ~- (mAaa --+ (Iab --+ mIba)) (from 7 by US) 
9. ~- (Iab --+ MIba) (from 5 and 8 by MP) 
10. ~- (MIba --+ MIab) (by Ap-con, US) 
11. ~- (Iab --+ MIab) (vi, from 9 and 10 by CW) 
12. e (LEab --+ Eab) (iii, from 11 by RV, SE, US) 
Proofs of the other four subordinations are straightforward and are omitted. 
II 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
269 
We show that all of the entries marked with 'V' on table 4 and all of the entries marked 
with a blank on table 5 correspond to asserted wffs in L-X-M. Proofs are streamlined by 
assuming immediate inferences established above and any immediate inferences obtain- 
able from them by US. So, for example, in the proof of Barbari LXL from Barbara LXL 
by CW in theorem LXL the subalternation ~ (LAac -4 LIac) is assumed. 
Theorem 4.6. All unmarked LXL and XLL cells on table 5 represent asserted wffs. 
Proof. 
1. ~ (LAbc -+ (Aab ~ LAac)) (Barbara LXL, by A5) 
2. ~- (LAbc --+ (Aab -+ LIac)) (Barbari LXL, from 1 by CW) 
3. ~ (Acb --+ (LAba -+ LIac)) (Bramantip XLL, from 2 by nI, CW, US) 
4. ~- (LAbc ~ (Iab -+ LIac)) (Darii LXL, by A7) 
5. ~ (LAbc ~ (Iba -+ Llac)) (Datisi LXL, from 4 by AS) 
6. ~- (LAbc -+ (Aba --+ LIac)) (Darapti LXL, from 5 by AS) 
7. ~ (Ibc --~ (LAab --+ LIac)) (Disamis XLL, from 5 by AI, CW, US) 
8. ~ (Icb ~ (LAba --+ LIac)) (Dimaris XLL, from 4 by AI, CW, US) 
9. ~- (Acb ~ (LAba ~ LIac' ) (Darapti XLL, from 7 by AS) 
10. e (LEbc --+ (Iab--+ LOac' 
11. ~ (LEcb --4 (Iab --+ LOac' 
12. e (LEbc --+ (Iba ~ LOac' 
13. e(LEbc --+ (Aba --+ LOac 
14. e (LEcb-+ (Iba --+ LOac' 
15. e (LEcb ~ (Aba --+ LOac 
16. ~- (LEcb -+ (Aab --+ LEac 
17. e (LEbc --+ (Aab--4 LEac 
18. ~- (Acb ---+ (LEab ---+ LEac 
19. e (Acb--4 (LEba --+ LEac 
20. e (LEbc --+ (Aab -+ LEac 
21. e (LEcb --+ (Aab -+ LOad 
22. ~- (Acb--+ (LEab--+ LEac 
23. ~ (Acb ~ (LEba --+ LEac 
) (Ferio LXL, by A8) 
) (Festino LXL, from 9 by AS) 
) (Ferison LXL, from 9 by AS) 
) (Felapton LXL, from 11 by AS) 
) (Fresison LXL, from 9 by AS) 
) (Fesapo LXL, from 13 by AS) 
) (Cesare LXL, by A6) 
) (Celarent LXL, from 15 by AS) 
) (Camestres XLL, from 16 by AI, CW, US) 
) (Camenes XLL, from 17 by AS) 
) (Celaront LXL, from 16 by CW) 
) (Cesaro LXL, from 15 by CW) 
) (Camestrop XLL, from 18 by CW) 
) (Camenop XLL, from 19 by CW) 
Theorem 4.7. All unmarked LLL cells on table 5 represent asserted wffs. 
1 
Proof. Use A9, A10 and AS with theorem 4.6. So, for example, Barbara LLL is asserted, 
since Barbara LXL is asserted and ~ (LAab --+ Aab). Disamis LLL is assserted, since 
Disamis XLL is asserted and ~ (LIab --+ Iab). 
1 
Theorem 4.8. All unmarked MXM, XMM, LMX and MLX cells on table 5 represent 
asserted wffs. 

270 
Fred Johnson 
Proof. Use theorem 4.6 and RV. So, for example, the assertion of Darii MXM is generated 
from the assertion of Ferison LXL as follows. ~-(MAbc --+ (Iab --+ MIac)) since 
~(LEac ~ (lab --+ LObc)) (by RV and SE), since ~-(LEbc --+ (Iba --+ LOac)) (by 
US). The assertion of Festino LMX is generated from the assertion of Celarent LXL as 
follows. ~-(LEcb --+ (mIab --+ Oac)) since ~-(LEcb -+ (Aac -~ LEab)) (by RV and 
SE), since e (LEbc --+ (Aab --+ LEac)) (by US). The assertion of Camenes MLX is 
generated from the assertion of Fresison LXL as follows, e (MAcb --+ (LEba -+ Eac)), 
since ~-(Iac --+ (LEba ~ LOcb)) (by RV and SE), since ~- (LEba --+ (Iac --+ LOcb)) 
(by AI), since (LEcb --+ (Iba --+ LOac)) (by US). 
II 
4.1 
Rejections in L-X-M 
To reject the syllogisms not marked with a "V" on table 4, as well as other invalid in- 
ferences, McCall adds twelve rejection axioms to the list of rejection axioms for the LA- 
system. We shall illustrate how some of these rejection axioms are used to reject some 
wffs. 
Theorem 4.9. (Rejection of Barbara XLL) ~(Abc --+(LAab -+LAac)). 
Proof. Recall that R2 = ~cr, where a = (LAbb --+ (MAab -+ (Aac--+ (LAca --+ 
(LAbc --+ LAac))))). 
1. -~a (by R2) 
2. ~- ((Aac --+ (LAce --+ LAac)) --+ a)(by A0) 
3. ~(Aac -+ (LAce -+ LAac)) (from 1 and 2 by R-D) 
4. ~- (Aac --+ (LAce --+ nAaa)) (by A5 and US) 
5. ~-((dac -+ (LAce --+ LAaa)) ~ ((Aac ---+ (LAaa -+ LAac)) --+ (Aac --+ 
(LAca --+ LAac)))) (by A0) 
6. ~-((Aac --+ (LAaa ~ LAac)) ~ (Aac -+ (LAca --+ LAac))) (from 4 and 5 by 
MP) 
7. ~(Aac ---+ (LAaa --+ LAac)) (from 3 and 6 by R-D) 
8. -~(Abc ~ (LAab --+ LAac)) (from 7 by R-US) 
II 
Theorem 4.10. Baroco XMM and Bocardo MLX are rejected. 
Proof. 
1. -~(Abc --+ (LAab ~ LAac)) (by theorem 4.9) 
2. -~(Abc --+ (MOac --+ MOab)) (from 1 by theorem R-RV and R-SE) 
3. -~(Acb --+ (mOab ~ mOac)) (Baroco XMM, from 2 by R-US) 
4. -~(mOac -~ (LAab --+ Obc)) (from 1 by R-RV and R-SE) 
5. -~(mObc --+ (LAba --+ Oac)) (Bocardo MLX, from 4 by R-US) 
Theorem 4.11. Barbara LMX, Baroco LXL and Bocardo XMM are rejected. 
m 
Proof. Recall that R3 =-~a, where a is (LAaa --+ (LAcc -+ (MAac --+ (LAca --+ 
Aac)))). 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
271 
1.-~cr (byR3) 
2. ~- ((LAcc -+ (MAac --+ Aac)) --+ or)(by A5) 
3. -~(LAcc -~ (MAac --+ Aac)) (from 1 and 2 by R-D) 
4. -~(LAbc -+ (MAab --+ Aac)) (Barbara LMX, from 3 by R-US) 
5. -~(LAbc -+ (Oac -+ LOab)) (from 4 by R-RV and R-SE) 
6. -~(LAcb -+ (Oab --+ LOac)) (Baroco LXL, from 5 by R-US) 
7. -~(Oac --+ (MAab --+ MObc)) (from 4 by R-RV) 
8. -~(Obc --+ (MAba --+ MOac)) (Bocardo XMM, from 7 by R-US) 
II 
Theorem 4.12. Barbari MLX, Bramantip LMX, Felapton XLL and Baroco XLL are 
rejected. 
Proof. Recall that R4 = -~cr, where cr = (LAaa ~(LAbb --+(LAcc --+LAab --+(MAba 
--+(MAbc --+(LAcb --+Iac)))))). 
1.-~cr (byR4) 
2. ~- ((MAbc ~ (LAab ~ Iac)) --+ cr) (by A0) 
3. -~(MAbc --+ (LAab --+ Iac)) (Barbari MLX, from 1 and 2 by R-US) 
4. -~(LAab ~ (MAbc --+ Iac)) (from 3 by R-AI) 
5. ~- (Ica --+ Iac) (by Con) 
6. -~(LAab --+ (MAbc ~/ca)) (from 4 and 5 by R-CS) 
7. -~(LAcb --+ (MAba --+ Iac)) (Bramantip LMX, from 6 by R-US) 
8. -~(Eac --+ (LAab -+ LObc)) (from 3 by R-RV and SE) 
9. -~(Ebc --+ (LAba -+ LOac)) (Felapton XLL, from 8 by R-US) 
10. -~(Ebc --+ Obc) (by Sub-a and US) 
11. -~(Obc ~ (LAba ~ LOac)) (Baroco XLL, 9 and 10 by R-AW) 
II 
Our purpose in this section has been to illustrate how McCall's rejection apparatus 
works. In the next section we discuss this result: whatever is rejected by using McCall's 
rejection apparatus may be shown invalid by using countermodels. McCall's [1963] con- 
tains no discussion of models. 
5 
SEMANTICS FOR L-X-M 
In [Johnson, 1989] a semantics for McCall's L-X-M is given. Validity is defined by using 
models, asserted wffs in L-X-M are shown to be valid (that is, system L-X-M is sound 
), and rejected sentences are shown to be invalid. So valid wffs in X-L-M are shown to 
be accepted (that is, system L-X-M is complete ) since, as McCall shows, every wff in 
L-X-M is either accepted or rejected. The presentation of the semantics here will benefit 
from comments about it in Thom's [1996] and Thomason's [1993] and [1997]. 16 
16For example, I borrow Thom's use of "base conditions" and "superstructural conditions" to present what 
he calls a "two-layered semantics". And I borrow Thomason's use of "'VM" to refer to a valuation relative to a 
model. 

272 
Fred Johnson 
The semantics for L-X-M extends the familiar semantics for the assertoric syllogistic 
that assigns non-empty sets of objects to terms. To define the semantic notion of validity 
we refer to models and valuations relative to models. 
Definition 5.1. (model) 3//is a model iff .M = (W, n +, q+, n-, q-), where W is a non- 
empty set and n+, q+, n-, and q- are functions that map terms into subsets of W and 
satisfy the following "base conditions", where + (x) is short for n + (x) U q+ (x), and x o y 
(x overlaps y) is short for x N y ~ 0: 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
If f and 9 are any of the functions n+, q+, q- or n- and f r g, then, for every term 
x, f(x) N 9(x) = 0; and for every x, n+(x) U q+(x) U q-(x) U n-(x) = W 
For every x, n + (x) 7~ 0 
(For every x, y and z) if + (z) C_ n- (y) and + (x) C_ + (y) then + (x) C_ n- (z) 
If + (y) C_ n + (z) and + (x) o + (y) then n + (x) o n + (z) 
If + (y) C_ n-(z) and + (x) o + (y) then n + (x) o n-(z) 
If +(z) C_ n+(y)and n+(x)o n-(y)then n+(x)o n-(z) 
For an intuitive grasp of the notion of a model think of W as the world, n + (a) as the set 
of things in W that are essentially a, q+ (a) as the set of things in W that are contingently 
a and are a, n-(x) as the set of things in W that are essentially non-a, and q-(a) as the 
set of things in W that are contingently not a and are not a. 
Definition 5.2. (valuation) A valuation V is a function that assigns t or f, but not both, 
to sentences, where: i) V(-~p) = tiff V(p) = f; and ii) V (p --+ q) = t iff V (~p) = t or 
V(q) = f; and iii) V(L-~-~p) = tiff V(Lp) = t. 
Definition 5.3. (valuation relative to model M) Let VM, a valuation relative to a model 
M, be a valuation that satisfies the following "superstructural conditions": 
$1 
$2 
$3 
$4 
$5 
$6 
(For every x and y) VM(Axy) - tiff + (x) C_ + (y) 
VM(Ixy) = tiff + (x) o + (y) 
VM(LAxy) = tiff + (x) C_ n + (y) 
VM(LIxy) = tiff n + (x) o n + (y) 
VM(L-.Axy) = tiff n + (x) o n-(y) 
VM(L-.Ixy) = tiff + (x) C_ n-(y) 
Definition 5.4. (valid) Let a be an L-X-M sentence, cr is valid (~ a) iff, for every model 
M, every valuation relative to M assigns t to a. a is invalid iff o- is not valid. 
In this section we shall construct models that show the invalidity of all of the syllo- 
gisms that correspond to marked cells on table 5. Exactly four models suffice to show 
the invalidity of the invalid LXL and XLL models marked on these tables. Models con- 
structed by interchanging rows in these four models suffice to invalidate the remaining 
invalid syllogisms mentioned on the table. 
Table 5 agrees with table 7 on p. 43 of [McCall, 1963]. A cell on the former is marked 
if and only if it is unmarked on the latter. The marks on McCall's table indicate the 
relevant syllogism is syntactically asserted in L-X-M. McCall's discussion of L-X-M is 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
273 
totally syntactic. He gives no formal semantics and thus no formal definition of validity. 
But as shown in [ 1989], the syllogisms that are syntactically asserted in L-X-M are the 
syllogisms that are valid in L-X-M and vice versa. The above theorems 4.6 and 4.7 pertain 
to the unmarked cells on table 5. 
Table 5. Countermodels for L-X-M syllogisms 
Figure 1 
Figure 2 
Figure 3 
Figure 4 
Subalterns 
LLL 
LXL 
XLL 
Barbara 
lac 
Celarent 
2ac 
Darii 
1 ac 
Ferio 
2ac 
Cesare 
Camestres 
3ac 
Festino 
Baroco 
3ac 
Darapti 
Felapton 
Disamis 
Datisi 
Bocardo 
Ferison 
Bramantip 
Camenes 
Dimaris 
Fresison 
Fesapo 
Barbari 
Celaront 
Cesaro 
Camestrop 
Camenop 
lca 
4ac 
lea 
3ac 
lca 
3ac 
3ac 
2ac 
2ac 
4ac 
2ac 
1 ac 
2ac 
2ac 
2ac 
2ac 
1 ac 
2ac 
2ac 
MXM 
XMM 
LMX 
MLX 
4bc 
4ab 
3ab 
2bc 
lba 
2ab 
3ac 
2bc 
2ab 
lbc 
lba 
2ab 
2ba 
lab 
2ab 
2ba 
lab 
2ab 
2ba 
2ba 
3bc 
3cb 
3cb 
lab 
3cb 
3cb 
2ab 
2ab 
lab 
lab 
lbc 
4ba 
2cb 
2bc 
lbc 
2cb 
2bc 
2cb 
2bc 
4cb 
lbc 
lbc 
2cb 
2cb 
3ba 
3ba 
lbc 
lbc 
3ab 
2bc 
We begin by constructing a model .M 1, presented by table 6, that shows the invalidity 
of Barbara LXL. When giving such tables we use the following conventions: set brackets 
are omitted when giving the range of a function, a blank cell indicates the range of the 
relevant function is the empty set, for terms x other than those explicitly mentioned on 
the table, n+(x) - 
n+(a), q+(x) - 
q+(a), n-(x) 
- 
n-(a) and q-(x) 
- 
q-(a), and 
w 
- n+ (a) u q+ (a) u n-(a) 
u 
So, for example, given table 6 the set of things that are essentially a has only one 
member, namely I. The set of things that are c and are contingently c has two members: 
1 and 2. The set of things that are essentially not b has no members. And the set of things 
that are not d and are contingently not d has 3 as its only member. W - { 1, 2, 3}. 
Table 6 expresses a model. Base conditions B1 and B2, here and below, do not require a 
comment. B3, B5 and B6 are trivially satisfied since, for every x and y, + (x)Nn- (y) - O. 

274 
Fred Johnson 
Table 6. Model .A//1 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
1,2,3 
3 
1,2 
Suppose (y) C_ n + (z). Then z - b. For all x, n + (x) o n + (b). So B4 is satisfied. 
Given model ,h//~: i) Y~l(Abc ) = t since +(b) C_ 
+(c); ii) V~I(LAab) 
- 
t 
since +(a) C_ n+(b); and iii) Y~x (LAac) - f since +(a) ~ n+(c). So VM~ (Abc --+ 
(LAaB --4 LAac)) - f . So ~ (Abc --4 (LAab --4 LAac)). So Barbara XLL is invalid. 
The invalidity of Barbara XLL is marked on table 5 by putting '1 ac' in the Barabara/XLL 
cell. 
Aristotle's informal counterexample for Barbara XLL at 30a28-30 uses terms 'motion', 
'animal' and 'man'. For Aristotle, Barbara XLL, construed as an inferential syllogism, 
is invalid given the inference 'All animals are (accidentally) in motion; all men are nec- 
essarily animal; so all men are necessarily in motion'. Aristotle takes the premises to be 
true and the conclusion false, making Barbara XLL invalid. 
By interchanging rows a and b in table 6 we may construct a model .M 1be expressed 
by table 7 that shows that Ferio MLX invalid. 
Table 7. Model .M lbc 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1,2,3 
1 
3 
2 
3 
1,2 
In general, if a table satisfies conditions B1 to B6 so will a table that results from 
the interchanging of its rows. For none of these conditions requires a particular ordering 
of rows. Note that V A/~lbc (MEac) = t, VMI~ c (Llab) = t and Wj~ab c (Obc) = f . So 
(MEac -9 (Llab ~ Oac)). That is, Ferio MLX is invalid. 
This is the recipe for constructing a table T2 for model M Nzv (where x and y are 
a, b or c) from a table T1 for model .MN (where 711 has rows a, b and c): make row a 
in T1 be row x in T2, make row c in T1 be row y in T2, and make row b in T1 be the 
third row in T2. Every row in T2 must be an a-row, a b-row or a c-row. So, for example, 
consider the Baroco/XMM cell on table 5, which is marked with 'lab'. Use the recipe to 
construct table 8 for model .M lab, which invalidates Baroco XMM. (The a-row of table 
6 becomes the a-row of table 8; the c-row of 6 becomes the b-row of table 8; and the 
b-row of 6 becomes the c-row of table 8.) Since Mlab(Acb) = t, M~ab(MOab) = t and 
.Mlab(MOac) = f, ~ (Acb --+ (MOab --+ MOac)). 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
275 
Table 8. Model .M lab 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
3 
1,2,3 
2 
3 
1,2 
Model .M2 expressed by table 9 may be used to show that Celarent XLL is invalid. 
Table 9. Model 3//2 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2 
3 
1 
Table 9 expresses a model. For all x and y, +x ~ n-(y). So conditions B3 and B5 are 
trivially satisfied. For all x and y if +(x) o +(y) then n+(z) o +(y). So B4 is satisfied. 
For all x and y, if +(x) C_ n+(y) then n-(y) C_ n-(x). So B6 is satisfied. 
Celarent XLL is invalid since: i) VM2 (Ebc) - t since + (b) does not overlap + (c)" ii) 
VM2 (LAab) - t since + (a) C_ n + (b)" and iii) VM2 (LEac) - f since + (a) ~ n-(c). 
So VM 2 (Ebc -+ (LAab --+ LEac)) - f. So ~ (Ebc --+ (LAab --+ LEac)). 
Model .M 3 expressed by table lO may be used to show that Camestres LXL is invalid. 
Table 10. Model 3//3 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
3 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
Table 10 expresses a model. B3 and B5 are trivially satisfied since, for every x and y, 
+(x) ~_ n-(y). For B4 note that if +(x) o +(y) then n+(x) o +(y). For B6 note that if 
+(z) C_ n+(y) then n-(y) C_ n-(z). 
Camestres LXL is invalid since: i) VM3 (LAcb) - t since + (c) c_ n + (b); ii) VM3 (Eab) = 
t since + (a)N + (b) = 13; and iii) VM3 (LEac) = f since + (a) ~ n-(c). So VM3 (LAcb 
(Eab-+ LEac)= f. So ~ (LAcb-+ (Eab-+ LEac)). 
For Aristotle, Camestres LXL is invalid since Celarent XLL is invalid. A "semantic 
rule" that underwrites this reduction of an invalidity to an invalidity may be stated as 
follows. 

276 
Fred Johnson 
RV:-DR3 i) From ~ (p --+ (q --+ r)) and ~ (p -+ s) infer ~ (s --+ (q + r)); and ii) 
from ~ (p--q (q --+ r)) and ~ (q --+ s)infer ~: (p--+ (s -+ r)). 
Proof. Fori) Supposea) ~ (p -+ (q ~ 
r)) andb) ~ (p --+ s). By a) there is a 
model M such that VM(p) = t, VM(q) -- t and VM(r) -- f. By b) VM(S) -- t. So 
1/= (s --+ (q --+ r)). Use similar reasoning for ii). 
II 
RV:-AW is the semantic counterpart of the syntactic rule R-DR3, which is called re- 
jection by antecedent weakening (R-AW). Given the rejection of Celarent XLL (Ebc --+ 
(LAab --+ LIac)) and the conversion principle e (Ebc --+ Ecb), Camestres LXL is re- 
jected by R-AW. Likewise, given the invalidity of Celarent XLL and the semantic conver- 
sion principle ~ (Ebc --+ Ecb), Camestres LXL is invalid by R V:-AW. 
Semantic counterparts of other syntactic rejection rules may be put to use to establish 
invalidities. We illustrate this point by considering the semantic counterpart of R-RV. 
RV:-RV i) From ~: (p -+ q) infer ~: (-~q --+ -~p); ii) from V: (p --+ (q --+ r)) infer [/: 
(p --+ (~r --+ -~q)); and iii) from V: (p ~ (q --+ r)) infer ~ (-~r -+ (p --+ -~q)). 
Proof. For i) suppose ~= (p --+ q). So there is a model M such that VM(p) -- t and 
VM(q) = f. So VM(--,q) -- rand VM(--,p) = f. So V= (~q --+ ~p). Use similar 
reasoning for ii) and iii). 
II 
By RV=-RV, since ~ 
(Ebc --+ (LAab -~ LEac)) (Celarent XLL is invalid), 
(Ebc --+ (-~LEac --+ -~LAab)). By using semantic counterparts of other syntactic prin- 
ciples stated above it is easy to conclude that Festino XMM is invalid. 
To show that Baroco XLL is invalid we use model .hal4, presented on table 11.17 
Table 11. Model .Aria 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1,2 
3,4 
1,3 
4 
1 
4 
2 
3 
2 
Table 11 expresses a model. Base conditions B3 and B5 are trivially satisfied since, for 
every x and y, + (x) ~Z n-(y). B4 and B6 are trivially satisfied since, for every x and y, 
n+(v). 
Given model .A//4: i) V~ 4 (Acb) - 
t since + (c) C_ 
+ (b); ii) V~ 4 (LOAD) -- t 
since n+(a) o n-b; and iii) VM4(LOac) - 
f since n+(a) does not overlap n-(c). 
So V~4((dcb--+ (LOAD-+ LOac))) - f. So ~ (Acb-+ (LOAD-~ LOac)). Fol- 
lowing the pattern indicated above we record on table 5 the invalidity of Baroco XLL by 
17Thomason [1993, p. 127] uses this table to invalidate Baroco XLL and Bocardo LXL though his definition 
of "validity" is not identical to that which we are currently discussing. Thomason models are discussed below. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
277 
putting '4ac' in the Baroco/XLL cell, where '4' refers to model .Ad4 and 'ac' indicates 
that 'a' and 'c' are taken as minor and major terms, respectively. 
Aristotle's counterexample for Baroco XLL is controversial. According to Thom on p. 
148 of [ 1991 ] Aristotle used terms 'animal', 'man' and 'white', generating the purported 
counterexample: 'All men are animals; some whites are necessarily not animals; so some 
whites are necessarily not men.' Thom says: 
The problem with this counter-example is not (as van Rijen supposes [ 1989]) 
that the major premise is necessarily true. It is that, if the minor is taken to 
be true then the conclusion will be true also. 
In agreement with Thom, Aristotle did not provide a good counterexample for Baroco 
XLL. A better informal counterexample is found in [Johnson, 1993, p. 179]: 'All things 
that are chewing are bears (Acb); some animals (dogs, say) are necessarily not bears 
(LOab); so some animals are necessarily not chewing (LOac)'. We do not follow Thom 
in developing formal systems that take Baroco XLL to be invalid. 
Though models .A//1 to .A/14 and variants of them constructed by interchanging rows 
in them suffice to give countermodels for the invalid syllogisms marked on table 5, other 
models are needed to invalidate all of McCall's rejection axioms and thus all of the invalid 
wffs. The model used in [1989] to invalidate McCall's (LAbb --+(LAff --+(Aad -+(LAda 
--+ (MAae -+(LAcb --+ (LAbd --+(LAce --+(Aec --+ (LAfc --+ (MAdf--+MAac))))))))))) (*5.41 
on p. 59) has four members. It is presented on table 12. 
Table 12. Model for *5.41 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1,2,3,4 
3,4 
4 
3,4 
3,4 
4 
3 
1 
1,2 
1,2 
2 
1,2 
2 
1,3 
An implication of [Johnson, 1989] is that every invalid L-X-M wff of form (Pl --+ 
(P2 --+ ... --+ pn)...), where each pi (for 1 < i _< n) is a simple wff or the negation of 
a simple wff, may be shown invalid by using a model (IV,...) in which W has no more 
than 6 members. 18 
In the next section we shall examine valuable attempts by Thomason to improve on the 
semantics discussed in this section. 
18[Johnson, 1991] shows that W does not require more than 3 members if all simple sentences are assertoric 
and all terms are "chained". 

278 
Fred Johnson 
5.1 
Thomason models 
In [Thomason, 1993] three notions of models are defined that enable Thomason to obtain 
soundness and completeness results for McCall's L-X-M calculus. In contrast to the 
soundness and completeness proofs given in [Johnson, 1989] no use is made of rejection 
axioms and rejection rules. One of these models comes close to the notion of a model 
defined above. We call it a "T3-model" (his "model3") and define it as follows. 
Definition 5.5. (T3-model) ,Ad is a T3-model iff 34 = (W, n+, q+, n-, q-), where W is 
a non-empty set and n+, q+, n-, and q- are functions that map terms into subsets of W 
and satisfy the following "base conditions", where + (x) is short for n + (x) U q+ (x)" 
B1 
If f and 9 are any of the functions n +, q+, q- or n- and f -7(: g, then, for every term 
x, f(x) N g(x) = O; and for every x, n+(x) tO q+(x) U q-(x) U n-(x) = W 
B2 
For every x, n + (x) r 0 
BT3 (For every x and y) if + (x) o + (y) then + (x) o n + (y) 
BT4 If + (x) C_ n-(y) then + (y) C_ n-(x) 
BT5 If +(x) C_ n+(y) then n-(y) C_ n-(x) 
To define "valuation relative to a model" and "validity" Thomason uses the same su- 
perstructural conditions as used above. 
Thomason, on p. 133 of [1997], says that in his [1993] he "tried to find simpler, and 
apparently weaker, requirements for models" than those given in [Johnson, 1989]. In the 
motivating section of [Thomason, 1993] he says "Johnson ... provided a semantics that 
has the right validities, but the latter is in some sense contrived." No doubt conditions 
BT3, BT4 and BT5 are more easily understood than B3, B4, B5 and B6 but Thomason is 
not correct in saying that the former, taken collectively, are weaker than the latter, taken 
collectively. We use the following theorem to show the relationship between T3-models 
and "J-models", the models defined above that satisfy base conditions B1 to B6. 
Theorem 5.6. i) Every T3-model is a J-model, but ii) there are J-models that are not 
T3-models. 
Proof. For i) suppose .Ad is a T3-model. First, suppose + (z) C n- (y) and + (x) C_ + (y). 
Then, by BT4, + (y) C_ n-(z) . Then + (x) C_ n-(z). Then .M satisfies B3. Next, 
suppose + (y) C_ n + (z) and + (z) o + (y). Then + (U) o + (z) and, by BT3, + (U) o n+ (x). 
Then n + (x) o n + (z). Then A4 satisfies B4. Next, suppose + (y) C_ n-(z) and + (x) o 
+(y). Then, by BT3, n+(x)o n+(z). Then.M satisfies B5. Next, suppose +(z) C_ n+(y) 
and n+(x) o n-(y). Then, by BT5, n-(y) C_ n-(z). Then n+(x) o n-(z). Then .A4 
satisfies B6. 
For ii) note that .M4, specified in table 11, is a J-model but not a T3-model since condition 
BT3 is not satisfied. Note that + (a) o +(b) but + (a) does not overlap n + (b). 
II 
Though both T3-models and J-models, with the superstructural conditions defined 
above, will reveal the invalidity of any invalid syllogism with any finite number of an- 
tecedents (or premises), it is not clear that BT3 and BT5 are Aristotelian principles. Cer- 
tainly BT4 is Aristotelian, given 25a27-28. And J-models may be simplified by replacing 
B3 with BT4, given the following theorem. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
279 
Theorem 5.7. i) B3 is derivable from BT4; and ii) BT4 is derivable from B3. 
Proof. For i) suppose that a) if + (z) C_ n-(y) then + (y) C n-(z) and that b) + (z) C_ 
n-(y) and +(x) C_ +(y). Then n+(y) C_ n-(z). Then +(x) C n_(z). 
For ii) suppose that c) if + (z) C n- (y) and + (x) C_ + (Y) then + (x) C n- (z) and d) 
+ (z) C_ n-(y). Since +(y) C_ + (y), + (y) C n-(z). 
II 
B4 (Darii LXL), B5 (Ferio LXL) and B6 (Baroco LLL) are Aristotelian given 30a37-b2 
and 30a6-14 of the Prior Analytics. 
5.2 
Variants of the L-X-M system 
Paul Thom in [1991, p. 137] points out that condition B2, used in the definitions of J- 
models and T3-models to guarantee that McCall's axiom LIaa is valid, is unAristotelian. 
He says that it is unAristotelian to think that there are walkers that are essentially walkers 
and whites that are essentially white. Johnson's [1993] and [1995] provide variants of 
McCall's L-X-M that are sound and complete systems, where condition B2 is omitted. 
Both systems have 100% Aristotelicity. The systems deviate from McCall's in that lines 
in deductions need not be axioms or lines that are ultimately derived from axioms by 
rules of inference. The systems are "natural deduction systems" rather than "axiomatic 
systems". Proofs of completeness assume that the inferences under discussion satisfy 
what Smiley calls the "chain condition" in [Smiley, 1994, p. 27]. And the systems attempt 
to accommodate Aristotle's proofs by ecthesis .19 In the remainder of this section we 
illustrate proofs by ecthesis and then discuss the chain condition in the next section. 
In addition to sentences such as Abe and Labc discussed above we count m C a (m is 
an a), m En a (m is necessarily an a), m ~'n a (m is necessarily not an a), etc. The latter 
are singular sentences. In contrast to Thorn's view, to present proofs by ecthesis singular 
sentences are required. 2~ Consider this proof of Darapti XXX taken from Smith's [1989, 
p. 9] with my additions in square brackets: 
When they [terms] are universal, then when both P [that is, c] and R [that is, 
a] belong to every S [that is, b], it results of necessity that P will belong to 
some R .... It is ... possible to carry out the demonstration through ... the 
setting out [that is, by ecthesis ]. For if both terms belong to every S, then if 
some one of the S's is chosen (for instance N [that is, m], then both P and R 
will belong to this; consequently, P will belong to some R. (28al 8-26) 
Aristotle's proof by ecthesis may be formalized as follows: 
1. Abc (Premise) 
2. Aba (Premise) 
19The systems proposed by [Lukasiewicz, 1957], [Corcoran, 1972] and [Smiley, 1973] do not attempt to 
accommodate Aristotle's proofs by ecthesis 
. According to Thorn's [Thom, 1991] account of ecthesis both 
Baroco XLL and Bocardo LXL are valid, though Aristotle regarded them as invalid. 
2~ 
an alternative method of working with singular sentences in the context of syllogistic reasoning see 
[Johnson, 1999a]. 

280 
Fred Johnson 
3. m C b (By ecthesis from 1. Since all b are c there must be a b that may be referred 
to as m.) 
4. m C c (From 1 and 3. Since all b are c and m is a b it follows that m is a c.) 
5. m C a (From 2 and 3 by the reasoning for line 4.) 
6. Iac (From 4 and 5 by "Existential Generalization"- if a particular object m is both 
an a and a c then something is both an a and a c.) 
Aristotle proves that Baroco LLL is valid in the following passage, taken from Smith's 
[1989, p. 13]: 
... it is necessary for us to set out that part [m] to which each term [b and 
c] does not belong and produce the deduction about this [m]. For it will be 
necessary in application to each of these; and if it is necessary of what is set 
out, then it will be necessary of some part [a] of the former term (for what is 
set out is just a certain "that". (30a9-15) 
His proof by ecthesis may be formalized as follows: 
1. LAcb (Premise. Whatever is c is necessarily b.) 
2. LOab (Premise. There is something that is necessarily a but necessarily not b.) 
3. mEna 
4. m ~'n b (Lines 3 and 4 come from line 2 by ecthesis. This is a use of "Existential 
Instantiation".) 
5. m ~'n c (From 1 and 4. If whatever is c is necessarily b and m is necessarily not in 
c then m is necessarily not in c.) 
6. LOac (From 3 and 5 by Existential Generalization.) 
6 
THE CHAIN CONDITION, RELEVANCE LOGIC AND THE AP SYSTEM 
The following remarks by Smiley from two of his papers show that Aristotle held views 
endorsed by contemporary "relevance logicians". 21 
By 
building 
onto 
the 
propositional 
calculus 
Lukasiewicz 
in 
effect 
equates syllogistic implication with strict implication and thereby commits 
himself to embracing the novel moods corresponding to such theorems as 
21 It is very surprising that Aristotle is scarcely mentioned in [Anderson and Belnap, 1975 and 1992], which 
provides authoritative discussions of relevance logic. See McCall's discussion of"connexive implication" [ 1975 
and 1992, pp. 434-452] for the one reference to Aristotle. In [Johnson, 1994] a syllogistic logic is developed that 
is a "connexive logic". Pleasing relevance logicians, the logic satisfies both Aristotle's thesis (If y is the logical 
consequence of a non-empty set of premises, X, then X is semantically consistent) and Boethius's Thesis (If z 
is the logical consequence of a set of premises, X U y, then z is not the logical consequence of a set of premises 
X U y', where yt contradicts y). Ironically, neither Aristotle's nor Boethius's thesis holds for what is now 
known as the "classical propositional calculus". In [Johnson, 1994] a theorem is proven that has as a corollary 
this interesting result due to C. A. Meredith in [1953]: The number of valid n-premised assertoric syllogisms 
(for n > 2) is 3n 2 + 5n + 2. There is no question that in Chapter 25 of Book I of the Prior Analytics Aristotle 
was looking for such a general result. Given the chain condition such counts are possible. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
281 
((Aab A Oab) -+ Icd) or ((Aab A Acd) -+ Aee). On the other hand Aris- 
totle's own omission of these syllogisms of strict implication, as they may 
be called can hardly be written off as an oversight. For they violate his dic- 
tum that a syllogism relating this to that proceeds from premises which relate 
this to that' (41a6). This dictum is part of a principle which is absolutely 
fundamental to his syllogistic, namely the principle that the premises of a 
syllogism must form a chain of predications linking the terms of the conclu- 
sion. Thus his doctrine of the figures, which provides the framework for his 
detailed investigation of syllogistic, is founded on this principle (40b30 ft.) 
Not less important is that the chain principle is essential to the success of 
his attempt at a completeness proof for the syllogistic. By this I mean his 
attempt to show that every valid syllogistic inference, regardless of the num- 
ber of premises, can be carried out by means of a succession of two-premise 
syllogisms. [Smiley, 1973, pp. 139-140] 
Probably the easiest way to formulate this 'chain condition' is to use the 
notation AB to denote any of the forms a, e, i, o regardless whether the 
subject is A or B. Then the condition is that a valid argument must be of the 
form 'AC, CD, DE, EF, . . . GH, HB; therefore AB'. The chain condition 
dramatically alters the character of the completeness problem (for a start, 
it excludes the possibility of anything following from an infinite number of 
premises) and it permits simple strategies for the proof that would otherwise 
be inconceivable. It is therefore not surprising that Aristotle's proof should 
fail to fit the same picture as, for example, Corcoran's own completeness 
proof for syllogistic logic without the chain condition [Corcoran, 1972]. 22 
[Smiley, 1994, p. 27] 
Aristotle's case for the chain condition is redolent of relevance w the need 
for some overt connection of meaning between premises and conclusion as a 
prerequisite for deduction. [Smiley, 1994, p. 30] 
Since McCall's presentation of the L-X-M calculus imitates Lukasiewicz's, it also em- 
braces "novel moods" of the sort mentioned by Smiley. (LAab -+(-7 LAab --+Icd)) is 
asserted in L-X-M even though neither c nor d occurs in the antecedent (and thus the 
consequent is irrelevant to the antecedents). This follows from the completeness result, 
mentioned above, for L-X-M. Note that for every model .M either VM(LAab) - f or 
Va~/l(~LAab 
-- f. 
SO ~ (LAab -~ (-,LAab --+ Ide)). And (LEab -+ (LEcd --+ 
(LEer -+ I99))) is asserted in L-X-M. For in every model M, V~(Igg) - t. So 
(LEab-+ (LEcd -+ (LEef -+ Igg))). So, by completeness, e(LEab--+(LEcd 
--+(LEef ~Igg))) even though 9 does not occur in any of the antecedents. 
22Corcoran gives a Henkin-style completeness proof for the assertoric syllogistic. His system validates infer- 
ences such as 'Eab; so Ace', inferences eschewed by relevance logicians. This inference is valid for Corcoran 
since the conclusion is logically true, even though the premise is irrelevant to the conclusion. 

282 
Fred Johnson 
By using the chain condition in [1973], Smiley formulates an elegant decision proce- 
dure for the assertoric syllogistic. In [Johnson, 1994] a system is developed for Aristotle's 
apodeictic syllogisms, call it the "AP system", that uses the chain condition. A decision 
procedure is given for it that yields Smiley's decision procedure as a corollary. 23 Both 
decision procedures are given below. 
Definition 6.1. (chain condition) Let Pri refer to "prefixes" of assertoric or apodeictic 
sentences: A, E, I, O, LA, LE, LI, LO, MA, ME, MI and MO. A chain is a set of 
sentences 
whose 
members 
can 
be 
arranged 
as 
a 
sequence 
(Prl[xlx2], 
Pr2[x2x3],..., Pr~[x~xl]), where Pri[xixj] is either Prixixj or Prixjxi and xi ~ xj 
ifi~j. 
So, for example, {LAab, MAcb, LIcd, Ead} and {Oba, LEbc, LEdc, LAde} are 
chains. But neither {LAaa} nor {LAab, Aba, Mdac, Aca} is a chain. 
Definition 6.2. (abbreviations for subsets of chains) X/LAxy refers to Axy or LAxy. 
X/LAx - y refers to q) if x = y; otherwise, it refers to {X/LAz~z2, X/LAz2z3,..., 
X/LAz~_lz~}, a subset of a chain, where x = zl, y = Zn and n > 1. LAx - y refers 
to q} if x - y; otherwise it refers to X/LAx - z, LAzy, a subset of a chain. X/LExy 
refers to Exy or LExy. X/LIxy refers to Ixy or LIxy. And X/LOxy refers to Oxy or 
LOxy. 
So, for example, LAab, LAbc, Acd has form X/LAa- 
d, but does not have form 
LAa - d. LAab, LAbc, Acd, LAd - e has form X/LAa - e and form LAa - e. 
Definition 6.3. (contradictory of, cd) Let cd(Axy) = Oxy where 'cd' may be read as 
'the contradictory of'. Let cd(Ixy) - Exy, cd(LAxy) = MOxy, cd(LExy) - MIxy, 
cd(LIxy) -- MExy, and cd(LOxy) = MAxy. And let cd(cd(x)) = x. So, for exam- 
ple, ad(Exy) = Ixy. 
Theorem 6.4. (Johnson [ 1994], decision procedure for "AP-validity") Suppose "validAp" 
(apodeictic syllogistic validity) is defined as in [1994]. Consider an inference in the "AP 
system" from premises P1, P2,..., Pn to conclusion C. This inference is validAp if and 
only if {P1,/='2,..., Pn, cd(C) } is a chain that has one of the following eleven forms: 
1. X/LAx-y, X/LOxy 
2. LAx-z, MAzu, LAu-y, LOxy 
3. X]LAx-z, LAzy, MOxy 
4. X/LAz-x, X/LAz-y, X/LExy 
5. X/LAz-x, X/LAz-u, MAuv, X/LAv-y, LExy (or LEyx) 
6. X/LAz-x, X/LAz-u, LAuy, MExy (or MEyx) 
7. X/LAz-x, X/LAu-y, X/Llzu, X/LExy (or X/LEyx) 
8. X/LAz-x, X/LAu-v, MAvw, X/LAw-y, X/Llzu (or X/Lluz), LExy (or LEyx) 
9. X/LAz-x, X/LAu-y, Mlzu, LExy (or LEyx) 
10. Llxy, MExy (or MEyx) 
23See [Johnson, 1994] and [Johnson, 1997] for other systems that yield Smiley's decision procedure as a 
special case of a more general decision procedure. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
283 
11. X/LAz-x, X/LAu-v, LAvy, X/LIzu (or X/LIuz), MExy (or MEyx) 
So, for example, {LAab, LAbc, Acd, cd(Aad) } has form I. So "LAab, LAbc, Acd; so 
Aad' is valid. {LAab, LAbc, Acd, cd(MAad)} has form 1. So 'LAab, LAbc, Acd; so 
MAad' is valid. {Aab, cd(Obc), Acd, Oad} has form 1. So 'Aab, Acd, Oad; so Obc' is 
valid. {MAac, LAcb, cd(MAab)} has form 2. So 'MAac, LAcb; so MAab' (Barbara 
LMM) is valid. {LAcb, Iac, cd(LIab)} has form 11. So 'LAcb, Iac; so Llab' (Darii 
LXL) is valid. 
Notice that since 'E' occurs at most once in any of the forms, it follows that no valid 
syllogism, regardless of the number of premises, is such that 'E' occurs in two or more of 
its premises. A similar comment applies to occurrences of 'M'. 
The following result is a corollary of theorem 6.4. 
Theorem 6.5. (Smiley [1973], decision procedure for "AS-validity") Suppose "validAs" 
(assertoric syllogistic validity) is defined as in [1973]. Consider an inference in the asser- 
toric syllogistic from premises P1, P2,..., Pn to conclusion C. This inference is validAs 
if and only if { P1, P2, 9 9 Pn, cd(C) } is a chain that has one of the following three forms: 
1. Ax-y, Oxy (restriction of form 1 of theorem 6.4) 
2. Az-x, Az-y, Exy (restriction of form 4 of theorem 6.4) 
3. XAz-x, Au-y, Izu, Exy (or Eyx) (restriction of form 7 of theorem 6.4) 
So, for example, given form 2 of the corollary both 'Aca, Acb; so Iab' (Darapti) and 
'Aca, Eab; so Ocb' (Celaront) are valid. 
On table 13 a syllogism is marked as valid by referring by number to the form listed in 
theorem 6.4 in virtue of which it is valid. So, for example, the first occurrence of '1' on 
the table indicates that Barbara XXX, XXM, XLX, XLM, LXX, LXM, LLX and LLM are 
valid in virtue of their relationship to {X/LAx - y, X/LOxy}. The 333 valid syllogisms 
marked on the table exactly match the 333 syllogisms that McCall accepts in his L-X-M 
system. See p. 46 of [McCall, 1963]. 
7 
CONTINGENT SYLLOGISMS 
A. N. Prior [1962, p. 188] gives a simple account of"the usual meaning of 'contingent"' 
in the following passage: 
In the De Interpretatione Aristotle remarks that the word 'possible' is am- 
biguous; we should sometimes say that 'It is possible that p' follows from 
'It is necessary that p', but sometimes that it is inconsistent with it. In the 
former sense 'possible' means simply 'not impossible'; in the latter sense, 
'neither impossible nor necessary'. It is for 'possible' in this second sense 
that the word 'contingent' is generally used. That is, 'It is contingent that 
p' means 'Both p and not-p are possible', KMpMNp [or (Mp A M-~p)]. 
Contingency in this sense stands between necessity and impossibility, but in 
quite a different way from that in which the simply factual stands between the 

284 
Fred Johnson 
Table 13. ValidAp 2-premised syllogisms 
X/L 
L 
L 
X 
L 
M 
M 
X 
L 
M 
X/L 
L 
X 
L 
M 
L 
X 
M 
M 
L 
X/M 
L 
L 
L 
M 
M 
M 
M 
X 
X 
Barbara 
Celarent 
Darii 
Ferio 
1 
3 
3 
2 
2 
7 
9 
9 
8 
11 
7 
11 
11 
9 
8 
7 
8 
8 
9 
11 
8 
9 
11 
11 
Cesare 
Camestres 
Festino 
Baroco 
7 
9 
9 
8 
11 
7 
9 
9 
11 
8 
7 
8 
8 
9 
11 
1 
2 
3 
2 
11 
8 
11 
9 
3 
11 
8 
Darapti 
4 
6 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
Felapton 
4 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
Disamis 
7 
11 
11 
8 
9 
9 
Datisi 
7 
11 
11 
9 
8 
8 
Bocardo 
1 
2 
2 
3 
3 
Ferison 
7 
8 
8 
9 
11 
11 
Bramantip 
Camenes 
Dimaris 
Fresison 
Fesapo 
4 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
7 
9 
9 
11 
8 
7 
11 
11 
8 
9 
9 
7 
8 
8 
9 
11 
11 
4 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
11 
8 
Barbari 
Celaront 
Cesaro 
Camestrop 
Camenop 
4 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
5 
6 
4 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
5 
6 
4 
5 
5 
6 
5 
6 
5 
4 
5 
5 
6 
5 
6 
5 
Total 
8 
24 
15 
8 
24 
24 
16 
7 
15 
8 
-- 333 
necessary and the possible. It is not that necessity implies contingency, and 
contingency impossibility; rather we have three mutually exclusive alterna- 
tives which divide the field between them -- either a proposition is necessary, 
or it is neither-necessary-nor-impossible (i.e. contingent), or it is impossible 
On p. 190 of [ 1962] Prior introduces the symbol 'Q' and reads 'Qp' as 'It is contingent 
that p'. McCall adopts Prior's use of 'Q' to refer to Aristotle's contingency operator and 
Thorn [1994, p. 91] refers to [McCall, 1963] to support his use of 'Q' in his discussions 
of contingency. In the discussion below, we shall also use 'Q'.24 
-' ' [Becker-Freyseng, 
2aThe following symbols are also found in the literature that formalizes contingency E, 2 
1933], '7"' [Lukasiewicz, 1957] and 'P0' [Smith, 1989]. Smith's P(Aab) is McCall's QAab, and Smith's PAab 
is McCall's MAab. Lukasiewicz used 'T' instead of 'Q' since earlier in his book he used 'Q' for 'is equivalent 
to'. McCall's Barbara LQM is Ross's [1949] A n ACA p. Montgomery and Routley use E7 for contingency in 
[1966] and [1968]. And Cresswell uses ~7 for contingency and/k for non-contingency in [1988]. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
285 
Thom makes the following remarks about contingency at the beginning of his article 
(p. 91): 
Aristotle's contingency syllogistic deals with the logic of derivations involv- 
ing propositions that contain an expressed mode of contingency. The contin- 
gent is defined at I. 13, 32al 8-20, as that which is not necessary, but which 
being supposed does not result in anything impossible, i.e. as two-sided pos- 
sibility. 
Fitting Prior's remarks, the two sides of contingency (Q) are necessity and impossibil- 
ity. The one side of possibility (M) is impossibility. 
McCall in [ 1963] diminishes and extends the L-X-M calculus, formulating the Q-L-X- 
M calculus. We give the basis for it. 
Primitive symbols 
Use the primitive symbols for L-X-M together with 
monadic operator Q 
Formation rules 
Use the formation rules for L-X-M, amending FRU as follows. 
FRU If p is a categorical expression then ~p is a categorical expression and Lp and Qp 
are wffs. 
Assertion axioms 
Use A0-A4 from system LA and A5-A14 from system L-X-M. So A2 is IAA. Add the 
following axioms. 
A 15 (Barbara QQQ) 
A16 (Darii QQQ) 
A17 (QXQ-AAE, figure 1) 
A18 (Darii QXQ) 
A 19 (Barbara XQM) 
A20 (Celarent XQM) 
A21 (Ferio XQM) 
~- (QAbc -+(QAab --+QAac)) 
(QAbc -+(QIab -+QIac)) 
(QAbc -+(Aab --+QEac)) 
(QAbc --+(lab -+QIac)) 
(Abc -+(QAab --+MAac)) 
(Ebc --+(QAab --+MEac)) 
(Ebc --+(QIab --+MOac)) 
A22 (complementary conversion, QE-QA) ~- (QEab -+QAab) 
A23 (complementary conversion, QI-QO) ~ (Qlab -+QOab) 
A24 (complementary conversion, QO-QI) ~- (QOab --+Qlab) 
A25 (QI conversion) 
e (Qlab -+QIba) 
A26 (QE-ME subordination) 
~ (QEab ~MEab) 
A27 (QI-MI subordination) 
e (QIab -+Mlab) 

286 
Fred Johnson 
A28 (QO-MO subordination) 
~- (QOab --+MOab) 
Assertion transformation rules 
Use the assertion tranformation rules for L-X-M. 
On p. 76 of [ 1963] McCall gives the following reason for changing A2 from LIaa to 
Iaa. 
If we retain the axiom LIaa, we may, by means of the substitution 
CKOAacLIaalac [((QAac /~ Llaa) -+ Iac))] of Darii QLX (proved be- 
low), derive the implication CQAacIac [(QAac --+ Iac)], which is un- 
Aristotelian. 
We shall present this reasoning systematically. 
Proof. 
1. ~- (Ebc ~ (QAab -+ MEac)) (by A20) 
2. ~ (QAab ~ (Ebc ~ MEac)) (from 1 by AI) 
3. ~- (QAab ~ (LIac ~ Ibc)) (from 2 by RV and SE) 
4. ~ (QAab --+ (LIaa --+ Iba)) (from 2 by US) 
5. ~ LIaa (by A2 for L-X-M) 
6. ~ (QAab --+ Iba) (from 4 and 5 by AI and MP) 
7. ~ (QAab --+ Iab) (from 6 by CW, given Con) 
8. ~- (QAac --+ Iac) (from 7 by US) 
II 
McCall devised his system Q-L-X-M so that it has this feature: (QEab --+ QEba) 
is not accepted. He wishes to reflect Aristotle's view that universally negative contin- 
gent propositions are not convertible. 25 McCall puts Aristotle's argument for the non- 
convertibility of such propositions as follows: 
... in 36b35-37a3, Aristotle gives what is in essence the following argument. 
We know that Q Aab implies QEab, and that QEba implies Q Aba [by com- 
plementary conversion]. Therefore if QEab implied QEba, QAab would 
imply Q Aba, which it does not. Hence Q Eab is not convertible. 
But, unfortunately, McCall's Q-L-X-M system is too strong. It forces us, for example, 
to accept (QAbc --+ (LAab --+ LAde)), which is clearly unAristotelian. It does not 
satisfy the chain condition mentioned above. After showing this, we shall lay out a system 
that is semantically consistent and maximizes Aristotelicity. 
25On p. 198 of [1957] Lukasiewicz calls Aristotle's view a 'grave mistake'. Lukasiewicz says 'He [Aris- 
totle] does not draw the right consequences from his definition of contingency, and denies the convertibil- 
ity of universally-negative contingent propositions, though it is obviously admissible.' But, following Mc- 
Call, one can attempt to formulate Aristotle's contingency syllogistic without, in effect, defining QEab as 
(--,LEab A --,L~Eab). 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
287 
7.1 
Overlooked acceptances in the Q-L-X-M system 
McCall claims that Barbara QLX is not a thesis in his Q-L-X-M system. See table 13 on 
p. 92 of [ 1963]. But this result is a corollary of the following theorem. 
Theorem 7.1. ~ (Q Abc --+( LAab -+x)), where x is any wff. 
Proof. 
1. ~ (Eca -+ (QAbc --+ MEba)) (by A20 and US) 
2. ~ (LAab --+ LIba) (by Ap-sub-a) 
3. ~- (MEba -+ MOab) (from 2 by RV and SE) 
4. ~- (Eca --+ (QAbc --+ MOab)) (from 1 and 3 by CW) 
5. ~- (QAbc --+ (LAab --+ Ica)) (from 4 by AI, RV and SE) 
6. ~- (LAab-+ (Ice -+ LIcb)) (A7 and US) 
7. e((Qdbc --+ (LAab --+ Ica)) --+ ((LAab --+ (Ica --+ LIcb)) --+ (QAbc 
(LAab ---+ LIcb)))) (by AO) 
8. ~- (QAbc --+ (LAab ---+ LIcb)) (from 5, 6 and 7 by MP) 
9. ~- (QAbc --+ QEbc) (by CC and US) 
10. ~- (QEbc ~ MEbc) (by A26 and US) 
11. ~ (MEbc --+ MEcb) (by Ap-con and US) 
12. ~- (QAbc --+ MEcb) (from 9, 10 and 11 by CW) 
13. e (QAbc --+ ~LIcb) (from 12 by SE) 
14. e((QADc ~ (LAab -+ Licb)) --+ ((QAbc -+ --,LIcb) ---+ (QAbc --+ (LAab --+ 
x)))) (by AO) 
15. ~ (QAbc -+(LAab --+x)) (from 8, 13, and 14 by MP) 
1 
The following theorem provides additional evidence that McCall's Q-L-X-M system is 
too strong to be Aristotelian. 
Theorem 7.2. ~ (LAbc -+(QAab -+x)), where x is any sentence. 
Proof. 
1. ~-(Eac --+ (QIba ---+ MObc)) (by A21 and US) 
2. ~- (QAab --+ QIba) (by A18, US, A2, MP) 
3. ~- (Eac --+ (QAab ~ MObc)) (from 1 and 2 by AS) 
4. ~- (LAbc --~ (QAab -+ Iac)) (from 3 by RV and SE) 
5. ~- (Iac ~ Ica) (by Con) 
6. ~ (LAbc --+ (QAab ~ Ica)) (from 4 and 5 by CW) 
7. ~- (QAab -+ (Ica --+ QIcb)) (by A18) 
8. ~-((LAbc --+ (QAab --+ Ica)) --+ ((QAab --+ (Ica --+ QIcb)) ~ 
(LAbc -+ 
(QAab --+ QIcb)))) (by AO) 
9. ~- (LAbc ~ (QAab --+ QIcb)) (from 6, 7 and 8 by MP) 
10. ~- (QIcb ---+ Q Ibc) (by A25 and US) 
l l. ~ (QIbc ~ QObc) (by A23 and US) 

288 
Fred Johnson 
12. ~- (QObc --+ MObc) (by A28 and US) 
13. ~-(LAbc ~ (OAab-+ MObc)) (from 9, 10, 11 and 12 by MP) 
14. ~ (LAbc --+ (QAab ~ ~LAbc)) (from 13 by SE) 
15. ~- ((LAbc --+ (QAab --+ --,LAbc)) --+ (LAbc --+ (QAab --+ x))) (by A0) 
16. e(LAbc --+(QAab --+x)) (from 14 and 15 by MP) 
m 
According to McCall's table 13 on p. 92 of [McCall, 1963], sentences representing 
Barbara QLX, Barbara LQX, Barbara LQQ, Baroco QXM and Bocardo XQM are not 
accepted in the Q-L-X-M system, though they correspond to inferences that Aristotle 
considered to be valid. But it is an immediate consequence of theorems 7.1 and 7.2 that 
the first three sentences are accepted. That the last two are accepted may be seen as 
follows: 
1. ~- (LAbc --+ (QAab --+ Aac)) (by theorem 7.2 ) 
2. ~- (Oac --~ (QAab ~ MObc)) (from 1 by RV and SE) 
3. ~- (Obc --+ (QAba ~ MOac)) (Bocardo XQM, from 2 by US) 
4. ~-(QAbc --~ (LAab--~ Aac)) (by theorem 7.1 ) 
5. ~- (QAbc --+ (Oac --+ MOab)) (from 4 by RV and SE) 
6. ~- (QAcb --+ (Oab --+ MOac)) (Baroco QXM, from 5 by US) 
So McCall's claim on p. 93 of [ 1963] that Q-L-X-M has 85 % Aristotelicity needs to be 
modified. Instead of 24 "non-Aristotelian moods" out of 154 moods marked on his table 
13, there are 29 out of 154. So the Aristotelicity of the Q-L-X-M system is about 81%. 
When determining the Aristotelicity of a system, McCall only uses figures 1, 2 and 
3 and none of the "subaltern moods" such as Barbari. Given theorems 7.1 and 7.2, the 
following wffs are accepted in Q-L-X-M, though they are not marked as accepted on 
McCall's table 13: Bramantip QLQ, Camenes LQQ, Fesapo QLQ and Barbari LQQ. 
In the following section we modify Q-L-X-M so that the resulting system, QLXM', 
does not have the unAristotelian features that result from theorems 7.1 and 7.2. Given 
the data- that Aristotle regarded Barbara LQM as invalid and Bocardo QLM as valid, for 
example- it is a virtue of the modified system that it does not have 100% Aristotelicity. 
Note that if ~- (QObc -4 (LAba -4 MOac)) (Bocardo QLM)then ~ (LAac -4 (QObc --4 
MOba)) (Baroco LQM) by Reversal. In system QLXM' both Barbara LQM and Bocardo 
QLM are invalid. In contrast, in system Q-L-X-M both are valid. 
8 
QLXM' 
To ensure that theorems 7.2 and 7.1 may not be proven in system QLXM' we exclude 
axioms A20 (Celarent XQM) and A21 (Ferio XQM). This decision is not difficult to 
make since, as McCall points out, Aristotle's proofs of Celarent XQM and Ferio XQM 
are flawed. McCall shows that one who endorses such reasoning, thinking that "what is 
impossible cannot follow from what is merely false, but not impossible", is committed to 
the absurd consequence that 'Some B are A; all C are A; so some C are A' is valid. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
289 
Only one other Q-L-X-M axiom is excluded to form QLXM ~" delete axiom A28, 
(QOab --+ MOab). This decision is a result of semantic considerations. For A28 to 
be validity preserving QOab and LAab must be semantically inconsistent. Since LAab 
is true iff + (a) C_ n + (b), we could make QOab and LAab contraries by fixing the se- 
mantics so that QOab is true iff + (a) o q(b). But then we are forced to say that Bocardo 
QLQ, for example, is valid even though Aristotle considered it to be invalid. (Suppose 
that VM(QOab) - t and VM(LAac) - t. Then +(a) o q(b) and +(a) C_ n+(c). Then 
n+(c) o q(b). Then +(c) o q(b). Then V~(QOcb) - t.) Note, also, that if QOab is 
true iff + (a) o q(b) then we would want to ensure that QIab is true iff + (a) o q(b) to 
guarantee the soundness of the complementary conversion principles that Aristotle clearly 
supported. But then we would be forced to say that Disamis QLQ is valid even though 
Aristotle considered it to be invalid. (Suppose that VM (QIbc) - t and VM (LAba) - t. 
Then + (b) o q(c) and + (b) C_ n + (a). Then n + (a) o q(c). Then + (a) o q(c). Then 
VM(QIac) - t.) Similar remarks may be made about Disamis QXQ, Datisi LQQ and 
Datisi XQQ. 
Rather than fixing the conditions for the truth of QOab as indicated above we may 
let QOab be true iff either Q Iab or Q Iba is true. 26 To make A28 truth preserving we 
must ensure that if LAab is true then both QIab and QIba are false. Such a position 
does not fit the sorts of examples Aristotle uses. Suppose, for example, that all things that 
are sleeping are necessarily men. It does not follow that it is not true that some men are 
contingently sleeping. 
We avoid the above difficulties by deleting axiom A28 when defining QLXM ~. 
In this system, as in Q-L-X-M, there are no rejection axioms and no rejection rules. 
Before giving a semantics for QLXM' we shall establish some immediate inferences 
that are conversions, subalternations or subordinations. With them we shall show the 
acceptance of various two-premised syllogisms indicated on table 15 by leaving a cell 
unmarked. After the semantics is given we shall show that sentences corresponding to the 
other cells, those in which numerals occur, are invalid. An occurrence of the "hat sign" 
in a cell in the table means the entry conflicts with Aristotle's judgments about validity as 
recorded on McCall's authoritative table 12 of [McCall, 1963]. 27 
Theorem 8.1. (Ordinary Q-conversions, Q-con) i) ~- (QIab --+ Qlba)" and ii) ~- (QOab --+ 
QOba). 
Proof. i) is A25. For ii) use A23, A24 and CW. 
m 
Theorem 8.2. (Contingency subalternations, Q-sub-a) i) e (QAab --+ QIab); ii) (QAab -+ 
QOab); iii) ~ (QEab -+ QIab)" and iv) ~- (QEab -+ QOab). 
Proof. For i) use A18, AI, A2 and MR For ii) use i), A23 and CW. For iii) use i), A22 
and AS. For iv) use ii), A22 and AS. 
II 
26Thom evaluates QOab in this way in [1993] and [1994]. 
2VIn the notes for table 12 McCall comments on tables in [Becker-Freyseng, 1933, p. 88] and [Ross, 1949, 
after p. 286]. 

290 
Fred Johnson 
Table 14. McCall's Table 12 and RV inconsistencies 
Q 
Q 
x 
Q 
L 
Q 
X 
Q 
L 
Q 
L 
Q 
x 
Q 
L 
Q 
X 
Q 
L 
Q 
L 
Q 
Q 
Q 
Q 
Q 
Q 
M 
M 
X 
X 
M 
M 
Barbara 
V 
V 
V 
V 1 
V 
V 13 
V 
Celarent 
V 
V 
V 
V 2 
V 7 
V 
V 14 
V 
Darii 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 8 
4 
12 
V 
V 
Ferio 
V 
V 
V 
V 3 
V 9 
V 
V 15 
V 
Cesare ' 
vlO 
3 
V 
15 
V 
Camestres 
V 4 
V 
6 
V 
~ 7 
Festino 
Vll 
2 
V 
14 
V 
Baroco 
1 
5 
13 
16 
Darapti 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Felapton 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Disamis 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
11 
7 
V 
V 
Datisi 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
lO 
o 
V 
V 
Bocardo 
V 
V 5 
V 
V 16 
V 
Ferison 
V 
V 
V 
V 6 
V12 
8 
V17 
McCall follows Ross's use of "complementary conversion" to refer to A22 to A24. 
On p. 298 of [Ross, 1949] Ross, in his discussion of 35a29-bl, identifies the following 
entailments, endorsed by Aristotle, as "complementary conversions": 
'For all B, being A is contingent' [QAba] entails 'For all B, not being A 
is contingent' [QEba] and 'For some B, not being A is contingent' [QOba]. 
'For all B, not being A is contingent' [QEba] entails 'For all B, being A is 
contingent' [QAba] and 'For some B, being A is contingent' [QIba]. 'For 
some B, being A is contingent' [QIba] entails 'For some B, not being A is 
contingent' [QOba]. 'For some B, not being A is contingent' [QOba] entails 
'For some B, being A is contingent' [QIba]. 
Given the following theorem and US, Ross's six complementary conversions are as- 
serted in QLXM'. 
Theorem 8.3. (Complementary conversion, CC) i) ~ (QAab --+ QEab)" ii) ~ (QAab --+ 
QOab)" iii) ~- (QEab --+ QAab)" iv) ~ (QEab --+ QIab); v) ~ (QIab --+ QOab); and vi) 
~- (QOab -+ Qlab). 
Proof. For i) use A17, US, AI, A1 and MR For ii) use Q-sub-a, A23 and CW. iii) is A22. 
For iv) use iii), Q-sub-a and CW. v) is A23. vi) is A24. 
9 
Theorem 8.4. (Complementary conversions per accidens, CC(pa)) i) w (QAab --+ Qlba); 
ii) ~ (QAab ~ QOba)" iii) ~ (QEab --4 QIba); and iv) k-(QEab --+ QOba). 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
291 
Table 15. QLXM' countermodels 
Q 
Q 
X/L 
Q 
X 
Q 
L 
Q 
X/L 
Q 
X 
Q 
L 
Q 
Q 
Q 
Q 
M 
M 
X 
X 
Q 
L 
M 
L 
Q 
M 
Barbara 
Celarent 
Darii 
Ferio 
Cesare 
Camestres 
Festino 
Baroco 
Darapti 
Felapton 
Disamis 
Datisi 
Bocardo 
Ferison 
7ac 
7ac 
7ac 
7ac 
Sac 
A 
6ac 
7ac 
5ac 
6ac 
7ac 
9ca 
6ac 
5ca 
7ac 
6ca 
9ac 
7ac 
5ac 
9ca 
6ac 
7ac 
6ca 
9ac 
7ac 
1 lbc 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
5ca 
9bc 
8bc 
5ca 
A 
5ca 
9bc 
11ac 
9bc 
8bc 
8bc 
7ab 
A 
7ab 
5cb 
A 
A 
7cb 
lbc 
7cb 
7cb 
llac 
5cb 
8ac 
8ac 
1 lbc 
7bc 
7bc 
7bc 
A llac 
1 lbc 
Bramantip 
5ca 
Camenes 
10ac 
6ca 
7bc 
Dimaris 
5ca 
Fresison 
7ac 
5ca 
6bc 
Fesapo 
5ca 
6bc 
7ac 
8bc 
8bc 
8ca 
8ca 
7ba 
7ba 
Barbari 
5ac 
Celaront 
6ac 
Cesaro 
7ac 
9ca 
6ac 
Camestrop 
7ac 
6ca 
9ac 
Camenop 
6ca 
7ac 
7ac 
7ac 
7ac 
lab 
7ab 
8ac 
Proof. For i) use Q-sub-a, Q-con, US and CW. For ii) use i), A23, US and CW. For iii) 
use i), A22 and AS. For iv) use iii), A23, US and CW. 
m 
Theorem 8.5. (Contingency subordinations, 
Q-sub-o) i) ~(QAab 
--+ 
MAab); 
ii) ~ (Q Eab ~ MEab); and iii) ~- (Q Iab --+ MIab). 
Proof. For i) use A19, A1, US and MP. ii) is A26. iii) is A27. 
n 
Uses of AS or CW in proofs of the following theorems involve only those immediate 
inferences that have been proven above. So, for example, in the proof that Celarent QQQ 
is asserted AS is used with Q-sub-a and US (e (QEbc --+ Q Abc)) and CW is used with 
Q-sub-a and US (~ (QAac -+ QEac)). 
Theorem 8.6. (asserted QQQs) The non-numbered QQQ cells on table 15 correspond to 
asserted sentences. 

292 
Fred Johnson 
Proof. 
1. ~(QAbc ~(QAab --+QAac)) (Barbara QQQ, by A17) 
2. ~ (QEbc ~(QAab --+QEac)) (Celarent QQQ, from 1 by AS, US, CW) 
3. ~ (QAbc --+(QIab -+QIac)) (Darii QQQ, by A16) 
4. ~ (QEbc --+(QIab --+QOac)) (Ferio QQQ, from 3 by AS, US, CW) 
5. ~ (QAbc --+(QAba -+QIac)) (Darapti QQQ, from 3 by AS, US) 
6. ~ (QEbc --+(QAba --+QOac)) (Felapton QQQ, from 5 by AS, US, CW) 
7. ~ (QAbc --+(QIba --+QIac)) (Datisi QQQ, from 3 by AS, US) 
8. ~ (QEbc --+(QIba --+QOac)) (Ferison QQQ, from 7 by AS, US, CW) 
9. ~ (QIbc --+(QAba -+QIac)) (Disamis QQQ, from 7 by AI, CW, US) 
10. ~ (QObc --+(QAba -+QOac)) (Bocardo QQQ, from 9 by AS, US, CW) 
11. ~ (QIcb ~(QAba --+QIac)) (Dimaris QQQ, from 9 by AS, US) 
12. ~- (QAcb -+(QAba ~QIac)) (Bramantip QQQ, from 11 by AS, US) 
13. ~(QEcb --+(QAba -+QOac)) (Fesapo QQQ, from 12 by AS, US, CW) 
14. ~ (QAbc --+(QAab -+QAac)) (Barbari QQQ, from 1 by CW, US) 
15. ~- (QEbc ~(QAab --+QEac)) (Celaront QQQ, from 2 by CW, US) 
16. ~ (QAcb ~(QEba --+QOac)) (Camenop QQQ, from 12 by AS, US, CW) 
Theorem 8.7. (asserted QXQs and XQQs) The non-numbered QXQ and XQQ cells on 
table 15 correspond to asserted sentences. 
Proof. 
1. ~(QAbc --+(Aab --+QAac)) (Barbara QXQ, by A17, US, CW) 
2. ~ (QEbc --+(Aab ~QEac)) (Celarent QXQ, from 1 by AS, US, CW) 
3. ~ (QAbc --+(Iab --+QIac)) (Darii QXQ, by A18) 
4. ~- (QEbc --+(Iab --+QOac)) (Ferio QXQ, from 3 by AS, US, CW) 
5. ~ (QAbc --+(Iba --+QIac)) (Datisi QXQ, from 3 by AS, US) 
6. ~ (QEbc ~(Iba -+QOac)) (Ferison QXQ, from 5 by AS, US, CW) 
7. ~ (QAbc -+(Aba -+QIac)) (Darapti QXQ, from 5 by AS, US) 
8. ~- (QEbc --+(Aba -+QOac)) (Felapton QXQ, from 7 by AS, US, CW) 
9. ~ (QAbc --+(Aab -+QIac)) (Barbari QXQ, from 1 by US, CW) 
10. ~ (QEbc --+(Aab -+QOac)) (Celaront QXQ, from 2 by US, CW) 
11. e (Ibc ~(QAba --+QIac)) (Disamis XQQ, from 5 by AI, CW, US) 
12. ~(Abc --+(QAba -+QIac)) (Darapti XQQ, from 11 by AS) 
13. ~ (Icb --+(QAba --+QIac)) (Dimaris XQQ, from 11 by AS) 
14. ~(Acb -+(QAba -+QIac)) (Bramantip XQQ, from 13 by AS) 
15. ~(Acb --+(QEba -+QOca)) (Camenop XQQ, from 14 by AS, CW) 
II 
Theorem 8.8. (asserted QLQs and LQQs) The non-numbered QLQ and LQQ cells on 
table 15 correspond to asserted sentences. 
Proof. Use theorem 8.7 and Sub-o. 
II 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
293 
So, for example, ~- (QAbc -+(LAab --+QAac)) since ~ (QAbc ~(Aab --+QAac)) by the- 
orem 8.7 and since ~ (LAab -+Aab) by Sub-o. 
Theorem 8.9. (asserted QXMs and XQMs) The non-numbered QXM and XQM cells on 
table 15 correspond to asserted sentences. 
Proof. For non-numbered QXM and XQM cells referred to by names that do not end 
with 'o' use theorem 8.7 wherever possible with Q-sub-o and CW. So Barbara QXM 
is asserted since Barbara QXQ is assserted. And, by this reasoning, Celarent QXM, 
Darii QXM, Darapti QXM, Datisi QXM, Barbari QXM, Darapti XQM, Disamis XQM, 
Bramantip XQM, Camenes XQM, Dimaris XQM and Barbari XQM. For the remaining 
non-numbered cells use asserted MXM syllogisms from table 13 wherever possibile with 
Q-sub-o and AS. So, Ferio QXM is accepted since Ferio MXM is accepted. And, by 
this reasoning, Festino QXM, Felapton QXM, Disamis QXM, Ferison QXM, Bramantip 
QXM, Dimaris QXM, Fresison QXM, Fesapo QXM, Celaront QXM, Cesaro QXM, Darii 
XQM, Datisi XQM and Barbari XQM. The only remaining non-numbered QXM and 
XQM cells correspond to the axiom Barbara XQM (A21) and Camenop XQM, which is 
deduced from Camenes XQM by CW given Ap-sub-a. 
II 
Theorem 8.10. (asserted QLXs and LQXs) The non-numbered QLX and LQX cells on 
table 15 correspond to asserted sentences. 
In the following proof the asterisks mark inconsistencies in the data as reported on 
McCall's table 12 on pp. 84-85 of [ 1963]. 
Proof. Use theorem 8.9 with RV and SE. So i) Celarent QLX is asserted since Festino 
QXM is asserted; ii) Celaront QLX (is asserted) since Cesaro QXM (is asserted); iii)* Ce- 
sare QLX since Ferio QXM; iv) Camestres QLX since Darii QXM; v)* Festino QLX since 
Celarent QXM; vi)* Baroco QLX since Barbara QXM; vii) Cesaro QLX since Celaront 
QXM; viii) Camestrop QLX since Barbari QXM; ix) Camenes QLX since Dimaris XQM; 
x) Fresison QLX since Camenes XQM; xi) Fesapo QLX since Camenop XQM; xii) Ca- 
menop QLX since Bramantip XQM; xiii) Celarent LQX since Disamis XQM; xiv) Ferio 
LQX since Datisi XQM; xv) Celaront LQX since Barbari XQM; xvi) Cesare LQX since 
Datisi QXM; xvii)* Camestres LQX since Ferison QXM; xviii) Festino LQX since Dis- 
amis QXM; xix) Cesaro LQX since Darapti QXM; xx) Camestrop LQX since Felapton 
QXM; xxi) Felapton LQX since Barbari XQM; xxii) Bocardo LQX since Barbara XQM; 
xxiii)* Ferison LQX since Darii XQM; xxiv) Camenes LQX since Fresison QXM; xxv) 
Fresison LQX since Dimaris QXM; xxvi) Fesapo LQX since Bramantip QXM; and xxvii) 
Camenop LQX since Fesapo QXM. 
II 
Theorem 8.11. The non-numbered QLM and LQM cells on table 15 correspond to as- 
serted sentences. 
Proof. For the QLMs use: i) results for the accepted QXM syllogisms stated in theorem 
8.9, Sub-o and AS; or ii) results for the accepted QLX syllogisms stated in theorem 8.10, 
Sub-o and CW. So, for example, ~ (QAbc ~ (LAab --+ MAac)) (Barbara QLM is as- 
serted) since ~ (QAbc --+ (Aab ~ MAac)) and ~ (LAab --+ Aab) given AS. e (QEcb -+ 

294 
Fred Johnson 
(LAab --~ MEac)) (Cesare QLM is asserted) since e (QEcb -+ (LAab --+ Eac)) and 
(Eac ~ MEac). 
For the LQMs use results for the XQMs in theorem 8.9 or the LQXs in theorem 8.10 
together with Sub-o, AS or CW. So, for example, ~ (LAbc --+ (QIab -+ MIac)) (Darii 
LQM is asserted) since ~ (LAbc --+ (QIab -+ Iac)) and ~ (Iac --+ MIac). ~ (LEbc -~ 
(QIab --+ MOat)) (Ferio LQM is asserted) since ~(LEbc --+ (QIab --+ Oat)) and 
(Oac ~ mOac)), 
m 
Theorem 8.12. The non-numbered QQMs on table 15 correspond to asserted sentences. 
Proof. Obtain the assertion of Barbara QQM from the assertion of Barbara QQQ by using 
CW with Q-sub-o. Use similar reasoning for Celarent, Darii, Barbari, Darapti, Disamis, 
Datisi, Bramantip and Dimaris. We generate the remaining four QQMs as follows. 
1. ~- (QEbc --+ (QAab -+ QEac)) (Celarent QQQ) 
2. ~- (QEac --+ MEac) (by Q-sub-o) 
3. ~- (MEac --+ MOac) (by Ap-sub-a) 
4. ~ (QEac --4 MOac) (from 2 and 3 by CW) 
5. ~ (QEbc --4 (QAab --+ MOac)) (Celaront QQM, from 1 and 4 by CW) 
6. ~ (QAab ~ (QEbc ~ QEac)) (from 1 by AI) 
7. ~- (MEac --+ MEca) (by Ap-con) 
8. ~- (QEac ~ MEca) (from 2 and 7 by CW) 
9. ~ (QAab ~ (QEbc -+ MEca)) (from 6 and 8 by CW) 
10. e (QAcb -+ (QEba -+ MEac)) (Camenes QQM, from 9 by US) 
11. ~- (MEac --+ MOac) (Ap-sub-a and US) 
12. e (QAcb--+ (QEba --~ MOac))(Camenop QQM, from 10 and l l by CW) 
13. e (QEcb --+ (QAba ~ MOac)) (Fesapo QQM, from 12 by CC and AS) 
m 
8.1 
Semantics for QLXM' 
The semantics for QLXM' is given by referring to Q-models. 
Definition 8.13. (Q-model) .Ad is a Q-model iff .Ad = (W, n+, q+, n-, q-), where W is 
a non-empty set and n+, q+, n-, and q- are functions that map terms into subsets of W 
and satisfy the following "base conditions": 
BQ1 If f and 9 are any of the functions n +, q+, q- or n- and f ~: 9, then, for every 
term x, f(x) N g(x) = 0; and for every x, n + (x) U q+ (x) U q-(x) t0 n-(x) = W 
BQ2 (For every x and y) if + (x) C_ n-(y) then + (y) C n-(z) 
BQ3 If +(y) C_ n+(z) and +(z)o +(y)then n+(x)o n+(z) 
BQ4 If+(y) C_ n-(z) and +(x) o + (y) then n+ (z) o n-(z) 
BQ5 If +(z) C_ n+(y) and n+(x) o n-(y) then n+(x) o n-(z) 
BQ6 If + (y) C_ q(z) and + (z) C_ q(y)then + (z) C_ q(z) 
BQ7 If + (y) C_ q(z) and + (x) o q(y) or q(x) o + (y) then + (z) o q(z) or q(z) o + (x) 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
295 
BQ8 If + (y) C_ +(z) and + (z) C_ q(y) then n + (z) does not overlap n- (z) 
Definition 8.14. (valuation relative to a Q-model) VM is a valuation relative to a Q- 
model .Miff it is is a valuation that satisfies the following "superstructural conditions": 
S1 (For every x and y) VM (Axy) = tiff + (x) C_ + (y) 
$2 Vz4 (Ixy) = tiff + (x) o + (y). 
$3 VM (LAzy) = tiff + (x) C_ n + (y) 
$4 VM(Llxy) = t iffn+(z) o n+(y) 
$5 VM(L-,Axy) = t iffn+(x) o n-(y) 
$6 V~ (L-~Ixy) = tiff + (x) C_ n- (y) 
$7 VM (QAxy) = tiff + (x) c_ q(y) 
$8 Vz4 (Qlzy) = t iff + (z) o q(y) or q(x) o + (y) 
$9 VM(Q-,Azy) = tiff +(x) o q(y) or q(x) o +(y) 
S10 Vz4(Q-,Ixy) = tiff +(z) c_ q(y) 
Definition 8.15. (Q-valid) ~Q 
a 
(a is Q-valid) iff, for every Q-model .h//, 
V~ (a) = t. a is Q-invalid (~c2 a) iff a is not Q-valid. 
Theorem 8.16. (soundness) If a is an assertion in QLXM' then ~Q a. 
Proof. We need to show that i) if ea is an axiom of QLXM' then ~Q a; and ii) each 
assertion transformation rule of QLXM' preserves Q-validity. Some examples of the rea- 
soning needed are given. For A1, ~Q Aaa since, for every Q-model 3d, VM (Aaa) = t 
since +(a) C_ +(a). For A2, ~Q Iaa since, for every Q-model .Ad, VM(Iaa) = t 
since + (a) o + (a). For A5, suppose there is a Q-model 3//such that Vz4(LAbc) = t, 
V~(Aab) = t and V~(LAac) = f. Then +(b) C_ n+(c), +(a) C_ +(b) and +(a) 
n+(c), which is impossible. So ~Q (LAbc -~ (Aab -+ LAac)). For A15, suppose 
there is a Q-model M such that VM (QAbc) = t, VM (QAab) = t and V~ (QAac) = f . 
Then + (b) C q(c), +(a) C_ q(b) and + (a) ~ q(c), which is impossible given BQ6. 
So ~Q (QAbc --+ (QAab -+ QAac)). For AR1 suppose ~Q (...z...z...) 
but ~Q 
(... y... y...), where (... y... y...) is the result of replacing every occurrence of term 
z in (...z...x...) 
with term y. Then, for some Q-model.M, VM(...y...y...) 
= f, 
where VM (y) is set S. Let VM (z) = S. Then VM (... z...x...) 
= f. So it is impossible 
for AR1 not to preserve validity. For AR2 suppose a) ~Q (p ~ q), b) ~Q p and c) ~Q q. 
Then, for some Q-model 3//, VM (q) = f, given c). Then, by a), VM (p) = f, which 
conflicts with b). So AR2 preserves validity. Reasoning for the other axioms and rules is 
straightforward and is omitted. 
9 
Given the soundness of QLXM' every asserted sentence in Lukasiewicz's LA is Q- 
valid since LA is a fragment of QLXM t. All of the L-X-M syllogisms marked as asserted 
on table 5 are Q-valid since all of them are asserted in QLXM'. And, given the following 
theorem, all of the syllogisms marked as invalid on table 5 are Q-invalid. 
Theorem 8.17. Models J~l, -/~2, -/~3 and 3//4 are Q-models. 

296 
Fred Johnson 
Proof. By earlier arguments the four models satisfy conditions BQ1 to BQS. Consider 
.A//1. Suppose +(y) C_ q(z). Then z - 
c. So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For all x, 
+ (x) o q(c). So BQ7 is satisfied. For all z, n-(z) - 0. So BQ8 is satisfied. Consider 
.M2. Suppose +(y) C_ q(z). Then y - 
a or y - 
b, and z - 
c. So BQ6 is trivially 
satisfied. For all x, + (x) o q(c). So BQ7 is satisfied. For all z, if + (c) C_ + (z) then z - c. 
Since n-(r 
- O, BQ8 is satisfied. Consider 3//3. Suppose +(y) C_ q(z). Then y - b or 
y - c, and z - a. So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For all x, + (a) o q(x). So BQ7 is satisfied. 
For all z, if + (a) C_ + (z) then z - a. Since n-(a) - 0, BQ8 is satisfied. Consider Ad4. 
For all y and z, if + (y) ~ q(z). So BQ6, BQ7 and BQ8 are trivially satisfied. 
II 
Table 16. Q-model 3//5 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
3 
1,3 
2 
3 
1 
2 
Table 16 expresses a model. BQ1 and BQ2, here and below, require no comment. 
For every y and z, if +(y) C_ n+(z) then z - 
c. For every x, n+(x) o n+(c). So 
BQ3 is satisfied. For every y and z, +(y) 9s n-(z). So BQ4 is trivially satisfied. If 
+(y) C_ n+(z) then z - 
c. For every x, y and z, if z C_ n+(y) then n+(x) does not 
overlap n- (y). So BQ5 is satisfied. For every x and y, if x C_ q(y) then x - a and y - b. 
So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For all x, x o q(b). So BQ7 is satisfied. For all z, + (a) does 
not overlap n- (z). So BQ8 is satisfied. 
Given Q-model 3/15, ~:Q (LAbc -+ (QAab -+ LAac)). For, VM5 (LAbc) - t since 
+ (b) C_ n + (c). VM5 (QAab) - t since + (a) C_ q(b). And VM5 (QAac) - 
f since 
+ (a) ~_ q(c). The occurrence of '4ac' in the Barbara/LQQ cell indicates Q-model .Ad5 is 
a countermodel for Barbara LQQ, where 'a' is the minor term and 'c' is the major term. 
This method of listing minor and major terms will be followed below. 
Table 17. Model .M6 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3,4 
3 
1 
4 
4 
1,2,3 
Table 17 expresses a model. For every y and z, if +(y) C_ n+(z) then y = z = c. For 
every x and y, if +(x) o +(y) then x = c. Since n+(c) o n+(c), BQ3 is satisfied. For 
everyy, if +(y) C_ n-(a) theny = bory = c. For everyx, ifxo 
+(b) orxo 
+(c) 
then n + (x) o n-(a). For every y, if + (y) C_ n-(b) then y = b. For every x, if x o + (b) 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
297 
then n + (x) o n-(b). For every y, if + (y) C_ n-(c) then y = a or y = b. For every 
x, if x o + (a) or x o + (b) then n + (x) o n-(c). 
So B4 is satisfied. For every y and 
z, if +(z) C_ n+(y) then n-(y) 
C_ n-(z) (that is, Thomason's BT5 is satisfied). 28 So, 
BQ5 is satisfied. For every x and y, if + (x) C_ q(y) then x = a and q = b. So BQ6 is 
trivially satisfied. For all w, if + (w) o q(a) or q(w) o + (a) then w = a or w = b. Since 
+ (a) o q(b) and + (b) o q(b), BQ7 is satisfied. For every z, if + (b) C_ z then z = b. Since 
+ (a) does not overlap n- (b), BQ8 is satisfied. 
Given Q-model 346, not ~O (LEac -+ (QAab --+ QObc)). For, VM6 (LEac) = t 
since + (a) C_ n-(c). VM6 (QAab) = t since + (a) C_ q(b). And VM6 (QObc) = f since 
+ (b) does not overlap q(c) and q(b) does not overlap + (c). The occurrence of '6bc' in 
the Felapton/LQQ cell indicates that Q-model .A//6 is a countermodel for Felapton LQQ, 
where 'b' is the minor term and 'c' is the major term. 
Table 18. Model .A4 7 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
3 
2 
2 
3 
1 
1 
3 
2 
Table 18 expresses a Q-model. Since Thomason's BT3 (if + (x) o + (y) then + (x) o 
n + (y)) is satisfied, both BQ3 and BQ4 are satisfied. 
Since BT5 is satisfied BQ5 is 
satisfied. If + (x) C_ q(y) then y = b and either x = a or x = c. Then BQ6 is trivially 
satisfied. If + (z)o q(a) or q(z) o + (a) and if + (z)o q(c) or q(z) o + (c) then + (z) o + (b). 
So BQ7 is satisfied. If + (b) C_ + (z) then z = b. Since n-(b) = ~, BQ8 is satisfied. 
Use Q-model 3,'18 to show that Barbari LQX and others are invalid. 
Table 19. Model .A//8 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
4 
4 
3 
1,2 
3,4 
2 
1 
Table 19 expresses a Q-model. Suppose +(y) C n+(z). Then y = b or y = c, and 
z - 
c. Since n+(b) o n+(c) and n+(c) o n+(c), BQ3 is satisfied. Since there is no 
x such that n + (x) o n-(c), BQ5 is satisfied. Since, for every x and y, x ~ y, BQ4 is 
28As noted above, BQ5 is a weaker condition than BT5. Replacing BQ5 with BT5 in the definition of a 
Q-model, forming a Q' model, yields this highly unAristotelian result: ~Q, (QAab -+ Eab). For, suppose 
that for some O'-model .AA, VA4(Eab) = f. Then V~(Iab) = t. By $2 and BT5, +(a) o n+(b). By $9, 
V M(QAab)- f. 

298 
Fred Johnson 
trivially satisfied. Suppose + (y) C_ q(z). Then y - 
a and z - 
b. Then BQ6 is trivially 
satisfied. Since, for every x, + (x) o q(b) or q(x) o + (b), BQ7 is satisfied. If + (b) C_ + (z) 
then z - b or z - c. Since, for all x, n + (x) does not overlap n-(b) and n + (x) does not 
overlap n- (c), BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 20. Model .M 9 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
3,4 
3 
2 
3,4 
1 
2 
1,2,4 
Table 20 expresses a Q-model. If + (y) c n + (z) then y - c and either z - c or z - b. 
If + (x) o + (c) then x - b or z - c. Since n + (x) o n + (z), BQ3 is satisfied. For every 
y, if + (y) C_ n- (a) then y - 
c. For every x, if x o + (c) then n + (x) o n-(a). 
There 
are no y such that y C_ n-(b). For every y, if + (y) C_ n-(c) then y - 
a. For every x, 
if x o +(a) then n+(x) o n-(c). So BQ4 is satisfied. If +(z) C_ n+(y) then z -c 
and 
either y - 
b or y - c. n+(x) does not overlap n-(b). If n+(x) o n-(c) then x - a or 
x - b. Since n + (a) o n- (c) and n + (b) o n- (c), BQ5 is satisfied. For every x and y, if 
x C_ q(y) then x - 
a and y - 
b. So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For all z, if + (z) o + (a) 
then z - 
a or z - 
b. Since + (a) o q(b) and + (b) o q(b), BQ7 is satisfied. For all z, if 
+ (b) C_ + (z) then b - z. Since n-(z) 
- 0, BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 21. Model 3//10 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
2 
4 
2 
1 
1,3 
3,4 
4 
Table 21 expresses a Q-model. For every x and y, +(x) ~= n+(y). So BQ3 and BQ5 
are satisfied. For all x and y, + (x) ~ n-(y). 
So BQ4 is satisfied. If + (x) C_ q(y) and 
+ (y) C_ q(z) then x - a and z - c. So BQ6 is satisfied. For every x and y, + (x) o q(y) 
or q(x) o + (y). So BQ7 is satisfied. If + (x) C_ q(y) then x - b or x - c. For all z, n + (b) 
does not overlap n-(z) and n + (c) does not overlap n-(z). So BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 22 expresses a Q-model. Since BT3 is satisfied, BQ3 and BQ4 are satisfied. 
Since BT5 is satisfied, BQ5 is satisfied. For every x and y, x r y. So BQ6, BQ7 and 
BQ8 are trivially satisfied. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
299 
Table 22. Model .M 11 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1,2 
1 
2 
1,2 
8.2 
Q-valid moods needed for completeness 
Aristotle did not discuss any moods with possiblity, as opposed to contingency, premises 
(or antecedents). But, given the semantics proposed for QLXM I we must recognize the 
Q-validity of some moods in which an M-wff is a premise (or an antecedent). In particular 
Darii QMQ is Q-valid. So, to move in the direction of obtaining completeness results for 
QLXM ! we shall amend the system by making Darii QMQ axiom 29 (A29). 
Theorem 8.18. (soundness of amended QLXM') Suppose QLXM ~ is amended by mak- 
ing the assertion of Darii QMQ, ~ (QAbc -+ (MIab -~ QIac)) be an axiom. Leave 
everything else unchanged. Then the resulting system is sound. 
Proof. Suppose ,A4 is a Q-model, VM(QAbc) = t and VM(MIab) = t. Given the 
definition of a Q-model, at least one of these three conditions is met: i) + (a) o + (b), ii) 
+ (a) o q(b) or iii) + (a) C_ n-(b). If i)is met then + (a) o q(c) and thus V~ (QIac) = t. 
If ii) is met then +(a) o q(c) or q(a) o +(c) and thus VM(QIac) -- t. If iii) is met 
then V~(MIab) = t and VM(MIab) = f. Given this absurdity VM(QIac) = t. So 
~Q (QAbc --+ (MIab--+ QIac)). 
m 
Assertions that are Q-valid correspond to unmarked cells on table 23. The marks in 
cells indicate how countermodels may be found for the Q-invalid syllogisms the table 
refers to. 
For each unmarked cell we shall show how the indicated syllogism is asserted in the 
system. 
Theorem 8.19. (asserted QMQs and MQQs) The non-numbered QMQ and MQQ cells 
on table 23 correspond to asserted wffs. 
Proof. 
1. ~- (QAbc --+ (MIab --+ QIac)) (Darii QMQ, A29) 
2. ~- (QEbc --+ (MIab --+ QOac)) (Ferio QMQ, from 1 by CC, AS, CW) 
3. ~- (QAbc -+ (MIba --+ QIac)) (Datisi QMQ, from 1 by Ap-con, AS) 
4. ~ (QAbc ~ (MAba --+ Qlac)) (Darapti QMQ, from 3 by Ap-con, AS) 
5. ~- (QEbc --+ (MIba --+ QOac)) (Ferison QMQ, from 3 by CC, AS, CW) 
6. ~- (QEbc --+ (MAba --+ QOac)) (Felapton QMQ, from 4 by CC, AS, CW) 
7. ~- (QAbc -+ (MAab --+ Qlac)) (Barbari QMQ, from I by Ap-sub-a, AS) 

300 
Fred Johnson 
Figure 1 
Table 23. Additional Q-syllogisms 
QMQ 
MQQ 
QMM 
MQM 
QLL 
LQL 
QQM 
Barbara 
12ac 
5ac 
12ac 
15ca 
7ab 
8ac 
Celarent 
12ac 
6ac 
13ac 
7ac 
7ab 
Darii 
5ac 
15ca 
7ab 
14bc 
Ferio 
6ac 
14ac 
14ac 
7ab 
15ba 
14ac 
Figure 2 
Cesare 
9ca 
6ac 
7ac 
7ac 
14ab 
Camestres 
6ca 
9ac 
7ac 
7ac 
14ba 
Festino 
9ca 
6ac 
7ac 
7ac 
13ab 
15ba 
Baroco 
6ca 
9ac 
7ac 
7ac 
12ab 
14ba 
7ac 
7ac 
7ac 
7ac 
Figure 3 
Darapti 
7cb 
7bc 
Fel apton 
9bc 
14ac 
14ac 
7cb 
15bc 
14ac 
Disamis 
5ca 
15ac 
7cb 
7bc 
Datisi 
5ca 
15ca 
7cb 
14bc 
B ocardo 
5ca 
9bc 
14ac 
8bc 
7cb 
15ba 
14ac 
Ferison 
9bc 
14ac 
14ac 
7cb 
15ba 
14ac 
Figure 4 
Bramantip 
5ca 
15ac 
8ca 
7ba 
Camenes 
6ca 
7bc 
7ac 
13ca 
7ba 
Dimaris 
5ca 
15ac 
7cb 
7ba 
Fresison 
5ca 
6bc 
7ac 
7ac 
13ab 
15ba 
Fesapo 
5ca 
6bc 
7ac 
8bc 
16cb 
15ba 
7ca 
Subalterns 
Barbari 
5ac 
15ac 
7ab 
14bc 
Celaront 
6ac 
13ac 
7ac 
7ab 
Cesaro 
9ca 
6ac 
7ac 
7ac 
13ab 
Camestrop 
6ca 
9ac 
7ac 
7ac 
14ba 
Camenop 
6ca 
7ac 
16ac 
7ba 
7ac 
7ac 
8. ~ (QEbc .4 (MAab .4 QOac)) (Celaront QMQ, from 7 by CC, AS, CW) 
9. ~- (MIbc .4 (QAba .4 Qlac)) (Disamis MQQ, from 3 by AI, Q-con, CW) 
10. ~- (MAbc .4 (QAba --4 QIac)) (Darapti MQQ, from 3 by Ap-sub-a, AS) 
11. ~ (MIcb -4 (QAba -4 QIac)) (Dimaris MQQ, from 1 by aI, Q-con, CW, US) 
12. ~ (MAcb -4 (QAba -4 QIac)) (Bramantip MQQ, from 11 by Ap-sub-a, AS) 
13. ~ (MAcb -4 (QEba -4 QOac)) (Camenop MQQ, from 12 by CC, AS, CW) 
II 
Theorem 8.20. (asserted QMMs and MQMs) The non-numbered QMM and MQM cells 
on table 23 correspond to asserted sentences. 
Proof. Use theorem 8.19 and Q-sub-o. 
II 
Theorem 8.21. (asserted QLLs and LQLs) The non-numbered QLL and LQL cells on 
table 23 correspond to asserted wffs. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
301 
Proof. Use theorem 8.20 and RV. 
II 
Theorem 8.22. (asserted QQMs) The non-numbered QQM cells on table 23 correspond 
to asserted wffs. 
Proof. Use theorem 8.6, Q-sub-o and CW for cells other than Camenes, Fesapo, Celaront 
and Camenop QQM. For them use the following reasoning. 
1. ~ (Q Ebc --+ (Q Aab -+ M Eac)) (Celarent QQM) 
2. ~ (QEbc -+ (QAab -+ MOac)) (Celaront QQM, from 1 by Ap-sub-a, CW) 
3. ~ (QAcb --+ (QAba --+ MEac)) (Camenes QQM, from 1 by AI, Ap-con, CW, US) 
4. ~ (QAcb ~ (QAba -+ MOac)) (Camenop QQM, from 3 by Ap-sub-a, CW) 
5. ~ (QEcb --+ (QAba --+ MOac)) (Fesapo QQM, from 4 by CC, AS) 
II 
Table 24. Model 3d 12 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
4 
3 
4 
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
4 
Table 24 expresses a Q-model. For every x and y, +(x) ~ n+(y). So BQ3 and BQ5 
are trivially satisfied. For every x and y, + (x) (7: n-(y). So BQ4 is trivially satisfied. 
Suppose + (y) C_ q(z). Then y - b and z - c. So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For every x, 
+ (x) o q(b) or q(x) o + (b). So BQ7 is satisfied. If + (c) C_ z then z - c. Since n + (b) 
does not overlap n-(c), BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 25. Model .Ad 13 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
4 
4 
3 
2 
1 
1,2 
3 
4 
Table 25 expresses a Q-model. Suppose +(y) C_ n+(z). Then y = a and z = c. 
If +(x) o +(a) then x = a or x = c. Since n+(a) o n+(c), BQ3 is satisfied. Since 
n-(c) = 0, BQ5is trivially satisfied. For every x and y, +(x) ~ n-(y). 
So BQ4 is 
trivially satisfied. Suppose +(y) C_ q(z). Then y = b and z = c. So BQ6 is trivially 
satisfied. For all x, + (e) o q(x). So BQ7 is satisfied. Since n-(z) = 13, BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 26 expresses a Q-model. For every x and y, if + (x) C_ n + (y) then x - a and 
y = c. If +(x) o +(a) then n+(x) o n+(c). So BQ3 is satisfied. For every x and y, 

302 
Fred Johnson 
Table 26. Model ./k414 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3,4 
3 
4 
1 
2 
1,2 
4 
3 
+ (x) ~Z n-(y). So BQ4 is satisfied. Since n-(c) = ~}, BQ5 is satisfied. For every x and 
y, if + (x) C_ q(y) then y -- a or y = c. So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For every z, z o q(a) 
or q(z) o + (a). And for every z, z o q(c) or q(z) o + (c). So BQ7 is satisfied. For every 
z, if + (a) C_ + (z) then z = a. And for every z, if + (c) C_ + (z) then z = c. Since 
n-(a) -- 0 and n-(a) = ~, BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 27. Model .M 15 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2,3 
4 
4 
3 
1,2 
2 
1,4 
3 
Table 27 expresses a Q-model. Since BT3 is satisfied, both BQ3 and BQ4 are satisfied. 
Since BT5 is satisfied BQ5 is satisfied. Suppose + (y) C_ q(z). Then z - b. So BQ6 is 
trivially satisfied. For all x, x o q(b). So BQ7 is satisfied. If + (b) C_ + (x) then x = b. 
Since n-(b) = !3, BQ8 is satisfied. 
Table 28. Model .A//16 
n + 
q+ 
n- 
q- 
1 
2 
3 
2 
3 
1 
1,2 
3 
Table 28 expresses a Q-model. Suppose +(y) c_ n+(z). Then z = c. Since, for all 
x, n + (x) o n + (c), BQ3 is satisfied. Since n-(c) = !3, BQ5 is satisfied. Since, for all x 
and y, + (x) ~ n-(y), BQ4 is trivially satisfied. Suppose + (y) C_ q(z). Then y = b and 
z = a. So BQ6 is trivially satisfied. For all x, x o q(a). So BQ7 is satisfied. For all x, 
n-(x) = t~. So BQ8 is trivially satisfied. 
Note that the acceptance of all but two of the QLM and LQM moods is generated from 
acceptances involving the MLM and LMM moods. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
303 
9 
THE ARISTOTELICITY OF QLXM' 
Of the 154 first, second or third figure syllogisms referred to on table 15 there are exactly 
thirteen that are Q-valid but invalid for Aristotle. And there are exactly nine that are 
Q-invalid but are valid for Aristotle. So the Aristotelicity of QLXM' system is about 
86%. Of the twenty-two discrepancies seventeen are due to mistakes involving the use of 
Reversal. These mistakes are marked on table 14 by using pairs of numbers from 1 to 17. 
So, for example, on this table both Barbara QXM and Baroco QLX are marked with '1', 
indicating that by Reversal both should be valid or both should be invalid. But Aristotle 
regarded only the former as valid. Both Ferison QLM and Camestres LQM are marked 
with '17', indicating that by Reversal both should be valid or both should be invalid. 
Aristotle regarded only the former as valid. 
So, there are five remaining discrepancies to account for. i) Darapti XQQ: Aristotle 
could have used Disamis XQQ to show its validity, ii) Darapti LQQ: Aristotle could have 
used Darapti XQQ to show its validity, iii) Festino QXM: As noted by McCall in [1963, 
p. 93], Aristotle could have used Festino MXM to show its validity. Given Reversal, 
Festino MXM is valid in virtue of Disamis XLL. iv) Celarent QLX: Aristotle could have 
used Reversal and Festino QXM to show it is valid, v) Felapton XQM: Aristotle properly 
regarded it as valid since he regarded Ferio XQM as valid. Given our interest in devel- 
oping a formal system that would not have the unAristotelian results, noted in theorem 
7.2, which are present in McCall's Q-L-X-M system, we chose to regard Ferio XQM as 
Q-invalid. 
10 
TALLY OF THE TWO-PREMISED Q-VALID SYLLOGISMS 
The 333 syllogisms marked on Table 13 are the Q-valid apodeictic two-premised syllo- 
gisms in which no contingent wff is a premise or a conclusion. Table 15 and table 23 refer 
to some of the Q-valid 2-premised syllogisms that involve contingent wffs. To count all 
of them we need to take account of complementary conversions. Note, for example, that 
AEA QQQ-figure 1 (that is (QAbc --+ (QEab -+ QAac))) is Q-valid by complemen- 
tary conversion since Barbara QQQ is Q-valid. 29 In this section we shall count all of the 
2-premised syllogisms that are Q-valid. 
When counting the valid moods we shall use '[A]' to mean that the premise or conclu- 
sion indicated may be either an A or an E wff. Similarly we shall use '[I]' to mean the 
premise or the conclusion indicated may be either an I or an O formula. So, by saying 
that QQQ [A][A][A] in figure 1 is Q-valid, we are claiming the validity of eight figure 1 
QQQ syllogisms: QQQ AAA (AAE, AEA, AEE, EAA, EAE, EEA, and EEE). By saying 
that QXQ [A]I[I] in figure 1 is Q-valid, we are claiming the Q-validity of four figure 1 
QXQ syllogisms: QXQ AII (AIO, EII, and EIO). 
29See Ross's table in [1949, facing p. 286] for references to this as well as several other syllogisms that may 
be validated by using complementary conversion. 

304 
Fred Johnson 
Q-valid QXQs and QLQs (40): 
Figure 1: [A]A[A], [A]I[I], [A]A[I], 
Figure 3: [A]A[I], [A]I[I] 
Q-valid XQQs and LQQs (32): 
Figure 3: A[A][I], I[A][I] 
Figure 4: A[A][I], I[A][I] 
Q-valid QXMs (34): 
Figure 1: [AIAA, [AIAE, [AIII, [AIIO, [AIAI, [AIAO 
Figure 2: [AIIO, [AIAO 
Figure 3: [AIAI, [AIAO, [IIAI, [AIII, [A110 
Figure 4: [AIAI, [IIAI, [AIIO, [AIAO 
Q-valid XQMs (20): 
Figure 1: A[A]A, A[I]I, A[A]I 
Figure 3: A[A]I, I[A]I, A[I]I, 
Figure 4: A[AlI, A[AlE, I[A]I, A[A]O 
Q-valid QLXs (24): 
Figure 1: [AIAE, [AIAO 
Figure 2: [AIAE, [AIEE, [AIIO, [AIOO, [AIAO, [AIEO 
Figure 4: [AIEE, [AIIO, [AIAO, [AIEO 
Q-valid LQXs (30): 
Figure 1: E[A]E, E[IlO, E[A]O 
Figure 2: E[A]E, A[A]E, E[IlO, E[AlO, A[A]O 
Figure 3: E[A]O, O[A]O, E[I]O 
Figure 4: A[A]E, E[IlO, E[A]O, A[A]O 
Q-valid QLMs (46): 
Figure 1: [AJAA, [AIM, [AJII, [AIIO, [AIAI, [AJAO 
Figure 2: [AIM, [AIEE, [AIIO, [AIOO, [AIAO, [AIEO 
Figure 3: [AIAI, [AIAO, [IIAI, [AIII, [A110 
Figure 4: [AIAI, [AIEE, [IIAI, [AIIO, [AIAO, [AIEO 
Q-valid LQMs (46): 
Figure 1: A[A]A, E[A]E, A[I]I, E[I]O, A[A]I, E[A]O 
Figure 2: E[A]E, A[A]E, E[I]O, E[A]O, A[A]O 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
305 
Figure 3: A[A]I, E[A]O, I[A]I, A[I]I, O[A]O, E[I]O 
Figure 4: A[A]I, A[A]E, I[A]-I, E[I]O, E[A]O, A[A]O 
Q-valid QMQs (16): 
Figure 1" [A]I[I], [A]A[I] 
Figure 3: [A]A[I], [A]I[I] 
Q-valid MQQs (16): 
Figure 3: A[A][II, I[A][I] 
Figure 4: A[A][I], I[A][I] 
Q-valid QMMs (8)" 
Figure 1" [A]II, [A]AI 
Figure 3: [A]AI, [A]II 
Q-valid MQMs (8)" 
Figure 3" A[A]I, I[A]I 
Figure 4" A[A]I, I[A]I 
Q-valid QLLs (8)" 
Figure 2" [A]EE, [A]EO 
Figure 4: [A]EE, [A]EO 
Q-valid LQLs (8)" 
Figure 1" E[A]E, E[A]O 
Figure 2: E[A]E, E[A]O 
Q-valid QQMs (48): 
Figure 1: [A][A]A, [A][A]E, [A][III, [A][AII, [A][A]O 
Figure 3: [A][A]I, [I][A]I, [A][I]I 
Figure 4: [A][A]I, [A][A]E, [I][A]I, [A][A]O 
There are 333+64+40+32+34+20+24+ 
30+46+46+ 
16+ 16+ 8+ 8 
+ 8 + 8 + 48 (that is, 781) Q-valid 2-premised syllogisms found in thirty five "general 
moods": LLX, LLM, LXX, LXM, XLX, XLM, XXX, XXM, LLL, LXL, XLL, LMM, 
MLM, MXM, XMM, LMX, MLX, QQQ, QXQ, QLQ, XQQ, LQQ, QXM, XQM, QLX, 
LQX, QLM, LQM, QMQ, MQQ, QMM, MQM, QLL, LQL, and QQM. 
11 EXTENSIONS 
The most natural extension of the above work on QLXM' would be to develop a Smiley- 
type decision procedure for validity for the n-premised syllogisms, for n _> 2, where these 
syllogisms meet the chain condition. Though Smiley's decision procedure for the asser- 
toric syllogistic pairs inconsistent sets of wffs with syllogisms construed as inferences, 

306 
Fred Johnson 
the pairing could also be between sets of wffs and syllogisms constructed as implications. 
The decision procedure would list Q-inconsistent sets such as {P1Azlz2, P2Azzz4,..., 
PnAz2n-lZ2n, QA:clz2n}, where: i) each P/, for 1 _< i < n, is X, L or Q; ii) Pr~ is Q; 
and iii) Q (the negation of Q) is a new quantifier. Given the decision procedure it would 
follow that (QAab ~ 
(Abc --+ (LAcd -+ (QAde --+ QAae)))), for example, is Q-valid. 
Though it is argued above that QLXM ~ is more Aristotelian than McCall's Q-L-X-M 
there are several other systems that could be developed to bring coherence into Aristotle's 
discussions of modalities. For example, consider Barbara XQM. McCall points out that 
Aristotle's defense of its validity is flawed, but McCall chooses to take it as an axiom in 
his Q-L-X-M. It is also an axiom in QLXM ~. Dropping this axiom would mean that the 
semantics for the weaker system would be simpler. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Anderson and Belnap, 1975 and 1992] Alan Ross Anderson and Nuel D. Belnap, Jr., editors. Entailment: The 
Logic of Relevance and Necessity, volume I and volume II. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1975 and 
1992. 
[Becker-Freyseng, 1933] Albrecht Becker-Freyseng. 
Die Aristotelische Theorie der Mir 
schH2sse: eine logischphilologische Untersuchung der Kapitel 13-22 von Aristoteles Analytica priora I. 
Junker and Diinnhaupt, Berlin, 1933. 
[Bell et al., 2001] John L. Bell, David DeVidi, and Graham Solomon. Logical Options: an Introduction to 
Classical and Alternative Logics. Broadview, Peterborough, 2001. 
[Bochefiski, 1963] I.M. Bochefiski. Ancient Formal Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963. 
[Corcoran, 1972] John Corcoran. The completeness of an ancient logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 37:696- 
702, 1972. 
[Cresswell, 1988] M.J. Cresswell. Necessity and contingency. Studia Logica, 47:145-149, 1988. 
[Fitting and Mendelsohn, 1998] Melvin Fitting and Richard L. Mendelsohn. First-order Modal Logic. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, 1998. 
[Frege, 1960] Gottlob Frege. Negation. In Peter Geach and Max Black, editors, Translations from the Philo- 
sophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, pages 117-135. Blackwell, Oxford, second edition, 1960. 
[Geach, 1964] P.T. Geach. Review of McCall, 1963. Ratio, 6:200-206, 1964. 
[Geach, 1972] P.T. Geach. Logic Matters. Blackwell, Oxford, 1972. 
[Girle, 2000] Rod Girle. Modal Logics and Philosophy. McGill-Queen's University Press, Montreal, 2000. 
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1968] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell. An Introduction to Modal Logic. Methuen, 
London, 1968. 
[Hughes and Cresswell, 1996] G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell. A New Introduction to Modal Logic. Rout- 
ledge, London, 1996. 
[Johnson, 1989] Fred Johnson. Models for modal syllogisms. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 30:271- 
284, 1989. 
[Johnson, 1991 ] Fred Johnson. Three-membered domains for Aristotle's syllogistic. Studia Logica, 14:181- 
187, 1991. 
[Johnson, 1993] Fred Johnson. Modal ecthesis. History and Philosophy of Logic, 14:171-182, 1993. 
[Johnson, 1994] Fred Johnson. Syllogisms with fractional quantifiers. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 23:401- 
422, 1994. 
[Johnson, 1995] Fred Johnson. Apodeictic syllogisms: Deductions and decision procedures. History and 
Philosophy of Logic, 16:1-18, 1995. 
[Johnson, 1997] Fred Johnson. Extended Gergonne syllogisms. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 23:553-567, 
1997. 
[Johnson, 1999a] Fred Johnson. Parry syllogisms. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 40:414-419, 1999. 
[Johnson, 1999b] Fred Johnson. Rejection and truth-value gaps. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 40:574- 
577, 1999. 
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] William Kneale and Martha Kneale. The Development of Logic. Clarendon Press, 
Oxford, 1962. 

Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms 
307 
[Lear, 1980] Jonathan Lear. Aristotle andLogical Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980. 
[Lukasiewicz, 1957] Jan Lukasiewicz. Aristotle's Syllogistic: From the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, second edition, 1957. 
[McCall, 1963] Storrs McCall. Aristotle's Modal Syllogisms. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathe- 
matics. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963. 
[Meredith, 1953] C.A. Meredith. The figures and models of the n-termed Aristotelian syllogisms. Dominican 
Studies, 6:42-47, 1953. 
[Montgomery and Routley, 1966] H. A. Montgomery and F. R. Routley. Contingency and non-contingency 
bases for normal modal logics. Logique et Analyse, 35-36:318-328, 1966. 
[Nortmann, 1990] Ulrich Nortmann. (0ber die St~rke der Aristotelischen Modallogik. Erkenntnis, 32:61-82, 
1990. 
[Patterson, 1989] Richard Patterson. The case of the two Barbaras: basic approaches to Aristotle's modal logic. 
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, 7:1-40, 1989. 
[Patterson, 1990] Richard Patterson. Conversion principles and the basis of Aristotle's modal logic. History 
and Philosophy of Logic, 11:151-172, 1990. 
[Prior, 1962] A.N. Prior. Formal Logic. Clarendon Press, Oxford, second edition, 1962. 
[Rescher, 1963] Nicholas Rescher. Aristotle's theory of modal syllogisms and its interpretation. In The Critical 
Approach: Essays in honor of Karl Popper. Free Press of Glencoe, New York, 1963. 
[Ross, 1949] W.D. Ross. Aristotle's Prior and Posterior Analytics. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1949. 
[Routley and Montgomery, 1968] R. Routley and H. Montgomery. On systems containing Aristotle's thesis. 
Journal of Symbolic Logic, 33:82-96, 1968. 
[Rumfitt, 1997] Ian Rumfitt. The categoricity problem and truth-value gaps. Analysis, 57:223-235, 1997. 
[Smiley, 1961] Timothy Smiley. On Lukasiewicz's L-modal system. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 
2:149-153, 1961. 
[Smiley, 1973] Timothy Smiley. What is a syllogism? Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2:136--154, 1973. 
[Smiley, 1994] Timothy Smiley. Aristotle's completeness proof. Ancient Philosophy, 14:25-38, 1994. 
[Smiley, 1996] Timothy Smiley. Rejection. Analysis, 56:1-9, 1996. 
[Smith, 1982] Robin Smith. What is Aristotelian ecthesis? History and Philosophy of Logic, 3:113-127, 1982. 
[Smith, 1989] Robin Smith. Aristotle, Prior Analytics. Hackett, Indianapolis, 1989. 
[Sugihara, 1957a] T. Sugihara. Necessity and possiblity in Aristotelian syllogistic. Memoirs of the Faculty of 
Liberal Arts, Fukui University, 6:75-87, 1957. 
[Sugihara, 1957b] T. Sugihara. Necessity and possiblity in Aristotelian syllogistic. Memoirs of the Faculty of 
Liberal Arts, Fukui University, 7:15-22, 1957. 
[Thom, 1991] Paul Thom. The two Barbaras. History and Philosophy of Logic, 12:135-149, 1991. 
[Thom, 1993] Paul Thom. Apodeictic ecthesis. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 34:193-208, 1993. 
[Thom, 1994] Paul Thom. Interpreting Aristotle's contingency-syllogistic. In C. C. W. Taylor, editor, Oxford 
Studies in Ancient Philosophy, volume 12, pages 91-109. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994. 
[Thom, 1996] Paul Thom. The Logic of Essentialism: An hlterpretation of Aristotle's Modal Syllogistic, vol- 
ume 43 of The New Synthese Historical Library. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1996. 
[Thomason, 1993] S. K. Thomason. Semantic analysis of the modal syllogistic. Journal of Philosophical 
Logic, 22:111-128, 1993. 
[Thomason, 1997] S. K. Thomason. Relational models for the modal syllogistic. Journal of Philosophical 
Logic, 26:129-141, 1997. 
[van Rijen, 1989] Jeroen van Rijen. Aspects of Aristotle's Logic ofModalities. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1989. 
[von Wright, 1951 ] G.H. von Wright. An Essay in Modal Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1951. 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

INDIAN 
LOGIC 
Jonardon Ganeri 
ARGUMENTATION WITHIN DIALECTIC AND DEBATE: PRAGMATIC 
CRITERIA FOR GOOD ARGUMENTATION 
1.1 
Early dialogues: 
checking 
information-seeking, interrogation and cross- 
The intellectual climate of ancient India was vibrant, and bristled with contro- 
versy. Debates were held on a great variety of matters, philosophical, scientific 
and theological. Quite soon, the debates became formal affairs, with reputations 
at stake and matters of importance in the balance. Already in the Brhaddranyaka 
Upani.sad (c. 7 th century BCE), we find the sage YXjfiavalkya being quizzed by 
the king's priestly entourage on tricky theological puzzles: 
Once when Janaka, the king of Videha, was formally seated, YXjfivalkya 
came up to him. Janaka asked him: 'YXjfivalkya, why have you come? 
Are you after cows, or discussion about subtle truths?' 
He replied: 
'Both, your majesty.' (BU 4.1.1). 
What followed was a question-answer type dialogue in which Janaka interro- 
gated the sage, not only to solicit information but to test YXjfiavalkya's mettle. 
The sage had earlier granted Janaka a wish, and the wish he chose was the freedom 
to ask any question at will. YXjfiavalkya was not to be released from this wish 
until he had fully satisfied Janaka's probing inquiry: 
[Janaka] 'Here, sire, I'll give you a thousand cows! But you'll have 
to tell me more than that to get yourself released!' 
At this point 
YXjfivalkya became alarmed, thinking: 'The king is really sharp! He 
has flushed me out of every cover.' (BU 4.3.33-4). 
It is in fact a characteristic of the earliest recorded debates that they take the 
form of question-answer dialogues. As a form of debate, the goal of a question- 
answer dialogue is not restricted merely to one party soliciting information from 
another, for there are, as this dialogue shows, elements too of testing out one's op- 
ponent and cross-checking what he says. A particularly important early question- 
answer dialogue is the Milinda-pa~ha, or Questions of King Milinda. It records 
the encounter between a Buddhist monk NXgasena and Milinda, also known as 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
(~) 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

310 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Menander, an Indo-Bactrian king who ruled in the part of India that had fallen 
under Greek influence at the time of Alexander's Indian campaign. The document 
dates from around the first century CE, although Milinda's reign was 155-130 
BCE. At the outset, NXgasena insists that their dialogue is conducted as scholarly 
debate and not merely by royal declaration ~ 
King Milinda said: Reverend Sir, will you discuss with me again? 
NXgasena: If your Majesty will discuss (vgda) as a scholar, well, but if 
you will discuss as a king, no. 
Milinda: How is it then that scholars discuss? 
NXgasena: When scholars talk a matter over one with another, then is 
there a winding up, an unravelling, one or other is convicted 
of error, and he then acknowledges his mistake; distinctions 
are drawn, and contra-distinctions; and yet thereby they are 
not angered. Thus do scholars, 0 King, discuss. 
Milinda: And how do kings discuss? 
NXgasena: When a king, your Magesty, discusses a matter, and he 
advances a point, if any one differ from him on that point, he 
is apt to fine him, saying "Inflict such and such a punishment 
upon that fellow!" Thus, your Magesty, do kings discuss. 
Milinda: Very well. It is as a scholar, not as a king, that I will discuss. 
(MP 2.1.3). 
VXda, the type of dialogue NXgasena depicts as that of the scholar, is one in 
which there are two parties. Each defends a position with regard to the matter 
in hand; there is an 'unravelling' (nibbet.hanam; an unwinding, an explanation) 
and a disambiguation of the positions of both 
a process of revealing commit- 
ments, presumptions and faulty argument; there is also a 'winding up' ending in 
the censure (niggaho; Skt. nigraha) of one party, a censure based on reasons he 
himself will acknowledge (pat. ikamman; 're-action', rejoinder). This is a species of 
the persuasion dialogue, a 'conversational exchange where one party is trying to 
persuade the other part that some particular proposition is true, using arguments 
that show or prove to the respondent that the thesis is true '2. Indeed, it would 
seem to be the species that has come to be known as the critical discussion, a 
1A similar distinction, in the types of scientific debate held between physicians, will be drawn 
a little later by Caraka, a medical theorist, and an important source of information about ancient 
Indian logic. He says, in an echo of the Meno 7.5 c-d, that debate (sam. bhgs. d) among specialists 
is of two types 
friendly (sandhaya) and hostile (vigrhya). See Caraka-Samhita 3.8.16-17 
and Ernst Prets, 'Theories of Debate, Proof and Counter-Proof in the Early Indian Dialectical 
Tradition', in Balcerowicz, Piotr & Mejor, Marek eds., On the Understanding of other cultures: 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sanskrit and Related Studies to Commemorate 
the Centenary of the Birth of Stanislaw Schayer, Warsaw 1999. (Warsaw: Oriental Institute, 
Warsaw University, 2000). 
2Douglas Walton, The New Dialectic: Conversational Contexts of Argument (Toronto: Uni- 
versity of Toronto Press, 1998), p. 37. 

Indian Logic 
311 
persuasion dialogue in which the conflict is resolved 'only if somebody retracts his 
doubt because he has been convinced by the other party's argumentation or if he 
withdraws his standpoint because he has realized that his argumentation cannot 
stand up to the other party's criticism '3. Not every persuasion dialogue need end 
in one party recognising defeat, for an important function of the general persua- 
sion dialogue is to be maieutic, helping each side to clarify the nature of their 
commitments and the presuppositions upon which their positions depend. 4 In the 
to-and-fro of such a dialogue, each party is allowed to retract earlier commitments, 
as it becomes clear what the consequences of such a commitment would be. This 
maieutic, clarificatory function of a dialogue is perhaps what N~gasena intends 
when he speaks of an 'unravelling', and it seems clearer still in his characterisation 
of 'investigation' (vikdra) as a 'threshing-out': 
Milinda: What is the distinguishing characteristic, NXgasena, of reflec- 
tion (vitakka) ? 
N~gasena: The effecting of an aim. 
Milinda: Give me an illustration. 
N~gasena: It is like the case of a carpenter, great king, who fixes in 
a joint a well-fashioned piece of wood. Thus it is that the 
effecting of an aim is the mark of reflection. 
Milinda: What is the distinguishing characteristic, N~gasena, of inves- 
tigation (vikdra) ? 
N~gasena: Threshing out again and again. 
Milinda: Give me an illustration. 
N~gasena: It is like the case of the copper vessel, which, when it is 
beaten into shape, makes a sound again and again as it grad- 
ually gathers shape. The beating into shape is to be regarded 
as reflection and the sounding again and again as investiga- 
tion. 
Thus it is, great king, that threshing out again and 
again is the mark of investigation. 
Milinda: Very good, N~gasena. (MP 2.3.13-14). 
So it is through reflection and argumentation that the parties to an investiga- 
tion together thrash out a position. N~gasena tells us very little about the sort 
of argumentation that is appropriate, and we can learn little more about argu- 
ment within persuasion dialogues from the Questions of King Milinda (although 
Milinda's repeated request to be given an illustration is suggestive of the impor- 
tance that would later be attached to the citation of illustrative examples in good 
argumentation; see w 
below). And yet there is still something to learn. For 
3Frans van Eemeren & Rob Grootendorst, Argumentation, Communication and Fallacies 
(Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,1992), p. 34. 
4Walton (1988: 48). 

312 
Jonardon Ganeri 
the dialogue of the Questions of King Milinda is not, contrary to NXgasena's ini- 
tial statement, a straighforwardly scholarly debate, but proceeds instead with his 
being interrogated at the hands of Milinda. Ostensibly Milinda wishes to be in- 
formed as to the answer to a range of thorny ethical and metaphysical questions, 
but his questioning is not so innocent, and at times he seems intent on entrapping 
NXgasena in false dichotomies and leading questions. So it is said of him: 
Master of words and sophistry (vetan..d~, clever and wise 
Milinda tried to test great NXgasena's skill. 
Leaving him not, again and yet again, 
He questioned and cross-questioned him, until 
His own skill was proved foolishness. (MP 4.1.1). 
Milinda here is significantly described as a 'master of sophistry' or vetan.df, a 
practitioner of the dialogue form known as vit. an.dS, a 'refutation-only' type of 
dialogue in which the opponent defends no thesis of his own but is set only on re- 
futing that of the proponent (see w 
The implication here is that such dialogues 
are essentially eristic. And it is, in particular, the eristic use of questioning that 
Milinda is a master of. Questions need not be innocent requests for information; 
they can also be disguised arguments. To reply to the question 'When did you stop 
cheating on your tax returns?' at all, affirmatively or negatively, is already to com- 
mit oneself to the 'premise' of the question, that one has indeed been cheating on 
one's tax returns. In the intellectual climate of ancient India, when interrogative 
dialogue was common-place, it was very well known that questions can be used to 
entrap the unwitting, and counter-strategies were invented to avoid entrapment. 
The Buddha himself was well aware that replying to a yes-no question can commit 
one to a proposition, whatever answer one gives, and his solution, famously, was 
to refuse to answer. Thus when asked a series of ten leading questions 
is the 
soul is eternal? is it non-eternal? etc. -- the Buddha declined to offer a reply. For 
any reply would commit him, against his wish, to the existence of souls. In the 
Questions of King Milinda, we see N~gasena experimenting with a different tech- 
nique to avoid entrapment. To some of Milinda's more devious yes-no questions, 
instead of refusing to reply at all, Ng~gasena replies 'Both yes and no'! To others 
he replies 'Neither yes nor no'! For example: 
Milinda: He who is born, NXgasena, does he remain the same or be- 
come another? 
NXgasena: Neither the same nor another. 
Milinda: Give me an illustration. 
NXgasena: Now what do you think, O king? You were once a baby, a 
tender thing, and small in size, lying flat on your back. Was 
that the same as you who are now grown up? 
Milinda: No. That child was one, I am another. 

Indian Logic 
313 
N~gasena: If you are not that child, it will follow that you have had 
neither mother nor father, no! 
nor teacher. 
You cannot 
have been taught either learning, or behaviour, or wisdom. 
... Suppose a man, O king, were to light a lamp, would it 
burn the night through? 
Milinda: Yes, it might do so. 
Nggasena: Now, is it the same flame that burns in the first watch of 
the night, Sir, and in the second? 
Milinda: No. 
Nggasena: Or the same that burns in the second watch and the third? 
Milinda: No. 
N~gasena: Then there is one lamp in the first watch, and another in 
the second, and another in the third? 
Milinda: No. The light comes from the same lamp all the night through. 
Nggasena: Just so, O king, is the continuity of a person or thing main- 
tained. One comes into being, another passes away; and the 
rebirth is, as it were, simultaneous. Thus neither as the same 
nor as another does a man go on to the last phase of his 
self-consciousness. (MP 2.2.1) 
The 'premise' of the question, that to change is to cease to be, is very effectively 
refuted with a 'neither yes nor no' reply. NXgasena first makes Milinda acknowledge 
that, with this as the background premise, answering either 'yes' or 'no' leads to an 
absurdity. For if he is strictly identical to the child, then he must share that child's 
properties; and if he is different, then he cannot. Having exposed the false premise, 
Nggasena, rejects it in favour of the view that persistence through time requires 
not strict identity but causal continuity. Here is a different kind of example: 
Milinda: Does memory, Nggasena, always arise subjectively, or is it 
stirred up by suggestion from outside? 
Nggasena: Both the one and the other. 
Milinda: But does not that amount to all memory being subjective in 
origin, and never artificial? 
Nggasena: If, O king, there were no artificial (imparted) memory, then 
artisans would have no need of practice, or art, or schooling, 
and teachers would be useless. But the contrary is the case. 
Milinda: Very good, NSgasena. (MP 3.6.11). 
Here the question's hidden premise is that memories are caused either wholly 
by what goes on in the mind or wholly by factors external to it, and the 'both 
yes and no' reply makes plain that what ought to be said is that memories are 

314 
Jonardon Ganeri 
wholly caused either by what goes on in the mind or by factors external to it, but 
not caused wholly by one or the other. Again, subsidiary argumentation exposes 
the absurdity in replying with an unqualified 'yes' or an unqualified 'no'. It was 
perhaps in recognition of the tactical importance of such 'neither yes nor no' and 
'both yest and no' replies that it became a common-place that there are four 
possible ways of responding to any question of the yes-no type, an idea that was 
systematised in the work of N~g~rjuna (w 
What we see very clearly in the 
Questions of King Milinda is a sophisticated early appreciation of the pragmatics 
of interogative dialogues. 
1.2 
On balance and fairness in the conduct of dialogue: 
The Kathdvatthu 
The Kathdvatthu or Points of Controversy (circa third century BCE) is a book 
about method. 
It describes, for the benefit of adherents to various Buddhist 
schisms, the proper method to be followed in conducting a critical discussion into 
an issue of doctrinal conflict. Recent scholarship has largely focussed on the ques- 
tion of the extent to which there is, in the Kathdvatthu, an 'anticipation' of results 
in propositional logic. 5 For, while it is true that the formulation of arguments 
there is term logic rather than propositional, and true also that the propositional 
rules are nowhere formulated in the abstract, the codified argumentation clearly 
exploits manipulations that trade on the definition of material implication, on con- 
traposition, and on at least one of modus tollens, modus ponens and reductio ad 
absurdum. The preoccupation with this question of anticipation, assumes, how- 
ever, a methodology for the interpretation of Indian logic that suffers a number of 
serious disadvantages. For, first, in presupposing that the only matter of interest 
is the extent to which a given text displays recognition of principles of formal logic, 
the methodology fails to ask what it was that the authors themselves were trying 
to do, and in consequence, is closed to the possibility that these texts contribute 
to logical studies of a different kind. And second, in supposing that arguments 
have to be evaluated formally, the important idea that there are informal criteria 
for argument evaluation is neglected. In fact, the KathSvatthu offers a particularly 
clear example of a text whose richness and interest lies elsewhere than in its antic- 
ipation of deductive principles and propositional laws. As a meticulous analysis of 
the argumentation properly to be used in the course of a dialogue of a specific type, 
its concern is with the pragmatic account of argument evaluation, the idea that 
5 Aung, S.Z., Points of Controversy, or, Subjects of Discourse: Being a Translation of the 
Kathdvatthu from the Abhidhammapit. aka, eds. S.Z. Aung and C.A.F. Rhys Davids. Pali Text So- 
ciety, translation series no.5. London: Luzac & Co. 1915; reprint 1960; Schayer, St., "Altindische 
Antizipationen der Aussagenlogik", Bulletin international de l'Academie Polonaise des Sciences 
et des Lettres, classe de philologies: 90-96 (1933), translated in Jonardon Ganeri ed., Indian 
Logic: A Reader (London: Curzon, 2001); Bochenski, J. M., "The Indian Variety of Logic", in 
his A History of Formal Logic. Freiburg. Trans. I. Thomas, Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press (1961), pp. 416-447., reprinted in Jonardon Ganeri ed., Indian Logic: A Reader; 
Matilal, Bimal Krishna, The Character of Logic in India. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1998. 

Indian Logic 
315 
arguments have to be evaluated as good or bad with regard to their contribution 
towards the goals of the dialogue within which they are embedded. The leading 
concern of the Kathgvatthu is with issues of balance and fairness in the conduct 
of a dialogue, and it recommends a strategy of argumentation which guarrantees 
that both parties to a point of controversy have their arguments properly weighed 
and considered. It is important, in the normative framework of the Kathgvatthu, 
that there is a distinction between the global aim of the dialogue as a whole 
here to rehearse in an even-handed manner all the considerations that bear upon 
an issue of dispute, to clarify what is at stake even if no final resolution is achieved 
and the local aim of each participant -- to advocate the stance they adopt with 
regard to that issue by supplying arguments for it and attacking the arguments of 
the other parties. 
A dialogue conducted in accordance with the prescribed method of the 
Kathdvatthu is called a vddayutti. 
The goal of a vddayutti is the reasoned ex- 
amination (yutti; Skt. yukti) of a controversial point in and through a noneristic 
dialogue (vdda). The dialogue is highly structured, and is to be conducted in ac- 
cordance with a prescribed format of argumentation. There is a given point at 
issue, for example, whether 'a person is known in the sense of a real and ulti- 
mate fact' (i.e. whether persons are conceived of as metaphysically irreducible), 
whether there are such things as morally good and bad actions, and so, in general, 
whether A is B. A dialogue is now divided into eight sub-dialogies or 'openings' 
(a.t.thamukha). These correspond to eight attitudes it is possible to adopt with 
regard to the point at issue. So we have: 
[1] Is A B? 
[2] Is A not B? 
[3] Is A B everywhere? 
[4] Is A B always? 
[5] 
[61 
[7] 
[8] 
Is A B in everything? 
Is A not B everywhere? 
Is A not B always? 
Is A not B in everything? 
The introduction of an explicit quantification over times, places and objects 
serves to determine an attitude of proponent and respondent to the point of con- 
troversy. If the issue in question is, for example, whether lying is immoral, the 
clarification would be as to whether that proposition is to be maintained or de- 
nied, and in either case, whether absolutely, or only as relativised in some way to 
circumstances, times or agents. So an opening thesis here is by definition a point 
at issue together with an attitude towards it. 

316 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Each such'opening' now proceeds as an independent dialogue, and each is di- 
vided into five stages: the way forward (anuloma), the way back (pa.tikamma), 
the refutation (niggaha), the application (upanayana), and the conclusion (nigga- 
mana). In the way forward, the proponent solicits from the respondent their 
endorsement of a thesis, and then tries to argue against it. In the way back, the 
respondent turns the tables, soliciting from the proponent their endorsement of 
the counter-thesis, and then trying argue against it. In the refutation, the respon- 
dent, continuing, seeks to refutes the argument that the proponent had advanced 
against the thesis. The application and conclusion repeat and reaffirm that the 
proponent's argument against the respondent 's thesis is unsound, while the re- 
spondent's argument against the proponent's counter-thesis is sound. 
It is significant to note that there is here no pro-argumentation, either by the 
respondent for the thesis or by the proponent for the counter-thesis. There is only 
contra-argumentation, and that in two varieties. The respondent, in the 'way back', 
supplies an argument against the proponent's counter-thesis, and in the refutation 
stage, against the proponent's alleged argument against the thesis. So we see here 
a sharp distinction between three types of argumentation -- pro argumention, ar- 
gumentation that adduces reasons in support of one's thesis, counter argumenation 
argumentation that adduces reasons against the counter-thesis, and defensive 
argumentation, argumentation that defends against counter-arguments directed 
against one's thesis. The respondent, having been 'attacked' in the first phase, 
'counter-attacks' in the second phase, 'defends' against the initial attack in the 
third, and 'consolidates' the counter-attack and the defence in the fourth and 
fifth. The whole pattern of argumentation, it would seem, is best thought of as 
presumptive, that is, as an attempt to switch a burden of proof that is initially 
even distributed between the two parties. The respondent tries to put the bur- 
den of proof firmly onto the proponent, by arguing against the proponent while 
countering any argument against herself. The fact that the respondent does not 
offer any pro argumentation in direct support of the thesis means that the whole 
pattern of argumentation is technically ab ignorantium; that is, argumentation of 
the form "I am right because not proved wrong". But ab ignorantium reasoning 
is not always fallacious; indeed, it is often of critical importance in swinging the 
argument in one's favour in the course of a dialogue (see w 
In the first stage, the way forward, the proponent elicits from the respondent 
an endorsement of a thesis, and then sets out to reason against it. Not any form 
of reasoning is allowed; indeed the Kathdvatthu prescribes a very specific method 
of counter-argumentation. Thus: 
I. The Way Forward 
Therav~din: Is the soul (puggala) known as a real and ultimate fact? 
[1] Puggalav~din : Yes. 
Therav~din: Is the soul known in the same way as a real and ultimate fact is 
known? 
[2] Puggalav~din: No, that cannot be truly said. 

Indian Logic 
317 
Therav~din: Acknowledge your refutation (niggaha): 
[3] If the soul be known as a real and ultimate fact, then indeed, good sir, you 
should also say, the soul is known in the same way as any other real and ultimate 
is known. 
[4] That which you say here is false, namely, that we should say, "the soul is known 
as a real and ultimate fact", but we should not say, "the soul is known in the same 
way as any other real and ultimate fact is known." 
[5] If the later statement cannot be admitted, then indeed the former statement 
should not be admitted either. 
[6] In affirming the former, while denying the latter, you are wrong. 
The respondent, here a puggalavddin or believer in the existence of personal 
souls, is asked to endorse the thesis. The proponent then attempts to draw out an 
implication of that thesis, an implication more over to which the puggalavddin will 
not be willing to give his consent. Here the thesis that persons are thought of as 
metaphysically irreducible elements of the world is held to imply that knowledge 
of persons is knowledge of the same kind as that of other types of thing. The 
puggalavddin, will perhaps want to draw an epistemological distinction between 
empirical knowledge of external objects and self-knowledge, and so will not endorse 
this derived proposition. And now the proponent, in a fresh wave of argumenta- 
tion, demonstrates that it is inconsistent for the puggalavddin to endorse the thesis 
but not the derived consequence. So a counter-argument has three components: 
the initial thesis or thapand (Skt. sthdpand), the derived implication or pgpand, 
and the demonstration of inconsistency or ropang. 
It is in the ropand that there seems to be an 'anticipation' of propositional logic. 
Of the four steps of the ropand, the first, from [3] to [4], looks like an application 
of the definition of material implication or its term-logical equivalent: 
(A is B --+ (C is D)--defn-~((A is B)&-~(C is D)). 
Notice here that an effect of soliciting from the respondent a 'no' in answer to 
the proponent's second question is that the negation is external and not internal. 
Thus, we have '--(C is D)' rather than '(C is --D)'. This what one needs in the 
correct definition of material implication. 
The second step, from [4] to [5], looks like a derivation of the contraposed 
version of the conditional, a derivation that depends on the stated definition of 
the conditional. From that definition, and assuming that '&' is commutative, it 
follows that 
(A is/3) -+ (C is D)iff-,(C is D)-+--(A is B). 
The final step now is an application of modus ponens. So what we have is: 
[11 (A is B) 
[2] -~(C is D) 
premise 
premise 

318 
Jonardon Ganeri 
[3] (A is B) -+ (C is D) 
[4] --((A is B)&~(C is D)) 
[5] ~(CisD)-+ 
--(AisB) 
[6] --(A is B) 
additional premise? 
3, defn. of --+ 
4, defn. of -+ 
2, 5, MP 
This is how Matilal 6 reconstructs the ropand stage of argumentation. Earlier, 
Bochenski 7 recommended a variant in which steps [3] and [4] "together constitute 
a kind of law of contraposition or rather a modus tollendo tollens in a term-logical 
version". Still another alternative is to see step [3] as a piece of enthymematic 
reasoning from the premise already given, rather than as the introduction of an 
additional premise. In other words, the 'if... then' in [3] is to be understood to 
signify the logical consequence relation rather than material implication. Then 
step [4] negates the premise in an application of reductio ad absurdum. That is: 
[1,2] (A is B) & ~(C is D) 
[3] (C is D) 
[4] --((A is B) & ~(C is D)) 
[5] --(C is D) --+ 
--(A is B) 
[6] -,((A is B) & -,(C is D)) 
premise 
1 + 2, enthymematic derivation 
1 + 2, 3; RAA 
4, defn. of -+ 
5, defn. of -~ 
This reconstuction seems more in keeping with the overall pattern of argumen- 
tation 
to take the respondent 's thesis and derive from it consequences the re- 
spondent will not endorse, and thereby to argue against the thesis (and it preserves 
the repetition of the original). Here again we see that the form of argumentation in 
the Kathdvatthu is better understood if we bear in mind the function it is intended 
to serve within a dialogue context. 
The same dialogue context is normative, in the sense that it gives the grounds 
for evaluating any actual instance of such argumentation as good or bad. It seems 
possible to understand the 'way forward' in terms of certain concepts from the 
theory of argumenation. Hamblin introduced the idea that each participant in a 
dialogue has a 'commitment store', a set of propositions to which they commit 
themselves in the course of the dialogue, primarily by asserting them directly, s 
In Hamblin's model, the commitments of each party are on public display, known 
to every participant in the dialogue. In order to represent the fact that this is 
very often not the case, Walton 9 employs a distinction between open or 'light-side' 
commitments, and veiled or 'dark-side' commitments. The veiled commitments of 
6Matilal (1998: 33-37) 
7 Bochenski (1961: 423) 
8Hamblin, C. L., Fallacies. London: Methuen, 1970. 
9Walton (1998: 50-51). 

Indian Logic 
319 
a participant are not on public view, and might not be known even to that partic- 
ipant themselves: but perhaps the participant trades on them in making certain 
kinds of dialogue move. Indeed, it is part of what Walton 1~ calls the 'maieutic' 
role of dialogue to make explicit the veiled commitments of the participants, a 
process of clarification that is valuable even if it does not lead to the issue at stake 
being decided in favour of one party or the other. 11 
Something of this sort is what is being described in the initial stages of the 
'way forward'. Steps [1] and [2] elicit from the respondent an explicit and open 
commitment to the propositions 'A is B' and '-7 (C is D)'. /,From the respective 
assertion and denial, these become parts of her explicit commitment store. But 
next, though the enthymematic argumentation that constitutes the p~pand or 
stage [3], it is made clear that the respondent has a veiled commitment to the 
proposition 'C is D'. For this is shown to follow from propositions in the explicit 
commitment store of the respondent. Finally, the ropan~ stage of reasoning reveals 
this newly explosed commitment to be inconsistent with the respondent's other 
explicit commitments. The overall effect is to force the respondent into a position 
where she must retract at least one of the propositions to which she has committed 
herself. Indeed, we can say that such a retraction is the primary goal of the way 
forward. The primary aim is not to disprove the thesis, but to force a retraction 
of commitment. 
So when we evaluate the argumentation used in this part of 
the dialogue, it is to be evaluated as good or bad with reference to how well it 
succeeds in forcing such a retraction, and not simply or only or even in terms of its 
deductive or inductive soundness. The strategic problem here is how to persuade 
the respondent to accept some proposition that is meant ultimately to be used to 
force a retraction, and the type of strategy being recommended is the one Walton 
calls that of "separating", where "two or more propositions are proved separately 
and then eventually put together in an argument structure that is used to prove 
one's own thesis or argue against an opponent's". 12 In setting out the reasoning 
in this way, the intention of the author of the Kath~vatthu is not to imply that 
precisely this sequence of arguments is sound. What is being shown is the form 
that any counter-argument should take. It is a description, in generic terms, of 
the strategic resources open to the proponent, and serves rather as a blue-print 
for any actual vddayutti dialogue. 
At this point in the sub-dialogue that is the first opening, then, the burden of 
proof seems to lie squarely with the respondent, the puggalavddin, who is being 
pressured into the uncomfortable position of having to retract his stated thesis. 
The remaining four phases of the first opening are a summary of the strategic 
resources open to the respondent to recover his position, and indeed to turn the 
tables against the proponent. First, the way back. This is a phase of counter- 
*~ 
(1998: 58). 
11 The term 'maieutic', from maieutikos 'skill in midwifery, is taken from the Theaetetus, where 
Socrates describes himself as a midwife for beautiful boys - helping them to give birth to whatever 
ideas are in them, and test them for whether they are sound. 
12Walton (1998: 44). 

320 
Jonardon Ganeri 
attack, in which the respondent uses parallel reasoning to force the proponent too 
into a position of retraction with regard to the counter-thesis. 
II. The Way Back 
Puggalav~din: Is the soul not known as a real and ultimate fact? 
[1] Therav~din: No, it is not known. 
Puggalav~din: Is it not known in the same way as any real and ultimate fact is 
known? 
[2] Therav~din: No, that cannot be truly said. 
Puggalav~din: Acknowledge the rejoinder (pa.tikamma): 
[3] If the soul is not known as a real and ultimate fact, then indeed, good sir, you 
should also say: it is not known in the same way as any other real and ultimate 
fact is known. 
[4] That which you say is false, namely, that we should say "the soul is not known 
as a real and ultimate fact", but we should not say "it is not known in the same 
way as any other real and ultimate fact is known". 
[5] If the latter statement cannot be admitted, then indeed the former statement 
should not be admitted either. 
[6] In affirming the former while denying the latter, you are wrong. 
At the end of the 'way back', if the respondent 's arguments have gone well, the 
proponent has been pressed in the direction of retracting his commitment to the 
counter-thesis. If the respondent were to leave matters here, however, he would 
have failed in the global aim of the 'opening'. The aim of the opening is to shift 
the burden of proof decisively onto the proponent. After the second stage in the 
opening, however, the burden of proof is again symmetrically distributed among 
the parties to the dialogue 
both are in a position of being pressed to retract 
their respective commitment. 
So, in the third phase, the respondent seeks, in 
a defensive move, to diffuse the argument of the proponent that is forcing this 
retraction. Again, the cited reasoning is schematic, it indicates a general strategy 
the details of which must be worked out differently in each specific case. The 
distinction being drawn is the one between counter-argument, and defensive repost, 
a distinction that makes sense only within the normative framework of a dialogical 
exchange. 
The first opening in the vddayutti has rehearsed the best argumentation that 
available against someone whose attitude towards the point at issue is one of 
unqualified affirmation. Remember, however the global aim of a vddayutti 
to 
be the form of dialogue most conducive to a balanced examination of the best 
arguments, both for and against. It is the function now of the second opening 
to rehearse the best argumentation against someone whose attitude towards the 
point at issue is one of unqualified denial, and of the subsequent openings to do 
likewise with respect to attitudes of qualified affirmation and denial. Even at the 
end of the dialogue, there may be no final resolution, but an important maieutic 
function has been served -- the clarification of the commitments entailed by each 
position, of their best strategies and forms of argumentation. So, indeed, it is 

Indian Logic 
321 
as a rich account of presumptive reasoning in dialogue, and not so much for its 
'anticipations' of formal logic, that the Kathgvatthu makes a rewarding object of 
study. 
1.3 
Case-based reasoning, extrapolation and inference from sampling: 
The Nydyas~ttra 
It was Henry Colebrooke la who first brought Indian logic to the attention of the 
English philosophical world, announcing in a famous lecture to the Royal Asiatic 
Society in 1824 his discovery of what he called the 'Hindu Syllogism'. Colebrooke's 
'discovery' consisted in fact in a translation of an ancient Indian treatise called 
the Ny~yas~tra. It dates from around the 1 st or 2 nd century AD, and is said to 
be the work of Gautama Aks.apgda. Scholars are now inclined to regard it as the 
amalgamation of two earlier works on philosophical method, one a treatise on the 
rules and principles of debate, the other a discussion of more general issues in 
epistemology and metaphysics. In a section on the proper way for a debater to set 
out their argument, the Nydyas~ttra prescribes a five-step schema for well-formed 
argument, and it is this schema that Colebrooke identified as the Indian syllogism. 
We now know much much more than Colebrooke about the historical development 
of Indian logic. He, for instance, was unaware of the informal logic and anticipa- 
tions of propositional calculus in the Kath~vatthu (w 
or the theories of the 
Buddhists Vasubandhu, Diflngga and DharmaMrti on formal criteria for inference 
(w167 
And scholars had yet to learn the complexities of the later logical school 
of Navya-Nygya (w167 
with its intriguing treatment of negation, logical conse- 
quence and quantification, and even, as Daniel Ingalls has shown in his pioneering 
book entitled Materials for the Study of Navya-Ny@a Logic, the formulation of 
De Morgan's Laws. 14 Nevertheless, in spite of Colebrooke's lack of acquaintance 
with the historical context, he and those who followed him were right to see the 
Nydyasgtra as a treatise of fundamental importance in Indian logical thinking, 
and I would like to pick up and continue the thread of their discussion. I want to 
argue that the Ny@as~ttra begins a transformation in Indian thinking about logic. 
And this in two inter-related respects: in the beginnings of a shift of interest away 
from the place of argumentation within dialectic and debate and towards a greater 
concern with the more formal properties of sound inference; and in a parallel and 
correlated shift from case-based to rule-governed accounts of logical reasoning. I 
will discuss each of these in turn. 
In the Nydyas~tra, there is a more systematic discussion of the categories and 
methods of debate than in earlier debating manuals. Three kinds of debate are 
13H. T. Colebrooke, "On the Philosophy of the Hindus: Part II - On the Nygya and Vaigeshika 
systems". Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society (182~), 1: 92-118; reprinted in Jonardon 
Ganeri ed., Indian Logic: A Reader. 
14D. H. H. Ingalls, Materials for the Study of Navya-Nydya Logic (Cambridge Mass.: Harvard 
University Press), 1951, pp. 65-67. 

322 
Jonardon Ganeri 
distinguished: good or honest debate (vdda), tricky or bad debate (jalpa) and a 
refutation-only debate (vitan.dd): 
Good debate (vdda) is one in which there is proof and refutation of the- 
sis and antithesis based on proper evidence (pramdn. a) and presumptive 
argumentation (tarka), employing the five-step schema of argumenta- 
tion, and without contradicting any background or assumed knowledge 
(siddh~nta). 
Tricky debate (jalpa) is one in which, among the features mentioned 
before, proof and refutation exploit such means as quibbling (chala), 
false rejoinders (j~ti), and any kind of clincher or defeat situation (ni- 
grahasthdna) . 
Refutation-only debate (vit. an..d~) is one in which no counter-thesis is 
proven. (NS 1.2.1-3). 
Here is our first reference to the Indian five-step inference pattern. It is a schema 
for proper argumentation among disputants who are engaged in an honest, friendly, 
noneristic, and balanced debate (vdda). In the dialectical context in which such 
arguments are embedded, a proponent attempts to prove a thesis and to refute 
the counter-thesis of the opponent, both parties drawing'upon a shared body of 
background knowledge and received belief, and using properly accredited methods 
for the acquisition and consideration of evidence. The aim of each participant 
in the dialogue is not victory but a fair assessment of the best arguments for 
and against the thesis. In Indian logic, vdda represents an ideal of fair-minded 
and respectful discourse. By contrast, in a tricky debate (jalpa), underhanded 
debating tactics are allowed, and the aim is to win at all costs and by any means 
necessary. The third kind of debate, the refutation-only debate (vi.tan..d~), is the 
variety of dialogue preferred by the sceptics 
to argue against a thesis without 
commitment to any counter-thesis. It is not entirely clear whether this is a type of 
good or tricky debate. We might conjecture, however, that if dialectic is a rough 
kin of vdda, and sophistic of jalpa, then the Socratic elenchus could be regarded 
as a species of vi.tan.dd, which is not, therefore, an entirely disreputable method of 
debate. 
The aim, in a good debate between friends, is the assessment of the best argu- 
ments for or against the thesis. And that leads to the question: how are arguments 
to be assessed or evaluated? Are the criteria for assessment formal, to do only with 
the form of the argument schema itself; or are they informal, pragmatic criteria, 
according to which arguments have to be evaluated as good or bad with regard to 
their contribution towards the goals of the dialogue within which they are embed- 
ded? 
With this question in mind, let us look at the five-step proof pattern. The proper 
formulation of an argument is said to be in five parts: tentative statement of the 
thesis to be proved (pratij~d); citation of a reason (hetu); mention of an example 
(uddharana); application of reason and example to the case in hand (upanaya); 

Indian Logic 
323 
final assertion of the thesis (nigamana). An unseen fire is inferred to be present on 
the mountain, on the basis of a plume of smoke; just as the two have been found 
associated in other places like the kitchen. The terms used here are defined in a 
series of admittedly rather gnomic utterances (NS 1.1.34-39): 
1.1.32 
'the parts [of an argument scheme] are thesis, reason, example, application 
and conclusion' 
(pratij(tdhetgddharan opanayanigamangnyavayavSh. ). 
1.1.33 
'the thesis is a statement of that which is to be proved' 
( sddhyanirdegah, pratijgg). 
1.1.34 
'the reason is that which proves what is to be proven in virtue of a simi- 
larity with the example' (ud~haranasgdharmygt sddhyasgdhanam hetuh.). 
1.1.35 
'again, in virtue of a dissimilarity' (tathd vaidharmydt). 
1.1.36 
'the example is an illustration which, being similar to that which is to 
be proved, has its character' (s~dhyasddharmydt taddharmabhgvf dr.st, gnta 
udgharan, am). 
1.1.37 
'or else, being opposite to it, is contrary' (tadviparyaydd vg viparftam). 
1.1.38 
'the application to that which is to be proved is a drawing in together 
(upasa.mhdra) "this is so" or "this is not so," depending on the example' 
(ud~haran@ek.sas tathety upasa.mhdro na tatheti v~ sgdhyasyopanayah.). 
1.1.39 
'the conclusion is a restatement of the thesis as following from the state- 
ment of the reason' (hetvapade~gt pratij~dygh, punarvacanarn, nigamanam). 
The basic idea is that an object is inferred to have one (unobserved) property 
on the grounds that it has another, observed, one- 
"there is fire on the mountain 
because there is smoke there". The most distinctive aspect of the schema, though, 
is the fundamental importance given to the citation of an example, a single case 
said either to be similar or else dissimilar to the case in hand. Suppose I want 
to persuade you that it is about to rain. I might reason as follows: "Look, it is 
going to rain (thesis). For see that large black cloud (reason). Last time you saw 
a large black cloud like that one (example), what happened? Well, its the same 
now (application). It is definitely going to rain (conclusion)." 
Let us try to unpick the Ny@as~tra definitions. Suppose we let 'F' denote the 
property that serves as the reason here (hetu), 'G' the property whose presence 
we are seeking to infer (sddhya), 'a' the new object about which we are trying to 
decide if it is G or not (paks. a), and 'b' the cited example (uddharana). Then we 
seem to have a pair of schematic inferences, one based on similarity, the other on 
dissimilarity: 

324 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Five-step proof based on similarity 
Ga 
[thesis] 
[reason] 
[example] 
Fa proves Ga, because b is similar to a. 
b has the 'character of a' because it is similar to a. 
[application] a is the same as b with respect to G. 
[conclusion] 
Ga 
Five-step proof based on dissimilarity 
Ga 
[thesis] 
[reason] 
[example] 
Fa proves Ga, because b is dissimilar to a. 
b does not have the 'character of a' because it is dissimilar to a. 
[application] a is not the same as b with respect to G. 
[conclusion] 
Ga 
The counter-proof follows the same pattern, proving the counter-thesis (-,Ga) 
by means of a different reason and example: 
Counter-proof 
-~Ga 
[thesis] 
[reason] 
[example] 
F'a proves Ga, because b is similar to a. 
c has the 'character of a' because it is similar to a. 
[application] a is the same as c with respect to G. 
[conclusion] 
-,Ga 
The five-step schema was interpreted in a particular way by V~tsy~yana, the 
first commentator on the Nydyas~ttra. 
His interpretation is largely responsible 
for shaping the direction Indian logic was later to take. 
At the same time, it 
was an interpretation that made the citation of an example essentially otiose. 
V~tsy~yana was, in effect, to transform Indian logic, away from what it had been 
earlier, namely a theory of inference from case to case on the basis of resemblance, 
and into a rule-governed account in which the citation of cases has no significant 
role. 
Let us then consider first V~tsy~yana's interpretation. What V~tsy~yana says 
is that the similarity between a and b just consists in their sharing the reason 
property F. 
The basic pattern of inference is now: a is like b [both are F]; 
Gb .'. Ga. Or else: a is unlike b [one is F and the other isn't]; -~Gb .'. Ga. Writing 
it out as before, what we have is: 

Indian Logic 
325 
Proof based on similarity 
[thesis] 
Ga 
[reason] 
Fa 
[example] 
Fb 
b is similar to a [both are F]. 
[thesis] 
[example] 
F~a 
F'c 
[application] -~Gc 
[conclusion] 
-~Ga 
Thus, for example, a proof might be: the soul is eternal because it is uncreated, 
like space. And the counterproof might be: the soul is non-eternal because it is 
perceptible, like a pot. 
The proposal is that if a resembles b, and b is G, then a can be inferred to 
be G too. 
But there is an obvious difficulty, which is that mere resemblance 
is an insufficient ground. 
Admittedly, the soul and space are both uncreated, 
but why should that give us any grounds for transferring the property of being 
eternal from one to the other? The respect in which the example and the case 
in hand resemble one another must be relevant to the property whose presence is 
being inferred. This is where the idea of a 'false proof' or 'false rejoinder' (jgti) 
comes in. 
Any argument that, while in the form of the five-step schema, fails 
this relevance requirement is called a 'false proof' and the Ny~yasfttra has a whole 
chapter (chapter 5) classifying and discussing them. A 'false rejoinder' is defined 
in this way: 
c is similar to a [both are F']. 
NS 1.2.18 'a jdti is an objection by means of similarity and dissimilarity' 
( s~dharymavaidharmy~bhSm pratyavasth~nam jdtih. ). 
It appears to be admissible to transfer the property 'rain-maker' from one black 
cloud to another black cloud, but not from a black cloud to a white cloud. It 
appears to be admissible to transfer the property 'has a dewlap' from one cow to 
another cow, but not from one four-legged animal (a cow) to another (a horse). It 
[application] Gb 
[conclusion] Ga 
In a counterproof, a is demonstrated to be similar in some other respect to some 
other example, one that lacks the property G: 
Counterproof 
--,Ga 

326 
Jonardon Ganeri 
is clear what now needs to be said. The argument is good if there exists a general 
relationship between the reason F and the property being proved G, such that the 
latter never occurs without the former. 
It is the Buddhist logician DiflnXga (480-540 CE) who seems to have been the 
first to make this explicit (see also w 
According to him, a reason must satisfy 
three conditions. Define a 'homologue' (sapaks. a) as an object other than a that 
possesses G, and a 'heterologue' (vipaks. a) as an object other than a that does not 
possess G. Then Difln~ga's three conditions on a good reason are: 
[1] F occurs in a. 
[2] F occurs in some homologue. 
[3] F occurs in no heterologue. 
Condition [3] asserts, in effect, that F never occurs without G, and this, together 
with [1] that F occurs in a, implies of course that G occurs in a. In effect, the 
citation of an example in the original Nydyasfttra formula has been transformed 
into a statement of a general relationship between F and G. There remains only 
a vestigial role for the example in condition [2], which seems to insist that there 
be an instance of F other than a which is also G. DiflnXga is worried about the 
soundness of inferences based on a reason which is a property unique to the object 
in hand; for example, the inference "sound is eternal because it is audible". For if 
this is sound, then why not the counter-argument "sound is non-eternal because 
it is audible"? And yet there are many inferences like this that are sound, so it 
seems to be a mistake to exclude them all. In fact condition [2] soon came to be 
rephrased in a way that made it logically equivalent to [3], namely as saying that 
F occur only in homologues (eva 'only' is used here as a quantifier). In asking for 
the respect in which the example and the new case must resemble each other, for 
the presence of G in the example to be a reason for inferring that G is present in 
the new case, we are led to give the general relationship that any such respect must 
bear to G, and that in turn makes citation of an example otiose. The five-step 
schema becomes: 
[thesis] 
Ga 
[reason] 
because F 
[example] 
where there is F, there is G; for example, b. 
[application] Fa 
[conclusion] Ga 
It is the five-step argument pattern so transformed that has suggested to Cole- 
brooke and other writers on Indian logic a comparison with an Aristotelian syllo- 
gism in the first figure, Barbara. We simply re-write it in this form: 

Indian Logic 
327 
All F are G. 
Fa. 
Therefore, Ga. 
This assimilation seems forced in at least two respects. First, the conclusion of 
the Nydyasfttra demonstration is a singular proposition. In Aristotle's system, on 
the other hand, it is always either a universal proposition with 'all' or 'no', or a 
particular proposition with 'some'. Second, and relatedly, the role of the 'minor 
term' is quite different: in the Indian schema, it indicates a locus for property- 
possession, while in Aristotle, the relation is 'belongs to'. Again, in reducing the 
Indian pattern to an Aristotelian syllogism, the role of the example, admittedly 
by now rather vestigial, is made to disappear altogether. 
A rather better reformulation of the five-step schema is suggested by Stanistaw 
Schayer, 15 who wants to see the Indian 'syllogism' as really a proof exploiting two 
rules of inference: 
[thesis] 
Ga 
[reason] 
f a 
['example'] 
(x)(Fz ~ Gx) 
[application] 
Fa -+ Ga 
[conclusion] 
Ga 
There is fire on a (= on this mountain). 
There is smoke on a. 
For every locus x: if there is smoke in 
x then there is fire in x. 
This rule also applies for x = a. 
Because the rule applies to x = a and 
the statement Ga is true, the statement 
Fa is true. 
Two inference rules are in play here -- a rule of substitution, allowing us to infer 
from '(x)~x' to '~a', and a rule of separation, allowing us to infer from '0 ~ ~a' 
and '0' to '~'. Schayer thereby identifies the Indian syllogism with a proof in a 
natural deduction system: 
THESIS. Ga because Fa. 
Proof. 
1 
(1) 
Fa 
Premise 
2 
(2) 
(x)(Fx--+Gx) 
Premise 
3 
(3) 
Fa -+ Ga 
2, by V Elimination 
1,2 
(4) 
Ga 
1 & 3, by -7' Elimination. 
We have seen how the NydyasSttra model of good argumentation came to be 
transformed and developed by later writers in the Indian tradition in the direc- 
tion of a formal, rule-governed theory of inference, and how writers in the West 
have interpreted what they have called the Indian 'syllogism'. I suggested at the 
beginning that we might try to interpret the Nyaya model along different lines 
altogether, seeing it an early atttempt at what is now called 'case-based reason- 
ing'. Case-based reasoning begins with one or more prototypical exemplars of a 
15Schayer, St., "Altindische Antizipationen der Aussagenlogik", Bulletin international de 
l'Acadernie Polonaise des Sciences et des Lettres, classe de philologies: 90-96 (1933); trans- 
lated in Jonardon Ganeri ed., Indian Logic: A Reader. 

328 
Jonardon Ganeri 
category, and reasons that some new object belongs to the same category on the 
grounds that it resembles in some appropriate and context determined manner one 
of the exemplars. Models of case-based reasoning have been put forward for med- 
ical diagnostics and legal reasoning, and some have been implemented in artificial 
intelligence models. It has been shown, for example, that training a robot to solve 
problems by having it retrieve solutions to stored past cases, modifying them to 
fit the new circumstances, can have great efficiency gains over seeking solutions 
through the application of first principles. Perhaps something like this underlies a 
lot of the way we actually reason, and perhaps it was as an attempt to capture this 
type of reasoning that we should see the ancient logic of the Nydyas~tra and indeed 
of the medical theorist Caraka. 16 In this model, a perceived association between 
symptoms in one case provides a reason for supposing there to be an analogous 
association in other, resembling cases. The physician observing a patient A who 
has, for example, eaten a certain kind of poisonous mushroom, sees a number of 
associated symptoms displayed, among them F and G, say. He or she now en- 
counters a second patient B displaying a symptom at least superficially resembling 
F. The physician thinks back over her past case histories in search of cases with 
similar symptoms. She now seeks to establish if any of those past cases resembles 
B, and on inquiry into B's medical history, discovers that B too has consumed 
the same kind of poisonous mushroom. These are her grounds for inferring that B 
too will develop the symptom G, a symptom that had been found to be associated 
with F in A. A common etiology in the two cases leads to a common underlying 
disorder, one that manifests itsself in and explains associations between members 
of a symptom-cluster. 
Can we find such a model of the informal logic of case-based reasoning in the 
Nydyas(ttra? 
Consider again NS 1.1.34. It said that 'the reason is that which 
proves what is to be proved in virtue of a similarity with the example.' On our 
reading, what this says is that a similarity between the symptom F in the new 
case and a resembling symptom F ~ in the past-case or example is what grounds 
the inference. And NS 1.1.36 says that 'the example is something which, being 
similar to that which is to be proved, has its character'. Our reading is that the 
old case and the new share something in their circumstances, like having eaten 
the same kind of poisonous mushroom, in virtue of which they share a 'character', 
an underlying disorder that expains the clustering of symptoms. So the five-step 
demonstration is now: 
16 Caraka-Samhit5 3.8.34: 'what is called "example" is that in which both the ignorant and 
the wise think the same and that which explicates what is to be explicated. As for instance, "fire 
is hot," "water is wet," "earth is hard," "the sun illuminates." Just as the sun illuminates, so 
knowledge of s~mkhya philosophy illuminates'. 

Indian Logic 
329 
[thesis] 
Ga 
[reason] 
Fa 
[example] 
b 
[application] 
[conclusion] 
Ga 
F is similar to F r in b. 
exhibits the same underlying structure as a, because 
it resembles a. 
a is the same as b with respect to G. 
Let us see if this pattern fits examples of good inference taken from a variety 
of early Indian logical texts. One pattern of inference, cited in the Nydyas(ttra, 
is causal-predictive: Seeing the ants carrying their eggs, one infers that it will 
rain; seeing a full and swiftly flowing river, one infers that it has been raining; 
seeing a cloud of smoke, one infers the existence of an unseen fire. Presumably 
the idea is that one has seen other ants carrying their eggs on a past occasion, 
and on that occasion it rained. The inference works if, or to the exent that, we 
have reasons for thinking that those ants and these share some unkown capacity, 
a capacity that links detection of the imment arrival of rain with the activity of 
moving their eggs. The pattern is similar in another kind of inference, inference 
from sampling: Inferring from the salty taste of one drop of sea water that the 
whole sea is salty; inferring that all the rice is cooked on tasting one grain. The 
assumption again is that both the sampled grain of rice and any new grain share 
some common underlying structure, a structure in virtue of which they exhibit the 
sydromes associated with being cooked, and a structure whose presence in both 
is indicated by their being in the same pan, heated for the same amount of time, 
and so forth. 
I will make two final comments about these patterns of case-based reason- 
ing. First, it is clear that background knowledge is essentially involved. As the 
Ny~yas(ttra stresses in its definition of a good debate, both parties in a debate 
much be able to draw upon a commonly accepted body of information. 
Such 
knowledge gets implicated in judgements about which similarities are indicative of 
common underlying disorders, and which are not. Second, in such reasoning the 
example does not seem to be redundant or eliminable in favour of a general rule. 
For although there always will be a general law relating the underlying disorder 
with its cluster of symptoms, the whole point of this pattern of reasoning is that 
the reasoner need not be in a position to know what the underlying disorder is, 
and so what form the general law takes. In conclusion, while the history of logic 
in India shows a strong tendency towards formalisation, the logic of ancient In- 
dia tried to model informal patterns of reasoning from cases that are increasingly 
becoming recognised as widespread and representative of the way much actual 
reasoning takes place. 
1.~ 
Refutation-only dialogue: vita.n.dd 
We have already seen how 'refutation-only' debate is defined in the Ny@as(ttra: 
Refutation-only debate (vitan.dd) is one in which no counter-thesis is 
proven. (NS 1.2.1-3). 

330 
Jonardon Ganeri 
For the Naiy~yika, to argue thus is to argue in a purely negative and destructive 
way. Here one has no goal other than to undermine one's opponent. People who 
use reason in this way are very like the sceptics and unbelievers of the epics. 
V~tsy~yana claims indeed that to use reason in this way is virtually self-defeating: 
A vaitdn.dika is one who employs destructive criticism. If when ques- 
tioned about the purpose [of so doing], he says 'this is my thesis' or 
'this is my conclusion,' he surrenders his status as a vaitdn.dika. If he 
says that he has a purpose, to make known the defects of the opponent, 
this too will is the same. For if he says that there is one who makes 
things known or one who knows, or that there is a thing by which 
things are made known or a thing made known, then he surrenders his 
status as a vaitdndika. 17 
Vi.tan..dd is the sceptic's use of argumentation, and it is a familiar move to at- 
tempt to argue that scepticism is self-defeating. In India, it is the M~dhyamika 
Buddhist N~g~rjuna (circa first century CE) who is most closely associated with 
the theoretical elaboration of refutation-only argumentation, through the method 
of 'four-limbed refutation' (catus. kot. i) and the allied technique of presumptive rea- 
soning (prasar~ga; tarka). In the next section, I will show how this latter technique 
became a device for shifting the burden of proof onto one's opponent. First, I 
will examine the method of 'four-limbed' refutation in the context of N~g~rjuna's 
wider philosophical project. 
Reasoning, for N~g~rjuna, is the means by which one 'steps back' from common 
sense ways of understanding to a more objective view of the world. Reason is a 
mode of critical evaluation of one's conceptual scheme. A more objective under- 
standing is one in which one understands that things are not necessarily as they 
appear. It is a view from which one can see how and where one's earlier concep- 
tions are misleading. One learns not to trust one's perceptions when a large object 
far away looks small, or a stick half submerged in water looks bent, and in learning 
this one exercises a mode of self-critical reason. So too a rational person learns 
not to trust their conceptions when they presuppose the existence of independent, 
self-standing objects. From the vantage point of an objective view, it is easy to see 
that one's old conceptions had false presuppositions. The real trick, however, is 
to be able to expose those presuppositions while still 'within' the old conception, 
and so to lever oneself up to a more objective view. This levering-up-from-within 
requires a new way of reasoning: N~g~rjuna's celebrated prasafiga-type rationality. 
It is a self-critical rationality which exposes as false the existential presuppositions 
on which one's present conceptions are based. The same method can equally well 
be used to expose the false presuppositions on which one's dialectical opponents' 
views are based, and for this reason the whole technique is strongly maieutic, in 
the sense defined earlier. 
A simple example will illustrate the kind of reasoning NXgXrjuna thinks is needed 
if one is to expose the presuppositions of one's conceptual scheme from within. A 
17 Nydyabhdsya 3, 15-20. 

Indian Logic 
331 
non-compound monadic concept 'F' has the following application-condition: it 
applies only to things which are F. It is therefore a concept whose application 
presupposes that there is a condition which divides the domain into two. For our 
purposes, the condition can be thought of either as 'belonging to the class of Fs' 
or 'possessing the property being-F'. Now take an arbitrary object, a, from some 
antecedently specified domain. There are apparently two possibilities for a: either 
it falls under the concept, or else it is not. That is, the two options are: 
(I) 
F applies to a 
(II) F does not apply to a. 
Suppose that one can disprove both of these options. How one would try to do 
this will vary from case to case depending on the individual concept under scrutiny. 
But if one is able to disprove (I) and to disprove (II), then the concept in question 
can have no application-condition. The presupposition for the application of the 
concept, that there is a condition (class, property) effecting a division within the 
domain, fails. A later M~dhyamika master is expresses the idea exactly: 
When neither existence nor nonexistence presents itself before the 
mind, then, being without objective support (nirdlambana) because 
there is no other way, [the mind] is still. 
Sentences are used to make statements, but if the statement so made is neither 
true nor false, then, because there is no third truth-value, the statement must be 
judged to lack content. 19 
N~g~rjuna's developed strategy involves a generalization. A generalization is 
needed because many if not most of the concepts under scrutiny are relational 
rather than monadic; centrally: causes, sees, moves, desires. When a concept is 
relational, there are four rather than two ways for its application-condition to be 
satisfied (see Figure 1, page 332): 
(I) 
R relates a only to itself 
(II) 
R relates a only to things other than itself 
(III) R relates a both to itself and to things other than itself 
(IV) R relates a to nothing. 
As an illustration of the four options, take R to the square-root relation v/, and 
the domain of objects to be the set of real numbers. Then the four possibilities are 
exemplified by the numbers 0, 4, 1 and-1 respectively. For ,r 
= 0, v/4 = 2 and 
also-2, v/1 = 1 and also-1, while finally-1 does not have a defined square root 
among the real numbers. The list of four options is what is called in Madhyamaka 
a catuskoti. 
lSS~ntideva, Bodhicarydvatgra 9.34. 
19On presupposition and truth-value gaps, see P. F. Strawson, Introduction to Logical Theory 
(London: Methuen, 1952). 

332 
Jonardon Ganeri 
9 
9 
9 
Figure 1. The Four Options 
Everything is thus, not thus, both thus and not thus, or neither thus nor 
not thus. That is the Buddha's [provisional] instruction. [Mfdamadhyanaka- 
ka=arikd, MK 18.8] 
Some say that suffering (duh. kha) is self-produced, or produced from 
another, or produced from both, or produced without a cause. [MK 
12.11 
Since every factor in existence (dharma) are empty, what is finite and 
what is infinite? What is both finite and infinite? What is neither 
finite nor infinite? [MK 25.22] 
It is easy to see that the four options are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaus- 
tive. For the class of objects to which R relates a is either (IV) the empty set 
or, if not, then either (I)it is identical to {a}, or (II)it excludes {a}, or (III)it 
includes {a}. Not every relation exhibits all four options. (I) not exhibited if R 
is anti-reflexive. (II) is not exhibited if R is reflexive and bijective. (IV) is not 
exhibited if R is defined on every point in the domain. Note in particular that 
if R is the identity relation, then neither (III) nor (IV) are exhibited, not (III) 
because identity is transitive, and not (IV) because identity is reflexive. Indeed, 
options (III) and (IV) are not exhibited whenever R is an equivalence (transitive, 
symmetric, and reflexive) relation. 

Indian Logic 
333 
The next step in the 'refutation-only' strategy is to construct subsidiary 'dis- 
proofs', one for each of the four options. Although there is no pre-determined pro- 
cedure for constructing such disproofs, by far the most commonly used method is to 
show that the option in question has some unacceptable consequence (prasafiga). I 
will examine this method in detail in w 
A major dispute for later MXdhyamikas 
was over what sort of reasoning is permissible in the four subsidiary disproofs, the 
proofs that lead to the rejection of each of the four options. It is a difficult question 
to answer, so difficult indeed that it led, at around 500 AD, to a fission within 
the school of Madhyamaka. The principal group (Pr~saflgika, headed by Bud- 
dhapXlita) insisted that only prasar~ga-type, 'presupposition-negating' reasoning is 
admissible. This faction is the more conservative and mainstream, in the sense that 
their teaching seems to be in keeping with N~g~rjuna's own method of reasoning. 
The important later MXdhyamika masters Candrakirti and SXntideva defended this 
view. A splinter faction, however, (SvXtantrika, headed by BhXvaviveka) allowed 
'independent' inference or inductive demonstration into the disproofs. Perhaps this 
was done so that the inferential methods developed by Difln~ga (w 
could be 
deployed in establishing the M~dhyamika's doctrinal position. Clearly, the fewer 
restrictions one places on the type of reasoning one permits oneself to use, the 
greater are the prospects of successfully finding arguments to negate each of the 
four options. On the other hand, we have seen that the citation of paradigmatic 
examples is essential to this type of reasoning (w 
and it is hard to see how one 
could be entitled to cite examples in support of one's argument, when the very 
conception of those examples is in question. 
The effect of the four subsidiary disproofs is to establish that none of the four 
options obtains: 2~ 
Neither from itself nor from another, nor from both, nor without a 
cause, does anything whatever anywhere arise. [MK 1.1] 
One may not say that there is emptiness, nor that there is non-emptiness. 
Nor that both, nor that neither exists; the purpose for so saying is only 
one of provisional understanding. [MK 22.11] 
The emptiness of the concept in question is now deduced as the final step in 
the process. For it is a presupposition of one of the four options obtaining that 
the concept does have an application-condition (a class of classes or relational 
property). If all four are disproved, then the presupposition itself cannot be true. 
When successful, the procedure proves that the concept in question is empty, null, 
~gnya. This is N~g~rjuna's celebrated and controversial 'prasafiga-type' rational 
inquiry, a sophisticated use of rationality to annul a conceptual scheme. 
20 Further examples: MK 25.17, 25.18, 27.15-18. Interesting is the suggestion of Richard 
Robinson that the method of reasoning from the four options has two distinct functions, a 
positive therapeutic role as exhibited by the unnegated forms, and a destructive dialectical role, 
exhibited by the negated forms. Richard H. Robinson, Early Mddhyarnika in India and China, 
(Madison, Milwauke and London: University of Winsconsin Press, 1967), pp. 39-58, esp. pp. 
55-56. 

334 
Jonardon Ganeri 
A statement is truth-apt if it is capable of being evaluated as either true or 
false. When NXgXrjuna rejects each of the four options, he is rejecting the claim 
that a statement of the form 'aRb' is truth-apt, since the four options exhaust 
the possible ways in which it might be evaluated as true. But if the statements 
belonging to a certain discourse are not truth-apt, then the discourse cannot be 
part of an objective description of the world (a joke is either funny or unfunny, but 
it cannot be evaluated as true or false.) The prasaitga negates a presupposition 
for truth-aptness and so for objective reference. 
NagXrjuna applies the procedure in an attempt to annul each of the concepts 
that are the basic ingredients of our common-sense scheme. 
In each case, his 
method is to identify a relation and prove that none of the four options can ob- 
tain. On closer inspection, it turns out that his argumentation falls into two basic 
patterns. 21 One pattern is applied to any concept involving the idea of an ordering 
or sequence, especially the concept of a causal relation, of a temporal relation and 
of a proof relation. The paradigm for this argument is N~gXrjuna's presentation of 
a paradox of origin (chapter 1), which serves as model for his analysis of causation 
(chapter 8), the finitude of the past and future (chapter 11), and suffering (chapter 
12). The argument seeks to establish that a cause can be neither identical to, nor 
different from, the effect. If nothing within the domain is uncaused, then the four 
options for the realization of a causal relation are foreclosed. 
The other pattern of argumentation in NXgXrjuna is essentially grammatical. 
When a relational concept is expressed by a transitive verb, the sentence has an 
Agent and a Patient (the relata of the relation). For example, "He sees the tree," 
"He goes to the market," "He builds a house." The idea of the grammatical argu- 
ment is that one can exploit features of the deep case structure of such sentences in 
order to prove that the Patient can be neither identical to the Agent, nor include 
it, nor exclude it, and that there must be a Patient. NXgXrjuna uses this pattern 
of argumentation in constructing a paradox of motion (MK, chapter 2), and this 
chapter serves as a model for his analysis of perception (chapter 3), composition 
(chapter 7), fire (chapter 10), and of bondage and release (chapter 16). Indeed, 
the same pattern of argument seems to be applicable whenever one has a concept 
which involves a notion of a single process extended in time. What exactly these 
arguments show and how well they succeed is a matter of debate, but what we 
have seen is the elaboration of a sophisticated sceptical strategy of argumentation, 
based on the idea of 'refutation-only' dialogue. 
1.5 
Presumptive argumentation (tarka) and burden-of.proof shifting 
Indian logicians developed a theory of what they call 'suppositional' or 'presump- 
tive' argumentation (tarka). It is a theory about the burden of proof and the role 
of presumption, about the conditions under which even inconclusive evidence is 
sufficient for warranted belief. As we have already seen, it is a style of reason- 
ing that is regarded as permissible within a well-conducted dialogue (vgtda; see 
21On other patterns in Nagg~rjuna's argumentation, see Robinson (1967: 48). 

Indian Logic 
335 
w 
In the canonical and early literature, tarka is virtually synonymous with 
reasoned thinking in general. The free-thinkers so derided in the epics were called 
tdrkikas or 'followers of reason'. Even later on, when the fashion was to adorn 
introductory surveys of philosophy with such glorious names as The Language of 
Reason ( TarkabhSsd, Moks~karagupta), Immortal Reason ( Tarkdmrta, Jagadi~a), 
Reason's Moonlight (Tarkakaumud~, Laug~ksi Bh~skara), it was usual to confer on 
a graduate of the medieval curriculum an honorific title like Master or Ford of 
Reason (tarkavdg~ga, tarkat~rtha). Such a person is a master in the art of evidence 
and the management of doubt, knowing when to accept the burden of proof and 
also when and how to deflect it. 
Extrapolative inference (anumdna, see w 
rests on the knowledge of universal 
generalisations, and it is the possibility of such knowledge that the most troubling 
forms of scepticism call into question. How can one be entitled to believe that 
something is true of every member of a domain without inspecting each member 
individually? How does one cope with the ineliminable possibility that an unper- 
ceived counterexample exists in some distant corner of the domain? The difficulty 
here is with the epistemology of negative existentials. The Buddhist Difin~ga for- 
mulates the extrapolation relation as a 'no counterexample' relation. For him, x 
extrapolates y just in case there is no x without y (y-avina x-abh~va). The Navya- 
Ny~ya logicians prefer a different negative existential condition, one derived from 
the reflexivity and transitivity of the extrapolation relation. Given transitivity, if 
x extrapolates y then, for any z, if y extrapolates z, so does x. The converse of 
this conditional holds too, given that the extrapolation relation is reflexive (proof: 
let z = y). So let us define an 'associate condition' (upSdhi) as a property which 
is extrapolated by y but not x. Then x extrapolates y just in case there is no 
associate condition. 22 One can infer fire from smoke but not smoke from fire, for 
there is an associate condition, dampness-of-fuel, present wherever smoke is but 
not wherever fire is. Tinkering with the definition, though, does not affect the 
epistemological problem; it remains the one of proving a nonexistence claim. 
Presumptive argumentation, tarka, is a device for appropriating a presumptive 
right 
the right to presume that one's own position is correct even without con- 
clusive evidence in its support. One is, let us imagine, in a state of doubt as to 
which of two hypotheses A and B is true. A and B are exclusive (at most one 
is true) but not necessarily contradictory (both might be false). Technically, they 
are in a state of 'opposition' (virodha). 23 The doubt would be expressed by an 
exclusive disjunction in the interrogative- Is it that A or that B? Uncertainty 
initiates inquiry, and at the beginning of any inquiry the burden of proof is sym- 
metrically distributed among the alternative hypotheses. A piece of presumptive 
22For a survey of the literature on this theory, see Karl Potter ed., "Indian Epistemology and 
Metaphysics", Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 2 (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1977), pp. 203-206; Karl Potter and Sibajiban Bhattacharyya eds., "Indian Analytical 
Philosophy: Gafigega to Raghun~tha", Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume 6 (Prince- 
ton: Princeton University Press, 1993), pp. 187-192. 
23Nandita Bandyopadhyay, "The Concept of Contradiction in Indian Logic and Epistemology," 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 16.3 (1988), pp. 225-246, fn. 1. 

336 
Jonardon Ganeri 
argumentation shifts the burden of proof by adducing a prima facie counterfactual 
argument against one side. The form of the argument is the same in all cases. It is 
that one alternative, supposed as true, would have a consequence in conflict with 
some set of broadly defined constraints on rational acceptability. The existence of 
such an argument gives one the right to presume that the other alternative is true, 
even though one has no conclusive proof of its truth, and even though the logical 
possibility of its being false remains open. In the psychologized language of the 
Ny~ya logician, a suppositional argument is a 'blocker' (bddhaka) to belief in the 
supposed alternative, and an 'eliminator' (nirvartaka) of doubt. The Naiy~yika 
V~caspati (9th century) comments: 24 
Even if, following a doubt, there is a desire to know [the truth], the 
doubt still remains after the desire to know [has come about]. This 
is the situation intended for the application of presumptive argumen- 
tation. 
Of two theses, one should be admitted as known when the 
other is rejected by the reasoning called 'suppositional.' Thus doubt 
is suppressed by the application of presumptive argumentation to its 
subject matter... A means of knowing is engaged to decide a question, 
but when there is a doubt involving its opposite, the means of knowing 
fails [in fact] to engage. But the doubt concerning the opposite is not 
removed as such by the undesired consequence. What makes possible 
its removal is the means of knowing. 
V~caspati stresses that a thesis is not itself proved by a suppositional demon- 
stration that the opposite has undesired consequences; one still needs evidence 
corroborating the thesis. But there is now a presumption in its favour, and the 
burden of proof lies squarely with the opponent. Presumptive argumentation 'sup- 
ports' one's means of acquiring evidence but it not itself a source of evidence. It 
role is to change the standard of evidence required for proof in the specific context. 
A radical sceptical hypothesis is a proposition inconsistent with ordinary belief 
but consistent with all available evidence for it. The aim of the radical sceptic is 
to undermine our confidence that our beliefs are justified, to introduce doubt. The 
Ny~ya logicians' response to scepticism is not to deny that there is a gap between 
evidence and belief, or to deny the logical possibility of the sceptical hypothesis. 
It is to draw a distinction between two kinds of doubt, the reasonable and the 
reasonless. A doubt is reasonable only when both alternatives are consistent with 
all the evidence and the burden of proof is symmetrically distributed between them. 
One paradigmatic example is the case of seeing in the distance something that 
might be a person or might be a tree-stump. 
Udayana gives the epistemology 
of such a case: it is a case in which one has knowledge of common aspects but 
not of specific distinguishing features. What we can now see is that the example 
gets its force only on the assumption that there is a level epistemic playing field, 
with both hypotheses carrying the same prima facie plausibility. 
Presumptive 
24 NySyavgrttikatdtparyat.[k5, below NS 1.1.40. 

Indian Logic 
337 
argumentation has the potential to break the impasse 
imagine, for example, 
that the unidentified lump is just one of ten in an orderly row not there an hour 
ago. The perceptual evidence remains the same, but the burden of proof is on 
anyone who wants to maintain in this situation that the lump is a stump. 
The other paradigm is knowledge of extrapolation relations. The problem here 
is that the thesis is one of such high generality that the burden of proof is al- 
ready heavily against it! How can a few observations of smoke with fire ground 
a belief that there is fire whenever there is smoke? Suppositional argument has 
a different supportive role here. Its function is to square the scales, to neutralise 
the presumption against the belief in generality. It does so by finding prima facie 
undesirable consequences in the supposition that an associate condition or coun- 
terexample exists. Then sampling (observation only of confirmatory instances in 
the course of a suitably extensive search for counterexamples), though still weak 
evidence, can tilt the scale in its favour. 
A presumptive argument moves from conjecture to unacceptable consequence. 
Modern writers often identify it with the medieval technique of reductio ad ab- 
surdurn, but in fact its scope is wider. The 'unacceptable consequence' can be an 
out-and-out contradiction but need not be so. For we are not trying to prove that 
the supposition is false, but only to shift the burden of proof onto anyone who 
would maintain it. And for this it is enough simply to demonstrate that the sup- 
position comes into conflict with some well-attested norm on rationality. Udayana, 
the first to offer any systematic discussion, does not even mention contradiction as 
a species of unacceptable consequence. He says 25 that presumptive argumentation 
is of five types - 
1. self-dependence (gtrnggraya) 
2. mutual dependence (itaretard~raya) 
3. cyclical dependence (cakraka) 
4. lack of foundation (anavasthd) 
5. undesirable consequence (anist. aprasaitga) 
The last of these is really just the generic case, what distinguishes presump- 
tive argumentation in general. The first four form a tight logical group. If the 
supposition is the proposition A, then the four types of unacceptable consequence 
are (1) proving A from A, (2) proving A from B, and B from A, (3) proving A 
from B, B from C, and C from A 
or any higher number of intermediate proof 
steps eventually leading back to A, and (4) proving A from B, B from C, C from 
D,..., without end. So what presumptive argumentation must show is that the 
supposition is ungrounded, its proof being either regressive or question-begging. 
Two points are noteworthy about Udayana's list. First, rational unacceptability 
bears upon the proof adduced for the supposition, not the supposition itself. The 
25Atrnatattvaviveka, p. 863. 

338 
Jonardon Ganeri 
underlying implication is that one has the right to presume that one's thesis is 
correct if one can find fault with the opponent's proof of the antithesis. Principles 
of this sort are familiar from discussion of the informal logic of arguments from 
ignorance in which one claims entitlement to assert A on the grounds that it is 
not known (or proved) that -~A. 26 In general such a claim must be unfounded - it 
amounts to the universal appropriation of a presumptive right in all circumstances. 
The second point to notice about Udayana's list, however, is that it is very 
narrow. Udayana places strict constraints on what will count as an unacceptable 
consequence, constraints which are more formal than broadly rational. Conflict 
with other well-attested belief is not mentioned, for instance. Udayana severely 
limits the scope of presumptive argumentation. His motive, perhaps, is to disarm 
the sceptic. 
For presumptive argumentation is the favoured kind of reasoning 
of the sceptic-dialecticians (and indeed the term Udayana uses is prasaTiga, the 
same term N~g~rjuna had used for his dialectical method). Sceptics typically will 
want to loosen the conditions on what constitutes an unacceptable consequence 
of a supposition, so that the scope for refutation is expanded. So what Udayana 
seems to be saying is that one does indeed have the right to presume that one's 
thesis is correct when the argument for the counter-thesis commits a fallacy of a 
particularly gross type 
not mere conflict with other beliefs but formal lack of 
foundation. If the best argument for the antithesis is that bad, then one has a 
prima facie entitlement to one's thesis. 
SrTharsa (c. AD 1140) is an Advaita dialectician, a poet and a sceptic. 27 He 
expands the notion of unacceptable consequence, noticing several additional types 
unmentioned by Udayana. 2s One is 'self-contradiction' (vydghdta). It was Udayana 
himself 29 who analysed the notion of opposition as noncompossibility, and cited 
as examples the statements "My mother is childless," "I am unable to speak", and 
"I do not know this jar to be a jar." In the first instance, the noncompossibility 
is in what the assertion states, in the second it is in the speech-act itself, while in 
the third the propositional attitude self-ascription is self-refuting (a case akin to 
the Cartesian impossibility of thinking that one is not thinking). 
Another refutation-exacting circumstance is the one called 'recrimination' (prat- 
ibandO. This is a situation in which one's opponent accuses one of advancing a 
faulty proof, when his own proof suffers exactly the same fault! There is a disagree- 
ment about what this state of equifallaciousness does to the burden of proof. The 
26Douglas Walton, Arguments from Ignorance (University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1996). 
27On SrTharsa: Phyllis Granoff, Philosophy and Argument in Late VedSnta: :~r~hars. a's 
Khan..danakhan..dakhSdya (Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 1978); Stephen Phillips, Clas- 
sical Indian Metaphysics (La Salle" Open Court, 1995), chapter 3. 
2SKhan..danakhan..dakhgdya IV, 19 (aprasangStmakatarkanir(tpana, pp. 777-788, 1979 edition; 
section numbering follows this edition). SrTharrs.a the negative dialectician wants to criticise even 
the varieties of presumptive argumentation, although his own method depends upon it. So he 
says: "By us indeed were presumptive argumentations installed in place, and so we do not reject 
them with [such] counter-arguments. As it is said - 'it is wrong to cut down even a poisonous 
tree, having cultivated it oneself"' (p. 787). 
29Atmatattvaviveka, p. 533. 

Indian Logic 
339 
practice of Naiy~yikas is to take the circumstance as tilting the balance against 
the opponent - the opponent discredits himself in pressing an accusation without 
seeing that it can be applied with equal force to his own argument. But Sriharsa 
quotes with approval Kum~rila's assertion that "all things being equal, where the 
same fault afflicts both positions one should not be censured [and not the other]" .3o 
Sr~hars.a, the sceptic, would like to see both parties refuted by this circum- 
stance. The same point underlies his mention as an unacceptable consequence the 
circumstance of 'lack of differential evidence' (vinigamandviraha), when thesis and 
antithesis are in the same evidential situation. Again, what we see is a jostling 
with the burden of proof. Here Sriharsa is saying that absence of differential evi- 
dence puts a burden of proof on both thesis and antithesis 
doubt itself refutes. 
It is the sceptic's strategy always to seek to maximise the burden of proof, and 
so to deny that anyone ever has the right to presume their position to be correct. 
That is, as Stanistaw Schayer observed a long time ago, a difference between the 
tarka of the Naiy~yika and the prasaTiga of a sceptic like Sriharsa or N~g~rjuna. 31 
For the latter, the demonstration that a thesis has an allegedly false consequence 
does not commit the refuter to an endorsement of the antithesis. N~g~rjuna wants 
to maintain instead that thesis and antithesis share a false existential precommit- 
ment. 
Simplicity (laghutva) is, SrTharsa considers and the Naiy~yikas agree, a ceteris 
paribus preference-condition. Of two evidentially equivalent and otherwise ratio- 
nally acceptable theses, the simpler one is to be preferred. The burden of proof 
lies with someone who wishes to defend a more complex hypothesis when a simpler 
one is at hand. The Ny~ya cosmological argument appeals to simplicity when it 
infers from the world as product to a single producer rather than a multiplicity of 
producers. Here too the role of the simplicity consideration is to affect the burden 
of proof, not itself to prove. Cohen and Nage132 make a related point when they 
diagnose as the 'fallacy of simplism' the mistake of thinking that "of any two hy- 
potheses, the simpler is the true one." In any case, simplicity can be a product 
not of the content of a hypothesis but only of its mode of presentation 
the 
distinction is made by the Naiy~yikas themselves. 33 And it is hard to see how it 
can be rational to prefer one hypothesis to another only because it is simpler in 
form. 
We have assumed that the rival hypotheses are both empirically adequate, that 
is to say, they are both consistent with all known facts. 
Sriharsa mentions an 
unacceptable consequence involving empirical evidence (utsarga). It is an objec- 
30 Khan. .danakhan.dakhadya II, 2 (pratiband~laksanakhan.dana, pp. 571-572). The full quotation 
is given in his commentary by Samkara Migra. 
31Stanistaw Schayer, "Studies on Indian Logic, Part II: Ancient Indian Anticipations of Propo- 
sitional Logic," [1933], translated into English by Joerg Tuske in Jonardon Ganeri ed., Indian 
Logic: A Reader. 
32Morris R. Cohen and Ernest Nagel, An Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method (London: 
Routledge ~ Kegan Paul, 1934), p. 384. 
33 Bhimacarya Jhalakikar, Nydyakoga or Dictionary of Technical Terms of Indian Philosophy 
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1928), s.v. laghutvam. 

340 
Jonardon Ganeri 
tion to the usual idea that if there is empirical evidence supporting one hypothesis 
but not the other, then the first is confirmed. Sriharsa's sceptical claim is that a 
hypothesis must be considered refuted unless it is conclusively proved; nonconclu- 
sive empirical evidence does nothing to affect this burden of proof. Likewise, he 
says, a hypothesis must be considered refuted if it is incapable of being proved or 
disproved -- this at least seems to be the import of the unacceptable consequence 
he calls 'impertinence' (anucitya) or 'impudence' (vaiydtya). 
Other varieties of suppositional refutation have been suggested along lines simi- 
lar to the ones we have reviewed. Different authors propose different sets of criteria 
for rational nonacceptance. What we have seen is that there is, in the background, 
a jostling over the weight and place of the burden of proof. The sceptic presses 
in the direction of one extreme 
that a thesis can be considered refuted unless 
definitively proven. The constructive epistemologist tries to press in the direction 
of the opposite extreme -- that a thesis can be considered proved unless definitively 
disproved. The truth lies somewhere in between, and it is the role of presumptive 
argumentation to locate it. 
BUDDHIST CONTRIBUTIONS IN INDIAN LOGIC- FORMAL CRITERIA 
FOR GOOD ARGUMENTATION 
2.1 
The doctrine of the triple condition (trairftpya) 
The Buddhist logician Difln~ga (c. 480-540 AD) recommends a fundamental re- 
structuring of the early NyXya analysis of reasoned extrapolation and inference. 
Recall that analysis. It is an inference from likeness and unalikeness. In the one 
case, some object is inferred to have the target property on the grounds that it is 
'like' a paradigmatic example. The untasted grain of rice is inferred to be cooked 
on the grounds that it is in the same pan as a test grain which is found to be 
cooked. In the other case, the object is inferred to have the target property on the 
grounds that it is 'unlike' an example lacking the target property. Likeness and un- 
alikeness are matters of sharing or not sharing some property, the reason-property 
or evidence grounding the inference. Examples are either 'positive' -- having both 
the reason and the target property, or 'negative' 
lacking both. Extrapolation 
is the process of extrapolating a property from one object to another on the basis 
of a likeness or unalikeness between them. 
The difficulty is that not every such extrapolation is rational or warranted. The 
extrapolation of a property from one object to another is warranted only when 
the two objects are relevantly alike or relevantly unalike. That two objects are 
both blue does not warrant an extrapolation of solidity from one to the other; 
neither can we infer that they are different in respect to solidity because they 
are of different colours. What one needs, then, is a theory of relevant likeness or 
unalikeness, a theory, in other words, of the type of property (the reason property) 
two objects must share if one is to be licensed to extrapolate another property (the 
target property) from one to the other. 

Indian Logic 
341 
This is exactly what Difln~ga gives in his celebrated theory of the 'reason with 
three characteristics' (trairftpya). DiflnXga's thesis is that relevant likeness is an 
exclusion relation. Two objects are relevantly alike with respect to the extrap- 
olation of a property S just in case they share a property excluded from what 
is other than S. In other words, a reason property H for the extrapolation of 
a target property S is a property no wider in extension than S (assuming that 
'non' is such that HN nonS - ~ iff H C_ S). Here is the crucial passage in the 
Pramdna-samuccaya, or Collection on Knowing: 
The phrase [from II l b] "through a reason that has three characteris- 
tics" must be explained. 
[A proper reason must be] present in the site of inference and 
in what is like it and absent in what is not [II 5cd]. 
The object of inference is a property-bearer qualified by a property. Af- 
ter observing [the reason] there, either through perception or through 
inference, one also establishes in a general manner [its] presence in 
some or all of the same class. Why is that? Because the restriction 
is such that [the reason] is present only in what is alike, there is no 
restriction that it is only present. But in that case nothing is accom- 
plished by saying that [the reason] is "absent in what is not". This 
statement is made in order to determine that [the reason], absent in 
what is not [like the site of inference], is not in what is other than or 
incompatible with the object of inference. Here then is the reason with 
three characteristics from which we discern the reason-bearer. 
Difin~ga's important innovation is to take the notions of likeness and unalike- 
ness in extrapolation to be relative to the target property rather than the reason 
property. Two objects are 'alike' if they both have, or both lack, the target prop- 
erty. Two objects are 'unalike' if one has and the other lacks the target property. 
We want to know if our object 
the 'site' of the inference 
has the target 
property or not. What we do know is that our object has some other property, the 
reason property. So what is the formal feature of that reason property, in virtue 
of which its presence in our object determines the presence or absence of the tar- 
get property? The formal feature, Difln~ga claims, is that the reason property is 
present only in what is alike and absent in whatever is unalike our object. 
This can happen in one of two ways. It happens if the reason property is absent 
from everything not possessing the target property and present only in things 
possessing the target property. Then we can infer that our object too possesses 
the target property. 
It can also happen if the reason property is absent from 
everything possessing the target property and present only in things not possessing 
the target property. Then we can infer that our object does not possess the target 
property. 
Call the class of objects which are like the site of the inference the 'likeness class', 
and the class of objects unlike the site the 'unlikeness class' (Difin~ga's terms are 

342 
Jonardon Ganeri 
sapaks, a and vipak.sa). Interpreters have traditionally taken the likeness class to be 
the class of objects which possess the target property, and the unlikeness class to 
be the class of objects which do not possess the target property. I read Difin~ga 
differently. I take his use of the terms 'likeness' and 'unlikeness' here at face-value, 
and identify the likeness class with the class of things in the same state vis-a-vis 
the target property as the site of the inference. We do not know in advance what 
that state is, but neither do we need to. The pattern of distribution of the reason 
property tells us what we can infer - that the site has the target property, that 
it lacks it, or that we can infer nothing. My approach has several virtues, chief 
among which is that it preserves the central idea of likeness as a relation between 
objects rather than, as with the traditional interpretation, referring to a property 
of objects. I think it also avoids many of the exegetical problems that have arisen 
in the contemporary literature with regard to Difin~ga's theory. 
One of the traditional problems is whether the site of the inference is included 
in the likeness class or not. 34 If the likeness class is the class of objects possessing 
the target property, then to include it seems to beg the question the inference is 
trying to resolve: does the site have that property or not. But to exclude it implies 
that the union of the likeness and unlikeness classes does not exhaust the universe 
(the site cannot, for obvious reasons, be unlike itself). 
So one is left with two 
disjoint domains, and an apparently insuperable problem of induction - how can 
correlations between the reason property and the target property in one domain 
be any guide to their correlation in another, entirely disjoint, domain? 35 
If we take Difin~ga's appeal to the idea of likeness at face-value, however, the 
problem simply does not arise. The site of the inference is in the likeness class on 
the assumption that likeness is a reflexive relation- but that begs no question, for 
we do not yet know whether the likeness class is the class of things which possess 
the target property, or the class of things which do not possess it. It is the class of 
things which are in the same state vis-a-vis the target property as the inferential 
site itself. We can, if needs be, refer to objects 'like the site but not identical 
to it;' or we can take likeness to be nonreflexive, and refer instead, if needs be, 
to 'the site and objects like it' 
but this is a matter only of labelling, with no 
philosophical interest. 
Another of the traditional problems with Difin~ga's account is an alleged logical 
equivalence between the second and third conditions. 36 
The second condition 
states that the reason property be present only in what is alike. 37 The third 
condition states that it be absent in what is not. But if it is present only in what 
34Tom F. Tillemans, "On sapaksa," Journal of Indian Philosophy 18 (1990), pp. 53-80. 
35Hans H. Herzberger, "Three Systems of Buddhist Logic," in B. K. Matilal and R. D. Evans 
eds., Buddhist Logic and Epistemology: Studies in the Buddhist Analysis of Inference and Lan- 
guage (Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 1982), pp. 59-76. 
36Bimal Matilal, "Buddhist Logic and Epistemology," in Matilal and Evans (1982: 1-30); 
reprinted in Matilal, The Character of Logic in India (Albany: State University Of New York 
Press, 1998), chapter 4. 
37There is some debate among scholars over whether it was Difin~ga himself or his commenator 
DharmakTrti who first inserts the particle only into the clauses. 

Indian Logic 
343 
is alike, it must be absent in what is not; and if it is absent in what is not alike, it 
must be present only in what is. Now it is clear that Difln~ga's reason for inserting 
the particle only into his formula is to prevent a possible misunderstanding. The 
misunderstanding would be that of taking the second condition to assert that the 
reason property must be present in all like objects. That would be too strong 
a condition, ruling out any warranted inferences in which the reason property is 
strictly narrower than the target. On account of the meaning of the particle only, 
we can see that it is also one of the two readings of the statement: 
In what is alike, there is only the presence [of the reason] 
where the particle only is inserted into the predicate position. Difln~ga eliminates 
this unwanted reading of the second condition, but he does so in a disastrous way. 
He eliminates it by inserting the particle into the subject position: 
Only in what is alike, there is the presence [of the reason]. 
The reason this is disastrous is that it makes the second condition logically 
equivalent to the third. Notice, however, that when only is in predicate position, 
there are still two readings. The reading one needs to isolate is the second of these 
two readings: 
In what is alike, there is indeed the presence [of the reason] 
That is, the reason is present in some of what is alike. 
Accordingly, the theory is this. The extrapolation of a property S to an object 
is grounded by the presence in that object of any property X such that X excludes 
nonS but not S. A reason property for S is any member of the class 
{X:XNS~-O 
~XA 
nonS=o}. 
The clause 'but not S' (the second of Difln~ga's three conditions) has a clear 
function now. It is there to rule out properties which exclude both nonS and S. 
Such properties are properties 'unique' to the particular object which is the site of 
the inference, and Difln~ga does not accept as warranted any extrapolation based 
on them. I will look at his motives in the next section. 
Reason properties are nonempty subsets of the properties whose extrapolation 
they ground. If two objects are 'alike' in sharing a property, and one has a second 
property of wider extension than the first, then so does the second. Inductive 
extrapolation, in effect, is grounded in the contraposed universal generalisation 
"where the reason, so the target." A difficult problem of induction remains - how 
can one come to know, or justifiably believe, that two properties stand in such a 
relation without surveying all their instances? Difln~ga has no adequate answer 
to this problem (but see [Tuske, 1998; Peckhaus, 2001]). DharmakTrti, Difln~ga's 
brilliant reinterpreter, does. His answer is that when the relation between the 
two properties is one of causal or metaphysical necessity, the observation of a few 

344 
Jonardon Ganeri 
instances is sufficient to warrant our belief that it obtains (w 
Dfln~ga, however, 
is not interested in such questions. For him, the hard philosophical question is that 
of discovering the conditions for rational extrapolation. It is another issue whether 
those conditions can ever be known to obtain. 
To sum up, Difln~ga's three conditions on the reason are: 
1. 
Attachment 
Presence in the site a attachment 
(paksadharmatd) 
2. 
Association 
Presence (only) in what is like 
(anvaya) 
3. 
Dissociation 
Absence in what is unlike 
(vyatireka) 
If we take these conditions to be independent, it follows that there are exactly 
seven kinds of extrapolative inferential fallacy 
three ways for one of the con- 
ditions to fail, three ways for two conditions to fail, and one way for all three 
conditions to fail. So the new theory puts the concept of a fallacy on a more 
formal footing. A fallacy is no longer an interesting but essentially ad hoc maxim 
on reasoned argument. It is now a formal failing of the putative reason to stand 
in the correct extrapolation-grounding relation. One way for the reason to fail 
is by not attaching to the site at all, thereby failing to ground any extrapola- 
tion of other properties to it. This is a failure of the first condition. Another 
way for the reason to fail is by 'straying' onto unlike objects, thereby falsifying 
the third condition. The presence of one property cannot prove the presence of 
another if it is sometimes present where the other one is not. (It can, however, 
prove the absence of the other if it is only present where the other is not 
and 
then the absence of the first property is a proof of the presence of the second.) 
We might then think of the third condition as a 'no counter-example' condition, 
a counter-example to the extrapolation-warranting relation of subsumption being 
an object where the allegedly subsumed property is present along with the absence 
of its alleged subsumer. An extrapolation is grounded just as long as there are no 
counterexamples. 
2.2 
Di/tndga's 'wheel of reasons' (hetucakra) 
In addition to his Pramdna-samuccaya, Difln~ga wrote another, very brief text 
on logic, the Wheel of Reasons, or Hetucakranirnaya. Difln~ga's aim here is to 
classify all the different types of argument which fit into the general schema (p has 
s because it has hi, and to give an example of each. It is here that he applies his 
theory of a triple-conditioned sign to show when an inference is sound or unsound, 
and the kinds of defect an inferential sign can suffer from. Hence, it leads to a 
classification of fallacious and non-fallacious inferences. 
The 'wheel' or 'cycle' is in fact a 3 by 3 square, giving nine inference types. 
Difln~ga derives the square as follows. A 'homologue' (sapaksa) is defined as any 
object (excluding the locus of the inference) which is possesses the inferrable prop- 
erty, s. Now, a putative inferential sign, h, might be either (i) present in every 
homologue, (ii) present in only some of the homologues but not in others, or (iii) 
present in no homologue. Suppose we let 'sp' stand for the class of homologues. 

Indian Logic 
345 
Then we can represent these three possibilities as 'sp+', 'sp+', and 'sp-' respec- 
tively. The same three possibilities are also available with respect to the class of 
heterologues (objects, excluding the locus, which do not possess the inferred prop- 
erty, s). We can denote these by 'vp+', 'vp+', and 'vp-' respectively. Thus, 'vp+' 
means that every member of vp (every heterologue) possesses the sign property, 
h, etc. Now since any putative inferential sign must either be present in all, some 
or no homologue, and also in either all, some or no heterologue, there are just nine 
possibilities (Figure 2): 
vp 
+ 
- 
+ 
sp 
+ 
4- 
deviating 
contradictory 
deviating 
goodK 
uniquely 
deviating 
good 
deviating 
contradictory 
deviating 
Figure 2. 
Why does Difin~ga say that only 2 and 8 are cases of a good inferential sign? 
Recall the three conditions on a good sign. The first is that the inferential sign 
must be present in the locus of inference. This is taken for granted in the wheel. 
The second states that the inferential sign should be present in some (at least 
one) homologous case. In other words, a good sign is one for which either 'sp+' 
or 'sp+' 
Thus the second condition rules out 4, 5 and 6. Similarly, the third 
condition states that the inferential sign should be absent from any heterologous 
case, i.e. that 'vp-'. This rules out 1, 4, 7 and 3, 6, 9. So only 2 and 8 represent 
inferential signs which meet all three conditions and generate good inferences. Note 
here that the third condition alone is sufficient to rule out every fallacious case 
except 5. Hence, seeing why DifinXga considers 'type-5' inferences to be unsound 
will reveal why he considered the second of the three conditions to be necessary 
(see below). 
Difin~ga next gives an illustration of each of the nine possibilities. They can be 
tabulated, as in Figure 3. 
In each case, the locus of the inference is sound. Note that wherever possible, 
Difin~ga cites both a 'positive confirming example', i.e. an object where both 

346 
Jonardon Ganeri 
eternal 
transitory 
knowable 
created 
positive 
example 
space 
a pot 
negative 
example 
counter- 
example 
a pot 
space 
manmade 
tansitory 
a pot 
space 
lightning 
eternal 
crated 
audible 
manmade 
eternal 
eternal 
natural 
lightning 
transitory 
a pot 
lightning 
transitory 
manmade 
a pot 
a pot 
a pot 
a pot 
space 
eternal 
incorporeal 
space 
a pot 
action 
Figure 3. 
h and s are present, as well as a negative confirming example', i.e. an object 
where neither h nor s is present. Both support the inference. He also cites, where 
relevant, a 'counter-example', i.e. a case where h is present but s is absent. The 
existence of a counter-example undermines the inference. 
Let us look at four 
representative cases. 
Case 2: A warranted inference. This inference reads: Sound is transitory, be- 
cause it is created, e.g. a pot; space. Intuitively, this inference is sound, because the 
reason-property, createdness, is present only in places where the inferred property, 
transitoriness, is also present. Hence createdness is a good sign of transitoriness. 
The inference is supported first by an example where both are present, a pot, and 
second by an example where neither are present, space. 
Case 3: 'deviating' (asiddha). This inference reads: Sound is manmade, because 
it is transitory, e.g. a pot; space. Intuitively, this inference is unsound, because 
the reason-property, transitoriness, is present in places where the inferred property, 
manmade, is absent. The counterexample cited is lightning 
transitory but not 
manmade. Because we can find such a counter-example, the inferential sign is said 
to 'deviate' from the inferred property. Deviating inferences are ones which satisfy 
the second condition but fail the third. 
Case 6: 'contradictory' (viruddha). The inference reads: Sound is eternal, be- 
cause it is manmade, e.g. lightning. The sign here fails both conditions 2 and 
3 
there is no case of a thing which is eternal and manmade, but there is a 
counter-example, for instance, a pot, which is manmade but non-eternal. Such 
an inference is called 'contradictory' because we can in fact infer to the contrary 
conclusion, namely that sound is non-eternal because it is manmade. We can do 
this because in the contrary inference, the homologous and heterologous domains 
are switched round. 
Case 5: 'specific' (asddh~ran. a). Sound is eternal, because it is audible, e.g. 
a pot. 
The first point to notice is that there are no counter-examples to this 

Indian Logic 
347 
inference, for there are no examples, outside the 'locus' domain of sounds, of an 
audible thing which is non-eternal. This is because there are no audible things 
other than sounds! Hence the third condition seems to be satisfied trivially. The 
characteristic of type-5 inferences is that the reason-property is 'unique' to the 
locus. According to Difln~ga, such inferences are unsound, and the reason is that 
they fail the second condition - there is no homologue, i.e. an eternal thing other 
than sound, which is also audible. 
But this just restates the characteristic feature of such inferences, it doesn't 
explain why they are unsound. Some modern authors argue that the significance 
of the second condition is more epistemological, than logical: the second condi- 
tion implies that there must be a positive supporting example, and without such 
an example the inference, even if sound, carries no conviction. DiflnXga might, 
however, have had a more formal or logical reason for rejecting type-5 inferences. 
The universal rule here is "Whatever is audible, apart from sound, is eternal". 
Now if a universal rule of the form '(Vx)(Fx ~ Gx)' is made true by there being 
no Fs, then so is the rule '(Vx)(Fx ~ 
not-Gx)' 
Hence, we could equally infer 
that sound is non-eternal because it is audible! This resembles the fault which the 
Ny~ya called 'prakaranasama' or 'indecisive' 
Difln~ga, it seems, wants to avoid 
this by saying that '(Vx)(Fx ~ Gx)' is true only if there is at least one F, which 
leads to the second condition. 
Let us consider the argument from specifics further. I have said that an extrap- 
olation-grounding property is a nonempty subproperty 
a property narrower in 
extension than the property being extrapolated, and resident at least in the ob- 
ject to which that property is being extrapolated. The sweet smell of a lotus is a 
ground for extrapolating that it has a fragrance; its being a blue lotus is a ground 
for extrapolating its being a lotus. Extrapolation is a move from the specific to the 
general, from species to genus, from conjunction to conjunct. Extrapolation is a 
move upwards in the hierarchy of kinds. This model of extrapolation works well in 
most cases, but what happens at the extremes? The extreme in one direction is a 
most general property of all, a property possessed by everything. Existence or 're- 
ality', if it is a property, is a property like this, and the theory entails that existence 
is always extrapolatable- the inference 'a is, because a is F' is always warranted. 
Difln~ga's theory faces a minor technical difficulty here. Since everything exists, 
then everything is 'like' the site of the inference (in the same state as the site 
with respect to existence), and the unlikeness class is empty. So Difln~ga has to 
be able to maintain that his third condition 
absence of the reason property in 
every unlike object 
is satisfied when there are no unlike objects. The universal 
quantifier must have no existential import. His innovative distinction between in- 
ference 'for oneself' (svarthanumdna) and inference 'for others' (pararthanumana) 
is a help here. It is the distinction between the logical preconditions for warranted 
extrapolation and the debate-theoretic exigencies of persuasion. While it might 
be useful, even necessary, to be able to cite a supporting negative example if one's 
argument is to carry conviction and meet the public norms on believable inference, 

348 
Jonardon Ganeri 
there is no corresponding requirement that the unlikeness class be nonempty if an 
extrapolation is to be warranted. 
What happens at the other extreme? Extrapolation is a move from the more 
specific to the less specific, and the limit is the case when the reason property is 
entirely specific to the site of the inference. There is no doubt but that Difin~ga 
thinks that extrapolation breaks down at this limit. He calls such reason proper- 
ties 'specific indeterminate' (asddhdrandnaikdntika), and classifies them as bogus- 
reasons. Indeed it is the entire function of his second condition to rule out such 
properties. That is why the second condition insists that the reason property must 
be present in an object like the site. This condition is an addition to the first, 
that the reason property be present in the site 
it demands that the reason be 
present in some other object like but not identical to the site. DifinXga's example 
in the Collection on Knowing [II 7d] is: 
[Thesis] 
[Reason] 
Sound is noneternal. 
Because it is audible. 
In the Wheel of Reasons [5cd-7a], he gives another example: 
[Thesis] 
Sound is eternal. 
[Reason] 
Because it is audible. 
What is the difference? In fact, the difference between these two examples holds 
the key to what Difin~ga thinks is wrong. The property audibility, something 
specific to sound, does not determine whether sound is eternal or noneternal. In 
either case, audibility is absent from what is unlike sound (because it is unique to 
sound) but also from what is like sound (except for sound itself). This symmetry 
in the distribution of the reason property undermines its capacity to discriminate 
between truth and falsity. To put it another way, if we take the universal quantifier 
to range over everything except the site of the inference, sound, then it is true both 
that everything audible is eternal and that everything audible is noneternal- both 
are true only because there are no audibles in the range of the quantifier. 
This seems to be Difln~ga's point, but it is not very satisfactory. Sound is either 
eternal or noneternal, and so audibility is a subproperty of one or the other. One 
and only one of the above universal quantifications is true when the quantifier is 
unrestricted. In any case, just why is it that we should not reason from the specific 
properties of a thing? We do it all the time. Historical explanations are notoriously 
singular 
unrepeated historical events are explained by specific features of their 
context. Difin~ga, it seems, is like the follower of the deductive-nomological model 
in insisting on repeatability as a criterion of explanation. What about mundane 
cases like this one: the radio has stopped because I have unplugged it? Being 
unplugged by me is a property specific to the radio, and yet the form of the 
explanation seems unapproachable. Perhaps, however, what one should say is that 
the explanatory property is 'being unplugged', and not 'being unplugged by me', 

Indian Logic 
349 
and the explanation rests on the generalisation 'whenever a radio is unplugged, it 
stops.' So then the restriction is not to any property specific to the site, but only 
to those which are not merely tokens of some more general explanatory property. 
And yet there are still intuitively rational but specific inferences 
that salt is 
soluble because it has a certain molecular structure, that helium is inert because 
it has a certain atomic number, flying creatures fly because they have wings. Why 
shouldn't the specific properties of a thing be implicated in inferences of its other 
properties? 
What we see here is Difinaga's adherence to a strictly inductivist model of 
extrapolation. The specific property audibility does not ground an extrapolation 
of eternality or noneternality because there can be no inductive evidence for the 
extrapolation. Inductive evidence takes the form of objects in the likeness and 
unlikeness classes known to have or not to have the reason. One might think that 
one does have at least 'negative' evidence, for one knows that audibility is absent 
from any object in the unlikeness class. So why can one not infer from the fact 
that audibility is absent in unlike objects that it must be present in like objects? 
The answer is that one can indeed make that inference, but it does not get one 
very far. For we must recall again the way these classes are defined - as classes of 
objects like or unlike the site with respect to eternality. We do not know whether 
the site is eternal or noneternal, and in consequence we do not know whether 
unlike things are things which are noneternal or eternal. So while we have plenty 
of examples of eternal inaudibles and noneternal inaudibles, we still do not know 
which are the 'alike' ones and which the 'unalike'. 
The explanation of salt's solubility by its specific molecular structure exemplifies 
a quite different model of explanation. It is a theoretical explanation resting on 
the postulates of physical chemistry. It is from theory, not from observation, that 
one infers that having an NaC1 lattice structure is a subproperty of being soluble. 
Similarly, within the context of suitable theories about the nature of sound and 
secondary qualities, one might well be able to infer from sound's being audible to 
its being noneternal. Difln~ga, in spite of his brilliance and originality, could not 
quite free himself from the old model of inference from sampling. His inclusion 
of the second condition was a concession to this old tradition. He should have 
dropped it. Later Buddhists, beginning with Dharmakirti, did just that - they 
effectively dropped the second condition by adopting the reading of it that makes 
it logically equivalent to the third. 
Difln~ga's insistence that any acceptible inference should be accompanied by 
both positive and negative supporting examples provoked the Naiy~yika Uddy- 
otakara to criticise and expand the Wheel. Uddyotakara points out that there are 
sound patterns of inference in which either the class of homologues or the class of 
heterologues is empty. These he calls the 'universally negative' (kevala-vyatikekin) 
and 'universally positive' (kevaldnvayin) inferences. We now have a wheel with 
sixteen possible cases (Figure 4): 
Here, 'o' means that the class (sp or vp) is empty. An example of a sound 
'universally positive' inference might be: "This exists because I can see it". There 

350 
Jonardon Ganeri 
sp 
+ 
+ 
vp 
+ 
-- 
 
0 
good 
good 
good 
good 
good 
Figure 4. 
are no heterologues, because there are no things which do not exist, and so there 
are no negatively supporting examples. 
Nevertheless, we should recognise the 
acceptibility such an inference. Examples of 'universally negative' inferences are 
more difficult to find. The later NyXya link such inferences with their theory of 
definition, considering such examples as "Cows are distinct from non-cows, because 
they have dewlap'. There are no objects which are distinct from non-cows except 
for cows, and hence no homologues. But the inference might have significance, 
for it tells us that the property of having dewlap serves to distinguish cows from 
non-cows, and hence can be used as a definition of cowhood 3s. 
2.3 
Arguments 
from effect, essence and non-observation 
DharmakTrti (AD 600-660) offers a substantive account of the conditions under 
which the observation of a sample warrants extrapolation. His claim is that this 
is so if the reason property is one of three types: an 'effect' reason (kdrya-hetu), a 
natural reason (svabhdva-hetu), or a reason based on nonobservation (anupalabdhi- 
hetu) .39 
In each case, the presence of the reason in some sense necessitates the presence 
of the target. An effect-reason is a property whose presence is causally necessitated 
by the presence of the target property - for example, inferring that the mountain 
has fire on it, because of smoke above it. The reason-target relation is a causal 
relation. 
Clearly one can, and later philosophers 4~ indeed did, extend this to 
cover other species of causal inference, such as cases when reason and target are 
both effects of a common cause. The generalisation 'night follows day' is true, 
38For further discussion, see B. K. Matilal, "Introducing Indian Logic", in Matilal (1998), 
reprinted in Jonardon Ganeri ed., (Indian Logic: A Reader 
39DharmakTrti, NySyabindu II 11-12. 
4~ 
MoksXkaragupta's eleventh century TarkabhSsg or Language of Reason. Yuichi Ka- 
jiyama, An Introduction to Buddhist Philosophy: An Annotated Translation of the TarkabhSsa 
of MoksSkaragupta, Memoirs of the Faculty of Letters (Kyoto) 10 (1966), pp. 74-76. 

Indian Logic 
351 
not because day causes night but because both day and night are caused by the 
rotation of the earth. An example often cited is the inference of lemon-colour from 
lemon-taste, when both are products of the same cause, viz. the lemon itself. Still 
another example is the inference of ashes from smoke: ashes and smoke are both 
effects of fire. Such an inference has two steps. First, fire is inferred from smoke; 
second, ash is inferred from fire. The second step, in which we infer an effect from 
its cause, is possible only because ash is a necessary effect of fire. 
A natural reason is one whose presence metaphysically necessitates that of the 
target property, for example the inference that something is a tree because it is a 
~im. gapg (a species of tree). Dharmakirti appears to regard the law "all gi.rngapgs 
are trees" as necessarily true, even if its truth has to be discovered by observation, 
and thus to anticipate the idea that there are a posteriori necessities. 4~ He states, 
surprisingly, that the reason-target relation in such inferences is the relation of 
identity. Why? Perhaps his idea is that the two properties being-a-gi.rngapd and 
being-a-tree are token-identical, for the particular tree does not have two distinct 
properties, being-a-gim, gapg and a separate property being-a-tree, any more than 
something which weighs one kilogramme has two properties, having-weight and 
having-weight-one-kilogramme. 
The properties as types are distinct, but their 
tokens in individual objects are identical. Trope-theoretically, the point can easily 
be understood. The very same trope is a member of two properties, one wider in 
extension than the other, just as the class of blue tropes is a subset of the class of 
colour tropes. But a blue object does not have two tropes - one from the class of 
blue tropes and one from the class of colour tropes. It is the self-same trope. 
Is absence of evidence evidence of absence? According to Dharmak~rti, nonob- 
servation sometimes proves absence: my failure to see an object, when all the con- 
ditions for its perception are met, is grounds for an inference that it is not here. 
The pattern of argument such inferences exemplify was known to the medievals as 
argumentum ad ignorantiam, or an 'argument from ignorance.' The pattern occurs 
whenever one infers that p on the grounds that there is no evidence that p is false. 
Dharmak~rti states that the argument depends on the object's being perceptible, 
i.e. that all the conditions for its perception (other than its actual presence) are 
met in the given situation. Douglas Walton, in a major study of arguments from 
ignorance, 42 claims that they depend for their validity on an implicit conditional 
premise -- if p were false, p would be known to be false. The characteristics of an 
argument from ignorance are then a 'lack-of-knowledge' premise- it is not known 
that not-p, and a 'search' premise -- if p were false, it would be known that not-p. 
The underlying hidden premise mentioned by Dharmakirti seems to be exactly the 
one Walton gives: if the object were here, one would see it. The necessity here is 
subjunctive. The argument has a presumptive status - one has a right to presume 
the conclusion to be true to the extent that one has searched for and failed to find 
counter-evidence. It is this idea that is strikingly absent in Difin~ga. Warranted 
extrapolation depends not on the mere nonobservation of counterexamples, but 
41pramdnavSrttika I, 39-42. 
42Walton (1996). 

352 
Jonardon Ganeri 
on one's failing to find them in the course of a suitably extensive search. 
In each of the three cases, the universal relation between reason and target is 
a relation not of coincidence but of necessity - causal, metaphysical or subjunc- 
tive. Dharmakirti's solution to the problem of induction, then, is to claim that 
observation supports a generalisation only when that generalisation is lawlike or 
necessary. In this, I think he anticipates the idea that the distinction between 
lawlike and accidental generalisations is that only the former support the coun- 
terfactual 'if the reason property were instantiated here, so would be the target 
property'. In such a context, let us note, the observation of even a single positive 
example might sometimes be sufficient to warrant the extrapolation: I infer that 
any mango is sweet having tasted a single mango; I infer that any fire will burn 
having once been burnt. 
Extrapolation is warranted when the reason-target is lawlike, but it does not 
follow that the extrapolator must know that it is lawlike. What Dharmak~rti 
has succeeded in doing is to describe the conditions under which extrapolation 
works- the conditions under which one's actions, were they to be in accordance 
with the extrapolation, would meet with success. It is a description of the type 
of circumstance in which extrapolation is rewarded (i.e. true 
if, as it seems, 
Dharmak~rti has a pragmatic theory of truth43). As to how, when or whether one 
can know that one is in such a circumstance, that is another problem altogether 
and not one that Dharmak~rti has necessarily to address. For a general theory of 
rationality issues in conditions of the form 'in circumstances C, it is rational to 
do r or 'in circumstances C, it is rational to believe p'. And this is precisely the 
form Dharmakirti's conditions take. 
2.4 
The Jaina reformulation of the triple condition 
Difin~ga had argued that there are three marks individually necessary and jointly 
sufficient for the warranted extrapolation from reason to target (w 
They are 
(1) that the reason be present in the site of the extrapolation, (2) that the reason 
be present (only) in what is similar to the target, and (3) that the reason be absent 
in what is dissimilar to the target. The second of these conditions is, arguably, 
equivalent to the third, which asserts that the reason property is absent when 
the target property is absent. That was supposed to capture the idea of a 'no 
counterexample' condition, according to which an extrapolation is warranted just 
in case there is nothing in which the reason is present but not the target. What 
happens to this account if one allows, as the Jaina logicians do, that a property 
and its absence be compossible in a single object? 44 What happens is that the 
three marks cease to be sufficient for warranted extrapolation. In particular, the 
third mark no longer captures the idea behind the 'no counterexample' condition. 
43Shoryu Katsura, "Dharmakirti's Concept of Truth," Journal of Indian Philosophy 12 (1984), 
pp. 213-235. 
Georges B. J. Dreyfus, Recognizing Reality: Dharmak~rti's Philosophy and its 
Tibetan Interpretations (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997), chapter 17. 
44See B. K. Matilal, The Central Philosophy of Jainism (Ahmedabad: L. D. Institute of 
Indology, 1981). 

Indian Logic 
353 
For now the absence of the reason property in a place where the target is absent 
does not preclude its presence there too! So the third mark can be satisfied and 
yet there still be counterexamples 
cases of the presence of the reason together 
with the absence of the target. 
The Jainas indeed claim that the three marks are neither necessary nor suffi- 
cient for warranted extrapolation. Their response is to substitute for the three 
marks a new, single, mark. It is clear that if the presence and absence of a prop- 
erty are compossible, then a distinction needs to be drawn between absence and 
nonpresence. The first is consistent with the presence of the property; the second 
is not. Early post-Difln~ga Jainas like Akalaflka and Siddhasena described the 
new mark in quasi-Buddhistic terms, as 'no presence without' (a-vind-bhgva) 
i.e. no presence of the reason without the target. Thus Akalaflka: 45 
An extrapolation is a cognition of what is signified from a sign known to 
have the single mark of no presence without the target (sgdhydvingbhgva). 
Its result is blocking and other cognitions. 
The relata of the causality and identity relations cannot be cognised 
without the suppositional knowledge (tarka) of their being impossible 
otherwise, [which is] the proof that this is the single mark even without 
those relations. Nor is a tree the own-nature (svabhgva) or the effect 
(kdrya) of such things as shade. And there is no disagreement here. 
There is an obvious reference to and criticism of Dharmakirti here, 46 and also a 
mention of the important idea, which we have already discussed, that presumptive 
argumentation (tarka) is what gives us knowledge of the universal generalisations 
grounding extrapolations. 
The crucial difference from the Buddhists is in the 
meaning of 'no presence'. For the Jainas, it has to stand for nonpresence and not 
for absence. That led them to reformulate the reason-target relation as a relation 
of necessitation. Siddhasena: 
The mark of a reason is 'being impossible otherwise' (anyathdnupannatva) [Ny~y~vat~ra 
22]. 
V~dideva Sfiri gives the developed Jaina formulation: 
A reason has a single mark, 'determined as impossible otherwise'. It 
does not have three marks, for fallacies are then still possible [Pram~nanaya- 
tatt~lok~lamk~ra 3.11-12]. 
The idea is that the reason cannot be present if the target is not. It is impossible 
for the reason to be present otherwise than if the target is present. The presence 
of the reason necessitates the presence of the target. 
45Laghfyastraya, verse 12. 
46On Akalanka on DharmakTrti: Nagin J. Shah, Akalanka's Criticism of Dharmak~rti's Philos- 
ophy (Ahmedabad: L. D. Institute, 1967), pp. 267-270. 

354 
Jonardon Ganeri 
I said that DiflnXga's three marks are, for the Jainas, neither necessary nor suf- 
ficient. They are not sufficient because they permit extrapolation when the reason 
is both present and absent, and the target nonpresent. On what grounds are they 
thought not to be necessary? The theory of extrapolation as developed first by the 
early NaiyXyikas and then by DiflnXga has a built-in simplifying assumption. The 
assumption is that extrapolation is always a matter of inferring from the presence 
of one property in an object to the presence of a second property in that same 
object. But that assumption excludes many intuitively warranted extrapolations. 
The main examples considered by the Jainas are" (i) the gakata star-group will 
rise because krttikd star-grouphas risen; (ii) the sun is above the horizon because 
the earth is in light; (iii) there is a moon in the sky because there is a moon in the 
water. 
These examples are said to prove that the first of DiflnXga's three marks, that 
the reason property is present in the site, is not a necessary condition on warranted 
extrapolation. And yet, while it is certainly desirable to broaden the reach of the 
theory to cover new patterns of extrapolative inference, it is not very clear what 
these examples show. What is the underlying generalisation? What are the similar 
and dissimilar examples? In the first case, the extrapolation seems to be grounded 
in the universal generalisation 'whenever the krttikd arises, so too does the gakat, a.' 
But then there is indeed a single site of extrapolation 
the present time. The 
inference is: the gakata will rise now because krttikd has now risen. A similar point 
could be made about the second example. There seems indeed to be an implicit 
temporal reference in both of the first two cases, an extrapolation grounded in a 
universal generalisation over times. 
The third case is more convincing, yet here too one might try to discern a com- 
mon site. For the true form of the extrapolation is" the moon is in the sky because 
it is reflected in the water, an extrapolation grounded in a universal generalisation 
of the form 'objects cause their own reflections'. Certainly, however, there are 
patterns of extrapolation for which the 'single site' condition does not hold. If, for 
example, one can find a universal generalisation of the form 'Vx3y(Fx ~ Gy)', 
then from '3xFx' one can infer '3xGx'. 
Perhaps this is the pattern of extrap- 
olation the Jainas intend to exemplify with their example of a sky-moon and a 
water-moon. If so, it is represents an important criticism of a simplifying, but in 
the end also restricting, assumption in the classical theory of extrapolation. 
JAINA CONTRIBUTIONS IN INDIAN LOGIC: THE LOGIC OF 
ASSERTION 
3.1 
Rationality and Consistency 
What is the rational response when confronted with a set of propositions each of 
which we have some reason to accept, and yet which taken together form an incon- 
sistent class? This was, in a nutshell, the problem addressed by the Jaina logicians 
of classical India, and the solution they gave is, I think, of great interest, both for 

Indian Logic 
355 
what it tells us about the relationship between rationality and consistency, and for 
what we can learn about the logical basis of philosophical pluralism. The Jainas 
claim that we can continue to reason in spite of the presence of inconsistencies, 
and indeed construct a many-valued logical system tailored to the purpose. My 
aim in this chapter is to offer an interpretation of that system and to try to draw 
out some of its philosophical implications. 
There was in classical India a great deal of philosophical activity. Over the years, 
certain questions came to be seen as fundamental, and were hotly contested. Are 
there universals? Do objects endure or perdure? Are there souls, and, if so, are 
they eternal or non-eternal entities? Do there exist wholes over and above collec- 
tions of parts? Different groups of philosophers offered different answers to these 
and many other such questions, and each, moreover, was able to supply plausible 
arguments in favour of their position, or to offer a world-view from which their 
particular answers seemed true. The body of philosophical discourse collectively 
contained therefore, a mass of assertions and contradictory counter-assertions, be- 
hind each of which there lay a battery of plausible arguments. Such a situation 
is by no means unique to philosophical discourse. Consider, for instance, the cur- 
rent status of physical theory, which comprises two sub-theories, relativity and 
quantum mechanics, each of which is extremely well supported, and yet which 
are mutually inconsistent. The same problem is met with in computer science, 
where a central notion, that of putting a query to a data-base, runs into trou- 
ble when the data-base contains data which is inconsistent because it is coming 
in from many different sources. For another example of the general phenomenon 
under discussion, consider the situation faced by an investigator using multiple- 
choice questionnaires, when the answers supplied in one context are in conflict 
with those supplied in another. Has the interrogee said 'yes' or 'no' to a given 
question, when they said 'yes' under one set of conditions but 'no' under another? 
Do their answers have any value at all, or should we simply discard the whole 
lot on account of its inconsistency? Perhaps the most apposite example of all is 
the case of a jury being presented with the evidence from a series of witnesses. 
Each witness, we might suppose, tells a consistent story, but the total evidence 
presented to the jury might itself well be inconsistent. 
The situation the Jainas have in mind is one in which a globally inconsistent 
set of propositions, the totality of philosophical discourse, is divided into sub- 
sets, each of which is internally consistent. Any proposition might be supported 
by others from within the same subset. At the same time, the negation of that 
proposition might occur in a distinct, though possibly overlapping subset, and 
be supported by other propositions within it. Each such consistent sub-set of a 
globally inconsistent discourse, is what the Jainas call a "standpoint" (naya). A 
standpoint corresponds to a particular philosophical perspective. 
Let us say that a proposition is arguable if it is assertible within some standpoint, 
i.e. if it is a member of a mutually supporting consistent set of propositions. 
The original problem posed was this: what is the rational reaction to a class 
of propositions, each of which is, in this sense, arguable, yet which is globally 

356 
Jonardon Ganeri 
inconsistent? It seems that there are three broad types of response. The first, 
which I will dub doctrinalism, is to say that it will always be possible, in principle, 
to discover which of two inconsistent propositions is true, and which is false. Hence 
our reaction should be to reduce the inconsistent set to a consistent subset, by 
rejecting propositions which, on close examination, we find to be unwarranted. 
This is, of course, the ideal in philosophical debate, but it is a situation we are 
rarely if ever in. The problem was stipulated to be one such that we cannot decide, 
as impartial observers, which of the available standpoints, if any, is correct. If 
doctrinalism were the only option, then we would have no choice but to come 
down in favour of one or other of the standpoints, basing our selection, perhaps 
on historical, cultural, or sociological considerations, but not on logical ones. 
A second response is that of scepticism. Here the idea is that the existence both 
of a reason to assert and a reason to reject a proposition itself constitutes a reason 
to deny that we can justifiably either assert or deny the proposition. A justification 
of a proposition can be defeated by an equally plausible justification of its negation. 
This sceptical reaction is at the same time a natural and philosophically interesting 
one, and indeed has been adopted by some philosophers, notably Ndgdrjuna in 
India and the Pyrrhonic sceptics as reported by Sextus Empiricus. Sextus, indeed 
states as the first of five arguments for scepticism, that philosophers have never 
been able to agree with one another, not even about the criteria we should use to 
settle controversies. 
The third response is that of pluralism, and this is the response favoured by the 
Jainas. The pluralist finds some way conditionally to assent to each of the propo- 
sitions, and she does so by recognising that the justification of a proposition is 
internal to a standpoint. In this way, the Jainas try "to establish a rapprochement 
between seemingly disagreeing philosophical schools ''47, thereby avoiding the dog- 
matism or "one-sidedness" from which such disagreements flow. Hence another 
name for their theory was anekdntavdda, the doctrine< of "non-one-sidedness". 4s 
In spite of appearances to the contrary, the sceptic and the pluralist have much 
in common. For although the sceptic rejects all the propositions while the pluralist 
endorses all of them, they both deny that we can solve the problem by privileging 
just one position, i.e. by adopting the position of the doctrinalist. 
(It seems, 
indeed, that scepticism and pluralism developed in tandem in India, both as critical 
reactions to the system-based philosophical institutions.) Note too that both are 
under pressure to revise classical logic. For the sceptic, the problem is with the 
law of excluded middle, the principle that for all p, either p or ~p. The reason 
this is a problem for the sceptic is that she wishes to reject each proposition p 
without being forced to assent to its negation -~p. The pluralist, on the other 
hand, has trouble with a different classical law, the law of non-contradiction, that 
for all p, it is not the case both that p and that -~p, for she wishes to assent both 
47B.K. Matilal, The Central Philosophy of Jainism, Calcutta University Press, Calcutta 
1977:61. 
48For a good outline of these aspects of Jaina philosophical theory, see B.K. Matilal, The 
Central Philosophy of Jainism, and P. Dundas, The Jains, Routledge Press, London 1992. 

Indian Logic 
357 
to the proposition p and to its negation. While a comparative study of the two 
responses, sceptical and pluralist, would be of interest, I will here confine myself 
to developing the version of pluralism developed by the Jainas, and discussing the 
extent to which their system becomes paraconsistent. It is very often claimed that 
the Jainas 'embrace' inconsistency, but I will be arguing that this is not so, that 
we can understand their system by giving it a less strongly paraconsistent reading. 
3.2 
Jaina seven-valued logic 
The Jaina philosophers support their pluralism by constructing a logic in which 
there are seven distinct semantic predicates (bhafig0, which, since they attach to 
sentences, we might think of as truth-values (for a slightly different interpretation, 
see Ganeri 2001, chapter 5). I will first set out the system following the mode of 
description employed by the Jainas themselves, before attempting to reconstruct 
it in a modern idiom. I will follow here the twelfth century author V~dideva Sfiri 
(1086-1169 A.D.), but similar descriptions are given by many others, including 
PrabhXcandra, Mallisena and Samantabhadra. This is what V~dideva Sfiri says 
(Pramdna-naya-tattvdlokSlafikdrah., chapter 4, verses 15-21): 49 
The seven predicate theory consists in the use of seven claims about 
sentences, each preceded by "arguably" or "conditionally" (syat), [all] 
concerning a single object and its particular properties, composed of 
assertions and denials, either simultaneously or successively, and with- 
out contradiction. They are as follows: 
1. Arguably, it (i.e. some object) exists (syad asty eva). The first 
predicate pertains to an assertion. 
2. Arguably, it does not exist (sydn ndsty eva). The second predicate 
pertains to a denial. 
3. Arguably, it exists; arguably, it doesn't exist (sy~d asty eva sydn 
ndsty eva). The third predicate pertains to successive assertion 
and denial. 
4. Arguably, it is 'non-assertible' (sydd avaktavyam eva). The fourth 
predicate pertains to a simultaneous assertion and denial. 
5. Arguably, it exists; arguably it is non-assertible (sydd asty eva 
sydd avaktavyam eva). The fifth predicate pertains to an assertion 
and a simultaneous assertion and denial. 
6. Arguably, it doesn't exist; arguably it is non-assertible (sydn ndsty 
eva sydd avaktavyam eva). The sixth predicate pertains to a de- 
nial and a simultaneous assertion and denial. 
49V~dideva Sfiri: 1967, PramSna-naya-tattvSlokSlam. kSra, ed. and transl. H. S. Battacharya, 
Jain Sahitya Vikas Mandal, Bombay. 

358 
Jonardon Ganeri 
7. Arguably, it exists; arguably it doesn't exist; arguably it is non- 
assertible (sydd asty eva sygn ndsty eva sydd avaktavyam eva). 
The seventh predicate pertains to a successive assertion and denial 
and a simultaneous assertion and denial. 
The structure here is simple enough. There are three basic truth-values, true (t), 
false (f), and non-assertible (u). There is also some means of combining basic 
truth-values, to form four further compound values, which we can designate tf, 
tu, fu and tfu. There is a hint too that the third basic value is itself somehow a 
product of the first two, although by some other means of combination - hence 
the talk of simultaneous and successive assertion and denial. Thus, in Jaina seven 
valued logic, all the truth-values are thought to be combinations in some way or 
another of the two classical values. 
There is, however, a clear risk that the seven values in this system will collapse 
trivially into three. For if the fifth value, tu, means simply "true and true-and- 
false", how is it distinct from the fourth value, u, "true-and-false"? No recon- 
struction of the Jaina system can be correct if it does not show how each of the 
seven values is distinct. The way forward is to pay due attention to the role of 
the conditionalising operator "arguably" (sy~t). The literal meaning of "sydf' is 
"perhaps it is", the optative form of the verb "to be". The Jaina logicians do not, 
however, use it in quite its literal sense, which would imply that no assertion is 
not made categorically, but only as a possibility-claims. Instead, they use it to 
mean "from a certain standpoint" or "within a particular philosophical perspec- 
tive". This is the Jaina pluralism: assertions are made categorically, but only from 
within a particular framework of supporting assertions. If we let the symbol "V" 
represent "sygf', then the Jaina logic is a logic of sentences of the form "Vp", a 
logic of conditionally justified assertions. As we will see, it resembles other logics 
of assertion, especially the ones developed by Jagkowski 5~ and Rescher al 
The first three of the seven predications now read as follows: 
1. IP[ = tiff Vp. 
In other words, p is true iff it is arguable that p. We are to interpret this as saying 
that there is some standpoint within which p is justifiably asserted. We can thus 
write it as 
1. [p[ = tiff 3or a :p, 
where "a : p" means that p is arguable from the standpoint or. For the second 
value we may similarly write, 
2. IP[=fiffV 
-~p. 
5~ 
S.: 1948, "Propositional calculus for contradictory deductive systems"; English 
translation in Studia Lo9ica 24: 143- 157 (1969). 
51Rescher, N.: 1968, Topics in Philosophical Logic, Reidel, Dordrecht. 

Indian Logic 
359 
That is, 
[p[ = f iff 3a a: ~p. 
The third value is taken by those propositions whose status is controversial, in 
the sense that they can be asserted from some standpoints but their negations 
from others. These are the propositions which the Jainas are most concerned to 
accommodate. Thus 
I.e. 
3. [Pl=tfiff[P]=t&lP[=f- 
or again 
[p[ = tf iff Vp & V~p, 
IPl = t f iff 3a a : p & 3a a : -,p. 
This way of introducing a new truth-value, by combining two others, may seem 
a little odd. I think, however, that we can see the idea behind it if we approach 
matters from another direction. Let us suppose that every standpoint is such that 
for any given proposition, either the proposition or its negation is assertible from 
within that standpoint. Later, I will argue that the Jainas did not want to make 
this assumption, and that this is what lies behind their introduction of the new 
truth-value "non-assertible". But for the moment let us make the assumption, 
which is tantamount to supposing that every standpoint is 'optimal', in the sense 
that for any arbitrary proposition, it either supplies grounds for accepting it, or 
else grounds for denying it. There are no propositions about which an optimal 
standpoint is simply indifferent. Now, with respect to the totality of actual optimal 
standpoints, a proposition can be in just one of three states: either it is a member 
of every optimal standpoint, or its negation is a member of every such standpoint, 
or else it is a member of some, and its negation of the rest. If we number these 
three states, 1, 2 and 3, and call the totality of all actual standpoints, E, then the 
value of any proposition with respect to E is either 1, 2 or 3. The values 1, 2 and 
3 are in fact the values of a three-valued logic, which we can designate M3. There 
is a correspondence between this logic and the system introduced by the Jainas 
(J3, say). The idea, roughly is that a proposition has the value 'true' iff it either 
has the value 1 or 3, it has the value 'false' iff it either has the value 2 or 3, and 
it has the value 'tf' iff it has the value 3. Hence the three values introduced by 
the Jainas represent, albeit indirectly, the three possible values a proposition may 
take with respect to the totality of optimal standpoints. 
Before elaborating this point further, we must find an interpretation for the 
Jainas' fourth value "non-assertible". 
Bharucha and Kamat offer the following 
analysis of the fourth value: 
The fourth predication consists of affirmative and negative statements 
made simultaneously. 
Since an object X is incapable of being ex- 
pressed in terms of existence and non-existence at the same time, even 
allowing for Syhd, it is termed 'indescribable'. Hence we assign to the 

360 
Jonardon Ganeri 
fourth predication ... the indeterminate truth-value I and denote the 
statement corresponding to the fourth predication as (p&_,p).52 
Bharucha and Kamat's interpretation is equivalent to 
4. Ipl = u iff V(p&~p), 
that is 
[Pl = u iff ::la a: (p&--,p). 
Thus, for Bharucha and Kamat, the Jaina system is paraconsistent because it 
allows for standpoints in which contradictions are justifiably assertible. This seems 
to me to identify the paraconsistent element in the Jaina theory in quite the 
wrong place. For while there may be certain sentences, such as the Liar, which 
can justifiably be both asserted and denied, this cannot be the case for the wide 
variety of sentences which the Jainas have in mind, sentences like "There exist 
universals" and so on. Even aside from such worries, the current proposal has 
a technical defect. For what now is the fifth truth-value, tu? If Bharucha and 
Kamat are right then it means that there is some standpoint from which 'p' can 
be asserted, and some from which 'p&~p' can be asserted. But this is logically 
equivalent to u itself. The Bharucha and Kamat formulation fails to show how we 
get to a seven-valued logic. 
Another proposed interpretation is due to Matilal. Taking at face-value the 
Jainas' elaboration of the fourth value as meaning "simultaneously both true and 
false", he says 
the direct and unequivocal challenge to the notion of contradiction in 
standard logic comes when it is claimed that the same proposition is 
both true and false at the same time in the same sense. This is exactly 
accomplished by the introduction of the [fourth] value- "Inexpressible", 
which can also be rendered as paradoxical. 53 
Matilal's intended interpretation seems thus to be 
4. 
Ipl = ~ iff V(p,--T), 
i.e. IP[ = u iff 3o(o : p&:a: ~p). 
Matilal's interpretation is a little weaker than Bharucha and Kamat, for he does 
not explicitly state that the conjunction 'p&-,p' is asserted, only that both con- 
juncts are. Admittedly, the difference between Matilal and Bharucha and Kamat 
is very slight, and indeed only exists if we can somehow make out the claim that 
52Bharucha, F. and Kamat, R. V.: 1984, "Syddvdda theory of Jainism in terms of deviant 
logic", Indian Philosophical Quarterly, 9:181 - 187; 183. 
53Matilal, B. K.: 1991, "Anekdnta: both yes and no?", Journal of Indian Council of Philo- 
sophical Research, 8:1 - 12; 10. 

Indian Logic 
361 
both a proposition and its negation are assertible without it being the case that 
their conjunction is. For example, we might think that the standpoint of physical 
theory can be consistently extended by including the assertion that gods exists, 
and also by including the assertion that gods do not exist. It would not follow that 
one could from any standpoint assert the conjunction of these claims. Yet whether 
there is such a difference between Matilal's position and that of Bharucha and Ka- 
mat is rather immaterial, since Matilal's proposal clearly suffers from the precisely 
the same technical defect as theirs, namely the lack of distinctness between the 
fourth and fifth values. 
Tere is another interpretation, one which gives an intuitive sense to the truth- 
value "non-assertible", sustains the distinctness of each of the seven values, but 
does not require us to abandon the assumption that standpoints are internally 
consistent. Recall that we earlier introduced the idea of an optimal standpoint, 
by means of the assumption that for every proposition, either it or its negation 
is justifiably assertible from within the standpoint. Suppose we now retract that 
assumption, and allow for the existence of standpoints which are just neutral about 
the truth or falsity of some propositions. We can then introduce a new value as 
follows: 
4. IPl = u ~ 
3o-(-,(o-: p)&~(a : ~p)). 
Neither the proposition nor its negation is assertible from the standpoint. 
For 
example, neither the proposition that happiness is a virtue nor its negation receives 
any justification from the standpoint of physical theory. We have, in effect, rejected 
a commutativity rule, that if it not the case that 'p' is assertible from a standpoint 
cr then '-~p' is assertible from a and vice versa [-~(a : p) 
~ 
(or : -~p)]. Our 
new truth-value, u, is quite naturally called "non-assertible", and it is clear that 
the fifth value, tu, the conjunction of t with u, is not equivalent simply with u. 
The degree to which the Jaina system is paraconsistent is, on this interpretation, 
restricted to the sense in which a proposition can be t f, i.e. both true and false 
because assertible from one standpoint but deniable from another. It does not 
follow that there are standpoints from which contradictions can be asserted. 
Why have so many writers on Jaina logic have felt that Jaina logic is paracon- 
sistent in the much stronger sense. The reason for this belief is the account which 
some of the Jainas themselves give of the meaning of their third basic truth-value, 
"non-assertible". As we saw in the passage from V~dideva Sfiri, some of them say 
that a proposition is non-assertible iff it is arguably both true and false simulta- 
neously, as distinct from the truth value t f, which is successively arguably true 
and arguably false. We are interpreting the Jaina distinction between successive 
and simultaneous combination of truth-values in terms of a scope distinction with 
the operator "arguably". One reads "arguably (t&f)", the other "(arguably t) 
& (arguably f)" 
If this were the correct analysis of the fourth truth-value, then 
Jaina logic would indeed be strongly paraconsistent, for it would be committed 
to the assumption that there are philosophical positions in which contradictions 
are rationally assertible. Yet while such an interpretation is, on the face of it, 

362 
Jonardon Ganeri 
the most natural way of reading VXdideva Sfiri's elaboration of the distinction 
between the third and fourth values, it if far from clear that the J aina pluralism 
really commits them to paraconsistency in this strong form. Their goal is, to 
be sure, to reconcile or synthesise mutually opposing philosophical positions, but 
they have no reason to suppose that a single philosophical standpoint can itself be 
inconsistent. Internal consistency was, in classical India, the essential attribute of 
a philosophical theory, and a universally acknowledged way to undermine the po- 
sition of one's philosophical opponent was to show that their theory contradicted 
itself. The Jainas were as sensitive as anyone else to allegations that they were 
inconsistent, and strenuously denied such allegations when made. I have shown 
that it is possible to reconstruct Jaina seven-valued logic in a way which does not 
commit them to a strongly paraconsistent position. 
The interpretation I give to the value "non-assertible" is quite intuitive, al- 
though it does not mean "both true and false simultaneously". 
My interpre- 
tation, moreover, is supported by at least one Jaina logician, PrabhXcandra. 
PrabhXcandra, who belongs to the first part of the ninth century C.E., is one 
of the few Jainas directly to address the question of why there should be just 
seven values. What he has to say is very interesting: 
(Opponent:) Just as the values 'true' and 'false', taken successively, 
form a new truth-value 'true-false', so do the values 'true' and 'true- 
false'. Therefore, the claim that there are seven truth-values is wrong. 
(Reply:) No: the successive combination of 'true' and 'true-false' does 
not form a new truth-value, because it is impossible to have 'true' 
twice .... 
In the same way, the successive combination of 'false' and 
'true-false' does not form a new truth-value. 
(Opponent:) How then does the combination of the first and the fourth, 
or the second and the fourth, or the third and the fourth, form a new 
value? 
(Reply:) It is because, in the fourth value "non-assertible", there is 
no grasp of truth or falsity. In fact, the word "non-assertible" does 
not denote the simultaneous combination of truth and falsity. What 
then? What is meant by the truth-value "non-assertible" is that it is 
impossible to say which of 'true' and 'false' it is. 54 
This passage seems to support the interpretation offered above. When talking 
about the "law of non-contradiction" in a deductive system, we must distinguish 
between two quite different theses: (a) the thesis that "--(p&-,p)" is a theorem in 
the system, and (b) the thesis that it is not the case that both 'p' and '--p' are 
theorems. The Jainas are committed to the first of these theses, but reject the 
second. This is the sense in which it is correct to say that the Jainas reject the 
"law of non-contradiction". 
54prabh~candra: 1941, PrameyakamalamSrtan.da, ed. M. K. Shastri, Nirnayasagar Press, 
Bombay; p. 683 line 7 ft. 

Indian Logic 
363 
I showed earlier that when we restrict ourselves to optimal standpoints, the total 
discourse falls into just one of three possible states with respect to each system. 
The Jainas have a seven-valued logic because, if we allow for the existence of 
non-optimal standpoints, standpoints which are just neutral with respect to some 
propositions, then, for each proposition, p say, the total discourse has exactly seven 
possible states. They are as follows: 
1. p is a member of every standpoint in E. 
2. -~p is a member of every standpoint in E. 
3. p is a member of some standpoints, and -~p is a member of the rest. 
4. p is a member of some standpoints, the rest being neutral. 
5. ~p is a member of some standpoints, the rest being neutral. 
6. p is neutral with respect to every standpoint. 
7. p is a member of some standpoints, 
points, and the rest are neutral. 
-,p is a member of some other stand- 
Although Jainas do not define the states in this way, but rather via the possible 
combinations of the three primitive values, t, f and u, it is not difficult to see that 
the two sets map onto one another, just as they did before. Thus t = (1, 3, 4, 7), 
f = (2, 3 5, 7), tf = (3, 7), and so on. 
Using many-valued logics in this way, it should be noted, does not involve 
any radical departure from classical logic. The Jainas stress their commitment 
to bivalence, when they try to show, as V~dideva Sfiri did above, that the seven 
values in their system are all products of combining two basic values. This reflects, 
I think, a commitment to bivalence concerning the truth-values of propositions 
themselves. 
The underlying logic within each standpoint is classical, and it is 
further assumed that each standpoint or participant is internally consistent. The 
sometimes-made suggestion 55 that sense can be made of many-valued logics if we 
interpret the assignment of non-classical values to propositions via the assignment 
of classical values to related items is reflected here in the fact that the truth-value 
of any proposition p (i.e. 
IPl) has two values, the status of p with respect to 
standpoint a ('IPI~') derivatively has three values, and the status of p with respect 
to a discourse E ('lPlr~'), as we have just seen, has seven. 
Consider again the earlier example of a jury faced with conflicting evidence from 
a variety of witnesses. The Jainas wouldn't here tell us 'who dun it', for they don't 
tell us the truth-value of any given proposition. What they give us is the means 
to discover patterns in the evidence, and how to reason from them. For example, 
if one proposition is agreed on by all the witnesses, and another is agreed on by 
some but not others, use of the Jaina system will assign different values to the two 
55Haack, S.: 1974, Deviant Logic, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 64. 

364 
Jonardon Ganeri 
propositions. The Jainas, as pluralists, do not try to judge which of the witnesses 
is lying and which is telling the truth; their role is more like that of the court 
recorder, to present the totality of evidence in a maximally perspicuous form, one 
which still permits deduction from the totality of evidence. 
So far so good. But there is another worry now, one which strikes at the very 
idea of using a many-valued logic as the basis for a logic of discourse. For, when 
we come to try and construct truth-tables for the logical constants in such a logic, 
we discover that the logic is not truth-functional. That is to say, the truth-value of 
a complex proposition such as 'p&q', is not a function solely of the truth-values of 
the constituent propositions 'p' and 'q'. To see this, and to begin to find a solution, 
I shall need briefly to describe the work of the Polish logician, Jagkowski, who was 
the founder of discursive logics in the West, and whose work, in motivation at 
least, provides the nearest contemporary parallel to the Jaina theory. 
3.3 
Ja~kowski and the Jainas 
Philosophical discourse is globally inconsistent, since there are many propositions 
to which some philosophers assent while others dissent. 
The Jainas therefore 
develop a logic of assertions-made-from-within-a-particular-standpoint, and note 
that an assertion can be both arguably true, i.e. justified by being a member 
of a consistent philosophical position, and at the same time be arguably false, if 
its negation is a member of some other consistent philosophical standpoint. This 
move is quite similar to that of the founder of inconsistent logics, Jagkowski, who 
developed a "discussive logic" in which a proposition is said to be 'discussively 
true' iff it is asserted by some member of the discourse. 
Jagkowski motivates his paper "Propositional Calculus for Contradictory De- 
ductive Systems" with two observations. The first is that 
any vagueness of the term a can result in a contradiction of sentences, 
because with reference to the same object X we may say that "X is 
a" and also "X is not a", according to the meanings of the term a 
adopted for the moment, 
the second is that 
the evolution of the empirical sciences is marked by periods in which the 
theorists are unable to explain the results of experiments by a homo- 
geneous and consistent theory, but use different hypotheses, which are 
not always consistent with one another, to explain the various groups 
of phenomena. 56 
He then introduces an important distinction between two properties of deductive 
systems. A deductive system is said to be contradictory if it includes pairs of 
theorems A and ~A which contradict each other. 
It is over-complete, on the 
56jagkowski, S." 1948, "Propositional calculus for contradictory deductive systems"; English 
translation in Studia Logica, 24: 143- 157 (1969); 144. 

Indian Logic 
365 
other hand, if every well-formed formula is a theorem of the system. In classical 
logic, these two properties are conflated; hence the slogan ',anything follows from 
a contradiction". The problem to which Jagkowski addresses himself, therefore, is 
that of constructing a non-classical system which is contradictory but not over- 
complete. In classical logic, given two contradictory theses A, --,A, we may deduce 
first that A&~A, using the &-introduction or Adjunction Rule, A,B ~ A&B. 
Then, since A&-~A iff B&-~B for any arbitrary A and B, and since B&--,B ~ B 
from &:-elimination or Simplification, A&B ~ A, it follows that B. More clearly: 
1. 
A, ~A 
2. 
A&-,A, 
3. 
A&--,A iff B&~B, 
4. 
B&-~B ~ B, 
5. 
A&-~A --+ B, 
6. 
B, 
from 1 by Adjunction. 
for any arbitrary A and B. 
by Simplification. 
from 3 and 4. 
from 2 and 5 by Modus Ponens. 
To get an inconsistent (contradictory but not over-complete) system, at least one 
step in this sequence must be broken. In Jagkowski's new system, 'discursive logic', 
it is the Adjunction Rule which no longer holds. Jagkowski considers the system 
in which many different participants makes assertions, each thereby contributing 
information to a single discourse. The best example, perhaps, is one already given, 
the evidence presented to a jury by witnesses at a trial. Jagkowski then introduces 
the notion of discursive assertion, such that a sentence is discursively asserted if 
it is asserted by one of the participants in the discourse, and he notes that the 
operator "it is asserted by someone that..." is a modal operator for the semantics 
of which it should be possible to use an existing modal logic. Thus 
A is a theorem of D2 iff ~A, 
where D2 is Jagkowski's two-valued discursive logic, and "(}" is the operator 
"someone asserts that...". 
For some reason, Jagkowski chooses a strong modal 
system, $5, to give the semantics of this operator, but this is surely a mistake. 
The reason is that the $5 modal principle 'A --+ (}A' does not seem to hold for a 
discursive system, since there will be truths which no-one asserts. It would not be 
difficult, however, to use a weaker modal system than $5, for example $2 ~ or $3 ~ 
which lack the above principle, as the basis for D2. (The characteristic axiom of 
$4 ~ '(~(}A ~ (}A', does not seem to hold in a discursive system: it can be assert- 
ible from some standpoint that there is another standpoint in which p is assertible 
without there being such a standpoint). The point to note is that, in most modal 
systems, the Adjunction Rule fails, since it does not follow that the conjunction 
A&B is possible, even if A is possible and B is separately possible. And this too, 
is what we would expect from the discursive operator, for one participant may 
assert A, and another B, without there being anyone who asserts the conjunction. 
Jagkowski therefore arrives at a system which is contradictory, since both A and 
~A can be theses, but, because it is non-adjunctive, is not over-complete. 

366 
Jonardon Ganeri 
3.~ 
The Logical Structure of the Jaina System 
The parallels in motivation between Jagkowski's discursive logic, and the Jaina 
system are unmistakable. There is, however, an important difference, to which I 
alluded earlier. Modal logics are not truth-functional; one cannot, for example, 
deduce the truth-value of '(~(A&B)' from the truth-values of '~A' and '~B'. And 
it seems for the same reason that a discursive logic cannot be truth-functional 
either. Suppose, for example, that we have two propositions A, and B, both of 
which are assertible from (possibly distinct) standpoints, and hence both true in 
the Jaina system. What is the truth-value of A&B? It seems that this proposition 
could be either true, false, or both. 
It is possible to offer a defence of the Jaina position here. For simplicity, let us 
restrict ourselves to the Jaina system with only optimal standpoints and just three 
truth-values. If my suggested defence works here, its extension to the full Jaina 
system JT, would not be especially problematic. Consider again the three-valued 
logic, M3, whose values were defined as follows: 
IPl = 1 iff Va a :p. 
IPl = 2 iffVa a:-~p 
IPl = 3 iff 3a a :p & 3a a : ~p. 
These correspond to the three possible states of a totality of optimal stand- 
points. When we try to construct the truth-table for conjunction in such a system, 
we find that it is non-truth-functional. Thus, consider the truth-value of 'p&q', 
when [Pl = [q[ = 3. Here, [p&q[ might itself be 3, but it might also be 2. Thus, 
the truth-value of the conjunction is not uniquely determined by those of its con- 
juncts. What is uniquely determined, however, is that the truth-value belongs 
to the class (2, 3). To proceed, we can appeal to an idea first introduced by N. 
Rescher in his paper "Quasi-truth-functional systems of propositional logic".57 A 
quasi-truth-functional logic is defined there as one in which "some connectives are 
governed by many-valued functions of the truth-values of their variables". The 
entries in the truth-table of such a logic are typically not single truth-values but 
sets of values. It is clear that the system set up just now is, in this, sense, quasi- 
truth-functional. 
Now, as Rescher himself points out, a quasi-truth-functional 
logic will always be equivalent to a multi-valued strictly truth-functional system. 
The idea, roughly, is that we can treat a class of truth-values as constituting a new 
truth-value. Typically, if the quasi-truth-functional system has n truth-values, its 
strictly truth-functional equivalent will have 2 n - 1 values (Rescher notes that "in 
the case of a three-valued (T, F, I) quasi-truth-functional system we would need 
seven truth-values, to represent: T, F, I, (T, F), (T, I), (F, I), (T, F, I)" but argues 
that there are special reasons entailing that for a two-valued quasi-truth-functional 
system we need four rather than three values.). The seven-valued system which 
results in this way from the three-valued logic sketched above has, in fact, been 
57Rescher, N.: 1962, "Quasi-truth-functional systems of propositional logic", Journal of Sym- 
bolic Logic, 27:1 - 10. 

Indian Logic 
367 
studied notably by Moffat 5s. I will therefore call it MT. An initially tempting 
idea is to identify the Jaina system J7 with MT. This, however, will only work if 
the fourth value, u, is defined thus: 
IP[ = u iff Va a :pVVa a : -~p. 
For then 'tu' in the Jaina system will be identical with '1' in the Moffat system, 
etc. This is, however, not an interpretation which receives any textual support. 
Instead, let us observe that there is a close connection between M7 and the 
restricted Jaina system, J3. For note that the value (1, 3) in M7 is such that 
IPl = (1, 3) 
iff 
IPI=IVIpI=3 
iff 
Vaa:pV(3aa:p&3aa:-~p) 
iff 
3a a :p. 
Thus (1, 3) in M7 is just the value 'true' in J3. Similarly, (1, 2) in M7 is just 
the value 'false' in J3. Thus, although J3 is not strictly truth-functional, its truth- 
tables are embedded in those of the Moffat logic, MT. 
It is presumably possible to find a quasi-truth-functional system whose truth- 
tables embed those of JT, the full Jaina system, in an entirely analogous way. 
Thus, although the loss of Adjunction means that the Jaina logic JT, is not truth- 
functional, its truth-table is embedded in a suitable quasi-functional system. The 
lack of truth-functionality is not, after all, a fatal flaw in the Jaina approach. 
3.5 
Axiomatisation of the Jaina System 
We have shown that it is possible to use many-valued truth-tables to formalise the 
Jaina system. This was, in effect, the approach of the Jaina logicians themselves. 
Yet it would surely be much better to proceed by axiomatising the modal stand- 
point operator, V. Once again we look to Rescher 59. His work on what he calls 
"assertion logics" is an extension of the work of Jagkowski. Rescher introduces a 
system A1, with the following axiomatic basis: 
(A1) 
(3p)a : p 
[Nonvacuousness] 
(A2) 
(a: p & a: q) D a: (p & q) 
[Conjunction] 
(A3) 
~a: (p & -~p) 
[Consistency] 
(R) 
If p ~- q, then a: p ~- a: q 
[Commitment] 
Note that one effect of the rule (R) is to ensure that the notion captured is not 
merely explicit assertion but 'commitment to assert', for (R) states that from a 
standpoint one may assert anything entailed by another of the assertions. I be- 
lieve that the Jainas would accept each of the axioms (A1) to (A3). Bharucha and 
58Moffat, D. C. and Ritchie, G. D.: 1990, "Modal queries about partially-ordered plans", J. 
Expt. Theor. Artif. Intell., 2:341 - 368. See also Priest, G.: 1984, "Hypercontradictions," 
Logique et Analyse, 107: 237-43. 
59Rescher, N.: 1968, Topics in Philosophical Logic, Reidel, Dordrecht, chapter xiv. 

368 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Kamat, it may be noted, would reject (A3), while Matilal, as I have represented 
him, would reject (A2). I have already argued that these claims are mistaken. In 
particular, with regard to (A2), although it is true that the Jainas reject Adjunc- 
tion, what this means is that assertions made from within different standpoints 
cannot be conjoined, not that assertions made within the same standpoint cannot 
be conjoined. 
We now introduce the modal standpoint operator, V "arguably", via the defi- 
nition: 
Vp iff (3a)cr : p, 
and add the axioms of S3 ~ or some other suitable modal system. 
Rescher defines some further systems by adding further axioms, none of which, 
I think, the Jainas would accept. For example, he defines A2 by adding to A1 
the axiom that anything asserted by everyone is true [(Va)a :p D p]. There is no 
reason to suppose the Jainas commit themselves to this. The system J3, however, 
is distinguished by the new axiom (A4): 
(A4) 
~(3a)(~o"p&--,o"--T) 
[Optimality] 
Rescher too proposes a "three-valued approach" to assertion logic, via the notion 
of 'the truth status of the assertion p with respect to an assertor', written 'lpla', 
and the definitions: 
IpL  
-T iff a'p, 
= F iff a'(-4p), and 
= I iff--,(a "p)&--,(a "-~p), 
and he shows that using the axioms of A1, we can derive a quasi-truth-functional 
logic for this system. These are not quite the Jaina values, as introduced earlier, 
for they do not quantify over standpoints or assertors. It is clear, however, that 
the J aina system is of the same type as a modalised Rescher assertion logic. Their 
innovation is to introduce three truth-values via the definitions given before (IPi~ - 
tiff (3o)(o : p); Ipl2 = f iff (3a)(cr : ~p); and Ipl~ = u iff (3a)(~(a : p)&~(a : 
~p)), where 'lPlr~' stands for 'the status of the assertion p with respect to the 
total discourse E'). It is this attempt to take a many-valued approach to the 
modalised, rather than the unmodalised, version of assertion logic which generates 
the extra complexity of the Jaina system. I have already noted that, since the 
axiom "p D Vp" is lacking, the modal structure of the system will be no stronger 
than that of $3 ~ Yet in principle there seems no reason to think that the Jaina 
system cannot in this way be given an axiomatic basis. 
3.6 Pluralism, Syncretism, and the Many-faceted View of Reality 
The Jainas avoid dogmatism and a one-sided view of the world simply by noting 
that assertions are only justified in the background of certain presuppositions or 
conditions. It is perfectly possible for an assertion to be justified given one set of 
presuppositions, and for its negation to be justified given another different set. The 

Indian Logic 
369 
Jainas' ingenuity lies in the skill with which they developed a logic of discourse 
to make more precise this natural idea. However, they also went beyond this, 
for they added that every standpoint reveals a facet of reality, and that, to get 
a full description of the world, what we need to do is to synthesise the various 
standpoints. 
As Matilal puts it, "The Jainas contend that one should try to 
understand the particular point of view of each disputing party if one wishes to 
grasp completely the truth of the situation. The total truth ... may be derived 
from the integration of all different viewpoints". 6~ But is this further step, the 
step from pluralism to syncretism, a coherent step to take? In particular, how is 
it possible to integrate inconsistent points of view? The point is made by Priest 
and Routley, who, commenting on the Jaina theory, state that "...such a theory 
risks trivialization unless some (cogent) restrictions are imposed on the parties 
admitted as having obtained partial truth- 
restrictions of a type that might well 
be applied to block amalgamations leading to violations of Non-Contradiction" .61 
Perhaps we can understand the Jaina position as follows. The so-called 'inte- 
gration' of two points of view, Cr 1 and a2, does not mean the creation of some 
new standpoint, which is the combination of the first two. For this would lead 
to the formation of inconsistent standpoints unless implausible constraints were 
placed on what can constitute a standpoint. Instead, what it means is that, if p is 
assertible from some standpoint al, then this fact, that p is assertible from al, can 
itself be asserted from a2 and every other standpoint. In this way, each disputant 
can recognise the element of truth in the other standpoints, by making explicit 
the presuppositions or conditions under which any given assertion is made. 
If correct, this idea has an interesting consequence. In moving from pluralism to 
syncretism, the Jainas commit themselves to the claim that we are led to a complete 
account of reality by integrating of all the different points of view. It follows from 
this that every true proposition must be asserted within some standpoint, i.e. 
"p D (3a)(a :p) or "p D Vp". Hence the move from pluralism to syncretism is a 
move from a logic of assertibility based on $3 ~ or weaker to one based on $3 or 
stronger. 
To conclude, we have seen how the Jainas developed a plausible and interesting 
logic of philosophical discourse, how they did not (or need not) commit themselves 
to the strongly paraconsistent position normally attributed to them, and how, as 
they strengthened their position from one of pluralism to one of syncretism, they 
had also to strengthen correspondingly the modal logic underlying the operator 
"sydf' . 
6~ 
B. K.: 1977, The Central Philosophy of Jainism, Calcutta University Press, Cal- 
cutta. 
61Priest, G., Routley, R. Norman, J. eds.: 1989, Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on the Incon- 
sistent, Philosophia Verlag, Munchen, p.17. 

370 
Jonardon Ganeri 
4 
LOGIC IN NAVYA-NYAYA: THE METAPHYSICAL BASIS OF LOGIC 
~.1 
The use of graphs in interpreting Vaige.sika Ontology 
Let us turn now to the Navya-Ny~ya school, a school and a set of thinkers predis- 
posed towards the study of the metaphysical structure of the natural world, and 
to the logical theory that is integral to this ontology9 Three revisionary Ny~ya 
thinkers- Bh~sarvajfia (c. AD 950), Udayana (c. AD 1050), and Raghun~tha 
(c. AD 1500) - saw in effect that there is a graph-theoretic basis to the classical 
Vaige.sika notion of a category. I will show how the graph-theoretic interpretation 
of their ideas lends itself to a distinctive treatment of negation, logical consequence 
and number. 
Classical Vaigesika lists six kinds of thing: substance, quality, motion, univer- 
sal, individuator, inherence. Later Vaigesika adds a seventh: absence. The basic 
stuff of the cosmos in the Vaigesika world-view is atomic. Atoms are uncreatable, 
indestructible, non-compound substances. Atoms can coalesce into composite sub- 
stances and can move. Indeed, the only changes in this cosmos are changes in the 
arrangement, properties and positions of the atoms. Creation is a matter of coa- 
lescing, destruction of breaking (and even God does not create the cosmos ab nihilo, 
but only 'shapes' it, as a potter shapes clay into a pot). A compound substance is 
a whole, composed out of, and inhering simultaneously in each of, its parts. These 
substances are individuated by the type and organisation of their parts. A 'qual- 
ity' in classical Vai~esika is a property-particular- for example, a particular shade 
of blue colour or a distinct flavour (what one would now call a 'thin' property). 
Qualities inhere in substances and in nothing other than substances. A 'motion' 
is another sort of particular; it too inheres in a substance and in nothing but a 
substance. Universals inhere in substances, qualities and motions. A universal 
inheres simultaneously in more than one, but has nothing inhering in it. Lastly, 
the 'individuator' (vige.sa) is a distinctive and eponymous component in classical 
Vaigesika ontology. An individuator inheres in and is unique to a particular atom" 
it is that by which the atomic, partless substances are individuated. 62 
Two principles lie at the heart of the Vaiges.ika system: a principle of identity 
and a principle of change. The Vaigesika principle of change is this: a becomes 
b iff the parts of a rearrange (perhaps with loss or gain) into the parts of b. 
'Motions' are that in virtue of which the parts rearrange or stay together. There 
are basic or partless parts, the atoms, which, precisely because they have no parts, 
are incapable of becoming anything else. They move about but are eternal and 
indestructible. The Vaiges.ika principle of identity is this" a - b iff the parts of a are 
numerically identical to and in the same arrangement as the parts of b. 'Qualities' 
are that in virtue of which the parts are numerically identical or different. Atoms, 
precisely because they are partless, require a different principle of identity: atoms 
are distinct iff they have distinct individuators. Universals are limits on the degree 
62An excellent review of the details of Vaigesika ontology is Karl Potter ed., "Indian Meta- 
physics and Epistemology - The Tradition of Ny~ya-Vaiges.ika up to Gangega", in The Encyclo- 
pedia of Indian Philosophies, vol. 2 (Delhi" Motilal Banarsidass, 1977), introduction. 

Indian Logic 
371 
of possible difference and change. One thing cannot change into another thing of 
an entirely different sort (a mouse into a mustard seed). One thing a can become 
another thing b iff the same universal resides in both a and b, that is, if a and b 
are of the same sort (as Udayana puts it, universals regulate causality). 
This is the motivation for there being six 'types' of thing (substances, qualities, 
motions, universals, individuators, inherence). The problem is to find a proper 
philosophical basis for the notion of a 'type' of thing thus appealed to. In his 
Laksandvalf, Udayana reconstructs the categories in a new way, a way which I 
shall claim explicates the notion of a type graph-theoretically. A graph is a simple 
sort of algebraic structure, consisting of set of nodes or vertices, and a set of edges 
(an edge being defined as a pair of nodes). A graph is 'directed' if the edges 
have a direction. Graphs, like many other mathematical structures, are realised in 
natural phenomena. A striking example is molecular structure" it is because the 
structure of a molecule is a graph that one can use a graph to depict one: 
H-O-H 
The implicit structure of the Vaigesika ontology is that of a directed graph. The 
inherence relation connects things in the ontology in inheror-inheree pairings. So 
the substances, qualities, motions, universals and individuators are represented 
as the nodes of a graph whose set of edges represent the inherence relation. A 
fragment of the graph might look like this" 
U 
Q 
; 
I 
I 
This graph represents the following state of affairs: a universal U inheres in a 
quality Q which inheres in a substance S. That substance is a dyad composed of 
two atoms in which it inheres, and each of which has inhering in it an individuator 
I. The structure of the world is a directed graph. 
The nodes in a graph can be classified according to the number of edges termi- 
nating in them, and the number of edges starting from them: so the valency of 
a node in a directed graph is an ordered pair of integers (n, m). What Udayana 
saw in the Laksangvalr is that things of different types in the Vaiges.ika ontol- 
ogy correspond to nodes of different valencies. His brilliant idea is to use the 
idea of valency to define the categories of substance, quality, motion, universal, 
and individuator. He begins with a classification of the categories into the four 
valency-groups (+, +), (+, 0), (0, +) and (0, 0): a3 
63Numbering of the verses in the Laksandvalf follows Musashi Tachikawa, The Structure of 

372 
Jonardon Ganeri 
5. Noneternal [= compound] substance, quality, motion, universal, and indi- 
viduator inhere. 
6. Eternal [i.e. atomic] substance, inherence, and absence lack the property of 
inhering. 
7. Substance, quality, and motion are inhered in. 
8. Universal, individuator, inherence, and absence have nothing inhering in 
them. 
In particular then, atoms have valency (+, 0), universals and individuators have 
valency (0, +), while compound substances, qualities and motions have valency 
(+,+). 
Notice that Udayana says that the inherence relation itself has a valency 
(0, 0). We should not take this to mean that the inherence relation is to be repre- 
sented by a node disconnected from the rest of the graph, but rather that it does 
not correspond to any node in the graph at all. The first and most fundamental 
graph-theoretic type distinction is the distinction between a node and an edge, 
and the inherence relation is represented in a graph by the set of edges, not by 
any node. The set of edges represents the extension of the inherence relation. 
If the categories are to be distinguished from one another according to the va- 
lency of the nodes in that graph which is isomorphic to the world of things, then 
further specification is needed. The distinction between universals and individu- 
ators is simple: an individuator has valency (0, 1) while a universal has valency 
(0, m), with rn > 1: 
202. A universal has nothing inhering in it, inheres, and is co-located with every 
difference. 
203. Individuators lack the property of being inhered in, inhere, and lack the 
property of inhering by being co-located with every difference. 
Udayana's phrase 'co-located with every difference' is a technical device for 
expressing the idea that a universal inheres in more than one. For if an inheror 
inheres in exactly one thing x, then all other things are loci of difference-from-x, 
and the inheror is not co-located with difference-from-x. However, if the inheror 
inheres in two things x and y, then difference-from-x is located in y and difference- 
from-y is located in x, and the inheror is co-located with both differences. So 
something co-located with every difference-from each of the things in which it 
inheres is necessarily located in more than one thing. 
Notice that in classical 
Vaigesika, individuators are said to have no universals inhering in them precisely 
because they are fundamental units of individuation, having nothing in common 
with one another. 

Indian Logic 
373 
UNIVERSAL 
9 
9 
O 
(2) 
9 
INDIVIDUATOR 
O 
(3 
Any node with valency (0, m) with m > 1 is now to be called a 'universal', and 
any node with valency (0, 1) is to be called an 'individuator': 
The valency of atoms is different from that or qualities or motions, but we 
still need a general definition of substance, covering both atomic and compound 
substances. For compound substances, like universals but unlike atoms, inhere in 
other things (their parts). Udayana in fact offers four definitions, of which the 
first three repeat older definitions. The fourth definition, however, is completely 
original: 
9. A substance is not a substratum of absence of quality. 
10. Or, it belongs to such a kind as inheres in what is incorporeal, inheres in 
what is not incorporeal and does not inhere in what inheres in what is not 
corporeal. 
11. Or, it belongs to such a kind as inheres in space and in a lotus but not in 
smell. 
the World in Udayana's Realism: A Study of the Laksa.ndval~ and the KiranSvalf (Dordrecht: 
Reidel Publishing Company, 1981). 

374 
Jonardon Ganeri 
12. Or, it is that in which inheres that in which inheres that which inheres. 
The first of these definitions is the classical one in Vaigesika 64 
a substance 
is that which possesses qualities. Udayana returns to this definition in his famous 
but conservative commentary, the Kiran. gvalf. He thinks of replacing it in the 
more experimental Lak.sa.ndvalf with a definition that makes no reference to any 
other category and indeed is phrased entirely in terms of the notion of inherence" 
a substance is 'that in which inheres that in which inheres that which inheres'. In 
other words, a substance is to be represented by a node like this- 
O 
9 
SUBSTANCE 
O 
The point of the definition is that a substance possesses qualities, and qualities 
possess universals, and nothing else in the ontology possesses something which pos- 
sesses something. For universals and individuators possess nothing, while qualities 
and motions possess universals and nothing else. 
Let us define a 'path' between one node and another in the obvious way: there 
is a path from node x to node w if there is a sequence of nodes {x, y, ..., w} such 
that there is an edge from x to y, an edge from y to z, ... , an edge from v to w. 65 
Define the 'length' of a path as the number of edges between the first and the last 
node. Udayana's definition of a substance is now: a node is a substance iff there 
is a path at least of length 2 leading to it. Substances inhere in their parts; so the 
definition entails that every part of a substance is a substance. 
The classical conception of qualities and motions makes them almost identical: 
they both inhere only in substances, and they both are inhered in only by univer- 
sals. 66 Pragastapada's remark 67 that the qualities other than contact, breaking, 
number and separateness 'inhere in one thing at a time' should not be construed 
as implying that they inhere in only one thing, but only that this group of qualities 
are monadic (non-relational) properties. These features are enough to distinguish 
qualities and motions from all else: from universals and individuators (which do 
64 Vaigesikas~tra 1.1.14: "The characteristic of a substance is to possess actions, qualities and 
to be [their] inherence cause." 
65In what follows, bold roman letters denote nodes in the graph, and italic letters denote the 
entities those nodes represent. 
66Vaigesikas~tra 1.1.15-6. 
Paddrthadharmasam'graha 18. 
Section numbering in the 
PadSrthadharmasam. graha follows Karl Potter ed., "Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology- 
The Tradition of Nyaya-Vaigesika up to Gangega", in The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, 
vol. 2 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1977), pp. 282-303. 
67 Padarthadharmasam'graha 50-51. 

Indian Logic 
375 
not have anything inhering in them), and from substances (which are inhered in 
by things that are themselves inhered in). It explains too why qualities cannot 
inhere in qualities ~ if they did then they would be equivalent graph-theoretically 
to substances. 
QUALITY or MOTION 
0 
0 
-0 
0 
0 
What is difficult is to find any principled way to distinguish between qualities 
and motions. There was indeed a persistent revisionary pressure to assimilate these 
two categories. BhXsarvajfia 6s heads the revisionary move, stating unequivocally 
that motions should be treated as qualities because, like qualities, they reside 
in substances and possess universals. 
From a graph-theoretic perspective, this 
revision is well motivated: qualities and motions are represented by nodes of the 
same valency, and so are things of the same type. Udayana chooses the harder 
way, and tries to formulate definitions that will accommodate the distinction. The 
classical Vai~esika idea 69 that motions are what cause substances to come into 
contact with one another is reflected in his definitions: 
126. A quality belongs to such a kind as inheres in both contact and non-contact, 
and does not inhere in the non-inherent cause of that sort of contact which 
does not result from contact. 
190. A motion belongs to such a kind as inheres in the non-inherent cause of 
contact and does not inhere in contact. 
These definitions introduce two new relations, contact and causation, neither 
of which are explicable in terms of inherence nor belongs to the graph-theoretic 
interpretation of the categories. The very success of that interpretation gives a 
rationale to the revisionary pressure. Finding a pattern into which all but a few 
items of some phenomenon fit grounds a presumption that those items are in some 
way discrepant. This is a general principle of scientific and rational inquiry, and we 
can see it been used by Bh~sarvajfia to motivate revisions in the classical Vai~esika 
theory. Rationality appears here in the form of principled revision. 7~ 
6SNydyabh~sana, p. 158. 
69 Vaigesikas~tra 1.1.16. 
7~ 
later comment on Bh~sarvajfia's revision: Karl Potter and Sibajiban Bhattacharyya eds. 

376 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Let us define a Vaigesika graph as a connected directed graph each of whose 
nodes is a substance, quality, motion, universal or individuator, where" 
A substance is a node terminating a directed path of length 2. 
A quality or motion is a node v with valency (+, +), such that the 
initial node of any edge terminating in v has zero invalency [i.e. such 
that qualities are not substances]. 
A universal is a node with valency (0, n) with n > 1. 
An individuator is a node with valency (0, 1). 
Let us say further that node x inheres in a node y iff xy is an edge in a Vai~esika 
graph. Then we can easily prove some results well-known to the Ny~ya-Vai~esika 
logicians" 
LEMMA 1. No quality inheres in a quality. 
Proof. The invalency of a quality x is nonzero, so any node in which x inheres 
terminates a path of length 2. 
m 
LEMMA 2. Substances inhere only in substances. 
Proof. Any node x in which a substance inheres terminates a path of length 2. 
m 
THEOREM 3. A Vaisesika graph has no directed cycles. 
Proof. The elements of a directed cycle must have valency (+, +). So no universal 
or individuator can be a member of such a cycle, because neither has nonzero 
invalency. No quality or motion can be a member of a cycle, because only universals 
and individuators inhere in qualities and motions, and there are no universals or 
individuators in a cycle. No atomic substance can be a member of a cycle, because 
atoms have zero outvalency. That leaves only cycles of compound substances. But 
there can be cycles of substances only if a substance can have as a part something 
of which it is a part and so (if the part-of relation is transitive) be a part of itself. 
m 
DEFINITION 4. The level of a node in a Vai~esika graph is the length of the 
longest directed path leading to it. (Note 
this is well-defined because there are 
no directed cycles.) 
THEOREM 5. 
(i) All and only universals and individuators belong to level O; 
"Indian Philosophical Analysis 
Nyaya-Vaige.sika from Gafigega to Raghun~tha Siromani", in 
The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, vol. 6 (Delhi" Motilal Banarsidass, 1993), pp. 323, 
525-528. 

Indian Logic 
377 
(ii) All and only qualities and motions belong to level 1; 
(iii) All and only substances belong to levels 2 and below. 
Proof. (i) Only universals and individuators have zero invalency. (ii) By Lemmas 
1 and 2, qualities and motions are inhered in only by universals and individuators, 
so belong to level 1. Substances do not belong to level 1 by definition. (iii). By 
definition, any node in level 2 is a substance, and by Lemma 2, any node in level 
n > 2 is a substance. 
II 
So the structure of the Vai~esika graph is like this: 
f 
0 / 
universals, individuators 
J 
1 
J 
qualities, motions 
j 
2 / 
substances all the way down 
To what extent are we justified in adopting the graph-theoretical interpretation 
of Navya-NyXya? I propose the following Methodological Test: The graph-theoretic 
interpretation is confirmed to the extent that it explains or predicts revisions made 
to the classical Vai~esika system. Revisions include the introduction of a seventh 
category absence, the assimilation of qualities and motions, the elimination of 
individuators, the identification of co-extensive universals, the new account of 
number. Let us say that a node x is redundant in G if its deletion, together with 
the deletion of any edge incident to it, preserves all paths in G not containing x. 
The resulting graph G. is a conservative contraction of G. Then we have, in effect, 
the following revisions being proposed by Ny~ya authors 
(I) All individuators 
are redundant in a Vaigesika graph (Raghun~tha); (II) Two universals are co- 
extensive only if at least one is redundant (Udayana); and (III) Qualities and 
motions are entities of the same type (Bhasarvajfia). 
~.2 
Negation as absence 
'Absence' in Navya-Ny~ya is not the same as nonexistence. Fictional characters, 
dream-objects and hallucinations are nonexistent: they do not exist as it were by 
nature. It would be an absurdity to go in search of Hamlet in order to find out 

378 
Jonardon Ganeri 
whether he really exists or not -- his nonexistence is not a merely contingent lack 
in the world of things. The absence of water on the moon, on the other hand, is a 
contingent and concrete fact; so too is the absence of colour in my cheeks. Notice 
the role of the phrases 'of water', 'of colour' here" an absence has an absentee -- 
that which the absence is an absence of. It also has a location (e.g. the moon, my 
cheeks), and a time. So the proposal is to reparse the sentence 'x does not occur 
in y at time t' as 'an absence-of-x occurs in y at t.' For it is often the case that 
the absence of something somewhere is more salient than any fact about what is 
present there. 
There is one relatively straightforward way to interpret the idea of absence 
graph-theoretically. If x does not inhere in y, then there is no edge (x, y) in the 
graph. Now for every graph, there is a dual. The dual has the same nodes as the 
original graph, but has an edge between two nodes just in case the original does 
not. So the dual graph does have an edge (x, y). Following this idea, one would 
be led to say that absences are things of a different type to any presence because 
they are edges in the dual graph, rather than edges or nodes in the original. 
For various reasons, the Vaiges.ika do not consider this to be an adequate expla- 
nation of the category. One problem is that it makes absences more like relations 
than 'things', and this does not keep to the spirit of the Vaigesika idea that ab- 
sences are entities. In fact, absences do display much relation-like behaviour 
after all, absence is always the absence of x in y. Another objection, however, is 
if absence is a new category, its introduction should result in an extension of the 
original graph, and not in the introduction of a new graph, let alone a graph com- 
pletely disconnected from the original. For the connected world of things ought 
not be represented by a pair of disconnected graphs. A third problem arises if we 
admit something called 'unpervaded' occurrence, as we will see. 
The Vai~esika idea is represent absences as nodes, related in new ways to the 
nodes of the original graph. Here is how to do it. For each unconnected pair of 
nodes (x, y), create a new node x' in the original graph. This new node will have 
edges to x and to y, but they will be edges of two new types. The edge (x', x) is 
an edge belonging to the extension of the absentee-absence (pratiyogitd) relation, 
which I shall signify as '~.' This represents the relation between an absence and 
what the absence is of. The edge (x ~, y) is an edge belonging to the extension 
of the 'absential special relation' (abhdv~ya-svarftpa-sambandha), signified here by 
'-*'. This represents the occurrence relation between an absence and its location. 
The relation between an absence and its location is clearly not the same as the 
relation between a presence and its location (inherence, contact), for it is clear 
that when a person is is absent from a room, their absence is not in the room in 
the same sense that the other things in the room are. 
These new nodes belong in a domain outside the system of levels, for they inhere 
in nothing and nothing inheres in them (inherence, and the whole system of levels, 
is a structure on presences). The modified graph is instead a concatenation of the 
original graph of nodes and edges with a new structure of 'absential nodes' and 
'absential edges.' 

original graph 
Indian Logic 
379 
modified original 
O x 
Ox 
ABSENCE 
(~) x' 
OY 
OY 
Navya-Ny~ya theory of absence draws a type distinction between simple ab- 
sence (atyantabhava) and difference (anyonyabhava). 
Difference is the absence 
of a relation of identity between two things. Here 'x r y' is paraphrased as 'a 
difference-from y occurs in x'. Graph-theoretically, the distinction between ab- 
sence and difference is a distinction between a negation on edges and a negation 
on nodes in the original graph. For, trivially, every node is such that it is different 
from every other node. One way to represent this would be to introduce a new 
kind of 'nonidentity' edge into the graph, an edge which connects every node with 
every other node. The Naiy~yika, however, wants to the category of absence to 
correspond to a domain of things rather than relations; so in the graph-theoretic 
representation, differences have to be represented as nodes rather than edges. So 
let us say that for every node x in the original graph, there is a new node x*. 
Call it an 'antinode'. x* is connected to every node in the graph. It is connected 
to x by an edge of the absentee-absence type, and to every node other than x by 
an absential location edge. There is a one-one correspondence between the new 
domain of antinodes and the domain of original nodes. 
OX 
DIFFERENCE 
O 
4.. 
(~) x* 
" 
0 
O 
The leading idea behind the graph-theoretic interpretation of the categories is 
that a type of thing is a type of node, and node-types are determined by patterns 
of possible valencies in the graph. It was for this reason that we did not need 
earlier to the label the nodes. With the introduction of the category of absence, 

380 
Jonardon Ganeri 
we have two higher-order type distinctions: the distinction between positive and 
negative nodes, and the distinction among the negative nodes between absential 
nodes and antinodes. Do these distinctions have a graph-theoretic explanation, 
or must we allow ineliminable node-labels to demarcate presence nodes, absential 
nodes and antinodes? 
What we do have now are three different types of edge 
corresponding to the relations of inherence, absence-absentee, and absential 
location. So we might hope to distinguish between positive and negative nodes as 
those which are not and those which are at the end of an absential edge. That is, 
we make it a requirement that no positive node absentially qualify any other node. 
Clearly, the suggestion will work only if the absence of an absence is not identical 
to a presence. We will see in the next section that the graph-theoretically oriented 
RaghunXtha indeed denies that this is so. So as not to beg the question at this 
point, and for the sake of pictorial clarity, I will continue to mark positive nodes 
C) and negative nodes @ differently. 
What about the distinction between absential and antinodes? The traditional 
way of making the distinction is to say that simple absence is the denial of inherence 
(or some other nonidentity relation) and difference is the denial of identity. Graph- 
theoretically, the distinctive feature of an antinode x* is that it absentially qualifies 
every node other than x, while an absential node x' does not. Does this difference 
fail when x is something which inheres in nothing (an atom, an individuator)? 
No, because such things do not inhere in themselves ~ so x ~ unlike x* absentially 
qualifies x. Indeed, this second contrast is itself sufficient to discriminate absential 
nodes and antinodes. 
The above treatment of absence is in effect a procedure for introducing new 
nodes into the original graph. One set of new nodes fills the 'gaps' in that graph: 
whenever there is no edge between two nodes, an absential node is introduced 
between, and linked to, them. 
Another set of new nodes exactly mirrors the 
original graph: for each node in the original, there is one and only one antinode, 
linked to everything the original node is not. But now, having supplemented the 
original graph with two sets of new nodes, nothing is to stop us from repeating 
the procedure again 
generating new sets of second-order absence nodes 
and 
to do this again and again. It seems that we have introduced a procedure for 
the indefinite recursive expansion of the graph. Fortunately this does not in fact 
happen. As we will now see, no subsequent recursion of the procedure after the 
first produces any new nodes. 
Prima facie, it seems plausible to reason as follows (as we will shortly see, this 
reasoning turns out to be subject to an important caveat). If x is in y, then x', 
the absence of x, is not in y, and so x", the absence of x', is in y. Conversely: if 
x" is in y, then x' is not in y, so x is in y. Graph-theoretically, we represent this 
as follows (see next figure): 
If this is right, then it follows that an entity and the absence of its absence 
'occur' in exactly the same set of loci: for all y, there is an inherence edge (x, 
y) just in case there is an absential location edge (x", y). Can we appeal now to 
a uniqueness condition for absences, and infer that the absence of an absence of 

Indian Logic 
381 
Ox 
@x' 
Ox" 
Oy 
an entity is identical to the entity? The point is controversial, with the majority 
favouring identification. It is Raghun~tha 71 who argues that the identification is 
unsound, on the ground that nothing can turn an absence into a presence. Here 
again Raghun~tha's intuition agrees with the graph-theoretic reconstruction: the 
nodes x and x" are connected to other nodes by means of different types of edge. 
So they cannot both represent entities of the same type. Moreover, as we shall 
see in more detail below, the Naiy~yikas do not accept that it is generally valid to 
infer from the occurrence of x in y to the occurrence of x" there, although they 
do allow the converse. This is the caveat in the line of reasoning with which I 
began this paragraph. The implication is that x and x" need not, after all, share 
the same set of loci. 
Let us repeat the procedure once more. If x ~, the absence of x, is in y, then 
x" is not in y, and so x"', the absence of x", is in y. Conversely: if x'" is in y, 
then x" is not in y, so x' is in y. Graph-theoretically: 
Ox 
< 
@x' 
-r 
@x" 
.r 
@x'" 
Oy 
It follows that a first-order absence and the absence of its absence reside in 
exactly the same set of loci. But here we can appeal to the uniqueness condition, 
71Raghun~tha, Paddrthatattvanir~pan. a, p. 
55. 
Daniel Ingalls, Materials for the Study of 
Navya-Nygya Logic (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1951), p. 68. Bimal. K. 
Matilal, Logic, Language and Reality (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985), p. 
149. 
Roy W. 
Perrett, "Is Whatever Exists Knowable and Nameable?" Philosophy East fg West 49.4 (1999), 
pp. 410-414, esp. 408-9. I disagree here with the idea of Matilal and Perrett that there is 
only an intensional difference between an object and the absence of its absence. For me, a type 
difference in the graph means a type difference in categories of thing. 

382 
Jonardon Ganeri 
because the edges are all of the same type. So x" is identical to x t, as RaghunXtha 
himself allows. 72 Similarly, x'" is identical to x', and so on. There are no absential 
nodes of order higher than two. The argument is summed up by Annambhat.t.a in 
the Tarkasam. graha [w 
The view of the early thinkers is that the absence of an absence is noth- 
ing but a presence; it is not admitted as a new absence for there would 
then be an infinite regress. According to the new school, however, the 
absence of an absence is a distinct absence, and there is no regress as 
the third absence is identical to the first. 
Recall that we defined the absence x ~ as a node such that x t is absentially 
located in y if there is no edge between x and y. That definition was adequate for 
the introduction of first-order absences, because there is only one kind of edge in 
the original graph, namely the inherence edge. The expanded graph has another 
sort of edge, however: the absential edge. So the notion of a second-order absence 
is underdetermined by our original definition. The new definition we need is: 
Rule for Absence: 
An absence x ~ is absentially located in y if x does not inhere in y. 
Rule for Higher Order Absence: 
For i > 1, an absence x i is absentially located in y iff x i-1 is not 
absentially located in y. 
The second clause implies that absence is a classical negation for i > 1, and so, 
in particular, that an absence of an absence of an absence is identical to an absence. 
A double negation, however, is a mixture -- a negation defined on inherence edges 
followed by a negation defined on absential qualifier edges - and for that reason 
behaves non-classically. What I will show in the next section is that Navya-Ny~ya 
logic rejects the classical rule of Double Negation Introduction 
the rule that 
licenses one to infer from p to ~p. 
What replaces it is a weakened rule 
infer 
from -~p to -,-,-~p. This is because negation is a procedure for filling 'gaps' in 
the graph: whenever there is no edge between two nodes, the rule for negation 
licenses us to insert an absential node between them. The classical rule for Double 
Negation Elimination - the rule that licenses one to infer from ~--p to p- 
remains 
valid in Nayva-NyXya logic (i.e. if x' is not in y, then x is in y).73 The effect of 
this weakening in the rule for Double Negation Introduction is that one is no longer 
72padSrthatattvanir~pan. a, pp. 67-69. Daniel Ingalls, Materials, pp. 68-69; Bimal. K. Matilal, 
Logic, Language and Reality, pp. 149-150. 
73Daniel Ingalls draws a comparison between Navya-Nyaya and intuitionist logic (Materials, p. 
68, n. 135), claiming that it is the elimination rule for double negation that is rejected. However 
we are able, in Navya-Nyaya logic, to infer from the absence of the absence of an entity to the 
presence of that entity; conversely, we are not able to infer from the presence of an entity to the 
absence of its absence -- the non-pervasive node is a counter-example. 

Indian Logic 
383 
entitled to infer that if x is in y, then x' is not in y. One effect of this is to block 
the equivalence of a positive entity with the absence of its absence. We can say 
that x' is the absence of x", but we cannot say that x is the absence of x'. Graph- 
theoretically, connections of the form O x =, @ x' are prohibited, since a positive 
entity cannot be the absence of anything. Also prohibited are triangles of the form 
below, because negation behaves classically within the domain of absences. What 
is stranger, however, is the effect the weakened rule has of permitting a positive 
entity to be co-located with its absence. For we are no longer in a position to 
assert that the presence of an entity is inconsistent with its absence. Let us see 
how the NyXya philosophers arrive at the conclusion that one must allow for such 
an unusual possibility. 
X 
,r 
@ X II 
k,,/ 
9 
Whenever something inheres in a compound substance, the question arises: does 
it also inhere in the parts? An entity is said to be of 'locus-pervading' occurrence 
just in case it inheres in all the parts of its locus (as well as in the locus itself). 74 It 
saturates its locus. A sapphire is red through-and-through, and sesame oil pervades 
every part of the seed; but a painted vase is blue only on the outside. Let us say 
then that x is locus-pervading with respect to y just in case x inheres in y and if z 
is a part of y then x inheres in z. 75 The only things that have parts are substances, 
and substances inhere in their parts and in nothing else. So x is locus-pervading 
with respect to y just in case x inheres in y and if y inheres in z then x inheres in 
z. Certain types of quality pervade their loci, according to the classical Vaigesika 
authors. 76 Examples include weight, viscosity, and fluidity. A thing is heavy just 
in case every part of it is heavy. Colours, tastes, smells can pervade their loci but 
need not do so. v7 And a compound substance is locus-pervading with respect to 
each of its parts, if 'part of' is a transitive relation. 
74Ingalls (1951: 73-74); Bimal Matilal, The Navya-Nydya Doctrine of Negation (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968), p. 53, 72, 85; Matilal (1985: 119-122). 
75 Frege's notion of 'divisibility' is formally rather analogous. Gottlob Frege, The Foundations 
of Arithmetic, translated by J.L. Austin (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1950), p. 66: "The syllables 
"letters in the word three" pick out the word as a whole, and as indivisible in the sense that no 
part of it falls any longer under the same concept. Not all concepts possess this quality. We can, 
for example, divide up something falling under the concept 'red' into parts in a variety of ways, 
without the parts thereby ceasing to fall under the same concept 'red."' 
76Karl Potter ed., "Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology - The Tradition of Nyaya-Vaigesika 
up to Gan. gega", in The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, vol. 2 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 
1977), pp. 114-119. 
77Raghun~tha, Paddrthatattvanir(tpana, pp. 44-6. 

384 
Jonardon Ganeri 
The notion of a locus-pervading entity has a distinctive graph-theoretic corre- 
late. An edge (nl, n2) is locus-pervading just in case there is an edge from nl to 
any node in any path from n2. 
0 
/'IX, 
0 
While locus-pervading nodes are straightforwardly definable in the system as 
so far developed, the concept of 'unpervaded occurrence' (avydpya-vrttitva) marks 
a theoretical innovation. The classic Buddhist refutation of realism about wholes 
is that wholes must be the bearers of contradictory properties. For if some parts 
of a vase are red and other parts are not red, and if the vase as a whole has a 
colour in virtue of its parts having colour, then one seems forced to admit either 
that the whole is both red and not red, or that it has no colour at all. 78 The 
traditional Nyaya-Vaiges.ika solution is less than satisfactory - it is to say that 
the whole has a new shade of colour called 'variegated'! Recognising the ad hoc 
nature of such a response, later Naiy~yikas try instead to make sense of the idea 
that a property can be co-located with its absence. 79 The idea is to capture the 
sense in which one says that the vase is red, because its surface is red, allowing 
at the same time that it is not red, because its insides are some other colour. A 
favourite Ny~ya example involves the relation of contact: the tree enjoys both 
monkey-contact (there is a monkey on one of its branches) and also the absence 
of monkey-contact (its roots and other branches are in contact with no monkey). 
This defence of realism is what motivates later writers to allow there to be such 
a thing as unpervaded occurrence, defined to be an occurrence that is co-located 
with its absence. That is, an unpervading node is a node x such that there is an 
edge (x, y) and an edge (x', y). Triangles such as the following are now deemed 
to be permissible in the graph: 
The strangeness of such a possibility is ameliorated if one says, as some Naiy~yikas 
do, that x occurs in y as 'delimited' by one part, and its absence occurs in y as 
'delimited' by another part. s~ Gaflgega nevertheless goes to considerable lengths 
to reformulate logic and the theory of inference in Navya-Ny~ya in a way that per- 
7SDharmakTrti, PramSnavSrttika II, 85-86; Kamalagila, Pa~jik5 under Tattvasamgraha 592- 
598. 
79Udayana, Atmatattvaviveka, pp. 586-617. Prabal Kumar Sen, "The Nyaya-Vaigesika Theory 
of Variegated Colour (citrar~pa): Some Vexed Problems", Studies in Humanities and Social 
Sciences 3.2 (1996), pp. 151-172. 
so Ingalls (1951: 73-4); Bimal Matilal, The Navya-Nydya Doctrine of Negation (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968), pp. 71-73. 

Indian Logic 
385 
C) x 
~ 
@x ~ 
9 
mits the co-location of an entity with its absence. The phenomenon of unpervaded 
occurrence is not regarded as a minor curiosity in Nygya, but as the occasion for 
serious revision in their analysis, sl 
~,.3 
Definitions of logical consequence 
With the introduction of absence, the graph-theoretic ontologies can serve as se- 
mantic models for a propositional language. A sentence 'p' is assigned, let us 
stipulate, an ordered pair of nodes (x, y). The sentence is true if that pair is an 
edge in the graph, false if it is not. s2 The negation of that sentence, '-~p', is true 
if (x', y) is an edge, false if it is not. Again, '-~--,p' is true if (x", y) is an edge, 
false if it is not. If triangles like the one above are possible, then the truth of 'p' 
does not imply the truth of '---~p', since (x, y) is an edge but not (x", y). So the 
propositional logic being modelled is, as we have already observed, one in which 
Double Negation Introduction does not hold. In this theory, we still have these 
correspondences between truth-value and negation: 
(R1) 
if ~Ta then T-~a. 
from Rule for Absence 
(R2) 
T-~a iff ~T-~a 
from Rule for Higher Order Absence 
What we no longer have is: 
(R3) 
if T-~a then ~Ta 
The reason, as I said before, is that negation is an operation that fills 'gaps' in 
the graph 
it tells us nothing when there is already an edge between two nodes. 
So the truth of a proposition is consistent, in Navya-Ny~ya logic, with the truth 
of its negation. 
This element of dialetheism in the theory does not, however, 
mean that anything is provable or that anything follows from anything else -- the 
correspondences R1- R2 are enough to prevent the system collapsing. Let us see 
why. 
SXMatilal's property-location language, in which properties have both a 'presence range' and 
an 'absence range' and the two ranges are permitted to overlap, is a different way to capture the 
same idea; Matilal (1985: 112-127). 
S2Gangega, Tattvacintdmani, I, prarnglaksana, p. 401. 

386 
Jonardon Ganeri 
In the modern analysis of valid inference, an inference is valid just in case 
it is impossible for the premises to be true without the conclusion also being 
true. In the logic of classical India, validity is a matter of property-substitution, 
and the problem is to determine the conditions under which the occurrence of a 
reason property at a location warrants the inference that a target property occurs 
there too ("Ta because Ra"). The leading idea is that such property substitutions 
are valid just in case the reason does not 'wander' or 'deviate' from the target 
(avyabhicdra). 
In a famous passage called the vydptipagtcaka, Gafige~a suggests 
five ways to make sense of this idea: s3 
Now, in that knowledge of a pervasion which is the cause of an infer- 
ence, what is pervasion? It is not simply non-wandering. For that is 
not 
1. nonoccurrence in loci of the absence of the target, nor 
2. nonoccurrence in loci of the absence of the target which are dif- 
ferent from loci of the target, nor 
3. non-colocation with difference from a locus of the target, nor 
4. being the absentee of an absence which resides in all loci of absence 
of the target, nor 
5. nonoccurrence in what is other than a locus of the target, 
since it is none of these where the target is maximal. 
A 'maximal' property is a property resident in everything (kevaldnvayin). Gafigega 
dismisses the five provisional analyses on the grounds that all are formulated in 
terms of 'absence of the target', and that that phrase is undefined when the tar- 
get is maximal (the absence of a maximal property 
assumed here not to be of 
unpervaded occurrence- would occur in nothing and so be 'unexampled', contra- 
dicting a basic condition of connectedness). In his preferred definition, Gafige~a 
exploits a trick to overcome this problem, s4 He says that any property whose 
absence is colocated with the reason is not identical to the target. This implies 
that the target is not a property whose absence is colocated with the reason, but 
the contraposed formulation avoids the use of the troublesome phrase 'absence of 
the target'. 
Consider now the difference between the first and second analyses in the list 
of five. Graph-theoretically, what the first analysis states is that, if r is the node 
representing the reason, and t is the node representing the target, then r is present 
in no node where t is absent 
But what happens if the target has nonpervaded occurrence? Then the first 
analysis is too strong, s5 For it is not a necessary condition on valid inference that 
S3Gangega, Tattvacintdmani, II, vydptipa~caka, pp. 27-31. 
S4Gangega, Tattvacintdmani, II, siddhSnta-laks, ana, p. 100. 
s5I follow here the explanation of Raghun~tha. Vydptipaftcakad~dhiti text 3-4 (Ingalls (1951: 
154)). 

Indian Logic 
387 
O r 
Q)t' 
~ 
0 t 
O 
/' 
the reason not be present wherever the target is absent, if there are nodes where 
the target is present as well as absent. What validity precludes is the presence 
of the reason without the presence of the target. So the proper definition is that 
the reason is not present wherever the target is not present (and so also absent). 
This is exactly what the second analysis states. We can make the point in terms 
of our earlier definitions of truth and negation. The premise in an inference is 
the statement that the reason occurs in a certain location, the conclusion the 
statement that the target occurs in that location. What our first analysis asserts 
is that the premise is not true if the negation of the conclusion is true ( = absence 
of target in the location). The second analysis states instead that the premise is 
not true if the conclusion is false ( = denial of presence of target in the location). 
Ironically, then, it is the very element of dialetheism of the Navya-Ny~ya system 
which forces Gafigega to disambiguate the definition of validity, and to distinguish 
the correct definition from the one that had been preferred before. 
Let a = "the reason r inheres in x", fl = "the target t inheres in x". Then 
a ~ fl iff t pervades r. The problem is to solve for 'pervades' The first solution in 
Gaflge~a is" 
1. whatever the value of x, a is not true if -7/3 is true, i.e. 
a ~/3 iff under any assignment of value to x, T-,13 -+ T-,a 
His second solution is: 
2. whatever the value of x, a is not true if/3 is not true, i.e. 
a ~/3 iff under any assignment of value to x, -,Ti3 -+ -~Ta. 
What we have seen is that (2) and not (1) is the correct analysis of logical 
consequence if R3 is rejected. 86 
4.4 
Number 
The classical Vai~esika theory of number is that numbers are qualities of sub- 
stances. 87 A quality 'two' inheres in both members of a pair of substances, another 
86R3 is what Graham Priest calls the 'exclusion principle.' For a semantic theory without this 
principle, see his In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent (Dordrecht: Martin Nijhoff 
Publishers, 1987), chapter 5. 
87 Vaigesikas~tra 1.1.9, 7.2.1-8. 

388 
Jonardon 
Ganeri 
quality 'two' inheres in another such pair, and all the qualities 'two' have inhering 
in them a single universal 'twohood' (see graph on page 388. s8 
9 
9 
9 
9 
| 
| 
O 
| 
/ 
9 
9 
O the universal "twohood" 
@ the quality-particular "two" 
Bh~sarvajfia and RaghunXtha, as usual, lead the reforming move. Bh~sarvajfia's 
theory s9 is that numbers are not qualities at all, but relations of identity and 
difference. Thus the sentence 'a and b are one' means simply that a = b, while 
'a and b are two' means that a r b. BhXsarvajfia's analysis is echoed, very much 
later, in GadXdhara's (c. AD 1650) comments on the meaning of the word 'one'. 9~ 
GadXdhara states that the meaning of 'one F' is: an F as qualified by being- 
alone, where 'being alone' means 'not being the absentee of a difference resident in 
something of the same kind.' In other words, 'one F' is to be analysed as saying 
of something which is F that no F is different to it. If this is paraphrased in a 
SSFor a more detailed description of the classical account: Jonardon Ganeri, "Objectivity and 
Proof in a Classical Indian Theory of Number," in Synthese, 129 (2001), pp. 413-437. 
SgNysyabhftsana, p. 159. 
9~ :~aktivdda with Kr. s. na Bhat. t. a 's Magtjgts. a, Mddhava BhattScSrya 's Vivrtti and SShitya 
Darganacarya's Vinodini, edited by G. D. Sastri (Benares" Kashi Sanskrit Series no. 57, 1927). 
p. 189. 

Indian Logic 
389 
first-order language as 'Fx & -~(3y)(Fy & y r x)' then it is formally equivalent 
to a Russellian uniqueness clause 'Fx & (Vy)(Fy ~ 
y - 
x)'. 
The idea that 
'one' expresses uniqueness is in the spirit of BhXsarvajfia's idea that it denotes the 
identity of a thing. In any case, it is clear that, for Gadg~dhara, 'one' has a logical 
role similar to that of the definite article. 
RaghunXtha is more radical still. 91 The central problem is that things in any 
category in the Vaigesika ontology can be numbered, and RaghunXtha concludes 
that numbers must belong in a new category of their own" 
Number is a separate category, not a kind of quality, for we do judge 
that there is possession of that [number] in qualities and so on. And this 
[judgement we make that qualities have number is] not an erroneous 
one, for there is no [other] judgement which contradicts it. 
RaghunXtha puts pressure at exactly the right place. The 'is-the-number-of' 
relation is not reducible to the relation of inherence or any relation constructed 
out of it, for it is a relation between numbers and any type of thing. What is 
this new relation? RaghunXtha points out that while inherence is a distributive 
relation (avydsajya-vrtti), the number-thing relation has to be collective (vydsajya- 
vrtti). The distinction occurs in the context of sentences with plural subjects. An 
attributive relation is distributive if it relates the attribute to every subject 
if the trees are old, then each individual tree is old. A relation is collective if it 
relates the attribute to the subjects collectively but not individually 
'the trees 
form a forest' does not imply that each tree forms a forest. Number attributions 
are collective; if one says that there are two pots here, one does not imply that 
each pot is two. Inherence, however, is a distributive relation, and so cannot be 
the relation of attribution for numbers. This new relation is called the 'collecting' 
(pary@ti) relation by Raghun~tha: 92 
The collecting relation, whose existence is indicated by constructions 
such as "This is one pot" and "These are two", is a special kind of 
self-linking relation. 
His commentator JagadTga explains- 
It might be thought that the collecting relation is [in fact] nothing but 
inherence...So Raghun~tha states that collecting [is a special kind of 
self-linking relation] .... In a sentence like "This is one pot", collecting 
relates the property pot-hood by delimiting it as a property which 
resides in only one pot, but in a sentence like "These are two pots", 
collecting relates the property twoness by delimiting it as a property 
which resides in both pots. Otherwise, it would follow that there is 
no difference between saying "These are two" and "Each one possesses 
twoness". 
91Paddrthatattvanir~pa.na, pp. 86-87. 
92Avacchedakatvanirukti with Jagad~ga's gdgad[g[, edited by Dharmananda Mahabhaga 
(Varanasi: Kashi Sanskrit Series 203), p. 38. 

390 
Jonardon Ganeri 
Thus the number two is related by the collecting relation'to the two pots jointly, 
but not to either individually. RaghunXtha's idea is clear in the graph-theoretic 
context. The introduction of numbers requires one final expansion of the graph. 
We introduce another new domain of nodes (1, 2, 3,.. ) and another new type of 
edge from these nodes. Like ordinary edges, this new type of edge is an ordered 
pair whose first member is a node, but now the second member is set of nodes. 
The new edge connects the node 2 with every pair of nodes (x, y). Likewise, it 
connects the node 3 with every triple of nodes (x, y, z), and so on. The node 
2, then, is that node from which all edges to pairs begin, the node 3 the node 
from which all edges to triples begin, and so forth. This is enough to individuate 
number-nodes graph-theoretically (see graph on 390: 
NUMBER 2 
NUMBER 3 
O~ 
"-~O 
The nodes to which the new edge can connect a number-node can be of any 
type. In particular, they can themselves be number-nodes. Indeed, the new edge 
connects 2 with pairs of nodes one of whose members is 2 itself (see graph on page 
391: 
This solves the cross-categorial problem. Number-nodes are related by the new 
kind of bifurcating edges to nodes of any and every type in the graph, including 
number-nodes themselves. 
The graph-theoretic approach is, I think, full of potential. It offers a new way to 
read and interpret Navya-Ny~ya logic. One might proceed by looking for further 
situational constraints on what constitutes a permissible graph and applying graph 
theory to analyse the structure of those graphs. One might also try to establish 

Indian Logic 
391 
9 
/l 
the relationship between such graphs and classical or nonclassical logics. The 
treatment of negation suggests a comparison with dialetheic logic, and the idea 
of self-linking nodes perhaps with non-wellfounded set theory. My aim here has 
been to expose the logical basis of Vaigesika theory, and to draw a conclusion 
about the nature of logical thinking in India. The conclusion is simply this. The 
idea that nature instantiates mathematical structure is not remote from the Indian 
understanding of natural philosophy, contrary to what has generally been believed, 
but is in fact a fundamental aspect of it. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
SELECTED INDIAN LOGICAL TEXTS 
[Mogalliputta Tissa, c. 3rd BC] Mogalliputta Tissa (c. 3 rd BC). Kath~vatthu. Translation - 
Aung (1915). Discussion- Bochenski (1956), Ganeri (2001), Matilal (1998: 33-7), Schayer 
(1932-33). 
[Milinda-pafih~, c. 1st AD] Milinda-pafih~ (c. 1st AD). Translation - T. W. Rhys Davids (1890). 
[Agnivega, c. 100 AD] Agnivega (c. 100 AD). Carakasamhit& Translation- Sharma (1981-94). 
Discussion- Gokhale (1992), Matilal (1998: 38-43), Prets (2000), Solomon (1976, chapter 2). 
[Kan.~da, c. 200 AD] KanXda (c. 100 AD). VaigesikasfLtra. Translation- Sinha (1911). Discus- 
sion- Nenninger (1994), Nozawa (1991), Schuster (1972) 
[N~gXrjuna, c. 200 AD] N~gXrjuna (c. 200 AD). Vaidalyaprakarana, Translation - Tola & Drag- 
onetti (1995). 
[N~gXrjuna, c. 200 AD] Nag~rjuna (c. 200 AD). Updyahrdaya. Discussion- Tucci (1929b). 
[Gautama, c. 150 AD] Gautama Aksap~da (c. 150 AD - 250 AD). Nygyasgtra. Translation - 
Gangopadhyay (1982). Discussion- Bochenski (1956), Chakrabarti (1977), Ganeri (2000), 
Ganeri (2001), Gokhale (1992), Matilal (1985), Matilal (1998), Prets (2001), Schayer (1933), 
Randle (1924), 

392 
Jonardon Ganeri 
[Vasubandhu, c. 400 AD] Vasubandhu c. 400 AD - 
480 AD). 
Vgdavidhi, 
Vgdavidhgna, 
Tarkaddstra. Discussion- Tucci (1929a), Tucci (1929b). 
[VXtsyXyana, c. 350 AD] VXtsyXyana (c. 350 AD- 425 AD). NySyabhSs. ya. Translation- Gan- 
gopadhyay (1982). Discussion- Bochenski (1956), Matilal (1998). 
[Difin~ga, c. 480 AD] Difinaga (c. 480 AD - 540 AD). PramSn. asamuccaya. Translation - Hayes 
(1988). Discussion- Bochenski (1956), Ganeri (2001), Hayes (1980), Hayes (1988), Herzberger 
(1982), Katsura (1983), Katsura (1986a), Matilal (1998), Matilal 8z Evans eds. (1986), Oetke 
(1994). 
[Diflnaga, c. 480 AD] Difln~ga (c. 480 AD - 540 AD). Hetucakranir.naya. Translation - Chatterji 
(1933), Chi (1969). Discussion- Bharadwaja (1990), Bochenski (1956), Chi (1969), Randle 
(1924) 
[Sankarasvamin, c. 500 AD] Sankarasv~min (c. 500 AD - 560 AD). Nydyapravega. Translation 
- Tachikawa (1971). Discussion - Chi (1969), Gillon & Love (1980), Oetke (1996). 
[Uddyotakara, c. 500 AD] Uddyotakara (c. 550 AD- 625 AD). NySyavSrttika. Translation- 
Jha (1984). Discussion - Gokhale (1992). 
[DharmakTrti, c. 600 AD] DharmakTrti (c. 600 AD - 660 AD). PramSnavSrttika. Discussion - 
Gokhale (1992), Hayes (1987), Katsura ed. (1999), Matilal (1998), Matilal & Evans eds. 
(1986), Steinkellner (1973), Steinkellner ed. (1991). 
[DharmakTrti, c. 600 AD] DharmakTrti (c. 600 AD - 660 AD). Nydyabindu. Translation - Gan- 
gopadhyay (1971), Stcherbatsky (1930, volume 2). Discussion - Gokhale (1992). 
[DharmakTrti, c. 600 AD] DharmakTrti (c. 600 AD- 
660 AD). VSdanydya. Translation- 
Gokhale (1993). Discussion - Chinchore (1988). 
[Siddhasena, c. 700 AD] Siddhasena (c. 700 AD). NySySvatSra. Translation and discussion- 
Balcerowicz (2001). 
[Udayana, c. 1050 AD] Udayana 
(c. 
1050 
AD). 
NySyavSrttikatStparyapariguddhi, 
NySyaparigista, Laksan. Svalf. 
[Gangega, c. 1325 AD] Gangega (c. 1325 AD). TattvacintSmani. Discussion- Bhattacharyya 
(1987), Bochenski (1956), Gangopadhyay (1975), Goekoop (1967), Ingalls (1951), Matilal 
(1968), Matilal (1985), Matilal (1998), Staal (1988), Vattanky (2001), Wada (1990), Wada 
(forthcoming). 
SECONDARY LITERATURE ON INDIAN LOGIC 
[Aung, 1915] S. Z. Aung. Points of Controversy, or, Subjects of Discourse: Being a translation 
of the KathSvatthu from the Abhidhammap~taka, eds. S.Z. Aung and C.A.F. Rhys Davids. 
Pali Text Society. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1915. 
[Bagchi, 1953] S. Bagchi. Inductive Reasoning: A Study of Tarka and its Role in Indian Logic. 
Munishchandra Sinha, Calcutta, 1953. 
[Balcerowicz, 2001] P. Balcerowicz. Epistemology in Historical and Comparative Perspective: 
Critical Edition and English Translation of Logical-Epistemological Treatises: NydygvatSra, 
Nygygvatgra-vrti and NySySvatSra-t ippana with Introduction and Notes, Franz Steiner Vet- 
lag, Hamburg, 2001. 
[Balcerowicz and Mejor, 2000] P. Balcerowicz and M. Mejor, eds. On the Understanding of other 
cultures: Proceedings of the International Conference on Sanskrit and Related Studies to 
Commemorate the Centenary of the Birth of Stanistaw Schayer, Warsaw 1999. Oriental In- 
stitute, Warsaw University. 2000. 
[Bharadwaja, 1990] V. Bharadwaja. Form and Validity in Indian Logic. Indian Institute of 
Advanced Study, Shimla, 1990. 
[Bhattacharyya, 1987] S. Bhattacharyya. Some Aspects of the Navya-Ny~ya Theory of Infer- 
ence, In Doubt, Belief and Knowledge, S. Bhattacharyya, pp. 245-267. Indian Council of 
Philosophical Research, Delhi, 1987. 
[Bochenski, 1956] J. M. Bochenski. The Indian Variety of Logic. In A History of Formal Logic, 
2nd edn, J. M. Bochenski, pp. 416-447. Trans. I. Thomas, Chelsea Publ. Co., New York, 1961. 
[Chakrabarti, 1977] K. K. Chakrabarti. The Logic of Gotama. University of Hawaii Society for 
Asian and Comparative Philosophy Monograph, no. 5. University Press of Hawaii, 1977. 

Indian Logic 
393 
[Chatterji, 1933] D. Chatterji. Hetucakranirnaya- A Translation. Indian Historical Quarterly, 
9,266-272, 511-514, 1933. 
[Chi, 1969] R. S. Y. Chi. Buddhist Formal Logic: A Study of Digndga's Hetucakra and K'uei- 
chi's Great Commentary on the NySyapravega. The Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain. 
London, 1969. 
[Chinchore, 1988] M. Chinchore. VddanySya - A Glimpse of a Nydya-Buddhist Controversy. 
Sri Satguru Publications, Delhi, 1988. 
[Davids, 1890] T. W. R. Davids. The Questions of King Milinda (2 volumes). Clarendon Press, 
Oxford, 1890. 
[Galloway, 1989] B. Galloway. Some Logical Issues in Madhyamaka Thought. Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 17, 1-35, 1989. 
[Ganeri, 1999] J. Ganeri. DharmakTrti's Semantics for the Particle eva ("only"). In Katsura ed., 
pp. 101-116, 1999. 
[Ganeri, 2000] J. Ganeri. Rationality as a method of research into the Nyaya system. In Bal- 
cerowicz & Mejor. 147-156, 2000. 
[Ganeri, 2001] J. Ganeri. Philosophy in Classical India: The Proper Work of Reason. Routledge, 
London, 2001. 
[Ganeri, 2001a] J. Ganeri, ed. Indian Logic: A Reader. Curzon, London, 2001. 
[Ganeri, 2001] J. Ganeri. Argumentation, Dialogue and the Kath~vatthu. douranl of Indian 
Philosophy, 29, 485-493, 2001. 
[Gangopadhyaya, 1971] M. Gangopadhyaya. Vin~tadeva's NySyabindut.~kS. Indian Studies Past 
& Present, Calcutta, 1971. 
[Gangopadhyay, 1975] M. Gangopadhyay. Gafigega on Vyaptigraha: The Means For The Ascer- 
tainment of Invariable Concomitance. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 3, 167-208, 1975. 
[Gangopadhyay, 1982] M. Gangopadhyay. Gautama's NySya-S~tra with VStsySyana's BhSsya. 
Indian Studies.Past & Present, Calcutta, 1982. 
[Gangopadhyay, 1984] M. Gangopadhyay. Indian Logic In Its Sources. Munshiram Manoharlal, 
Delhi, 1984. 
[Gillon and Love, 1980] B. Gillon and M. L. Love. Indian Logic Revisited: Ny~yapravega Re- 
viewed. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 8, 349-384, 1980. 
[Gillon and Hayes, 1982] B. Gillon and R. Hayes. The Role of the Particle eva in (Logical) 
Quantification in Sanskrit. Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siid-und Ostasiens, 26, 195- 
203, 1982. 
[Gillon, 1999] B. Gillon. Another Look at the Sanskrit Particle eva. In Katsura ed., pp. 117-130, 
1999. 
[Gillon, 2001] B. Gillon, ed. Proceedings of the Panel on Logic in Classical India, ICANAS 
Montreal 2000. Journal of Indian Philosophy Special Issue. vol. 29, 2001. 
[Goekoop, 1967] C. Goekoop. The Logic of Invariable Concomitance in the Tattvacintdmani. 
Reidel, Dordrecht, 1967. 
[Gokhale, 1991] P. P. Gokhale. The Logical Structure of Syadv~da. Journal of Indian Council 
of Philosophical Research, 8, 73-81, 1991. 
[Gokhale, 1992] P. P. Gokhale. Inference And Fallacies Discussed In Ancient Indian Logic. Sri 
Satguru Publications, Delhi, 1992. 
[Gokhale, 1993] P. P. Gokhale. Vddanyaya of Dharmak[rti: The Logic of Debate. Sri Satguru 
Publications. Delhi, 1993. 
[Gupta, 1895] S. N. Gupta. The Nature of Inference in Indian Logic. Mind, 4, 159-175, 1895. 
[Hayes, 1980] R. P. Hayes. Difin~ga's Views on Reasoning. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 8,219 
- 277, 1980. 
[Hayes, 1987] R. P. Hayes. On The Reinterpretation Of Dharmakirti's svabh~vahetu. Journal 
of Indian Philosophy, 15,319-332, 1987. 
[Hayes, 1988] R. P. Hayes. Difin~ga on the Interpretation of Signs. Studies of Classical India, 
vol 9. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1988. 
[Herzberger, 1982] H. H. Herzberger. Three Systems of Buddhist Logic. In B. K. Matilal and R. 
D. Evans eds., pp. 59-76, 1982. 
[Hoffman, 1982] F. J. Hoffman. Rationality in early Buddhist four-fold logic. Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 10, 309-337, 1982. 
[Ingalls, 1951] D. H. H. Ingalls. Materials for the Study of Navya-NySya Logic, Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, Harvard, 1951. 

394 
Jonardon Ganeri 
[Jha, 1984] G. Jha. The Nydya-SStras of Gautama with the BhSsya of VStsydyana and the 
Vdrttika of Uddyotakara. Motilal Banarsidass (reprint), Delhi, 1984. 
[Katsura, 1983] S. Katsura. Dignaga on trairfipya. Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies, 32, 
15-21, 1983. 
[Katsura, 19866] S. Katsura. On trairfipya Formulae. In Buddhism and Its Relation To Other 
Religions: Essays in Honour of Dr. Shozen Kumoi on His Seventieth Birthday, pp. 161-172, 
1986. 
[Katsura, 1986b] S. Katsura. On the Origin and Development of the Concept of Vy~pti. Tet- 
sugaku, 38, 1-16, 1986. 
[Katsura, 1999] S. Katsura, ed. Dharmak~rti's Thought and its Impact on Indian and Tibetan 
Philosophy:..Proceedings of the Second International Dharmak[rti Conference, Hiroshima, 
Verlag Der Osterreichischen Akademie Der Wissenschaften, Wien, 1999. 
[Katsura, 2001] S. Katsura. Indian logic: induction, deduction or abduction? In Gillon (2001). 
[Matilal, 1968] B. K. Matilal. The Navya-Nydya Doctrine of Negation. Harvard University 
Press, Harvard, 1968. 
[Matilal, 1971] B. K. Matilal. Epistemology, Logic and Grammar in Indian Philosophical Anal- 
ysis. Mouton, The Hague, 1971. 
[Matilal, 1985] B. K. Matilal. Logic, Language and Reality: An introduction to Indian Philo- 
sophical Studies. Delhi Motilal Banarsidass, 1985. Second edn. under new subtitle, Indian 
Philosophy and Contemporary Issues, 1990. 
[Matilal, 1990] B. K. Matilal. The Word and the World, Appendix 2. Oxford University Press, 
Delhi, 1990. 
[Matilal, 1998] B. K. Matilal. The Character of Logic in India, edited by Jonardon Ganeri and 
Heeraman Tiwari. State University of New York Press, Albany, 1998. 
[Matilal and Evans, 1986] B.K. Matilal and R. D. Evans, eds. Buddhist Logic and Epistemology: 
Studies' in the Buddhist Analysis of Inference and Language. Studies of Classical India, vol. 
7. Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1986. 
[Mullatti, 1977] L. C. Mullatti. The Navya-Nydya Theory of Inference. Karnatak University 
Press, Dharwad, 1977. 
[Mfiller, 1853] M. Miiller. Indian Logic. Printed as an Appendix to Thomson, W. An Outline of 
the Necessary Laws of Thought. 3rd edition. Longmans, Green, and Co, London, 1853. 
[Nenninger, 1994] C. Nenninger. Analogical Reasoning in Early Ny~ya-Vaige.sika. Asiatische 
Studien, 48,819-832, 1994. 
[Nozawa, 1991] M. Nozawa. Inferential Marks in the Vaigesikasfitras. Sambhds5: Nagoya Studies 
in Indian Culture and Buddhism, 12, 25-38, 1991. 
[Oetke, 19946] C. Oetke. Studies On The Doctrine Of Trair~pya, : Wiener Studien zur Ti- 
betologie und Buddhismuskunde, Wien, 1994. 
[Oetke, 1994b] C. Oetke. Vier Studien zum Altindischen Syllogismus. Reinbek, 1994. 
[Oetke, 1996] C. Oetke. Ancient Indian Logic as a Theory of Non-Monotonic Reasoning. Journal 
of Indian Philosophy, 24, 447-539, 1996. 
[Ono, 1999] M. Ono. DharmakTrti on as~saran~naikantika. In Katsura ed., pp. 301-316, 1999. 
[Peckhaus, 2001] V. Peckhaus. Dign~ga's Logic of Invention. Lecture delivered at the First In- 
ternational Conference of the New Millenium on History of Mathematical Sciences, Indian 
National Science Academy. University of Delhi. 
[Prets, 2000] E. Prets. Theories of Debate, Proof and Counter-Proof in the Early Indian Dialec- 
tical Tradition. In Balcerowicz & Mejor eds. pp 369-382, 2000. 
[Prets, 2001] E. Prets. Proof and counterproof in early indian dialectic and logic. In Gillon ed., 
(2001). 
[Randle, 1924] H. N. Randle. A Note on the Indian Syllogism. Mind, 33,398-414, 1924. 
[Randle, 1930] H. N. Randle. Indian Logic in the Early Schools. Oxford University Press, Ox- 
ford, 1930. 
[Robinson, 1957] R. H. Robinson. Some Logical Aspects of N~g~rjuna's System. Philosophy East 
and West, 6, 291-308, 1957. 
[Schayer, 1932] St. Schayer. Studien zur Indischen Logik. 1. Der Indische und der Aristotelis- 
che Syllogismus. 2: Altindische Antizipationen der Aussangenlogik. Bulletin International de 
l'Academie Polonaise des Sciences et des Lettres, Classe de Philologie, Krakow, hr. 4-6, pp. 
98-102 (1932) and nr. 1-6, pp. 90-96 (1933). Krakow. 

Indian Logic 
395 
[Schayer, 1933] St. Schayer. ~lber die Methode der NyXya-Forschung. In O. Stein and W. Gam- 
bert eds., Festschrift fiir Moritz Winternitz, pp. 247-257. Leipzig, 1933. 
[Schuster, 1972] N. Schuster. Inference in the Vaigesikasfitras, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 1, 
341-395, 1970. 
[Sharma, 1981] R. K. Sharma. Caraka-samhitS: Agniveda's Treatise Refined and Annotated by 
Caraka. Text with English Translation. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Orientalia, 1981-84. 
[Sinha, 1911] N. Sinha. The Vaigesikas~ttras of Kan. Sda, with the commentary of Sa~ikara Migra. 
The Panini Office, Bhuvaneswari Asrama, Allahabad, 1911. , 
[Solomon, 1976] E. Solomon. Indian Dialectics, 2 volumes. B. J. Institute of Learning and Re- 
search, Ahmedabad, 1976. 
[Staal, 1988] J. F. Staal. Universals: Studies in Indian Logic and Linguistics. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1988. 
[Stcherbatsky, 1930] Th. Stcherbatsky. Buddhist Logic. Vols 1 and 2, Bibliotheca Buddhica, 26. 
Leningrad. 
[Steinkellner, 1973] E. Steinkellner. On the Interpretation of the svabh~vahetu? 
Wiener 
Zeitschrift Fiir Die Kunde Siid-Und Ostasiens, 18, 117-129, 1973. 
[Steinkellner, 1991] E. Steinkellner. The Logic of the svabh~vahetu in Dharmak~rti's V~dany~ya. 
In E. Steinkellner, ed., 1991a. 
[Steinkellner, 1991a] E. Steinkellner, ed. Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition. 
Proceedings of the Second International Dharmak[rti Conference, Vienna, 1989. Verlag Der 
Osterreichischen Akademie Der Wissenschaften, Wien, 1991. 
[Tachikawa, 1971] M. Tachikawa. A Sixth-Century Manual of Indian Logic. (A Translation of 
the Ny~yapravega), Journal of Indian Philosophy, 1, 11-145, 1971. 
[Tillemans, 1990] T. F. Tillemans. On sapaks.a, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 18, 53-80, 1990. 
[Tola and Dragonetti, 1995] F. Tola and C. Dragonetti. NdgSrjuna's Refutation of Logic 
(NySya): Vaidalyaprakarana. Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1995. 
[Tucci, 1929a] G. Tucci. Buddhist Logic before Difinaga (Asafiga, Vasubandhu, Tarka~stras). 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 451-88, 1929. Corrections: ibid. 870-1, 1929. 
[Tucci, 1929b] G. Tucci. Pre-Didndga Texts on Logic from Chinese Sources. Gaekwad Oriental 
Series, no. 49, Baroda, 1929. 
[Tucci, 1930] G. Tucci. The Nydyamukha of DignSga: 
The Oldest Buddhist Text on Logic. 
Materialen zur Kunde des Buddhismus, no. 15. Heidelberg: Otto Harrasowitch, 1930. 
[Tuske, 1998] J. Tuske. Difin~ga and the Raven Paradox. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 26, 
387-403, 1998. 
[Vidyabhusana, 1921] S. C. Vidyabhusana. A History of Indian Logic: Ancient, Mediaeval and 
Modern Schools. Calcutta University, 1921. 
[Warder, 1963] A. K. Warder. The earliest Indian logic, Trudi Dvadtsat Pyatogo Mejdunaro- 
dnogo Kongressa Vostokovedov, Moscow, Izdatelstvo Vostochnoi Lieraturi, vol. IV, 1963 
[Uno, 1993] A. Uno. Vy~pti in Jainism. In N. K. Wagle and F. Watanabe eds., Studies on Bud- 
dhism in Honour of Professor A. K. Warder, pp. 160-167. University Of Toronto, Toronto, 
1993. 
[Vattanky, 2001] J. Vattanky. A System of Indian Logic: The Nydya Theory of Inference. Rout- 
ledge, London, 2001. 
[Wada, 1990] T. Wada. Invariable Concomitance in Navya-Nydya. Sri Satguru. Delhi, 1990. 
[Wada, forthcoming] T. Wada. The Origin of Navya-Ny~ya and its Place within the History of 
Indian Logic. In the Felicitation Volume for M. Tachiwaka (forthcoming). 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

THE MEGARIANS 
AND THE STOICS 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
In the opinion of Carl Prantl, the nineteenth century historian of logic, the Stoics 
were no logicians at all, but merely confused plagiarists who peddled second-rate 
versions of Peripatetic and Megarian doctrines. 
Chrysippus of Soli, touted by 
many as the greatest logician of the Hellenic age, was a special target of Prantl's 
baleful attacks, as witness the following assessment of his logical skills: 
Chrysippus created nothing really new in logic, for he only repeated 
details already known to the Peripatetics or pointed out by the Megar- 
ians; his activity consisted in this, that in the treatment of the material 
he descended to a pitiful degree of dullness, triviality, and scholastic 
quibbling .... It is to be considered a real stroke of luck that the works 
of Chrysippus were no longer extant in the Middle Ages, for in that 
extensive morass of formalism, the tendency (weak as it was) toward 
independent investigation would have been completely eliminated. 1 
Although Chrysippus may have borne the main thrust of Prantl's assault, there 
is no doubt that his criticisms were meant to have general application among the 
philosophers of the Stoa. 
It is difficult to discern the motivation behind Prantl's ad hominem attacks on 
the Stoics in general and on Chrysippus in particular, and one has to look back 
to Plutarch's polemic in De communibus notitiis and De Stoicorum repugnantiis 
to find anything remotely similar in tone. On the other hand, it is not so difficult 
to see, as Mates argues [Mates, 1953, pp. 87-88], that one can safely discount 
virtually all of Prantl's judgements on Stoic logic, not only because there is lacking 
any argument to substantiate them, but also because Prantl himself seems to have 
had little understanding of what the Stoics were about (cf. Bocheiiski 1963, 5). 
Unfortunately, Prantl's estimation of Stoic logic, echoed by Eduard Zeller with 
somewhat more scholarly decorum, but with little more skill and understanding, 
was to remain for the most part unchallenged until late in the first half of the 
twentieth century when it was called into question, first, by Jan Lukasiewicz, and 
later, by Benson Mates. 
1Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande, 1.404. Translated by Mates [1953, p. 87]. 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
@ 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

398 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Prantl's work, according to Lukasiewicz, although "indispensable ... as a collec- 
tion of sources and material,.., has scarcely any value as an historical presentation 
of logical problems and theories" [Lukasiewicz, 1967, p. 67]. Moreover, since nei- 
ther Prantl, nor Zeller, nor any other of the older historians of logic, had any 
understanding of the difference between the logic of terms, which was Aristotle's 
logic, and the logic of propositions, which was the logic of the Stoa, there exists no 
history of the logic of propositions, and thus, no complete understanding of the his- 
tory of formal logic. For this reason, "the history of logic must be written anew, 
and by an historian who has fully mastered mathematical logic" [Lukasiewicz, 
1967, p. 67]. 
In the interest of setting the historical record straight, one cannot help but 
endorse this project, and we ought to be ever grateful not only to Lukasiewicz, 
but also to Mates, Bochefiski, the Kneales, and others for their contributions 
toward this end. It should be noted, however, that there is a danger that the 
historian of logic possessing this requisite mastery of mathematical logic may allow 
his or her familiarity with the discipline to obscure, or even distort, the historical 
enterprise. When viewing the past from the perspective of contemporary doctrines, 
it is sometimes all too easy to succumb to the appeal of a 'convergence' theory of 
history, and to assume that one's predecessors, if only they had got it right, would 
have come to the same place we now occupy. At any rate, there seems to have 
been a tendency toward such a view among several modern commentators. These 
writers seem to presume that the Stoics had in mind to develop a formal logic along 
the lines of the modern propositional calculus, and their respective appraisals of 
Stoic logic might be seen as dependent on their estimates of the degree of success 
to which this goal was carried through. 
It must be admitted, however, that there are some texts which would seem to 
justify such a presumption; on the other hand, all of these texts can be, and have 
been, called into question. To consider two examples, there are texts which may 
be taken to indicate that, in general, the Stoics defined those logical constants 
having a role in their syllogistic as binary connectives; other texts may be taken 
to support the view that Stoic logic was a formal logic--formal, that is, in the 
specialised sense in which mathematical logic is formal, namely, the substitutional 
sense. 
As to the first of these suppositions, it is surely false that the logical connectives 
which appear in the Stoic syllogisms were in general defined as binary connectives. 
In particular, consider ~t~uu 
which is evidently the notion of disjunction 
occurring in the fourth and fifth Stoic syllogisms. 2 This disjunction, represented 
at the linguistic level by the connective particle '~' (or '~xot'), is assumed by 
not a few writers to be the 'exclusive' disjunction defined by the matrix 0110. 3 
2The fourth syllogism may be represented by the schema 'a or fl; but a; therefore, not fl', 
and the fifth by the schema 'a or ~; but not a; therefore, ~' 
3Lukasiewicz [1967, p. 74]; Bochefiski [1963, p. 91]; Mates [1953, p. 51]; Kneale and Kneale 
[1962a, p. 148]; Gould [1970, p. 72]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
399 
The reason for this assumption, according to some writers at least, 4 is that an 
inclusive notion of disjunction will not support both the fourth and fifth Stoic 
syllogisms, whereas the exclusive disjunction will. It can be shown, however, that 
St~uyg~vo~, the Greek notion of disjunction which validates both the fourth and 
the fifth syllogisms, is not the exclusive disjunction of modern logic in which the 
connective is defined as a binary operator satisfying the matrix 0110. 
Now it is not at all clear whether the Stoics viewed St~uy~vov as a purely 
truth-functional notion of disjunction, but it seems evident from the texts which 
mention a disjunction consisting of more than two disjuncts that if the Stoic dis- 
junction were to be characterized truth-functionally, then the general truth con- 
dition (i.e. the truth condition for the occurrence of two or more disjuncts) would 
be that it is true whenever exactly one of its clauses is true. 5 On the other hand, it 
can be shown by means of a simple inductive proof that the general truth condition 
for the modern exclusive disjunction is that an odd number of disjuncts be true. 
As a consequence of this result, it is apparent that even if the Stoic disjunction 
is given a truth-functional interpretation, its truth will coincide with that of the 
0110 disjunction only in the two-disjunct case. 
It seems evident, then, that we can rule out the assumption that the Stoic 
disjunction and the modern exclusive disjunction are identical; hence, we can not 
take their alleged identity as evidence for the conclusion that the Stoic disjunction 
was viewed as a binary connective. Furthermore, there seems to be nothing in the 
texts to force the interpretation of ~t~uy~vov as even having a fixed 'arity', 6 
and in particular, nothing to force the interpretation that it has arity two. But 
if a Stoic disjunction has no fixed arity, then we are not required--indeed, we are 
not allowed--to treat an n-term disjunction as a two-term disjunction by the use 
of some bracketing device. This proscription has consequences for the idea that 
Stoic logic was formal in the substitutional sense, an issue which we shall take up 
later on in this article. 
If it is neither true that the logical connectives occurring in the Stoic syllogisms 
are in general binary operators, nor that Stoic logic is a formal system in the 
substitutional sense of formal, then the modern historians and commentators who 
have affirmed the contrary have misunderstood and misrepresented Stoic logic 
no less than have the earlier historians of logic, such as Prantl and Zeller. The 
obstacle for both the later and earlier writers, it seems to us, is that they have 
allowed their preconceptions to obscure their understanding. It is obvious from 
their writings that Prantl and Zeller held to the general conviction of their era that 
the intellectual achievements of the Hellenic period in Greece were few indeed. 
And no doubt this view would have affected their ability to provide a balanced 
account of Stoic philosophy in general, and Stoic logic in particular. As for the 
writers who published in the early and middle years of this century, they no doubt 
4Mates 
[1953, p. 52]; Bochefiski 
[1963, p. 91]. 
5cf. Aulus Gellius Noctes Atticae. 16.8.13-14; Galen inst. log. 12; PH 
2.191. 
6The 
'arity' of a binary operator is 2; that of a ternary operator, 3; of a quaternary 
operator, 
4; and so on. 

400 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
were influenced by the tendency, experienced at some time or other by most of us 
familiar with modern formal logic, to suppose that there really is no other notion 
of logic. 
Be that as it may, we are nevertheless indebted to these logicians and historians 
of logic for having rescued the logic of the Stoa from the lowly status to which it 
was relegated at the hands of Prantl and his contemporaries. That having been 
said, it needs also to be said that we ought now to move out from the shadows of 
Lukasiewicz, Bocheflski, and Mates, and attempt an interpretation of Stoic logic 
less coloured by a reverence for modern formal systems, and more in harmony with 
what the texts seem to indicate as being the place of logic in the Stoic system as 
a whole. This point of view is well expressed by Charles Kahn: 
We may not have an accurate picture of Chrysippus' enterprise in "di- 
alectic" if we see it simply as a brilliant anticipation of the propositional 
calculus. No doubt it could not be accurately seen at all until it was 
seen in this way, again by Lukasiewicz and then more fully by Mates. 
But now that their insights have been assimilated, I think it is time 
to return to a more adequate view of Stoic logic within the context of 
their theory of language, their epistemology, their ethical psychology, 
and the general theory of nature [Kahn, 1969, p. 159]. 
The elements of Stoic philosophy mentioned by Kahn-- epistemology, theory of 
language, ethical psychology, and a general theory of nature--are just the elements 
viewed as extraneous to the logician's enterprise by the early modern commenta- 
tors. Indeed, the creation of contemporary formal logic by Frege required, in the 
words of Claude Imbert, "[the] gradual and piecemeal disintegration of a logical 
structure built by or borrowed from the Stoics" [Imbert, 1980, p. 187]. On this 
account, it seems evident that any attempt to understand Stoic logic as a formal 
calculus must fail; moreover, it would seem that anyone wishing to provide an 
adequate understanding would be constrained to do so as part of a reconstruc- 
tion of the logical edifice built by the Stoics. The present essay is one attempt to 
formulate such an interpretation. 
Leaving aside the matter of setting straight the historical record, one might ask 
what the worth of studying an ancient logic such as that of the Stoics might be. 
The answer to this question, it seems to us, lies in how one views the nature of 
Stoic logic itself. For our part, we believe that Stoic logic developed out of a desire 
to provide an account of the inferences one could make concerning the natural 
course of events, such inferences depending on premisses based in the perceptual 
knowledge of the occurrence of particular events or states of affairs, and in a 
general knowledge of relationships discovered in nature between events or states 
of affairs of certain types. 
The relationships between events or states of affairs which the Stoics referred 
to as 'consequence' (d 
and 'conflict' (gdX~), are represented in the Stoic 
syllogistic in the major premisses of four of their five basic inference schemata. Par- 
ticular events or states of affairs are represented in the minor premisses. Knowl- 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
401 
edge of these relationships and particular events is based on certain perceptual 
structures called 'presentations' (q~c~xc~c~ic~t). Associated with these presentations 
as their content are conceptual structures called pragmata (~paygc~x~), and asso- 
ciated with the pragmata are 'propositional' structures called lekta (),~ 
Ac- 
cording to the Stoic theory, we proceed from language and thought to the world, 
and to language and thought from the world, through the media of these various 
structures. 
This theory suggests a different paradigm from that of present-day formal logic. 
It would seem to imply an understanding of logic as a human linguistic practicena 
theory of inference rather than of inferability. Given the difficulties encountered 
so far in attempts to develop automated inference systems based on the paradigm 
of modern formal logic, it may be worthwhile to attempt a formalisation of the 
Stoic semantic theory in the hope that such a formalisation would provide a more 
successful alternative. 
The first step in such an enterprise would be to try to 
develop as clear an understanding of the Stoic theory as is possible. 
2 
HISTORICAL SURVEY 
On the assumption that more than a few readers will be unfamiliar with early Stoic 
philosophy, and since this essay is an interpretation of certain logical doctrines of 
the Old Stoa, it would seem appropriate to present first a brief historical sketch 
of the Stoic School, and, in particular, of the philosophers of the early Stoa. 
2.1 
The influence of Stoicism 
The first Stoic was Zeno of Citium who founded the school some time near the turn 
of the century between the third and fourth centuries B.C. The last Stoic, according 
to Eduard Zeller [Zeller, 1962, p. 314], was Marcus Aurelius, the Roman emperor 
who died in 180 A.D. Of course, as J. M. Rist points out [Rist, 1969c, p. 289], one 
ought to understand this claim not in a literal sense, for there were Stoics who 
came after Aurelius, but rather in the sense that with his passing the school came 
to an end as a recognisable entity. Hence the Stoic School was extant for a period 
of almost five hundred years, a remarkable achievement by any standard. But it is 
not only the longevity of the school which would seem exceptional, for it might be 
claimed, as at least one scholar has done, that "Stoicism was the most important 
and influential development in Hellenistic philosophy" (A. A. Long [1986], 107). 
The basis for this claim lies in part at least in the far-reaching domain of Stoic 
doctrines. For according to Long, not only were Stoic teachings prevalent among 
a large segment of the educated population in the Hellenic era, but also their 
influence is apparent in various intellectual spheres during the early post-Hellenic 
period as well as from the Renaissance up to fairly recent times. The tenets of 
Christian philosophy, for example, exhibit certain evidence of Stoic bias, as do the 
moral precepts of Western civilisation in general. Moreover, the manifestations of 
such influence would seem apparent in the realm of secular literature and thought 

402 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
as well, reaching a peak, according to Long, between 1500 and 1700 (1986, 247). 
One scholar even perceives the presuppositions of Stoic logical principles at work 
in the writings of the Alexandrian novelists and poets (Claude Imbert [1980]). In 
later philosophy, according to Long, Stoic canons are evident in the writings of 
men as diverse in their beliefs as the religious philosopher Bishop Butler and the 
metaphysicians, Spinoza and Kant (1986, 107). And according to Imbert: "[The] 
gradual and piecemeal disintegration of a logical structure built by or borrowed 
from the Stoics was a necessary preliminary to Frege's formulation of a sentential 
calculus and to the conception ... of such a calculus as an independent system" 
[Imbert, 1980, p. 187]. 
But if Stoicism has indeed found expression in such widespread and various areas 
of thought, then why, one might ask, does it seem that in the English-speaking 
world at least, Stoic philosophical theories have been so little studied in recent 
times as compared with the treatises of Plato and Aristotle--aside, that is, from 
the chiefly moralistic writings of the later Stoics such as Marcus Aurelius. The 
answer no doubt lies, at least in part, in the fact that virtually none of the records of 
the early Stoics has survived the vagaries of time. We are fortunate to have mined 
in their extant writings an abundant source from which we may develop a deep 
appreciation of the philosophical thought of Plato and Aristotle, but there is no 
mother lode of philosophical literature from which to develop a rich understanding 
of Stoic thought. Those direct sources which have survived consist in a few badly 
damaged papyri salvaged from the ruins of Herculaneum. 
For the most part, 
however, one must rely on the reports of various commentators of uneven reliability, 
authors such as Sextus Empiricus, 7 Diogenes La~rtius, s Galen, Cicero, Stobaeus, 
Plutarch, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and Aulus Gellius, to name a few. Many 
of these reports are presented in the form of doxography, and many are second- 
hand; some, however, possess the merit of having direct quotations appearing in 
them, and it is from these quotations that the most reliable information can be 
gleaned. But even having quotations available is no guarantee that one is getting 
an unbiased account. For much of the commentary by authors such as Plutarch, 
7Sextus Empiricus (circa A.D. 200) was a Greek physician and sceptic philosopher who suc- 
ceeded Herodotus of Tarsus as head of the Sceptic School. Sextus' critique of Stoic philosophical 
doctrine is covered in a series of eleven books under the general title of Adversus Mathematicos 
(abbreviated AM), and a series of three books under the title Outlines of Pyrrhonism (abbre- 
viated PH). Stoic logical doctrine is contained for the most part in Books 7 and 8 of AM and 
in Book 2 of PH. Physical tenets are covered in Books 9 and 10 of AM and in Book 3 of PH. 
Ethical teachings are criticised in Book 11 of AM and in Book 3 of P H. Sextus' account of Stoic 
Philosophy is probably one of the most extensive of the ancient commentaries. However, because 
of it polemic nature, its value is perhaps less than it might been. 
S After Sextus Empiricus, Diogenes La~rtius (circa A.D. 200-250?) provides the next most 
extensive account of Stoic doctrine. Much of what he writes on the Stoics corroborates what 
is written by Sextus Empiricus, but in contrast to the latter's account, Diogenes' report has 
the advantage that it is not in the least polemical. It is fortunate that in Book 7 of Lives and 
Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, the section in which he covers the Stoic School, Diogenes 
draws on a handbook written by Diocles of Magnesia. His account of Stoic logic, therefore, is 
widely considered to be reliable. Since he is not in general considered a reliable source, it might 
have been otherwise. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
403 
Alexander, Sextus Empiricus, Cicero, and to some extent, Galen, is polemical in 
tone and clearly inimical to various Stoic doctrines. Hence, one suspects that 
quotations are often chosen not to illustrate a point in a positive mode, but rather 
to show up perceived absurdities and inconsistencies in Stoic thought. 
Given 
problems of this kind, it is clear that the road to an understanding of Stoicism 
could not be as free from impediment as that to an understanding of Plato and 
Aristotle. 
A further reason why Stoic philosophy has been by comparison so little studied 
in recent times might be the bad press it received at the hands of the nineteenth 
century historians of philosophy, Prantl and Zeller. 9 Prantl apparently took to 
heart Kant's pronouncement that "since Aristotle... logic has not been able to 
advance a single step, and is thus to all appearance a closed and completed body 
of doctrine. ''1~ Hence, in his Geschichte der Logik, he was especially critical of 
Stoic logical doctrines, attacking with a vehemence curiously out of place in what 
is supposed to be a scholarly work, not only these doctrines themselves, but also 
the men who authored them. Nor did Stoic logic fare much better at the hands 
of Zeller, although it must be admitted that his critique lacks to some extent 
the intense personal animosity characteristic of Prantl's writings. According to 
Zeller, "no very high estimate can be formed of the formal logic of the Stoics" 
[Zeller, 1962, p. 123], and "the whole contribution of the Stoics in the field of 
logic consists in ... clothing the logic of the Peripatetics with a new terminology" 
[Zeller, 1962, p. 124]. But it was not only the field of Stoic logic that received 
such negative assessment from Zeller, for in his judgement the Hellenistic era was 
characterised by a general decline in the quality of intellectual life, and by the 
particular decline in the virtue of the philosophical enterprise (cf. Long [1986, 
p. 10; 247]). There would seem to be little doubt, according to Long, that the 
estimates of Prantl and Zeller in favour of Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy 
and against Hellenistic philosophy carried a good deal of weight among succeeding 
historians of the subject [Long, 1986, p. 10]. Perhaps no further reason than this 
need be sought to account for the want of a general interest in Stoic philosophy in 
the modern era. 
2.2 
The philosophers of the Early Stoa 
Traditionally, the Stoic era has been divided into three periods: the Early Stoa 
(often the Old Stoa), which begins with Zeno and ends with Antipater; the Middle 
Stoa, which covers the leadership of Panaetius and Posidonius; and the Late Stoa, 
which is represented by Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. 11 Since this 
9We have relied on the commentaries of Benson Mates [1953, pp. 86-90] and I. M. Bochefiski 
[1963, pp. 6-8]; [1963, pp. 5-6] for an assessment of Prantl's contribution to the history of Stoic 
logic. 
lo Critique of Pure Reason, Unabridged Edition. Translated by Norman Kemp Smith. Macmil- 
lan, 1929. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1965. 
11See, for example, A. A. Long, [1986, p. 
115]; Jonathan Barnes, Oxford History of the 
Classical World, p. 368. 

404 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
essay will be concerned mainly with the logical doctrines of the Early Stoa, and in 
particular the doctrines of Zeno, Kleanthes, and Chrysippus, we shall have little 
to say in this introduction about the Middle and Late periods of Stoic history; 
indeed, given these restrictions, we shall not have much to say about those Stoics 
such as Diogenes of Babylon, Antipater of Tarsus, and several others, who came 
after Chrysippus but yet belong to the Old Stoa. Furthermore, the scope of this 
introduction will not permit more than a cursory glimpse of the lives of Zeno and 
his two immediate successors, nor will it allow more than a brief and somewhat 
arbitrary survey of their philosophical doctrines. 
Zeno (333-261 B.C.) 
As mentioned above, the Stoic School was founded by Zeno, a native of Citium on 
the island of Cyprus. Born around 333/2 B.C., Zeno is reported to have arrived 
in Athens at about the age of twenty-two and to have begun his teaching about 
300/301 B.C. 12 By way of establishing himself as a teacher, he chose to discourse 
with his followers in the 'Painted Colonnade' (Stoa Poikilg), where Polygnotus' 
paintings of the Battle of Marathon were displayed. Hence, his followers, known 
first as the 'Zenonians', came to be known as 'the men of the Stoa' or 'the Stoics' 
(DL 7.5). 
In the period between his arriving in Athens and his starting the Stoic School, 
Zeno engaged in the development of his formal philosophical education. He ap- 
parently began this training by studying with the Cynic philosopher Crates (DL 
7.4), but though it would seem fairly certain that Zeno's first formal training in 
philosophy was in the doctrines of the Cynics, it is possible that he had prepared 
himself for the study of philosophy by reading the many books on Socrates which 
his father, a merchant, had brought home from his trips to Athens (DL 7.31). After 
the period of study with Crates, Zeno became a pupil of the Megarian philosopher 
Stilpo and of the Dialectician Diodorus Cronus (DL 7.:25). As well, he "engaged 
in careful dispute" with the Dialectician Philo of Megara, who was also a student 
of Diodorus Cronus (DL 7.16). He is further reported to have studied with the 
Academic philosophers Xenocrates and Polemo (DL 7.2), but given the chronology 
cited above, there is some doubt that he actually did study with the former (cf. 
Zeller [1962, 37nl]). On the other hand, there is confirmation that he was a pupil 
of Polemo, for Cicero explicitly states that this was so (de fin. 4.3), and Diogenes 
La~rtius attests that he was making progress with Diodorus in dialectic when he 
would enter Polemo's school (7.25). It may be, however, that his attendance at 
12Much of the information on the lives and doctrines of the early Stoics come from Diogenes 
La~rtius' Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers. However, we have also relied heavily on 
Reichel's Stoics, Epicurians, and Sceptics, which is translated from the third volume of Zeller's 
Die Philosophie der Griechen, as well as on Long's Hellenistic Philosophy, on Long and Sedley's 
The Hellenistic Philosophers, on Sandbach's The Stoics, on Rist's Stoic Philosophy, and on 
Barnes' article in The Oxford History of the Classical World, pp. 365-85. 
It is evident from Diogenes account that there was some dispute concerning the important 
dates in Zeno's life. By way of reconciling this problem, we will report the alternatives which 
Long and Zeller suggest to be the most reliable. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
405 
Polemo's lectures was somewhat surreptitious, for according to Diogenes, Polemo 
is said to have reproached him thus: "You slip in, Zeno, by the garden door--I am 
quite aware of itqyou filch my doctrines and give them a Phoenician make-up." 13 
However that may be, it is in light of Cicero's further testimony that Zeno's associ- 
ation with Polemo is significant, for he maintains that Zeno had adopted Polemo's 
teaching on the primary impulses of nature (de fin. 4.45), as well as on the doctrine 
that the summum bonum is 'to live in accordance with nature' (de fin. 4.14). 
There is some controversy among modern scholars whether the Peripatetics had 
any influence on Zeno's philosophical education, and, assuming they did have, in 
what it might have consisted. Some commentators propose that there was such in- 
fluence, 14 but it would seem that such proposals should be regarded as conjecture, 
for unlike the situation with the Cynics, the Megarians, the Dialecticians, and 
those from the Academy, "there is no ancient evidence concerning Zeno's relation- 
ship with Theophrastus or other Peripatetics" Long [1986, p. 112]. 1~ In addition, 
many writers insist that certain Stoic doctrines must have developed either as an 
extension of Aristotelian theories, or, as a reaction to them, and underlying this 
contention is the assumption that the early Stoics must have had available, and 
made a close study of, the corpus of Aristotelian literature which we have available 
to us. 16 In his monograph "Aristotle and the Stoics," F.H. Sandbach conducts a 
careful study of these claims and of the assumptions which underlie them. He con- 
tends that this investigation supports the theory that, barring a few exceptions, 
this corpus of Aristotle's works (which he refers to as the 'school-works') was not 
available to the early Stoics [Sandbach, 1985, p. 55]. On the other hand, where 
certain Stoic doctrines are similar in content to passages in the school-works, this 
similarity may be explained by the hypothesis that an analogous passage occurred 
in an 'exoteric work', 17 and some Stoic had read it there. Alternatively, the early 
Stoics may have come across these teachings in oral form, either as explicitly at- 
tributed to Aristotle or as recognised Peripatetic doctrine. 
Another possibility, 
one apparently acknowledged by few, if any, writers, is that the Stoics may simply 
have thought of these doctrines independently of Aristotle [Sandbach, 1985, p. 
55]. Sandbach concludes that for the most part the evidence will not support the 
probability, let alone the certainty, that Aristotle was an influence on the origin 
13Sandbach: "... Citium, once a Greek colony, was [at the time of Zeno's birth] predominantly 
Phoenician in language, in institutions, and perhaps in population. Zeno's contemporaries who 
called him a Phoenician may have been justified in so doing, but he must be imagined as growing 
up in an environment where Greek was important" [Sandbach, 1975, p. 20]. 
14Andreas Graeser, for example, in his Die logischen Fragmente des Theophrast assumes that 
Zeno was a pupil of Theophrastus (44). 
15Cf. F.H. Sandbach's reference "the striking absence of explicit evidence that the early Stoics 
took an interest in the work of Aristotle or of his following in the Peripatos" [Sandbach, 1985, 
p. 55]. 
16This view is expressed by Sandbach in his concluding paragraph [Sandbach, 1985, p. 55], 
and evidence for it is well-documented throughout his monograph. 
17Sandbach's explanation of this term is as follows: "... Aristotle did write some works, 
now lost, of which some were dialogues, intended for a wider public than the students who 
were attached to his school. Later scholars, and probably Aristotle himself, referred to these as 
'exoteric"' [Sandbach, 1985, p. 1]. 

406 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
of Stoic doctrines [Sandbach, 1985, p. 57]. Moreover, he quite forcefully expresses 
the view that "it is a mistake to proceed on the a priori assumption that the 
Stoics must have known the opinions expressed in his school-works, must have 
understood his importance sub specie aeternitatis, and must therefore have been 
influenced by him" [Sandbach, 1985, p. 57]. It is important to see that Sandbach 
is not ruling out the possibility of Aristotelian or Peripatetic influence, but rather 
urging a more careful and less biased approach to the question. 
As might be expected, the foundations for many of the central tenets of Stoicism 
can be discerned in the philosophical education of Zeno, and though it would be 
interesting to trace the sources of the full range of Stoic doctrines, such pursuits 
will be restricted in this introduction to considering those influences which would 
seem likely to have affected the origins of Stoic logical theory. Probably Zeno's 
most significant contribution to Stoic logic is his work in epistemology. 
It has been widely accepted among modern commentators that Zeno received 
his education in logical techniques directly from the Megarians, and in particular, 
from Diodorus Cronus (cf. Long [1986, p. 111]; Mates [1953, p. 5]; Kneale and 
Kneale [1962a, p. 113]; Rist [1978, p. 388]). An article by David Sedley, however, 
would seem to raise some doubt that this assumption can be maintained. What 
is called into question is not whether Zeno was indeed a student of Diodorus, for 
this would seem to be beyond dispute, but rather whether Diodorus himself can 
be established as belonging to the Megarian School. 
The Megarian School was founded by Euclides, a pupil of Socrates (DL 2.47) 
and a native of Megara on the Isthmus (DL 2.106). He was succeeded as head of 
the school first by Ichthyas and later by Stilpo, also a native of Megara in Greece 
(DL 2.113). Evidently, since Diodorus can trace his philosophical lineage back 
to Euclides through Apollonius Cronus and Eubulides (DL 2.110-11), it has been 
generally thought that he also was a member of the Megarian school; hence, the 
Megarian connection with respect to the source of Zeno's logical doctrines would 
seem assured. 
Sedley, however, has presented what seems to us a convincing 
argument to the effect that Diodorus belonged rather to a rival school which was 
called the Dialectical School (Sedley, [1977, pp. 74-75]; cf. Sandbach, [1985, p. 
18]). 
At 2.106 Diogenes reports that the followers of Euclides were called Megarians 
after his birthplace. Later they were called Eristics, and later still, Dialecticians. 
Sedley argues for the possibility that these remarks should not be interpreted, as 
they usually are, to mean that this was one and the same school known at different 
times by different names, but rather that these names designated splinter groups 
whose raisons d'etre were different enough from that of the Megarian School to 
warrant viewing them as distinct schools [Sedley, 1977, p. 75]. According to Sed- 
ley, several sources inform us that the Dialecticians recognised Clinomachus of 
Thurii, a pupil of Euclides, as the founder of their school [Sedley, 1977, p. 76]. 
However, since the name 'Dialectician' was first coined for the school by Dionysius 
of Chalcedon (DL 2.106), an "approximate" contemporary of Diodorus (Sedley 
[1977, p. 76]), it seems more likely not that Clinomachus actually founded the 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
407 
school, but rather that he was recognised by its members as the source of the 
ideas foremost in their teachings [Sedley, 1977, p. 76]. As Sedley points out, prac- 
tically nothing is known of Clinomachus' doctrines, except for the fact, reported 
by Diogenes La~rtius (2.112), that he was the first to write about axi6mata is 
(&~t(5~) and predicates (x~lYopfl~c~). 
But this fact is of "utmost signifi- 
cance" [Sedley, 1977, p. 76], for both of these notions, as will become apparent 
in the sequel, are fundamental constituents of the conceptual apparatus in Stoic 
logic. 
The Dialectician Diodorus and his pupil Philo apparently engaged in a famous 
debate about the criterion according to which the consequent of a conditional 
axi6ma (proposition) 'follows' from the antecedent (PH 110-12; AM 112-17). i9 
The controversy between these logicians was apparently of interest not only to 
themselves, for Sextus Empiricus reports that Challimachus, who served in mid- 
third century B.C. as the chief librarian at the great library in Alexandria, wrote to 
the effect that even the crows on the rooftops, having repeatedly heard the debate, 
were cawing about the question which conditional axi6mata are sound (AM 1.309- 
10). The debate was extended by the introduction of two additional accounts, one 
of which is attributed to Chrysippus on fairly strong evidence (e.g., Gould, [1970, 
pp. 74-76]), but the other not attributed to any particular philosopher or even to 
any particular school. Given Zeno's association with Diodorus and Philo it seems 
fairly certain he would have taken part in the debate; moreover, he wrote a book 
On Signs (~p't C~l~dCo~ ) (DL 7.4), and a 'sign' is defined by the Stoics as "the 
antecedent axi6ma in a sound conditional, capable of revealing its consequent" 
(AM 8.245). Hence he would have had an interest in the criterion for a sound 
conditional axiSma, perhaps even offering a view of his own. We will argue in the 
sequel (see page 142) that given his motivation and particular interests in logic, 
it is unlikely that he would have opted for the view of either Diodorus or Philo. 
And since the third account can be attributed to Chrysippus with some certainty, 
one may conjecture that Zeno supported the fourth view. Furthermore, if Long 
and Sedley are correct, there may be no significant difference between the third 
and fourth statements of the criterion [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.211], so that 
one might suppose, as long as we are in the realm of speculation, that the third 
criterion represents a tighter version of the fourth account. 
Evidently, then, there is some reason to believe that Zeno was influenced by 
Diodorus and Philo through a familiarity with these ideas, and that it was the 
Dialectic School rather than the Megarian School which was the important in- 
spiration for the development of Stoic logic (Sedley [1977, p. 76]). It may be, 
nevertheless, that Stilpo played some part as an influence on Zeno's logical edu- 
cation, and indeed, there may be some overlap in certain areas, for after all, if 
what has been argued above is correct, the source of the logical doctrines of both 
iSAxi6mata are somewhat akin to propositions, but differ in some important ways. For a 
discussion see section 6 on page 463. 
19For the details on this debate, see Section 8.1. 

408 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
the Megarians and the Dialecticians is, for the most part, one and the same. 2~ 
Given that Stilpo was one of those who came to listen to Diogenes the Cynic (DL 
6.76), it is possible, as Sandbach submits [Sandbach, 1975, p. 22], that it was not 
Stilpo's logical tutoring but rather his moral teachings which attracted Zeno to 
the Megarian School, for these instructions were probably not unlike those of the 
Cynics. On the other hand, J.M. Rist puts forward the hypothesis that Zeno be- 
came dissatisfied with Cynic ethical doctrine and its rather circumscribed concept 
of 'life according to nature', and so was looking to develop an account of nature 
with a basis in physical theory--any such account being rejected by the Cynics 
[Rist, 1978, pp. 387-88]. The difficulty in such an undertaking is summed up by 
Rist as follows: 
In Zeno's time and before ... the problems confronting a philosopher 
who has come to the conclusion that he must embark on the study of 
nature ... is that Parmenides and his Eleatic successors had attempted 
to rule out such study altogether, and before it could be taken up, 
philosophers deemed it desirable to propose ways by which Parmenides' 
ban could be overcome [Rist, 1978, p. 388]. 
Hence "for the would-be q~ucnx6r the acquisition of a certain familiarity with 
Eleatic procedures would be a sine qua non" [Rist, 1978, p. 
388]. 
According 
to the testimony of Diogenes La~rtius, Euclides "applied himself to the writings 
of Parmenides" (2.106), and since Stilpo was a pupil of Euclides (or at least, of 
one of Euclides students) (2.113), he would no doubt be familiar with the argu- 
ments of Parmenides; hence, it is possible that Zeno was attracted to him for this 
reason. And certainly in the Stoic theory of a coherent and continuous universe 
held together by a pervasive pneuma immanent in all matter, (e.g., Alexander de 
mixtione 216.14-17) there is some evidence that Zeno took up Parmenides' thesis 
of the unity of being. 
Another possibility, not necessarily an alternative, is that Zeno was attracted 
by Stilpo's fame in the posing of logical problems and fallacies. One account has 
it that Zeno once paid twice the asking price for seven dialectical forms of the 
'Reaper Argument', so great was his interest in such things (DL 7.25). Probably 
of more reliability, we have Plutarch's testimony that Zeno would spend time 
solving sophisms and would encourage his pupils to take up dialectic because of its 
capacity to assist in this endeavour (de Stoic repugn. 1034e). Furthermore, Stilpo 
2~ should be noted in passing that it cannot be assumed that either Sextus Empiricus, or any 
other late commentator or doxographer, in using the term 'hoi dialektikoi', is referring specifically 
to the Dialectical School. Sedley points out at least two reasons for supposing that this is so: 
first, the term 'dialektikos', was commonly used to designate anyone who used the method of 
argumentation from which the Dialectical School got its name, that is, the method of putting an 
argument in the form of question and answer (75; cf. DL 2.106); moreover, to quote Sedley, "by 
the time of Chrysippus, in the late third century, [dialektikos] is the standard term for 'logician"' 
[Sedley, 1977, p. 75]. Now since the Stoics were recognised for their logical acumen above and 
beyond any rival school, it seems more likely that when Sextus refers to 'hoi dialektikoi', for the 
most part, he means the Stoics. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
409 
is reported by Diogenes LaSrtius to have "excelled all the rest in the invention of 
arguments and in sophistry" (DL 2.113). The story goes that during a banquet 
at the court of Ptolemy Soter he addressed a dialectical question to Diodorus 
Cronus which the latter was unable to solve. Because of this failure, Diodorus 
was reproached by the king and subsequently received the derisive name 'Cronus'. 
This caused him so much anguish that he wrote a paper on this logical problem 
and "ended his days in despondency" (DL 2.112). Even taking into account the 
likelihood that this story might be somewhat apocryphal, it probably can be taken 
as a reliable indicator of Stilpo's skill as an inventor of logical arguments and 
puzzles. As an aside, recalling Sedley's argument cited above, it would also seem 
to point to a certain tension between Stilpo and Diodorus, a tension that one 
would not normally expect if they had been members of the same school. 
Another logical doctrine in which Zeno may have been influenced by Stilpo 
is that concerning his rejection of the 'forms' or 'ideas'. According to Diogenes 
La~rtius, Stilpo used to demolish the forms or universals, saying that whoever 
asserts the existence of Man refers to nothing, for he neither refers to this particular 
man nor to that; hence, he refers to no individual man (DL 2.119). And according 
to the testimony of Stobaeus. similar opinions were held by Zeno, for he and his 
followers relegated such 'ideas' or 'concepts' (~wor~btc,~c~) to a sort of "metaphysical 
limbo", referring to them as 'pseudo-somethings' (d0c~avr Ttva) (eclog. 1.136.21). 
It should be noted that this stance does not represent a rejection of all those things 
which we refer to as 'universals'. Common nouns such as 'man' or 'horse' were 
taken to refer to the essential quality- and all qualities are corporeal - which made 
something either a man or a horse (DL 7.58). It is if we were to use the term 'man' 
to refer to the genetic material which differentiates us from other creatures. 
Kleanthes (331-232 B. C.) 
After the death of Zeno in 261/2 B.C., Kleanthes, a native of Assos on the Troad, 
became head of the Stoic School (DL 7.168). According to the historian Antis- 
thenes of Rhodes, Kleanthes was a boxer before taking up philosophy (DL 7.168). 
Upon his arrival at Athens he fell in with Zeno and was introduced to Stoic teach- 
ings which, in spite of having no natural aptitude for physics and of being ex- 
tremely slow (DL 7.170), he studied "right nobly", remaining faithful to the same 
doctrines throughout (DL 7.168). Zeno compared him to those hard waxen tablets 
which are difficult to write on but which retain well the characters written on them 
(DL 7.37). Kleanthes was perhaps the most religious of the Stoics, as witness his 
well-known Hymn to Zeus. 21 He was acclaimed for his industry and perseverance 
(DL 7.168), for it was said that he came to Athens with only four drachmas in his 
possession (DL 7.168), and so was forced to work drawing water for a gardener by 
night in order to support himself while studying philosophy by day (DL 7.169). 
21The Greek text is in Stobaeus Eclogae Physicae et Ethicae, vol. 1, page 25, line 12 to page 
27, line 4. The text is translated in Long and Sedley [1990, 1.326-327]. There is also a translation 
in somewhat more archaic (poetical?) language in Sandbach [1975, pp. 110-111]. 

410 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Apparently he never got far beyond this impecunious state, for the story goes that 
he was too poor even to buy paper, and so used to copy Zeno's lectures on oyster 
shells and the blade-bones of oxen (DL 7.174). At some point, however, he must 
have gained access to a supply of writing material, for Diogenes has compiled a 
list of his writings which includes about sixty books. 
Of these sixty books catalogued, a series of four is listed under the title Inter- 
pretations of Heraclitus (DL 7.174). A connection with Heraclitus is also indicated 
by the report of Arius Didymus to the effect that Kleanthes, comparing the views 
of Zeno with those of other natural philosophers, says that Zeno's account of the 
soul or psychg (~u;(ft) is similar to that of Heraclitus (fr. 12 DK; DDG 470.25- 
471.5). Other than a book under the title Five Lectures on Heraclitus attributed 
to the Stoic Sphaerus, a pupil of Kleanthes (DL 7.178), there is little other direct 
evidence to support the hypothesis of the influence of Heraclitus on Stoicism and 
on Zeno in particular. This hypothesis is expressed, for example, in the following 
statement by A.A. Long: "Heraclitus' assumption that it is one and the same logos 
which determines patterns of thought and the structure of reality is perhaps the 
most important single influence upon Stoic Philosophy" [Long, 1986, p. 131]. It 
is also expressed by G.S. Kirk, but with reservations: 
Although Zeno must have based his physical theories particularly upon 
Heraclitus' description of fire, he is never named in our sources as 
having quoted Heraclitus by name; while Kleanthes evidently initiated 
a detailed examination of Heraclitus with a view to the more careful 
foundation of Stoic physics upon ancient authority .... 
and there is 
reason to believe that he made some modification of Zeno's system in 
the light of his special knowledge of the earlier thinker ... [Kirk, 1962, 
pp. 367-68]. 
It is not a straightforward matter to see what can be made out from these cir- 
cumstances. 
What seems likely is that Zeno tacitly appealed to Heraclitus in 
formulating his views on physics and cosmology, and that it was left to Kleanthes 
to make explicit this appeal, modifying the theory where it seemed appropriate to 
do so. 
We can also look to the catalogue of Kleanthes' writings reported by Diogenes 
La~rtius for assistance in giving an account of Kleanthes' contribution to Stoic 
logical theory. There is a set of three books under the title rr~pl vo~ Adyov (DL 
7.175) which one might take to be about logic, especially since Hicks translates 
this title as Of Logic. It seems to us, however, that Of the Logos would be equally 
possible. In light of Kleanthes' interest in Heraclitus, and in light of the apparent 
debt--pointed out by Long in the passage above--which the Stoics owe to Heracli- 
tus for their concept of the logos, it seems less likely that these books of Kleanthes 
are about logic than that they are about the logos. There are three other titles, 
however, which would appear to be uncontroversially on logical topics. These are: 
Of Dialectic, Of Moods or Tropoi, and Of Predicates (DL 7.175). As to the first 
title, not much can be said, for there is little in the sources to indicate Kleanthes' 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
411 
particular thoughts on dialectic as such. However, more can be said about the 
subjects of the other two books, for it is of some interest that Kleanthes wrote 
about them. 
Concerning the book about tropoi, Galen reports that logicians (dialektikoi) 
call the schemata of arguments by the name 'mode' or 'tropos' (xp6~o~). 
For 
example, for the argument which Chrysippus calls the first indemonstrable (5 
xpgxo~ &vc~dS~t 
and which we would call modus ponens, the mode or tropos 
on the Stoic account is as follows" If the first, the second; but the first; therefore, 
the second (inst. log. 15.7). Now according to Galen, since the major premisses 
(~po~t~) 22 t~ ~d/XXoyt~ oq~ ~t~ GOpT (t~ ~t~ ~C~, ~ 
~O~t~tOV~X ~p~t~) ~p~ 
S~x~p[atv~xt~ (/?u 
of the minor premisses (~poaX@r 
Chrysippus and his 
followers call such a proposition or azidma not only determinative but also tropic 
(xpo~ 
23 What is of interest here is that Kleanthes' concern with tropoi may 
be an indication that he had some knowledge of the so-called indemonstrables, 
that is, the five argument schemata which Chrysippus took as the basis of the 
Stoic theory of inference. ~4 As to the book about predicates ( 
we 
also have a passage of Clement of Alexandria which maintains that Kleanthes 
and Archedemes called predicates lekta (Xr215 
(strom. 8.9.26.3-4). According to 
Michael Frede, this testimony indicates that Kleanthes was the first philosopher 
to use the term 'lekton' ([Frede, 1987b], 344). This innovation is quite significant, 
for the concept of the lekton is well recognised as possibly the most fundamental 
notion in Stoic semantic theory. 
Frede suggests, however, that this passage is 
evidence that the concept may have been introduced by the Stoics in the ontology 
of their causal theory rather than in their philosophy of language ([Frede, 1987a, 
p. 137]; cf. Long and Sedley [1990, 2.333]). At any rate, one might conjecture 
that Kleanthes had some hand in the development of this concept. 
We have the testimony of Epictetus of a book on a logical topic written by 
Kleanthes but not recorded by Diogenes. Although he does not give its name, this 
work, according to Epictetus, was on the so-called 'Master Argument' of Diodorus 
Cronus (disc. 2.19.9). The Master Argument was apparently posed by Diodorus 
in order to establish his definition of the possible (disc. 2.19.2; cf. Alexander in 
22The term protasis (~pdxc~mc) is used in Sextus Empiricus to refer to the major premiss 
of a categorical syllogism (PH 2.164; 195). Galen seems here to be extending the use of this 
term to refer to the major premiss of a Stoic hypothetical syllogism as well. Thus it would be 
interchangeable with the term lgmma (Xf~t~tc~), which, according to Diogenes Lafirtius, the Stoics 
used to refer to the major premiss of an argument (DL 7.76). 
23In his commentary on this section of the Institutio, Kieffer provides the following explanation: 
"Galen's point in calling the major premiss in a hypothetical syllogism determinative of the 
minor is that the minor premiss is either one of the members of the hypothetical major or its 
contradictory" ([Kieffer, 1964], 92). Thus in the case where the major premiss of the hypothetical 
syllogism is a conditional, the minor premiss will be either the antecedent of the conditional (as in 
modus ponens) or the negation of the consequent (as in modus tollens). Note that 'hypothetical 
syllogism' here covers any syllogism which is not categorical, and for the Stoics this includes not 
only syllogisms with a conditional as major premiss but also those with either a disjunctive or a 
negated conjunction. 
24For a more complete account of the Stoic argument schemata called the 'indemonstrables', 
see page 474. 

412 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
an. pr. 184.5), this definition being 'The possible is that which either is or will 
be' (6 ~ ~cyxtv ~ ~c~xc~t (in an. pr. 184.1). 25 A definition of the possible attributed 
to the Stoics both by Diogenes La~rtius (7.75) and by Boethius (in de interp. 
234.27) is that the possible is 'that which admits of being true and which is not 
prevented by external factors from being true' (DL 7.75). Now both Kleanthes 
and Chrysippus rejected Diodorus' interpretation of the Master Argument (Epict. 
disc. 2.19.6) and presumably, therefore, would have also rejected his account of 
the possible, and since the Stoic characterisation given by Diogenes and Boethius 
is not attributed to any specific Stoic, it is open to debate whether to credit it 
to Chrysippus or to Kleanthes. There is, however, a passage in Plutarch which 
would seem to indicate that Chrysippus warrants the attribution (de Stoic repugn. 
1055d-e). However that may be, it is evident that Kleanthes had an interest in 
questions about modality and no doubt gave some account of the possible and the 
necessary. 
Chrysippus (circa 282-206 B.C.) 
Chrysippus of Soli 26 succeeded Kleanthes in 232 B.C. to become the third leader of 
the Stoic School (DL 7.168; 1.15-16). There is not much information on his early 
life. Hecato, the Stoic, says that he came to philosophy because the property he 
had inherited from his father had been confiscated by the king (DL 7.181). And 
there is a story that he was a long distance runner before taking up philosophy 
as a pupil of Kleanthes (DL 7.179). Even as a student he seemed to possess a 
good deal of confidence in his abilities, especially in logic, for he used to say to 
Kleanthes that he needed to be instructed only in the doctrines; the proofs he 
would discover himself (DL 7.179). His relationship with Kleanthes was somewhat 
troublesome to him at times. On the one hand, he showed a great deal of respect 
for Kleanthes, deflecting to himself the attacks of certain presumptuous dialecti- 
cians who would attempt to confound Kleanthes with their sophistical arguments. 
Chrysippus would reproach them not to bother their elders with such quibbles, 
but to direct them to his juniors (DL 7.182). On the other hand, he himself would 
sometimes contend with Kleanthes, and whenever he had done so, would suffer a 
good deal of remorse (DL 7.179). 
Chrysippus apparently left the Stoic school while Kleanthes was still alive, be- 
coming a philosopher of some reputation in his own right (DL 7.179), and on the 
authority of the historian Sotion of Alexandria, Diogenes tells us that he also stud- 
ied philosophy for some period under Arcesilaus and Lacydes at the Academy (DL 
25cf. Boethius in de interp. 234.22-26: quod aut est aut erit. As Benson Mates points out, 
Boethius in this passage also gives definitions of the related terms 'impossible', 'necessary', and 
'non-necessary', and based on the construction of these other definitions, one can conjecture that 
the above definition of the possible was "slightly elliptical." The full definition should have been 
'that which is or will be true' [Mates, 1953, p. 37]. 
26According to Zeller, the view of most writers was that Chrysippus was born at Soli in Cilicia; 
however, since his father emigrated to Soli from Tarsus, it is possible that Chrysippus was born 
there instead ([Zeller, 1962], 45n5). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
413 
7.183). This would explain, according to Diogenes, his arguing at one time for 
common experience (ouvrlg~io~), 27 ~v8 o~vozrFp zt~ ~ycavoz tz (AA 7.184). Bq) -crltr 
p~totp Atoycvr 
tC vo 8OUST pcq0~pptvy ~:o Tqr ~OtCT TlqaT ~p~OtFFUC C0pO-Ce a Or162 
Op Ot~ 13ooxr uvSep zqe -ctTXe Ayazucr~ @pou E~epleu~e (KaT& Tfir ouv~e{a~), as 
well as a series of seven books under the title/n Defence of Common Experience 
(Tz~p xf-lg ouvrlge{ag ) (DL 7. 198). In this regard, according to Cicero, some later 
Stoics complained against him for providing Carneades and the Academy with 
arguments with which to assail against the whole of common experience, as well 
as against the senses and their clarity and against reason itself (acad. 2.87; cf. 
Plutarch de Stoic repugn. 1036b-c). 
Chrysippus was an extremely prolific writer. Diogenes La~rtius reports that in 
all he wrote seven hundred and five books (DL 7.180), of which three hundred and 
eleven were on logic (DL 7.198). And Diogenes provides an inventory of about 
three hundred and seventy five of them, the majority of these being books on logic 
(DL 7.189-202). Diogenes also cites the testimony of Diocles Magnes who claims 
that Chrysippus wrote about five hundred lines a day (DL 7.181). It would seem, 
however, that in the opinion of many, such a profusion of material did not come 
without a price, for the ancients, according to Zeller, were unanimous in putting 
forward a litany of complaints against the literary style of these texts [Zeller, 1962, 
pp. 47-48]. However, this criticism is somewhat mitigated by Zeller's comment 
that "with such an extraordinary literary fertility, it will be easily understood that 
their artistic value does not keep pace" [Zeller, 1962, p. 47]. But whatever are the 
merits of these criticisms, one cannot help but speculate on how different would 
have been our understanding of Hellenistic philosophy had even a few of these 
works survived. 
With the death of Kleanthes, Chrysippus returned to Stoicism to become leader 
of the school. In that capacity he was, "in the opinion of the ancients, ... the 
second founder of Stoicism" Zeller, [1962, p. 45], for it was said, according to Dio- 
genes Lai~rtius, that "if there had been no Chrysippus, there would have been no 
Stoa" (DL 7.183). Gould takes this to refer to the belief that Chrysippus "revived 
the Stoa after the crushing blows dealt it by Arcesilaus and other Academics" 
[Gould, 1970, p. 9]. He continues: 
In antiquity, then, even outside the school, Chrysippus was regarded 
as an eminently capable philosopher, as an extraordinarily skilful di- 
alectician, and as one who came to the defense of the Stoa in a crucial 
moment, namely, when it was about to encounter its death blow from 
a rival school in Athens, the Academy, which had then become the 
stronghold of scepticism [Gould, 1970, p. 9]. 
27Here, and in Plutarch's De Stoicorum repugnantiis at 1036c, as well as in Epictetus' The 
Discourses at 1.27.15-21, the term 'ou~ge{c~' seems to have the meaning 'common experience'; 
on the other hand, in Diogenes La~rtius at 7.59 it would appear to mean 'ordinary language', 
and in De Stoicorum repugnantiis at 1048a, to mean 'common use of language' (cf. the entry in 
Liddel and Scott, II.2). 

414 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
It was no doubt his skill as a dialectician which enabled Chrysippus to defend 
so well the doctrines of the Stoa, for he was considered by many to have been 
one of the foremost logicians of Hellenic Greece. In fact, according to Diogenes 
La~rtius, he was so renowned for his logical acumen "that it seemed to most 
people, if dialectic was possessed by the gods, it would be none other than that of 
Chrysippus" (DL 7.180). Perhaps there would be no more fitting way to conclude 
this section on Chrysippus than to quote the words of Long and Sedley in their 
source book The Hellenistic Philosophers: 
"In the period roughly from 232 to 
206 [Chrysippus] was to ... develop all aspects of Stoic theory with such flair, 
precision and comprehensiveness that 'early Stoicism' means for us, in effect, the 
philosophy of Chrysippus" [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.3]. 
3 
PRELIMINARIES 
Several of our sources attest to a tripartite division of philosophy by the Sto- 
ics. These branches are logic, physics, and ethics (DL 7.39; A~tius plac. DDG 
273.11; Plutarch de Stoic repugn. 1035a). According to Diogenes LaSrtius, Zeno 
of Citium, in his book On Discourse (~epl ~.dyov), was the first of the Stoics to 
make this division (DL 7.39). Diogenes also informs us that Zeno arranged these 
topics with logic first, physics second, and ethics third (DL 7.40), although it is 
somewhat unclear whether the standard for this arrangement is according to in- 
trinsic importance or according to teaching priorities. Perhaps what it reflects is 
the relationship between these parts as it is represented in one of the many similes 
that the Stoics drew upon for illustration. Their philosophical system, they said, 
is like a fertile field with logic as the surrounding wall, physics as the soil or trees, 
and ethics as the fruit (DL 7.40). It is clear on this conception that logic is given 
the task of protecting the system from external threats--the first line of defence, 
as it were, and the aspect of logic emphasised is skill in dialectic in the sense of 
mustering counter-arguments and solving sophisms (cf. Plutarch de Stoic repugn. 
1034e). But there is another aspect of logic in which the sense of dialectic stressed 
is that in which it signifies "the testing of hypotheses and the quest for ultimate 
principles or true definitions, which are the essential procedures of every meta- 
physician" (Long and Sedley 1.189). In The Discourses, Epictetus surmises that 
the reason why the philosophers of the Old Stoa put logic first in the exposition of 
their doctrine is that it is in the study of logic that one comes to understand the 
criterion by which one judges in other pursuits what is true. So it is, according to 
Epictetus, that: 
... in the measuring of grain we put first the examination of the mea- 
sure. And if we should neither first define what a modius is, nor first 
define what a scale is, how shall we be able to measure or weigh any- 
thing? So with the subject of logic, how shall we be able to investigate 
accurately and understand thoroughly anything of other subjects if we 
neither thoroughly understand nor accurately investigate that which is 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
415 
the criterion of other subjects and that through which other subjects 
are thoroughly understood? (disc. 1.17.7-8) 
In the first part of this section, we explore the hypothesis that the development of 
the Stoic system as it is discernible in the philosophical education of Zeno followed 
the reverse order to that envisaged above: it evolved from a primary interest in 
ethics and thence to physics and logic. And the aspect of logic cultivated in this 
succession is that characterised both in the quotation from Long and Sedley and 
in the quotation from The Discourses: that is, logic as concerned with truth, 
knowledge, definitions, and other elements of reason, and, as Zeno says, with 
understanding "what sort of thing each of them is, how they fit together and 
what their consequences are" (Epictetus disc. 4.8.12). Given this understanding 
of Zeno's development of the Stoic system, we shall suggest, in the second part of 
this section, an interpretation of Stoic logical doctrines which may be perceived as 
being motivated by this evolution, doctrines propounded either by Zeno himself 
or by his successors. 
3.1 
Stoic Ethics: the Motivational Basis 
From Crates and the Cynic School Zeno doubtless inherited the foundation for 
his moral theories. But the Cynics apparently devoted themselves only to ethics, 
choosing to do away with the topics of logic and physics (DL 6.103). Zeno, on 
the other hand, clearly did not reject these topics, for it is uncontroversial that he 
laid the foundations not only for Stoic ethics, but for physics and logic as well. It 
would seem evident, therefore, that at some point he broke ranks with the Cynics, 
choosing a philosophical curriculum richer than that of his mentors.28The point 
on which Zeno diverged from the Cynic path is the premiss described by Long and 
Sedley as "the bastion of Stoic ethics," that is, "the thesis that virtue and vice 
respectively are the sole constituents of happiness and unhappiness" [Long and 
Sedley, 1990, 1.357].29Ar162165 xo ~rltr tcco, cmgc ~rltvyc~--q~o P c~c~kc, rlcc&xq, 
r 
~3cc~ux+, c~v~ ~rlcpotr 
oxpcvyxrt--r 
vctxrtc p ~3cvcqx-c (6bcp~kc~) nor harm 
28This thesis is put forward by J.M. Rist in his essay "Cynicism and Stoicism" which appears 
as Chapter 4 of his Stoic Philosophy. 
29The terms which Long and Sedley render as 'happiness' and 'unhappiness' are 'u68c%tov(cz ' 
(eudaimonia) and '162215162 
respectively. Now although these are standard 
translations, it has been suggested that they fail to capture the notion which they are intended 
to express. Sandbach has the following to say on this point: 
eudaimonia, although something experienced by the man who is eudaimOn, is (per- 
haps primarily) something objective, that others can recognise--having a good lot 
in life .... Thus the Stoics did not attempt to describe eudaimonia as a subjective 
feeling, but identified it with such things as 'living a good life', 'being virtuous', 
or 'good calculation in the choice of things that possess value' ... For the Stoic, 
who confines the word 'good' to the morally good, it is consistent that a good life 
is a morally good life and the well-being indicated by eudaimonia is unaffected by 
what is morally indifferent, however acceptable [Sandbach, 1975, p. 41]. 
In another place Long himself renders eudaimonia as 'self-fulfilment' ([Long, 1971], 104), a 
translation which probably better comprehends the meaning, although still not completely. 

416 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
(~3X~x~t): they are neither necessary nor sufficient for a virtuous--which is to say 
a moral--life, and thus can have no effect on one's eudaimonia; hence, they are 
called 'indifferent' (& 
(DL 7.102-03). This thesis was undoubtedly an 
endowment to Zeno from the Cynics, for we learn from Diogenes Lai~rtius that 
for the Cynics virtue is sufficient in itself to secure happiness (DL 6.11), so that 
"the end for man is to live according to virtue" (x~Xo~ eTv~ xb  
&p~x~lv ~v), 
a credo that was echoed by the Stoics (DL 6.104; el. Stobaeus eclog. 2.77.9). 
We also learn from Diogenes that the Cynics count as 'indifferent' whatever is 
intermediate between virtue and vice (DL 6.105). 
The Cynic stance toward the 'indifferents' can perhaps best be understood 
by considering the views of Ariston of Chios, a pupil of Zeno's whom we might 
call a 'neo-Cynic', since he "greatly simplified Stoicism, so that it was hardly 
distinguishable from the attitude of the Cynics" (Sandbach [1975, p. 39]; cf. Rist 
[1969c, pp. 74-80]). Ariston recommended complete indifference to everything 
between virtue and vice, recognising no distinctions among them and treating 
them all the same, for the wise man, according to Ariston, "is like a good actor, 
who can play the part of both Thersites and Agamemnon, acting appropriately in 
each case" (DL 7.160). A problem for this credo is summarised by Cicero, who is 
setting out the opinions of the Stoic Cato: 
If we maintained that all things were absolutely indifferent, the whole of 
life would be thrown into confusion, as it is by Aristo, and no function 
or task could be found for wisdom, since there would be absolutely 
no distinction between the things that pertain to the conduct of life, 
and no choice need be exercised among them (de fin. 
3.50; trans. 
Rackham). 
This criticism, which was no doubt a standard reproach among the ancients, might 
be expressed by the observation that "[Aristo's] position robbed virtue of content" 
[Sandbach, 1975, p. 38]. It is unclear whether Zeno himself subscribed to this 
assessment; however, it would seem likely that he did. He was, after all, in at- 
tendance at Polemo's lectures, and there he would no doubt have become familiar 
with the view, ascribed by Cicero to Xenocrates as well as to his followers, that 
the 'end of goods' (finis bonorum) is not limited to virtue alone, but includes just 
those things which belong to the class which the Cynics and Ariston held to be 
'indifferents' (de fin. 4.49; Tusc. disp. 5.29-30). 3o 
At any rate, although he may have agreed with this critique of Cynic views 
to the extent of granting that such things as "health, strength, riches, and fame" 
(de fin. 4.49) have some value, Zeno was nevertheless unwilling to depart from 
Cynic tenets to the point of admitting that any of the indifferents were required 
for eudaimonia. 
His solution to this dilemma was to introduce a classification 
3~ 
doctrine of the Academy would appear to go back to Plato himself, for in Laws 661a-d, 
he has the Athenian say that things such as health, beauty, wealth, and acute sensibility all are 
to be counted as goods, but only in the possession of the just and virtuous; in the possession of 
one who is not so, however, all these things are rather evils than goods. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
417 
of the indifferents distinguishing those which are 'according to nature' (~& xaz& 
q~6Gtv), those which are 'contrary to nature' (~& ~ap& q06otv), and those which are 
neither (Stobaeus eclo9. 2.79.18). Indifferents which are according to nature (ta 
kata physin) are such things as health, strength, sound sense faculties, and the like 
(eclog. 2.79.20). All indifferents which are kata physin have 'value' (&~(a), whereas 
those contrary to nature have 'disvalue' (&~a{[a) (eclog. 2.83.10). A categorisa- 
tion of indifferents which would seem to coincide with this division is that which 
distinguishes them according to those which are preferred' (~& ~poqyg~va), those 
'rejected' (~& &~o~porlyg{vc~), and those neither preferred nor rejected (DL 7.105; 
Cicero de fin. 3.51; Stobaeus eclog. 2.84.18). According to Diogenes La~rtius, the 
Stoics teach that those indifferents which are preferred (ta proggrnena) have value 
(axia), whereas those rejected have 'disvalue' (apaxia) (7.105). Thus it would ap- 
pear that the class of those indifferents which are 'kata physin' is coextensive with 
' ta pro~gmena '. 
Value is defined by the Stoics as having three senses, only two of which are 
relevant in this context. 3~ Foremost, it is the property of contributing to a harmo- 
nious life, this being a characteristic of every good (&u 
(DL 7.105). However, 
since no goods are among the preferred (Stobaeus eclog. 2.85.3), this connotation 
of axia must refer only to goods and not to the preferred, and hence designates 
value in an absolute sense; indeed, the things which have value in this sense are 
called '~tia~v  
~6x6' (eclog. 2.83.12), which may be rendered as 'value per se' 
(cf. Cicero de fin. 3.39 and 3.34). The second sense is that of some faculty or use 
which contributes indirectly (~a{oq) to life according to nature (DL 7.105). Things 
which have value according to this sense of axia are 'selected' ({215 
in 
Antipater's phrase, on which account, when circumstances permit we choose these 
particular things rather than those: for example, health against illness, life against 
death, and wealth against poverty (Stobaeus eclog. 2.83.13). The notion of value 
among those indifferents having 'preferred' status, as well as the responsibility of 
the moral agent with respect to these notions, is well summarised by Long and 
Sedley in the following passage: 
This 'selective value', though conditional upon circumstances (con- 
trast the absolute value of virtue), resides in the natural preferability 
of health to sickness etc. That is to say, the value of health is not 
based upon an individual's judgement but is a feature of the world. 
The role of moral judgement is to decide whether, given the objective 
preferability of health to sickness, it is right to make that difference 
the paramount consideration in determining what one should do in 
the light of all the circumstances. In the case of those indifferents of 
'preferred' status, there will be 'preferential' reason for selecting these 
'when circumstances permit'. It is up to the moral agent to decide, 
from knowledge of his situation, whether to choose actions that may 
31In the third sense, according to Diogenes, "value is the worth set by an appraiser, which 
should be fixed according to experience of the facts, as, for example, wheat is said to be exchanged 
for barley plus a mule (DL 7.105). 

418 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
put his health at risk rather than preserve it, but the correctness of 
sometimes deciding in favour of the former does not negate the normal 
preferability of the latter [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.358]. 
The hypothesis of ta kata physin as a sub-class of the indifferents, then, will 
permit Zeno to maintain the thesis that only virtue is good, and at the same time 
provides a content for his ethics. A concomitant result of this hypothesis will be 
to lead to the reinstatement of physics and logic as legitimate components of a 
philosophical education. The theory may be represented as positing three levels of 
maturation in the moral agent (Cicero de fin. 3.20-21; 4.39; Aulus Gellius 12.5), 32 
so that ta kata physin contribute content for Zeno's theory in accordance with 
the level of moral development of the agent (cf. Edelstein and Kidd, 155-57). In 
each stage of development ta kata physin are associated with a category of acts 
to which Zeno has given the name 'appropriate acts' (xd xcx0~]xov~c~) (DL 7.108). 
At the first level, instanced by babies and young children in whom the faculty of 
reason or logos (X6u 
has not yet evolved, the agent is concerned with 'primary' 
things according to nature (x& ~p&x~ x~& q)6c~tv) (Stobaeus eclog. 2.80.7; Aulus 
Gellius 12.5.7). These are the things toward which natural impulse (6pta~) inclines 
us in order to preserve and enhance our own constitution (Cicero de fin. 3.16; 
Seneca epist. 
121.14). Hence at this level an appropriate act would be just to 
carry out those desires which impulse urges that we do; moreover, such acts would 
entail no consequences for morality, since moral choice and responsibility requires 
rationality. 
At the second stage, subsequent to the emergence of the faculty of reason in the 
agent, ta kata physin are the base (proficiscantur ab initiis naturae) (Cicero de 
fin. 3.22) and the impetus or archg (@X~I) (Plutarch comm. not. 1069e) for those 
acts which reason convinces us to do, or those for which, when done, a reasonable 
justification can be given (DL 7.108; Stobaeus eclog. 2.85.14). Ta kata physin are 
themselves still the objects of appropriate acts, but now it is logos rather than 
hormg (impulse) which is active in the agent, directing his choices (Cicero de fin. 
3.20). Concomitantly with the emergence of logos, comes the capability to form 
'conceptions' or ennoiai (~vvot~t). The gradual accumulation of the appropriate 
stock of ennoiai will, in the end, endow the agent with the capacity to discern the 
order and harmony in nature and to act in accordance with them (de fin. 3.21). 
3~Long and Sedley note that in De finibus 3.17 and 20-21, Cicero "envisages five progressive 
stages, each of which is represented as performance of 'proper functions' as these could evolve 
for a human being" [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.368]. Edelstien and Kidd, on the other hand, 
stresses De finibus 4.39 where Cicero gives a threefold division of ta kata physin (Posidonius I: 
the Fragments 155). It seems to us that there is a clear relationship between this division of ta 
kata physin and the five stages of ta kath~konta as they are summarised at de fin. 3.20, wherein 
the first two stages of ta kathgkonta, i.e. "to preserve oneself in one's natural constitution" 
and "to retain those things which are in accordance with nature and to repel those that are 
the contrary," are associated with the first division of ta kata physin; the second two stages, 
i.e. "choice conditioned by reasoned action" and "such choice becoming a fixed habit," with the 
second division; and the last stage, i.e. "choice fully rationalised and in accordance with nature," 
with the third division. Hence in our presentation we have exploited this relationship by merging 
these categorisations into one three-fold differentiation. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
419 
Having reached this state, the agent is at the threshold of the third stage of 
moral development. At this third level, ta kata physin are no longer the impetus 
for choice, but are merely the 'material' or hyle (5Xfl) of ta kathgkonta (Plutarch 
comm. not. 1069e; cf. Cicero de fin. 3.22-23 and Galen SVF 3.61.18); moreover, 
the object of ta kathgkonta at this level is not the attainment of ta kata physin, 
but rather wisdom of choice, which is, in effect, choice in accordance with virtue 
(de fin. 3.22); hence, it is the moral character of the agent that determines the 
appropriateness of the act (de fin. 3.59; Sextus Empiricus AM 11.200; Clement 
SVF 3.515). Thus, even though there may be "a region of appropriate action 
which is common to the wise and unwise" (Cicero de fin. 3.59), the appropriate 
acts of the wise man, unlike those of the unenlightened, are consistently motivated 
by reason. Appropriate acts at this stage are 'perfect' and are referred to as 'right 
actions' ( 
since they contain all that is required for virtue (de fin. 
3.24; Stobaeus eclog. 2.93.14). 
It is evident, given the above characterisation of a 'perfect' kathgkon or 'right 
action' (katorthOrna), that the Stoic sage will be the only one to reach the third 
level of moral development, for only the wise man performs right actions (Cicero 
de fin. 4.15). It would seem, therefore, that a function or task for wisdom, the 
lack of which was seen as a shortcoming of the Cynic view as represented by 
Ariston (see page 416), is found in the choices the wise man makes among ta kata 
physin. Where this Stoic version of moral preference differs from what might be 
called the 'common sense' account is that the object of such choices is not the 
attainment of particular things which accord with nature--things such as health, 
strength, wealth, and so on--but rather the attainment of a virtuous disposition 
which functions consistently in the making of such choices (Cicero de fin. 3.22; 
3.32). Thus, even though this feature of the Stoic position was much maligned in 
ancient times (e.g., de fin. 4.46-48; Plutarch comm. not. 1060e), there is no doubt 
that Zeno's innovation provided the improvement he desired over Cynic doctrine 
(Cicero de fin. 4.43). 
A related shortcoming of the Cynic view is the doctrine to the effect that "virtue 
needs nothing except the strength of a Socrates" and that "virtue is concerned 
with deeds, requiring neither a host of rules nor education" (DL 6.11). One might 
suspect that for Zeno the difficulty with this credo would have been the problem 
that it rendered the content of virtue as quite arbitrary, dependent only on the 
will of the wise man; 33 moreover, one might also surmise that Zeno would have 
questioned how the ordinary person, not endowed by nature with the strength of a 
Socrates, would be supposed to go about improving himself with respect to moral 
rectitude. This difficulty was evidently addressed by the thesis that virtue is the 
outcome of a developmental process. The latter premiss suggests that it should 
3aSo Sandbach: "What Zeno was probably afraid of was that what might be dignified with 
the name of acts of will might in fact be acts of whim and caprice. Since virtue itself seemed so 
difficult to understand or describe, the danger of this was very real indeed. That is why so many 
of the Cynics give the impression of being merely irresponsible exhibitionists" [Sandbach, 1975, 
p. 71]. 

420 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
be possible to learn to be virtuous, and, indeed, the idea that virtue is or can be 
taught is explicitly reported as Stoic doctrine in several places (DL 7.91; Clement 
SVF 3.225). Now although Zeno is not mentioned as advocating this view, both 
Kleanthes and Chrysippus are; hence, there would seem to be no good reason not 
to attribute it to Zeno as well. The details of the Stoic account of how virtue is 
learned may be inferred from the sources; 34 what is relevant here, however, is the 
contrast between this thesis and the preceding description of Cynic doctrine. 
Given the account of moral development outlined above, it would seem that 
Zeno would have been in a position to augment the Cynic dictum reported by 
Diogenes La~rtius that 'the telos for man is to live in accordance with virtue' (see 
page 416). The right actions or katorth6mata performed by the wise man are 
mentioned in several places by Stobaeus as being actions performed according to 
'right reason' (6pgb~ Xdyor (eclog. 2.66.19; 93.14; 96.18); moreover, right reason 
is described by numerous sources as being equivalent to virtue (Plutarch de virt. 
mor. 441c; Cicero Tusc. disp. 4.34; Seneca epist. 76.11). Hence, the virtue of the 
wise man consists in the perfection of his rationality with respect to the choices 
he makes among ta kata physin (Seneca epist. 76.10; Cicero de fin. 3.22). These 
choices are made in accordance with his own rational nature and in accordance 
with the logos of the universe, the rationality of which he shares (DL 7.87-88; 
Cicero de nat. deorum 1.36-39; 2.78; 133; 154; Seneca epist. 124.13-14). 
According to Diogenes La~rtius, Zeno's position concerning the summum bonum 
was that "the telos for man is to live harmoniously with nature" (x~),o~ gx~ xb 
6[aoXoyoula~v~ x.~ q0/)a~t) (DL 7.87); Stobaeus, however, reports that this formu- 
lation is due to Kleanthes, whereas Zeno's statement is simply that the telos is 
"to live harmoniously" (xb 6[ao;koyoug~v~ ~v). This means to live in accordance 
with a single harmonious logos, since those who live in conflict with this are not 
eudaimones (eclog. 2.75.6-76.6). Chrysippus', on the other hand, said that the 
telos is "to live in accordance with experience of what happens by nature" (~v 
 
~[a~tp(c~ ~v q)0a~t ~u~[3c~tvdv~cov) (eclog. 2.76.6-8). There would seem to be 
no good reason to suppose that these definitions are incompatible in any way, for 
according to Stobaeus, the augmentations to Zeno's statement were proposed not 
because Kleanthes and Chrysippus disagreed with him, but rather because they 
assumed that his formulation was an 'incomplete predicate' (eclog. 2.76.2-3) and 
they wished to make it clearer (eclog. 2.76.7). 35 
Cicero reports a further statement which the Stoics declared to be equivalent to 
Zeno's representation. It asserts that the telos is "to live in the light of a knowl- 
edge of the natural sequence of causation" (vivere adhibentem scientiam earum 
return quae natura evenirent) (de fin. 4.14). The justification for this equiva- 
lence can evidently be inferred from several passages in the sources. First, the 
Stoics called the natural sequence of causation 'heimarmeng' (d[ac~p[a~v~), usually 
translated as 'fate' or 'destiny' (Cicero de div. 1.125-26; Aulus Gellius 7.2.3). In 
addition, Stobaeus reports that heimarmen~ is the logos, or rational principle of 
34E.g., Cicero de fin. 3.33; Seneca epist. 120.4. See also Long [1986], 199-205. 
35See Sandbach's discussion in The Stoics, [Sandbach, 1975, pp. 53-55]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
421 
the universe (kosmos). It is "the logos according to which past events have hap- 
pened, present events are happening, and future events will happen" (X6u 
xc~' 
furthermore, Stobaeus informs us that the rational principle, in addition to be- 
ing called the logos, is also referred to as 'truth' (&X~tcz), 'explanation' (cz[x[c~), 
'nature' (@6c~t~), or 'necessity' (&v~u215 
1.79.1-12; cf. Alexander de fato 
192.25). The identification of heimarmeng with logos, the rational principle of the 
kosmos, and the fact that this principle is also referred to as physis, would seem 
to establish the basis for the equivalence in question. 
Thus Zeno's interpretation of the Cynic doctrine that the end for man is to live 
according to virtue can be formulated first by the statement that the telos is 'to live 
according to right reason', since virtue and right reason are taken to be equivalent. 
What this means, given the account of the development of the virtuous man, is 
that the end for man is 'to live in accordance with his own rational nature and in 
accordance with the logos of the universe'. This latter version can be summarised 
in turn by the statement that the telos for man is 'to live harmoniously with 
nature', or equivalently, 'to live in the light of a knowledge of the natural sequence 
of causation'. 
Evidently, if someone thought that to be a wise man one ought to live according 
to nature in the sense of living according to a knowledge of the natural sequence 
of causation, then he most likely would also think that the study of physics and 
logic would be a requirement of a philosophical education. It is quite probable, 
therefore, that Zeno's concept of the telos would have led him to adopt a philosophy 
in which physics and logic were as much a part of the curriculum as was ethics. The 
discussion in the last few paragraphs would seem to show that the development 
of Zeno's notion of the telos is a result of his doctrine of ta kata physin. This 
doctrine represented a major break with his Cynic roots inasmuch as it required 
that some things which the Cynics had classified as absolutely morally 'indifferent', 
be classified instead as 'preferred', in the sense that they are 'according to nature'. 
Hence it would seem not only that Zeno's notion of ta kata physin itself represented 
an important break with Cynic doctrine, but also that this notion led to a further 
breach inasmuch as it induced him to include physics and logic in his philosophical 
curriculum, contrary to the Cynics. 
If the philosopher is to be educated in the study of physics and logic, the ques- 
tion arises concerning the scope and content of his knowledge in these subjects. A 
passage from Seneca and one from Diogenes La@tius will be helpful here. Seneca 
tells us that "the wise man investigates and learns the causes of natural phe- 
nomena, while the mathematician follows up and computes their numbers and 
their measurements" (epist. 88.26) In a passage with a similar theme, Diogenes 
La@tius tells us that the part of physics concerned with causation is itself divided 
between the investigation of such things as the hggemonikon (~u215 
is, the 'leading part' of the soul or psychg (d/uX~), of what happens in the psychE, 
of generative principles, and of other things of this sort. This is the province of 
the philosopher. On the other hand, the mathematician is concerned with such 

422 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
things as the explanation of vision, the cause of an image in a mirror, the origins 
of weather phenomena, and similar things (DL 7.133). These passages would seem 
to suggest that scope of the wise man's knowledge of physics would probably not 
be of particular data, but rather of general principles. 36 
As to the question concerning the nature of the logical theory that the philoso- 
pher would need, we take it that the motivation for such a theory would be the 
requirements of the ethical doctrine outlined above. 37 Thus, given that the wise 
man's aim is to live in harmony with a knowledge of the natural sequence of 
causation, he will need to make correct judgements about the relations between 
particular states of affairs, based on his knowledge of the general principles gov- 
erning such connections; moreover, he will need to comprehend the patterns of 
inference which will allow him to effect such judgements. Evidently, these general 
principles will be manifestations of the universal logos, and as such, given that 
logos is another name for anankg (necessity) (Stobaeus eclog. 2.79.1-12; Alexan- 
der de fato 192.25), they will be embodied by necessary connections in nature; 
moreover, one can surmise that the patterns of inference which emerge will consist 
in part of representations of such necessary connections. 
3.2 
Inference and Akolouthia 
At 7.62, Diogenes La~rtius reports that, according to Chrysippus, dialectic is 
about 'that which signifies' and 'that which is signified' (x~p't xd ~rl~C~o~T~  
x& 
~rl[~w6~s~ ). It is clear from the context that 'that which signifies' is a meaningful 
utterance. Presumably, then, 'that which is signified' is the significatum of such 
an utterance. Diogenes does not elaborate on what belongs to this class, except to 
say that the doctrine of the lekton is assigned to the topic of 'that which is signi- 
fied'. 38 H~ -~rl~v yo~r ov -~o c~x~-~r cxv cxr162 
o~ ~:~s cxp~our ~:d~sr oq~ A~va (AA 
36For a more extensive explication of this problem, see Kerferd's article in Rist 1978: "What 
Does the Wise Man Know?" [Kerferd, 1978b]. See also the article by Nicholas White, "The 
Role of Physics in Stoic Ethics," Southern Journal of Philosophy: Recovering the Stoics, Spindel 
Conference: 1984 (1985): 57-74. White takes the view that "we are not in a position to be 
sure why the early Stoics thought that detailed physical and cosmological theory ... would be 
required by their ethics" [White, 1985, p. 72]. Although White grants the plausibility of the 
premiss that they might have held such a view, he argues that any actual arguments for it, or 
explanations of it, are lacking [White, 1985, p. 72]. 
37 At the end of his summary of Stoic logic Diogenes has this to say: "The reason why the 
Stoics adopt these views in logic is to give the strongest possible confirmation to their claim that 
the wise man is always a dialectician. For all things are observed through study conducted in 
discourses, whether they belong to the domain of physics or equally that of ethics (DL 7.83). 
Compare: "IT]he Stoics, who define dialectic as the science of speaking well, taking speaking 
well to consist in saying what is true and what is fitting, and regarding this as a distinguishing 
characteristic of the philosopher, use [the term 'dialectic'] of philosophy at its highest. For this 
reason, only the wise man is a dialectician in their view" (Alexander in top. 1.8-14). 
38Contrary to some interpretations (e.g., Kerferd [1978a, p. 260]; Watson [1966, pp. 47-48], we 
take it that although every lekton belongs to the class of sgmainomena, not every s~mainomenon 
is a lekton. Proper names and common nouns, for example, are s~mainonta which signify 'in- 
dividual qualities' (~c~ xotSx~r and 'common qualities' ( 
xot6x~r respectively (DL 7.58). 
Since qualities for the Stoics are corporeal, and since lekta are incorporeal, it is evident that both 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
423 
7.63). f~u r 
rl~u ~opu to ~c~@ tv ~rlu c~XuuX r162165 
zr~u ~rluop~ oq~ ~rlu A,e~vov 
~v8 ~r~u ~c~vtvy oq~ zrlu T~p[~ 'Tb Xr215 
but for the present it will be sufficient to 
understood the meaning as 'what is said' or 'what can be said' (cf. Long [1971], 
77); in any case, what is of immediate interest is the reported Stoic classification 
of lekta, and in particular, the type of lekton called the azi6ma. 
Axi6mata have two characteristic properties which differentiate them from the 
other lekta: first, they are the significata of declarative sentences, and second, they 
are the only lekta which can be true or false (DL 7.68; cf. AM 8.74). Thus, it seems 
apparent that axiOmata are somewhat in accord with what we call propositions 
(I have already used that term to refer to them in the discussion above); there 
are, however, several characteristics with respect to which axi6mata differ from 
propositions, so that they cannot be merely identified with them (cf. 
Kneale 
and Kneale [1962a], 153-57). 
It may be, as Long and Sedley propose (1.205), 
that 'proposition' is the least misleading of the possible translations for axi6ma; 
nevertheless, we propose to avoid using 'proposition' and to merely transliterate 
the term. 
Having introduced the notion of an azi6ma, Diogenes goes on to report that 
several Stoics, including Chrysippus, divided aziSmata into the simple and the 
non-simple. Simple aziOmata, on this account, are those consisting of one aziOma 
not repeated (for example: 'It is day'), whereas non-simple are those consisting 
either of one azi6ma repeated (for example" 'If it is day, it is day') or of more than 
one azi6ma (for example: 'If it is day, it is light') (DL 7.68-69). Of the non-simple 
azi6mata, the first introduced is the 'conditional', an azi6ma constructed by means 
of the connective 'if' (~[) (DL 7.71). The Greek word is 'c~u~Yt[ag~vov' , which might 
be better rendered 'connexive' in accordance with its etymology; however, even 
leaving etymological questions aside, translating syn~mmenon as 'conditional' is 
somewhat misleading. It seems evident that the Stoic use of the connective '~[' 
was technical, and hence there are some uses of this connective in ordinary Greek 
which seem not to be captured by the Stoic understanding of the term. 
One problem with taking 'conditional' as the translation of 'syngmmenon' is 
that there is a temptation to suppose, as the Kneales seem to do, that what 
the Stoics had in mind was to give an account of the occurrence in language 
of the connective '~[' which would be "satisfactory as a general account of all 
conditional statements" (Kneale and Kneale [1962a, p. 135]). It seems to us that 
this interpretation gets the matter wrong. 
The term 'syngmmenon' denotes a 
complex azidma, and according to the description of Diogenes La~rtius at 7.66, 
this is just to say that it denotes a complex state of affairs; moreover, this complex 
state of affairs is signified by the predication of the relation of following between 
the states of affairs which are the constituents of the complex axi6ma. What the 
Stoics had in mind was to give an account of the inferences that could be made 
given the knowledge that some particular type of event or state of affairs folIowed 
from some other particular event or state of affairs. It seems plausible that they 
chose '~[' as the syntactic representation of the relation of following because it is 
individual qualities and common qualities are sgmainomena which are not lekta. 

424 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
suggestive of that relation, as the arrow is suggestive of the relation of implication 
in modern syntactic accounts. Hence they chose expressions of the form 'If A, 
B' to be the canonical representation in their patterns of inference. They might, 
however, have chosen to express this relation by saying 'B follows from A' rather 
than 'If A, B', for although they would not recognise the schema 'B follows from 
A; but A; therefore B' as a proper syllogism of their logical system, they were 
nevertheless willing to view it as being equivalent to the syllogistic schema 'If A, 
B; but A; therefore B', which was an authentic syllogism of their system (Alexander 
in an. pr. 373.29-35). And if they had chosen so to represent it, then no one, 
we assume, would be tempted to view their characterisation of '~& ~uv~vo~' 
as an attempt to give a general account of conditional statements. Having said 
all this, we will nevertheless carry on the tradition of translating 'syn~mmenon' 
as 'conditional axi6ma', just so long as it is understood that by so doing we do 
not assume that in giving a characterisation of'syn~mmenon' the Stoics supposed 
themselves to be providing a general account of conditionals. 
Now although the Stoics did not use expressions of the form 'B follows from 
A' as the canonical expression of the relation denoted by 'syn~mmenon', this 
notion of 'following' in a conditional was of primary importance in their theory 
of inference, for their fundamental criterion of a valid argument was based on 
this concept. This canon is the so-called conditionalisation principle (cf. Mates 
[1953, pp. 74-77]). As it is framed by the Stoics, this principle states that an 
argument is conclusive 39 whenever its corresponding conditional is sound (6yt~: 
PH 2.137) or true (~k~: 
AM 8.417): 4~ that is, the conditional which has the 
conjunction of the premisses as antecedent and the conclusion of the argument 
as consequent. Now Sextus Empiricus writes that "the 'dialecticians '41 all agree 
that a conditional is sound whenever its consequent 'follows' its antecedent" (AM 
8.112; cf DL 7.71). In effect, then, one can say that for the Stoics, an argument 
is valid (conclusive) just in case its conclusion 'follows' from its premisses, as the 
consequent follows from the antecedent in a sound or true conditional. In noting 
this criterion, however, Sextus also outlines a difficulty, for it seems that although 
the 'dialecticians' were agreed on the standard for a true conditional, there was 
a controversy as to how the notion of 'following' was to be characterised (AM 
8.112; PH 2.110). 
There were apparently four competing views, 42 only two of 
which, we shall suggest, would have provided a criterion consistent with the role 
of inference in Stoic philosophy: the first of these, advocated by those who spoke 
39In some places (e.g., PH 2.137, 146) Sextus uses 'auvc~ 
and 'ioOv~ 
for 'conclusive' 
and 'inconclusive' (or 'valid' and 'invalid'), whereas at other places (e.g., AM 8.429) he uses 'xsp- 
~xt 
and '&~pa~xo{'. Hence, as Mates indicates in his glossary ([Mates, 1953], 132-36), these 
terms appear to be interchangeable. Diogenes La~rtius, however, in his discussion of arguments 
from 7.77-79 uses 'xap~vxt 
exclusively for 'conclusive' and '~x~puvxo~' for 'inconclusive'. 
4~ 
page 477 for a discussion of the use of '6yt~{' and 'd),~q~' in these contexts. 
4lit is unlikely that by 'dialectician' here Sextus is referring exclusively to a member of the 
Dialectical School of which Diodorus Cronus and Philo were members. He is probably using it 
as a synonym for 'logician' (see footnote 20, page 408). 
42See Section 8.1 for a discussion of the four views. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
425 
of 'connexion' (auv@x~tat~), required that the contradictory of the consequent 
'conflict' (g~XYlX~t) with the antecedent; while the second, advocated by those 
who spoke of 'implication' (~gqxxat~), required that the consequent be 'potentially 
contained' (~pt~X~xc~t Sov@~ 0 in the antecedent (PH 2.111-12). 43 
The Greek terms used in these contexts are '&xoXou9~v' or '~a9~t', 
either of 
which has the sense of 'to follow upon' or 'to be consequent upon'. Now although 
'to follow logically' is no doubt one way in which these terms were understood, it 
also seems evident that this meaning is not the only one they carried. But even 
if it had been, that fact would not warrant the assumption that for the Stoics 
'to follow logically' meant quite what it does in a modern setting. 
For, given 
the hypothesis outlined earlier in this section of a motivation for logic grounded in 
ethics, we take it that the role of logic in Stoic philosophy is primarily to determine 
the inferential relations between states of affairs and only derivatively (if at all) 
between sentences of the language. The view we put forward has much in common 
with that expressed by A.A. Long in the following passage ([Long, 1971], 95): 
The human power of drawing inferences from empirical data presup- 
poses an ennoia akolouthias, an idea of succession or consequence. 
... And endiathetos logos, internal speech (reason), is described as 
'that by which we recognise consequences and contradictions' (x& & 
 
T~ g~Xdg~) But akolouthia is not confined to what we would call 
'logical consequence'. The sequence of cause and effect is explained by 
reference to it, for fated events occur  
x~Xt~  
~ 
to order and consequence] or  
~1~ ~c0 v ~[c0v ~ 
to the following of causes]. This use of a common term is exactly what 
we should expect in view of Chrysippus' methods of inference from 
actual states of affairs. 
Given that the world operates according to a strict causal nexus one 
of the roles of logic, perhaps its major role in Stoicism, is to make pos- 
sible predictions about the future by drawing out consequences from 
the present. The cardinal assumption of the Stoics is that man can 
put himself in touch with the rational course of events and effect a cor- 
respondence between them and his own actions and intentions. This 
assumption provides the ethical aim of living homologoumen6s [harmo- 
niously]. More particularly, ethics is connected with logic and physics 
by akolouthia and its related words. 
If this is an accurate characterisation of the role of logic in Stoic philosophy, then 
in order that such predictions might be carried out, the Stoic conditional will need 
to represent the logical as well as the nomic connections, not only between actual 
events or states of affairs, but also between mooted events or states of affairs. 
Such connections will need to be manifest in the relation between the content of 
the antecedent and that of the consequent. 
43Long and Sedley have commented that the containment view "may not differ significantly" 
from the conflict view (1.211). We intend to explore this possibility. 

426 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
In describing these constraints on akolouthia in the above quotation, Long refers 
to Chrysippus' "methods of inference from actual states of affairs" (1971, 95). In 
a similar vein, J.B. Gould states that "as Chrysippus maintains, one may gen- 
eralise and amrm that if events of a particular sort occur, then other events of 
a specified sort will occur. Such generalisations may be expressed in conditional 
propositions .... 
These kinds of generalisations, then, are true only when they 
denote connections between things or events in nature" ([Gould, 1970], 200-201). 
Along the same lines, Michael Frede asserts that "the Stoics seem to regard con- 
sequence and (possibly various kinds of) incompatibility as the relations between 
states of affairs or facts in terms of which one can explain that something follows 
from something" ([Frede, 1987d], 104). We propose to take seriously this talk of 
'states of affairs' and 'facts' in order to present an interpretation of the notion of 
'following' or 'consequence' in the Stoic system of inference. 
If the conception of consequence or 'following from' as expressed in the con- 
ditional is a notion of a relation between states of affairs, then to say that a 
sound conditional is such that the contradictory of the consequent 'conflicts with' 
the antecedent, as in the 'connexion' theory, or that the consequent is 'potentially 
contained' in the antecedent, as in the 'containment' theory, would seem to suggest 
that these conceptions of conflict and of potential containment are also notions of 
a relation between states of affairs. How is this to be understood? In particular, 
how are we to understand this talk of 'states of affairs' and the notion of one 
state of affairs being 'in conflict with' or being 'potentially contained in' another.? 
Unfortunately, there is so little information in the texts about the containment 
criterion that we cannot attempt to give more than a speculative account of this 
definition. On the other hand, there are fairly clear indications in the texts about 
what was meant by 'conflict' 
As to the first part of this question, answering it 
will be the burden of our interpretation of Stoic semantic theory. Interpreting 
Stoic semantics is in effect to provide an understanding of the theory of the lek- 
ton. Moreover, since there is a clear indication in the texts of the dependence of 
lekta on 'rational presentations' (q~vx~[c~ Xoyt 
(e.g. AM 8.70" DL 7.63), it 
would seem that an understanding of the lekton will require an interpretation of 
this relation in particular, and of the theory of presentations in general; indeed, 
it seems to us that there is evidence enough to indicate that one cannot give an 
adequate account of Stoic logical theory without taking into consideration the 
theory of phantasiai. Such reflections will no doubt entail some involvement in 
epistemological questions, and though some writers have ruled out concern with 
such questions as being 'extra-logical' (e.g., Mates [1953, pp. 35-36]; Kneale and 
Kneale [1962a, p. 150]; Mueller [1978, p. 22]), others see them as an essential 
component of an understanding of Stoic logical theory (e.g., Imbert [1978, p. 185]; 
Gould [1970, pp. 49-50]; Kahn [1969, p. 159]). 
Our suggestion is that the 'states of affairs' which stand in the relation of conflict 
or containment in a sound conditional can be thought of as abstract semantic 
structures the constituents of which correspond to individuals, properties, and 
relations. They are the objective content of rational presentations as well as of 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
427 
axiOmata and other types of lekta, and as such are the designata of the Stoic term 
'pragmata' 
4 
SEMANTICS 
~.1 
Epistemology: phantasiai and lekta 
The connection between the theory of the lekton and the Stoic doctrine of pre- 
sentations is well documented in the texts. Parallel passages in Sextus Empiricus 
and in Diogenes La~rtius explicitly refer to this connection. The passage written 
by Sextus at AM 8.70 is somewhat more complete: 
[The Stoics] say that the lekton is that subsisting (bq)to~ci~vov) co- 
ordinately with a rational (),oyt 
presentation, and that a rational 
presentation is one in which it is possible that what is presented be 
exhibited by means of discourse. 44 
The corresponding passage in Diogenes La~rtius is at 7.63: "They (sc. the Stoics) 
assert that the lekton is that subsisting coordinately with a rational presenta- 
tion. ''45 The Stoics used forms of the verb 'bq)tc~x&c~gc~' to indicate a 'mode of 
being' which is something less than the being that material bodies possess (see 
page 462); hence, the use of '0q0tc~x~9~' to describe the being of the lekton, makes 
it seems evident that one can take the lekton as somehow dependent for its being 
on the corresponding rational presentation. On this understanding of the relation- 
ship between the lekton and the presentation, it is evident that an exploration of 
the semantic role of the lekton cannot leave the doctrine of presentations out of 
account. As we understand the theory, that which is presented (xb q)c~vxc~c~9*v) 
in a rational presentation, and which is capable of being exhibited by means of 
discourse, is a pragma (r~p~y~ac~). Moreover, we take it that the term 'pragma' 
is used in Stoic semantics to mean a 'state of affairs' which is the unarticulated 
objective content of a rational presentation. And since we also understand the 
axiOma to be what is said in the assertion of a pragma, it would seem necessary 
to refer to the Stoic theory of presentations in order to present a characterization 
of the notion of akolouthia as a relation between azi6mata. 
From the point of view of some modern logicians and historians of logic, this 
proposal presents a difficulty inasmuch as it implies a merging of epistemological 
(and psychological) concerns with logical concerns. Benson Mates, for example, 
states in his Stoic Logic that "the criterion for determining the truth of presen- 
tations ... is an epistemological problem and not within the scope of this work" 
[Mates, 1953, pp. 
35-36]. 
According to the Kneales, "the theory of presenta- 
tions belongs to the epistemology rather than the logic of the Stoics" [Kneale and 
Kneale, 1962a, p. 150]. And Mueller expresses the view that considerations of the 
x~' ~jv x5 q0c~a~v ~axt X6u 9 ~9~ax~ ac~. 

428 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
possibility of knowledge of "necessary connections between propositions" (which, 
we take it, are a component of the theory of presentations) "would take us outside 
the domain of logic and into epistemology" [Mueller, 1978, p. 22]. In other words, 
there seems to be a strong bias among some contemporary commentators in favour 
of the supposition that epistemological considerations could have had no part in 
the logic of the Stoa, and that those who cultivated Stoic logic shared this aver- 
sion in common with those who developed the propositional calculus. But not all 
present-day commentators agree with this assessment. Some believe, in the words 
of Claude Imbert, that "the ancients.., judged matters differently" [Imbert, 1980, 
p. 185]. 
Josiah B. Gould, for example, cites textual evidence from Sextus Empiricus 
and from Epictetus to support the claim that the Stoics placed their epistemolog- 
ical theory "squarely within the confines of logic" ([Gould, 1970], 49-50). In his 
treatise against the logical doctrines of 'the dogmatists', Sextus tells us that the 
logical branch of Stoic philosophy includes the theory of criteria and proofs (AM 
7.24).4~According to this theory, things which are evident can be apprehended 
directly, either through the senses or through the intellect, in accordance with a 
criterion of truth. 47 Things non-evident, on the other hand, can be apprehended 
only indirectly through the means of signs and proofs by inference from what is 
evident (DL 7.25). The inclusion of such a theory--which, as Gould points out 
[1970, p. 49], is that of Chrysippus himself--in the logical division of their phi- 
losophy seems clearly to commit the Stoics to consideration of epistemological 
concerns within the purview of their logic. As for Epictetus, according to him the 
philosophers of the Old Stoa held that logic "has the power to discriminate and 
examine everything else, and, as one might say, to measure and weigh them" (disc. 
1.17.10). Thus it is "the standard of judgement for all other things, whereby they 
come to be known thoroughly" (disc. 1.17.8). This power, it seems to him, is the 
reason why these philosophers put logic first in the development of their doctrine 
(cf. AM 7.22; DL 7.40). In Gould's estimation [Gould, 1970, p. 49], these com- 
ments of Epictetus seem to provide further evidence of a close relationship between 
logic and knowledge in early Stoic philosophy. 
As the quotation above would appear to indicate, Claude Imbert is another 
recent commentator who thinks we have evidence that the Stoics took epistemo- 
logical questions to be within the province of logic. She cites the passage at 7.49 
in Diogenes Lahrtius to support this thesis. In an earlier passage Diogenes has 
presented a summary of the Stoic logical doctrine (7.39-48), and he proposes now 
to give in detail what has already been covered in this introductory treatise. He 
begins with a quotation from the book Synopsis of the Philosophers by Diocles of 
Magnesia, the passage cited by Imbert: 
466 8~ u Xou 
~ox6< ~1~ x~pl ~v xptx~lp[~v xc~i ~v &xoSd@~v 9~p[~ xcpt~x~. 
47According to Rist, "the overwhelming body of evidence that we shall consider [concerning 
the Stoic criterion of truth] suggests that the normal Stoic answers to the question What is the 
criterion of truth? are either Recognition [xcr 
or Recognizable Presentation [xc~x~X~x~tx~ 
q~c~vxc~o[c~]" [Rist, 19695, p. 133]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
429 
The Stoics accept the doctrine that the account of presentation and 
sensation (dCcrgrlc~t~) be ranked as prior [in their logical theory], both 
inasmuch as the criterion by which the truth of states of affairs (~p&yg~x~) 
is determined is of the genus presentation, and inasmuch as the account 
of assent (auu215 
apprehension ( 
and the process of 
thought (~d~t~), although preceding the rest [of their logical theory], 
cannot be framed apart from presentation. 
For presentation comes 
first, then thought, being capable of speaking out, discloses by means 
of discourse that which is experienced through the presentation (DL 
7.49). 
This passage, according to Imbert, indicates that "however obscure it may seem to 
modern logicians, it is undeniable that the Stoics derived their methods of inference 
from certain presentational structures" [Imbert, 1980, p. 185]. Moreover, since it 
indicates that the criterion of truth is itself a presentation, it also implies that 
Stoic logical theory contains an epistemological component. 
The difference of opinion among these scholars concerning the content of Stoic 
logic is no doubt a reflection of a more fundamental disagreement about its general 
nature. Some writers seem to view the Stoic system as an attempt to develop a 
calculus of propositions with a truth-functional semantics in accordance with the 
model of the propositional calculus which emerged in the twentieth century. For 
such writers the inclusion of epistemological (or psychological) components in a 
logical system would no doubt be seen as a flaw, a reason to discount such a system 
as a genuine logic and to view the attempt at its development as misguided. And of 
course, if Stoic logic really were an attempt to develop such a calculus, they would 
be right. Other writers, however, seem to proceed with no such presuppositions 
about the nature of the Stoic system, or at least, with different ones. This latter 
approach is well summarised by C.H. Kahn in a passage which we cited in the 
introductory section (see page 400). According to Khan, our picture of Stoic logic 
will be distorted if we see it merely as a precursor to the propositional calculus. 
A more adequate view would require that we take into account the relationship 
in Stoic philosophy between 'dialectic' (logic) and their epistemology, semantics, 
ethical psychology, and general theory of nature [Kahn, 1969, p. 
159]. 
Since 
we are in agreement with this assessment of what is required to construct an 
adequate interpretation of Stoic logic in general, we could perhaps appeal to these 
remarks as independent justification for including the doctrine of presentations in 
an interpretation of the notion of akolouthia. However, assuming that akolouthia 
is a relation between axihmata, it would seem that the connection outlined above 
between axihmata, lekta, and rational presentations is sufficient in itself to justify 
this inclusion. 
~.2 
Phantasiai 
'Presentation' (q0~zctc~i~), according to Stoic doctrine, is an 'impression' (xh~coc~t~) 
on the soul or psyche (d?~)X~) (AM 7.228). Sextus Empiricus attests that this doc- 

430 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
trine was put in place by Zeno himself (AM 7.2.30; 36), but that it was interpreted 
somewhat differently by Kleanthes and Chrysippus (AM 7. 2.28-31). Kleanthes 
apparently took the meaning of the term 'impression' quite literally, understanding 
it in the sense that a signet-ring makes an impression in wax (AM 7.228). Chrysip- 
pus objected to this interpretation, arguing that not only would this model make 
simultaneous impressions impossible, but also it would imply that more recent im- 
pressions would obliterate those already in place. Since experience would seem to 
show that various impressions can occur simultaneously, and that prior impressions 
can coexist with more recent ones, this model cannot be correct (AM 7.228-30). 
The model to which Chrysippus appealed was that of the air in a room, which, 
when many people speak at once, receives many different impacts and undergoes 
many alterations (AM 7.231). The model is apt, as we shall see, since the soul, 
according to Chrysippus, is composed of pneuma or 'natural breath'. Accordingly, 
he defined phantasiai as 'alterations' or 'modifications' occurring in the psychg, 
revealing both themselves and that which has caused them:4Smore specifically, 
they are modifications of the h~gemonikon (~ly~[~ovtx6v), the 'governing part' of 
the psych~ (AM 7.233). 49 
We are informed by several sources that the psych~ itself has eight parts. 5~ 
Aside from the h~gemonikon already mentioned, it consists in the five senses, the 
faculty of speech (xb q~wlxtx6v), and the generative or procreative faculty. 51 In the 
account of Diogenes LaSrtius, the term '~y~ow 
does not appear; instead, he 
uses the term 'Bt~vorFtx6v' , i.e., the intellectual faculty, "which is the mind itself' 
(DL 7.110).52The suggestion implicit in this passage is that we can understand 
the h~gemonikon to be the mind itself; moreover, this interpretation is verified by 
Sextus Empiricus in the passage at AM 7.232: "[Presentations occur] only in the 
mind or governing part of the psych~."53Thus it would seem that presentations, 
according to the Stoics, are modifications or alterations of (or in) the mind. In the 
parlance of present-day philosophy of mind, we (at least some of us) would refer 
to presentations as 'mental states' and associate them with corresponding 'brain 
states'. But for the Stoics there was no need to postulate this kind of dualism (cf. 
Sandbach [1971b, p. 10]). For according to them, the psychg is constituted by 
'pneuma' or 'breath' (~v~5~), itself composed of the elements fire and air "which 
are blended with one another through and through" (Galen SVF 2.841).54It seems 
evident on this account that since fire and air are material elements par excellence, 
the soul must also be a material entity. 
4SSextus Empiricus AM 7.230; A~tius SVF 2.54. Sextus uses the term '~x~potcSo~t~', which we 
have rendered as 'alteration' or 'modification' (cf. Bury). In the corresponding passage, A~tius 
uses 'gpa'joc', which might be rendered 'affection' (cf. Long and Sedley [1990, 1.237]). 
49This expanded definition was put forward in order to forestall certain objections that not all 
modifications of the psych~ could be presentations. 
5~ 
SVF 1.143; Chalcidius SVF 2.879; DL 7.110. 
51Xb "y'E:'c~'lr]'l:l. 
DL 7.110; xb o~:epp.o~xtx6v: Nemesius SVF 2.39.22. 
53&k;k& ~ep~. -~.~ ~tczvo(~ p.6vov x~ xEo "/'lyep.o'~txo~. 
54~t' 5kcov &XX~kotc x~xpcr 
his Alexander of Aphrodisias on Stoic Physics, Robert B. 
Todd discusses the Stoic theory of total blending as it is reported by Alexander in De mixtione. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
431 
The Stoics held that there are two principles (&pXod) in the universe: the passive 
(xb ~&aXOV), which is substance without quality (oGa~ xo~), or prime matter 
(SXrl) , and the active (zb xo~oSv), which is the logos inherent in matter, or God 
(DL 7.134). By the nature of the properties ascribed to the pneuma, it would 
appear that the active principle is embodied in it. First, the pneuma is the force 
which maintains the universe as a unity. Chrysippus, for example, holds that "the 
whole of substance is unified because it is entirely pervaded by a pneuma, by means 
of which the universe is held together, is maintained, and is in sympathy with 
itself."55Second, the pneuma invests with qualities the undifferentiated matter 
(SXrt) in which it inheres (Plutarch de Stoic repugn. 1054a-b). And third, the 
pneuma is constitutive of the souls of human beings. According to Chalcidius, 
Zeno and Chrysippus put forward similar arguments for this thesis. Chrysippus 
argues thus: "It is certain that we breathe and live with one and the same thing. 
But we breath with natural breath (naturalis spiritus). Therefore we live as well 
with the same breath. But we live with the soul. Therefore, the soul is found to 
be natural breath" (SVF 2.879). ~6 
According to the Stoics, then, the psychO, is corporeal, and hence just as much a 
material entity as is the substantial body of which it is a part. Further arguments 
for this thesis are set out both by Kleanthes (SVF 1.518) and by Chrysippus 
(SVF 2.790); moreover, there is no doubt that they followed Zeno in this view 
(SVF 1.137; 138; 141). The details neither of these arguments nor of the under- 
lying physical theory need concern us here; what is of interest, however, is the 
implication that when the Stoics speak of modifications or changes in the mind, 
they are not speaking metaphorically. A modification of the mind would appear 
to be a determinate change of state of the mind-substance or pneuma (rcv~5[ao O. 
Hence a presentation, since it is such an alteration, would be a physical event (cf. 
[Sandbach, 1971a, p. 10]), as much a physical entity as the pneuma itself, s7 
At 7.51, Diogenes Lai~rtius provides evidence that the Stoics observed a dis- 
tinction among presentations between those which are sensory (od.c;gri-axc~[) and 
those which are non-sensory (oG ~[agrV~ ). "Sensory impressions," according 
to Diogenes' account, "are those which are apprehended (Xc~g~3~vdg~v~) through 
one or more of the sense organs; non-sensory, on the other hand, are those which 
apprehended through thought or by the mind (S~& x~ S~vo[~), such as those of 
the incorporeals (&ad)g~xc~) and other things apprehended by reason (DL 7.51). 
We take it that this distinction is designed to describe presentations in accordance 
with the character of their immediate sources. Obviously, a sensory presentation 
55~t ~ ~1 Xpuo~ou ~d~cc x~pl xpdo~r ~e ~,~ogccc ~v bxoz~gez~t ~, ob~cr 
oGo~c~v, 
xvr 
q:tvo~ ~t& x~oT1r cxbq:~l~ ~t~xovq:O~, bq~' 05 ouv~XczczC ~:r x~ aup.p.~vct x~ aup.xcxg~r ~a'~tv 
ocbl: ,~ l:b ~v(Alexander de mixtione 216.14-17). 
56Zeno's corresponding argument is also recorded by Chalcidius (SVF 1.138). cf. Tertullian 
(SVF 1.137). 
57One fragment seems to indicate that not only presentation, but also assent (~uy162162162 
impulse (bpt~), and reason (X6yor 
are qualities of the psych 
(Iamblichus de anima, apud 
Stobaeus eclog. 1.368.12-20; cf. AM 7.237), and qualities, according to the Stoics, are corporeal 
(SVF 2.376-98). 

432 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
is one whose immediate source is an actual state of affairs, and this state of affairs 
is also its cause. It is somewhat unclear what the immediate source of non-sensory 
presentations might be, but since they are "apprehended through thought," per- 
haps the most likely candidate would be another presentation. Moreover, there 
would seem to be nothing to stand in the way of this second presentation's being 
the cause of the first, for presentations, as was noted above, are 'bodies' (s6mata) 
and hence can enter into causal relationships (Stobaeus eclog. 138.24; AM 9.211). 
Indeed, there would seem to be no reason why one could not envisage a sequence 
of presentations forming a causal chain. 
Ultimately, however, there must be a presentation whose cause is not another 
presentation, but rather some external state of affairs. This requirement would 
not be a problem in the case of some non-sensory presentations: for example, the 
Stoics hold that "it is not by sense-perception (~[o0@tr 
but by reason (X6yor 
that we become cognizant of the conclusions of demonstrations, such as of the ex- 
istence of the gods and of their providence" (DL 7.52). Presumably, since the gods 
themselves are evidently corporeal entities, 5s it would be as a result of their actions 
that one would become cognizant of their existence, and the presentation in which 
one apprehends that existence would have its cause in the gods themselves. But 
in the case of other non-sensory presentations, such as those of the incorporeals, 
there is a difficulty in seeing how to give an account of the causal basis of such 
a presentation. For the Stoics hold that the class of incorporeals, which includes 
lekta, void, place, and time (AM 10.218), are asOmata (literally 'without body') 
and hence cannot enter into causal relationships (AM 8.263). A plausible solution 
to this difficulty is suggested by Long and Sedley, who propose that "perhaps we 
should connect [this relation between asSmata and presentations] with 'transition' 
[ta~z~3c, c~t~], a method by which incorporeals are said to be conceived" ([Long and 
Sedley, 1990], 1.241). They go on to suggest that "this refers ... to the mind's ca- 
pacity to abstract, e.g., the idea of place from particular bodies" [Long and Sedley, 
1990, 1.241]. In an earlier work, however, Long renders metabasis as "a capacity 
to frame inferences" [Long, 1971, p. 88], and there are several texts which would 
seem to confirm this reading. 59 Presumably, such a capacity would be seated in 
the mind (hggemonikon) or intellectual faculty (dianogtikon) and thus ultimately 
in the soul itself (cf. DL 7.110). 
According to Iamblichus as quoted by Stobaeus, "those philosophers who follow 
Chrysippus and Zeno and all those who conceive of the soul as body, bring together 
5SAristocles SVF 1.98; Chalcidius 293, L & S 44E; Galen hist. phil., DDG 608; DL 7.134. 
One reading of DL 7.134 (Suidas) has it that the archai are &~d)gcr 
The reading 
of the codices, however, has it that they are ad)~cr 
Long and Sedley prefer the 
reading '(~r162 
[1990, 2.226], their reasons being (1) that this interpretation is supported by 
other texts, and (2) the corporeality of the principles follows by implication from the Stoic view 
that only bodies are capable of acting and being acted upon [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.273-74]. 
But since the active principle is explicitly identified with God (DL 7.134), then it would seem to 
follow that God (or the gods) is corporeal. 
59AM 8.194;275;3.25;DL 7.53. Sandbach [1971a, p. 26] translates 'metabasis' in DL 7.53 as 
'inference'. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
433 
the powers (at 8uv@etg) of the soul as qualities in the substrate (brm 
and posit the soul as substance (ohm[a) already underlying the powers" (eclog. 
1.367.17). Moreover, there are several texts which report that the Stoics charac- 
terise qualities as corporeal, 6~ and at least one passage specifically reports that 
they describe the qualities of the psychg as such (Alexander de anima 115.37). 
Given their corporeal nature, one might suppose that the various capacities of 
the psych~ would have causal powers, and this supposition gains credence from a 
passage in which Zeno is reported to hold that prudence (q)p6vrlc~tg) is the cause 
of 'being prudent' (~b q0pov~v), and temperance (c~coq0poc~6vrl) is the cause of 'be- 
ing temperate' (xb c~0q)povgv) (Stobaeus eclog. 1.138). Thus one might plausibly 
conjecture that the Stoics could give an account of the causal basis of non-sensory 
presentations, such as those of the incorporeals, by invoking, presumably along 
with the data of experience, the causal powers associated with metabasis. And 
one might further suppose that some such account would throw light on the Stoic 
explanation that "presentations are formed because of [the incorporeals] and not 
by them," 6~ and that they are perceived not by the senses, "but in a certain man- 
ner by the senses" (sed quodam modo sensibus) (Cicero acad. 2.21). If so, then we 
would not have to suppose with Long and Sedley that these explanations represent 
an attempt by the Stoics "to find a relationship other than causal to fit the case" 
[Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.241]. 
Whatever may be the difficulties involved in providing a causal basis for non- 
sensory presentations, no comparable problems exist for sensory presentations, for 
the source of such presentations is an actual state of affairs. We can probably take 
a passage of AStius to imply that sensory presentations are the primary means by 
which a person develops the stock of conceptions which comprise the content of 
memory and experience. 
When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding-part of his 
soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon. On this he inscribes 
each one of his conceptions ({vvo~c,t). The first method of inscription is 
through the senses. For by perceiving something, e.g., white, they have 
a memory of it when it has departed. And when many memories of a 
similar kind have occurred, we then say we have experience ({tarvetpCa). 
For the plurality of similar impressions is experience. Some conceptions 
arise naturally in the aforesaid ways and undesignedly, others through 
our own instruction and attention. The latter are called 'conceptions' 
only, the former are called 'preconceptions' (~poXr~d?et~) as well. Rea- 
son, for which we are called rational, is said to be completed from our 
preconceptions during our first seven years. 62 
6~ 
example, Plutarch de comm. not. 1085e; Galen SVF 2.377; 410; Simplicius in cat. 
271.20; in phys. 509.9. Long and Sedley argue indexLong, A. A.that "the corporeality of qualities 
is one of many Stoic theses implied by the corporeality of the principles" [Long and Sedley, 1990, 
1.274] (see 432, footnote 58). 
61~K' 0~6"l:Oig q)aV'l:~(JtOtg[.I.{VOt)  
O6 X 0E' 0~6"I:~V (AM 8.409). 
62A~tius plac. 4.11.1-4, DDG 400 = SVF 2.83. The translation is that of Long and Sedley 

434 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Another distinction among presentations which is relevant at this point is that 
between presentations which are rational (Xoyt 
and those which are irrational 
(&Xoyo 0. 
Rational presentations, according to Diogenes La~rtius, are those of 
rational creatures. They are processes of thought (DL 7.51), and they have an 
objective content which can be expressed in language (AM 8.70). 
It looks as 
though the 'preconceptions' mentioned in the quotation from A~tius are those 
which 'arise naturally' from sensory presentations. 
Since these preconceptions 
are a requisite for rationality, it is apparent that our first sensory presentations 
are preconceptual and hence non-rational. Evidently, rational presentations are 
possible only when a person has acquired the preconceptions which go to make 
up the content of such presentations. 
Since the preconceptions would seem to 
provide a fairly basic conceptual apparatus (e.g., colour concepts), the rational 
presentations based on them would also be fairly basic. Diogenes La~rtius lists 
several ways that more complex conceptions may be brought about. 
Of these [complex conceptions] some are acquired by direct experience, 
some by resemblance, some by analogy, some by transposition, some by 
composition, and some by contrariety .... 
Some things are conceived 
by inference (gexd~3acng), such as lekta and place. The conception of 
what is just and good comes naturally. And some things are conceived 
by privation, such as the idea of being without hands (DL 7.52-53). 
Sextus Empiricus gives a similar list of ways by which conceptions are grasped, and 
it is notable that he precedes this list with the comment, apparently having its basis 
in Stoic doctrine, that "in general it is not possible to find in conception that which 
someone possesses not known by him in accordance with direct experience" (AM 
8.58). Of the rational presentations which are primary, an important sub-class are 
those presentations which are called 'apprehensive' or 'cognitive' (~t xc~aXri~txa't 
q)c~v~ao[at).We follow F.H. Sandbach in rendering 'at xa~akrln~txa't q)av~ao[at' as 
'cognitive presentations' [Sandbach, 1971a, p. 10]. Presentations belonging to this 
class play a central role in the Stoic theory of knowledge. 
The material nature of the mind in Stoic psychology is an important component 
in what seems to us a plausible interpretation of the notion of an 'apprehensive' or 
'cognitive' presentation. The interpretation we have in mind is that presented by 
Michael Frede in his essay "Stoics and Skeptics on Clear and Distinct Impressions" 
[Frede, 1987e, 151-76]. Cognitive presentations (Frede calls them 'cognitive im- 
pressions') were deemed by the Stoics to be "the criterion of truth" (~b  
[1990, 1.238]. According to Sandbach, "the claim that reason is made up in the first seven years 
is surprising and conflicts with all other sources, which give 14 as the age when it is established. 
... Au)'tius seems to have confused the beginning of the growth of reason in the first seven 
years of life with its completion round about the age of fourteen" [Sandbach, 1985, 80n118]. 
Jamblichus, for example, reports that "the Stoics say that reason is not immediately implanted, 
but is assembled later from sense perceptions and presentations about the fourteenth year" (de 
anima, apud Stobaeus eclog. 1.317.20). cf. Inwood: "Reason ... begins to be acquired at or 
about the age of seven and is 'completely acquired' at or about the age of fourteen" [Inwood, 
1985, p. 721. 

The 'Megarians and the Stoics 
435 
x~g &X@e[ag) (DL 7.54), and as such played a foundational role in the Stoic account 
of the development of an individual person's knowledge of the world. According 
to the definition given both by Sextus Empiricus (AM 7.248) and by Diogenes 
LaSrtius (7.46), cognitive presentations arise only from that which is real and are 
imaged and impressed in accordance with that reality. 6a In his account, Sextus 
Empiricus adds a third condition to this definition: a cognitive presentation can- 
not have its source in that which is not real (AM 7.248). This last condition was 
apparently added to forestall certain objections of the Academics. According to 
Sextus (AM 7.252), the Stoics thought that a cognitive presentation would pos- 
sess a distinctive feature (tSCHgc~) by which it could be distinguished from all other 
presentations, such a feature reflecting a corresponding distinction in the object 
from which the cognitive presentation arises. The Academics, on the other hand, 
denied that any presentation could have such a feature. According to them, a 
false presentation can always be found which is similar in all respects to any given 
presentation (AM 7.402-10). According to Frede, both the Stoic and Academic 
schools probably agreed that cognitive presentations, "in order to play the role 
assigned to them by the Stoics, would have to satisfy the third condition too" 
[Frede, 1987e, pp. 165-66]. 
A problem for the Stoics, then, is to give an account of how one could tell that 
a presentation satisfied this condition, or, as Sandbach expresses it, "How could 
the bona tides of a cognitive presentation be established?" [Sandbach, 1971a, p. 
19]. The difficulty is that any sort of test one might make to determine whether 
a given presentation is cognitive will itself depend on a presentation. But then 
a test will be required to determine whether the latter presentation is cognitive, 
and so on. Evidently such a process will lead to an infinite regress, a criticism 
expressed by Sextus Empiricus (AM 7.429), and probably derived from the early 
Academics, Arcesilaus and Carneades (cf. Long and Sedley, [1990, 1.249]). 
One sort of reply to this criticism is that proposed by Sandbach: "There must 
be a point to call a halt. There must be some presentations that are immediately 
acceptable, that are self-evidently true. That is what constitutes a cognitive pre- 
sentation. It is the attitude of common sense that most presentations are of this 
sort" [Sandbach, 1971a, p. 19]. It is not clear how far this reply will go to convince 
the sceptic. At any rate, if there were to be such self-evidently true presentations, 
it seems a plausible supposition that they would be sensory presentations having 
fairly basic conceptions as content. From these basic cognitive presentations the 
corresponding conceptions would be derived, and from these, in turn, more com- 
plex presentations. Thus, through the development of more and more complex 
notions, a complete grasp of things would eventually be gained, such grasp being 
expressed in general conditionals such as this: "If a thing is a human being, it is 
63We are rendering 'r.b Orc&pXov' as 'that which is real' or 'reality' rather than as 'the real 
object'. We will argue in the sequel that although the Stoics took "objective particulars" as 
their "fundamental existents" (cf. Long [1971, p. 75]), they nevertheless thought that reality 
consists not only in such objective particulars, but also in the properties and relations of these 
objects. 

436 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
a rational mortal animal" (Si homo est, animal est mortale, rationis particeps). 
This seems to be the developmental process envisaged by Antiochus in his defence 
of Stoic epistemology (Cicero acad. 2.21). Frede conveys the idea with the remark 
that "the Stoics take the view that only perceptual impressions are cognitive in 
their own right. Thus other impressions can be called cognitive only to the ex- 
tent that they have a cognitive content which depends on the cognitive content of 
impressions which are cognitive in their own right" [Frede, 1987e, p. 159]. 
Frede suggests that these basic presentations which are self-evidently true are 
so because they possess a causal feature which acts on the mind "in a distinctive 
way" thus bringing about recognition of the veridicality of the presentation [Frede, 
1987e, p. 
168]. 
"It is in this sense," according to Frede, "that the mind can 
discriminate cognitive and noncognitive impressions" [Frede, 1987e, p.168]. The 
plausibility of this suggestion, it seems to us, depends in no small measure on the 
material nature of the mind in Stoic psychology. Previously in this section we saw 
that the pneuma which pervades all substance is also constitutive of the minds of 
human beings. Now according to the Stoics, causal interactions between bodies 
occur either through spatial contact (Simplicius in cat. 302.31) or through the 
medium of the pneuma (A~tius plac. 1.11.5, DDG 310). Hence, the feasibility of 
a causal interaction between the mind and some distinctive feature of a state of 
affairs is not prima facie out of the question; moreover, such an interaction would 
evidently result in a unique presentation. 
5 
LEKTA 
5.1 
Signifier and Signified 
Traditionally, one of the more celebrated texts providing evidence for Stoic seman- 
tic theory is that presented by Sextus Empiricus at AM 8.11-12. Just before this 
passage he has given an account of a controversy between the Epicureans and the 
Stoics as to whether the true is that which is perceptible only to the senses or only 
to the intellect. He continues: 
Such, then, is the character of the first disagreement concerning what 
is true. But there was another controversy according to which some 
located both the true and the false in that which is signified, some in 
the utterance, and some in the process of thought. The Stoics, more- 
over, put forward the first opinion, saying that three things are con- 
nected: that which is signified (xb (~[ac~tvo[a~vov), that which signifies 
(xb ~~vov), 
and the subject of predication (xb xuyX~,ov ). Of these, 
that which signifies is the utterance (qx0,~t), for example, 'Dion'. That 
which is signified, that is, what is indicated (xb ~rlXo@~vov ) by the 
utterance, is the state of affairs itself (~)xb xb xp~y~ac~) which we ap- 
prehend as subsisting coordinately with (~p~q)t(~xc~g~vou) our thought, 
but which the Barbarians, although hearing the utterance, do not com- 
prehend. The subject of predication is the external substrate (xb ~ 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
437 
5xo 
as, for instance, Dion himself. And of these (three things) 
they say that two are corporeal, namely, the utterance and the subject 
of predication; whereas one is incorporeal and spoken, or able to be spo- 
ken (Xs 
namely, the state of affairs (xp~yg~) signified, precisely 
that which also becomes (yi,sx~t) true or false. And these (pragmata 
which are spoken or can be spoken) are not all of a kind, but some 
are incomplete (~XXtx~), while others are complete (~)xoxsXfl). And of 
the complete, one is called axi6ma, which they also describe by saying 
"The axiOma is that which is true or false." 
The above passage provides a point of reference for the discussion of various ques- 
tions which play a central role in the interpretation of Stoic semantic theory. It 
is our intention that an understanding of this theory will emerge as a result of 
discussing these various issues. Since we will frequently refer to this passage in 
what follows, it will be convenient for such reference to call it 'Passage A'. 
Sextus informs us in this passage that the Stoics develop their theory of what 
is true or false by distinguishing three kinds of items which are connected. These 
are 'that which signifies' (~b a~[a~,~ov), 'that which is signified' (~b a~ac~tvo~vov), 
and 'the subject of predication' (zb zuYX~O~ ). He goes on to provide a more 
specific delineation of each of kind of item. That which signifies (to sgmainon) is 
characterised as 'the utterance' (fl q)c~ 
The term 'qxo~f 1' is standardly rendered 
as 'sound' or 'speech', but it seems to us that in certain contexts it has a somewhat 
more ambiguous meaning for the Stoics, this meaning being better captured by the 
indeterminate sense that 'utterance' has as it is used in modern philosophy. For 
instance, 'utterance' on this account would encompass writing as well as speech (cf. 
DL 7.56). As an example of to s~mainon, Sextus provides the utterance of the name 
'Dion'. This example, it seems to us, is not only completely inappropriate for the 
context, but is also inappropriate at a more fundamental level. We shall have more 
to say about this problem presently. That which is signified (to sgmainomenon), 
that is, what is indicated by the utterance, is characterised as 'the state of affairs 
itself' (~0~b ~b ~p~y[a~) .64 Sextus implies that on hearing the utterance a Greek 
speaker will apprehend the pragma as 'subsisting coordinately with thought', but 
the Barbarian or non-Greek-speaker will not apprehend the pragma, even though 
he hears the same utterance. Recalling that rational presentations are 'processes 
of thought' (DL 7.51) having an objective content which can be expressed by 
discourse (AM 8.70), this sounds very much like a description of how a rational 
presentation would be induced in the mind of the Greek speaker by the utterance, 
with the content of the presentation being the state of affairs signified by the 
utterance. 
64We follow several authors in translating 'xb xp~y~c~' as 'the state of affairs" e.g., Long [1971, 
107n10]; Long and Sedley [1990, 1.195, 202]; Reesor [1989, Ch. 3]. The term certainly can have 
this meaning in ordinary Greek; it seems evident, however, that the Stoics gave it a technical 
meaning in the context of their semantic theory. We take it that in this context the term referred 
to a semantic structure which corresponded in structure either to a real state of affairs, or to a 
mooted state of affairs. 

438 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
To return to the problem of Sextus' example 'Dion', the context of Passage A 
is an account of what it is to which the Stoics ascribed the property of having a 
truth value, and we are told that it is to s~mainomenon. We are also told that to 
s~mainomenon is the pragma or state of affairs indicated by the utterance. Now 
it seems evident that the utterance of 'Dion' will not indicate a state of affairs 
which is either true or false. Hence, the example seems to be inappropriate in the 
context of the discussion. A more suitable example would be something like the 
utterance of the sentence 'A(cov ~pt~~' (Dion is walking). 65 
At a more fundamental level, the example is problematic inasmuch as it seems to 
suggest that in Stoic semantics a proper name signifies a 'meaning' or 'sense' and 
refers to the object named. According to Diogenes La~rtius, however, Diogenes 
the Babylonian defined a name as a part of speech (~@poc)~6you) indicating an 
individuating quality ([~(~ xotSx~l~ ) (DL 7.58). This teaching would appear to have 
its basis in certain epistemological and metaphysical concerns, in particular, in the 
doctrine of cognitive presentations, in the principle of the identity of indiscernibles, 
and in the theory of change and identity. Recall that one of the functions of the 
pneuma in Stoic philosophy is to invest undifferentiated matter (u)~l) with qualities 
(see page 430). Certain of these qualities serve not only to differentiate portions 
of prime matter from the rest, but also to individuate them as unique entities. 
The matter invested with an 'individuating quality' ([~(~ ~ot6xrl~ ), along with 
the quality itself, together comprise 'that which is individually qualified' (5 [S(a)~ 
xot6~), that is, the uniquely qualified individual which serves as the substrate for 
further qualities and for the predication of attributes (Simplicius in cat. 48.11). 
An essential feature of this doctrine is that although the substance (o6(~(~) of which 
an individual entity is comprised is constitutive of that entity, it is not identical 
with it (Stobaeus eclog. 1.178.21-179.17). Thus, the Stoics were able to defend the 
idea of something which remains constant and serves as the basis for change, for 
although the substance of which an entity is comprised might undergo constant 
'alteration' (&~,)~o(o)~t~) and so never be the same from moment to moment, the 
individuating quality remains constant (Stobaeus eclog. 1.177.21-178.21; Plutarch 
comm. not. 1083c). As well, this notion of a uniquely qualified individual is no 
doubt the basis of the Stoic thesis of the identity of indiscernibles which held that 
"no hair or grain of sand is in all respects the same as another hair or grain" 
(Cicero acad. 2.85), and which served in the defence of the theory of cognitive 
presentations (acad. 2.83-85). 
According to this doctrine, then, the utterance of 'Dion' signifies the portion 
of pneuma individuating that part of the substrate (xb bzoxe(~evov) which is 
constitutive of the qualified individual ([~(~0~ xotS~), Dion. And even when Dion 
has died and it is no longer possible to refer to him by means of a demonstrative, 
65For similar commentary on Sextus' example, see Long and Sedley [1990, 2.197]; Long [1971, 
p. 77 and 107nll]; Frede [1987b, p. 349]. Kerferd, on the other hand, argues that the conclusion 
that 'Dion' signifies a lekton is straightforward in spite of the many passages suggesting that 
only axi6mata are true or false [Kerferd, 1978a, pp. 260-61]. He does not mention the difficulty 
posed by Diogenes' passage which says that names signify corporeal qualities, not incorporeal 
lekta. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
439 
it is still possible to refer to him by name (Alexander in an. pr. 177.31), since the 
name picks out not the substance of Dion, but the individuating quality. At any 
rate, the point is that the Stoics already have an adequate theory of signification 
for names which links the utterance of the name directly to what it signifies, and 
there is no need, therefore, to posit an incorporeal 'meaning' or 'sense' as the 
signification of a name. 
Returning to Sextus' account of the three connected items, the 'subject of 
predication' (zb ~uyx~vov ) is characterised as 'the external substrate' (~b ~x~br 
b~o 
According to Simplicius, the Stoics, as well as earlier philosophers, 
held that the substrate is twofold: primarily it is unqualified matter (di=oto< 5Xrl) , 
which is what Aristotle named it; and secondly, it is that which is commonly or 
individually qualified (5  
~otdv ~ [~(co~). In this latter case, the qualified 
substrate serves as the substrate for further qualities and as the subject of pred- 
ication (in cat. 48.11-16). Since it seems evident that the utterance signifies the 
pragma and predicates a property or quality of the external substrate, we have 
translated 'zb zuyX~vov' as 'the subject of predication'. 6~ 
Having given this more specific characterisation of the three connected items, 
Sextus then reports the Stoic doctrine that two of these items are 'corporeals' 
(a&ta~zc~), which is to say, bodies or material entities, while the other is 'incor- 
poreal' (&ag[a~), literally, 'without body'. It seems obvious that the Stoics would 
have classed the external substrate as corporeal. Moreover, since they viewed the 
utterance as a body, it seems clear that they would also have classed it as corpo- 
real. It is Stoic doctrine that whatever produces an effect is a body; hence, the 
utterance is evidently a body, for it produces an effect as it proceeds from the 
speaker to the hearer (DL 7.55-56). In addition, since a written utterance (q)cov~ 1 
~yyp@g~zo~)--which, according to Diogenes the Babylonian, is speech (),~t~) (DL 
7.56)--is also capable of producing an effect, they no doubt would have counted 
it as corporeal as well. On the other hand, given that the Stoics held that "bodies 
alone are existents" (Plutarch comm. not. 1073e), the conception of the pragma 
as incorporeal does seem to be problematic, for, as Gerard Watson puts it, "'in- 
corporeal' is an extraordinary concept in a materialist universe" [Watson, 1966, 
p. 38]. We shall have more to say about the ontological status of the pragma 
or lekton in Subsection 5.5. For the moment, however, we discuss the semantic 
considerations which might have prompted the Stoics to posit such an item. 
At the end of Passage A Sextus makes it clear that there are several different 
types of complete pragmata, and in a later passage (AM 8.70-74) he provides a list 
of them. In this later text, however, he does not write, as he does in Passage A, 
of complete pragmata which are spoken or can be spoken (k~ 
but rather of 
complete lekta. It would appear, therefore, that we can take complete lekta to be 
complete pragmata which are spoken or can be spoken. From what was said earlier 
66Long and Sedley translate 'xb TuyX&vov' as 'the name-bearer'. For an explanation and 
discussion of this translation, see Long and Sedley [1990], 1.201 and 2.197. In an earlier work, 
Long translated 'xb xuyX&~o~' as 'the object of reference' [Long, 1971, p. 76, 107n9]. For Michael 
Frede's interpretation, see his [1987b, pp. 349-50]. 

440 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
in Passage A, the lekton is the signification of an utterance, and from discussion 
in the text at AM 8.70-74, as well as in the text of Diogenes La~rtius at 7.65-68, 
the type of the lekton is evidently determined by the type of speech act which is 
its signifier. One type of lekton, for example, is signified by the utterance of a 
command, another type, by the utterance of a question (DL 7.66; AM 8.71). The 
axi6ma, as one might expect, is apparently signified by an assertion, which is to 
say, the utterance of a declarative sentence (DL 7.65-66). 
Now it would seem that a difficulty becomes manifest when one asks what is 
the character of the lekton, or, as it might be expressed, what is the character of 
'that which is signified'. This difficulty is relevant to every type of lekton, but one 
can get a general idea of the problem by considering the axidma in particular. At 
the beginning of Passage A Sextus informs us that the Stoics rejected the view 
that the true and the false are in the utterance, as well as the view that they are 
in the process of thought. They themselves put forward the thesis that the true 
and the false are located in 'that which is signified' (xb orlg~tvog~vov ). At the end 
of Passage A, we are told that of the various types of complete lekta, the axiOma 
is the one which the Stoics say is true or false, and according to Diogenes La~rtius 
(7.65-66), the axi6ma is signified by an assertion. Hence, according to the Stoics, 
when someone makes an assertion, i.e., utters a declarative sentence, he signifies 
an axi6ma, and the axiSma is either true or false. The problem, then, which in 
general can be expressed as 'What is the nature of "that which is signified"?', can 
be expressed with respect to the axiOma as 'What is the nature of "that which is 
true or false"?'. 
It might be helpful at this point to consider how the Stoics define something as 
being true. Sextus reports in one place, for example, that they hold the definite 
axiSma 'This man is sitting' or 'This man is walking' to be true (&X@~) whenever 
the predicate 'to sit' or 'to walk' corresponds to the attribute falling under the 
demonstrative (AM 8.100).67Similarly, Diogenes Lai~rtius relates that on the Stoic 
account, someone who says 'It is day' seems to make a claim that it is day, and 
the axiOma set forth is true (&Xrlg~) just in case it really is day, otherwise, it is 
false (@58o~) (DL 7.65). 68 
Now suppose that someone utters the sentence 'Dion is walking', and suppose 
further that Dion really is walking. 
Evidently, on the above account, what is 
signified by the utterance would be true, and it seems tempting in such a situation 
br~pX~tv 5xc~ x 0 bxb "~lv ~g{tv ~[xxo~xt aug[3sl3~x~ xb xax~lydp~gc~, oTo~ ~b xc(~f'lagat ~ xb xspt- 
x0cz~v. 
68Note that in English, the axiOma is mentioned by setting of the corresponding sentence in 
single quotation marks. 
In the Greek, it is often mentioned by similar means~usually with 
double quotation marks, and examples are often introduced by the term 'olov', with or without 
quotation marks. Also, the axiOma is sometimes mentioned by nominalising the corresponding 
sentence by means of the definite article. Hence, the axiOma which we represent in English as 
'Dion is walking', may be represented in the Greek as 'T.b A[cov xuptg~xu~'. At any rate, the same 
means are used to mention sentences, both in English and in the Greek, respectively, and it 
would appear that some ancient commentators, as well as some recent translators, do not always 
keep the distinction in mind. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
441 
to think that what is signified is the actual state of affairs, which, on the Stoic 
view, could be described as Dion's h~gemonikon in a certain state. And since the 
hggemonikon, which part of the soul, is constituted by pneuma and so is corporeal 
(see page 430), what would be signified on this understanding would be something 
corporeal, and hence unproblematic for Stoic materialism. 69 Suppose, however, 
that someone utters the sentence 'Theon is walking', and that Theon is actually 
sitting at the Stoa listening to Zeno's lecture. Evidently, what is signified by the 
utterance in this case will be false; moreover, there is no temptation to think 
that what is signified is an actual state of affairs consisting in the non-walking 
Theon. Nevertheless, the utterance is significant, and whether Theon is actually 
walking or not, a Greek speaker who hears the utterance of the sentence 'O{~ov 
xeptxaxg' will experience in either case a rational presentation according to which 
he will apprehend the same pragma signified and spoken. In other words, what 
will be signified by the utterance will be the same in either case. It seems evident, 
therefore, that what is signified is not the actual state of affairs. What is suggested 
by this commentary is that the Stoics were persuaded by theoretical considerations 
to admit items into the ontology of their theory of language for which they could 
not give a materialist account. 
It may be, however, that because of reflections on their theory of causality, 
the lekton, or at least, the incomplete lekton, had already been admitted as an 
item in their ontology. Although the weight of evidence adduced by many modern 
commentators would seem to support the view that the lekton was posited by the 
Stoics in their semantic theory, Michael Frede has recently proposed that "it is not 
clear ... that the notion of a lekton was introduced by the Stoics in the context 
of their philosophy of language rather than their ontology" [Frede, 1987a, p. 137]. 
The evidence for this proposal comes from a passage in Clement's Stromata (8.9.4) 
in which it is claimed that Kleanthes called predicates ( 
lekta. As far 
as we know, according to Frede, this is the first use by a Stoic of the term 'lekton' 
[Frede, 1987a, p. 137]. In order to bring out the significance of this passage with 
respect to the present concern, it will be necessary to consider briefly the role of 
the predicate (kat~gorgma) in the Stoic theory of causality. 
It would seem that for the Stoics "the canonical representation of the causal 
relation was ... as a three-place relation between a body and another body and 
a predicate true of [the second] body" (Frede [1987a, p. 137]). Thus a knife (or 
a scalpel) is the cause for flesh of being cut (~ o~px~ ~o5 z~v~ogc~t) (AM 9.211; 
Clement strom. 8.9.30.3), and fire is the cause for wood of burning (~ ~5X9 
9 o5 xc~aogGt) (AM 9.211). In representing the causal relation in this manner the 
Stoics were no doubt influenced by their conception of the universe as a dynamic 
continuum. Such a view would seem to presuppose a theory of causality in which 
events rather than particular entities are seen as the effects of causes. For on this 
conception, the universe just is the totality of events which occur as the result 
69It is evident that the Stoics thought that the attribute 'walking' is real when possessed by 
someone or something, even though they also thought that the predicate 'walking' is incorporeal 
(see footnote 84, page 448). 

442 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
of causal interactions between bodies (s6mata), either through spatial contact or 
through the medium of the pneuma. 7~ According to Sextus Empiricus, the Stoics 
characterise such interactions as follows: "Every cause is a body which becomes 
responsible to a body of something incorporeal" (AM 9.211). 71 Thus an effect, on 
this account, is something which happens to a body as a result of some action of 
another body. This 'something which happens', however, is not itself a body, but 
is something 'incorporeal', that is, a predicate. We shall return to the topic of 
the predicate and its role in Stoic semantic theory, but for the moment we intend 
to give some consideration to the various other types of lekta recognised by the 
Stoics. 
In the last part of Passage A, Sextus writes that the pragmata which are signified 
by the utterance are not only incorporeal, but also spoken or able to be spoken 
(Xa 
They are differentiated first of all between those which are 'complete' 
(~6~o~),fl) and those which are 'incomplete' (~),Xt~fl). Of the complete pragmata, 
one is called the axi6rna, and it is this which is either true or false. In similar 
texts strongly suggestive of a common source, Sextus and Diogenes Lai~rtius each 
render an account of the various kinds of complete pragmata (AM 8.70-74; DL 
7.65-68). In these passages, however, they write of lekta rather than of pragmata 
which are spoken or can be spoken. In the text at AM 8.70, Sextus reiterates some 
of the things he mentioned in Passage A. In particular, he tells us that the Stoics 
maintain in common that the true and the false are in the lekton. He goes on 
to report that according to them, the lekton subsists coordinately with a rational 
presentation, and that a rational presentation is one in which it is possible that 
what is presented be exhibited in discourse. Further on, he also mentions again 
that the Stoics call some lekta incomplete, and others, complete. He then provides 
a list of several different kinds of complete lekta (AM 8.71-73). 
Diogenes Lai~rtius, after relating that Chrysippus takes the subject of dialectic to 
be that which signifies (xb or~[acdvovxc~) and that which is signified (c~rl~cavd~vc~), 
also reports that the lekton is that which subsists coordinately with a rational 
presentation. He provides a brief summary of the doctrine of the lekton, saying 
that this theory is arranged under the topic of pragmata and sgmainomena, and 
includes complete lekta, such as axiOmata and syllogisms, as well as incomplete 
lekta, namely predicates (x~u 
both direct (6pOd~) and indirect (Sx~tcx) 
(DL 7.63).ZeHe then gives an account of incomplete lekta, or predicates (7.63-65), 
70 "As physical events are transmitted by nearby action, either through direct contact of bodies 
or by the pneuma, this must be true also for cause-effect relations. Contiguity is therefore an 
essential attribute of causality, and causes are bodies acting upon other bodies either in spatial 
contact with them or through the medium of the pneuma" (Sambursky [1959, p. 53]). 
72Hick's note here is somewhat misleading. He writes that "'Direct Predicate' answers to our 
Active Verb, 'Predicate Reversed' to our Passive" (DL 7.63 note a). This seems to point out 
a fairly fundamental misunderstanding of the concept of a lekton in Stoic semantics. As lekta, 
predicates are incorporeal, verbs are parts of speech, and as such, are corporeal. A verb (~tc~), 
according to Diogenes the Babylonian, is a part of speech signifying an uncombined predicate 
(DL 7.58). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
443 
which leads into a summary of the various kinds of complete lekta (7.65-68). He 
begins this synopsis with the following characterisation of the axi6ma" 
An axi6ma is that which is either true or false, or a complete pragma 
(~6~o~X~r ~p~y~c~) such as can be asserted (&~oq)c~v~dv) in itself. Thus 
Chrysippus says in his Dialectical Definitions, "An axiOma is that such 
as can be asserted in itself, as, for example, 'It is day', 'Dion is walking'" 
(DL 7.65). 73 
There is some question concerning the meaning of '&~oq)c~vx6v' in this passage. 
Hicks renders it 'capable of being denied', but Mates argues that this adjective is 
derived from &xoq)~Cvco, not from &~oq)~a 
or &~6q)qgt, and so should be translated 
as 'asserted' or 'capable of being asserted' [Mates, 1953, p. 28]. In accord with 
Mates' view, Diogenes writes, just after the text quoted above, that the term 
'&~[c0g~' is derived from the verb '&~toSGgc~t'. This has the meaning 'to be asserted' 
or 'to be claimed'. 74 
As for the other kinds of complete lekta, both authors present a similar cata- 
logue. There are discrepancies, however, inasmuch as some kinds of lekta appear 
on one list but not on the other, and inasmuch as some kinds are not denoted by the 
same terminology on both lists. What we report here is inclusive of both lists and 
ignores the differences in terminology. This comprehensive list includes questions 
of two kinds" interrogations (~pcbxqg~xc~), i.e., those which require only a 'yes' or 
'no' reply, and inquiries (~Sc~g~xc~), i.e., those which require an explanatory reply. 
It also includes imperatives (~poc~txo[), prayers (~0x~xc~i) and curses (&p~tx~[), 
oaths (6pxtxoC), hypotheticals (0~o9~ztxoC), vocatives (~poac~yop~u~xo~), declara- 
tives (&zoq)~vx~xc~[), a kind of rhetorical question (~z~zopqx~xoi), and finally, a 
lekton which Diogenes calls a quasi-azi&na (Sgo~ov &~co~) (DL 7.67). For exam- 
ple, although the sentence 'Priam's sons are like the cowherd' signifies an axi5ma, 
the sentence 'How like to Priam's sons the cowherd is!' signifies a quasi-axiOma; 
or, as Sextus puts it, "something more than an axiSma, but not an axiSma" (AM 
8.73). We have noted that these texts would seem to suggest that the type of lekton 
is determined by the type of speech act which is its signifier, and it is tempting 
to conjecture that there is some parallel with the speech act theories of Searle, 
Hare, and Austin. At any rate, we shall say more about this possibility in the 
next subsection. 
Not much textual information has come down to us concerning the Stoic treat- 
ment of these various kinds of lekta other than axiSmata. We do know, however, 
that Chrysippus had an interest in developing a theory of at least some of them, 
b XpOu~r~r~6r q)rl(nv ~v ~o~r AtcxX~x~txo?~ 6pore '&~[a)ti4 ~c~t ~b &rvoq)o~wbv ~ xo~c(q)o~v~bv 6cmv ~q)' 
@au~'. 
Compare the definition given by Sextus at PH 2.104: 'xal vb g@v &{[~g& q)otc~tv e~'vat 
Xex~bv a6~oveX@~ &=oq~awbv 6~ov ~q)' ~au~.~'. These descriptions differ on in that Sextus has 
'lekton' instead of 'pragma'. 
And Aulus Gellius reports that he found this definition of the 
axiOma in his Greek books: 'Xex~bv a6zo~eX~c &r~dq)av~ov 6cmv @q)' ab~ .~'. 
74For further discussion of the difficulties in rendering this passage, see Frede [1974, pp. 38-40]; 
Long and Sedley [1990, 2.204-05]- and Margaret Reesor [1989 pp. 46-48]. 

444 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
for he is reported by Diogenes La~rtius to have written a series of books on imper- 
atives and questions under the general heading of Logical Topics Concerning Lekta 
(DL 7.191); moreover, in a damaged papyrus discovered at Herculaneum we have a 
discussion by Chrysippus on the relationship between predicates, statements, and 
imperatives.75Nevertheless, aside from these examples and some isolated entries 
in the texts of a few commentators "most of the attention was given to proposi- 
tions" [Frede, 1987b, p. 345], and virtually all of the extant writing by the ancient 
commentators on the topic of the lekton is about the axiSma. 
5.2 
Lekta and rational presentations 
In the passage from Sextus Empiricus quoted above (AM 8.70), we are told that 
"the lekton is that which subsists in accordance with a rational presentation" and 
that "a rational presentation is one in which it is possible that what is presented 
(xb ~c~w~cy0~v) be set forth in language." Another passage, this one from Diogenes 
La~rtius, informs us that "those presentations which are rational are processes of 
thought" 76 (DL 7.51). If one compares these texts with the text of Passage A, where 
Sextus implies that the pragma is that which subsists coordinately with thought, 
this comparison would seem to indicate that there is some sort of correspondence 
between the terms 'pragma' and 'lekton' in these contexts. Confirmation for this 
correspondence is provided by a comparison of the discussion at the end of Pas- 
sage A with what Sextus reports at AM 8.70 concerning complete and incomplete 
lekta. In Passage A, Sextus writes that the pragmata which are spoken or can 
be spoken (~p~y~c~x~ ks 
differ inasmuch as some are complete, whereas oth- 
ers are incomplete. At AM 8.70, however, he writes that lekta are differentiated 
in that some are complete while others are incomplete. What would seem to be 
the case, then, is that lekta are pragmata which are spoken or can be spoken. 
If this judgment is correct, then it is evident that in the text at AM 8.70 one 
could substitute 'pragma which is spoken or can be spoken' for 'lekton' and thus 
interpret Sextus' remark as 'the pragma which is spoken or can be spoken is that 
which subsists coordinately with a rational presentation'. It also seems plausible 
that in the kinds of contexts under consideration the qualifying phrase 'spoken or 
capable of being spoken' could be dropped. This possibility seems to be realised, 
for example, in Passage A, where the pragmata referred to are s~mainomena, and 
hence, one would suppose, spoken. At any rate, by dropping the qualifying phrase, 
and substituting just the term 'pragma' for the term 'lekton' in the text at AM 
8.70, one could simply say that 'the pragma is that which subsists coordinately 
with a rational presentation'. However, 'pragma' should always be understood as 
'pragma spoken' or 'pragma which can be spoken'. 
75This book, called Logical Inquiries (AOFIK~tN ZHTHMAT~tN), is included in the collection 
by von Arnim as Fragment 2.298a. For an interesting view on the content of these writings and on 
the possible similarity of the Stoic theory to those of modern theorists in the logic of imperatives: 
see Inwood's Ethics and Human Action in Early Stoicism, [Inwood, 1985] 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
445 
Possibly a relevant text here is that of Diogenes La~rtius in which he writes that 
under the general heading of dialectic, the doctrine of the lekton is arranged under 
the topic of pragrnata and sgrnainornena (7.63). These remarks seem to indicate 
that lekta belong to a differentia of pragrnata and of sgrnainomena. That lekta are 
a species of sgrnainomena seems unproblematic, and we shall argue in the sequel 
that not all sgmainornena are lekta. It is not clear, on the other hand, what the 
other differentiae of pragmata would be. However, given the understanding of 
'pragmata' as 'states of affairs', it is plausible to suppose that the Stoics did not 
think that all states of affairs are spoken or capable of being spoken. 
Another section of the text at AM 8.70 to consider is the remark that a rational 
presentation is one for which it is possible that what is presented (xb q0awaa9{v) 
be exhibited by means of discourse. There is some controversy concerning the 
interpretation of 'xb q)c~vx~c~9~v' in this passage. Mates writes that 'xb q)c~vx~9~v' 
is "the objective content of the presentation," and equates it with 'xb l~ 
(1953, 22). In criticising this view, Long says that "'the presented object' (sc. ~b 
q~,x~c~9~v) is what a phantasia reveals, a 'thing' not a lekton. If I see Cato walking 
I am presented with an object which can be denoted in a complete lekton" [Long, 
1971, 109m33]. We would reply that what I am presented with is not merely Cato, 
but Cato walking, which we take to be not merely an object, but a state of affairs. 
We would agree with Long, however, that xb t~ 
should not be equated with 
xb q0~x~c~9~. It seems to us that 'xb q~xc~c~9~V should be understood simply as 
'that which is presented', and the text should be taken as setting out a necessary 
and sufficient condition for a presentation to be rational. On this reading, we take 
it that the condition is fulfilled if and only if xb q)c~xc~c~9~ is a ~p~u 
l~ 
, 
that is, a state of affairs which is spoken or can be spoken. On the other hand, the 
condition is not fulfilled if xb q)~x~c~9~ is not a ~pay[ac~ l~ 
77 At any rate, 
we take it that Sextus' remark can be rephrased thus: "A rational presentation is 
one in which what is presented is a pragma which is spoken or can be spoken." 
The following quotation from Diogenes Lai~rtius indicates that the Stoics appear 
to have drawn a distinction which is of relevance to the present discussion. They 
seem to have differentiated discourse from both mere utterance and speech, and 
to have referred to discourse as 'speaking pra9mata' 
Mere utterance (q0cov/l) and speech (),{~tg) differ inasmuch as mere ut- 
terance is sometimes just noise, whereas speech is always articulate 
(~vapgpog). And speech also differs from discourse (Xdu 
inasmuch 
as discourse is always significant (c~Tlgawt 
hence, though speech 
(lezis) is sometimes meaningless, as for instance the word 'f3X{xupt', dis- 
course is never so. And discourse or 'speaking' (~b),{yetv) also differs 
from mere utterance, for whereas sounds are uttered, states of affairs 
(~p4y[aaxa) are spoken: and such states of affairs, in fact, happen to 
be lekta (DL 7.57). 
7rThe presentations of children, for example, are not rational until they have accumulated a 
certain stock of conceptions (e.g., see footnote 62, page 433), but since they apparently do have 
presentations, surely one can speak of 'that which is presented' in such presentations. 

446 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
This notion of 'discourse' as 'speaking pragmata' is elaborated by Sextus Empir- 
icus in a passage in which he is reports that "to speak (~6 k{yetv), according to 
the Stoics themselves, is to utter sounds capable of signifying the state of affairs 
(xpaygc~) apprehended" (AM 8.80). Thus one might say that to engage in dis- 
course, that is, to speak pragmata, is to utter articulate sounds which signify the 
state of affairs apprehended in a rational presentation. 
Other 
passages 
which 
seem 
relevant 
are those 
recorded 
by Diogenes 
La~rtius at 7.66-67. Here he informs us that, according the Stoics, an axi6ma 
"is a [state of affairs] which we assert to be the case when we speak it" (7.66).rSwe 
take it that what this means is that when one 'speaks a pragma '79 by asserting 
it, the lekton, that is, what is said, is an axiOma: to put it another way, what is 
said when one asserts that some state of affairs holds or is the case is an axiOma 
or proposition. It might be instructive to compare Diogenes' account of the lekton 
called an imperative (~:poo-co~xctxdv): "An imperative is a pragma which we com- 
mand to be the case when we speak it" (DL 7.67). 80 
Thus, when one speaks a 
pragma by commanding it, the lekton, or what is said, is a prostaktikon: in other 
words, what is said when one commands that some state of affairs be the case is a 
prostaktikon or imperative. Similarly, when one speaks a pragma by asking it, the 
lekton is a query or interrogation ({p&xr~bta). According to Diogenes, the sentence 
'It is day' signifies an axiOma whereas the sentence 'Is it day?' signifies an inter- 
rogation. What this example would seem to indicate is that the same pragma or 
state of affairs--in this case, its being day--can function as the content of various 
types of lekta, depending on the speech act involved. 
Brad Inwood plausibly suggests that this conception is comparable to the idea 
familiar in the speech act theories of Searle and Hare, that is, the idea of a "dis- 
tinction between content and mode of assertion" [Inwood, 1985, p. 93]. 81 It is 
similar, for example, to the distinction made by Searle "between the illocution- 
ary act and the propositional content of the illocutionary act" (Searle, [1969, p. 
30]). By 'illocutionary acts' he means acts of "stating, questioning, commanding, 
promising, etc." [Searle, 1969, p. 24], and by 'propositional content' he seems to 
mean (in the case of asserting or stating, for example) "what is asserted in the 
act of asserting, what is stated in the act of stating" [Searle, 1969, p. 29]. Thus 
according to Searle, uttering the sentence 'Sam smokes habitually' constitutes the 
performance of a different illocutionary act than uttering the sentence 'Does Sam 
7s&~t&t*~ 11~, V&9 ~o~tv [xp~Vtxc~] 5 k~yo,~xer &rmqxztv6ttegc,. My justification for inserting 
'~p~y~0~' into the text here is twofold: first, there is the passage at 7.65 where Diogenes de- 
scribes the axi6ma as a 'x9~u 
cr162 
&xoq~awbv 5aov ~q~' ~c, uxUo. '; second, in the passages 
from 7.66-68, there are the instances of 'rtp~ytxc~' occurring in similar grammatical constructions 
in the descriptions of the other types of lekta. For the translation in these contexts of 'xp~Vt*~' 
as 'state of affairs', see Long, ([1971], 107n10; Long and Sedley, [1990], 1.195, 202; Reesor, [1989, 
Ch. 3]. 
rgSee Margaret Reesor's comments on the Stoic notion of speaking as 'speaking a pragma' 
(state of affairs)[Reesor, 1989, pp. aa-a4]. 
80xpoo~o~x~t 
8~ ~o~t rtp~ypt0~ 8 k@yovl:~:r ~poc~&o~ol1~v. 
sl As it is used in the phrase 'mode of assertion', the term 'assertion' should be understood as 
neutral among the various illocutionary acts. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
447 
smoke habitually?' or 'Sam, smoke habitually!', but although the 'mode of asser- 
tion' differs in each case, the propositional content, which might be represented 
by the complex {Sam, smokes habitually}, is the same. Inwood has reservations 
about this comparison, however, writing that "for the analogy to a speech act 
theory like Hare's or Searle's to be complete, it would have to be the case that the 
Stoics isolated a subject-predicate complex from its mode of assertion. And they 
appear not to have done this" ([Inwood, 1985], 95). We shall attempt to develop 
an interpretation to the contrary, an interpretation in which the complete pragrna 
(~6 aOxo~ek~g xp~y[aa) is just such a complex. 
At 7.49, Diogenes La~rtius details an order of priority between presentation 
and discourse. He writes that according to the Stoics, "presentation is first, then 
thought, which is capable of speaking out, discloses by means of discourse that 
which is experienced through the presentation." At 7.57, Diogenes also writes that 
pragrnata are spoken and that discourse is to speak pragrnata. If one interprets 
'~5 Xe 
to mean 'that which is spoken or can be spoken', an interpretation 
we shall argue for in the sequel, then one can render the text at AM 8.70 as 
'that which is spoken or can be spoken is that subsisting coordinately with a 
rational presentation'. Since 'that which is spoken' is the pragrna, the foregoing 
interpretation becomes 'the pragrna is that subsisting coordinately with a rational 
presentation'. Hence, the pragrna will also be prior to discourse, since it subsists 
coordinately with the rational presentation. And of course, if the pragrna is what 
is spoken, it would seem to be prior to discourse in any case. This priority, we 
take it, along with the passage at DL 7.66-67 in which Diogenes characterises each 
type of lekton as a pragma spoken in a certain mode, is a strong indication that 
the Stoics isolated the pragrna from its 'mode of assertion'. 
The question arises as to the nature of the pragrna, or more particularly, of the 
complete pragrna. The simplest procedure for setting out an account of this item 
will be to consider an example of a sensory presentation which is a presentation 
of a real feature of the world. A general characterisation of the pragrna might be 
that it is an abstract structure which is the result of a mental process whereby the 
mind interprets the actual state of affairs apprehended in the presentation. This 
structure is assembled from the appropriate conceptions selected from those stored 
in the mind's stock of conceptions, s2 and it is this interpretation which allows what 
is perceived to be represented in language. Pragrnata, then, are abstract structures 
which correspond, on the one hand, to the language used to represent them, and 
on the other hand, to the actual states of affairs or situations which engender the 
presentations of which they are the content. This latter correspondence, however, 
only holds in the case of veridical presentations, sa 
82See page 433 for a discussion of how rationality is completed from our preconceptions 
(xpoXr~betr and see page 434 for a discussion of how more complex conceptions might be pro- 
duced from these primary conceptions. 
83Contrast Graeser, [1978b, p. 8]: "[The Stoics] insisted that there holds no isomorphic cor- 
relation between thought on the one hand and things-that-are on the other .... [They] implied 
that ontological analysis is bound to be subjective, or rather functional, in that it is man's mind 
that superimposes its concepts on reality." It seems to us, however, that if someone believed that 

448 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Consider an example. Suppose we see Dion walking. What there is, according 
to the Stoics, and hence, what is perceived, is the individually qualified substance 
of Dion in a certain state (xco~ ~Xov), that is, possessing the attribute 'walking' (~b 
z~ptz~iv). 84 The mind searches its stock of conceptions, and if the conception of 
Dion and of the attribute 'walking' are among them, then it possesses the necessary 
components for constructing the pragma. In general, for a simple example such 
as this, the components of the pragma could be thought of as an ordered pair 
of items, of which the first is either an individuating quality ('/St~ xotd~rN) or a 
common quality (xotv~ ~otd~r~), and second is a predicate ( 
For a 
particular pragma, the first of these components would be signified by either an 
individual name or a common name, and the second, by a nominalised infinitive 
verb. For convenience, we shall represent such a structure by first writing down a 
left brace, then the name signifying the individuating quality, then a comma, then 
the nominalised infinitive verb signifying the predicate (AM 9.211; Clement strom. 
8.9.30.3), and last, a right brace. Hence, for the example under consideration, the 
pragma will be represented thus: {Ai~0v, ~b ~p~~}. 
In English this will be: 
{ Dion, to walk}.S~ 
We take those passages at AM 8.80 and DL 7.66-67 to indicate that to 'speak a 
pragma' is to perform what Searle defines as an 'illocutionary act' (24). According 
to these texts, the result of speaking a pragma in a certain mode is a certain type 
the same logos which structures reality is also immanent in our minds, then one would expect 
them also to believe in some sort of isomorphism between thought and reality. But then Graeser 
seems to take what Long and Sedley refer to as a "variant reading" [Long and Sedley, 1990, 
1.274] of Diogenes La~rtius 7.134 as evidence that the logos itself is incorporeal [Graeser, 1978b, 
p. 99]. He mentions Posidonius as possibly holding such a view [Graeser, 1978b, p. 99]. This 
may be so. However, as Long and Sedley have argued [1990, 1.274], this cannot be the view of 
the Old Stoa. 
S4According to Stobaeus, Chrysippus held that even predicates are real, but only those which 
are actual attributes (oup.13cl3~ 
He says that "'walking' (~b x~pt~x~v) is real (bx&p 
for me when I am walking, but it is not real when I have lain down or am sitting down" (eclog. 
1.106.18-20). 
Seneca records a dispute between Kleanthes and his pupil Chrysippus about the nature of 
walking. According to Kleanthes walking is breath (spiritus = pneuma) extending from the 
hggemonikon (principalis = hggemonikon) to the feet, whereas, according to Chrysippus, it is 
the h~gemonikon itself (epist. 113.23). Leaving aside the question of how the dispute turned 
out, it seems apparent that whatever else they meant by the term 'walking', both Kleanthes and 
Chrysippus thought that they were talking about something corporeal, for in Stoic doctrine both 
the pneuma and the h~gemonikon are bodies (SVF 2.879). But since there is no doubt that they 
conceived of predicates as being incorporeal, they clearly could not have been referring to the 
predicate {walking} by their use in this context of the term 'walking'. 
ssIt seems apparent that the Stoics used the nominalised infinitive verb to signify a predicate. 
For example, at AM 9.211, Sextus reports that according to the Stoics, "the scalpel is corporeal, 
and the flesh is corporeal, but the predicate 'to be cut' is incorporeal" (c~cr ~v xb clot)Joy, 
~&~i(zxt ~ x~ o~px(, &or 
~ ~o5 ~tv~ag~t x~x~lyop~ptc~o~) (cf. Clement strom. 8.9.30.3). 
Although it may seem more natural to render the nominalised infinitive by a gerund, for example, 
'walking' rather than 'to walk', it is not always the simplest representation, particularly in the 
case of complex predicates. Note that a finite verb seems to be the signification of an incomplete 
predicate. So at 7.63 Diogenes La~rtius says that the verb 'Vp4q~' (He/she writes) signifies an 
incomplete predicate (see the next section for further discussion of incomplete predicates). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
449 
of lekton. Obviously, 'lekton' (or, more strictly, ~zp~u 
),~xx6v') will have the 
sense in these contexts of 'pragma spoken'. An azidma, on this account, is the 
result of speaking a pragma by asserting it, a prostaktikon is the result of speaking 
a pragma by commanding it, and a similar account can be given for the other 
types of lekta. Moreover, an azidma is what is asserted in the act of asserting, 
a prostaktikon is what is commanded in the act of commanding, and so on. One 
can probably think of the lekton as an abstract structure which will include the 
elements of the associated pragma, but which will have a richer structure in that 
it will contain items not part of the pragma. For example, lekta will obviously 
have moods, and probably tenses as well. At any rate, as the Kneales point out, 
axi6mata will have tenses [Kneale and Kneale, 1962a, p. 
153]. There may be 
items corresponding to various sentence operators, such as operators for negations 
and questions. In addition, there may be items corresponding to connectives and 
articles (cf. DL 7.58). Although We will need to look at aziOmata which involve 
items corresponding to connectives, we do not intend to give an analysis of the 
structure of lekta in general; hence, for the most part, we will simply represent 
a lekton by writing down its signifying sentence and enclosing it with a pair of 
braces. For example, one way in which one could speak the pragrna Dion, walking 
would be to utter the sentence 'Dion is walking'. The azi6ma associated with this 
utterance would be represented thus: {Dion is walking}. 
At this point, there are some observations which should be made. First, it is 
evident that the pragma is what might be called the 'propositional content' of a 
rational presentation, but we would as soon avoid using this expression. Some 
commentators who speak of the 'propositional content' of a rational presentation 
seem to suppose that this content is a proposition (e.g., Frede [1987e, p. 154]). 
However, the only item which could be compared to a proposition in Stoic seman- 
tics is the azi5ma, and we do not see why, supposing that the content of a rational 
presentation is a lekton, it should be an azidma rather than some other type of 
lekton. Second, the formation or construction of the pragma would appear to be 
a constituent of the perceptual process. According to Chrysippus, a presentation 
reveals itself and that which caused it (AM 7.230; A~tius plac. 4.12.1, DDG 401). 
Thus one is conscious of the mental process which is the presentation, as well as 
the external state of affairs (in the case of a sensory presentation) which caused 
the presentation. Sandbach writes that the presentation thus "gives information 
about the external object" [Sandbach, 1971b, p. 13]. But clearly, without the 
pragma , which we take to be the mind's interpretation of the external state of 
affairs, there can be no information received, and hence, no perception. Third, it 
was suggested above that a presentation is rational if and only if there is a pragma 
subsisting coordinately with it. This would be a lekton in the sense of a 'pragma 
which can be spoken'. We do not think that there is necessarily a lekton subsisting 
coordinately with the presentation in the sense of a pragma spoken. This result 
would seem to be indicated by the priority of the presentation with respect to 
discourse (see page 428). 

450 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
It is clear that this account of the lekton is fairly rudimentary at best. For 
example, we have said nothing of how this interpretation will function for non- 
sensory presentations. Although we will need to address this topic in particular 
and expand certain other aspects of the account as well (aspects such as axi6mata 
involving connectives, already mentioned above), we believe that what has been 
said so far will serve as a basis for developing a characterisation of the role of the 
axi6ma in the theory of inference. 
5.3 
Incomplete lekta 
Nouns and incomplete lekta 
Another relevant point not brought out in Passage A but mentioned just after, 
is the distinction among lekta drawn by the Stoics between those lekta which are 
'complete' (~0xox~,~r 
and those which are 'incomplete' (~,~,tx~). This distinc- 
tion is confirmed by Sextus in another passage (AM 8.70-74) and also by Diogenes 
(7.65-68). Incomplete lekta, according to Diogenes, are those for which the signi- 
fying expression is also incomplete. For example, 'He writes' (Fp~(~t), although 
a grammatically complete expression, signifies an incomplete lekton, presumably 
because it lacks a definite subject, and hence, does not signify a complete state 
of affairs. A complete lekton, on the other hand, is one signified by a complete 
expression, for example, 'Socrates writes' (Fp~t E~xp~x~) (7.63). At 7.58 Dio- 
genes reports that a verb (fl~c~) signifies an uncombined predicate, and at 7.64 
he gives a characterisation of a predicate (x~xgyop~) as "an incomplete lekton 
which has to be combined with a nominative case (5pgbr ~x~(~tr in order to form 
a complete lekton." Given that the expression 'Socrates writes' signifies a complete 
lekton these two passages would seem to suggest that the significatum of a noun 
such as 'Socrates' occurring in the subject position of a sentence such 'Socrates 
writes' is, according to the Stoics, a nominative case (5pgbr xx~(~tr (DL 63-64). 
Moreover, no matter how odd or even obscure it might seem to us, what is further 
suggested is that for the Stoics the cases (hal pt6seis) are not understood primarily 
in a grammatical sense. 
From what has been said above, it is clear that an isolated verb such as 'writes' 
can signify an incomplete lekton. An issue which arises is the question whether 
isolated nouns can also signify incomplete lekta. Many commentators seem to think 
that they can, s6 and they seem to think so for one or both of two closely connected 
reasons. 
One reason is the example given by Sextus Empiricus in Passage A. 
Recall that Sextus informs us in this passage that the Stoics distinguish among 
three things" that which signifies (to s~mainon), i.e., the utterance (hE ph6n~); 
that which is signified (to s~mainomenon), i.e., the lekton; and the subject of 
predication (to tynchanon), i.e., the external existent (to ektos hypokeimenon). 
As an instance of that which signifies he cites the utterance 'Dion'. Given this 
S6Mates [1953], 16-17; Kneale & Kneale [1962a], 144, 148; Watson [1966], 47-49; Graeser 
[1978b], 91; Sandbach [1975], 96. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
451 
example it seems natural to suppose that there is a lekton associated with this 
expression and that one may take this lekton to be something like its sense or 
meaning; one may suppose, moreover, that the referent of this meaning is the 
object picked out, i.e., Dion himself. All this seems to suggest a Fregean semantic 
analysis of the lekton, and this is the course which some authors appear to take. s7 
There is a difficulty with this approach, however, and it involves the fact that 
in Passage A Sextus is giving an account of a controversy over what it is that is 
true or false. According to him, the Stoics locate truth and falsity in 'that which 
is signified', which, as we have seen, is the axi6ma. But we have also seen that an 
axiOma is signified by the utterance of a declarative sentence. Hence one would 
expect that Sextus would give a declarative sentence as an example of an utterance 
which is 'that which signifies'. Whatever else it might be, the utterance 'Dion' 
seems clearly not to be the utterance of a declarative sentence. Hence it is not the 
significans of an axigma, and thus not the significans of anything either true or 
false. The inappropriateness of Sextus's example is emphasised by consideration 
of a passage from Seneca's Epistulae Morales. The content of this passage would 
seem to parallel that of Passage A. 
I see Cato walking. The sense (of sight) reveals this (state of affairs), 
the mind believes it. What I see is an object, toward which I direct 
both (my) sight and (my) mind. Then I say: "Cato is walking." What 
I say now, according to them, is not an object, but something declar- 
ative about an object: this (that I say) some call 'effatum', others 
'enuntiatum', and others 'dictum'. 88 Thus when we say 'wisdom' we 
understand something material; when we say 'He is wise', we say (some- 
thing) about an object. It makes a great deal of difference, therefore, 
whether you indicate the object or say something about it (3: 117.13). 
It is apparent that something like Seneca's example 'Cato is walking' is needed, 
and this requirement is all the more apparent when one considers the examples 
given by Chrysippus as quoted by Diogenes La~rtius, i.e., 'It is day', 'Dion is 
walking' (DL 7.65). One proposal for clearing up this problem is the suggestion 
that uttering 'Dion' may be taken as "equivalent to asserting the true proposition 
'this man is Dion'" [Long, 1971, p. 77, 107n11]. Whatever are the merits of this 
particular suggestion, it seems that something of this sort must be posited, for 
we have another passage similar in context to Passage A in which Sextus also 
mentions the expression 'Dion' as being the significans of an "incorporeal lekton" 
(AM 8.75). Hence we cannot simply write off the example as an aberration in 
Sextus's account (cf. Frede [1987b, p. 349]). Be that as it may, we think that 
the infelicity of Sextus's example for the point it is meant to illustrate renders it 
questionable as evidence that Stoics viewed isolated nouns as significantia of lekta. 
87For example Mates [1953, p. 19]; Gould [1970, 70nl]. 
88Note that 'effatum', 'enuntiatum', and 'dictum' are Latin translations of &~J~u(cf. Cicero 
acad. 2.95 [effaturn]; de fato 19.28 [enuntiatum ---- enuntiatio]). 

452 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Recall that, according to Passage A, the Stoics suppose that the sign (to sgmainon) 
and the object of reference (to tynchanon) are both corporeal (ocog~xt 
whereas 
the lekton is incorporeal (&ad)[a~xo~). We wish to discuss an assumption made by 
some authors which is based on the posited immaterial nature of the lekton. This 
assumption leads to the second reason for an affirmative reply to the question 
whether isolated nouns can signify an incomplete lekton. This is the assumption 
that since the lekton is incorporeal, whatever are its constituents must also be 
incorporeal. 
Hence, since the significatum of a noun such as 'Socrates' can be 
a constituent of a complete lekton--for example, the lekton signified by the ex- 
pression 'Socrates walks'--it would seem to follow that the significatum of the 
expression 'Socrates' is incorporeal. But if it is, then it must be a lekton of some 
sort, since it could hardly be an incorporeal belonging to any one of the other 
classes of immaterial entities. Now it seems clear that the expression 'Socrates' 
will not signify a complete lekton; therefore, it seems natural to conclude that this 
expression signifies an incomplete lekton, and that, in general, isolated nouns can 
signify incomplete lekta. 
Given the Stoic view cited above that nouns signify cases (nxd)c~t~), it would 
seem to follow from the argument in the last chapter that a case is an incomplete 
lekton and hence something incorporeal. On the other hand, if one assumes that 
"the ptOsis is definitely conceived of as something incorporeal" [Graeser, 1978b, 
p. 91], then it would seem to follow that a case is an incomplete lekton. Either 
way we get the conclusion that isolated nouns can signify incomplete lekta. One 
attractive feature of this argument is that it fits in rather well with the example 
'Dion' presented by Sextus Empiricus in Passage A; indeed, some writers conclude 
that the supposed incorporeal nature of the cases provides confirmation of the le- 
gitimacy of Sextus's example (cf. Graeser [1978b, p. 91]), whereas others conclude 
that Sextus's example provides confirmation that the Stoics viewed the cases as 
incorporeal. 89 
We have already suggested that Sextus's example is suspect as evidence that 
isolated nouns signify lekta, and this would seem to count against the view that the 
Stoics thought of the cases as incorporeal. However, there are two other objections 
to these theses which would seem to be somewhat stronger. The first is based 
on the fact that in any discussion of this subject in the sources, only predicates 
are ever mentioned as being incomplete lekta (cf. Frede [1987b, p. 347]; Long 
[1971, pp. 104-05]; Graeser [1978b, p. 91]). The other is based on the report of 
Diogenes La~rtius (7.58) to the effect that the Stoics assumed that the significata 
of names and common nouns are, respectively, individual qualities (~t~t not6~~) 
and common qualities ( 
not6~;). 
Now there is no doubt that the Stoics 
assumed that the qualities of material objects were themselves material; 9~ hence, 
if proper nouns and common nouns signify qualities, and qualities are corporeal, 
89These conclusions are discussed both by Frede [1987b, p. 349] and by Long [1971, p. 105]; 
however, neither author agrees with them. 
9~ 
Rist [1969a], 159; Long [1971], 105; Frede [1987b], 347. For citations from the sources see 
SVF 2.449,463; DL 7.134; Simplicius in cat. 209.10. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
453 
there would seem to be a difficulty for anyone wishing to maintain the view either 
that nouns signify incomplete lekta, or that cases are incorporeal. 91 
One might suppose that this should resolve the matter, but at least two more 
complications arise. The first complication involves two passages in Clement of 
Alexandria's Stromateis in which it is claimed that "a case is incorporeal ... and 
... agreed to be incorporeal" (Frede [1987b], 350). As for the claim that a case 
is incorporeal, Frede has argued convincingly that non-Stoics of later periods in 
Greek philosophy would use the term 'case' with the conviction that cases are 
incorporeal "because they did not share the Stoic view that qualities are bodies" 
([Frede, 1987b], 350). As for the claim that cases are agreed to be incorporeal, he 
argues that the examples cited by Clement are examples of things which would no 
doubt be agreed to be incorporeal by the Stoics, but which would not be agreed 
by them to be examples of cases. So much then for the difficulties raised by the 
passages of Clement. 
The second complication involves interpreting a passage of Stobaeus (SVF 1.65) 
in such a way that common qualities, at least, are shown to be incorporeal (cf. 
Rist [1969a, p. 165]). This passage, which is described by Frede as "notoriously 
obscure and difficult" [Frede, 1987b, p. 348]), is as follows: 
Zeno <and his followers> say that concepts (~,~oft~ac~xc~) are neither 
somethings (xt,c~) nor qualified things (~ot~), but are mere images in the 
mind--only quasi-somethings or pseudo-qualified things (d)c~c~[ S~ xtvc~ 
 
d)c~c~,~i not&). These (sc. concepts) are called ideas by the ancients. 
For the ideas are (ideas) of the things falling under (5~o~txxd,xco,) the 
concepts, such as of men, or of horses, or, speaking more generally, 
of all living things, and of any other things which they say are ideas. 
The Stoic philosophers say that these (sc. concepts) are non-existents, 
and that whereas we participate ([a~x~X~t,~) in the concepts, the cases, 
which they call prosggoria, we possess (x~)yXd~,~t~). 
Following Frede [1987b, pp. 348-49], we take it that the substance of this passage 
is claim that the Stoics from Zeno on refused to grant the Platonic Forms or Ideas, 
which they called 'concepts', any existential status at all--not even the existential 
status of the incorporeals such as lekta, void, place, and time. However, there are 
things which, because they 'fall under' (5~o~i~x~t,~) the concepts, are called 'cases' 
(~xcbc~t~) by the Stoics, and which are contrasted with the concepts, the contrast 
91Rist outlines this difficulty as follows: 
Our problem is why the Stoics put these common qualities into the category of 
quality, that is, of material objects ... rather than with other incorporeals like 
time, void, place and the lekta. The answer to this is not easy to find [Rist, 1969a, 
pp. 165-66]. 
It should be noted that the purported textual evidence adduced by Rist and others to show 
that common qualities are not corporeal, would not show, even if it were correct, that common 
qualities were classed with the incorporeals such as lekta. What would be shown, as we soon 
shall see, is that common qualities had no ontological status at all. 

454 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
being that corporeal objects merely participate in the latter, whereas the cases 
they possess. 
Now according to Frede [1987b, p. 348], the Platonists assumed that in ad- 
dition to the transcendental forms or ideas, there are immanent forms which are 
embodied in concrete particulars. He suggests that the immanent forms of the 
Platonists correspond to the Aristotelian forms, and that both are qualities of 
some kind. Thus the Platonists differentiate between the transcendental form wis- 
dom, which the Stoics would call the concept wisdom, and the embodiment of 
the form in Socrates himself, i.e., Socrates' wisdom. On the Stoic view, according 
to Stobaeus, Socrates' wisdom would be a case (ptosis), because it falls under 
(hypopiptein) the concept wisdom. Moreover, Socrates would merely participate 
in the transcendental form wisdom, whereas he would possess the embodiment of 
that form. Hence the Stoic cases appear to correspond to the embodied forms of 
the Platonists and the Aristotelians, and like them, appear to be qualities of some 
kind. As such, they would be corporeal on the Stoic view, although they would 
be incorporeal on the Platonic or Aristotelian conception. 
This interpretation of Stobaeus's passage seems to us to capture the substance 
of the Greek. Unfortunately, not all commentators agree. Rist, for example, thinks 
that we can deduce from this passage that it is the common qualities of the Stoics 
which correspond to the Platonic Forms, and hence, that such qualities must have 
been given the same ontological status as the Forms--which is to say, they were 
thought of as non-existents ([Rist, 1969a, p. 165]; cf. Reesor [1954, p. 52]). It is 
not difficult to see how one might arrive at this interpretation, for there would seem 
to be some confusion created inasmuch as the common nouns such as 'man' and 
'horse', which, on the Stoic view, signify common qualities (DL 7.58), are used by 
the commentators to refer to the ideas or concepts. Thus, since the term 'horse' is 
used to talk about both the quality common to all horses and the concept 'horse', 
it should not be surprising that the concept and the common quality are taken to 
be identical. Now it may be that the Stoics themselves are to blame for at least 
some of this confusion, for it is easy enough to be careless about the distinctions 
one draws. On the other hand, given the view that the cases are qualities, and 
given the distinction between cases and concepts--both of which are integral to 
Frede's interpretation of Stobaeus's passage--there is no reason to suppose that the 
Stoics did not intend to maintain the distinction between concepts and common 
qualities. But if this distinction is observed, then there would seem to be no basis 
for maintaining that common qualities are not corporeal. 
It should be noted that the distinction between concepts and cases is mentioned 
in other ancient texts. Simplicius, for example, using language similar to that of 
Stobaeus, reports that the Stoics called the concepts 'g~9~ 
(which may be 
translated as particibilia (cf. Frede [1987b, p. 348]), because they are participated 
in (g~;~c~gc~t) and the cases 'possessibles', because they are possessed (~uu 
(in cat. 209.12-14). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
455 
Predicates 
At 7.63 Diogenes La~rtius comments that the class of incomplete lekta includes all 
predicates (165 
and if we are correct in rejecting the significata of iso- 
lated nouns from this class, then it includes only predicates. A predicate, according 
to Diogenes, is "that which is said about something, or a pragma constructed from 
one or more elements, or (as we have already noted above) an incomplete lekton 
which must be joined on to an nominative case (5p95g ~xgc~tg) in order to yield 
an axi6rna" (DL 7.64). The first two of these characterisations are attributed to 
the Stoic Apollodorus and the passage is translated by Hicks as if they were in 
conflict with the last one. But it seems to us that the versions of Apollodorus are 
compatible with the third one and that the three are merely alternatives. Given 
what has been said above about complete lekta, we take the sense of the first of 
these alternatives to be the idea that in order to signify a complete lekton one 
must make some attribution to an object, and what is attributed is a property or 
attribute. Corresponding to this property at the level of lekta, is a predicate or 
incomplete pragma, and, at the level of language, a verb. In the example of the 
above paragraph, writing has been asserted about Socrates to form the aziSma 
'Socrates writes' 
But it would seem that one could also form the interrogative 
(~pd)x~c~) 'Is Socrates writing?' by asking of Socrates whether he is writing (cf. 
DL 7.66). In either case we take it that {yp~q0~t} is 'that which is said' about 
Socrates. 
The second alternative seems to reflect an ambiguity in the Stoic use of the term 
katggorgrna which we are rendering as 'predicate'. This ambiguity has been noted 
by Michael Frede in his article "The Origins of Traditional Grammar" [Frede, 
1987b, pp. 338-59]. According to Frede, the Stoics made a distinction between 
those predicates which are simple and those which are complex [Frede, 1987b, p. 
346]. There seems to be good reason to take the latter to be the result of combining 
a 'direct predicate' (zb 5p~bv xc~zrlyopf]~ac 0 (DL 7.64) with an oblique case (rl 5P9~1 
~x~c~tr 
Such complex predicates, according to Diogenes, must be constructed 
in this way so as to be capable of combining with a nominative case to produce 
a complete lekton. The examples cited by Diogenes are signified by verbs such 
as 'hears', 'sees', and 'converses', and these are contrasted with those signified by 
such verbs as 'thinks' and 'walks' (DL 7.64). Now we know that for the Stoics a 
verb (~[ac~) is "a part of speech signifying an uncombined (&o6~o~) 
predicate" 
(DL 7.58). Hence, it seems to be the case that some uncombined predicates (e.g., 
those cited as instances of direct predicates) cannot as they stand be joined with 
other elements to produce a complete lekton, the reason being that there is a sense 
in which the verbs signifying such predicates must first be combined with other 
parts of speech before they can be joined with a name or common noun in the 
nominative case to produce a complete thought. For example, in comparison with 
'Dion is thinking' or 'Dion is walking', it seems plausible that the sentence 'Dion is 
seeing' or the sentence 'Dion is hearing' requires a complement in order to express 
a complete thought. To recapitulate, there are, it would seem, some uncombined 

456 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
predicates which are required to be joined with other elements before they can 
partake in the production of a complete lekton. 
On the other hand, there are 
some which can partake in the production of a complete lekton just as they stand. 
Frede calls the former 'syntactic predicates' and the latter 'elementary predicates' 
([Frede, 1987b], 346). We shall adopt this terminology in the sequel. 
Given this ambiguity in the term katggorgma, one can think of the third al- 
ternative characterisation of a predicate as a recipe for constructing an axiOma 
from either an elementary predicate or a syntactic predicate. On the one hand, 
an incomplete lekton which is an elementary predicate can be combined with a 
nominative case to produce an axiOma without further ado. On the other hand, 
an incomplete lekton which is a syntactic predicate must first be combined with 
other elements before it can be joined with a nominative case to form an axiOma. 
It is perhaps appropriate at this point to make explicit what is suggested in 
the preceding discussion concerning the 'construction' of an axi6ma" that is, the 
notion of a syntax of lekta. 92 A good way to introduce this task is to notice that 
the Greek noun from which the English word 'syntax' is derived, is itself derived 
from the Greek verb ((~5w~tg) and that various forms of this verb are used by 
Diogenes in the passages from 7.63 to 7.74 to indicate the notion of 'putting 
together' various kinds of elements to form a lekton (cf. Frede [1987c, p. 323, 
246]; Elgi, in Brunschwig [1978, p. 137]). Furthermore, we have evidence that 
Chrysippus, at least, was interested in such a notion, for among the more that 
seven hundred books he is reported to have written (DL 7.180), the following 
titles appear: (2) On the Syntax o/ What is Said,/our books (II~p't z~ (su~zd~s~ 
~ 
X~yo~co~ 8'), and (3) Of the Syntax and Elements of What is Said, to Philip, 
three books (II~pl z~ ~owd~co~  
~zotx~(~ ~v X~yo~vcov xpb~ ~(kt~ov u 
(DL 7.193). 93 Now according to A.A Long, the expression 'x6 Xsy6~vov', which 
may be rendered as 'what is said' or as 'that which is said', is extremely difficult 
to distinguish in sense from to lekton ([Long, 1971], 107n13); moreover, as Frede 
points out, the passage at DL 7.57 indicates that 'what is said' is in fact a lekton. 
These writings of Chrysippus seem to reinforce what is implicit in Diogenes' report 
of the Stoic characterisation of a predicate at DL 7.64 and in the whole discussion 
from DL 7.63 to DL 7.74: that is, that the Stoic theory of the lekton included the 
conception that lekta were analysable into various elements and that there was 
a set of syntactic principles whereby such elements were to be joined together to 
form a lekton. 
92Much of what we write on the notion of a syntax of lekta is drawn from two papers by 
Michael Frede, both of which appear in his Essays in Ancient Philosophy. These are: "The 
Principles of Stoic Grammar" (especially 323-32) and "The Origins of Traditional Grammar" 
(especially 353-57). 
93These titles have been numbered as they are since they are second and third in a sequence 
of four to which we shall refer. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
457 
5.~ Lekta and parts of speech 
The Stoics seem to have thought that one constructs a lekton, and in particular 
an axi6ma, by combining the elements of the corresponding declarative sentence 
in the right way. This amounts to putting together the elements of the sentence 
in such a manner that the structure of the corresponding axi6ma is syntactically 
correct, its elements being combined in accordance with the syntax of lekta (cf. 
Frede [1987c, p. 324]). The supposition that the Stoics entertained some such 
notion of a relation between the elements of a sentence and the elements of the 
corresponding lekton is suggested by the remaining two titles in the sequence of 
four mentioned above. These are" (1) On the Elements of Speech and on Things 
Said, five books (II~p~ ~v ~otx~cov zo5 Xdyou x~t z~v X~yo~vcov ~'), and (4) 
On the Elements of Speech, to Nicias, one book (H~p[ z~v (~zotxdcov zo5 Xdyou 
~pb~ Nt 
~') (DL 7.193). Note that (1) and (4) are concerned not only with 
the parts of speech but also with the elements of lekta, and that (2) and (3) are 
concerned not only with the elements of lekta but also with the syntax of lekta. 
The placement of these titles in this particular sequence seems to point to "a 
systematic connection between parts of speech, elements of lekta, and the syntax 
of lekta" [Frede, 1987c, p. 324]; moreover, such a connection would be explained 
by assuming that the Stoics envisaged the production of a lekton to take place in 
accordance with the theory outlined above. 
As for the connection between the parts of speech and the elements of lekta, we 
have a text of Diogenes LaSrtius which seems to suggest that this connection is 
a relation of signification. Both Chrysippus and Diogenes the Babylonian, 94 ac- 
cording to this text, stated that there are five parts of speech- these are individual 
name, common name, verb, conjunction, and article. Diogenes, in his treatise On 
Language, associates at least the first three of these with the corresponding ele- 
ments of lekta. An individual name (5vo~c~), according to him, is a part of speech 
indicating (~qXoOv) an individual quality (~c~ ~otdzrl~ ) (e.g., Diogenes, Socrates); 
whereas a common name is a part of speech signifying (oTl~a~vov) a common qual- 
ity ( 
l ~otdxq~) (e.g., man, horse). A verb (~gc~) is a part of speech signifying 
an uncombined predicate (as we have already seen). A conjunction (c~0vS~o~ao~) 
is an indeclinable part of speech, binding together the parts of a sentence, and 
an article (dlpgpo,) is a declinable element of a sentence, determining the genders 
and numbers of nouns (DL 7.58). The relation outlined in this passage between 
the elements of speech and the elements of lekta seems clear with respect to the 
first three parts of speech on the list. It also seems clear what the corresponding 
element at the level of lekta is for each of these parts of speech. If we take the 
participle '~qXoSv' to mean 'signified' in this context, then we can suppose that 
for the Stoics there is a relation of signification respectively between individual 
names, common names, and verbs at the level of parts of speech, and individual 
qualities, common qualities, and predicates at the level of lekta. 
94A Stoic also known as Diogenes of Seleucia, but called The Babylonian because Seleucia is 
near Babylon (cf. DL 6.81). 

458 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
The passage is not so clear, however, about the elements of lekta which are 
supposed to correspond to conjunctions or articles. 
One assumes, given what 
has been said about the other three parts of speech, that whatever the nature of 
these elements of lekta might be, the connection between each of them and the 
corresponding part of speech should also be one of signification. But it is difficult 
to tell from the text, for conjunctions and articles are defined grammatically rather 
than by their signification at the level of lekta. In addition, as Frede points out 
[Frede, 1987c, p. 331], there is a difficulty inasmuch as the Stoics think that the 
class of conjunctions includes both conjunctions proper and prepositions, and that 
the class of articles includes both articles proper and pronouns. Thus it is not 
at all transparent how one is to envisage an element of a lekton which can be 
the significate both of conjunctions and of prepositions, or one which can be the 
significate both of articles and of pronouns. 
5.5 
Ontological concerns 
In this section we intend to consider briefly some issues concerning the ontological 
status of the lekton. The first of these is the problem of how one ought to interpret 
the meaning of the term 'lekton' 
The question presents some difficulty inasmuch 
as it seems to be connected with ontological concerns. 
The other topic is the 
question whether the lekton was conceived by the Stoics as merely a construct of 
the mind, or as something having a more tangible status. 
The interpretation of 'A~vd~" 
The substantive expression '-cb XExx6v' is derived from the neuter nominative of 
the verbal adjective 'X~xx6~', which in turn is derived from the verb 'X~yEtv', to 
say or to speak. Since lektos is one of those adjectives having the sense both of 
the perfect passive participle and of the notion of possibility, to lekton is probably 
best understood either as 'that which is said' or as 'that which can be said'. Now 
it is true that one way in which the Stoics characterise the lekton is to say that it 
is 'that which is signified' (~b c~tvo~vov) 
by a significant utterance (e.g. AM 
8.11-12), and some writers take it that to lekton ought therefore to be rendered, 
either exclusively or primarily, as 'what is meant'. 95 
This interpretation, which 
gains further credence from the fact that Liddell and Scott list 'to mean' as one 
of the senses of legein, is then taken to imply that a lekton was thought of by the 
Stoics as some kind of 'meaning' or 'sense', whatever such may be (e.g., Graeser 
[1978b]). 
95Andreas Graeser, for instance, asserts that "in Stoic semantics [the verb sgrnainein] stands 
exclusively for a relation that holds between the linguistic sign and its sense" [Graeser, 1978b, 
p. 81]. Since he also takes sgmainomenon to be synonymous with lekton [Graeser, 1978b, p. 
87], it is apparent that he would give preference to this reading. The Kneales, who argue that 
the Stoics "deliberately identified sgmainomena with lekta," are of the opinion that "'what is 
meant' is probably the most literal translation of lekton" [Kneale and Kneale, 1962a, p. 140]. 
According to Bochefiski, "the ),e 
corresponded to the intension or connotation of the words" 
[Bochefiski, 1963, p. 84]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
459 
There are at least two difficulties with this reading. One is the question whether 
the Stoics did in fact take 'cyqg~tvog~vo~' and '),~ 
to be synonymous. From 
the fact that they called lekta s~mainomena, it does not follow that all significata 
of significant utterances are lekta. Indeed, there is a passage in Diogenes La~rtius 
(7.58) which seems to make it clear that this is so. According to this passage, what 
is signified by a name is an 'individual quality' (tS(c~ ~otdx~g), and by a common 
noun, a 'common quality' ( 
~otdx~g). Now since the qualities of corporeal 
bodies are, according to the Stoics, as much material as the bodies themselves (cf. 
Simplicius in cat. 217.32), and since lekta are not material entities, what seems to 
be suggested is that 'what is signified' by a name or common noun is not a lekton. 
In other words, 'xb c~qgc~tvog~vov' is not coextensive with '),~ 
The other problem with reading to lekton as 'what is meant' is that there is more 
than a little evidence supporting the idea that one species of lekton, the axidma, 
had the role in Stoic semantic theory as that which is true or false. Hence, if one 
interprets the lekton as being in general a 'meaning' or 'sense', then one seems to 
commit the Stoics to saying that such things as 'meanings' or 'senses' are the sorts 
of things which can be true or false. We think that one would be hard pressed to 
find textual evidence for such a commitment. Thus it would appear that however 
else they may have thought of the axidma, it is unlikely that the Stoics could 
have viewed it as such a thing as a meaning or sense. It seems to us rather that 
the Stoics would have agreed with Austin in his contention that "we never say 
'The meaning (or sense) of this sentence (or of these words) is true'" ("Truth" in 
Phil. Papers, 87); hence, it seems unlikely that the Stoics could have viewed the 
axihma as such a thing as a meaning or sense. But if it is improbable that the 
Stoics thought of the axi6ma as a meaning or sense, then since the axiOma is a 
kind of lekton, it is not clear that one can legitimately promote an interpretation 
of the lekton as being in general a meaning or sense. From the point of view of 
the interpretation we are suggesting, rendering 'to lekton' as a meaning or sense 
cannot do justice to the various roles the concept plays in Stoic semantics (cf. 
[Long, 1971, p. 77]). 
But even supposing we interpret 'to lekton' as 'what is said', there is still some 
controversy whether we should also interpret it as 'what can be said'. The problem 
is summarised by Andreas Graeser as follows: 
For taking lekton to mean "that which can be said" may seem tan- 
tamount to committing oneself to the position that the lekton exists 
regardless of whether it is being expressed or not, whereas taking lekton 
to mean "what is said" seems rather to entail that the very entity in 
question exists only as long as the expression that asserts it [Graeser, 
1978b, pp. 87-88]. 
This worry is reiterated later in Graeser's essay when he asks "Did the Stoics 
hold that the axihmata or lekta respectively exist in some sense whether we think 
of them or not?" [Graeser, 1978b, p. 95], and it is echoed by A.A. Long when 
he wonders whether "lekta only persist as long as the sentences which express 

460 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
them" [Long, 1971, p. 97]. In giving expression to this problem both Graeser and 
Long are concerned to reply to an assertion made by the Kneales to the effect 
that axiSmata "exist in some sense whether we think of them or not" [Kneale and 
Kneale, 1962a, p. 156]. The context in which this claim is made is an iteration 
of the various similarities and dissimilarities perceived by the Kneales between 
axidmata and propositions. 
We shall not comment on the arguments adduced 
by the Kneales concerning this issue, nor on the counter-arguments presented by 
Graeser and Long. Indeed, we intend to develop an interpretation of the lekton 
which will require an understanding of the meaning of the term 'to lekton' as being 
systematically ambiguous. On such a reading this controversy would seem to be of 
less concern. We do, however, wish to note that saying "lekta only persist as long 
as the sentences which express them" does not seem to render their existence any 
less mysterious or problematic than saying that they "exist in some sense whether 
we think of them or not." 
The passage in Diogenes La~rtius at 7.66, discussed in the last section, would 
seem to suggest that the axiOrna is the significatum of some actual utterance of a 
particular type, i.e., an assertion. Similarly, each of the other kinds of lekta is the 
significatum of the appropriate type of utterance (i.e., command, question, and 
so on). It seems apparent that on this account the question whether aziOrnata 
"exist in some sense whether we think of them or not" should not arise, for the 
subsistence of the azi6rna is clearly dependent upon the existence of an act of 
assertion. Obviously this dependent status will apply to the lekta corresponding 
to the various other types of illocutionary acts. We suggested in the last section 
that one ought to understand 'lekton' in these contexts as a generic term denoting 
the content of a speech act; hence, it seems appropriate in such cases to take 'to 
lekton' to mean 'what is said'. 
On the other hand, there would seem to be room in the Stoic theory for lekta 
which subsist independently of any particular utterance. When one asserts, for 
example, that the state of affairs {Dion, walking} is a fact, or commands that 
it become a fact, or questions whether it is a fact and so on, what gets said, 
or exhibited (~c~p~o~o~t) in language, in such an utterance is the unarticulated 
objective content (xb q~vx~o0~v) of the rational presentation, that is, the ~p~yg~ 
{Dion, walking} (cf. AM 8.70). We have proposed that 'lekton' is sometimes used 
to denote the pragma which is the unarticulated content of a rational presentation. 
In such contexts, it seems appropriate to understand 'to lekton' to mean 'what can 
be said'. 
The lekton and ontology 
There is a tradition among ancient commentators that the Stoics posited a sum- 
mum genus (ysvt 
which they called 'the something' (~d ~t) (AM 8.32; PH 
2.86; Seneca epist. 58.13-15), and under which they included not only material 
bodies or 'corporeals' (od~g~), but also a set of items 'without body' which they 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
461 
called 'incorporeals' (&od)g~z~) (AM 10.218). 96 We are informed by Sextus Em- 
piricus that under the class of incorporeals were included lekta, void, place, and 
time ( 
zd~ov, Xpdvov) (AM 10.218). 97 Now inasmuch as the Stoics thought 
that "bodies alone are existents, ''98 it is apparent that they did not take 'to be 
something' necessarily to mean the same as 'to exist' in the sense that material 
bodies exist. 
In addition to material bodies and incorporeals, the class of somethings appears 
to have included a collection of items containing both fictional beings and theo- 
retical constructs, particulars such as Centaurs (Seneca epist. 58.15) and limits 
(Proclus SVF 2.488; DL 7.135). Although it might seem natural to assume that 
these particulars ought to have been classified among the incorporeals, there is no 
evidence to support the view that the Stoics did so, for none of the texts providing 
a list of the incorporeals include such items in the list. The fact that the members 
of this class of 'mental constructs' are included among the 'somethings' but are 
never included among the incorporeals, would seem to indicate that the genus of 
'the something' was differentiated into three subclasses: the class of material bod- 
ies or 'corporeals'; the class of 'incorporeals' which included lekta, void, place, and 
time; and the class of fictions or mental constructs (cf. Long and Sedley [1990, 
1.163-66]). At least one respect in which such a tripartite differentiation would 
be significant is to give lie to the claim made by some modern commentators that 
the incorporeals were viewed by the Stoics as merely 'constructs of the mind' (e.g., 
Watson, [1966, pp. 38-39]). We believe that the commentary of Long and Sedley 
is sufficient to show that the Stoics did indeed propose this tripartite division of 
the genus of 'the something'. But granting this division as a component of Stoic 
ontology, the question occurs as to the basis for differentiating between fictional or 
theoretical constructs and the incorporeals. Since an adequate treatment of this 
problem is beyond the scope of this essay, we can only give a suggestion here of 
the reason. 
It seems fairly clear, at least with respect to void, place, and time, that the 
Stoics needed these items in their ontology in order to develop their physical 
and cosmological theories. A consideration of the roles envisaged for these items 
makes it also seem clear that although these incorporeals fell short of having the 
real existence that substantial bodies have, it is unlikely that the Stoics viewed 
them merely as mental constructs. Similar reasons can be adduced on behalf of 
the lekton, supposing that Frede is correct in his suggestion that the concept of the 
lekton was first introduced in the ontology of Stoic causal theory [Frede, 1987a, 
p. 137]. On the other hand, the connection between the lekton and the immanent 
96For additional citations from the primary sources, see SVF 2.329-35; AM 10.234; AM 11.224; 
PH 2.223-25; Plutarch adv. colot. 1116b-c. For commentary on these notions by modern writers, 
see Long and Sedley [1990, pp. 162-66]; Long [1971, pp. 88-90]; Rist [1969a, pp. 152-54]; Watson 
[1966, pp. 92-96]; Sandbach [1975, p. 92]. 
9Vcf. Plutarch, adv. colot. 1116B. 
985vzc~ u 
~tdvc~ x& u6Iac~zcz xc&oSmv(Plutarch comm. not. 1073e). cf. A~tius plac. 1.11.4, 
4.20 (SVF 2.340, 387); Stobaeus eclo9. 1.336, 338; Cicero acad. 1.39; Seneca epist. 117.2, 106.4; 
DL 7.56. 

462 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
logos, a feature of its role as the pragma which is the content of a presentation, 
would seem to provide further reason why it is unlikely that the lekton was viewed 
merely as a mental construct. 
Recalling our suggestion that for the Stoics 'to be something' did not seem 
to mean the same as 'to exist', the question naturally arises as to what 'to be 
something' did mean. It has been suggested that for the Stoics 'to be something' 
meant "to be a proper subject of thought and discourse" (Long and Sedley [1990, 
1.164]). This idea is developed with the observation that since the Stoics thought 
that expressions such as 'Centaur' and 'limit' "are genuinely significant, they are 
taken to name something, even though that something has no actual or indepen- 
dent existence" [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.164]. It is not obvious, however, what 
the force of the expression "genuinely significant" is supposed to be in this con- 
text. This shortcoming, however, can probably be filled out by a consideration 
of what is excluded from the genus of the something. We have a passage from 
Stobaeus (eclog. 1.136.21 = SVF 1.65) which would seem to indicate that the 
Stoics did not include what 'the ancients' (o~ &px~ot) called 'ideas' ([~c~t) in the 
class of somethings. 
Michael Frede plausibly suggests that these 'ideas' which 
the Stoics called 'concepts' (~vVO~lp~c~), are the transcendental Ideas or Forms of 
Plato ([Frede, 1987b], 348). According to Stobaeus, 'concepts' such as 'Man' or 
'Horse' were referred to by Zeno and his followers as 'pseudo-somethings' (r 
~tv~). A possible reason why these items might have been refused the ontological 
status of somethings can be gleaned from a passage of Sextus Empiricus. Clearly 
presenting Stoic doctrine, Sextus argues at AM 7.246 that the genera of which 
the particular instances may be of this kind or that kind cannot themselves be 
of either kind. Thus the generic 'Man' is neither Greek nor Barbarian, for if he 
were Greek, then all particular men would have been Greek, and, conversely, if he 
were Barbarian, then all particular men would have been Barbarian. We take the 
general point of this argument to be the idea that it is not possible to ascribe to 
the ennogmata any of the attributes one may ascribe to the particulars which fall 
under them. But if one cannot say of the universal 'Man' that he is either Greek 
or Barbarian, young or old, tall or short, cowardly or brave, and so on, then the 
term 'man' would seem to lack 'genuine significance' when it is used in this way. 
Hence the force of the expression "genuinely significant" might be understood to 
specify a contrast between terms such as 'Centaur' and 'limit', which are taken 
to name items to which one can ascribe certain appropriate attributes, and terms 
such as 'Man', which are taken to name items to which one can not ascribe such 
attributes. Thus, although it makes sense to say 'A Centaur has four legs', it does 
not make sense to say "'Man" has two legs'. Hence, the Stoics might have thought 
that an item such as a Centaur or a limit could be said to be something, which 
is to say "the proper subject of thought and discourse," but it was evidently not 
part of their ontological commitment to think that an item such as the universal 
99 
'Man' could also be so. 
99Note that the Stoic use of the expression 'universal Man' is as a synonym for the expression 
'the concept "Man"' 
We should remind ourselves that such items belong to an ontological 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
463 
The terms which the Stoics standardly used in their characterisations of the 
incorporeals were various forms of the verbs 'bq)(c~x~c~gc~t' (AM 8.70; DL 7.63), 1~176 
and 'xc~pu@cyx~c~c~t' (AM 8.12; Simplicius in cat. 361.10). These terms, which are 
both customarily translated as 'to subsist' (e.g., Long and Sedley [1990], 1.196, 
162-66), are contrasted with the verb 'bx&p?(~t~' (e.g., Stobaeus eclog. 1.106.20) 
which, on at least one of its senses, can be translated as 'to exist'. This distinction, 
referred to by Galen as 'splitting hairs' (SVF 2.322), was, needless to say, the 
source of much critical commentary (cf. also Alexander in topica 301.19). We shall 
not attempt here to discuss this criticism, since it has, in any case, already been 
adequately addressed by A.A. Long [1971, pp. 84-90]. It seems clear, however, that 
the Stoics used this distinction to indicate the ontological status of the incorporeals 
as 'somethings', although not necessarily as existents. It has been suggested that 
the Stoic usage of the terms "seems to capture the mode of being that Meinong 
called bestehen and Russell rendered by 'subsist'" (Long and Sedley [1990, 1.165]). 
The parallel is perhaps even closer inasmuch as the Stoics also seemed to count 
'fictions' or 'mental constructs' such as surfaces and limits as belonging to the 
class of 'somethings' and to use forms of these verbs to refer to them (Proclus SVF 
2.488; DL 7.135). It would be wrong, though, to infer from this that they classed 
incorporeals as fictions, the views of some modern commentators notwithstanding. 
6 
AXI()MATA 
It is evident that in some respects axiOmata have a character similar to that of 
propositions. For one thing, several texts confirm the judgment that the Stoics at- 
tributed to axi6rnata the property of being true or false. 1~ There is some question, 
however, whether axi6rnata were true or false in 'the basic sense'. This question 
arises because the Stoics assigned the terms 'true' and 'false' not only to axi6mata, 
but also to arguments (Xdyot) and to presentations (q)~vxac~(~t). An argument was 
said to be true whenever it was conclusive (c~uvc~xTtxdv) and had true premisses 
(PH 2.138; DL 7.79), and, according to Sextus, "a true presentation is one from 
which it is possible to produce a true predication (176 
such as this in 
the present circumstances: 'It is day', or this: 'It is light'" (AM 7.244). l~ 
The 
category different from that to which the common quality 'Man' belongs, the latter, according 
to the Stoics, being something corporeal. 
l~176 Cleomedes SVF 2.541; Proclus SVF 2.521; Stobaeus eclog. 1.106.19. 
l~ 
example, Sextus Empiricus: AM 8.10; 12; 73; 74; Diogenes La~rtius: 7.65; 68. 
l~ 
Kneale observes that "if we take xc~yop(c~ here as equivalent to &~((o~ then Sextus 
is defining the truth of presentations in terms of the truth of axiOrnata" [Kneale and Kneale, 
19626, p. 150]. Although admitting that "this identification is plausible" [Kneale and Kneale, 
19626, p. 150], she is hesitant however to apply it, her reason being that the term 'katggoria' 
appears only this once in Sextus' writings, and its meaning is nowhere mentioned by him [Kneale 
and Kneale, 19626, p. 150]. But it seems that many commentators think that this identification 
is more than plausible (e.g., Mates [1953, p. 34]; Long and Sedley [1990, 1.240]; Long [1971, p. 
92]; Graeser [19786, p. 201]). 
l~ 
~:v oSv ~tc~iv ~v ~cvctv &X~tg~l xocc~yop(o~,~ xo~a~crgca, &c xo5 '~Lx~pc~ ~a~tv' ~xl xo5 

464 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
consensus among modern commentators, however, seems to be that "the basic ap- 
plication was probably to propositions" [Long, 1971, p. 92]. In addition to being 
the primary items to which the terms 'true' and 'false' are applied, axi~mata are 
like propositions in that they are signified by declarative sentences. 1~ According 
to the Kneales, two further ways in which axi6mata are similar to propositions, 
is that "they are abstract, or, as the Stoics perhaps rather unhappily put it, in- 
corporeal; and they exist in some sense whether we think of them or not" [Kneale 
and Kneale, 1962a, p. 156]. We have discussed the latter thesis in Subsection 5.5. 
As for the former, it may be that we can plausibly think of axi6mata as 'abstract'; 
it would seem, however, that we can criticise the Stoics for calling them 'incorpo- 
real' instead of 'abstract' only if we are certain that they meant 'abstract' and not 
'incorporeal'. 
At any rate, however many of these characteristics of propositions one wants to 
apply to axi6mata, there are several differences which, according to the Kneales, 
indicate that axi6mata cannot simply be identified with propositions [Kneale and 
Kneale, 1962a, pp. 153-56]. For one thing, axi6mata appear to have certain 'gram- 
matical' characteristics which we usually do not associate with propositions, but 
rather with the sentences which express them. For another thing, lekta obviously 
have moods. For another, lekta in general, and hence axi6mata in particular, have 
tenses. This is indicated by the titles of a series of four books written by Chrysippus 
and reported by Diogenes La~rtius. These titles are Temporal Lekta 1~ -ca)o ~oo 
(II~p~ z~v x~z& Xp6Vour X~yo~ov ~' ~3') and Axi#mata in the Perfect Tense, two 
books (II~p't c~uw~ktx~v &r 
{3') (DL 7.190). There are reports as well that 
predicates, which are major constituents of axi6mata, were distinguished according 
to voice (DL 7.64-65) and number (Chrysippus SVF 2:99.38-100.1). Michael Frede, 
in his discussion of the origins of traditional grammar, has suggested that for the 
Stoics the notion of syntax was applied primarily to lekta and only derivatively to 
parts of speech and sentences ([Frede, 1987b], 345-47). Hence, distinctions which 
we would expect to be made at the level of expressions are made by the Stoics 
at the level of lekta, and the features at the level of expressions which correspond 
to certain features distinguished at the level of lekta, take their names from these 
latter features ([Frede, 1987b], 345). If Frede is correct, then it should come as no 
surprise that axi6mata differ from propositions in these ways. 
Another difference between axi6mata and propositions, is that axi#mata can 
change truth value. 
As the Kneales point out, this feature is what might be 
expected since axi#mata have tenses [Kneale and Kneale, 1962a, pp. 
153-54]. 
Finally, axi#mata may cease to exist. 1~ 
The evidence for this latter property 
1~ 
examples of axiOmata which Sextus cites at AM 8.93-98 and which Diogenes La~rtius 
cites at 7.68-70 are all clearly signified by declarative sentences. The texts at AM 8.71 and DL 
65-66 also indicate that axi6mata are signified by declarative sentences. 
1~ 
we are translating "cb kcv6~vov', which literally means 'that which is spoken' as 
'lekton'. A.A. Long has said that "in sense lekton can hardly be distinguished from xb )~v6~ov" 
([Long, 1971], 107n13). 
1~ 
Graeser's remarks on these differences between axiOmata and propositions [Graeser, 
19785, pp. 94-95]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
465 
is a passage of Alexander of Aphrodisias (in an. pr. 177.25-178.1). He reports 
that according to Chrysippus, the axi6ma 'This man is dead' (indicating Dion 
demonstratively) is impossible when Dion is alive but is 'destroyed' (q)gdpec~gc, t) 
when Dion has died (177.31). 
On the other hand, the axiOma 'Dion has died' 
which is possible when Dion is alive is apparently still possible when Dion has 
died (178.21-22). This result is what one would expect, given that a demonstra- 
tive must indicate the individually qualified substrate (t8{co~ r~otdv), that is, the 
qualified substance of Dion, whereas the name signifies the individuating quality 
('CSta r~otd~rl~ ) (DL 7.58). When Dion has died, the individually qualified substrate 
ceases to exist as such, and thus can no longer be indicated demonstratively; the 
individuating quality, however, can still be referred to by the name. 
According to Sextus Empiricus, the 'dialecticians' (i.e., the Stoics) declare that 
the first and most important distinction among axiOmata is that between those 
which are 'simple' (&~Xa) and those which are 'complex' (o6 X &r~Xa) (AM 8.93). 
Sextus reports that even though axidmata are constructed of other elements, they 
are called 'simple' if they do not have axiOmata as constituents. Thus a simple 
axiOma is one which is neither constructed from a single axiOma taken twice (8t~ 
Xatl~3avd{levov), nor from different aziOmata by means of one or more conjunctions 
(c~5vSeob, o~ ) (AM 8.94). The following, for example, are simple axiOmata, as is 
every axi6ma of similar form: 'It is day', 'It is night', 'Socrates is conversing' 
(AM 8.93). Complex axiOmata, on the other hand, are those constructed from a 
single axiOma taken twice, for example, 'If it is day, it is day'; or those constructed 
from different axi6mata by means of a conjunction, for example, 'If it night, it is 
dark'. Further examples of complex axiOmata are such as the following: 'Both it 
is day and it is light', 'Either it is day or it is night' (AM 8.95). The content of 
these passages should be compared with the similar content of the text of Diogenes 
La~rtius at 7.68-69. Each author goes on to discuss the various kinds of simple 
and complex axi6mata, but we shall refer to Diogenes' text for this information. 
Simple axiOmata, according to Diogenes, are classified as follows: 'negative' (~b 
&:voq)czztxdv), 'negatively assertoric' (zb &pvrFtxdv), 'privative' (zb az~prFtxdv), 'as- 
sertoric' (zb 165 
'demonstrative' (~b 165162215 
and 'indefinite' 
(~b &dpto~ov) (7.69). *~ 
In the passage at 7.70, Diogenes provides some details 
about these various kinds of simple axiOmata. A negative axiOma is constructed 
with a negative particle and an axidma, e.g., 'Not: it is day'. A negatively asser- 
toric axiOma is produced from a negative constituent and a predicate, e.g., 'No 
one is walking'. A privative axiOma is constructed with a privative constituent 
and a possible axiOma (&~t&ga~o~  
80vatitv), e.g., 'This man is unkind'. An 
assertoric axiOma is constituted by a nominative case and a predicate, e.g., 'Dion 
is walking'. A demonstrative axidma is constructed with a demonstrative nom- 
inative case and a predicate, e.g., 'This man is walking'. An indefinite axiSma 
consists of one or more indefinite constituents and a predicate, e.g., 'Someone 
is walking'. Diogenes makes a special note of the 'double-negative' axiOma (~b 
br~par~oq)c,~ 
This is a negative aziOma constructed with a negative particle 
l~ 
have followed the translations of Long and Sedley ([1990], 1.205) to render these terms. 

466 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
and a negative axi6ma, e.g., 'Not: not: it is day'. Such an axi6ma, according to 
Diogenes, is assumed to have the same meaning as the axi6ma 'It is day' (DL 
7.69). 
Of the complex axi6mata described by Diogenes, we will consider only those 
which have a role in the Stoic syllogistic system. 1~ 
These are the 'conditional 
axiSma'(t'o ~uvrl[J[~ov), the 'disjunctive axi6ma' (~b ~t~uyI~vov), and the 'con- 
junctive axi6ma' (-:b r 
The conditional axi6ma is constructed 
by means of the conditional connective 'if' (~[). 1~ 
This connective 'guaran- 
tees, (~x~yy~kkax~) that the second constituent of the conditional axi6ma follows 
(&xokoug~v) from the first, as, for example, 'If it is day, it is light' (DL 7.71). 
A disjunctive axi6ma is constructed by means of the connective 'or' (~xo~). This 
connective guarantees that one or the other of the constituent axi6mata is false, 
for example, 'Either it is day or it is night' (DL 7.72). A conjunctive axi6ma is 
constructed by means of a 'conjunctive' connective, such as the particle ' 
in 
this example: 'It is day and it is light' (xs ilp~po~ ~a~:'~ x~ q~r ~) 
(DL 7.72). 
A topic of interest at this point might be that concerning the truth conditions 
for the various types of complex axi6mata. We shall discuss the truth conditions 
for the conditional in the section on inference, but for the moment we intend to 
consider some questions about axi6mata in relation to what has been written about 
presentations and pragmata. One of the distinctions among presentations recorded 
by Diogenes Lai~rtius is that between sensory (c~[~9~Vtx~) and non-sensory (oOx 
c~i~9~lX~X~( ) presentations (DL 7.51). He writes that "sensory presentations are 
those apprehended through one or more sense-organs, whereas non-sensory pre- 
sentations are those perceived through the mind itself, such as those of the incor- 
poreals and of other things apprehended by reason" (DL 7.51). 110 In Passage A 
Sextus implies that a Greek speaker, on hearing a significant utterance in Greek, 
will apprehend the pragma signified and subsisting coordinately with thought, 
whereas the non-Greek-speaker will not apprehend the pragma (AM 8.12). We 
interpreted this as a description of how a rational presentation would be induced 
in the mind of the Greek speaker by the utterance. The content of the presentation 
would be the pragma signified by the utterance. 
We take it that such a presentation, although induced by a sound sensed through 
the hearing organs, or perhaps by the marks on a papyrus or a stone sensed through 
the organ of sight, would, nevertheless, be classified as a non-sensory presentation. 
For in order that a presentation be a sensory presentation, it seems evident that not 
only must it be apprehended through one or more of the sense organs, and hence 
have its cause in some portion of the qualified substrate, but also it must have 
l~ 
Empiricus' account of complex axi6mata is not so compact or concise as that of 
Diogenes, but it is perhaps more philosophically interesting. He talks about the conditional 
axi6ma at AM 8.108-12, and about the conjunctive axi6ma at AM 8.124-29, but he does not 
seem to have an account of the disjunctive axi6ma which is comparable to that of Diogenes. 
l~ 
doxography is attested by Chrysippus in his Dialectics and by Diogenes the Babylonian 
in his Art of Dialectic (DL 7.71). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
467 
a content in which either that portion of the qualified substrate is itself signified 
by a demonstrative, or the quality which individuates it is signified by a name. 
It is apparent that in the normal course of events, a presentation caused by an 
utterance may satisfy the first requirement, but it will not satisfy the second, for 
the content of such a presentation, as is indicated by the discussion in the preceding 
paragraph, is the pragma signified by the utterance, and not any feature of the 
utterance itself. 
There is evidence that the Stoics viewed certain thought processes as some 
sort of 'internal discourse' (~vSt~9~xo~ ~,6~'O~). 111 
Such thoughts can no doubt 
be considered as 'utterances', and as such, will induce presentations in the mind. 
Clearly the presentations produced by such utterances will be non-sensory. Hence 
it would seem that a non-sensory presentation may be induced in one's mind either 
by someone (else) speaking a pragma, or by one speaking a pragrna in thought. 
The pragma spoken (~p~y~),~xxdv) might be an axi6rna signified by an assertion, 
but it might also be prostaktikon signified by a command, or an erdtgma signified 
by a query, or some other type of lekton. No doubt we not only sometimes make 
assertions to ourselves in thought, but also sometimes ask ourselves questions or 
exhort ourselves to action. This latter notion of speaking imperatives to ourselves 
in thought seems to be a necessary feature of Brad Inwood's interpretation of the 
Stoic theory of action [Inwood, 1985, pp. 59-60 86-87]. Interesting as it might be 
to follow up on these other classes of lekta, aziOmata, however, are the lekta which 
are of interest in the present context. 
We take it that the presentation induced by someone uttering a declarative 
sentence, or by someone uttering a declarative sentence in thought, will have a 
pragrna as content which has a structure isomorphic to that of the aziSma signified. 
We are using 'isomorphic' here to suggest a structure preserving correspondence 
between the elements of the pragma and the elements of the aziSma. Thus, if we 
see Dion walking and so have a sensory presentation of Dion walking, the pragma 
accompanying this presentation can be represented by the simple structure {Dion, 
to walk}; however, if someone were to say to us 'Dion is walking' so that we have 
a non-sensory presentation of Dion walking at the present time, the attendant 
pragrna, although representable on some level by the same structure, would seem 
to require a representation which includes an element to signify the present tense. 
111In the Theatetus Socrates says that "when the mind is thinking, it is simply talking to 
itself, asking questions and answering them, and saying yes or no" (190a). In a similar vein in 
the Sophist, the Eliatic Stranger says that "thinking and discourse are the same thing, except 
that what we call thinking is precisely, the inward dialogue carried on by the mind with itself 
without spoken sound" (263a). No doubt there are problems with the view that all thinking 
is like internal discourse; it seems, however, that something of this tradition was carried on by 
the Stoics, for according to Sextus Empiricus, they held that "it is not with respect to uttered 
speech (~poq)optxS~ X5u 
that man differs from the irrational animals (for crows and jays 
and parrots utter articulate sounds), but with respect to internal discourse (~,~t~gexor165162 
(AM 8.275). And according to Galen, the Stoics define the mental process which provides the 
means of converting sensory data to knowledge, that is, the process by means of which "we 
understand consequence and conflict, in which separation, synthesis, analysis and demonstration 
are involved" (SVF 2.135), as 'internal discourse' (endiathetos logos). 

468 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
One might, for example, portray this pragma as follows: {Dion, to walk: now}. 
However, since it is beyond the scope of this work to develop a detailed account 
of how such representations might be handled, we will resist the temptation. We 
have chosen to characterise the axi&na by merely enclosing its signifying sentence 
in braces, and although there are probably good reasons to develop distinct modes 
of representation for the pragma and the axi&na, we have chosen to depict the 
pragma by the same method. 
To consider a more complex example, suppose that someone says to one 'Dion 
was walking about in Athens at noon yesterday'. It seems evident that the pragma 
which accompanies the presentation induced by this utterance will reflect the struc- 
ture of the axiOma, and hence have as constituents not only the individuating 
quality signified by the name 'Dion' and the predicate signified by the verb 'walk- 
ing', but also temporal components and the individuating quality signified by the 
name 'Athens'. We shall represent both the pragma and the azi6ma as follows: 
{Dion was walking about in Athens at noon yesterday}. It is worth emphasising 
that we shall represent the pragma in this way only when it is the content of a 
presentation induced by an utterance. 
7 
THE CONDITIONAL AXIOMA 
The conditional axidma, according to Chrysippus and Diogenes the Babylonian, is 
constructed from two axi6mata by means of the connective 'if' (d) (DL 7.71). Of 
the two constituent axi6mata, the one signified by the sentence placed immediately 
after the connective is called the 'antecedent' and 'first' (~lyo@~vov), whereas the 
other is called the 'consequent' and 'second' (Xf]yov) (AM 3.110). 112 The connec- 
tive 'if' seems to 'promise' or 'guarantee' (~xc~yy~),X~X~xc~t) that the consequent 
'follows' (&xoXou.9~) the antecedent (AM 8.111; DL 7.71); hence, the relationship 
of 'following' (&xoXou0[c~) between its antecedent and consequent is evidently the 
characteristic property of the conditional axi6ma. Since the conditional axidma 
is, after all, an axi&na, it might be expected that for any particular conditional 
aziSma, one could give an account of the presentation to which it corresponds, 
and of the pragma which is the content of the presentation. A passage of Sextus 
Empiricus, which we intend to quote presently, provides a clue to the psychologi- 
cal aspects of this relationship. However, since the context in which this passage 
occurs is a discussion of the Stoic doctrine of signs, it might be useful to give a 
short summary of this teaching. 
According to Sextus Empiricus, the Stoics define the sign (xb c~qp~ov) as a true 
antecedent axi6ma in a sound conditional, capable of revealing (~xxaXu~tx6~) 
the consequent (AM 8.245; 250; PH 2.104). 113 Sextus reports that signs were 
distinguished between those which are 'indicative' (~vSCtx~tx6,), and those which 
112Sextus notes that reversing the normal sentence order does not affect this rule. Thus, in 
each of the examples 'If it is day, it is light' and 'It is light, if it is day', the antecedent is the 
axiOma signified by the sentence 'It is day' (AM 8.110). 
11aAt AM 8.104, Sextus implies that this definition was reserved only for the 'indicative sign' 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
469 
are 'commemorative' (bxogvYla-ctxdv) (AM 8.151). An indicative sign is said to 
indicate 'that which is naturally non-evident' (xb q00a~t diS~lXOV), and is never 
observed in conjunction with the thing signified (8.154). The soul, for example, 
is naturally non-evident, and its existence is supposed to be indicated by bodily 
motions (8.155). A commemorative sign, on the other hand, signifies what is 
'temporarily non-evident' (~( ~v ~pb~ x~tpbv &~flXc0v), and is sometimes observed 
in conjunction with what is signified; hence, the perception of the sign brings to 
mind what is often perceived along with it but is momentarily unperceived. For 
example, since smoke is often observed in conjunction with fire, it is taken as a 
commemorative sign of fire even though the fire itself is unperceived (8.151-52). 
7.1 
Akolouthia: psychological aspects 
The connection between the doctrine of signs and the notion of 'following' 
(& 
is spelled out by Sextus Empiricus in a passage which records the 
Stoic reply to several criticisms levelled at the theory of signs by the Skeptics. 
[The Stoics] say that it is not with respect to uttered speech (xpo- 
q~opt 
Xdyog) that man differs from the irrational animals--for crows 
and jays and parrots utter articulate sounds, but with respect to in- 
ternal discourse (~vSt~9~xog Xdyog). Nor [does man differ from the 
irrational animals] with respect to the simple presentations (for they 
also form such presentations), but with respect to the 'inferential' 
(~t~'~0~C~'~tXl~) 114 0t~ '~O~KOC~t-~tO~C~,' ((JU~$q~tXl~)presentations, because 
of which he immediately possesses the conception (~votc~) of 'following' 
(&xoXoug(~), and through the conception of following he apprehends 
the notion (~dYtet~) of sign (eYtg~ov); for sign itself is such as this: 'If 
this, then this'. Therefore it follows that sign also exists in accordance 
with the nature and constitution of man (AM 8.275-77). 
We interpret this passage as follows. The faculty of forming presentations from 
our conceptions and complex presentations from simpler ones is part of the nature 
and constitution of human beings. This faculty is itself founded on our capacity 
for 'internal discourse', which makes possible the 'inferential' and 'compositional' 
thought necessary for the production of such presentations. Thus, we differ from 
the irrational animals, for they do not possess this faculty for producing presenta- 
tions, but must rely solely on their senses for the data from which presentations 
are formed. Moreover, because of this capacity for constructing inferential and 
compositional presentations, we also possess the conception of 'following', and 
since the relationship between the sign and what it reveals can be represented as a 
conditional axi6rna, it is through the conception of following, that we understand 
the notion of sign. 
ii4The adjective '~xc~3c(xt 
is derived from the noun 'gex~f3c~at~', the basic meaning of which 
is 'a moving over' or 'a shifting' or 'a change of position' (Liddell and Scott). This etymology is 
reflected in the use of the adjective in this context which seems to suggest the transition from 
one conception to another by the process of inferential or discursive thought 

470 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Of immediate interest in this text is the statement that we possess the con- 
ception of akolouthia because of our ability to form inferential and compositional 
presentations. There is little indication in the passage as to how this capacity is 
supposed to produce the conception of following. It may be possible, however, to 
work out an interpretation by considering some clear examples of akolouthia from 
Sextus Empiricus' discussion of the theory of signs, and by keeping in mind the 
quotation of A~tius concerning the acquisition of conceptions and preconceptions, 
as well as the texts of Diogenes La~rtius and Sextus Empiricus concerning the 
ways of producing complex conceptions. 115 Our conjecture is that the 'inferential' 
and 'compositional' presentations are those from which the conceptions of general 
conditionals are inscribed on the soul. Furthermore, we would suggest that it is 
the totality of conceptions of general conditionals from which the conception of 
following arises. 
Consider, then, some examples of signs mentioned by Sextus Empiricus. The 
following are commemorative signs: smoke is a sign of fire and a scar a sign 
of a previous wound (AM 8.152-53; PH 2.102). A punctured heart is a sign of 
immanent death (AM 8.153). Lactation is a sign of conception (AM 8.252; PH 
2.106) and a bronchial discharge is a sign of a lung wound (AM 8.252-53). In 
these examples, according to Sextus, the sign often appears together with what 
it indicates, and hence, when the latter is not evident, the sign is able to reveal 
it because we remember that they occur together, for instance, that a punctured 
heart results in death (AM 8.152-53). But it would seem to be implicit in the 
passage quoted above that a certain degree of prior conceptual development must 
take place before one acquires the conception of sign, and so understands one state 
of affairs as a sign of another states of affairs. 
This development, as Sextus indicates, no doubt begins by one's noticing that 
certain types of presentations seem to occur together as a sequence. Thus a pre- 
sentation of a man who has been wounded in the heart will be followed after some 
period of time by a presentation of the same man having died. The pragmata 
which are the contents of these presentations may be represented respectively by 
the complex {This man, to be wounded in the heart} and the complex {This man, 
to die}. They would be spoken respectively as the aziOmata This man is wounded 
in the heart and This man has died (cf. 
AM 8.254). 
Given some number of 
similar situations and supposing the capacity for 'inferential' and compositional' 
thought--perhaps along with certain conceptions and preconceptions already es- 
tablished, for example, general conceptions of causality--one might produce a non- 
sensory presentation of a causal connection between these types of events. 116 The 
content of this presentation would be a complex pragma, and the components of 
this complex pragma may be represented as follows: the first constituent will be 
115$ee Section 4.2 for both of these references 
116We are making two assumptions here which we have not made explicit but which seem 
plausible. These are (1) that a basic notion of causality would be recognised by the Stoics as a 
preconception (n96k~t~) acquired by most people, and (2) that the Stoics would recognise the 
examples of commemorative signs listed above as cases in which there is a causal connection 
between the sign and what it indicates 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
471 
the pragma {Someone, to be wounded in the heart}, followed by, say, an arrow to 
represent the connection, 117 followed by the pragma {That one, to die}. Finally, 
the whole complex will be enclosed in braces. Thus the representation will be 
constructed as follows: 
{{Someone, to be wounded in the heart} -+ {That one, to die}}. 
The axiOma which is this pragma spoken as an assertion might be represented in 
a similar manner, although it may contain certain constituents such as temporal 
elements not present in the representation of the pragma. The azi6rna, then, might 
be represented as follows: 
{{Someone is wounded in the heart} + {That one will die}}. 
Taking the particle 'if' (d) as the connective which seems to provide the most 
natural way to signify the arrow, the sentence which signifies this axi6rna will 
be the sentence 'If someone is wounded in the heart, that one will die'. 
This 
sentence which signifies a generalised conditional axiSma (Tb 215 
might 
be seen as expressing a law-like relationship between those situations in which 
someone is wounded in the heart and those situations in which that person dies 
of the wound. No doubt this could be viewed as a relationship of 'following' or 
'consequence' in the causal sequence of events, and given a similar analysis of 
the causal relationships between other states of affairs, it seems probable that a 
general conception of following would be developed; moreover, one might plausibly 
assume that the relationship of following conceived to obtain between events in 
the causal nexus would be carried over to the axi6mata. In any case, there is no 
doubt that the Stoics viewed the relationship of akolouthia as one which holds 
between axiOrnata as well as between events in the causal nexus. 
A difficulty with this interpretation is that for most of the examples cited from 
Sextus Empiricus, the direction of the relationship between the sign and what it 
indicates, or between the antecedent and consequent of the parallel conditional 
axi&na, is not the same as the direction of the causal sequence. For example, a 
scar is said to be a sign of a previous wound. The general conditional axiOrna 
might be expressed by the sentence 'If anyone has a scar, that one has had a 
wound'. According to the interpretation so far, having a wound would follow from 
having a scar, but clearly, the direction of akolouthia with respect to the causal 
sequence is from the occurrence of the wound to the formation of the scar. So it is 
obvious that some adjustment must be made in this account of the development 
of the conception of akolouthia. 
Previously, we quoted A.A. Long ([1971, p. 46]: see page 425) to the effect 
that since the Stoics assumed that events occurred according to a strict causal 
nexus, they perhaps assigned to logic as its major function the task of making 
possible predictions about the future from considerations of what follows from 
117The arrow will turn out to be the item at the level of lekta which is signified by the connective 
'if' (e~) 

472 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
present events. On this assumption, one might expect that they would have con- 
centrated at first on examples in which the direction of akolouthia coincided for 
the causal sequence and the relationship of following in the conditional axi6ma, 
and so stressed the development of the conception of following as we have inter- 
preted it above. But of course, they would also have been interested in drawing 
out the present consequences of past actions or events, especially with respect to 
allocating responsibility in the sphere of ethics. Hence, the following relationship 
between the antecedent and consequent of a conditional axi6ma need not always 
proceed from cause to effect as does the following relationship of the parallel causal 
sequence. And not the least consideration would be those instances of following 
between the parts of a conditional axiSma which do not correspond to instances 
of following in the causal nexus: in other words, conditional axi6mata matching 
logical connections. Nevertheless, it is not implausible to suppose that the con- 
ception of following as it relates to axiSmata had its basis in a preoccupation with 
the kinds of examples which involve reasoning from cause to effect. 
There are not so many examples of indicative signs occurring in the text as 
there are of commemorative signs, but here are two: bodily movement is a sign of 
the presence of the soul (AM 8.155) and sweat flowing through the skin the sign 
of the existence of intelligible pores (AM 8.306). For the Stoics, the first example 
would be a straightforward instance of a causal relationship. The presence of the 
cause, however, must be inferred from the existence of the effect, hence acquiring 
the conception of the relationship between them will depend entirely on already 
established conceptions and preconceptions, and on the capacity for inferential and 
compositional thought. The relationship in the second example is not obviously a 
causal relationship, but seems to be a strictly logical. Yet acquiring the conception 
of the following relationship between these states of affairs would also seem to 
depend on previously acquired conceptions and preconceptions, such as theories 
about surfaces and the flow of fluids, as well as on inferential and compositional 
thought. 
7.2 
Pragmata spoken as conditionals 
Suppose that someone utters the sentence 'If Dion is walking, Dion is moving'. 11s 
What is the nature of the pragma signified by this utterance and of the presentation 
which has this pragma as content? Apparently, the utterance of this sentence will 
induce a presentation in the mind of the hearer, the content of which will be a 
complex pragma. The components of this complex pragma may be represented 
as follows: the first constituent will be the pragma {Dion, to walk}, followed by, 
say, an arrow to represent the relation of akolouthia, 119 followed by the pragma 
{Dion, to move}. Finally, the whole complex will be enclosed in braces. Thus the 
representation will be constructed as follows: 
llScf. DL 7.78 where this conditional is featured as the major premiss of the argument 'If Dion 
is walking, Dion is moving; but Dion is walking; therefore, Dion is moving' 
l l9The arrow is the item at the level of lekta which is signified by the connective 'if' (e~) 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
473 
{ {Dion, to walk} -+ {Dion, to move} } 
As we indicated in the previous section, the axiOma, that is, the pragma spoken, 
will be represented by the construction 
{{Dion is walking} --+ {Dion is moving}} 
The information conveyed by the axi6ma and apprehended in the pragma is that 
any situation in which Dion is walking will be one in which Dion is moving; more- 
over, this information is communicated regardless of whether there ever is any real 
situation in which Dion is walking. 
Similarly, the utterance of the sentence 'If Dion was walking about in Athens at 
noon yesterday, he was not on the Isthmus at noon yesterday' will induce a presen- 
tation which has as content the pragma which may be represented by the complex: 
{{Dion was walking about in Athens at noon yesterday} -+ 
{Dion was not on the Isthmus at noon yesterday}}. 
What the axiOma conveys is that the existence of the situation in which Dion 
was walking about in Athens at noon yesterday, rules out the existence of the 
situation in which Dion was on the Isthmus at noon yesterday. 12~ We shall see 
in the sequel that the standard criterion for the sound conditional axidma, that 
is, one for which the consequent follows from the antecedent, is a reflection of the 
kind of relationship that holds between these situations. This relationship might 
also have been signified by a sentence constructed with the connective 'not both 
... and ... ', but it may be that Chrysippus wished to reserve this connective to 
signify contingent relationships between states of affairs. 121 
Each of the conditional axiOmata in these examples will be sound (byt~) or 
true (&XTIg~) if and only if the consequent axi6ma follows from the antecedent 
axidma, which is to say, if and only if it is the case that the pragrna signified by the 
consequent sentence follows from the pragma signified by the antecedent sentence. 
How would someone know that this relation holds? In the first example, if one were 
to have the conception of the general conditional axi6ma If anything is walking, 
that thing is moving, and were to know that the relation holds for the general 
conditional, then it seems clear that one would know that it holds for the particular 
conditional. It is probably important that this conception could, in principle, be 
acquired by experience, although it is probably more likely that it would be taught. 
It could be acquired by experience because in Stoicism something walking possesses 
an attribute which is identifiable as a certain configuration or mixture of the 
12~ 
Stoics characterise the relationship between these situations by saying that they 'conflict' 
(g~Xr 
with one another 
121cf. Mueller [1978, p. 20]; Kneale and Kneale [1962a, p. 161]; Long and Sedley [1990, 1.211]. 
Note that the relationship between these situations could not be signified by the Stoic disjunction, 
since that connective indicates that exactly one of the disjuncts is true. But evidently it need 
not be the case that Dion be either at Athens or on the Isthmus. 

474 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
pneuma with the individually qualified substrate; moreover, something moving also 
has an attribute identifiable in the same manner. Thus one could find out through 
direct experience that anything which possessed one attribute also possessed the 
other, and in this way come to have the conception of the general conditional. In 
the other example, one would rely on the conception of the general conditional 
{{Something is at place A at time t} -+ {that thing cannot be at place B at time 
t}}. 
It is unclear how the acquisition of this conception would be explained. It may 
be that it would be classified as a preconception (xp6X@tr 
In any event, knowing 
that the relation holds for the particular conditional would seem to require knowing 
that it holds for the general conditional. 
8 
SEMANTICS AND INFERENCE 
The foundation of the Stoic system of inference was the so-called 'indemonstra- 
bles' (or &v(xxoSdxxot), a set of five basic argument types which are attributed 
to Chrysippus by several sources (AM 8.223; DL 7.79; Galen inst. 
log. 
34- 
35), although there is some controversy whether they actually originated with 
him. Their origin has been ascribed to the Peripatetic philosopher Theophrastus 
by both Prantl and Zeller, 122 but it has been argued by Bochefiski 123 and oth- 
ers 124 that this claim is doubtful. On the other hand, there is some indication 
that arguments of this sort were discussed by Aristotle and his followers. In the 
Prior Analytics at 50 a 16-506 4, Aristotle discusses arguments from agreement 
(~ 6~aoXoy[cxr and arguments by reduction to the impossible (~t& x~ de &~6wx-rov 
&TCC(y(Oyf']~). 125 He says that many other arguments are concluded from hypothesis, 
and these he promises to consider and distinguish in the sequel. But, as Alexander 
of Aphrodisias points out (in an. pr. 390.1), Aristotle never did fulfil this promise. 
Alexander conjectures, however, that perhaps Aristotle was speaking of certain 
arguments from hypothesis mentioned by Theophrastus and Eudemus and some 
others of his followers (390.2-3). These include 'arguments by connection' (xo6~ 
x~ St& c~uv~oS~), which are also called 'conditional' (c~uvq~p~vov) or 'hypothetical 
by an additional premiss' (xob~ ~t~ x~ ~poc~Xfld?~co~ b~o0~txo6~), 'arguments by 
122Zeller [1962, 119n2]; Mates [1953, p. 69] attests that both Prantl and Zeller held this view, 
and Kieffer [1964, p. 66] confirms that Prantl held it. He cites Volume 1, page 386 of Prantl's 
Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande (Graz, 1955). (Photographic reprint of Leipzig, 1855, 
edition). 
123Both Mates [1953, p. 69] and Kieffer [1964, p. 8] cite Bochefiski's La Logique de Thu)opraste 
(Collectanea Friburgensia, N.S. fasc. xxxvii) (Fribourg: 1947). Mates cites pages 116-17 and 
chapter 7, note 5; while Kieffer cites page 103 ft. 
124Kieffer writes that Prantl "by a strained interpretation of certain passages in the later com- 
mentators on Aristotle ... reached the unjustified conclusion that the traditional hypothetical 
syllogisms were the discovery or invention of Theoprastus" ([Kieffer, 1964], 66). It seems clear 
that Mates ([1953], 69) also rejects Prantl's conclusion. 
125This is the wording of Alexander of Aphrodisias (in an. pr. 389.31). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
475 
separation' (zob St& zoo 8tatpeztxoS), also called 'disjunctive' (8te~euyg{vov), and 
'arguments from a negated conjunction' (zoOg St& &r~oq~aztx~g c~ul~=Xoxftg ) (390.3- 
6). In another place, Alexander attributes this alternative terminology to 'the 
younger philosophers' or ne6teroi (ved)zepot), and there is no doubt that this is 
Stoic terminology. The terms '(~uvrlgg~vov', '8t~uybKvov', and '(~ug~Xo &~o- 
q)azt 
are attested as Stoic in numerous places. The term 'zpo~t 
is attested 
by Sextus Empiricus (PH 2.202) and by Galen (inst. log. 17.1), and the term 
'xpoa),@t~' by Sextus (AM 8.413) and by Diogenes LaSrtius (7.76). According to 
Kieffer [1964, p. 66], the terms 'argument by connection' (St& zo5 c~uv~xoSg ) and 
'argument by separation' (St& zoo 8tatpezt 
are not found in Aristotle's works. 
Kieffer [1964, p. 67] cites Bochefiski's argument (La Logique de Thu)ophraste 108) 
that since these terms are Peripatetic but not Aristotelian, they likely were coined 
by Theophrastus and Eudemus. All in all it would seem to be rather unclear to 
what extent these philosophers advanced the study of hypothetical arguments. If 
indeed they were responsible for this terminology, then perhaps, as the Kneales 
suggest [Kneale and Kneale, 19623, p. 105], its existence is an indication that 
they made some headway in the analysis of such arguments. On the other hand, 
we have the testimony of Boethius that neither Theophrastus nor Eudemus car- 
ried the investigation into the hypothetical syllogisms much further than where 
Aristotle left off (Graeser Die logischen Fragmente des Theophrast, ft. 29). 
A general description of the indemonstrables would be that they are argu- 
ments with two premisses of which the 'major', called 'tropikon' (zpo~t 
is 
either a conditional, a disjunction, or a negated conjunction, and the minor, called 
'proslgpsis' (~pdc~X@t~), is a categorical. If the major is a conditional, then the 
minor is either its antecedent, in which case the conclusion is its consequent, or 
it is the negation of the consequent, in which case the conclusion is the negation 
of the antecedent. If the major is a disjunction, then either the minor is one of 
the disjuncts, in which case the conclusion is the negation of the other disjunct, 
or it is the negation of one of the disjuncts, in which case the conclusion is the 
other disjunct itself. If the major is a negated conjunction, then the minor is one 
of the conjuncts and the conclusion is the negation of the other conjunct. The 
indemonstrables were often represented by the Stoics as they are below, that is, 
as schemata having ordinal numbers as variables: 126 
126See Mates [1953, p. 68] (Table II) for an extensive documentation of the evidence for the 
indemonstrables. Strictly speaking, I should be talking about the 'conditional axi6ma', the 
'disjunctive axiSma', and the 'conjunctive aziSma', but for the most part we shall refer to 
'conditionals', 'disjunctions,' and 'conjunctions' in the sequel. 

476 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
(I) 
If the first, the second; 
but the first; 
therefore, the second. 
(IV) Either the first or the second; 
but the first; 
therefore, not the second. 
(II) If the first, the second; 
but not the second; 
therefore, not the first. 
(v) Either the first or the second; 
but not the first; 
therefore, the second. 
(III) Not both the first and the second; 
but the first; 
therefore, not the second. 
In what follows we intend to consider mainly those arguments having a conditional 
axi6ma as the major premiss, its antecedent as minor premiss, and its consequent 
as conclusion, which is to say, those arguments exemplifying schema (I) in the 
above list. 
8.1 
The sound conditional 
In this section we consider several topics concerning the character of the Stoic 
conditional. These questions would seem to have a bearing on one's view of the 
role of the conditional in the Stoic system of inference and on one's view of Stoic 
logic in general. These topics are: (1) the debate over the criterion for a sound 
conditional, (2) the question whether there was a standard criterion for the Old 
Stoa, and (3) an account of the notion of conflict (g~X~) which appears in the 
criterion attributed to Chrysippus. 
The controversy 
It is well known to students of ancient logic that in the fourth century B.C. a con- 
troversy prevailed among various 'dialecticians '127 as to the proper criterion for a 
sound conditional (x6 6u 
c~u~[a[a~ov) 128 Although this dispute is mentioned 
briefly by Cicero in Academica 2.143, our information comes mainly from the writ- 
ings of Sextus Empiricus. At 8.108 in Adversus Mathematicos, Sextus outlines the 
Stoic characterisation of the conditional axi6rna. 129 
The conditional, according 
127This reference to the 'dialecticians' would seem to be one in which the term should be taken 
in the general sense of 'one who practices dialectic' or 'logician', rather than in the sense of 
denoting a member of the Dialectical School (cf. footnote 20, page 408). 
128In his translation of Sextus Empiricus, R.G. Bury renders 'auv~tx~ov' as 'hypothetical 
syllogism'; however, as Mates points out ([Mates, 1953], 43), this term always denotes an 'if... , 
then ... ' proposition in the examples given by ancient commentators, never an argument or 
inference-schema. 
The Stoics seem to use 'bVt~r (sound) and '&X~@~r (true) interchangeably in these contexts. 
We shall argue in the sequel that we should understand 'true' in the sense of 'sound' when it so 
occurs, rather than the other way around. 
129The Greek is '&~[co[xc~'. This term is often translated as 'proposition' but we have not com- 
mitted ourselves to so translate it (see page 423). It would seem better for us to transliterate 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
477 
to the Stoics, is a non-simple axidma whose parts are joined by the connective 
'if' (~[). The part preceding this connective is called the 'antecedent' or 'first' 
(~lu 
whereas the other is called 'consequent' or 'second' (X~lu 
Such an 
azi6ma "seems to promise that its second component follows consequently on its 
first" (AM 8.111), and if this promise is carried through so that the consequent 
does indeed 'follow' the antecedent, then the conditional is true (&XYlg~), but if 
not, then it is false (@5So~) (AM 8.112). 
Note that in these passages where he is discussing the controversy on condition- 
als (AM 8.112-17; PH 2.110-12), Sextus appears to use 'byt~' (sound) and '&),@~' 
(true) as though they were synonymous. In the glossary of Stoic Logic, Mates 
claims that, according to Stoic usage, these terms are interchangeable ([Mates, 
1953], 132). Jonathan Barnes states that the conditional "'If p then q' is byt~l~ iff 
it is true." On the other hand, he also writes that "of course, 'byt(q~' does not mean 
'true'" ([Barnes, 1980], 169n11). It seems possible that there is an ambiguity in 
Sextus' use of the adjective '&X@~', which, given that he is reporting on Stoic 
doctrine, one might assume to be a reflection of an ambiguity in Stoic usage. Sex- 
tus seems for the most part to represent the Stoics as using this term to describe 
a statement expressing an axi6ma the content of which correctly represents 'the 
way things are'. For example, he reports in one place that the definite azi6ma 
'This man is sitting' or 'This man is walking' is true (&X@~) whenever the person 
indicated by the demonstrative is actually sitting or walking (8.100). 13~ On the 
other hand, there is some evidence to suggest that in the passages cited above 
(AM 8.112-17; PH 2.110-12), he may also use the term (&),@~) in the sense of 
'genuine' or 'real'. 
First, there is the evident fact that he seems to use 'byt~' and '&),rlg~' inter- 
changeably. But, as Barnes has pointed out, '0u 
does not mean 'true' in the 
sense of a correct representation of the 'way things are'. On the other hand, ac- 
cording to other sources on Stoic logical theory, it does appear in certain contexts 
to mean 'genuine' or 'proper'. Consider, for example, the following dilemma set 
out by Aulus Gellius (2.7.6-10): 
A father's command is either honourable or base; 
if his command is honourable, it is not to be obeyed merely because it 
is his order, but because it is right that it be done; 
if his command is base, it is not to be obeyed because what is wrong 
ought not to be done; 
therefore, a father's command ought never to be obeyed. 
Gellius rejects this argument on the basis that the leading premiss "cannot be 
considered what the Greeks call a sound and proper (byt~ et ,6gt~ao~) disjunctive 
proposition." (2.7.21). He claims that it requires the additional disjunct "or are 
neither honourable nor base" in order to be considered a genuine Stoic disjunction. 
the term, since at least part of our thesis involves the question of its meaning. 
13~ 
Diogenes La~rtius relates that on the Stoics account, the axi6ma 'It is day' is true 
(&XYlg~c) just in case it really is day, otherwise, it is false (~5~or 
(DL 7.65). 

478 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Gellius' motivation here seems to be a reflection of his claim at 16.8.12-14 that the 
disjuncts of a Stoic disjunction must exhaust the alternatives. 
Sextus himself makes the same claim at AM 8.434 where he includes an argu- 
ment invalid because of deficiency in his classification of invalid Stoic arguments. 131 
Here Sextus writes that in the following argument the disjunctive premiss is deft- 
cient: 
Either wealth is an evil or wealth is good; 
but wealth is not an evil; 
therefore wealth is good. 
In order to be byt~ , according to Sextus, the disjunctive premiss ought to read 
as follows: 'Wealth is either a good or an evil or indifferent'. In both this example 
and in Gellius' example, the etymological derivation from the sense of 'byt~' as 
'sound' to its sense as 'complete' or 'having the required characteristics' would 
seem to be clear. Moreover, since that which is incomplete could not be a proper 
exemplar of its kind, the derivation to its sense as 'genuine' also seems clear. 
At AM 8.111-112, Sextus writes that a conditional proposition "seems to promise" 
that its consequent follows (& 
from its antecedent. Moreover, he adds 
that such a proposition is &kY19~ just in case this promise is fulfilled. Since a con- 
ditional proposition which lacked this characteristic could not be a proper Stoic 
conditional, one might suppose that a conditional is also therefore byt~ when this 
promise is fulfilled. Now inasmuch as '&Xrlg~' can be used in the sense of 'genuine' 
or 'real', it is possible, therefore, that Sextus uses both '0u 
and '&k~' 
in that 
sense. This would explain why he uses them interchangeably, even though 'byt~' 
does not mean 'true' in the sense of a correct representation. However, a con- 
ditional proposition which was 'sound' or 'true' in the sense of 'genuine'~which 
is to say that its consequent follows from its antecedent--could not help but be 
'true' in the derivative sense that it would correctly represent the real connections 
between the states of affairs represented in the antecedent and consequent. 
To return to Sextus' account, it would seem to be agreed among the dialecticians 
that a conditional axi6ma is sound whenever the consequent 'follows' from the 
antecedent. The disagreement arises, however, over the question of a criterion to 
determine when this relation of following holds. At AM 8.112, Sextus sets up the 
dispute as follows: 
Now on the one hand all the dialecticians assert in common that the 
conditional proposition is sound whenever its consequent follows its 
antecedent. On the other hand, concerning when and how it follows 
they are at odds with one another, and set forth conflicting criteria for 
the notion of 'following'. 132 
131According to the classification of invalid arguments reported by Sextus at PH 2.146 and AM 
8.429, Gellius' argument in its unaltered form is also an example of an argument invalid because 
of deficiency. 
~youp.~v~ xb ~v ~Gl:0~ k~Vo,~)-- xepl 8~: -~o5 x6r.e & 
 
x~r c~x~a~ouo't xpb~: &kk'~kour 
x~ W.o~Z6W.~v~ xflr &xokou~(~r ~x~(~vxo~t xpvc~p~o~. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
479 
The most valuable discussion of the controversy over the criterion for a sound 
conditional is presented by Sextus in the passage at PH 2.110-12, wherein he 
outlines the four distinct and competing accounts. 
In this presentation Sextus 
apparently orders these definitions from the weakest to the strongest, in each case 
citing an example which is allowed by the next weaker interpretation, but which 
is rejected by the one under discussion. 
Sextus begins by summarising the position of Diodorus Cronus of the Dialec- 
tical School and the conflicting position of his pupil, Philo the Dialectician. 133 
He attributes the first account to Philo, and states that according to this ver- 
sion, a conditional is sound whenever it is not the case that the antecedent is 
true and the consequent false (PH 2.110, cf. AM 8.113). In the passage at AM 
8.113, Sextus presents what is in effect a truth table for the Philonian conditional. 
According to this summary, there are three combinations of truth values for the 
components of the conditional which make it sound and one which makes it false. 
These assignments correspond to the assignments in the truth table for the mate- 
rial conditional (cf. AM 8.245); consequently, there is general agreement among 
modern logicians that Philo's definition amounts to a definition of the material 
conditional (cf. Mates [1953, p. 44]; Bochefiski [Bochefiski, 1963, p. 89]). The 
second definition cited by Sextus is ascribed to the Diodorus Cronus. According 
to Diodorus, a sound conditional is one which neither was capable nor is capable 
of having a true antecedent and a false consequent (PH 2.110; cf. AM 8.115). 
Mates has argued cogently that a sound Diodorian conditional is an always true 
Philonian conditional ([Mates, 1953], 44-46). 
Sextus attributes the third version of the correct criterion to those who advance 
the view that there must be a 'connexion' or 'coherence' (~u~@xYlc~t~) between 
the antecedent and consequent of a sound conditional. 
According to this view, 
a conditional proposition is sound whenever the contradictory (&vxt 
134 
oq) t~ ~o~o~Xu~v~ govq)),t~ (pd~xrvc, t ) with its antecedent (PH 2.111). Unlike the 
first two cases, this definition is not linked by Sextus to the name of any particular 
philosopher. Recently, however, several authors (e.g., Kneale and Kneale [1962a], 
129; Gould [1970], 76; Mueller [1978], 20) have cited a passage in Cicero (De Faro, 
12) as evidence that the 'connection' view is that of Chrysippus. We shall refer to 
this definition of a sound conditional as the 'connexivist view', in accordance with 
its attribution by Sextus to "those who introduce connexion." ~a~ 
The fourth definition, according to Sextus, is advocated by "those who intro- 
duce 'implication' ({gq)dot~)." It states that in a sound conditional the consequent 
133In the passage AM 8.112-17 Sextus gives a more detailed account of the differences between 
Diodorus and Philo, but he does not include any mention of the other competing views. 
134In his glossary, Mates points out the distinction between '&~xtx~l~vo~', which means the 
contradictory of a proposition, and '&~oq)~xtx6v', which means a proposition with 'not' prefixed 
to it. His example makes the distinction clear" "The propositions ~pc~ ~c~x(~ lit is day] and oSx 
~pc~ ~az[v lit is not day] are both &vxtx~o~ with respect to one another, but only the latter 
is &xoq~c~xtx6v' ([Mc~x~r 1953], 133). 
135The name has been adopted in certain modern interpretations such as those of Storrs McCall 
(e.g., in Anderson and Belnap [c1975-, pp. 434--52] and in McCall [1966]. 

480 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
must be 'potentially contained' (x~pt~xex~t Su~g~t) in the antecedent (PH 2.112). 
According to Mates ([1953], 49), this fourth definition cited by Sextus is not dis- 
cussed by any other ancient sources, nor has its ancestry been attributed to any 
particular philosopher. In addition, with such a dearth of information, it has been 
little discussed by modern commentators. Martha Kneale has suggested that this 
may even be a Peripatetic view (Kneale and Kneale [1962a], 29). Long and Sedley, 
on the other hand, think that it may not be Significantly different from the con- 
nexion account ([Long and Sedley, 1990], 1.211). In any event, this version does 
not bear the name of any ancient philosopher, nor has a name been adopted as a 
consequence of its modern interpretations, as in the case of the connexivist thesis. 
More recently, however, Michael J. White has speculated that the motivation for 
this fourth type of conditional is somewhat akin to the ideas put forward in rood- 
ern relevant logics (White [1986, pp. 9-14]; hence we might call this fourth view 
the 'relevantist' view. However, since White's speculations are somewhat tenuous, 
and since the philosophers who propose the definition invoke the notion of the 
virtual 'inclusion' or 'containment' of the consequent in the antecedent, it would 
seem better to call this fourth view the 'inclusion' or 'containment' criterion. 
As an example of a conditional which is sound according to Philo's criterion, 
Sextus cites the following: 'If it is day, I converse'. This conditional is sound, he 
says, when in fact it is day and the subject is conversing (PH 2.110). And indeed, if 
Philo's definition is the analogue of the material conditional, it would also be sound 
whenever either it is not day or the subject is conversing. But Sextus tells us that 
according to Diodorus this conditional is false (~5So~), 136 since it is obviously 
capable of having a true antecedent and false consequent whenever it is in fact 
day, but the subject remains silent (PH 2.110). As is the case with each of the 
critiques offered by Sextus, one has to consider the possibility that this objection 
was not in fact put forward by Diodorus but was contrived by Sextus himself for 
exegetical reasons. It was noted above that in presenting these definitions of a 
sound conditional Sextus' intention seems to have been to order them from the 
weakest to the strongest, one definition being stronger than another just in case 
an example can be found which is rejected as being a sound by the former, but 
which is accepted by the latter. Martha Kneale [1962a, p. 129]) has pointed out 
that if Sextus did so arrange them, then it cannot be assumed that these criteria 
were actually conceived in the order presented. But even if one cannot make this 
assumption, it seems to us that one can put forward an account of the development 
of the controversy which is at least partially along the lines of Sextus' arrangement. 
For one thing, it is unclear why chronological priority should be a factor in the 
debate between Diodorus and Philo. Since these philosophers were teacher and 
pupil, then regardless of which definition was put forward first, it seems plausible 
136In his discussions of conditionals, Sextus seems for the most part to use 'qb~5~or to contrast 
with both 'byt~' and '&),~9~' (cf. AM 8.112-17 and PH 2.110-12). On the other hand, he also 
uses 'goxg~lc6r for this purpose (cf. PH 2.105, 111), but this latter term seems to be used more 
extensively to mean 'invalid' or 'faulty' in connection with arguments (PH 2.150; AM 8.433) or 
argument schemata (PH 2.146, 147; AM 8.429, 432). 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
481 
to suppose that it was Diodorus himself who articulated the objections to Philo's 
account and put forward the counter-example. In addition, since several modern 
commentators agree that the connexion view can be attributed to Chrysippus, it 
seems feasible that this criterion was formulated later than both the Diodorian 
and the Philonian definitions; moreover, it seems quite reasonable to suppose that 
it was Chrysippus who raised the objections to the Diodorian view. On the other 
hand, it would be somewhat more difficult to substantiate Sextus' ordering of the 
connexion and inclusion accounts, the reason being that there is no confirmation 
other than Sextus' own testimony to support the hypothesis that the inclusion 
criterion was formulated after the connexion account. 
Nor is there any other 
evidence to support his version of the inclusionist objections to the connexivist 
criterion. Hence, in contrast to Kneale's assumption that "we can take it that the 
objections mentioned by Sextus were in fact put forward at some time" [Kneale 
and Kneale, 1962a, p. 129], we would urge that one not take his account of the 
debate between the inclusionists and the connexivists for granted. 
The conditional presented by Sextus as being sound according to Diodorus' 
criterion but not sound according to the connexion criterion is the following: 'If 
it is not the case that atomic elements of existents are without parts, then atomic 
elements of existents are without parts '137 (IIH 2.111). 
T~t~ a~zSpa coouk~ ~z 
T[9~gE OV AtO~O~gU' Ot~CODVT ~E~OttJO'$ tT ~k(Dc(~ ((~()138 begins with the false clause 
'It is not the case that atomic elements of existents are without parts' and ends 
with the true clause 'atomic elements of existents are without parts'; hence, it 
never was capable, nor is it capable of beginning with a true antecedent and 
ending with a false consequent (PH 2.111). It seems clear that the axi6ma 'Atomic 
elements of existents are without parts' is conceptually or analytically true, and 
hence necessary. 
What is more relevant, however, is that it would count as a 
necessary proposition according to the versions of necessity of both Diodorus and 
Chrysippus. The definition of Diodorus is worded as follows: "The necessary is 
that which being true, will not be false" (necessarium, quod cure verum sit non 
Bury translates this as: 'If atomic elements of things do not exist, atomic elements exist', 
whereas Martha Hurst has a reading similar to ours [Hurst, 1935, p. 489]. Mates appears to 
agree with Bury's translation, and his argument for this reading is as follows: "[W]e are explicitly 
told that the denial of the consequent is not incompatible with the antecedent. Since the denial of 
the consequent is the antecedent, this implies that the antecedent is not incompatible with itself. 
But if the antecedent were the negation of an analytic statement, it would be incompatible with 
itself" [Mates, 1953, p. 50]. The problem with this argument is that Mates is assuming a 'non- 
connexivist' interpretation of 'incompatible'. According to this view, any necessary proposition 
is incompatible with itself. But this is just the assumption that the connexivists wish to deny 
(cf. page 482). 
It is perhaps worth mentioning that Hurst cites this example as evidence in her argument 
against a temporal reading of Diodorus' definition of a sound conditional [Hurst, 1935, p. 489], 
the temporal interpretation being the one favoured by Mates. In doing so, however, we believe 
she errs in not taking seriously the possibility that this is a counter-example brought against the 
Diodorean criterion by the connexivists, and not necessarily an example which Diodorus would 
have put forward himself. 
13SBury fails to translate the Greek word for 'always', thereby missing the point of the example. 

482 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
erit falsum) (Boethius in de interp. 234); whereas that of Chrysippus is worded 
thus: "The necessary is that which being true does not admit of being false, or 
admits of being false but is prevented by external factors from being false" (DL 
7.75). 139 
It is evident that on either account of necessity, Diodorus' criterion 
for a sound conditional will make the counter-example sound merely by the fact 
that the consequent is necessary or that the antecedent is impossible, since either 
circumstance is sufficient to insure that the conditional never was capable, nor 
is capable, of having a true antecedent and a false consequent. 
Thus it seems 
plain why Diodorus' definition would be rejected by someone who thinks that a 
sound conditional requires a connexion or coherence between the antecedent and 
consequent, for clearly his criterion would permit a conditional to be sound even 
though there is no connection whatever between its parts. 
Note that the rejection of the counter-example cited in the previous section can 
be generalised by stating that the connexivist criterion renders false any condi- 
tional in which the antecedent and consequent are contradictories. This charac- 
teristic property of the connexivist view of implication is stated by Storrs McCall 
as follows: "[N]o proposition connexively implies or is implied by its own nega- 
tion, since it is never incompatible with its own double negation, nor is its own 
negation incompatible with itself' [McCall, 1966, p. 415]. According to McCall, 
"this connexive property of propositions was known to Aristotle" [McCall, 1966, 
p. 415]. In the Prior Analytics Aristotle argues that "it is impossible that the 
same thing should be necessitated by the being and by the not-being of the same 
thing" (5763). If it is supposed, for example, that if A is white, then necessarily B 
is great, and if A is not white, then necessarily B is great, then "it follows of neces- 
sity that if B is not great, then B itself is great; but this is impossible" (~u~v~t 
~( &v&yxq< ~o5 B #sy&Xou #f~ 5w:o~ c~b~b ~b B slvGt [~yc~ ~o5 ~' &~Svc~:ov) (57b13). 
Consequently, McCall dubs this property, which he represents in Polish notation 
as NCNpp, 'Aristotle's Thesis' ([McCall, 1966], 415). 14~ 
139&V0tyX0t~OV ~6 ~O"l:tV ~71:gp (~)k~ OV O~X ~O'l:tV ~t~SXI:tX6V "1:O~ ~g~O~ g~'V(:Zt, ~ ~/~t~gXXtX()V IJ.gV 
~oxt, x& ~' ~xxb~ 0~x.~ ev0~vxtoSxoa xpb~ Tb qbsS~o~ 61'wzt. This account of the necessary is not 
specifically attributed to Chrysippus by Diogenes; however, as Mates points out, a passage of 
Plutarch (de Stoic repugn. 1055d-e) would seem to indicate that this view cited by Diogenes is 
that of Chrysippus. 
Compare the view called 'Stoic' by Boethius (in de interp. 235): necessarium autem, quod 
cure verum sit falsam praedicationem nulla ratione suscipiat (The necessary is that which when 
it is true, by no account will admit of a false affirmation). According to Martha Kneale [1962a, 
p 123], this version "can safely be attributed to Chrysippus" since the context in which it occurs 
in Boethius is similar to that in which Cicero (de fato 12-20) contrasts the views on modality of 
Chrysippus and Diodorus. 
14~ 
characteristic connexive property mentioned by McCall is 'Boethius' Thesis', repre- 
sented as: CCqrNCqNr ([McCall, 1966], 416). In De syllogismo hypothetico, Boethius presents 
an inference schema which McCall takes to require the assumption of the connexivist principle 
for a sound conditional. The schema is this: If p, then if q then r; if q then not-r; therefore, 
not-p [McCall, 1966, p. 415]. If we take Cpq and CpNq as connexivist conditionals, then p is in 
conflict with both Nq and NNq. Hence, it seems reasonable on connexivist grounds to say that 
Cpq and CpNq are in conflict, and by the connexivist definition for a sound conditional, we get 
CCqrNCqNr, i.e., Boethius' Thesis. Presumably, then, Boethius' argument proceeded as follows 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
483 
As an instance of a conditional sound according to the connexivist criterion, 
Sextus puts forward the example 'If it is day, it is day' (PH 2.111). This conditional 
is connexively sound since obviously every proposition must be in conflict with its 
own contradictory. Sextus claims that on the inclusion view this proposition and 
every such 'duplicated' (St%~opo@evov) conditional would be false, the reason 
being that "it is not feasible that any object should be included in itself' (PH 
2.112). 
Sextus does not give an example of a conditional sound according to 
the inclusion criterion, and the reason may be, as is suggested by Michael J. 
White, that "it would ill accord with his purpose of producing suspension of belief 
... with respect to all accounts to leave the reader with the impression that 
[this] last account.., is correct" [White, 1986, p. 10]. White also suggests that 
Sextus "gives the impression of having to strain a bit" [White, 1986, p. 10] in 
his attempt to show that the aforementioned connexivist paradigm would be false 
according to the inclusion view. As he expresses the point, this rather "literal- 
minded" interpretation of 'rvept{Xe~c~t Buy&bier' does nothing to convince one that 
these conditionals were indeed rejected by the inclusion view. i4i 
It is of interest in this regard to note some comments which have been recorded 
concerning the relationship between the connexion and inclusion conditionals. The 
remark of Long and Sedley to the effect that they may not differ significantly from 
one another has already been mentioned above. Add to this the comments of 
Martha Kneale that "the difference between them was small" and that "the ob- 
jection which the partisans of implication brought against the theory of connexion 
is not of a fundamental kind" (Kneale and Kneale [1962a, p. 134]), as well as the 
observation of Mates that "the fourth type of implication seems to be a restricted 
type of Chrysippean implication" [Mates, 1953, p. 49], and there seems to be 
reason enough to concur with White's doubts about the accuracy of Sextus' re- 
port concerning the relationship between these two accounts of implication. Given 
these doubts, one is tempted to speculate that the order of appearance between 
the connexion and inclusion definitions may have been the reverse of Sextus' ar- 
rangement. If so, then it may be that Chrysippus saw a need for more precision 
than that afforded by the inclusion definition, and thus formulated the connexion 
account in response to that perception. 
(cf. McCall [1966, p. 416]): 
(1) 
p-+ (q --+ r) 
Assumption 
(2) 
q --~ --r 
Assumption 
(3) 
(q -+ r) --+-~(q -+-~r) 
Boethius 
(4) 
-~-~(q --~ ~r) 
2 Double Negation 
(5) 
-~(q -~ r) 
3,4 Modus Tollens 
(6) 
-~p 
1,5 Modus Tollens 
141 Commenting on Sextus' statement that the inclusion definition would reject a conditional of 
the form 'If p, then p', Michael Frede says that "Sextus Empiricus himself makes it very clear 
his comment is merely his own interpretation of the definition" [Frede, 1974, p. 90]. 

484 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
The standard Stoic conditional 
There are several reasons to suppose that from Chrysippus on, the connexivist 
account was the standard doctrine of the Old Stoa concerning the criterion for 
a sound conditional. First, there is some textual evidence in Diogenes La~rtius. 
At 7.71, in recording the Stoic account of non-simple axi6mata, Diogenes reports 
that according to Chrysippus in his Dialectics and Diogenes of Babylon in his 
Art of Dialectic, a conditional is a non-simple axi~ma constructed by means of 
the connective 'if' (d), such that this connective promises that the consequent 
follows (& 
the antecedent. Later, at 7.73, he attests that according to 
the Stoic criterion, a true (&krtO{g) conditional is one in which the contradictory of 
the consequent conflicts (btdXCxatt) with the antecedent. Now although this version 
of a sound conditional is not actually attributed to Chrysippus and Diogenes of 
Babylon, the juxtaposition of these passages would seem to indicate a connection. 
In any case, there is further indirect textual support afforded by the passage of 
Cicero at De/ato 12. We have already mentioned that this passage has been cited 
by several modern commentators as providing strong evidence that the connection 
or coherence criterion was the account accepted by Chrysippus. 142 
Although the testimony of Cicero and Diogenes La~rtius would appear to be 
sufficient to establish that Chrysippus propounded the connection doctrine for a 
sound implication, it does not focus any light on the question as to what crite- 
rion Zeno and Kleanthes supported. Indeed, the information available in the texts 
would seem to be inadequate to establish any certainty in this regard. However, 
there are some passages in which Sextus Empiricus attributes the Philonian crite- 
rion to 'the Stoics' or to 'the Dogmatists', and these remarks are taken by at least 
one writer to indicate that Zeno adopted Philo's definition of a sound conditional 
[Rist, 1978, p. 391]. Since Zeno and Philo were contemporaries and both students 
of Diodorus Cronus, this is a plausible conjecture. On the other hand, there is 
nothing specific in these passages to link the Philonian criterion to Zeno, and in 
fact, there is room for some doubt concerning Sextus' attribution of this definition 
to the Stoics. 
As a sceptic Sextus was out to discredit the views of all the so-called 'dogmatic 
philosophers'. With respect to the Stoics this would have involved, among other 
things, showing their logical system to be useless as a means of making inferences 
or providing demonstrations. Thus it is significant that in those passages where he 
attributes the Philonian definition to the Stoics, Sextus then invokes this alleged 
characteristic in an attack on some aspect of the Stoic theory of inference. For 
example, consider the passages at PH 2.104 and at AM 8.244 where he assails the 
Stoic doctrine of signs. 14a 
According to Sextus, the Stoics define the sign as an 
142See pages 407 and 479 for references. Long and Sedley take it that the 'cohesion' criterion is 
the standard Stoic doctrine for a sound conditional; moreover, they think that "it probably had 
the approval of Chrysippus" [Long and Sedley, 1990, 1.211]. 
143Sextus claims not to reject altogether the existence of signs, but only those signs which the 
'dogmatic philosophers' and 'logical physicians' call 'indicative' (~vS~txxtx6v) (AM 8.156). On 
the other hand, those signs called 'commemorative' (0rvobtvrlaxtxdv) are accepted by Sextus, since 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
485 
antecedent axiOma in a sound conditional, capable of revealing (~x 
the 
consequent (AM 8.245; PH 2.104). Since there are three possible combinations of 
truth values for a sound conditional, 144 the Stoics further stipulate that the sign 
will be the antecedent of a sound conditional which begins with a true axi6ma 
and ends with a true azi6ma (AM 8.248-50; PH 2.106). Clearly, nothing in this 
definition of a sign commits the Stoics to the Philonian criterion for a sound con- 
ditional; however, Sextus claims that this is the criterion they accept (AM 8.247; 
PH 2.105). In proceeding with his criticism, Sextus points out that, according 
to the Stoics, the thing signified (Grlgetcox6v) is either 'pre-evident' (xp68rt),ov) or 
'non-evident' (&Sr~),ov) (AM 8.265; PH 2.116). But if pre-evident, then "it will not 
admit of being signified, nor will it be signified by anything, but will be perceived 
of itself' (AM 8.267). On the other hand, if it is non-evident, then it cannot be 
known that it is true, since if it were known, it would then be pre-evident (AM 
8.267). Hence, although the truth-value of the antecedent is known to be true, 
that of the consequent is necessarily uncertain. Therefore, the truth-value of the 
conditional is uncertain, since the truth-value of the consequent must be known in 
order to determine the truth value of the conditional (AM 8.268). Hence the Stoic 
account of a sign is useless, since the soundness of a conditional with a non-evident 
consequent is indeterminate (AM 8.268). 
At AM 8.449, using a similar strategy, Sextus attacks the Stoic argument 
schemata, and in particular, the first indemonstrable. 145 He intends to show that 
an argument having this schema cannot in fact be a demonstrative argument, 
and hence, is of no use in demonstrating a conclusion. According to the Stoics, a 
demonstrative argument (&rvo~tx~txdg Xdyog) is an argument which is conclusive 
(auva 
has true premisses and a true conclusion, and deduces a non-evident 
conclusion from pre-evident premisses (PH 2.140; AM 8.422). Starting with this 
definition, Sextus proceeds roughly as follows (AM 8.449-52). Given any argument 
for which the premisses are pre-evident, the conclusion is either pre-evident and 
known, or it is non-evident and unknown. If the conclusion is pre-evident and 
known, then according to the definition of a demonstrative argument, such an ar- 
gument is not demonstrative. On the other hand, if the conclusion if non-evident 
and unknown, then the truth value of the conditional premiss is indeterminate. 
For the antecedent of this conditional is the minor premiss of the argument, which 
is pre-evident and known to be true, while the consequent is the conclusion of the 
argument, which we are assuming to be non-evident and unknown. Hence, since 
it cannot be determined whether the premisses are true, it cannot be determined 
that the argument is demonstrative; therefore, in either case, the argument is not 
he takes them to be among the 'common preconceptions of mankind' (xair xotvair xgv &v~pd)~v 
r~pX{q~ecuv) (8.157). Thus, Sextus is apparently attacking the conception as well as the Stoic 
theory of indicative signs in these passages, but not the Stoic theory of commemorative signs. 
144Note that on each of the four accounts, not just on the Philonian definition, a conditional 
with a true antecedent and false consequent will not be sound; moreover, on each account a 
sound conditional may have either a true antecedent and true consequent, or a false antecedent 
and false consequent, or a false antecedent and true consequent. 
145i.e., an argument with the schema 'If p, then q; p; therefore q. 

486 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
demonstrative. But if it is not demonstrative, then it is of no practical use as a 
means of inference. 
As Ian Mueller points out [Mueller, 1978, p. 23], if the truth-functional inter- 
pretation of the conditional is taken as the Stoic criterion, then no defence against 
Sextus' argument can be mustered on behalf of the first indemonstrable. On the 
other hand, if the connexion interpretation (or the inclusion interpretation) were 
taken as the Stoic definition, then Sextus' argument would fail. It should be obvi- 
ous that the ascription of either the connexion criterion or the inclusion criterion to 
the Stoics would, in addition to blocking Sextus' criticism of the indemonstrables, 
also nullify his objection, discussed above, to the Stoic doctrine of signs. With 
respect to the criticism of the indemonstrables, Mueller expresses the point thus: 
There is no way out of this situation, a fact that strongly suggests 
that Sextus' insistence on applying the truth-functional interpretation 
to the conditional represents an argumentative device rather than an 
accurate reflection of standard Stoic doctrine. If the first premise of an 
undemonstrable argument expresses a stronger than truth-functional 
connection between its component propositions, there is no reason why 
the first premise can not be established independently of the conclusion 
[Mueller, 1978, p. 23]. 
Mueller goes on to point out that the ascription of a strong interpretation to 
the Stoic conditional "means that philosophically a great deal of weight must be 
placed on the knowledge of necessary connections between propositions" [Mueller, 
1978, p. 23]. It seems to us, however, that although Mueller's point is correct, 
his putting the matter in this way is somewhat misleading. Although we will not 
argue for the point here, we would suggest that it is because their view places a 
great deal of philosophical weight on a knowledge of necessary connections between 
axidmata that one ought to ascribe a strong interpretation of the conditional to 
the Stoics, and not the reverse. 
A further point mentioned by Mueller is that many of the criticisms put forward 
by Sextus in the course of his writings are directed against the possibility of there 
being such knowledge of necessary connections as the Stoics suppose [Mueller, 
1978, p. 23]. However, since it is not our intention here to defend Stoic doctrines 
from the objections of Sextus Empiricus and other critics, these criticisms are 
not a concern. 
What is of concern is to minimise the effects of Sextus' claim 
that the Stoics adopted the Philonian criterion for a sound conditional. One of 
these effects, as has already been noted above, is Rist's conjecture that it was 
Zeno himself who opted for the Philonian view. Clearly this conjecture is at odds 
with the interpretation we intend to put forward; we take it, however, that what 
has been said about Sextus' motives in ascribing the Philonian conditional to the 
Stoics is sufficient to cast some doubt on his claim, and hence, to render Rist's 
conjecture doubtful as well. 
There is yet another passage which would seem to indicate that the Stoics chose 
the Philonian interpretation for the conditional. This passage occurs in Diogenes 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
487 
Lai~rtius, and hence, since Diogenes does not write in a polemical tone, one cannot 
in this case invoke the sort of argument used against Sextus' attribution. There 
are, however, some doubts which can be raised against this ascription as well. The 
passage in question is at 7.81. Here Diogenes says that according to the Stoics: 
The true follows from the true, as, for example, 'It is light' from 'It is 
day'; and the false, from the false, for example, 'It is dark' from the 
false 'It is night'; and the true from the false, for example, 'The earth 
exists' from 'The earth flies'; but the false does not follow from the 
true, for from 'The earth exists', 'The earth flies' does not follow. 
The difficulty with taking this passage as an indication the Stoics adopted the 
Philonian conditional (e.g. Mates [1953, 44n14]) is that one is immediately con- 
fronted with an inconsistency in Diogenes' account of Stoic logic. For at DL 7.73, 
he reports that, according to Stoic theory, a true conditional is one in which the 
contradictory of the consequent conflicts with the antecedent. This criterion is 
precisely the definition of a sound conditional which Sextus described as the one 
put forward by "those who introduce 'connexion' (PH 2.111). 146 So if one takes 
the passage at DL 7.81 to indicate that the Stoics adopted the Philonian condi- 
tional, then it appears that the account from which Diogenes got his information 
is inconsistent, since it attests to the adoption by the Stoics of two incompatible 
definitions of a sound or true conditional. One possibility, of course, is that these 
different views were predominant at different periods in the history of the Stoic 
school. However, according to Hicks (DL 7.38nb), the source for the entire dox- 
ography on the Stoics from DL 7.49 to DL 7.83 is Diocles of Magnesia, a scholar 
of the first century B.C. considered by Mates "to have a fair knowledge of Stoic 
logic" [Mates, 1953, p. 9]. Consequently, one would expect that the account given 
in these passages would be fairly unified; moreover, one would also expect that 
if criteria from different periods were included in this doxography, some mention 
would have been made of the fact. Given these considerations, we would suggest 
that rather than suppose an inconsistency in Diogenes' source, one take the con- 
nexivist definition as the standard Stoic criterion for the period covered by this 
doxography and look for some other interpretation to explain the passage at DL 
7.81. 
Such an interpretation might be suggested by considering the examples intro- 
duced by Diogenes in this passage. It seems to us that the examples of a sound 
conditional which he cites are all conditionals which would be sound according 
to the connexivist criterion (and also, perhaps, according to the inclusion crite- 
rion). For instance, he illustrates the true-true case with the conditional 'If it is 
day, it is light', and the false-false case with 'If it is night, it is dark'. It seems 
plausible that the Stoics might have taken the contradictory of the consequent in 
these conditionals to be in conflict with the antecedent on the grounds that these 
146We are not unaware that Diogenes' definition refers to a true (&X~9~) conditional, not a 
sound (6vt~) conditional. We have already argued, however, that in these contexts both '6vt{r 
and '&X~9~c' should be understood as 'proper' or 'genuine' (See page 477). 

488 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
states of affairs are related by a necessary causal sequence. Diogenes exemplifies 
the false-true case with 'If the earth flies, the earth exists', and for this example 
it is feasible that the Stoics might have invoked conceptual grounds to argue that 
the contradictory of the consequent would conflict with the antecedent. What 
we have in mind, then, is that the passage quoted above can be interpreted as 
a demonstration of the point that it is possible for a sound conditional to have 
either a true antecedent and true consequent, or a false antecedent and false con- 
sequent, or a false antecedent and true consequent. And in order to facilitate this 
demonstration, the Stoics naturally presented examples of conditionals which they 
took to be sound according to the connexivist criterion, since they adopted the 
connexivist definition as their criterion for a sound conditional, as we are informed 
at D L 7.?3. For the case in which the antecedent is true and the consequent false, 
which is to say, for the case where the conditional is not sound, Diogenes gives the 
example 'If the earth exists, the earth flies'. It would seem that the Stoics might 
again appeal to conceptual considerations in order to say that in this example the 
contradictory of the consequent does not conflict with the antecedent; moreover, 
since this criterion determines an unsound conditional (DL ?.?3), they could also 
say on connexivist grounds that this conditional is not sound. 
We have already suggested that, given the Stoic definition of a sign, Zeno's 
interest in the doctrine of signs would afford him reason to take a stance with 
respect to the criterion for a sound conditional (see page 407). And we have also 
put forward the view that the purpose of logic for Zeno's wise man is to allow 
him to make correct judgements about the connections between particular states 
of affairs on the basis of his knowledge of the general causal principles governing 
such connections (see page 422). Hence, we take it that Zeno's interest in signs is a 
manifestation of his general concern to draw out the implications of one's actions 
in accordance with the natural sequence of events. 
And since Zeno identified 
the natural sequence of causation, which he called heimarmen~ with the logos or 
rational principle of the universe (DL ?.149), and since he also identified the logos 
itself with 'necessity' (Lactanius, Tertullianis SVF 1.160), our understanding is 
that he saw these causal connections as necessary in the sense implied by these 
identifications. Moreover, we propose that he chose the conditional construction 
as the syntactical representation of these connections because such representation 
is suggestive of the causal sequence of events. Hence, the Stoic use of the particle 
'~[' is technical and already implies a strong interpretation of the conditional since 
it presupposes a necessary connection between the antecedent and consequent (see 
page 423). 
Therefore, it seems unlikely to us that Zeno would have adopted the view of 
either Philo or Diodorus, for on either of these conceptions a conditional may be 
sound even though there is no connection between its parts. 
Moreover, if the 
invention of the connexion view can be attributed to Chrysippus, then it seems 
evident that Zeno could not have opted for this definition since it would not have 
been available to him. One might conjecture that he proposed an account of his 
own, and if this were the case, then plausibly he introduced the inclusion criterion. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
489 
On the other hand, it is possible that he put forward a version which is completely 
unrecorded, although it seems to us that this alternative is not so plausible as the 
first one. In any event, although we shall pursue the matter no further in this 
work, it would be of interest to explore the possibility that the inclusion definition 
of a sound conditional was the criterion with which Zeno worked. 
Consequence and conflict 
The view of Mates and others notwithstanding, it would appear to be an open 
question how one is to understand the use of the verb 'gciXexc~t' in the passages 
where it is used in the definition of a sound conditional by Sextus Empiricus (PH 
2.111) and Diogenes La~rtius (7.73; 77). The consensus among these commenta- 
tors is that it should be understood as 'is incompatible' where 'incompatible "is 
used in its ordinary sense," which is to say, in the sense that two "incompatible 
propositions cannot both be true, i.e., their conjunction is logically false" [Mates, 
1953, p. 48]. On this view, then, a valid argument, according to the connex- 
ivists, is such that it is not logically possible for both the contradictory of the 
conclusion and the conjunction of the premisses to be simultaneously true. But 
even leaving aside the difficulty of determining the Stoics' understanding of 'logical 
possibility', 14r there remain some etymological questions as to whether one ought 
to accept this account as accurately reflecting the intension of 'btd~Xeq:c~t' in Stoic 
terminology. 
To forestall possible objections to putting an etymological cast on the problem, 
it would be useful to consider Mates' criticism of Philip De Lacy for the latter's 
use of "weaving together" as a translation of the Greek term 'c~ug~Xoxr~', which is 
standardly translated as 'conjunction'. 
c~utaJvXo 
the technical term for conjunction, should not be translated 
as "weaving together." There is no virtue in employing etymological 
translations for technical terms, since a term becomes technical pre- 
cisely by being dissociated from its etymological and other connota- 
tions and associated unambiguously with its denotation [Mates, 1953, 
92n24]. 
Doubtless one can agree that it is never virtuous and perhaps always somewhat 
fanciful to translate a technical term by summoning forth its etymological origins. 
But it does not follow that in attempting to understand a term, the technical 
meaning of which is either unclear or controversial, one ought to ignore its semantic 
history. 
In the present case, there are those who believe that 'incompatibility' designates 
a non-truth-functional relation which exists between propositions. 14s They would 
147 Consider, for example, Gould's comment that "it may be the case that [the] distinction 
[between empirical impossibility and logical impossibility] had not, as a matter of fact, been 
discerned in the Hellenistic age" [Gould, 1970, p. 81]. 
14SSee, for example, E.J. Nelson [1930, esp. pp. 440-43]; and R.M. Stopper, [1983, pp. 281-86]. 

490 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
criticise Mates' and those who agree with him on the grounds that, according 
to his characterisation, it would turn out that an impossible proposition would 
be incompatible with any proposition, even itself. This result is not in accord 
with their logical intuitions. The relation which Mates describes is, on their view, 
more aptly designated as incompossibility. 149 What is relevant to this controversy, 
however, is the question of how the Stoics understood the meaning of '~(xX~xc~t', 
which, as has been noted, is standardly translated as 'incompatible'. It is here 
that one can look to etymology for assistance. 
The primary meaning for p~X~c~9~t, the infinitive form of the verb, is to fight or 
to battle or to war. Now, one would hardly want to translate the term '~X~X~t' in a 
logical context as 'fights' or 'battles' or 'wars'. To the modern logician, not only do 
they seem somewhat fatuous as a description of a relation between propositions, 
but also they seem rather out of place in a logic treatise. 
Nevertheless, these 
renderings would seem to reflect more faithfully the etymology of '~X~x~t' than 
does the translation 'is incompatible', at least where the latter is understood as 
Mates understands it. 
Probably 'conflicts' is just the right compromise. 
It is 
bloodless enough for a logic book, yet it remains faithful to the etymological origins 
of the Greek term, more so, it would seem, than 'is incompatible'. 
Now with this translation in mind, consider the thesis that the Stoics understood 
this notion of conflict in terms of 'incompossibility', where this term is taken in the 
sense that two propositions are incompossible just in case it is not possible that 
they both be true. It has been pointed out that, according to this characterisation, 
it is a sufficient condition for two propositions to be incompossible if one of them 
is necessarily false. 
Hence, the propositions 'All triangles have four sides' and 
'Chrysippus is the greatest of Stoic logicians' would be incompossible. Would the 
Stoics have considered these propositions to be in any sense 'in conflict'? It is 
difficult to see how anyone would suppose them so. On the other hand, consider 
the propositions 'All triangles have four sides' and 'All triangles have five sides'. 
These propositions are clearly incompossible because both are impossible, but it is 
also clear that they are related in such a way that if one is affirmed, then the other 
must be denied. This relation, moreover, is independent of the truth values or the 
modal status of the individual propositions. It is this sort of relation which the 
critics of Mates' view appear to have in mind as the proper meaning of the term 
'incompatibility'. And, one might assume, it is also what they would expect that 
the Stoics had in mind when the latter spoke of propositions or states of affairs 
being 'in conflict' 
149M.R. Stopper quoting from a paper by Mauro Nasti de Vincenti ("Logica scettica e impli- 
cazione stoica," in Lo scetticismo antico, ed. G. Giannantoni, Naples, 1981.), writes that "'P' 
conflicts with 'Q' just in case 'P' and 'Q' are not compossible," and he symbolises this definition 
thus [Stopper, 1983, p. 284]: 
(A3) C(P,Q) e+ L~(P A Q) 
He goes on to say that (A3) has "some strange consequences." For example, "any impossible 
proposition is incompossible with any other proposition whatsoever" [Stopper, 1983, p. 285]. 

T~le Mey~ptczv~ 0~v~ x~ E~ot~r 
491 
8.2 
The conditional and inference 
Validity and conditionalisation 
The so-called principle of conditionalisation is presented in several places by Sextus 
Empiricus as a Stoic criterion for a valid argument. 15~ As it is framed by the Stoics, 
this canon states that an argument is conclusive 151 r 
p tzq ~opp~(zrrov6zuy 
~ou6zvzoua/~ t~ (~ouv~ (byt~ : PH 2.137) or true (&X@@: AM 8.417): that is, 
the conditional which has the conjunction of the premisses as antecedent and the 
conclusion of the argument as consequent. As an example, Sextus presents the 
following case at PH 2.137. The argument 
(1) 
If it is day, it is light; 
it is day; 
therefore it is light 
has as its corresponding conditional the following: 
(2) 
If (it is day, and if it is day, it is light), it is light. 
The application of the principle here is the assertion that since the corresponding 
conditional is sound, the argument is valid. According to Sextus' account at AM 
8.111-12, it was agreed among the 'dialecticians' that a conditional axi6ma is sound 
whenever its consequent axiOma 'follows' its antecedent axi6ma. Hence, to say that 
(2) is sound is just to say that its consequent, which corresponds to the conclusion 
of (1), indeed follows its antecedent, which corresponds to the conjunction of the 
premisses of (1). It seems evident that if the Stoics wished to attribute such a 
property to a valid argument, then they must have assumed that the relation of 
'following' (& 
which they took to be the relation holding between the 
antecedent and consequent in a sound conditional, was the same relation holding 
between the premisses and conclusion of a valid argument (cf. PH 2.113). 
Taking into account the debate over the sound conditional discussed in Section 
8.1, as well as the principle of conditionalisation, one would expect that there 
would have been recorded as many distinct conceptions of a valid argument as 
there were accounts of a sound conditional. 
This does not, however, seem to 
be the case. Other than the conditionalisation principle itself, there appears to 
be no mention in the fragments of a criterion for a valid argument except the 
one implied by Diogenes La@tius at 7.77. In this passage Diogenes presents the 
following characterisation of an invalid argument. 
iS~ 
AM 8.415; PH 2.113, 137. See Mates ([1953], 74-77) for a discussion of this principle. As 
Mates points out, this principle need not be taken as defining the Stoic conditional, but merely 
as a characterising a property common to all valid arguments. 
151in some places (e.g., PH 2.137, 146) Sextus uses 'auvc~162 
and '&auvct 
for 'conclusive' 
and 'inconclusive' (or 'valid' and 'invalid'), whereas at other places (e.g., AM 8.429) he uses 
'x~p~t162 and '&~pctvxdc'. Hence, as Mates indicates in his glossary [Mates, 1953, pp. 132- 
36], these terms appear to be interchangeable. 

492 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
And of arguments some are conclusive (valid) and some inconclusive 
(invalid). 
Inconclusive are those in which the contradictory of the 
conclusion does not conflict with the conjunction of the premisses. ~2 
Although it is not explicitly stated, this characterisation would seem to imply that 
a valid argument is one in which the contradictory of the conclusion is in conflict 
with the conjunction of the premisses. 
In addition to the above account which implies a criterion for a valid argument, 
Diogenes also reports the following Stoic criterion for a sound conditional. 
So, then, the true conditional axiSma is one in which the contradictory 
of the consequent conflicts with the antecedent, as in this example: 'If 
it is day, it is light' (DL 7.73). ~ 
It is evident that the criterion for a sound conditional described in the passage 
at DL 7.77 is identical to the one which Sextus Empiricus reports at PH 2.111. 
This is the criterion proposed by "those who introduce 'connexion' or 'coherence' 
(c~uv~pxrlc~t~)" as a condition on the relation of following between the antecedent 
and consequent of a sound conditional. It was mentioned earlier that this standard 
has been ascribed by several modern commentators to Chrysippus himself (see 
page 479). In light of his influence on the development of Stoic logic, it is probable 
that if this 'connexivist' view was indeed the one he advocated, then it would have 
been the one accepted by the Stoa. 
The formulation of the connexivist criterion leaves no doubt that its adoption 
would commit the Stoics to a strong interpretation of the criterion for a sound con- 
ditional axiOma. Thus it seems plausible that for the Stoics the term '&xoXou~v' 
expressed a real connection or coherence between the antecedent and consequent, 
and, in some sense, a necessary relation between them. Since the conditionali- 
sation principle implies that the same relationship holds between the premisses 
and conclusion of a valid argument, we can infer that such a connexion obtained 
between them as well. 
Now in accordance with the conditionalisation principle, the ubiquitous Stoic 
example 
(3) 
If it is day, it is light; 
it is day; 
therefore it is light 
would be valid just in case the following conditional were sound: 
The question concerning the interpretation of the Greek term 'l~&X~Ca', which we have rendered 
as 'conflicts', has already been discussed (see page 489). We have argued that the notion of 
conflict which the Stoics had in mind requires some degree of common content between the 
axidmata in this relationship. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
493 
(4) 
If (it is day, and if it is day, it is light), it is light. 
And in accordance with the description of a sound conditional given by Dio- 
genes La~rtius at 7.73, (4) would be sound just in case the contradictory of its 
consequent were in conflict with its antecedent. Thus, in conformity with the con- 
ditionalisation principle and the description of a sound conditional presented by 
Diogenes, (3) would be valid just in case the contradictory of its conclusion were 
in conflict with the conjunction of its premisses. This would seem to suggest that 
the characterisation of a valid argument given by Diogenes at 7.77 is derived from 
an application of the connexivist notion of a sound conditional to the principle of 
conditionalisation. 
There are, however, difficulties with this proposal. The first objection is that 
there are the passages in Sextus Empiricus (PH 2.104; AM 8.245) which seem to 
indicate that the Stoics adopted the Philonian account of a sound conditional (cf. 
[Mates, 1953, p. 43]). A further objection is that both Mates [1953, p. 60, 75] and 
Bochefiski [1963, p. 97] cite passages at PH 2.137 and AM 8.415 to support the 
thesis that the conditionalisation principle required a 'Diodorean-true' conditional. 
The views of the Dialecticians Philo and Diodorus have been discussed earlier (see 
page 479), however, a brief summary of their views might be in order for the 
present. According to Philo, then, a conditional is sound whenever it does not 
have a true antecedent and false consequent (PH 2.110; AM 8.113). According to 
Diodorus, on the other hand, a conditional is sound if it neither was capable nor is 
capable of having a true antecedent and false consequent (PH 2.110; AM 8.115). 
In replying to the first objection one probably cannot deny that the texts appear 
to support the view that the Philonian account gained some measure of acceptance 
among the Stoics. One might point out that acceptance of this account was by no 
means unanimous, as the passage at AM 8.245 indicates. And even if this was the 
view chosen by many Stoics, the debate continued. 154 If it were the case that they 
did opt for the Philonian criterion, then one would expect that applications of the 
conditionalisation principle would reflect that fact. But we believe that a more 
telling reply would be to point out the inconsistencies in Sextus' various reports. 
First, the adoption of the Philonian truth conditions would seem to be in conflict 
with the reported wide acceptance of the doctrine that an argument is valid when 
and only when its corresponding conditional is sound. Since there is no neces- 
sity in the relation between the antecedent and consequent of a sound Philonian 
conditional, it is hard to see how such a conditional could underwrite the validity 
of its corresponding argument. Against this reply, one might propose, as Josiah 
B. Gould does [Gould, 1974, p. 160], that the advocates of the Philonian view 
perhaps invoked the Diodorian truth conditions in applications of the conditional- 
isation principle. One might point to those passages cited by Mates and Bochefiski 
wherein it appears that the Stoics had the Diodorean conditional in mind when 
154Xp[~gt~ ~g ~OU 0ytoU~ ~uv~vov rcokk&~ ~v xcd ~Xkot~ r 
q)c~c~tv, [a[c~v 8' ~ &~ot~v 0~:~pXctv , 
xczl ~cz6~Ylv o6X 61tdkoyov, xhv &~oSoO~ootl~v~v (AM 8. 245). 

494 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
they framed this principle. This approach, however, has its own problems. This 
interpretation of the texts mentioned above would seem to be inconsistent with 
the account of the criteria for invalidity referred to by Sextus at PH 2.146-51 and 
AM 8.429-34. 
In this account Sextus reports that the Stoics deemed an argument invalid ac- 
cording to a list of four criteria. These are: having premisses and conclusion which 
are incoherent with one another, having redundant premisses, being propounded 
in an invalid form, and having a deficient premiss. A problem arises when one at- 
tempts to square the first criterion on this list with the proposal that the principle 
of conditionalisation required a Diodorean-sound conditional. As a consequence 
of this proposal, an argument such as the following would appear to be valid: 
(5) 
If Dion is walking, he is moving; 
but wheat is being sold in the market; 
therefore, the elements of existents are without parts. 
One would be committed to judge (5) as valid if the following, which is its 
corresponding conditional, were Diodorean-sound: 
(6) 
If (wheat is being sold in the market, and if Dion is walking, then 
he is moving), then the elements of existents are without parts. 
But (5) could not be considerd valid according to the criterion which prohibits 
incoherent (Std~px~lat~) arguments from being valid. The problem, therefore, is that 
if the principle of conditionalisation requires a Diodorean-sound conditional and 
if (6) were Diodorean-sound, then (5) would be valid, contrary to the criterion 
for invalidity mentioned above. On the other hand, if this criterion for invalidity 
were to prevail, then (5) could not be valid and the conditionalisation principle 
could not require a Diodorean-sound conditional, provided that (6) is Diodorean- 
sound. Thus, if (6) is Diodorean-sound and (5) is not valid, then it is not clear 
that one ought to accept the thesis that the principle of conditionalisation requires 
a Diodorean-sound conditional. 
Now it is apparent that Diodorus would have been committed to the soundness 
of (6) merely because of the modal status of its consequent, for according to Sextus 
Empiricus (PH 2.111), Diodorus would deem the following conditional to be sound. 
(7) 
If it is not the case that the elements of existents are without parts, 
then the elements of existents are without parts. 
It was determined earlier (see page 481) that the consequent of this conditional 
would have been considered necessarily true according to the Diodorean view of 
necessity. Hence, the corresponding conditional of (5) would be Diodorean-sound 
merely because, according to Diodorus, its consequent could have been neither false 
nor false. That is, (6) neither was nor is capable of having a true antecedent and a 
false consequent, since it neither was nor is capable of having a false consequent. It 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
495 
would seem apparent, then, that (6) is Diodorean-sound. It is not clear, therefore, 
that one need accept the contention that the principle of conditionalisation requires 
a Diodorean-sound conditional. 
In view of the foregoing arguments, neither of the objections considered is de- 
cisive against the proposal that the connexivist standard was the criterion for a 
sound conditional which prevailed in the early Stoa. The formulation of this ac- 
count, which was put forward by "those who introduce 'connexion' or 'coherence'" 
as a condition on the relation of following between the components of a sound 
conditional, would seem clearly to have committed the Stoics to a strong interpre- 
tation of the relationship between the antecedent and consequent of a conditional 
axiOma. Thus the Stoics would seem to have understood the term 'to follow' 
(& 
as expressing a necessary relation, in the appropriate sense of neces- 
sary, not only between the antecedent and consequent of a sound conditional, but 
also, as a result of the connection between a valid argument and its corresponding 
conditional, between the premisses and conclusion of a valid argument. 
General conditionals 
According to Josiah Gould, as we have seen, Chrysippus thought that one could 
generalise on the observed relations between different types of states of affairs or 
events and express these generalisations as conditional statements [Gould, 1970, 
pp. 
200-201]: see page 426). 
What is required, then, is an account of such 
general conditionals, and clearly the relationship between singular and general 
conditionals will need to be sorted out. Unfortunately, there are very few examples 
of such general conditionals in the extant texts; however, the few that there are 
would seem to be sufficient to indicate the pattern. 
An example occurring in 
Cicero is as follows" "If anyone (quis) was born at the rising of the dogstar, he 
will not die at sea" (De fato 12). Another example occurs in Sextus Empiricus 
where he informs us that, according to the writers on logic, "the definition 'Man 
is a rational, mortal animal', although differing in its construction, is the same 
in meaning as the universal (215 
'If something (x[) is a man, that thing 
(~ 
is a rational, mortal animal'" (AM 11.8). Other examples are available, 
but the pattern for the general conditional seems apparent. Evidently, the subject 
of the antecedent clause is expressed by an indefinite pronoun, and though it is 
not clear in the Latin example, the Greek example would seem to indicate that 
the subject of the consequent clause having anaphoric reference to the subject of 
the antecedent clause is also an indefinite pronoun. 155 
Now consider the example of a singular conditional from AM 8.305 and what 
we might call its 'associated' general conditional, the latter being constructed on 
the pattern determined above. The singular conditional is If Dion is walking, Dion 
is moving, and the associated general conditional would be If someone is walking, 
155It should be noted here that although '~xr 
would normally be classed as a demonstrative 
pronoun, it seems evident that in constructions such as this where it serves as a relative pronoun 
with anaphoric reference to an indefinite pronoun, it must be taken as an indefinite relative 
pronoun. 

496 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
he (or that one) is moving. In his paper "Stoic Use of Logic," William H. Hay has 
suggested that what we have here is, in effect, a universally quantified conditional 
and an instantiation of it [Hay, 1969, 151n22]. If this assessment is correct, then it 
would evidently imply not only that the Stoics used general conditionals in place 
of statements using 'all', 156 as well as employing a rule of instantiation for deriving 
singular conditionals from general ones, but also that their logic cannot be viewed 
on this account as simply a logic of propositions. The suggestion expressed by 
Hay raises a difficulty which is communicated by Charles Kahn in the following 
dilemma: 
Either Stoic logic is based solely on the propositional connectives, and 
then it is epistemically sterile... Or else it involves generalized condi- 
tionals and a rule of instantiation, but then it is defective as logic since 
we are left without any account of the quantified conditional [Kahn, 
1969, p. 164]. 
Now we believe that what Khan has in mind here in setting out the first horn of this 
dilemma is a propositional logic with a classical truth-functional interpretation of 
the propositional connectives. It is worth noting that the classical interpretation 
of the connectives is only one of many possible interpretations which might be 
assigned to them; hence, given an appropriate interpretation, a propositional logic 
need not be so barren as Kahn envisages. In any case, it seems evident that Stoic 
logic was not a classical propositional logic, and could not, therefore, be viewed as 
'epistemically sterile' on the assumption that it was; moreover, it also seems clear 
that the Stoics themselves did not consider their logic to be so. Thus, we would 
reject the first horn of the dilemma. As for the other horn, we find it difficult to 
agree that the Stoic system was 'defective' as logic because it lacks an account 
of the quantified conditional. Kahn writes that "it is time to return to a more 
adequate view of Stoic logic within the context of their theory of language, their 
epistemology, their ethical psychology, and the general theory of nature" [Kahn, 
1969, p. 159]. This suggestion would seem to imply that Stoic logic be assessed on 
it own terms and not as an attempt at constructing a modern formal system. In 
putting forth his criticism, Kahn seems to be ignoring his own reproach. At any 
rate, it may be that one can give an account of general conditionals which justifies 
the inference from general conditionals to singular or particular conditionals, and 
do so without invoking universal quantifiers and a rule of instantiation. 
A general conditional, as has been noted above, seems to be signified by a 
conditional sentence having an indefinite pronoun in the subject position of the 
antecedent and an indefinite pronoun having anaphoric reference to the subject of 
the antecedent. It seems evident that the general conditional would be true just 
in case every associated particular conditional which has either a demonstrative 
pronoun or a name in the subject position, is true. Thus the general conditional 
156Mates has pointed out that "nowhere in the rather elaborate classification [of propositions] 
is any provision made for universal affirmative propositions, that is, for propositions beginning 
with 'all'" [Mates, 1953, p. 32]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
497 
may have been viewed as the conjunction of its associated particular conditionals. 
If the Stoics were to have allowed the inference of the conjuncts of a conjunction 
without an explicit rule of conjunction elimination, then this might explain why 
they seem to have supposed that one could infer the particular conditional from 
the general conditional without a rule of universal elimination. 
9 
FORM IN STOIC LOGIC 
Over the long history of what is referred to as Stoicism, there was no doubt much 
unrecorded even unnoticed variability in metalogical doctrine. No doubt many 
distinctions which we now take for granted were 'beneath the level of specificity 
of their intentions'. Nor is there any reason to suppose that the Stoics surpassed 
twentieth-century philosophers in their awareness of the degree of indeterminacy of 
their adopted theoretical language, or of their prospects for success. And no doubt, 
their approach consisted, to some extent, in talking in order to find out what they 
were talking about. So there might be little point in looking for a mathematically 
precise account of their doctrines, even if the historical records were much more 
complete than they are. In fact their intellectual environment was so different from 
our own as to have long since rendered their semantic space largely inaccessible 
to us. We simply cannot reconstruct, let alone reproduce, the effects that their 
theoretical vocabulary could have been counted upon to have. The best we can 
hope for is an illusion of precise positive understanding. We can, however, take 
some precautions against particular misunderstandings of their project. 
More 
specifically, and for all likely purposes, most usefully, we can take account of ways 
in which their logical culture and methods differed from our own, and take due 
note of the superficiality of apparent similarities between their approach and ours. 
Positively, we can give more reliable shape to Stoic logical theory by using our 
own richer notational resources to approximate their conceptions and engage their 
subject matter. And we can try to triangulate their position by considering what 
theoretical resources lay nearly within their reach. 
In this section we illustrate the difficulties by a detailed consideration of the 
Stoic notion of (5~uyg~vov) (disjunction) in relation to the question as to whether 
Stoic logic can be regarded as formal in the twentieth-century use of the word. 
9.1 
First blush 
The superficial similarities of the indemonstrables to a set of natural deductive 
rules may tempt the unwary to a reconstruction in the language of twentieth- 
century formal systems, to define the elements of the language, the atoms, the 
connectives, the well-formed formulae, and then to introduce the rules for ex- 
tending proofs. This would be to suppose that the Stoics viewed the connective 
vocabulary of the indemonstrables as having uniform logical status. A closer ex- 
amination would reveal that the supposition was unwarranted. They seem to have 
been interested in vocabulary whose correspondents had, for them, some degree 

498 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
of physical ~clat. So they were more interested in disjunctions than conjunctions, 
and more interested in conditionals, than in negations. In fact, although there 
seems to have been some unclarity on this score, their focus was primariy upon 
relationships, conflict and consequence, for example, and only secondarily upon 
the vocabulary that was used to distinguish them. 
A related temptation would be to suppose that because a connective would ad- 
mit an introduction or an elimination rule that coincides with an indemonstrable, 
that must have been the connective that the Stoics had in mind. Consider first 
the accepted doctrine that indemonstrables [IV] and IV] rely upon the exclusive 
disjunction of 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
I. M. Bochefiski: 
... out of the fourth and fifth indemonstrables which were fundamental 
in Stoic logic, we see that exclusive disjunction (matrix '0110') was 
meant. ([Bochefiski, 1963], 91) 
W. and M. Kneale (on Galen's remark that 'Either it is day or it is night' is 
equivalent to 'If it is not day it is night'): 
Possibly his expression is loose and he means to say that the disjunctive 
statement is equivalent to the biconditional 'It is not day, if and only 
if, it is night'. For the assertion of such an equivalence would indeed be 
in keeping with the Stoic doctrine of disjunction, provided always that 
the conditional is understood to convey necessary connection. ([Kneale 
and Kneale, 1962b], 162) 
Benson Mates: 
Two basic types of disjunction were recognized by the Stoics: exclusive 
and inclusive. Exclusive disjunction (St~r165 
was most used, and 
is the only type of disjunction which occurs in the five fundamental 
inference-schemas of Stoic propositional logic. ([Mates, 1953], 51) 
Lukasiewicz: 
It is evident from the fourth syllogism that disjunction is conceived of 
as an exclusive 'either-or' connective. ([Lukasiewicz, 1967], 74) 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
499 
Ian Mueller: 
'The first or the second' is true if and only if exactly one of the first 
and the second is true. 
(In modern logic it is customary to use 'or' 
inclusively, and hence to substitute 'at least' for 'exactly' in the truth 
conditions for disjunction. The fourth indemonstrable argument shows 
that disjunction is exclusive in the Stoic system.) ([Mueller, 1978], 16) 
9.2 
Some evidence 
All of these authors cite ancient sources for this account, among them, Cicero, 
Gellius, Galen, Sextus Empiricus and Diogenes La~rtius. Their accounts are the 
following: 
Cicero: 
There are several other methods used by the logicians, which consist 
of propositions disjunctively connected: Either this or that is true; but 
this is true, therefore that is not. Similarly either this or that is true; 
but this is not, therefore that is true. 
These conclusions are valid 
because in a disjunctive statement not more than one [disjunct] can be 
true. ~57 
Gellius: 
There is another form which the Greeks call ~t~uyg~vov di~t~gc~ and 
we call disjuncture. 
For example: 'Pleasure is good or evil or it is 
neither good nor evil.' Now all statements which are contrasted ought 
to be opposed to each other, and their opposites, which the Greeks 
call dlvzt 
ought also to be opposed. Of all statements which are 
contrasted, one ought to be true and the rest false. ~s 
Galen: 
... the disjunctives have one member only true, whether they be com- 
posed of two simple propositions or of more than two. 159 
157 Topica, 14.56-7. 
Reliqui dialecticorum modi plures sunt, qui ex disiunctionibus constant: 
aut hoc aut illud; hoc autem; non igitur illud. Itemque: aut hoc aut illud; non autem hoc; illud 
igitur. Quae conclusiones idcirco ratae sunt quod in disiunctione plusuno verum esse non potest. 
15SNoctes Atticae, 16.8. 
Est item aliud, quod Graeci 8~wrp.~vov &~[cop.~ nos 'disiunctum' 
dicimus. 
Id huiuscemodi est: 
'aut malum est voluptas aut bonum neque malum est'. 
Om- 
nia autem, quae disiunguntur, pugnantia esse inter sese oportet, eorumque opposita, quae 
5vctx~(~svcz Graeci dicunt, ea quoque ipsa inter se adversa esse. Ex omnibus, quae disiunguntur, 
unum esse verum debet, falsa cetera. 
159Inst. Log., 5.1 .... 
~v 8t~uyp.~,~cov ~v ~6vov ~6v-ccov 5X~c, 5v x' ~x 8uo~v 5~(u)tz~c~v 
5~k~v "&v ~' ~x nk~tbvc0v (~uyx~Y)~ca. (The translation is that of Kieffer [1964].) 

500 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
Sextus Empiricus: 
... for the true disjunctive announces that one of its clauses is true, 
but the other or others false or false and contradictory. 16~ 
Diogenes La~rtius: 
A disjunction is [a proposition] conjoined by means of the disjunctive 
conjunction 'either' (~xot). For example, 'Either it is day or it is night.' 
This conjunction declares that one or the other of the propositions is 
false. 161 
9.3 
The question of arity 
The first point to attend to is that three of the five authors admit disjunctions of 
more than two disjuncts, while two illustrate the construction with two-member 
disjunctions. No great importance is attached to this by the commentators, and it 
is unclear whether none of them thinks it significant. There need, of course, be no 
great importance in the fact that the earliest and the latest of the sources quoted 
above define disjunction specifically with reference to two-termed disjunctions. In 
Diogenes' example, it may only be because the illustration is two-termed that the 
last comment is framed as it is. It is reasonable to surmise that neither Cicero nor 
Diogenes La~rtius would have precluded three-term or four-term disjunctions, and 
that their account would coincide with those of Gellius, Galen and Sextus Em- 
piricus, according to which, in the three-term case, the disjunction is true if and 
only if exactly one of its disjuncts is true. Since none of the modern commentators 
explicitly addresses the issue of arity, one might have assumed that that is their 
view of the matter as well. Bochefiski [1970, p. 91] mentions the greater general- 
ity of Stoic conjunction 'the [conjunctive] functor was defined by the truth-table 
'1110' [sic] as our logical product (only an indeterminate number of arguments 
was meant)', and one may assume that his omission of the corresponding remark 
about f~xot is an oversight. But some explain three-member disjunctions as though 
they nested a two-member disjunction. Commenting on the form: 
Either the first or the second or the third; but not the first; and not the second; therefore the 
third 
which Sextus attributes to Chrysippus, the Kneales [1962a, p. 167] surmise: 
Here, it seems, we must think of the words 'the second or the third' 
as bracketed together in the disjunctive premiss; for the conclusion 
160pH 2.191. zb u 
0yt~ ~t~glgyp.~vov ~x~yy~gx(xt ~v x~v ~v (xSz~ byt~ g'[vo~t, z() ~ ~ot~:bv 
z& Xotx& ~bs58or ~ qbsuS~ ~r 
iI&X~r 
161DL 7.72. 8tS~r 
8~ ~oztv (~ (~XO zOO <(~zOt>> 8t~Su215 
oUVS~(~p.OU 8r162215 
O'[OV 
<(~zot ~p.~p~ ~z'~ ~ v6~ ~z:v.)> ~xczyy~kXszc~:t 8' 5 ~6v8~c~or oSzoc zb ~zcpov z~v &~t~p.&z~v 
~e58or d, czt. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
501 
can then be obtained by two applications of indemonstrable 5. If this 
procedure is correct, the disjunction may be as long as we please, since 
the conclusion can always be proved by a number of applications of 
the same indemonstrable. 
But though bracketing will have the required effect in the case of the fifth in- 
demonstrable, its effect will be quite other in the case of the fourth; for correctly 
inferring from the truth of the first disjunct the falsity of the disjunction of the 
second and third will not then let us infer the falsity of the third from the truth 
of the second: the disjunction of the second and the third may be false because 
both the second and the third disjuncts are true. The conclusion must be that 
although we can in isolated instances treat three-term disjunctions as nestings, 
nevertheless if we are to give a unified account of Stoic disjunction, we may never 
understand three-term disjunctions as understanding the second and third to be 
implicitly bracketed. Brackets are simply not permitted. If this arity-free account 
is the correct and most general account of the Stoic notion of disjunction, several 
observations may be made: first that were we to symbolise such a connective it 
would be unambiguous and natural to do so in prefix notation as: 
Vo-(OL1, 
. . . 
,OLn) 
where the subscript a serves to make the Stoic connection explicit. For the (~Vot) 
of Greek, like the 'or' of English, is not specifically a binary connective, and the 
Stoic practice of representing sentences by nominals (xb ~pdx~pov, xb 8~uT~pov, xb 
xpixo~, the first, the second, the third) tends to mask the distinction which, when 
in a philosophical set of mind, we implicitly make in English between, say, a list of 
three nominals composed with 'or' and a three-term disjunctive sentence. In the 
former case, we do not, indeed cannot think of the or-list of two of the names as 
forming a new name and that disjoined to the third. In ordinary English we are 
not required to think of the or-composition of three sentences in this way either. 
No rules of well-formedness force us to parse a three-clause sentence composed 
with 'or' into a two-clause sentence one of whose clauses is a disjunction. Except 
for the exclusivity, the Stoic construction 
~xot x6 zp6x~pov r xb 8~Sx~pov ~ x6 xp~xov 
(Either the first or the second or the third) 
alternatively, 
is more like the syntax of ordinary Greek than the modern symbolization 

502 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
is like the syntax of ordinary English, since to repeat the 'either' to express the 
inner parenthesis would be stilted and unidiomatic. Now, to be sure, we could 
abbreviate a modern n-term exclusive disjunction analogously by: 
since exclusive disjunction is an associative operation. But although the ambiguity 
is not vicious, we would normally understand such a formula as associated to the 
left or to the right, since v is a binary connective, and well-formedness requires it. 
That modern exclusive disjunction is a binary truth-function and that the Stoic 
notion had no fixed arity should not be lost sight of when comparing the two. It 
will serve to remind us that the truth conditions of the two constructions are not 
in general the same, a fact upon which none of the modern commentators seems 
to have remarked. Consider as example the exclusive disjunction: 
v((2 + 2 - 4), (2 + 3 - 5), (2 + 4 - 6)). 
When it is disambiguated into, say" 
(2 + 2 - 4) v ((2 + 3 - 5) v_ (2 + 4 - 6)), 
it becomes evident that since the second disjunction is false (since both of its 
disjuncts are true) and the first disjunct is true, the whole disjunction is true in 
spite of (or rather because of) the fact that all its disjuncts are true. The Stoic 
disjunction: 
Vo-((2 + 2 = 4), (2 + 3 -- 5), (2 + 4 = 6)) 
is false, since more than one of its disjuncts are true. Since Stoic disjunction has 
no fixed arity, it would be suitable to regard it as a kind of restricted propositional 
quantifier, having, in prefix notation, the reading 
Exactly one of the following is true: 
Since exclusive disjunction is commutative and associative, a quantifier reading 
would be suitable for it as well. But as a simple induction will demonstrate, its 
quantificational rendering would be: 
An odd number of the following are true: 
The two kinds of disjunction will, of course, coincide on the two-clause case, but 
will coincide for no n-clause case for n < 2. A three-clause exclusive disjunction, 
for example, will be true if and only if either exactly one or exactly three clauses 
are true, as will a four-clause exclusive disjunction. A five- or six-clause exclusive 
disjunction will be true if and only if either exactly one or exactly three or exactly 
five disjuncts are true, and so on. 
A valid Stoic disjunction of two terms would disjoin a sentence c~ with a sentence 
equivalent to the negation of c~. A true n-term Stoic disjunction would disjoin n 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
503 
finite state descriptions. As an example, imagine the formulation of a row of a 
truth table, that is, the effect of conjoining propositional variables or negations of 
propositional variables accordingly as l's or 0's appear under them in that row. A 
valid Stoic disjunction in rn independent variables would be equivalent to the 2 m- 
term disjunction of the formulations of the rows of a table displaying all possible 
combinations of their truth values. Particularly if, as some of the early sources 
suggest, the Stoic notion of disjunction was that of an intensional operation, a 
sentence of the form 
(Either the first or the second or the third or the fourth) 
given such a technical use of r would assert that the four sentences bore to one 
another a relationship akin to the relationship of the formulations of rows of a 
two-variable truth table: 
~zot (p A q) r (p A --,q) i] (~p A q) ~ (--,p A --,q). 
As a consequence of this, if we seriously adopt the view that the disjunction that 
Chrysippus had in mind in the fourth indemonstrable is the present day 0110 
disjunction, then the Stoics really had at least two different kinds of disjunction 
represented by the same piece of notation in their logical system. And having 
come this far, we could admit no grounds for regarding the disjunction of the fifth 
indemonstrable as anything but a third sort, namely 1110 disjunction. The more 
plausible account would be that they had one sort of disjunction in mind, namely, 
the disjunction of no fixed arity which happens to resemble 0110 disjunction in 
the two-term case. 
9.~ 
The consequences for their idea of form 
The standard notion of form as applied to propositional argument schemata fol- 
lows these lines: let F be the set of sentences of a language L and S an argument 
schema expressed with constants of the language L and metalogical variables of 
the metalanguage ranging over F. Then the argument form Fs associated with S 
is the set of arguments which can be generated from S by uniform substitution of 
sentences of F for metalogical variables in S. This notion of form depends upon 
a fixed meaning for the constants of L. In the propositional case, for example, we 
assume that -7, A, V, --+ and so on do not change their meanings as we uniformly 
substitute sentences for the metalogicaI variables flanking them. We do not ac- 
count '~ ; therefore ~ or ~3 ' an invalid form because from the sentence 'You may 
go or you may stay' it follows that you may stay. We say rather that 'You may go; 
therefore you may go or you may stay' is not of the form '~; therefore ~ or ~3'. We 
might retreat, if pressed, to the claim that they share grammatical but not logical 
form. Or we might admit the argument to the form but insist that the conclusion 
must then be understood as a disjunction, from which 'You may stay' does not 

504 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
follow. It seems certain that the Stoics never articulated a notion of argument 
form in these or equivalent terms. But, if we are to take into account the totality 
of evidence from early sources, according to which 8t~uy[a~vov was understood 
in something like the quantificational reading outlined earlier, and the generally 
held view that they gave to the particle ~xot a technical meaning accordingly, then 
the Stoic schema [IV]: 
f]:ot -c6 ~p6~spo'~ fl :b 8sO~:spov" 
9 
b 8s xp6cspov" 
oOx ~po~ :6 8sOTspov). 
Either the first or the second; 
But the first; 
Therefore not the second. 
is insufficiently general to capture the inferential force of the connective ~ in their 
technical sense. The three-term a-disjunction is not obtainable from the two-term 
a-disjunction by substitution of a two-term a-disjunction for one of the original 
disjuncts. Some such schema as: 
Va(oL1,---, O~i,-.- ,an) 
aj (1 < j < u); 
9 ".-'ak (1 <__ k < n)(k # j) 
would be required. So if the Stoic notion of disjunction was as general as the 
early commentators suggest, and we are to judge their conjectured position by 
standards of any rigour, then we must conclude that their understanding of the 
role of the fourth indemonstrable schema was something other than that of speci- 
fying a form in the substitutional sense of the word. Notably it is only the fourth 
indemonstrable that straightforwardly gives rise to such a problem of reinterpre- 
tation, since the other logical connections exhibited in the earlier indemonstrable 
schemata, viz. if... 
then.., 
and not both.., 
and.., 
represent specifically 
binary connections, at least for the Stoics, and at least so far as the evidence tells 
us. Of these, only not both ... and ... 
readily admits of generalization to the 
n-ary case, and there is nothing in the sources to guide us in choosing between 
the generalization to At most one o/the following is true and the generalization 
to Not all of the following are true, interpretations which again coincide only in 
the two-term case. If we suppose that they took conjunction seriously as a logical 
connection, perhaps the second is the more natural; for there is nothing to require 
the translation of the initial x~i as both except in the two-term case. Even here a 
slightly dissimilar case would arise if we tried to construct the generalized schema. 
For in the two-term case, the connective not both ... and ... coincides in sense 
with the Sheffer stroke, which, since it is not an associative operation, cannot, in 
the n-term case, be straightforwardly thought of quantificationally. The sentence: 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
505 
would mean something like: 
Either all of c~, fl, 7 are true, or c~ is false. 
There would, however, remain the problem that the third indemonstrable schema: 
Not both the first and the second; The first; Therefore, not the second 
is insufficiently general in form to define the class of arguments which the general 
account of conjunction would license. 
Now it is unfortunately convenient to treat Stoic logic, however fragmentary and 
indirect our understanding of it, as a product of the same general understanding 
of the issues that we ourselves are able to bring to bear. In this frame of mind, 
we are apt to see our scholarly task as one of rational reconstruction in the light 
of that general understanding. In such a frame of mind, we might well agree with 
Josiah Gould [1970, p. 83] that 
it is clear in each of our fragments that the author intends the adjec- 
tive 'undemonstrated' to qualify what we would today call 'argument 
forms. ' 
and that the examples given are 
what we would today call substitution instances. [Gould, 1974, p. 84] 
Better to ask of the fragmentary information available to us, what stage the Stoics' 
general understanding might have reached, allowing the relics of their doctrines a 
reasonable degree of tentativeness without assuming that their approach, had it 
only succeeded, would have been our own. This is, admittedly, a delicate task, 
not least because we cannot know whether we have succeeded in it. 
But the 
approach permits us, as need arises, to say 'They did not foresee this difficulty' 
rather than 'This view creates a difficulty on the modern understanding and must 
therefore not be attributed to them.' As an exercise, one might ask whether, on 
the evidence, the Stoics had hit upon something like our notion of logical form. If 
they had, well and good, but if they had not, then we ought not to suppose that 
all of the indemonstrables were regarded as formally valid or correct schemata in 
any single sufficiently well-defined sense of 'formal' to be of use. We would not 
be compelled, as we are by the contrary assumption,to assert of them that their 
use of ~ot ... 
~ ... 
in the fourth and fifth indemonstrables was a technical 
one according to which it meant what is meant by 0110 disjunction. As we have 
seen, unless they meant different things by ~jxot... 
~... 
in different contexts, 
0110 disjunction is not what they meant anyway, even if there is something, in 
the relevant respects determinate, that they did mean. In spite of what we have 
said about the notion of form, there is no harm in applying the word formal to 
the Stoics' work. By some standards, it is not informal and by those standards 
we may therefore call it formal where that is the contrast intended; and we may 
therefore distinguish their uses of ~jxot and ~ in formal contexts from their uses 
of them in merely expository ones, where by this we mean just to distinguish the 
ceremonial from the everyday. 

506 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
10 
THE LINGUISTIC EVIDENCE 
Was there something that ijxot and ~ meant? What is the evidence? Quite apart 
from the remarks of the early commentators, there is the evidence provided by 
the Greek and Latin languages themselves. It is an urban myth that there is an 
exclusive sense of or in English, and a suburban myth that Latin lexically marked 
the distinction between 1110 and 0110 disjunctions by vel and aut. It is unclear 
when these myths first arose. We have been unable to find them in any sources 
earlier than the twentieth century. It is true that the Latin commentators used 
aut ... aut ... to convey the Stoic use of~xot ... 
~ ... 
, but we must not place 
too much weight upon this. It was the best choice on grounds quite separate from 
the fictional one that aut corresponded to exclusive 'or'. We should recall that 
in the course of explaining the truth conditions of what he takes to be the Stoic 
notion of St~uy~a~vo~, Gellius uses aut in a long disjunctive antecedent clause 
of a conditional which is transparently intended to abbreviate a conjunction of 
conditionals: 
... 
si aut nihil omnium verum aut omnia plurave quam unum vera 
erunt, cut quae disjuncta sunt non pugnabunt, cut quae opposita eorum 
sunt contraria inter sese no erunt, tune id disjunctum mendacium est 

9
 
Noctes A tticae 16.8.14. 
(... 
if none of them is true, or all or more than one are true, or the 
contrasted things do not conflict, or those opposed are not contrary, 
then it is a false disjunction... 
) 
Evidently the choice of Latin vocabulary in which to cast the connective of the 
fourth and fifth indemonstrables was not dictated by the need to convey exclusivity 
formally. Had no Megarian or Stoic ever dreamt of the fourth indemonstrable, the 
most suitable Latin translation of the fifth indemonstrable and for the regimenta- 
tion of ordinary language arguments of the corresponding grammatical cast, would 
nevertheless have used cut. There is no reason to suppose that the mere use of 
aut, independently of ancillary discussion and explanation of what it was intended 
to convey, would have made the formal correctness of the fourth indemonstrable, 
or of particular instances of it, transparent to Roman commentators. 
Greek, like Latin, possessed no special connective by which 0110 disjunction was 
distinguished from 1110 disjunction. The 'logical' sense of ij~ot ... 
~ ... 
and 
its variants was essentially that of either ... 
or ...; like either ... 
or..., 
its 
use was indifferent as to the number of terms joined and as between exclusive 
and non-exclusive fillings; any additional imposition of an exclusive reading was 
through emphasis and intonation. In particular the use of ~zot as an auxiliary had 
no special role as an indicator of exclusivity, that particle being a compound of 
meaning variously or or than, and the enclitic tot an etymological cousin of the 
second person singular pronoun. Its ordinary use was emphatic, akin to the use 
in English of now surely or in Welsh English of Look you. Galen reports ~ as an 
alternative to ~ot in Stoic usage, although he himself uses the latter exclusively 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
507 
in the context of the indemonstrables [Frede, 1974, pp. 93-4], Certainly the use 
of fjzot ... 
;~... 
in ordinary non-philosophical written Greek was uncommon by 
contrast with some philosophical writing and there is evidence that the philoso- 
phers have pressed into use a construction normally reserved as a spoken form. 
Thus Denniston [1954, p. 553]: 
;jzot... 
;~... 
(often fjxot ... 
y~... 
;~) is common in Plato and 
Aristotle. 
It is difficult to say what degree of vividness tot retains 
here. On the one hand, Thucydides confines ;jtot, like simple tot, to 
speeches ... this suggests that he felt tot as vivid in the combination. 
On the other, the frequency of ;~tot in the matter-of-fact style of Aris- 
totle suggests that for him tot did nothing more than emphasize the 
disjunction. 
But ov~ ouyqt rot to tvq0~p q0po[a zqtq tricot ;jtot ... 
;~ ... 
is more common 
than r --- 
;~ ... 
in Aristotle and Plato, or that either of them set aside the 
former for uses which prefigured the Stoic use. Neither is by any means true. In 
particular, Aristotle uses ~ ... 
;~ ... 
in the overwhelming majority of cases, 
and in many which would have provided excellent examples of disjunction for the 
Stoics: 
IIp~tc~cn; t,.t~:v oSv ~t~ X6yo; xc~tc~gGttxb; ~ c~xoq)Gttxb; ttvb; xc~tc~ ztvo<. 
o5tor ~& ~ xczO6Xou ~ ~v p~:pst ~ &St6ptator (Prior Analytic 24 a 16). 
(.4 premiss then is a sentence affirming or denying something of some- 
thing. This is either universal or particular or indefinite.) 
... 
aukk~k6ytc~x~t 5it dlougg~tpo~ ;~ oug~a~tpor ;~ St~g~tpor (46 b 31). 
(... he has proved that the diagonal is either commensurate or incom- 
mensurate) 
and others where, if his understanding of the meaning of ;~tot ... 
anticipated the Stoic use of it, we would expect ;jtot ... 
;~ ... 
" 
o 
o 
~ 
~Ttc~v y&p ~ov 9v~zbv fi b~:6~:ou fi ~Ttouv ~c~zt (46 b 15). 
every mortal animal is either footed or footless) 
On the other hand, Aristotle's uses of ~tot ... 
~ ... 
, either give no evidence 
that he was after a distinction that anticipated the Stoics', or else provide evidence 
that he had no such intention. Thus, when in the course of explaining kinds of 
contrariety he denies that everybody must be black or white, he uses fjtot ... 
f~ 
9 
. 
. 
: 
. 
. 
o 
ou9 yc~-p no(v f~tot X~uxbv f~ [4~:Xo~v ~:at[v (Categories 12 a 13). 
not everyone is either white or black) 

508 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
but the reason for denying this is that there are intermediates between white and 
black, namely all the other colours. It is in any case used here between predicates 
and not between whole sentences. 
The relative scarcity of fl .-- 
~ ... 
as opposed to ~xot ... 
fl .-. 
in the 
logical setting does not of course indicate that the Stoics gave the word ~xot any 
special technical sense as distinct from a technical use. The thesis that it has a 
special sense is forced upon us only if we also adopt the view that their enter- 
prise was a formal one in the substitutional sense. We have already seen that on 
any straightforward interpretation, it was not. A more plausible guess would be 
that that combination gradually gained favour in general philosophical practice 
and presented itself to the philosophical innovator, perhaps Theophrastus, casting 
about for suitably perspicuous notation as a construction already set apart for 
special philosophical applications. Compare the current use of It is not the case 
that .... 
Again, it need hardly be said that there was no special intensional sense 
of ijzot or ~ or ~xot ... 
fl .-- 
in ordinary Greek, the necessity or contingency of 
a disjunction being entirely determined by its disjuncts. But insofar as intended 
exclusivity can be conveyed by emphasis, the intention is conveyed more easily 
with more syllables than with fewer. And on that score ~xot is more emphatic 
than fl- Greek, like Latin and, come to that, like English, had a great variety of 
connectives all of which could receive translation as or, but whose significance in 
discourse is best understood by immersion in the literature in which they occur. 
Like sive ... 
sive ... 
of Latin, Greek had dx~ ... 
~(x~ which was common as 
a conjunctively distributive connective in the antecedents of conditional construc- 
tions. Homeric Greek sometimes has z~ in place of a second fl, and fl xc~(, in place 
of a second ~'~zs . Aeschylus sometimes answers ~'(~s with ~'(zs xc~ . But Greek 
was in general more fluid in its use of particles than Latin. There are recorded 
instances of ~ ... 
xc~( ... 
where fl .-- 
fl .-- 
would be expected; and there 
are idioms in which xc~( occurs with the sense of ~, as in 
~.vgp~:(w I ~o~(o~ 6X(you q:tvor ~.~(o~ ~cr:iv xc~( o6~v6r 
Human wisdom is worth little or nothing 
yesterday or the day before. 
In general, the use of particular particles in the Greek of the last several centuries 
of the old era varied, not only over time, but from author to author, even from 
work to work, and particularly from genre to genre. 162 As a symptom of this 
greater fluidity, there is evident a larger freedom in the use of particles in abbre- 
viative constructions, especially favouring the use of constructions relying upon 
superficial grammatical ellipsis over those requiring (or rather, as our thesis de- 
mands, at least capable of receiving) a truth-functional logical transformation. The 
use of or constructions in /f-clauses to force a conjunctive reading is reinforced 
162For a detailed authoritative discussion, see Denniston [1954]. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
509 
by the availability of a non-elliptical reading for an antecedent in and, particu- 
larly in a language which, like Latin, is less subtly variable than Greek in its use 
of particles,. In Greek, for whatever reason, this tension between grammatical 
ellipsis and logical transformation was less insistent than in Latin, so that when 
the context demands it, an /f-clause occurrence of  
more readily accedes to a 
conjunctively distributive reading. And one finds  
sometimes following ~'Cx~p 
and grammatically absorbed by it, producing something akin to if even ... , as 
one finds them in the opposite order having the sense of even if .... 
The logical 
particles whose English counterparts we have been taught to think of as, to extend 
Ryle's colourful metaphor, importantly combat-ready, lived altogether more easily 
in one another's company. 
Any attempt to construct a useful formal system that still retains a connection 
with the inferential practices that have inspired it cannot but sacrifice non-logical 
distinctions, and the logic of the Stoics, arising as it did out of a language so fluid 
in its particulate usages as the Greek of their period, was not to be excepted. The 
abstraction of the logically essential into a simplified vocabulary was part of the 
task, but refining their very conception of the task and what was essential to it 
was all a part of the same continuing academic enterprise. As modern logic has no 
distinct notation for whether.., 
or... 
, letting if... 
or... 
do the work, and as 
Roman logicians did not retain sive ... 
sive ... or turn ... 
turn, so Greek logicians 
shed ~'~ ... 
~'Cx~ as they did the distinction between the suppositive negating 
adverb ~af 1 and the absolute o0 X (o6~, o~)x ) since the retention of [a~ in negated if- 
clauses would complicate conditionalization of arguments of the form of the second 
indemonstrable. In any case, however much greater fluidity there may have been, 
and however much simplified the account of logical connection, it remains true 
that the role of  
in Greek was preponderantly 
aggregative or agglomerative. 
And the role of ~Fot ... 
~ ... 
was preponderantly 
separative, as that of either 
... 
or... 
is in English. 
Its ordinary understanding was certainly such as to 
support an inference schema such as the fifth indemonstrable. But the use of ~xot 
... 
~ ... 
in the fourth indemonstrable goes beyond simplification. For, as we 
have noted, there was, in Greek as in Latin and English, no or word that indicated 
exclusive disjunction. If the Stoics intended that the fourth indemonstrable should 
be understood formally in the substitutional sense, they could not have counted 
upon that formal 
correctness being evident from the ordinary understanding of 
its logical vocabulary, as they could have in the case of the first, second, third and 
fifth. Consider, for example, a remark of Sextus: 
... 
':6 8~ 8t.~uyp.i:vov ~v ~X~t ':~v ~,v c,5:~ 5.Xr191: , 6r ~v &p.qod-c~p~ r 
&@~ ~ &gq)6~ep~ d/eu8~, @58oc ~a~c~t ~6 5Xov 
... the disjunction has one of its clauses true, since if both are true or 
both are false, the whole will be false. (SE AM 
8.283) 
EtB~v=X~, ~s Xc~a~ occuppEvcs 0 9 ~ is not to be understood 'in an exclusive sense', 
in spite of the exclusiveness of its disjuncts, but rather in the ordinary sense 
which makes the conditional in whose antecedent it occurs elliptical for, or at least 

510 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
equivalent to, a conjunction of conditionals. The inequivalence of the conditional 
having an exclusive disjunctive antecedent (in modern notation), 
(a v Z) 
and the corresponding conjunction of conditionals 
-+ 
A (Z 
has consequences elsewhere. 
On a purely syntactic/semantic understanding of 
~t~uy~vo~ by which it would mean just declarative sentences joined by ;~ un- 
derstood in the technical 0110 sense, that inequivalence would make it difficult 
to square the fondness for the dilemma, which was ubiquitous from pre-Socratic 
through Hellenistic writings, with the general acceptance of the principle of con- 
ditionalisation, which was generally accepted by the Stoics. Now the ordinary 
application of conditionalisation as a test of validity would conjoin the premisses 
in the/f-clause of a conditional, having the conclusion as then-clause. Presumably, 
in the particular application, an argument involving dilemma would yield a pair 
of conditionals whose validity would then be considered. The difficulty lies in the 
fact that the conditional 
v,, 9) --+ "7 
might be necessarily true because both a and/~ were necessarily true and a V~/~ 
therefore necessarily false, but both conjuncts of 
A (9 -+ 
false because 7 was false. On those grounds alone, it is unlikely that ~t~uy~vov 
was a simple syntactic/semantic item in the Stoic conception of logic. 
10.1 
Cicero 's clanger 
There is further evidence of this tension between the normal use of ~xot ... 
... 
and the Stoic use of it in the fact that there is a greater confusion sown in the 
accounts of ~t~uy~vov than there is in the accounts of the other connections. 
If the fourth indemonstrable was intended as a formally admitted schema in the 
substitutional sense, the difficulty can only have been one of understanding a new 
technical sense being lent to the grammatical form ~xot ... 
~ ... 
It cannot 
be confidently rejected that Cicero, whose faux pas in his Topica still costs him 
invitations, was among the victims of the confusion. 
At least it must be said that a formal reading by which the fourth indemonstra- 
ble does represent a new technical use of ~ ought to dispose us more charitably 
toward Cicero's curious augmentation, in top. 13.57 of the standard five indemon- 
strables. Cicero claims there, so far as we know erroneously, that there was a Stoic 
indemonstrable the Latin form of which would have been: 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
511 
Non et hoc et illud; non hoc; illud igitur. 
Not both this and that; not this; therefore that. 
When the indemonstrables are understood formally, this would seem on first hear- 
ing to represent a truly resounding logical clanger. Since the indemonstrables are 
almost universally regarded as formal, this estimation has been the conventional 
view. l~a There is no independent evidence that any Stoic logician ever included 
this kind of argument in his list of indemonstrables. On this point, we take it that 
Cicero was merely wrong. But could there have been such a kind of argument? 
If we are right about what inferences could be justified by reference to the mean- 
ing of ~j~ot ... 
~ ... 
in Greek, and if the indemonstrables are formal, then the 
use of ~ot ... 
~ ... 
in the fourth indemonstrable forces an exclusive reading 
which did not exist in the natural language. For there, the nearest we have to an 
exclusive ~j~ot ... 
~ ... 
is the use of ~j~ot ... 
~ ... 
with exclusive alterna- 
tives. But then the analogous technical use of not both ... 
and ... would force a 
reading according to which from the falsity of one element the truth of the other 
would follow. Indeed, anyone whose understanding of Stoic logic was indirect and 
conjectural, and whose knowledge of Greek was not, might well have considered 
that given the eccentric character of the fourth indemonstrable, the Stoics could 
be expected to have a corresponding dual eccentricity of the sort embodied in 
Cicero's argument. It is true that the use of not both ... 
and ... 
never implies 
by itself that both sentences cannot be false, but neither is there a use of or that 
implies by itself that both sentences cannot be true. However, there are uses of not 
both ... 
and ... with sentences which cannot both be false, just as there are uses 
of or with sentences which cannot both be true. Understood as a formal theory, 
there is nothing more eccentric about Cicero's supplement than there is about the 
undoubtedly Stoic fourth indemonstrable. But suppose for the sake of argument 
that Cicero's addition were to be found extensively in Stoic logical writings and 
attributed, say, to Chrysippus. Any historian of Stoic logic finding himself unwill- 
ing to accept that indemonstrable as merely representing a technical usage, ought 
to feel no more willingness to accept, on those terms, the Stoics' eccentric use of 
'or' in the fourth. 
Make the parallel more explicit. The formalist historian claims that the Stoics 
used ~j~ot ... 
~... 
technically to mean Either... 
or... 
and not both.., 
and 
... In ordinary Greek, its meaning comprehended the former conjunct but not the 
latter. If Cicero were right, there would be a second pill to swallow: that the Stoics 
used Not both A and B technically to mean the same thing. In ordinary Greek, 
its meaning comprehended the latter but not the former. 
Even on a formalist 
rendering, the mistake ought to seem on reflection no great logical howler. But 
when we consider, as we shall, the notion that the indemonstrables were not for- 
mally intended, we may also entertain among others, the possibility that Cicero's 
163The Kneales are a notable exception, and offer a plausible and detailed alternative account. 
Bochefiski has remarked (in conversation) that to ask Cicero about logic is about as sensible as 
to enquire of Sartre about the writings of Carnap. Calvin Normore has offered that the error 
may be imputed to Cicero's well known insomnia. Both may well have some bearing. 

512 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
error represents at worst a merely historical error or a badly worded description, 
a wrong but not unreasonable reconstruction from memory of something he had 
read or heard from Diodotus or Philo. 164 But again, on a non-formalist construal, 
especially given our more less comprehensive ignorance of the teachings of minor 
Stoic teachers, it could well be an accurate recollection of something taught him 
(however erroneously) by Diodotus. It would not have been an impossible kind 
of argument, on a non-formalist view, for a Stoic to have noted. Consider what 
textbooks of this age say about aut. 
10.2 
The question of form 
So we return to the question whether the Stoics regarded the indemonstrables as 
formally correct schemata in anything like the modern understanding of formal 
correctness. The evidence is clouded and there are many imponderables. We do 
not know with certainty to what extent the technical vocabulary, bytCl~, validus, 
~tc~cuu 
and so on had been freed from its etymological roots for Galen or 
Sextus, or with certainty what points of terminology and doctrine remained a mat- 
ter of controversy into the Christian era. We do not know with what exactitude 
the logical vocabulary was defined by Chrysippus or others. But it would not be 
too pessimistic at least to lower our estimations of their capacity for logical de- 
scription. As we have seen, the standard substitutional notion of valid form does 
not adequately account for the Stoic account of disjunction in inference, since it 
does not accommodate connectives of no fixed arity. A relaxed, descriptive notion 
of valid form might come closer to theirs. The difference is this" a substitution 
account presents a schema and (perhaps implicitly) a rule of uniform substitution, 
or asserts that for every pair of sentences a and b, such and such a conclusion may 
be inferred from such and such premisses. Arguments of the same form retain 
the syncategorematic vocabulary and repeat sentences in the same pattern as the 
repetition of metalogical variables in the schema. One might say that the sub- 
stitutional account stands for an abstract syntactic description applicable to any 
argument of the form. What we shall call a descriptive account would give an ex- 
plicit description, saying what belongs in each premiss, and what in the conclusion, 
perhaps illustrating by a schema, or an example. Of the fourth indemonstrable it 
might say" 'An argument of the fourth type has a diezeugmenonic major premiss 
etc.' and mention that a diezeugmenonic sentence is of the grammatical form: 
(not 'a diezeugmenonic sentence is any sentence of the grammatical form 
9'.) 
The class of valid arguments of that descriptive form would be the class of ar- 
guments satisfying the description, which might but might not coincide with the 
164particularly bearing in mind that the account in the Topica is a reconstruction written, not 
in a library, but during a journey. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
513 
class of arguments obtained by uniform substitution in the illustrating schema. In 
the case of arguments with a diezeugmenonic major premiss, presumably the two 
notions would not coincide if the understood arity of disjunction were variable. 
If the distinction between the two notions of form were never explicitly stated, it 
is credible that discussions would sometimes vaguely have assumed the one and 
sometimes vaguely the other. 
In the case of the fourth indemonstrable, a substitution account would offer the 
schema: 
Either c~ or fl; but c~; therefore, not ft. 
A rule of substitution would license any argument obtained by substituting an 
occurrence of some declarative sentence A for every occurrence of c~ and an occur- 
rence of some declarative sentence B for every occurrence of r as an argument of 
the form of the schema. Alternatively, a substitution account would say: 
For every sentence c~ and every sentence fl, from c~ or/3, and c~, not-fl 
may be inferred. 
A descriptive account of [IV] (for the general case) would be this: 'From a dis- 
junction together with one of its disjuncts, the negation of any distinct disjunct 
may be inferred.' What constitutes an argument of this description depends upon 
what is meant by disjunction, but we may say that the simplest argument of this 
kind would of be the form: 
Either the first or the second; the first; therefore, not the second. 
Now if, in addition, our notion of disjunction had as its foundation the notion of 
a relationship between states of affairs or situations such that exactly one of them 
must obtain (and only derivatively of a string of sentences alleging such states, 
separated by or), rather than simply any string of sentences separated by or, the 
puzzle about the technical meaning of ~xot ... 
~ ... 
would be less perplexing. 
Indeed there would be no puzzle. Both the fourth and fifth indemonstrables would 
represent valid kinds of argument, and the schemata presented would represent the 
forms of the simplest arguments of this kind. Why Either ... 
or ... ? It is the 
obvious connective, since it permits the construction of a true sentence out of 
contradictories and, in any case, the Either... 
or... 
construction is the one in 
which these contradictory alternatives are naturally contemplated. That the fifth 
indemonstrable is justifiable solely on the basis of the meaning of or and the fourth 
only on the basis of the particularities of its arguments, on such an account, does 
not matter. It is relevant only in the presence of convincing evidence that they 
had in mind a substitutional notion of form. That is precisely what is lacking. 
The evidence suggesting the less finely tuned notion of validity is by no means 
unequivocal. The clearest case of a descriptive presentation of the indemonstrables 
is that of Ioannes Philoponous in his Scholia to Ammonius: 

514 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
The disjunctive syllogism proceeds on the basis of complete incompat- 
ibles. 165 
But all of the early sources give, more or less, a descriptive account of the fourth 
and fifth indemonstrables. 
Cicero, who gives barely more than schemata, feels 
it necessary to add the comment that 'these conclusions are valid because in a 
disjunctive statement not more than one (disjunct) can be true', a remark more 
significant for having seemed necessary than for what it says. Much that is oth- 
erwise puzzling is less so on the view that their notion of validity had, at least 
not yet, become fixed upon a substitution account. If the notion of disjunction 
was the descriptive one, meaning essentially sentences in a certain relation, every 
disjunction which was 5u 
or validus in the more etymological sense of 'proper' 
or 'sound' would also be byt~g or validus in the derivative sense of true, even in 
the further derivative sense of valid. This would explain Gellius' rejection of the 
premiss 
A ut honesta sunt, quae imperat pater, aut turpia 
A father's commands are either honourable or base 
on the grounds that it is not what the Greeks call 'a sound and regular disjunction' 
(5yt~ et ~Spt~ov ~t~uyp~vo~). (Gellius Noctes Atticae 2.7.21) It would justify 
Favorinus' response to Bias' dilemma, that its major premiss (You will marry either 
a beautiful or an ugly woman) was not a proper disjunction (iustum disiunctivum), 
since it was not inevitable that one of the two opposites be true, which must be 
the case in a disjunctive proposition. (Noctes Atticae 5.11.8) On the substitution 
account, the truth or falsity of a premiss ought not to affect validity. On the 
descriptive account, particularly in the case of a disjunctive premiss, its falsity 
cannot but affect at least the question whether it is of the particular valid kind, 
since if it is false, it is not a genuine disjunction. There are other, similar instances, 
as for example Sextus' rejection of the argument: 
Wealth is either good or bad; but wealth is not bad; therefore, wealth 
is good 
on the grounds that the first premiss does not state an exhaustive disjunction of the 
possibilities. 166. These 'extra-logical considerations' [Gould, 1974, pp. 165-66] and 
this 'serious confusion between a disjunction and a true disjunction' [Mates, 1953, 
pp. 52-53] have puzzled earlier modern commentators. But if the specification of 
form was thought of as being given descriptively rather than substitutionally, so 
that the distinction between disjunction and true disjunction was not present, then 
the inexhaustiveness of the major premiss would debar justification by reference 
to IV] as the incompleteness of conflict would debar justification by reference to 
[IV]. And notice the restricted claim Sextus Empiricus is, on one occasion, content 
to allow himself about the nature of disjunction: 
165Ammonius in an. pr. Praefatio xi. The translation is Mates's [1953, p. 131]. 
166SE AM 8.434 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
515 
~ Xot~5~ r ~& Xot~& @~o~ ~ d?~u~f 1 ~e~& [a&Xn~ (SE PH 8.191). 
The true disjunction declares that one of its clauses is true, but the 
other or others false or false and contradictory. 
It is a curious restriction if the distinction between a disjunction and a true dis- 
junction is an important one. 
Again, Galen's discussion of the distinction between ~t~uyia~o~ and ~p~t~uu 
makes it clear that he at least does not understand the claims of the fourth and fifth 
indemonstrables according to a substitution sense of validity. For he recognised 
what could be called paradisjunctive syllogism as a distinct type of syllogism, while 
evidently not regarding it as exhibiting a distinct form. Having given an account 
of Chrysippus' classification of the indemonstrables, he remarks: 
In syllogisms of this sort i.e., disjunctive and hypothetical, the major 
premisses determine the minor; for neither in the disjunctive do more 
than two additional premisses occur nor in the conditional, while in 
the case of incomplete conflict (~XXt~ g~Xq) it is possible to make one 
additional assumption only. (Institutio Logica 7.1) 
But when earlier he discusses the distinction between complete and incomplete 
conflict, a single multi-termed sentence does duty for both. 
For 'Dion is walking' is one simple proposition, and also 'Dion is sit- 
ting'; and 'Dion is lying down' is one proposition, and so, too, 'He is 
running,' and 'He is standing still,' but out of all of them is made a 
disjunctive proposition, as follows: 'Dion is either walking or is sitting 
or is lying down or is running or is standing still'; whenever a propo- 
sition is formed in this way any one member is in incomplete conflict 
with another, but taken all together they are in complete conflict with 
one another, since it is necessary that one of them must be true and 
the others not. (Institutio Logica 5.2) 
Notice that as an example of conflict, Galen's is a good one in its listing states 
that cannot simultaneously obtain, but a bad one in providing a list that is not, 
as Galen suggests, genuinely exhaustive. (Dion might be crouching or signalling.) 
From an inferential point of view, its inexhaustiveness is unimportant, since given 
the truth of the disjunction it follows, solely in consequence of the meaning of the 
particle ~, that if one of the disjuncts is false, then one of the others is true. 
Ian Mueller, in his discussion of the possible non-truth-functional status of the 
Stoic sentential combinations says 
We cannot be sure about 'or,' but I suspect that a disjunction was taken 
to be true only if the disjuncts were mutually exclusive and exhaustive 
of the alternatives. [Mueller, 1978, p. 20] 

516 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
It is a more plausible conjecture that what was meant by 'disjunction' was what 
would be called 'true disjunction' on a substitution interpretation, that in the case 
of disjunction, the etymological sense of 'sound' suggesting the correct internal 
relationships among parts, was not absent from the understanding of 5u 
. In 
an application to a very simple object, this sense would be tantamount to 'true' 
in the sense of 'genuine'. (For in a sufficiently simple kind of object, little in the 
way of internal relationships can fail before the object is not merely defective of 
the kind, but no longer an instance of the kind.) No disjunction that was true in 
the sense of 'genuine' could fail to be true in the sense of 'representative of how 
things are'. Now to say this is not to say that they were confused between form and 
content as we imagine we understand the distinction. It is to say that the boundary 
between the two had not yet been clearly drawn, let alone drawn where, at least in 
propositional logic, we now draw it. In fact, we can go further. For one need only 
read De Morgan's Cambridge lectures to see how far much of the philosophical 
establishment as recently as the nineteenth century was from grasping our present 
understanding of form. The resistance from Sir William Hamilton and his followers 
to the liberation of the idea of logical form from the shackles of Kantianism was 
one of the most serious academic obstacles that De Morgan had to surmount in 
getting his logical ideas accepted. One could argue that that struggle for liberation 
was one of the major contributions of nineteenth century logic. And the battle 
will not be certifiably won until the day when logic textbooks no longer call 1110 
disjunctions exclusive on the grounds that their disjuncts are incompatible. It is 
therefore a serious matter to suppose that the Stoics were in full possession of 
the notion, particularly when the historical evidence indicates so clearly that their 
conception of the nature and place of logic were fundamentally different from that 
of twentieth century theorists. 
Finally, when the matter is viewed in this light, one is tempted to speculate 
that it was precisely their preoccupation with the dilemma both as a form of ar- 
gument and as a paradigm of moral predicament which fixed the attention of the 
later Peripatetics and the Stoics upon inference patterns such as [IV], as having a 
fundamental place in a codification of academic inferential practice. If this were 
true it would not be surprising that they would wish to exclude as improper those 
disjunctions of which both disjuncts could be true, for these are the just the in- 
stances which would defeat conditionalisation of dilemmas. Since the substitution 
account of validity would not rule out such disjunctions and a descriptive account 
would, the descriptive account seems on that score to be the more likely candidate 
for the Stoic conception of validity. 
11 
WHAT STOIC DISJUNCTION MAY HAVE BEEN 
We have concentrated upon disarming the prejudices which might suggest that 
they introduced a technical sense of~j~ot... 
~ ... 
and aut 
... 
aut 
... 
or relied 
upon senses of those constructions already present in Greek and Latin. But we 
have allowed, without comment, anachronistic terminology such as 'proposition' 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
517 
to creep into our account (albeit only descriptively) which might itself create the 
false impression that the Stoics had some such notion in common with us. It 
would in particular be a serious misunderstanding to suppose that the Stoics had 
in their notion of a lekton a notion corresponding to the Fregean proposition. It 
is precisely in the nature of the lekton that most recent commentators have found 
grounds for denying the earlier assumption that the nature of Stoic logic could 
be well enough understood by comparison with modern calculi. Their arguments, 
to which may be added the arguments given here against the application to their 
work of a substitutional notion of logical form, have drawn their premisses from 
quite a different source, namely the nature of the relationship between Stoic logic 
and Stoic epistemology and physics. 
One account which forcefully presents Stoic logic in a non-formalist interpre- 
tation, is due to Claude Imbert [1980]. She takes as her point of departure the 
Stoic notion of q0awc~oic,, usually translated as 'presentation', taken up as an al- 
ternative to Aristotle's theory of imitation and applied to the art of Alexandria. 
It is through an understanding of the nature of q~c,v~c, eiat and their relationship to 
the major premisses of the indemonstrables that we understand why Stoic logic is 
conceptually incomparable with modern calculi. 
The conclusion of a Stoic syllogism is inferred from other sentences 
which translate natural signs apprehended in presentations, and which 
never presuppose the existence of transcendent forms or universals 
... Every logical structure rests on the possibility of translating pre- 
sentations into discursive sequences, and each sequence must exhaust 
the scientific content latent in its presentation. Inference thus depends 
on a rhetorical function which maps utterances (lekta) on to contents 
of presentations (phantasia). [Imbert, 1980, pp. 187-88] 
The transition from impression, which all animals have, to a presentation charac- 
teristic of human apprehension, depends upon the capacity to grasp connections 
among the contents of experience. Complex utterances, hypothetical, conjunctive 
and disjunctive, represent three ways of grasping connections. 
The one which 
concerns us here is the way which corresponds to the disjunctive proposition: the 
recognition of alternative exclusive possibilities. The use of the language of q~av- 
9 aoic, in this connection is suggestive, in one respect, of Aristotle's use of the same 
term in De Anima where it designates an activity characteristic of common (as 
distinct from particular) sense. And other evidence has suggested to some com- 
mentators that the ideas of the logical connections were originally a Peripatetic 
innovation. 167 Finally, a full understanding of the Stoic preoccupation with what 
appears to the present day philosopher as a rather specialized and arcane notion 
of disjunction cannot neglect its connection with a theme which recurs as a leit- 
motif in one form or another throughout the history of Greek philosophy. The 
167See [Barnes, 1985] for a discussion of the evidence suggesting that Theophrastus was one 
Peripatetic source. 

518 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
St~{~uyg~vov of the Stoics is a late practical refinement of the notion of the con- 
flict of opposites, which can be traced through Heracleitus' doctrines of the unity 
of opposites to Anaximander's doctrine of the generation of opposites from the 
undifferentiated &=~tpov , and is to be found in the central images of the mythic 
cosmogony of Hesiod. For the Stoics, it was at the heart of their ethics, physics 
and logic, and its recognition was a necessary constituent of the rational unity to 
be made of the conduct of human affairs and the operations of nature. We can 
construct a simplified model that realizes some such conception as the one they 
seem to have had in mind. According to such a picture, each succeeding state of 
the world makes some atomic sentences true and the rest false. So each moment of 
time may be thought of as a function or rule which takes sentences to truth values. 
Coming to an understanding of the intelligent character of the world amounts to 
grasping the principles by which these functions are selected in their turn. And in 
a poetic or spiritual frame of mind, we might imagine such rules as competing for 
selection and thus, since they represent incompatible assignments of truth-values, 
we might imagine them as being in conflict. Moreover, the image comes equally 
to mind of nature selecting its way among these competing functions according 
to some rational principle. 
In the sphere of individual action, the notion will 
readily suggest itself to us that in minute part we each bear some responsibility 
through our choices for the successive states of the universe. The apprehension 
of the distinctness of these state-functions within the subdomain of alternatives 
presented to us would, in this admittedly fanciful reconstruction, correspond to 
the apprehension of ~t~)y~a~vov. Like the rows of a truth table, or the items of 
a menu, they would be represented as mutually exclusive alternatives; were we to 
articulate them, it would most naturally take the form of a string of alternatives 
separated by 'or': this set of atoms true or that or the other .... 
Now this fancy is an anachronism, though the Stoics seemed to recognize some- 
thing like the possibilities represented by the rows of a truth table. But if we 
cannot understand the Stoic use of or in other terms than those of twentieth cen- 
tury logical theory, it would be less misleading to bring the notion of ~t~uy[a~vo~ 
into the light of such simple-hearted model-theoretic ideas than to associate it 
with the substitutional idea of a particular logical form. 
As much as one might wish to complain to the Stoics that there are connections, 
such as non-exclusive alternatives, which are not provided for in their scheme, such 
objections are not to the present point, for what we have wanted is an explana- 
tion of the Stoic use of ~jzot ... 
~ ... 
which accords with the evident fact that 
their technical use does not constitute a technical meaning. Understood as rep- 
resenting the most succinct way in which we reflect in utterance the connection 
between exclusive alternatives viewed as such, the use is surely unobjectionable. 
The fact that we, and for that matter, the Greeks, had other less succinct ways of 
reflecting such connections and as well used the same connective for non-exclusive 
alternatives is neither here nor there. In any case, when such alternatives confront 
us, a complete analysis of the possibilities will always yield exclusive alternands, 
namely, those corresponding to the three l's of the truth table of V. If c~ and 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
519 
present themselves to us as non-exclusive alternatives, our choice, when fully and 
analytically apprehended, is seen to be among the three exclusive alternatives: 
pursuing both c~ and ~, pursuing c~ but not ~, and pursuing ~ but not a. Though 
the origins were different and the motives, the method need not be thought en- 
tirely unlike Boole's. For he too took exclusivity, even the same arity-free idea 
of exclusivity, to be centrally important to his representation, but the exclusivity 
was constructed out of a non-exclusive disjunctive use of or. 
12 
STOIC DISJUNCTION AS A HYPER-RELATION 
It is important to bear in mind that before the nineteenth century, logical the- 
orists, though they spoke of form (as distinct from content) thought of logical 
connection in relational rather than formal terms. The character and status of 
the items between which the relations were thought to obtain varied through the 
history of the subject, but the relational character can be said to have persisted 
without challenge at least until George Boole's temporal semantics for the con- 
nectives, and in some branches of logic, notably Idealist logic, to have persisted as 
explicit doctrine well into the twentieth century. The 1929 symposium on negation 
(Mabbott et al. 1929) might be said to mark its final departure from academic 
philosophical logic. We can, however, capture the character of Stoic disjunction 
in the recent language of coherence measures. 
Let 2 be a set of sentences. Then the coherence level of N, A(Z) - min ~ 9 37r C 
H~(E) 9 Vc C 7r, c z_k, if that limit exists; else A(E) - oc. 
Thus, for example, A({p,-~p}) - 2; A({p A q,p A -~q,-~p A q,-~p A -~q}) -- 4; A({_L 
}) 
-
-
 ~ and so on. 
Let E be a set of sentences. Then the coherence dilution of E, 5(2) - min ( " 
3~x c_ r~ IAI- ~, and A ~- if such a subset exists; else 6(E) - oo. 
Thus, for example, 6({pA ~p} -- 6({ 
-- 1;5({pAq,pA-~q,-,pAq,-~pA-~q}) 
-- 
2; ~({c~, c~ ~ ~,/3 --+ ~, ~ -+ <,-~{}) -- 5; 6({p}) -- oe and so on. 
Again, maximum dilution is illustrated by the modest believer, whose only 
mistaken belief is that at least one of his beliefs is false. No proper subset of his 
beliefs is inconsistent, yet the set as a whole is. 
Then a set-representation of an n-term Stoic disjunction can be given as the set 
N = {el,..., an} of its disjunctions where Z satisfies: 
- 
-Ir 
l- 
The weaker Stoic notion of paradisjunction can be given a set-representation 
that weakens the dilution requirement to 

520 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
It1. 
Now it would not have taken the Stoics beyond the resources available to them to 
have introduced a measure on paradisjunctions representing the maximum number 
of disjuncts that could be true. Such a measure would indirectly have yielded a 
measure of dilution of incoherence capable of independent study. As an example, 
consider the set 
E= {p --+ q,q --+ p, p A q} 
A(E) = 1; 
= 2. 
E is a set representative of a paradisjunction: one of its elements must be true 
but all of them can be. On the other hand, the conflict among the elements of 
-~[E] is less diffuse than among the negated disjuncts of a Stoic disjunction. If 
the ideal is the absence of conflict, evidently more dilute conflict is better than 
less. Thus the notion that inference should preserve dilution is in the logical spirit 
of Stoicism. We conclude with the observation that a system of inference that 
(a) permitted only dilution-preserving inferences, and (b) took those inferences 
E .'. c~ as correct for which the dilution of E U {c~} was greater than the dilution 
of E U {-~a} would satisfy connexivist constraints on inference corresponding to 
the theses of Aristotle and Boethius discussed earlier (page 482). Such a system 
was nearly within reach of the Stoics, and would constitute a natural extension of 
their logical theory. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Anderson and Belnap, c1975-] Alan Ross Anderson and Nuel D. Belnap, Jr. Entailment: the 
logic of relevance and necessity. Princeton UP, Princeton, N.J., c1975-. 2 volumes. 
[Barnes, 1980] Jonathan Barnes. Proof destroyed. In Schofield et al., editors, Doubt and Dog- 
rnatisrn, pages 161-81. Clarendon, Oxford, 1980. 
[Barnes, 1985] Jonathan Barnes. Theophrastus and hypothetical syllogistic. In William W. 
Fortenbaugh et al., editors, Theophrastus of Eresus: On His Life and Work. New Brunswick, 
1985. 
[Bochefiski, 1963] I.M. Bochefiski. Ancient Formal Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963. 
[Bochefiski, 1970] I.M. Bochefiski. A History of Formal Logic. 1961. Editor and translator, Ivo 
Thomas. Chelsea, New York, 2nd edition, 1970. 
[Denniston, 1954] J.D. Denniston. The Greek Particles. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2nd edition, 
1954. Rpt. (with corrections) 1966. 
[Elgi, 1978] Urs Elgi. Stoic syntax and semantics. In Jacques Brunschwig, editor, Les Stoi'ciens 
et leur logique, pages 135-54. Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1978. 
[Frede, 1974] Michael Frede. Die stoische Logik. Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, GSttingen, 1974. 
[Frede, 1987a] Michael Frede. The original notion of cause. In Essays in Ancient Philosophy, 
pages 125-150. U of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1987. 
First published in Doubt and 
Dogmatism, editors Malcolm Schofield, et al, Clarendon, 1980. pp. 216-249. 
[Frede, 1987b] Michael Frede. The origins of traditional grammar. In Essays in Ancient Philos- 
ophy, pages 338-359. U of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1987. First published in Historical 
and Philosophical Dimensions of Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, editors R.E. 
Butts and J. Hintikka, Reidel, 1977. pp. 51-79. 

The Megarians and the Stoics 
521 
[Frede, 1987c] Michael Frede. Principles of stoic grammar. In Essays in Ancient Philosophy, 
pages 301-337. U of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1987. First published in The Stoics, editor 
J.M. Rist, U of California Press, 1978. pp. 27-75. 
[Frede, 1987d] Michael Frede. Stoic vs. aristotelian syllogistic. In Essays in Ancient Philoso- 
phy, pages 99-124. U of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1987. First published in Archly fiir 
Geschichte der Philosophie, volume 56, 1956. 
[Frede, 1987e] Michael Frede. Stoics and skeptics on clear and distinct impressions. In Essays in 
Ancient Philosophy, pages 151-176. U of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1987. First published 
in The Sceptical Tradition, editor Miles Burnyeat, U of California, 1983. 
[Gould, 1970] Josiah B. Gould. The Philosophy of Chrysippus. State U of New York Press, 
Albany, 1970. 
[Gould, 1974] Josiah B. Gould. Deduction in stoic logic. In John Corcoran, editor, Ancient 
Logic and Its Modern Interpretations, pages 151-68. D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1974. 
[Graeser, 1978a] Andreas Graeser. The stoic categories. In Jacques Brunschwig, editor, Les 
Sto~'ciens et leur logique, pages 199-221. Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1978. 
[Graeser, 1978b] Andreas Graeser. The stoic theory of meaning. In J.M. Rist, editor, The Stoics, 
pages 77-100. U of California Press, Berkeley, 1978. 
[Hay, 1969] W.H. Hay. Stoic use of logic. Archly fiir Geschichte der Philosophie, 51:145-57, 
1969. 
[Hurst, 1935] Martha Hurst. Implication in the fourth century b.c. Mind, 44:484-95, 1935. 
[Imbert, 1978] Claude Imbert. Th@orie de la repr@sentation et doctrine logique. In Jacques 
Brunschwig, editor, Les Stoi'ciens et leur logique, pages 223-49. Librairie Philosophique J. 
Vrin, Paris, 1978. 
[Imbert, 1980] Claude Imbert. 
Stoic logic and alexandrian poetics, translated by jonathan 
barnes. In Malcolm Schofield et al., editors, Doubt and Dogmatism, pages 182-216. Clarendon, 
Oxford, 1980. 
[Inwood, 1985] Brad Inwood. Ethics and Human Action in Early Stoicism. Clarendon, Oxford, 
1985. 
[Kahn, 1969] Charles H. Kahn. Stoic logic and stoic logos. Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philoso- 
phie, 51:158-72, 1969. 
[Kerferd, 1978a] Georg Kerferd. 
The problem of synkatath~sis and katal~psis in stoic doc- 
trine. In Jacques Brunschwig, editor, Les Stoi'ciens et leur logique, pages 251-72. Librairie 
Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1978. 
[Kerferd, 1978b] Georg Kerferd. What does the wise man know? 
In J.M. Rist, editor, The 
Stoics. U of California Press, Berkeley, 1978. 
[Kieffer, 1964] John Spangler Kieffer, editor. Galen's Institution Logica. Translation by John 
Spangler Kieffer. Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, 1964. 
[Kirk, 1962] G.S. Kirk, editor. Heraclitus: The Cosmic Fragments. Cambridge UP, Cambridge, 
1962. 
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962a] William Kneale and Martha Kneale. The Development of Logic. 
Clarendon, Oxford, 1962. Reprinted (with corrections, new as paperback)1988. 
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962b] William Kneale and Martha Kneale. The Development of Logic. 
Clarendon, Oxford, 1962. Reprinted (with corrections, new as paperback)1988. 
[Long and Sedley, 1990] A.A. Long and D.N. Sedley. The Hellenistic Philosophers. 1987. Cam- 
bridge UP, Cambridge, 1990. 2 volumes. 
[Long, 1971] A.A. Long. Language and thought in stoicism. In A.A. Long, editor, Problems in 
Stoicism, pages 75-113. Athlone, London, 1971. 
[Long, 1986] A.A. Long. Hellenistic Philosophy. U of California Press, Berkeley, 2nd edition, 
1986. 
[Lukasiewicz, 1967] Jan Lukasiewicz. On the history of the logic of propositions. In Storrs 
McCall, editor, Polish Logic: 1920-1939, pages 67-87. Oxford, 1967. 
[Mates, 1953] Benson Mates. Stoic Logic. U of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 
1953. 
[McCall, 1966] Storrs McCall. Connexive implication. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 31:415- 
33, 1966. 
[Mueller, 1978] Ian Mueller. An introduction to stoic logic. In J.M. Rist, editor, The Stoics, 
pages 1-26. U of California Press, Berkeley, 1978. 
[Nelson, 1930] Everett J. Nelson. Intensional relations. Mind, 39:440-53, 1930. 

522 
Robert R. O'Toole and Raymond E. Jennings 
[Reesor, 1954] Margaret E. Reesor. The stoic concept of quality. American Journal of Philology, 
75:40-58, 1954. 
[Reesor, 1989] Margaret E. Reesor. The Nature of Man in Early Stoic Philosophy. Duckworth, 
London, 1989. 
[Rist, 1969a] J.M. Rist. Categories and their uses. In J.M Rist, editor, Stoic Philosophy, pages 
152-72. Cambridge UP, 1969. Rpt. in Long 1971, 38-57. 
[Rist, 1969b] J.M. Rist. The criterion of truth. In J.M Rist, editor, Stoic Philosophy, pages 
133-51. Cambridge UP, 1969. 
[Rist, 1969c] J.M Rist. Stoic Philosophy. Cambridge UP, 1969. 
[Rist, 1978] J.M. Rist. Zeno and the origins of stoic logic. In Jacques Brunschwig, editor, Les 
Sto~'ciens et leur logique, pages 387-400. Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1978. 
[Sambursky, 1959] S. Sambursky. Physics of the Stoics. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 
1959. 
[Sandbach, 1971a] F.H. Sandbach. Ennoia and prol~psis. In A.A. Long, editor, Problems in 
Stoicism, pages 22-37. Athlone, London, 1971. First published in the Classical Quarterly 
volume 24, 1930. pp. 45-51. 
[Sandbach, 1971b] F.H. Sandbach. Phantasia katal~ptik~. In A.A. Long, editor, Problems in 
Stoicism, pages 9-21. Athlone, London, 1971. 
[Sandbach, 1975] F.H. Sandbach. The Stoics. Chatto and Windus, London, 1975. 
[Sandbach, 1985] F.H. Sandbach. Aristotle and the stoics. In Supplementary volume 10 of The 
Cambridge Philological Society. Cambridge UP, 1985. 
[Searle, 1969] John R. Searle. Speech Acts. Cambridge UP, Cambridge, 1969. 
[Sedley, 1977] David Sedley. Diodorus Cronus and hellenistic philosophy. In Proceedings of the 
Cambridge Philological Society, volume 23, pages 74-120, 1977. 
[Stopper, 1983] M.R. Stopper. Schizzi pirroniani. Phronesis, 28:265-97, 1983. 
[Watson, 1966] Gerard Watson. The Stoic Theory of Knowledge. Queen's U, Belfast, 1966. 
[White, 1985] Nicholas White. The role of physics in stoic ethics. In Spindel Conference1984: 
Recovering the Stoics, volume 23 of The Southern Journal of Philosophy. Dept. of Philosophy, 
Memphis State U, 1985. Supplementary volume. 
[White, 1986] Michael J. White. The fourth account of conditionals in Sextus Empiricus. History 
and Philosophy of Logic, 7:1-14, 1986. 
[Zeller, 1962] E. Zeller. The Stoics, Epicurean and Sceptics. Trans. Oswald J. Reichel. Russell 
and Russell, New York, revised edition, 1962. Translation of Die Philosophie der Griechen, 
vol. 3, 1879. 

ARABIC LOGIC 
Tony Street 
INTRODUCTORY COMMENTS 
This chapter limits itself to logical writings in the peripatetic tradition produced in Arabic 
between 750 and 1350. It is intended to provide a tentative framework for analysis of 
these logical works by describing aspects of the historical and intellectual context within 
which they were written. This is done by testing the model put forward in Rescher's 
Development of Arabic Logic against accounts of the syllogistic in a number of authors. 
By about 900, the Organon had been translated into Arabic, and was subject to in- 
tensive study. We have texts from that time which come in particular from the Baghdad 
school of philosophy, a school which at its best proceeded by close textual analysis of the 
Aristotelian corpus. The school's most famous logician was Alfarabi (d. 950), who wrote 
a number of introductory treatises on logic as well as commentaries on the books of the 
Organon. 
Within fifty years of Alfarabi's death, another logical tradition had crystallized, finding 
its most influential statement in the writings of Avicenna (d. 1037). Although Avicenna 
revered Alfarabi as a philosophical predecessor second only to Aristotle, his syllogistic 
system differed from Alfarabi's on two major structural points. It is in consequence rel- 
atively straightforward to assign subsequent logicians to one or other tradition. Avicenna 
differed from Alfarabi in his approach to the Aristotelian text, and assumed even less than 
Alfarabi had that it contained a straightforward exposition of a coherent system merely 
awaiting sympathetic interpretation to become clear. Due perhaps to the flexibility of the 
larger philosophical framework with which it was associated, a framework which proved 
adaptable to the needs of Islamic philosophical theology, Avicenna's logic came in time 
to be the dominant system against which later logicians set forward their own systems as 
alternatives or modifications. 
The success and rapid spread of Avicenna's philosophy and logic elicited a strong re- 
action from establishment theology, whose very intellectual vitality was perceived to be 
threatened. The clearest and most influential response to Avicenna was given about half a 
century after his death by Abfi- .H~mid al-CJaz~l~ (d. 1111). A case had been made at least 
as early as Alfarabi that logic could help Muslim scholars in juristic and theological rea- 
soning. Gaz~.l~ accepted these arguments and went so far as to preface his juridical summa, 
The distillation of the principles of jurisprudence, with a short treatise on logic. Logic 
continued to face pious opposition after CJaz~.lL but even scholars who were opposed to 
Greek philosophy in its various manifestations were agreed that, taken as a formal system, 
logic was unobjectionable. 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
@ 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

524 
Tony Street 
Logic after Gaz~.li was regularly studied by Muslim scholars for use in theology and 
jurisprudence. It also continued to be studied by Muslim scholars who were interested 
in the deeper formal and philosophical questions Avicenna had raised. Gaz5.1i extended 
the number of students of logic by inspiring people to study basic logic as a kind of exer- 
cise in critical thinking, but had no impact on the vitality or nature of the existing logical 
tradition. It would seem that the most interesting discussions in Arabic on logic were con- 
ducted from the late eleventh century on. Scholarly studies particularly in Spain carried 
on in the tradition of the Baghdad school, culminating in the work of Averroes (d. 1198). 
The Averroist project to make literal and globally consistent sense of the Aristotelian texts 
was an extension of the methods of the Baghdad school, even though Averroes saw many 
flaws in the work of his predecessors. Elsewhere, however, Aristotle had ceased to fig- 
ure as a major coordinate to which logicians referred in constructing their systems. This 
role was rather filled by Avicenna's system, which was modified, extended, and in part 
rejected. 
By 1350, it is clear that the Avicennan tradition predominated over the Farabian and 
Averroist traditions throughout the Islamic world, and the systematic problems in Avi- 
cenna's formal syllogistic were taken as being settled. By this time, texts were being 
produced which continued to figure in the syllabus of the madrasa down until recent 
times. For centuries after, advanced logical investigations continued in the Islamic world, 
but the madrasa texts were always the way that Muslim scholars had come to be able to 
conduct those investigations. 
A note on conventions 
All dates are given in common era, except occasionally in the bibliography. I have denied 
diacritical machinery to all names of dynasties and places, and also to the scholars I 
refer to by names that are either simplified, or derived from the medieval Latin tradition 
(among others, Alfarabi, Avicenna and Averroes). All other names are given on their first 
occurrence within a section in sufficient fullness to identify the scholar in question, and 
afterwards in a shortened form" so, for example, Fah_raddTn ar-Rg.zi becomes after first 
reference to him merely RfizL Due to the vagaries of my grasp of B iBTEX, all names are 
given in the bibliography without their final definite article. 
In the translations, I have tended to standardize the names of Muslim scholars. Book 
titles are given in translation in the text, and in Arabic in the bibliography. Many of the 
texts presented here in translation have been translated before. When I refer only to a 
translated version of the text, or to the translated version before the Arabic original, I 
have followed that translated version verbatim. When I refer to the Arabic original before 
the translated version of a text, I have relied on the translated version, but departed from 
it in some way, even if only slightly. At those times that I have emended an Arabic text as 
I have translated it, I mark the point that I have modified it with an asterisk. 
Two frequent intrusions in the chapter may prove annoying. The first is constant cross- 
referencing within the text--I hope this makes what is essentially a narrative somewhat 
more chapter-like. The second is the phrase 'at least on my reading' 
The phrase is 
intended to be disarming. A number of the texts used here are only in manuscript, or 

Arabic Logic 
525 
are part of a larger opus demanding extended treatment, and my interpretation of them is 
tentative. 
I have instituted one semi-technical convention. When I refer to a logician as 'Avi- 
cennan', I mean that he has put forward a system including the three elements I identify 
on page 553 below. By contrast, when I refer to a logician as 'post-Avicennan', I just 
mean that he lived after Avicenna had died. By this convention, all Avicennans are post- 
Avicennan, but the reverse is not the case. 
Two last points regarding conventions. Although I use 'Spain' to refer to what used 
to be called al-Andalus, I refer to the logicians working there as Andalusian. The Index 
gives occurrences of ancient and medieval logicians named in the chapter, and is intended 
to serve as a point of reference for a set of names which for the Anglophone can be fairly 
forgettable. Definite articles, even medial ones, are ignored in ordering index entries. 
1 LIMITS, METHODS AND SOURCES FOR THE CHAPTER 
In this chapter, I present a historical sketch of logical writing in Arabic. A number of 
works have dealt with the broad topic of Arabic logic in the recent past [Arnaldez, 1960-; 
Black, 1998" Gutas, 1993; Inati, 1996" Madkour, 19692; Rescher, 1963c" ?" Rescher, 
1967a], and though all have given at least a rapid historical outline of the subject, it seems 
to me still to invite more extended treatment. This is so above all because understanding 
the particular logical tradition within and against which a given logician writes determines 
absolutely our ability to go on to appreciate and assess the nature and quality of the work 
presented. When the output of a logician writing in Arabic seems incommensurable with 
the work of a contemporary logician writing in Latin, it is nearly always as a result of the 
different configurations of their respective logical traditions. In light of this, I have tried to 
pull the existing secondary literature together to make clear the delineation of logical tra- 
ditions in the Islamic world. This has led me in sections 2, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 4 to reparade 
material which appears as such (in more or less extended form) in earlier writers, whereas 
in sections 3.4, 3.5, 3.6 and 5, I deploy material in ways less frequently encountered. The 
upshot of all this is that I end up offering, with somewhat more detail of technical aspects 
and traditional affiliation, the account first given by Ibn-_Haldfin (translated at page 580 
below). In the remainder of this section, I try to justify the limits, methods and sources I 
have used in writing the chapter. 
Limits 
'Arabic logic' is in four respects imprecise as a title for this chapter. Firstly, 
because the logical works studied here consist of those written between 750 and 1350 (and 
I concentrate only on those written between 900 and 1300), many Arabic logical works are 
left to one side; these include a number of modern works contributing directly to the post- 
Fregean logical enterprise. Secondly, many of the scholars studied here were Muslim. 
They contributed to a tradition of writing which was made possible in the last analysis by 
the Islamic conquests, a tradition which was carried forward in both Arabic and Persian. 
In light of considerations like these, some would argue that a title like 'Islamic logic' 
would be more appropriate. Thirdly, although it is clear that Stoic logic filtered through 

526 
Tony Street 
to scholars working in Islamic law and theology, there is no tradition of translating Stoic 
works and commenting on them comparable with that devoted to Peripatetic works, and, 
except for brief mention at page 556 below, I have left them out of consideration. Lastly, 
for reasons I explain below in Sources, I confine myself to aspects of the syllogistic. A 
more precise though less attractive title for this chapter, given its restrictions, would be 
'Peripatetic logical writings in Arabic produced in the realms of Islam between 750 and 
1350, with special reference to the syllogistic.' 
The study of medieval Arabic logic is not yet in a state remotely comparable with the 
cognate study of medieval Western logic. The vast majority of the relevant texts are still 
in manuscript, and a fair number of those that are available in print have not been edited 
adequately. Important preliminary studies have been carried out, but the sum of these is 
still a long way short of desiderata set down as long ago as 1965 [Mahdi, 1965]. This 
state of affairs has two consequences for the writer of handbook entries. The first is that, 
at best, only a sketchy and often conjectural outline of the history of the subject can be 
given. The second consequence, more philosophically disappointing, is that although we 
can point to various aspects of Arabic logical writings that are of philosophical interest, 
we are not in a position to say that a given topic or set of topics as treated by logicians 
writing in Arabic is more interesting or original than others. 
Having noted the limits I have imposed on myself, or had imposed upon me by the 
state of the field and the reach of my competence, I should go on immediately to dispel the 
impression that I stop at 1350 because it is the end of original logical writing in Arabic, as 
it is sometimes said to be. I am perfectly prepared to entertain the possibility that logical 
production went through a radical decline in quality at this time. But it cannot simply be 
assumed to be the case because the preferred genre of logical composition came to be the 
commentary, or because (as one writer on Arabic logic put it): "Toute 6volution sociale 
monte et descend, progresse et tombe en d6cadence" [Madkour, 19692, page 240]. We 
simply have to read these texts. Sadly, I cannot claim to have done sommy knowledge of 
Arabic logical texts written after 1350 is even sketchier than my knowledge of the texts 
written before 1350. 
Still, plausible reasons can be given for stopping at 1350. By that time, it is clear 
that even in Spain, as well as in North Africa and Egypt, a system of logic which had 
descended from the Avicennan tradition had come to predominate. By that time, texts 
had been composed which continued to be commonly taught in the madrasa down until 
recent years. Further, by this time Qu.tbaddin ar-R~z~ at-Taht~ni (d. 1365) had written 
his book purporting to settle conflicts between two philosophical traditions in Persia and 
Transoxianamhis contribution has been claimed to mark the end of a significant period in 
the history of Arabic logic [Rescher, 1964, page 81]. Finally, 1350 is sufficiently recent 
to include Ibn-Taymiyya (d. 1328), a great and very quotable hater of logic. 
Aside from these limitations, this chapter is confined and configured by my own prej- 
udices. I think that disproportionate scholarly effort has gone to the study of the Baghdad 
school at the expense of post-Avicennan logic. In consequence, I have dwelt rather more 
on the logicians of Persia and Transoxiana in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries than 
most historians of Arabic logic do. I also say rather less about Averroes than most his- 
torians do. Western medievalists have tended to be more interested in the logicians and 

Arabic Logic 
527 
philosophers of the Islamic world who were translated into Latin, such as Averroes. While 
there is nothing wrong with studying Averroes and in recognising more fully the extent 
of his contribution to Western logic, there is a danger in presenting a distorted picture of 
the relative range, intensity and quality of logical studies throughout the Islamic world. 
There is simply no doubt that the time and place of major output was in the east, in Persia, 
Khurasan and Transoxiana, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries--it may well also be 
the time and place that most of the interesting insights and doctrines were formulated. 
Methods 
Although a number of attempts have been made in the past to sketch an outline 
of the history of Arabic logic, two in particular exemplify how widely approaches to 
the task have differed. The first approach assumes that logic is somehow separate from 
other philosophical doctrines, and is not fitted out to serve given metaphysical purposes. 
Madkour writes of the logicians writing in Arabic that 
I1 serait fastidieux de suivre ces logiciens dans leurs divers expos6s; d' ailleurs, 
il n'y aurait pas grand int6r~t ?~ mettre un tel projet ?~ execution; car si les 
philosophes musulmans different entre eux en ce qui concerne certains probl~mes 
physiques ou m6taphysiques, ils sont tous d' accord sur les grandes questions 
logiques. [Madkour, 19692, page 9] 
This means that it only remains to find a paradigm author to give the systematic outline 
of Arabic logical doctrine. Madkour would have preferred if that author could have been 
Alfarabi, but given the fragmentary nature of his surviving writings, it has to be Avicenna 
... qui repr6sente ?~ juste titre l'6cole arabe et offre une doctrine complete 
sur laquelle on peut se prononcer ais6ment. Ses 6crits, que nous avons en 
main, pr6sentent les diff6rentes mani~res dont les philosophes musulmans 
ont trait6 la logique aristot61icienne; ils en contiennent des abr6g6s trbs pr6cis 
et des commentaires assez 6tendus. Ibn Sinfi est surtout le philosophe de 
langue arabe, et sa logique est encore aujourd'hui enseign6e dans les 6coles 
musulmanes... [Madkour, 19692, pages 9-10] 
The alternative approach assumes that logical differences map precisely onto the dif- 
ferences among philosophical schools; to write a logical history of the realms of Islam, 
one need only write their more general philosophical history. Thus we find Rescher 
in [Rescher, 1964] tracing the filiations of the philosophical schools, and placing logicians 
and their writings onto the genealogy produced--the logicians inherit as proponents or 
opponents of their logic the same philosophers who promote or oppose their metaphysics. 
As I hope will become clear in the course of this chapter, Rescher's approach accounts 
far better than Madkour's for the logical texts produced by the various authors; in fact, 
I have adopted Rescher's model as a heuristic device to work with in writing this chap- 
ter. Three changes seem to me to be in order. Firstly, the notion of 'school' as a way 
of collecting groups of logicians is fine, so long as it is recognized that these 'schools', 
particularly later on, may have had no fixed point of convention, no set curriculum, and no 
doctrinal unanimity. They tend to be united only by pedagogical lineage, itself often ten- 
uous. The Baghdad school is closest to being a school in our usual sense of the word, but 

528 
Tony Street 
it is unclear that its teaching practice was common later on and further east. Secondly, the 
periodization of Rescher's study (800 to 900, 900 to 1000, and so on) does not even have 
the doubtful merit of following the temporal boundaries of ruling dynasties. Abbasid im- 
perial policy began the earliest sustained efforts to translate logical works [Gutas, 1998], 
but by the end of the second Abbasid century (950), it was debate about that translated 
logical problematic conducted among logicians writing in Baghdad and elsewhere that 
determined the further fortunes of logic in the Islamic world. I have tried to structure this 
chapter around moments of particularly intense logical activity in the realms of Islam. 
Thirdly, and mainly due to his conviction that divisions among logicians follow divi- 
sions among philosophical schools more broadly conceived, Rescher tended to write his 
history from biobibliographical accounts of Islamic philosophical history. I have supple- 
mented his account with different sources. I try mainly to use the references logicians 
made in their writings to other logicians. Post-Aristotelian logicians generally speaking 
are given to referring to other logicians, and the logicians writing in Arabic are no ex- 
ception. These references serve to modify aspects of Rescher's account. It has to be 
stressed, however, that the references I have gathered, taken together, are not sufficient to 
do anything more constructive than modify an existing account. But I believe that there 
are sufficiently many such references ultimately to produce a far sounder history than we 
have at present. 
Sources 
A few words are in order concerning the sources. Ideally, of course, one would 
give oneself up, like a corpse to the body-washers, to the vast body of logical treatises 
and their varying formulations of different logical doctrines, only regaining critical con- 
sciousness to note the past and contemporary logicians to whom they refer. As a paltry 
beginning to that ideal task, I have decided to examine aspects of the syllogistic. I have 
chosen the syllogistic due to the concentration of existing scholarship; I do not think that 
any other single area in Arabic logic has been studied through so wide a range of writers, 
or so successfully, from both a technical and a philological point of view. It may not be 
the most interesting of the achievements of the logicians writing in Arabic, but it is central 
to their systems, and each one of them treats it. 
When I talk about the concentration of scholarship on the syllogistic, I mean especially 
the editions we have of the earliest Arabic version of the logic [D~nigpa~fih, 1978], and 
the achieved translation of the Prior Analytics [Badawi, 1948/52]; the careful study of 
the Prior-Analytics complex, its technical terms, and the use made of the Prior Analyt- 
ics by Alfarabi [Lameer, 1994]; the translations of texts by Avicenna which exposit the 
central features of his theory of the syllogistic [Goichon, 1951; Inati, 1981]; the anal- 
ysis of Averroes' changing treatments of the modal syllogistic [Elamrani-Jamal, 1995], 
and the editions and studies of his major extant texts on the subject [Averroes, 1983a; 
Averroes, 1983b]; and the description of, and semantics for, the syllogistic system com- 
mon to most writers after the end of the thirteenth century due to Rescher and vander 
Nat [Rescher and vander Nat, 1974]. 
In testing and modifying Rescher's account, I have looked especially at the logicians 
who are writing at historically significant moments, moments when new directions are 
claimed to be either beginning or ending. For this reason, I have looked especially at Abfi- 

Arabic Logic 
529 
1-Barakfit al-Bagdfid~ (d. 1165), Fah_radd~n ar-R~.zi (d. 1210), Nas~raddin a.t-Tas~ (d. 1272), 
and Qu.tbaddin ar-Rfizi at-Taht~.ni (d. 1365). Throughout, I have written with an eye to 
explaining how the widely used treatise by Na~madd[n al-K~.tibi (d. 1276 or 1294), Logic 
for Samsaddrn [Kfitibi, 1854], came to acquire the form and content it has. This has 
helped to shape the narrative of this chapter and the way I read all the logicians consid- 
ered. Inevitably, people will object to a number of the sources I have not used (especially 
works by Alfarabi and Averroes), the writers I have neglected, and the range of logical 
disciplines in the tradition which I have ignored. For those who want to know in advance 
what is not treated in this chapter, section 6 provides a summary of its main points, and in- 
dicates some of the lines of research not broached here. I hope the bibliographical notes in 
the third appendix help direct people disappointed in this way to further relevant material 
or, at least, to lists of such material. 
2 
THE TRANSLATION OF THE ORGANON 
For more than two centuries throughout the period of the Graeco-Arabic translation move- 
ment the Organon was translated and revised numerous times by succeeding generations 
of scholars in accordance with their philosophical and philological needs. By the time a 
settled version had been achieved, a number of other commentaries by Greek writers of 
late antiquity had also been translated to help make sense of it. In this section of the chap- 
ter, the history of the translators and their cumulative efforts in rendering the Organon 
and related works into Arabic will be presented in four stages: the Syriac translations, 
the earliest Arabic translations, the translations produced by the translation circles headed 
by al-Kind~ and by H. unayn, and the later revisions. It must be stressed, however, that the 
process was not in fact a linear progression to a final and complete version of the Organon, 
but was much more fluid, being carried out by a number of translators with varying lev- 
els of technical skill and differing philosophical priorities. Some of the early translations 
found a permanent place among the writings Arabic logicians read as a matter of course 
in centuries to come, while other translations were subject to revision after revision. 
The Syriac translations 
A great many of the early translators of logical works were 
Christians belonging to one or other of the Syrian Churches. 
This is because these 
churches had for many centuries taught some logic from the Organon. That said, they 
taught even less than had been taught in the Alexandrian curricula of the sixth century, 
and limited themselves to the Categories, On Interpretation, and the assertoric syllogistic 
in the Prior Analytics (which is to say, to the end of the seventh book of the first part). 
The reason Alfarabi gave for their stopping at that point was this: 
The Christians stopped instruction in Rome, but it carried on in Alexandria, 
until the Christian king looked into it. The bishops gathered and took counsel 
on what part of philosophical instruction should be left, and what should be 
stopped; they came to the opinion that the logical texts up to the end of the 
assertoric figures should be taught, but not what comes after that. They came 
to this opinion because they thought that the later parts were injurious to 

530 
Tony Street 
Christianity, while the earlier parts that they permitted contained things that 
would help towards the promotion of their religion. So this amount remained 
in public instruction; the rest was looked into privately, until Islam came, a 
long time after... ([Ibn-Abi-Usaybi'a, 1882, page 135.8-14]; cf. [Lameer, 
1994, page xviii], and especially [Gutas, 1999, pages 163 & 164]) 
It has been suggested that it was the same reason behind the narrow compass of the old 
logic in the West [Pines, 1996]. Whatever the historical merits of this argument, it must be 
borne in mind that the Syriac tradition always had the early parts of the Prior Analytics, 
and that provided textual authority against the kind of speculation about conversion that 
a scholar like Abelard was free to pursue. The old logic of the Syriac churches had 
potentialities different from the old logic of the West. It is even more important to note 
that the story of the Christian interdiction on the study of modal logic and beyond bears 
the marks of polemical tensions that pre-date Alfarabi. Once these are cleared aside, we 
can discover that Syriac logic was a constriction on the Alexandrian logical curriculum; 
when logical studies were widened in Baghdad at the turn of the tenth century to cover 
the whole of the Organon, it was a major structural change indeed ([Gutas, 1999, page 
186]). 
By the sixth century, a decline in the knowledge of Greek among Syriac Christians 
meant that any part of the Organon and related logical writings that were to be studied 
had to be translated into Syriac. One of the greatest translators in the resulting translation 
movement was Sergius of Reg'ayna ('the Boethius of the Syriac tradition'; d. 536); he was 
followed by important commentators such as Severus Sebokht (d. c. 666) and Athanasius 
of Balad (d. 686) [Brock, 1993]. These men were among the first to attempt the difficult 
task of translating the Organon into a Semitic language. Subsequent translations of the 
Organon into Arabic almost always went by way of a prior Syriac translation. 
The earliest Arabic translations 
The early Caliphate and the Umayyads neither dis- 
couraged nor advanced logical studies in their newly conquered territories. But in 750, 
the Abbasid dynasty came to power, and by 756 had founded the empire's new capital, 
Baghdad. For various reasons, translation activity served to further Abbasid imperial pro- 
paganda and was therefore encouraged. The translation movement began by drawing on 
the living Syriac pedagogical tradition in philosophy and, to a lesser extent, the Sassanian 
tradition, but it soon came overwhelmingly to surpass both these traditions in terms of 
range and quality of the translations it produced and the energies it devoted to the teach- 
ing and study of those works. In fact, the translations created and met cultural needs 
in such a way that they came to be sustained alongside and ultimately without official 
Abbasid support [Gutas, 1998]. 
For all the importance of the Syriac Christians in the movement, it may well be that it 
was a Zoroastrian convert to Islam who produced the first work on logic written in Arabic. 
Ibn-al-Muqaffa', who was executed in 757 for political reasons, translated an epitome of 
the Categories, On Interpretation and the first part of the Prior Analytics, and prefaced 
the whole work with a short introduction on the value of philosophy and a brief treat- 
ment of the predicables [D~.nigpa~fih, 1978, pages 1-93]. Ibn-al-Muqaffa' was not the 

Arabic Logic 
531 
only scholar to translate this short textbook ([D~.ni~paZfih, 1978, page 93]" cf. [Lameer, 
1994, pages 11-12]), but we have no clear idea about who wrote the original. What- 
ever its origin, however, in covering the categories, ending with the assertoric syllogistic, 
but stretching to include some coverage of the Posterior Analytics, the work belongs to 
the pre-Syriac Alexandrian tradition ([Gutas, 1999, pages 184 & 185]). Soon after this 
textbook became available, a translation of the Topics was commissioned by the Caliph 
al-Mahdi (d. 785), and the commission was carried out by the Nestorian Patriarch Timo- 
thy I and Abfi-Nfi.h, a Christian secretary, working with a Syriac intermediary text [Gutas, 
1998, page 61 ]. The way the Topics was translated became typical. Among other schol- 
ars working at these early translations were Theophilus of Edessa (d. 785), who worked 
as the Caliph's court astrologer, and Theodore abfi-Qurra (d. 826), the Melkite Bishop 
of Harrg.n. The Christian tradition of which these scholars formed a part continued into 
the later period, and included H. unayn ibn-Is.h~q (d. 873), Ish. ~.q ibn- .Hunayn (d. 910), and 
Abfi-Bigr Mattfi (d. 940). /,From the ninth century on, many scholars in the Christian 
tradition had come to write in Arabic by preference, and not merely in fulfillment of a 
translation contract; such scholars include Ya.hy~. ibn-'Adi (d. 974) and 'Abdall~.h ibn-at- 
T. ayyib (d. 1043) [Brock, 1993, page 9]. 
The translation circles 
How the translators were employed is not entirely clear. A few, 
like Theophilus of Edessa, were employed directly by the Caliph. Most seem to have 
enjoyed the patronage of courtiers and wealthy patrons, or even just worked on projects 
by contract. They formed groups, perhaps only loosely affiliated. By around the 840s, 
the first famous circle of translators had formed around the celebrated 'philosopher of the 
Arabs', al-KindT (d. 873) and his student, as-Sarah_si (d. 899). Although Kindi and Sarah_si 
were Muslims, most of their colleagues were Christians. The circle seems to have been 
interested in texts we now associate with neoplatonism [Zimmermann, 1986], and one 
member of the group, Ibn-Nfi'ima (ft. c. 830), translated the Sophistical Fallacies as well 
as the Plotinian Theology of Aristotle. This did not exclude interest in Aristotle, of course, 
and Kindi himself wrote an outline of the Organon [KindL 1950; Rescher, 1963b]. 
Due to recent important work by Endress [END, ], we have a rich understanding of 
the activities and goals of the Kindi-circle. It was probably fairly loosely constituted, and 
the fact that Kindi revised a translation by Ibn-al-Bihriz (d. c. 860), the Bishop of Mo- 
sul (who also produced the earliest surviving compendium of logical terms [Dfinigpa~fih, 
1978, pages 97-126]), may not indicate that Ibn-al-Bihriz was actually part of the circle. 
In fact, Ibn-al-Bihriz enjoyed the patronage of the BuhtTgfi' family, one of the wealthy 
families supporting translation work, and we know that the Buh_t~gfi' family particularly 
supported the circle working around H. unayn ibn-Ish.fiq (d. 873). I-.I. unayn was a Nesto- 
rian Christian, and the most famous of the translators. The dates at which he and Kindi 
were working must have overlapped. He, his son Is.hfiq ibn- .Hunayn (d. 910), and his 
pupils translated nearly the whole of the Organon..Hunayn and his pupils drew on ear- 
lier Syriac translations when available, and on the Greek commentaries of late antiquity. 
.I-.Iunayn's primary interests were medical, and he held Galen in high regard; in conse- 
quence, he translated many of Galen's logical works along with the medical works, in- 
cluding the Institutio Logica, a treatise on the number of syllogisms, fragments dealing 

532 
Tony Street 
with On Interpretation, and fragments of On Demonstration [Bergstrfisser, 1925, pages 
47-48]. Galen may well have dominated logical studies in Baghdad for one or two gen- 
erations after .Hunayn, but a reaction ultimately set in, and neither Alfarabi and Avicenna 
acknowledged any debt to Galen's logical works ([Zimmermann, 1981, page lxxxi]; this 
does not mean that they did not share some of his ideas; see [Shehaby, 1973b, pages 5 & 
6] and [Lameer, 1994, pages 10, 47]). 
The period of revision 
The activities of the group of scholars who had worked around 
.Hunayn and his son carried on after Ish. aq's death, and merged seamlessly with the ac- 
tivities of a new group of scholars in Baghdad who worked with the texts more critically 
and philosophically. Claiming to represent the true pedagogical lineage of the Alexan- 
drian school, a certain Abfi-Ya.hya al-Marwazi taught the scholars who taught the great 
luminaries in the Baghdad school of the early tenth century: Abfi-Bi~r Matt~ ibn-Y~nus 
(d. 940), and Alfarabi (d. 950). 
Alfarabi claimed himself to be an Aristotelian and, in making this claim, he meant to 
be taken as a true Peripatetic, doing something rather more rigorous than his predecessors. 
This is not to say that Alfarabi did not take a great deal from the Syriac tradition. Among 
other things, the sources for the logic chapter of his Enumeration of the sciences are 
mediated through that tradition [Gutas, 1983, page 255 ft.]. But Alfarabi came to respone 
to two urges in his work as a logician. Firstly, as a Muslim, he felt a desire to explain the 
whole enterprise of logic in terms that exponents of the other Islamic disciplines would 
understand. Secondly, he became increasingly aware that the introductory Syriac treatises 
obstructed understanding of the original Aristotelian texts, and he wanted to rectify this. 
What matters for present purposes is the second of these pressures. Alfarabi began a 
critical examination of the Aristotelian texts, often setting aside the prevailing interpre- 
tation. This must have galled some of his colleagues, and they seem to have cited him 
less than one would expect given the quality of his work ([Zimmermann, 1981, page cxi 
& note 1]; but see also [Marmura, 1983, page 763b]). Later historians of philosophy 
referred to Alfarabi as a leading philosopher, a 'head of school', distinguished by his crit- 
ical attitude towards and interaction with the translated texts. His colleague Abfi-Bi~r, 
and one of his students, Ya.hy~ ibn-'Adi (d. 974), were similarly distinguished, as were 
Ya.hya ibn-'Adi's students, Ab~-Sulaym~n as-Si~ist~ni (d. c. 990), Ibn-Zur'a (d. 1008), 
and Ibn-Suw~r (d. 1017). 
With Ibn-Suw~r, we may say that the translation and refinement of the Organon was 
complete. It is his copy of the Organon, with extensive marginal and interlinear notes, 
which was copied as the manuscript now in the Biblioth~que Nationale (codex ar. 2346), 
and which serves as the basis of our contemporary edition ([Badawi, 1948/52]; cf. now 
[Jabre, 1999], which further uses MS Istanbul Ahmet III 3362). Ibn-Suw~r is a product 
of the Baghdad approach to the Organon, and his version of it bears elegant testimony to 
the intimacy of the connexion between translation and interpretation, philology and phi- 
losophy. For a long time, the interlinear notes and marginalia of codex ar. 2346 have been 
recognised as showing the growing philological acuity of the Baghdad school [Walzer, 
1962]; what they also show is a sophisticated philosophical reaction to the text as it was 
being received into Arabic ([Hugonnard-Roche, 1993]; but see also [Lameer, 1996]). 

Arabic Logic 
533 
We are fortunate to have from this time the catalogue of a Baghdad bookseller, Ibn-an- 
Nadim (d. 995), called simply The Index, completed in 987 ([Ibn-Nadim, 1871/72]; the 
logic chapters are translated in [Peters, 1968]). Ibn-an-Nadim knew Ibn-Suwfir personally, 
as well as other members of the school of which he was a part. The Index provides most 
of the information we have about the translators of the various parts of the Organon and 
of the various Greek commentaries on it that were also translated. Aside from the works 
of Galen, these Greek commentaries included works by Theophrastus, Porphyry, John 
Philoponus, Stephanus the Alexandrian, Ammonius, Themistius, Simplicius, Iamblichus, 
a mysterious Alinfis [Elamrani-Jamal, 1989-] and, perhaps most importantly, works by 
Alexander of Aphrodisias. /,From The Index one also gets a sense of the nature of the 
shared enterprise that produced Ibn-Suwfir's version of the Organon: draft translations, 
commentary, discussion, revised translations. Through this process, the translators also 
established a technical vocabulary with which to render the Organon [Afnan, 1964], it- 
self one of the great achievements of the translators. This technical vocabulary, and the 
translations in their various stages of refinement, enabled and were in turn enriched by 
vigorous philosophical debate. 
A note on the Arabic Prior Analytics 
Lastly, since this chapter focuses on the syllogis- 
tic, especially as presented in the first twenty-two books of the Prior Analytics, it is worth 
making a few specific comments about the translation of the Prior Analytics. The trans- 
lator was the mysterious Tad_firi, plausibly identified by Lameer as a certain Theodore, 
a Syriac Christian working with H. unayn's circle [Lameer, 1994, pages 3 & 4], though 
quite possibly working long before that time. Ta_dfiri was making his translation against 
a background in which the syllogistic was known at least superficially due to works like 
the text by Ibn-al-Muqaffa'. His translation was corrected by .Hunayn, and, somewhat 
strangely for the translations of the Organon, used as a basis for the Syriac translation by 
.Hunayn and Is.h~q [Ibn-Nadim, 1871/72]. The edition which we have [Badawi, 1948/52, 
vol. I, pages 103-306] is based on the Paris manuscript, and the parts directly relevant to 
this chapter are Prior Analytics 24a10--40b16 & 50 b [Badawi, 1948/52, pages 103-176 
& 217-218]. ([Jabre, 1999] came to my attention too late to be used for this chapter.) 
Some reflections on the notes that would have been available to Alfarabi, and his attitude 
to them, are given in Zimmermann [Zimmermann, 1981, pages lxxiv-lxxv]; the Prior- 
Analytics complex has been reconstructed as far as is possible by Lameer [Lameer, 1994, 
chapter one]. One general comment can be made: the Prior Analytics came with a mass 
of interpretative material, not of all of which was mutually compatible. 
3 
ALFARABI AND AVICENNA 
Alfarabi (d. 950) and Avicenna (d. 1037) are the two most important writers to consider 
in constructing a history of medieval Arabic logic. They constitute, with Aristotle, the 
three main reference points for later writers as they react against or conform with the 
philosophical options before them. Both Avicenna and Alfarabi came to the Baghdad 
translation of the Aristotelian corpus by way of the translated commentatorial material. 

534 
Tony Street 
As they worked, both sought to set themselves apart from the bulk of the Syriac Chris- 
tians who, numerically at least, had dominated philosophising in the Islamic world up to 
that point. In this, Avicenna was explicitly following Alfarabi as his venerated forebear. 
This is true even though Avicenna differed from Alfarabi at many points, especially in 
the logic. With Avicenna's awarding Alfarabi a pre-eminent place in the history of Aris- 
totelian philosophy, and with his reformulation of the Aristotelian system, we may say 
that a truly naturalized tradition of logic in the realms of Islam begins. 
We know hardly anything about Alfarabi. He was born somewhere in the East, perhaps 
in Transoxiana, perhaps around 870. He moved at some time to Baghdad, and it was 
probably there that he studied logic up to the end of the Posterior Analytics with Yuh. annfi 
ibn- .Hayl~.n. This took place some time within the reign of al-Muqtadir, which is to say 
between 908 and 932. Near the end of 942 he left Baghdad for Syria, and worked in 
Damascus and Aleppo. He visited Egypt towards the end of his life, then returned to 
Syria, and died in Damascus in 950 or 951 [Gutas, 1982-b]. Most of his surviving works 
are on logic, or deal with logic as a central theme. 
By contrast, we know quite a lot about Avicenna, and we can be confident that most 
of what we know is accurate. Born in Bukhara some time before 980 [Gutas, 1987-88], 
Avicenna spent the first twenty years of his life on philosophical studies, most of which 
he undertook without a teacher. Faced with political upheaval in his homeland, Avicenna 
travelled from one principality to another: from Bukhara to Khwarezm, after some years 
on to Jurjan, then to Rayy, to Hamadhan, and finally to Isfahan. In each of these places, he 
supported himself by his skills in medicine and administration. He died in 1037, leaving 
behind a huge corpus of works, many of which deal with logic. 
3.1 
Approaches to the Aristotelian tradition 
The ways Alfarabi and Avicenna approach the logic are determined by their attitudes to 
the broader Aristotelian tradition. Each of them wrote a short text designed to clarify his 
attitude to Aristotelianism. 
Alfarabi's approach 
Alfarabi is part of a movement in Baghdad which began around 
900 with his teacher Yuh. annfi ibn- .HaylS.n and his senior colleague, the Christian Ab0-Bi~r 
Matt~.. Alfarabi described his philosophical pedigree in a short tract, On the appearance 
of philosophy, in which he claimed his teachers and himself to be Aristotelians, alumni 
of the Alexandrian school, a school whose move to Baghdad he also traced in the tract. 
There are many difficulties in reaching a good understanding of the considerations that 
went into the composition of this tract (see now [Gutas, 1999]), but it is possible to state 
concisely what being an Aristotelian meant for Alfarabi's conception of his forebears. 
If, as would appear, the pillars of the Baghdadian renaissance were Alexan- 
der and Themistius, neither of whom had been connected with Alexandria, 
it makes sense to talk of a continuity of Alexandrian tradition only in al- 
Farabi's scheme of the history of philosophy according to which all Greek 
Aristotelians, on the strength of their spiritual connexion with the legendary 

Arabic Logic 
535 
school of Aristotle at Alexandria, would qualify as representatives of 'Alexan- 
drian' tradition. [Zimmermann, 1981, civ-cv] 
For present purposes~ the historicity of Alfarabi's On the appearance of philosophy is be- 
side the point; what matters is that Alfarabi was consciously trying to revive a true, textual 
Aristotelianism after a period of rupture [Hasnawi, 1985]. He was doing this, moreover, 
without making any mention of KindT and his circle, or of the sui generis Muhammad ibn- 
Zakariy~. ar-Rg.z~ [Gutas, 1999, page 155]IAlfarabi obviously considered these philoso- 
phers part of the problem. 
Another motivation behind many of Alfarabi's formulations was his consciousness of 
working in an Islamic community. At the time that Alfarabi was studying and teaching 
in Baghdad, the various Islamic disciplines were achieving their classical articulation. 
Alfarabi worked towards both making philosophy resemble the Islamic disciplines in its 
historical claims, and making its utility for and complementarity with those disciplines 
obvious [Gutas, 1982-a, page 219]. 
Avicenna's approach 
Avicenna was just as ardently Aristotelian as Alfarabi, but his 
Aristotelianism was constituted and implemented in different ways. It was constituted 
differently in that Avicenna's respect for Aristotle was not alloyed with a correspondingly 
high respect for Plato: "if the extent of Plato's achievements in Philosophy is what came 
down to us of him, then his wares were paltry indeed and philosophy in his time had not 
matured to the point of reaping" [Gutas, 1988, page 38]. Further, as has been mentioned, 
Avicenna had woven Alfarabi into his litany of great past philosophers, and reassigned 
lesser positions to some members of the Greek schools; on his work at one point in his 
later life, he wrote: 
... [I] am occupied with men like Alexander [of Aphrodisias], Themistius, 
John Philoponus, and their likes. As for Abfi-Nasr al-Fg.rfibL he ought to be 
very highly thought of, and not to be weighed in the same scale as the rest: 
he is all but the most excellent of our predecessors. ([Gutas, 1988, page 64]; 
cf. [BadawL 1948, page 122.2-4]) 
Avicenna's respect for Alfarabi was joined to an explicit contempt for the Syriac Chris- 
tian philosophers. One of Avicenna's students remembered in his memoirs that Avicenna 
condemned Ibn-Suwfir (whose version of the Organon is so important for modern schol- 
ars; see above page 532) and his colleagues, who, "because their field is so narrow, adhere 
more closely than others to the [traditional] transmissions of certain books." 
Upon my life, these people relax and are satisfied with whatever they imagine 
to be the case which is easily treated, dismissing logic absolutely. With regard 
to the matters of syllogisms, their dismissal is complete and they pay no 
attention whatever to themmand not only today, but they have been doing 
this for quite some time. As for the forms of syllogisms, specifically these 
people have disregarded them. Whenever they treated them, they strayed 
from the right path because they never acquired the habit of dealing with 
them and they never suffered the pains of analyzing the details of problems 

536 
Tony Street 
so that they may gain a syllogistic habit; their sole reliance, instead, is upon 
ideas not subject to rules. [Gutas, 1988, pages 68-69] 
It is in the implementation of his Aristotelianism, however, that Avicenna differed more 
significantly from Alfarabi. Whereas Alfarabi constructed the story of his philosophical 
education to tie himself to a school and its teaching tradition, Avicenna constructed the 
story of his education to sever himself from any teaching tradition at all. He designed 
his autobiography to present himself as an autodidact successful by virtue of intuition. 
Gutas has summed up the major effect that the doctrine of intuition which undergirds the 
autobiography has for Avicenna's reading of Aristotle. 
The perspective of the Autobiography, therefore, is that of a philosopher be- 
longing to no school tradition, who established truth on his own by means 
of his Intuition, equalling Aristotle in this regard, if not surpassing him, and 
whose independent Verification of the truth, which reproduces for the most 
part the philosophical sciences as classified originally by Aristotle, puts him 
in a position both to teach this more accurate version of the truth, and to judge 
the philosophical attainments of others. [Gutas, 1988, pages 197-198] 
The content of the doctrine of intuition need not concern us here--what matters is that 
its effect was to position Avicenna relative to the Aristotelian corpus differently from 
Alfarabi. When Avicenna collided with a crux in the text, he did not have to resort to 
exegetical strategies to find his way out. In fact, throughout The Cure it is clear that he 
believed he had worked out the unified vision that motivates Aristotle's presentation, and 
this allowed him to elide, transform and augment the system of the Prior Analytics. 
3.2 
Alfarabi and the logical treatise 
Alfarabi's attitude to Aristotle seems to have become clearer over time, and in conse- 
quence his position changes from one work to another. And Alfarabi had any number of 
opportunities to change his position: he wrote many works, nearly half of which seem 
to have been addressed principally to logic. In some places we find undigested stretches 
of logical doctrine which do not fit well with the rest of what he is doing [Zimmermann, 
1972]. Further, we find that from one logical treatise to the next, some terms are be- 
ing used more precisely, others are being discarded, and doctrines are being clarified as 
their relevance to each part of his project is established [Lameer, 1994, e.g pages 202, 
259-289]. Alfarabi writes in the tradition of the Alexandrian summary, as a Muslim in 
an Islamic society, and as an Aristotelian concerned to recover the true sense of Aris- 
totelian texts. Only the first two activities will be considered in this section--Alfarabi the 
Aristotelian commentator is considered in sections 3.4 and 3.5 below. 
The fact that Alfarabi's final views on logic only came to be delineated over time makes 
it difficult to describe his logic generally. Further, we have lost a number of his works, 
especially the long commentaries. Most significantly for the line of investigation I am 
following in this chapter, we have lost the first section of the Long Commentary on the 
Prior Analytics, although we can reconstruct enough of this work for present purposes 

Arabic Logic 
537 
from references in Avicenna and Averroes. We do have the long commentary to On 
Interpretation, and shorter commentaries on the other books of the Organon; and we 
have many works in which logic is a major or the major subject under discussion (for 
a short overview, see [Gutas, 1993, pages 47-50]; cf. [Lameer, 1996, page 97]). But 
these works were addressed to various audiences, and it is not always easy to say what 
the relative importance is of various doctrines, nor, because so many of the longer works 
are as yet unavailable, whether Alfarabi at the stage of his most mature reflections would 
have wanted to affirm any given doctrine. In short, we are not now, and probably never 
will be, able to describe Alfarabi's logic with confidence. Still, we can name a number of 
doctrines later logicians adopted from him. 
Logic and language 
Alfarabi presented his definition of logic by contrasting it with 
grammar. To hold that this is the best way to go about such a definition is an important 
philosophical claim, which Avicenna was later to reject; but it is also a political claim, 
finding a position for Greek logic within Islamic society. Grammar is not uncommonly 
contrasted with logic--it is implicitly contrasted with logic and rhetoric throughout the 
medieval Western tradition of the trivium--but events in Alfarabi's Baghdad had made 
such a contrast especially urgent. Alfarabi's senior colleague, Abfi-Bigr Matt~., had been 
ignominiously routed by a grammarian, Abfi-Sa'7d as-Sirfiff (d. 978), who doubted the 
scholarly viability of an independent subject like logic given that people had grammar (see 
below page 554). Subsequent treatments of logic tended to inherit from discussions like 
this an apologetic edge, trying to find a task for logic separate from but complementary 
with grammar. Alfarabi wrote in his Introductory epistle on logic: 
Our purpose is the investigation of the art of logic, the art which includes the 
things which lead the rational faculty towards right thinking, wherever there 
is the possibility of error, and which indicates all the safeguards against error, 
wherever a conclusion is to be drawn by the intellect. Its status in relation to 
the intellect is the status of the art of grammar in relation to language, and 
just as the science of grammar rectifies the language among the people for 
whose language the grammar has been made, so the science of logic rectifies 
the intellect, so that it intellects only what is right where there is a possibility 
of error. Thus the relation of the science of grammar to the language and the 
expressions is as the relation of the science of logic to the intellect and the 
intelligibles, and just as grammar is the touchstone of language where there is 
the possibility of an error of language in regard to the method of expression, 
so the science of logic is the touchstone of the intellect where there is the 
possibility of an error in regard to the intelligibles. [Dunlop, 1956, page 230 
(Arabic, page 225)] 
So grammar deals with the manipulation of expressions in a particular languages, whereas 
logic deals with the manipulation of meanings common to all peoples. Alfarabi's general 
point was accepted among his colleagues in Baghdad, though the extent to which the 
intelligibles can be compared to separate utterances was disputed, especially by Avicenna. 

538 
Tony Street 
The context theory 
In the Introductory epistle we also find Alfarabi presenting his logic 
according to what is known as the context theory, which he inherited from the Alexandrian 
tradition. Thus he took the Categories, On Interpretation, and the Prior Analytics to have 
general application across all stretches of discourse, and each of the following five books 
of the Organon to have only specific utility for a particular mode of discourse. (Although 
he did accept the Categories as a logical work, Alfarabi recognised the force of arguments 
that sought to classify it as metaphysical.) 
According to the context theory, syllogisms with premises of differing epistemic grades 
constitute distinct stretches of discourse, and may belong to demonstrative philosophy, 
dialectic, sophistry, rhetoric or poetry (cf. [Gutas, 1983, pages 256-257 and diagrams IV 
& V]). That is to say, syllogistic contributes to the analysis of every stretch of discourse. 
Syllogism is employed either in discoursing with another or in a man's bring- 
ing out something in his own mind... Philosophical discourse is called demon- 
strative. It seeks to teach and make clear the truth in the things which are such 
that they afford certain knowledge. Dialectical discourse seeks to overcome 
the interlocutor in the things which are known and notorious. Sophistic dis- 
course seeks to overcome the interlocutor by a supposed victory in the things 
which are thought ostensibly to be known, without being so. The aim is to 
draw the interlocutors and hearers into error, likewise falsification and trick- 
ery, and that the speaker should produce the opinion of himself that he is 
one who possesses wisdom and knowledge, without being so... Rhetorical 
discourse seeks to satisfy the hearer by what will partially content his soul, 
without reaching certainty. Poetical discourse seeks to represent the object 
and suggest it in speech, as the art of sculpture represents different kinds of 
animals and other objects by bodily labours. The relation of the art of poetry 
to the other syllogistic arts is as the relation of sculpture to the other practi- 
cal arts, and as the relation of chess-playing to the skilful conduct of armies. 
[Dunlop, 1956, page 231 (Arabic, page 226)] 
The context theory depends on a division of discourse according to the 'matter' which 
makes it up--divisions of this matter came to be disputed, and even Alfarabi seems to 
change his mind from one text to the next. However the material aspects of discourse 
were divided, each of the resulting divisions was related to one or other of the faculties 
of the soul, and can be explained fully only in tandem with a treatment of psychological 
and epistemological doctrines ([Black, 1990, chapters 4 & 6]; cf. [Lameer, 1993]). The 
extent to which the syllogistic contributed to the analysis of various stretches of discourse 
was also disputed, and Avicenna doubted that rhetoric or poetics could really be treated 
formally as syllogistic. The context theory and its permutations continued to be a factor 
in logic manuals at least until the seventeenth century, though not always dictating the 
same structure in each treatise. It also had consequences for how logic related to the 
Islamic disciplines, such as those devoted to the analysis of dispute, and to rhetoric" as the 
Islamic disciplines came to exert a stronger claim to these fields, their treatment within 
logical treatises became sketchier and sketchier (see Ibn-Haldfin's brief comments on this 
phenomenon, page 580 below). 

Arabic Logic 
539 
Syllogistic analysis of arguments 
In Alfarabi's works We find another feature which 
recurs in a great many Arabic logical texts: the attempt to show that all valid argument- 
forms relate in some way to the syllogism, an attempt first made by Aristotle. Like the 
claim that logic and grammar had different but complementary interests in language, the 
claim that the structure of the syllogism was important in understanding the structure 
of other arguments was directed at Muslim jurists and theologians. In this effort, the 
earliest relevant text Alfarabi wrote was The short treatise on reasoning in the way of the 
theologians 
... in which he interpreted the arguments of the theologians and the analogies 
(qiydsat) of the jurists as logical syllogisms in accordance with the doctrines 
of the ancients. ([Alfarabi, 1986b, page 68.11-12]; cf. [Sabra, 1965, page 
242a]) 
In this text, we find analyses of the paradigm, of the argument used by Muslim theolo- 
gians called 'reasoning from the seen to the unseen' (al-istidldl bi~-~ahid 'ald l-ga'ib), 
and of 'the juristic argument' (al-qiyds al-fiqhf) itself. Alfarabi takes the second kind of 
argument to reduce to the first, and offers an elaborate analysis of the third as involving 
a range of rhetorical argument techniques [Lameer, 1994, respectively, chapters 6, 7 & 
8]. This began a trend which did in fact issue in the acceptance of logic as useful by 
an important Muslim jurist, Abfi-H~.mid al-(3az~li (see below page 554 ft.). It also led 
subsequent writers of logic manuals to consecrate at least a part of their manuals to the 
reduction of argument-forms to the syllogism, a reflex carried over from this early time 
when Muslim scholars contested the place of logic in Islamic society. 
3.3 
Avicenna and the logical treatise 
At the latest, Avicenna came by his middle age to a settled view of the proper conception 
and formulation of logic. Like Alfarabi, a large proportion of his work was given over to 
logic (for a brief overview of his works and their genres, see [Gutas, 1993, pages 50-53]). 
Though we lack any of his early commentaries directly on the texts of Aristotle, we have 
all of The Cure, Avicenna's great philosophical opus. The first book of The Cure treats the 
subject-matter of Porphyry's Introduction, and each one of the next eight books covers the 
subject-matter of each of the parts of the Alexandrian arrangement of the Organon. We 
also have a number of shorter expositions, three of which I refer to in this chapter. Two 
of these shorter expositions, The Book of Salvation and Pointers and Reminders, present 
the system with all the sophistication we find in The Cure, while the third, in Philosophy 
for 'Ala'uddawla, presents a greatly simplified system. 
Avicenna's books became important as paradigms for subsequent writers. So, for ex- 
ample, we find Ab0-1-Barakfit al-Bagdfid/(d. 1165) consciously modeling his major philo- 
sophical work on The Cure. Most important of all Avicenna's works, however, is Pointers. 
Because of its difficult and allusive style, it became the subject of many commentaries-- 
these evolved in time into free-standing treatises which none the less preserved the order 
and emphases of Pointers. Many of the changes in the treatment of logic which Ibn- 
_Hald0n notes (see below page 580) are apparent already in Pointers. 

540 
Tony Street 
Rejection of Farabian doctrine 
In defining logic, Avicenna differed from Alfarabi. 
Avicenna agreed that logic was a normative instrument to protect man from going astray 
in thinking ([Avicenna, 19712, pages 117-127]; cf. [Gutas, 1988, page 281]). But he did 
not characterise logic in the way Alfarabi did. 
There is no merit in what some say, that the subject-matter of logic is spec- 
ulation concerning the expressions insofar as they signify meanings... And 
since the subject-matter of logic is not in fact distinguished by these things, 
and there is no way in which they are its subject-matter, [such people] are 
only babbling and showing themselves to be stupid. ([Black, 1991, page 54]; 
cf. [Avicenna, 1952, pages 23.5-6, 24.3-4]) 
One reason for this is that in Avicenna's psychology, language as a set of discrete expres- 
sions is not essential for the intellect in its operations; it is only accidentally the path that 
humans have to follow. 
... [I]f it were possible for logic to be learned through pure cogitation, so 
that meanings alone would be observed in it, then this would suffice. And it 
if were possible for the disputant to disclose what is in his soul through some 
other device, then he would dispense entirely with its expression. ([Black, 
1991, pages 54-55]; cf. [Avicenna, 1952, page 22.14-17]) 
In consequence, intelligibles are not able to be likened to expressions in a language, which 
must by their essence be uttered and grammatically ordered through time. 
Modifications to Alfarabi's doctrines 
Avicenna differed from Alfarabi in holding that 
logic does not deal with expressions in so far as they signify meanings. Rather, according 
to Avicenna, logic deals with meanings which classify meanings--logic does not deal 
with a proposition's subject in terms of the meaning it signifies, but as a subject-term. 
This is the famous doctrine that the subject-matter of logic is the second intentions (and 
here I quote the only doctrine of a medieval Arabic logician that is given in Kneale and 
Kneale [Kneale and Kneale, 1962, page 230]): 
As you have known, the object of logic is the second intentions (al-ma'gmral- 
ma 'q~la al-th~niya)--those that depend upon (tastanid iICt) the first intentions-- 
insofar as they may be of use in arriving at the unknown from the known, 
and not insofar as they are thoughts (ma'q~la) having an intellectual exis- 
tence that is not attached to matter at all or attached to non-corporeal matter. 
([Sabra, 1980, page 753]; translation modified slightly) 
In this way, Avicenna was able to define logic not only as a normative instrument, as noted 
above, but also as an independent science with its own subject-matter, namely, the second 
intentions. For all the strong language used in clearing Farabian teaching away to make 
space for this doctrine, it would appear that Avicenna is in fact developing ideas found in 
Alfarabi [Sabra, 1980, pages 755-756]. 
It is fairly easy to compare Avicenna with Alfarabi on some other points. In terms 
of traditional allegiances, Avicenna was much more forthright in dismissing the logical 

Arabic Logic 
541 
writings of the Syriac Christians than Alfarabi had been (see page 535 above). Avi- 
cenna echoed Alfarabi in questioning the propriety of placing the Categories within the 
Organon, and decided that it should only be treated within the other logical texts due to 
immemorial custom. But it is no help in understanding the syllogism" 
The student of logic, after learning what we have told him about regarding 
the simple terms, and learning the noun and the verb, can go on to learn 
propositions and their parts, and syllogisms, and definitions and their kinds, 
and the matters of syllogisms and the demonstrative and non-demonstrative 
terms and their genera and species, even if it does not occur to him that there 
are ten categories. ([Avicenna, 1959, page 5.1-4]" cf. [Gutas, 1988, page 
265]) 
It is worth noting that in this decision, and in his excision of the assertoric syllogistic (see 
below page 548), Avicenna was cutting out of his logic the two things to which the Syriac 
Christians devoted most of their efforts. 
On the other hand, like the Syriac Christians, and like Alfarabi, Avicenna at the begin- 
ning of his career accepted the context theory, though he dispensed with it later on ([Gutas, 
1988, page 18, note 6]). In Pointers, however, he placed the major consideration of the 
material aspects of discourse, and its consequences for dividing kinds of discourse, at the 
end of his treatment of propositions [Avicenna, 19712, pages 341-364]. This became the 
standard place and way to treat the context theory in short treatises thereafter. 
Avicenna's elimination of the categories from his logic texts, and the method by which 
he dealt with the context theory, were both influential. But perhaps most important for the 
structuring of logical treatises after him was a distinction he found in Alfarabi and used 
in his own writings" the distinction between tasawwur and tasdTq. This is a distinction 
dividing knowledge into 'conceptions' and 'judgements to which one assents'. Alfarabi 
mentioned the distinction in his treatment of demonstration, writing that knowledge "is 
of two kinds, conception and assent" [Alfarabi, 1986a, page 19.5], and later implicitly 
assigning the logical operations of definition and syllogism to the attainment of, respec- 
tively, conception and assent [Alfarabi, 1986a, page 45.1]. In all of Avicenna's writings, 
by contrast, the distinction is made at the very outset. Among conceptions are for example 
'house' and 'man', and so forth. Among judgements to which one assents are included 
for example the judgement that a house is where people dwell, and that man is a ratio- 
nal animal. Indeed, all knowledge is either conception or assent. All investigations are 
directed 
either to a conception to be acquired, or to an assent to be acquired. It is 
customary to call the thing which leads to the desired conception an explana- 
tory phrase, which includes definition and description and the like; and the 
thing which leads to the desired assent a proof, which includes syllogism and 
induction. [Avicenna, 19712, pages 136-137] 
Logic then is concerned to prevent one going astray in thinking about conceptions and 
assent; that is, it provides a theory of definition, and a theory of proof [Sabra, 1980, page 
7611. 

542 
Tony Street 
Finally, like Alfarabi, Avicenna agreed that the argument-forms used in law and theol- 
ogy were best analysed by reference to the syllogism ([Avicenna, 19712, pages 365-373]; 
see also [Avicenna, 1971, pages 38-40]). But unlike Alfarabi, apologetics for logic rela- 
tive to the Islamic disciplines are not central to what he wrote. 
Points for comparison 
There are problems in making further comparisons between 
Avicenna and Alfarabi. Alfarabi modified his logical doctrines throughout his life, Avi- 
cenna by and large did not; many texts of Alfarabi are missing, whereas we have the whole 
of the Avicennan system (even if we haven't yet worked through it); Alfarabi wrote both 
commentaries on Aristotle and apologetics for logic to propitiate the lawyers, Avicenna 
wrote neither (at least in later life). 
A comparison, then, is difficult. Luckily for the narrow confines of this chapter, how- 
ever, Avicenna directed comments to the Farabian system, presumably as developed in 
the lost Long commentary on the Prior Analytics, while he was dealing with important 
points in his own syllogistic. Modern scholars have tended to overlook these comments 
because Avicenna referred to Alfarabi as 'the eminent later scholar' (al-fgt.dil min al- 
muta'a_h_hirrn), and many have thought that by this he meant Alexander of Aphrodisias 
(see for example [Mar6th, 1989, page 7]). The eminent later scholar is, however, Alfarabi 
(see [D~.ni~pa~.fih, 1989, vol. 3, Dib~.~a 14]; cf. [Averroes, 1983b, page 101.3-5], and 
most recently [Street, 2001 ]). Avicenna referred to Alfarabi while developing his modal 
logic, and at one point in developing his hypothetical syllogistic. Because Avicenna dic- 
tated by his changes what were to be the fundamental questions for later logicians, these 
are the major points of discussion by Averroes, and so we find the later tradition effec- 
tively evaluating the earlier traditions with reference to this material. 
Four of Avicenna's references to Alfarabi are particularly helpful for comparing the 
systems the two men built. The first point of comparison is made somewhat complex 
by the fact that the two men meant different things by 'absolute proposition' (qa.diyya 
mutlaqa)--I return to this below (see page 547)--and Alfarabi argued that an abso- 
lute e-proposition converts as an absolute e-proposition, whereas Avicenna argued that 
e-conversion fails for the absolute. This is symptomatic of more fundamental and far- 
reaching differences in how the two men went about laying the foundations for their modal 
systems. The second reference is to the fact that Alfarabi accepted Barbara LXL (as did 
Avicenna). This raises a problem of consistency for Alfarabi relative to the stratagem he 
adopted to save the conversion of the two-sided possible proposition--this is the third 
important reference to Alfarabi. Lastly, Avicenna rejected an ascription to Alfarabi of a 
long text on the hypothetical syllogistic; this reference allows us to put to rest claims of a 
missing long treatment by Alfarabi of the hypothetical syllogistic. 
Broadly speaking, then, this provides material for a comparison of how the two men 
take the modal syllogistic, and how they take the hypothetical syllogistic. I deal with the 
hypothetical syllogistic first. 

Arabic Logic 
543 
3.4 
The hypothetical syllogistic 
I stress at the outset that I do not intend to analyse the hypothetical syllogistic. Alfarabi 
probably never treated it in enough detail to ground such an analysis, and the differences 
between Avicenna and Averroes touch on deep issues which I do not properly understand. 
I will only be using debate about the hypothetical syllogistic as one index for the traditions 
to which Avicenna and Alfarabi belonged, and for the way later logicians worked within 
their respective traditions. 
I use 'hypothetical syllogistic' loosely here, as a term sufficiently broad to cover the 
two quite different approaches of Avicenna and Alfarabi. In translating Alfarabi's qiyds 
~artf as 'hypothetical syllogistic', I am prescinding from the debate about better possible 
translations (raised because it does not extend to cover as many inferences in Alfarabi's 
usage as 'hypothetical syllogistic' does in Alexander's usage, but rather seems limited 
like Galen's" see [Lameer, 1994, pages 45-46]). Again, in the case of Avicenna, there 
is no technical phrase that corresponds directly with 'hypothetical syllogistic'wsome of 
his iqtiraniyydt and all of his istit_na'iyydt together would constitute what I mean here by 
hypothetical syllogistic (for Avicenna's technical terms, see below page 546; for aspects 
of the usage of istit_nd', see [Gyekye, 1972]). I use hypothetical syllogistic in the same 
way Barnes does: 
A hypothetical syllogism is an argument at least one of whose premisses is a 
hypothetical proposition. A proposition is hypothetical if it is a compound of 
at least two propositions... 
Hypothetical syllogistic contrasts with categorical syllogistic, for a syllogism 
is categorical if all its component propositions are "simple," i.e., if none is 
compounded of two or more propositions. [Barnes, 1985, page 129] 
Alfarabi on the hypothetical syllogistic 
Alfarabi made the following remark regarding 
the hypothetical syllogistic in his Long Commentary on On Interpretation: 
He (Aristotle) examines the composition of hypothetical (statements) not at 
all in this book, and only slightly in the Prior Analytics. The Stoics, on the 
other hand, Chrysippus and others, examined it thoroughly to the point of 
excess, made a thorough study of hypothetical syllogisms--as Theophras- 
tus and Eudemus had done after Aristotle's time--and claimed that Aristotle 
wrote books on hypothetical syllogisms. But we have no knowledge of any 
separate treatment by him (Aristotle) of hypothetical syllogisms in his books 
on logic; this (claim) is found rather in the commentaries of the commenta- 
tors who give an account of them (hypothetical syllogisms) on the authority 
of Theophrastus only. [Fortenbaugh and others, 1992, page 239] 
Similarly, Alexander of Aphrodisias had said in his own short comments on the hypothet- 
ical syllogistic that "no book of his (Aristotle) on the subject is in circulation. Theophras- 
tus, however, refers to them in his own AnalyticsMand so do Eudemus and some others 
of Aristotle's associates" ([Barnes, 1985, page 125]; cf. [Shehaby, 1973b, page 24, note 

544 
Tony Street 
11]). In short, Alfarabi belonged to a tradition which was unacquainted with the exis- 
tence of a separate, genuinely Aristotelian treatise on the hypothetical syllogistic, and 
which seemed reluctant positively to postulate the existence of such a treatise. 
We can also say something concrete about Alfarabi's own hypothetical syllogistic. A1- 
farabi presented in his treatises (and here I take The short treatise on reasoning in the way 
of the theologians as an example) a definition of the syllogism: 
A syllogism is a phrase, composed of propositions laid down from which, if 
so composed, some other thing follows of necessity by virtue of these very 
things themselves, and not accidentally. And whatever comes to be known 
through a syllogism is called a 'conclusion' or 'what follows'... 
The least from which a syllogism may be composed is two propositions shar- 
ing in a single part; and syllogisms may be composed from hypothetical or 
categorical propositions. ([Alfarabi, 1958, page 250.12-apu]; cf. [Lameer, 
1994, pages 16-17]) 
Alfarabi delivered as his hypothetical syllogistic the five Stoic indemonstrable inference 
schemata ([Alfarabi, 1958, pages 257.6-260.10]; cf. [Lameer, 1994, page 45]), and did 
not take it to contribute to the analysis of the deduction involving a contradiction ([A1- 
farabi, 1958, pages 260.11-261.7]; cf. [Lameer, 1994, pages 50-54]). 
It has been speculated that Alfarabi's lost first part of the Long Commentary on the 
Prior Analytics covered the hypothetical syllogistic in considerably more detail [Mar6th, 
1989], but it is unlikely that it did. Avicenna almost certainly had read that commentary, 
yet we find in The Cure that 
... we came across a book on conditional (propositions and syllogisms) at- 
tributed to the most excellent among later (scholars). It seems to be wrongly 
imputed to him. It is neither clear nor reliable. It neither gives an extensive 
survey of the subject nor does it achieve its purpose. It gives a mistaken ex- 
position of conditional propositions, of a large number of syllogisms which 
accompany them, of the reasons for productivity and sterility, and of the num- 
ber of moods in the figures. The student should not pay any attention to itmit 
is distracting and misleading. ([Shehaby, 1973b, page 159]; cf. [Avicenna, 
1964, page 356.10-15]) 
On coming across an alternative treatment of the hypothetical syllogistic, Avicenna thought 
it was not Alfarabi's, but he did not know. If Alfarabi had treated the hypothetical syl- 
logistic at any length in his Long Commentary, Avicenna would have known for sure 
whether or not the attribution of the book to Alfarabi was correct. Later, Averroes would 
have referred to Alfarabi's longer treatment of the hypothetical syllogistic when treating 
the problem in one of his essays (see below page 565). Avicenna did not know for sure, 
Averroes did not refer to the longer treatment. We have already the main burden of what 
Alfarabi wanted to present about the hypothetical syllogistic in developing his syllogistic. 
Avicenna on the hypothetical syllogistic 
Alfarabi did not think Aristotle had written a 
separate treatise on the hypothetical syllogistic, and he did not think that the hypothetical 

Arabic Logic 
545 
syllogistic merited extensive treatment. But he was aware of another, divergent tradition 
on this point. Against Alfarabi's comments in On Interpretation we must compare Avi- 
cenna's comments in The Book of the Syllogism from The Cure, on the proof by reduction 
and its proper analysis. 
The only thing invoking this pointless exertion from people is the fact that 
they have lost the work that Aristotle wrote detailing the hypothetical syllo- 
gistic. ([Avicenna, 1964, page 397.4-5]; cf. [Shehaby, 1973b, page 190]) 
Avicenna, that is to say, was part of the tradition which claimed extensive treatment of the 
hypothetical syllogistic by Aristotle, a tradition known to Alfarabi when he was writing 
his long commentary on On Interpretation. 
This point makes a radical difference to how the two men write their treatises on logic. 
Avicenna devoted substantial portions of The Cure to the hypothetical syllogistic (trans- 
lated in [Shehaby, 1973b]). He was clear that he got his treatment from elsewhere. 
In our native country we came to know a long annotated book on this subject 
which we have not seen since we left our country and travelled around to 
look for a means of living. However, it might still be there. ([Avicenna, 
1964, page 356.7-]; cf. [Shehaby, 1973b, page 159]) 
Two observations should be made at this point. Firstly, Avicenna did not create differences 
from the Farabian system, but followed existing ones. Secondly, he was concerned to 
modify the syllogistic so he could accommodate the doctrine of this non-Aristotelian text. 
Avicenna on proof by reduction 
To repeat: there are many important aspects of Avi- 
cenna's doctrines on hypothetical propositions and hypothetical syllogistic which cannot 
be considered in this chapter. Here are three, which I mention because Averroes com- 
mented on them (see below page 566 f.). Firstly, Avicenna wrote at one point 
All conditional and disjunctive propositions, and in particular the conditional 
in which the antecedent and the consequent share one part, can be reduced 
to categorical propositions--as when you say, for example, "If a straight line 
falling on two straight lines makes the angles on the same side such and 
such, the two straight lines are parallel." This is equivalent in force to the 
categorical proposition: "Every two straight lines on which another straight 
line falls in a certain way are parallel." ([Avicenna, 1964, page 256.11-15]; 
cf. [Shehaby, 1973b, page 55]) 
though his full doctrine on this matter is nuanced and complicated (see e.g. [Avicenna, 
1964, page 264 f.]; cf. [Shehaby, 1973b, page 62]). Secondly, Avicenna held that a syllo- 
gism which conveyed new knowledge had to depend in the final analysis on a categorical 
syllogism, which is therefore in this sense primary [Avicenna, 1964, page 415 f.]. Thirdly, 
Avicenna's analysis of hypothetical syllogisms and categorical syllogisms includes claims 
about the epistemic immediacy of the inferences [Avicenna, 1964, page 416.12 ff.]. All 
these points deserve careful study, which they do not receive in this chapter. 

546 
Tony Street 
What I do examine (and it has been examined before in [Shehaby, 1973b, page 277 f.]) 
is the way Avicenna accommodated the hypothetical syllogistic so that it goes to his analy- 
sis of proof by reduction. I present very briefly Avicenna's placement of the hypothetical 
syllogistic and its use in explaining the way Baroco is proved. I do so because it ex- 
emplifies how seamlessly Avicenna fitted extra-Aristotelian doctrine into his syllogistic. 
To do this, I turn from Avicenna's long exposition of the hypothetical syllogistic in The 
Cure to the more managable exposition in Pointers [Avicenna, 19712; Goichon, 1951; 
Inati, 1981 ], which is limited in its presentation to just those three parts of the hypotheti- 
cal syllogistic actually used in the explanation of Baroco [Tfis~, 1971, page 441 ]. 
As first studied in [Rescher, 1963d], Avicenna's hypothetical propositions are quanti- 
fied. Always: when A is B, then D is H is an a-conditional; sometimes: when A is B, then 
D is H is an i-conditional; never: when A is B, then D is H is an e-conditional; and some- 
times not: when A is B, then D is H is an o-conditional. They and categorical propositions 
contribute to inferences, which Avicenna divided into conjunctive (iqtir~m-) and exceptive 
(isti_tn~'t-). This division is one of the points in his logic where he claimed for himself the 
doctrine put forward: 
According to what we ourselves have verified, syllogistic divides into two, 
conjunctive (iqtirdnt-) and exceptive (isti_tn~t'D. The conjunctive is that in 
which there occurs no explicit statement [in the premises] of the contradic- 
tory or affirmation of the proposition in which we have the conclusion; rather, 
the conclusion is only there in potentiality, as in the example we have given. 
As for the exceptive, it is that in which [the conclusion or its contradictory] 
occurs explicitly [in the premises]. [Avicenna, 19712, page 374] 
Avicenna built his wholly hypothetical conjunctive syllogistic from quantified condition- 
als: 
From the conditionals may be composed the three figures, just like the figures 
of the categorical--they share in a consequent or an antecedent, and differ in 
a consequent or an antecedent, just as the categoricals share in a subject or 
a predicate, and differ in a subject or a predicate. The status [of one] is the 
status [of the other]. [Avicenna, 19712, pages 435-436] 
An example of such a syllogism would be (Barbara): 
Always: when A is B then J is D, and 
Always: when J is D then H is Z, which produces 
Always: when A is B then H is Z 
There are also a number of rules, including ecthesis, which deliver fourteen moods in the 
wholly hypothetical syllogistic ([Avicenna, 1964, pages 295-304]; cf. [Shehaby, 1973b, 
pages 91-99]). 
Avicenna then considered the conditional premise conjoined with a categorical: 
The conditional may be joined with a categorical. The most natural of these 
[conjunctions] is when the categorical shares the consequent of the affirma- 
tive conditional, in one of the ways categoricals share [a term with each 

Arabic Logic 
547 
other]. Then the conclusion will be a conditional whose antecedent will be 
the very antecedent [of the first conditional], and whose consequent will be 
the conclusion of the composition of the consequent conjoined with the cat- 
egorical. An example is: If A is B then every J is D, and Every D is H* it 
follows that lfA is B, then every J is H. It is up to you to enumerate the rest of 
the divisions from what you have learned. [Avicenna, 19712, pages 440-441 ] 
Lastly, in a separate section, Avicenna listed the exceptive hypothetical syllogisms, which 
include modus ponendo ponens, modus tollendo ponens, modus tollendo tollens, and 
modus ponendo tollens [Avicenna, 19712, pages 448-452]. 
With this material, we may follow how Avicenna analyses Baroco [Avicenna, 19712, 
page 453 f.]. In schematized form: 
To prove: Given all Bs are Ds and some Js are not Ds, then some Js are not 
Bs. 
1. Conjunctive: 
When it is not the case that some Js are not Bs, then all Js are Bs. And all Bs 
are Ds. 
Therefore: when it is not the case that some Js are not Bs, then all Js are Ds. 
2. Exceptive: 
When it is not the case that some Js are not Bs, then all Js are Ds. 
But it is not the case that all Js are Ds. 
Therefore: It is not not the case that some Js are not Bs. 
I would think that this could be extended programmatically to cover all proofs by re- 
duction, although Avicenna did not himself do so. In any event, Avicenna's analysis failed 
to impress the majority of logicians who followed him. The analysis allows us to observe 
attitudes to Avicennan logic in the later tradition, however, as will become apparent (see 
page 576 below). It is also significant, as noted above, because it shows just how Avicenna 
fitted a non-Aristotelian tradition into his treatment of the categorical syllogistic. 
3.5 
Avicenna 
on Alfarabi on the modal logic 
Avicenna and the tradition to which he belonged had a very different approach to the 
hypothetical syllogistic from the one that Alfarabi and the Baghdad school had. There is 
an even larger difference in the treatment of the categorical syllogistic, both as it is made 
up of unmodalized and modalized propositions. 
Differences concerning the absolute 
Basic to the many differences between Avicenna 
and Alfarabi in treating the modal logic is their difference regarding the absolute propo- 
sition (al-qa.diyya al-mut, laqa), the 'existential' proposition (al-qa.diyya al-wu~,~diyya), 
and their truth-conditions. Why these terms came to be used the way they were need not 
concern us here (but see [Lameer, 1994, page 55 ft.], whence I draw the information in 
this paragraph). In any event, mut.laqa was used in the mid-800s to render Aristotle's tou 
hyparchein protasis as well as in connexion with the synonymous hyparchousa protasis, 

548 
Tony Street 
whereas wugadiyya seems to have been preferred later (about 900) to render hyparchousa. 
Lameer's results not only make clear the importance that the lexical preferences of the 
translators have for coming to grips with the technical terms of the Arabic philosophical 
tradition; they also make clear the fact that Alfarabi's usage of both al-qa.diyya al-mutlaqa 
and al-qa.diyya al-wu~f~diyya may be translated as 'assertoric proposition'; and, finally, 
that Alfarabi begins his logical work by constructing an assertoric syllogistic [Lameer, 
1994, chapter four]. 
By contrast, Avicenna did not put forward an assertoric syllogistic and then modal- 
ize it. Propositions 10 and 24 in appendix two serve roughly to show how Avicenna 
took the absolute (al-qa.diyya al-mutlaqa) and the 'existential' proposition (al-qa.diyya 
al-wugadiyya; henceforth referred to as the special absolute), in that their contradictories 
are perpetuals or disjunctions of perpetuals (proposition 5 in appendix two). It is easy to 
understand the way Avicenna understood the absolute proposition--his favourite example 
of it is all men sleep. That is to say, an absolute a-proposition is taken as concealing an 'at 
least once'; all Frenchmen drink wine is not naturally taken to mean that they drink wine 
constantly, but at least once in their lives. The unmodalised e-proposition by contrast 
can be taken to convey perpetuity: no teetotaller drinks wine means that no teetotaller 
ever drinks wine. Avicenna took the customary understanding of an e-proposition to be 
perpetual, but stipulated that for logical purposes, it was to be taken as concealing the 
same temporality as the a-proposition. The squares generated by the absolute and the per- 
petual are isomorphic with the squares generated by one-sided and two-sided possibility 
taken with the necessary proposition (respectively, propositions 13, 26 and 1 in appendix 
two), which are sometimes referred to as the classical squares of modal opposition [Thom, 
1996, pages 13 & 15]. 
Further, Avicenna rejected the conversion of the absolute e-proposition. Whereas con- 
tradiction for his simple propositions (_dgtff; see below 550) depends on the modality or 
temporality of the predicate, conversion depends further on the modality of the subject- 
term. This is where we have the opportunity directly to compare what he was doing with 
what Alfarabi was doing. Avicenna rejected the conversion by citing the counterexample, 
no man is laughing. The only way to have the conversion go through according to him is 
to take all men at the time or times that they are not laughing. One way then is to have 
at time t: no men are laughing, which would convert as at time t: no laughing thing is 
a man. Avicenna rejected this as a solution, because the men of a given time are not all 
men, as should be the case in a proposition ready for logical treatment. (See further on 
the conditions under which a proposition may be read at page 550 below.) 
Proofs for e-conversion did not impress Avicenna. He had seen Alexander's proof for 
e-conversion as given in On the conversion of propositions, which runs as follows: 
It may also be possible to prove conversion of the e-proposition by reduction 
to the absurd. So if A belongs to no B, and B belongs to some A, these 
combine by Ferio to mean that some A does not belong to A.* Since this is 
impossible, its contradictory is necessary, which is that B belongs to no A. 
[Alexander, 1971, page 65.6-9] 

Arabic Logic 
549 
Whether Avicenna thought Alexander was entitled to the proof is unclear, but Alfarabi 
had adopted the proof, and Avicenna held it to be inconsistent with other doctrines he 
held. 
He who is eminent among the later scholars made this claim [for e-conversion] 
with a good argument: [no Js are Bs converts to no Bs are Js,] if not, then 
some Bs are Js; but no Js are Bs. This is a perfect syllogism [Ferio], self- 
evidently productive. It is only made known afterwards by way of reminding 
us, not to convey knowledge of which we are ignorant. From the above it fol- 
lows that some Bs are not Bs--this is absurd. [Avicenna, 1964, page 81.1-4] 
The reason Alfarabi could not use, for example, the stratagem of the as-of-now proposi- 
tion to escape the counterexample was because he, like Avicenna, held that the subject- 
term in a proposition ready for logical treatment could not be limited to those things that 
fall under it at a given time (see next section, and also page 562 below). 
On the other hand, if the subject is taken in the way chosen by the eminent 
later scholar, such that J is whatever can be J, so that everything that can be 
J, even if it exists or not or it is not the case that it is J, enters under it. Let 
what follows from this be investigated... [Avicenna, 1964, page 85.5-7] 
Differences concerning the modal logic 
Alfarabi's ampliation of the subject-term got 
him all the inferences in Aristotle, though often, as was pointed out later by Averroes, 
with such obviousness that the proofs put forward by Aristotle become pointless (see page 
562 below). One inference it gave Alfarabi was Barbara LXL, against the well-known 
Theophrastean objection. 
Know that the eminent scholar with whom I am most concerned to conduct 
my discussion agrees with what I say; indeed, the First Teacher believes that 
if the necessary major in the first figure is joined to a non-necessary minor, 
the conclusion is necessary. Let us assume all Js are Bs non-necessarily, and 
all Bs are As necessarily, and it yields what the eminent scholar and the First 
Teacher both agree on, and what you have learned. [Avicenna, 1964, page 
148.9-12] 
Once again, however, Alfarabi is accused by Avicenna of holding incompatible doc- 
trines. Straight after noting that Alfarabi accepts Barbara LXL, Avicenna goes on: 
But why doesn't one of them go on to say that this is not a necessary propo- 
sition, but rather must be: all Bs are As necessarily in so far as they are Bs... 
If this is taken into account, then what the detractors say against those who 
produce a necessary from these premises turns out to be true. That is because 
what the detractor is saying in this matter is like what the eminent scholar had 
to say about the conversion of the possible proposition... [Avicenna, 1964, 
page 148.13-pu] 

550 
Tony Street 
The 'detractor', a Theophrastean, would have as the conclusion all Js are As necessarily 
in so far as they are Bs. Alfarabi is open to this objection because of the way he used 
a reduplicative proposition to have the conversion of the two-sided possible go through. 
His arguments on this point are reported by Avicenna (who by contrast held the two-sided 
possible to convert as a one-sided possible [Avicenna, 19712, page 340]) as follows: 
That which a certain eminent scholar said is this: every animal is possibly 
sleeping in so far as it is sleeping, so some of that which is sleeping is in 
so far as it is sleeping possibly an animal, because its being an animal does 
not belong to it in so far as it is sleeping--this is sheer sophistry. As for that 
which rightly should be known about this matter, it is something the proof 
for which has been given above. That which we ought to repeat and set down 
here is that the utterance 'in so far as it is sleeping' is said either as part of the 
predicate, or as part of the subject. If it is part of the predicate, then it must 
first off in conversion be made part of the subject, thus: Some of that which 
is sleeping in so far as it is sleeping is possibly an animal; this is as you hear 
it [that is, it is gibberish]. Given that it is true, it is not what we are talking 
about... 
But you know, O eminent one, that the sleeping taken without condition is 
other than the sleeping taken with the condition of its being sleeping, and in 
so far as it is sleeping... [Avicenna, 1964, pages 209.7-210.5] 
Avicenna, that is to say, took Alfarabi to task for using one solution to get out of the 
problem of the conversion of the two-sided possible, but not continuing to bind himself 
by that solution in solving the problem of the two Barbaras. Avicenna placed both stricter 
and looser demands on logical exegesis: it need not follow Aristotle everywhere, but it 
must be internally consistent. More generally, Alfarabi was trying to find a way to make 
sense of the Aristotelian text, proposing solutions to local problems, and hoping that the 
ideas behind the text would ultimately shine through, whereas Avicenna did not think that 
there was any point in trying to give a literal exegesis of Aristotle's syllogistic. 
You should realize that most of what Aristotle's writings have to say about 
the modal mixes are tests, and are not genuine opinions--this will become 
clear to you in a number of places... [Avicenna, 1964, page 204.10-12] 
Avicenna's modal syllogistic 
So how did Avicenna build his modal syllogistic? The 
first important feature to note is that having taken the absolute as a temporal, he placed it 
within his syllogistic alongside the modals. 
The second important feature in Avicenna's syllogistic is the conditions under which 
a proposition can be read. There is no distinction made in Arabic logic corresponding to 
the Western distinction between divided and composite readings. The distinctions Avi- 
cenna proposed, however, became just as important and pervasive for logicians writing 
in Arabic. There are four intrinsic and two extrinsic conditions under which propositions 
can be read. (Although this passage is given for a necessary proposition, these conditions 
are applied to propositions with other modal operators.) 

Arabic Logic 
551 
Necessity may be (1) absolute, as in God exists; or it may be connected to 
a condition. The condition may be (2) perpetual for the existence of the 
substance (flat), as in man is necessarily a rational body. By this we do 
not mean to say that man has been and always will be a rational body, be- 
cause that would be false for each given man. Rather, we mean to assert 
that while he exists as a substance (md dama maw~,i~da d-dat), as a human, 
he is a rational bodyL Or the condition may be (3) perpetual for the sub- 
ject's being described in the way it is (dawama kawni l-mawda'i mawsafan 
bi-ma wudi'a ma 'ahu), as in all mobile things are changing; this is not to be 
taken to assert that this is the case absolutely, nor for the time [the subject] 
exists as a substance, but rather while the substance of the moving thing is 
moving. Distinguish between this condition and the first condition, because 
the first has set down as the condition the principle of the substance, 'man', 
whereas here the substance is set down with a description (sifa) that attaches 
to the substance, 'moving thing'. 'Moving thing' involves a substance (flat 
wa-gawhar) to which movement and non-movement attach" but 'man' and 
'black' are not like that. 
Or it may be a condition (4) of the predicate; or (5) of a definite time, as in 
an eclipse; or (6) of an indefinite time, as in breathing. [Avicenna, 19712, 
264-266] 
This passage draws on earlier Peripatetic writings (for an analysis of its probable sources, 
see [B~.ck, 1992]), and it is best understood as the way Avicenna laid out various modal 
notions. Avicenna's interests were, with one exception, exclusively in propositions read 
under the second condition (the _datr, or substantial reading) and the third (the wasfi, or 
descriptional reading), but later Avicennan logicians also investigated the fifth (the waqtr, 
or temporal) and the sixth (the muntashir, or spread). (See the renditions in appendix two 
at page 592 below; g renders the _dat~, C the was.fi, and 7- and ,5' the fifth and sixth waqtr 
readings.) 
I think that the _datr reading, although it turns on a distinction different from the one 
which delivers Abelard's divided reading, is functionally the same as the divided. Two 
examples may help clarify the distinction between it and the wasfi. All bachelors are 
necessarily unmarried is true as a wasfi, because 'bachelors' picks out men just while they 
are unmarried: all men while bachelors are necessarily unmarried. As a _datf, however, it 
is false: all bachelors are men, and it is untrue that all men are necessarily unmarried. By 
contrast, (and this is the most common Avicennan example) all who sleep wake is true as 
a _dat~ (because every animal that sleeps also wakes up from time to time), but false as a 
wasfi (because nothing can be awake while sleeping). No As are Bs while As, Avicenna 
claimed in Pointers, would convert as no Bs are As while Bs, and would contradict some As 
are Bs while As" and would save the second figure for the account in the Prior Analytics. 
Avicenna took great pride in the fact that his two readings of the propositions allowed him 
to square a set of examples where other logicians had failed (see also page 578 below). 

552 
Tony Street 
The people who went before us were not able to reconcile us to their view 
by their examples and usage. The explanation of this is lengthy. [Avicenna, 
19712, page 314] 
Avicenna later in his work also investigated the way a wasfi major and a _daft minor func- 
tion in a syllogism, but those investigations deserve extended study, and are beyond the 
scope of this chapter (though see now [Thom, ]). Later logicians challenged Avicenna's 
claims for the way the wasfi contributes to an inference (see below page 575 f.), and devel- 
oped his insights extensively; even later, they included his extrinsic temporal conditions 
in their investigations. 
And the syllogistic with purely _datr premises? Avicenna developed his _daft modal 
syllogistic as two isomorphic systems, one using temporal propositions (functioning in 
contradiction and conversion like propositions 5, 10 and 24 in the appendix) and the other 
using modal propositions, which function in contradiction and conversion like these (the 
numbers indicate the propositions in appendix two which replace Avicenna's modals in 
later logical writings)" 
1.* (Vz)[OAx D fflB~] 
13.* (Vz)[OAx D OB~] 
26.* (Vz){OAx D [OBx & O ,-~ B~]} 
But Avicenna wanted the two sub-systems to interract in ways that show that these ren- 
ditions are not rightwfor example, Avicenna wanted syllogisms with possible minors, in 
particular Barbara XMM, yet argued that absolute a- and i-propositions convert as ab- 
solute propositions. The system deserves serious study (for a description of the whole 
system with _datr premises, see [Street, ]). 
It is important to note that Avicenna, though using the perpetual to provide a contradic- 
tory for the absolute, did not investigate how the perpetual contributes to other inferences. 
I think that Avicenna wanted to provide a syllogistic that looks like it is treating only the 
propositions that Aristotle examined. Later logicians were far less concerned with pre- 
serving that sort of contact with the Aristotelian tradition, and investigated the perpetual 
as a fully-fledged member of their set of propositions. Working out Avicenna's system is 
the first and major problem for the study of medieval Arabic logic. It may be complicated 
by non-logical factors" Avicenna saw himself as a second Aristotle, and it may well be 
that certain features of his own logic are tests set to puzzle his readers. 
3.6 
Baghdad and the East 
The history of post-Avicennan logic is the history of the eventual conquest of a system de- 
rived from Avicenna's system over the logic taught in the Baghdad school. In this section 
I offer a few reflections on the respective provenance and strengths of each tradition. 
Firstly, I think that there are some grounds to believe that Avicenna was not offering 
an entirely new system to which people had to be converted, but was merely setting in 
sharper format a system which was already broadly accepted in Khurasan. At least on 

Arabic Logic 
553 
my reading of Pointers, Avicenna only claimed as his personal contributions to the formal 
logic he presented the following: the coinage of the term wu~diyya, the use of the wasff 
as a plausible way to save Aristotle's position on the absolute, and the division of the 
syllogistic into conjunctive and exceptive [Avicenna, 19712, respectively pages 309, 314, 
374]. The last two contributions ramify through the rest of the system. Even without 
them, however, the fact remains that the absolute would be treated quite differently from 
the way Alfarabi had treated it, and attention would be paid to a body of hypothetical 
syllogistic ignored by the Baghdad philosophers. This is at least compatible with the 
conclusion that the logic studied in Khurasan was quite different from Baghdad logic 
before Avicenna arrived. Avicenna came to an Aristotle mired in nearly one and a half 
millenia of interpretations, and the specificities of the tradition in Khurasan may have been 
paramount in determining what he did with Aristotle, and perhaps also in determining 
what those who came after him did. This speculation is not meant to deny that Avicenna's 
formulation of that logic was the strictest, and the one to which subsequent logicians, both 
friendly and unfriendly to the project, had first recourse. 
Other reasons for the wide acceptance of the Avicennan tradition of logic have to do 
with the general fortunes enjoyed by the larger philosophical system Avicenna put for- 
ward. That system, having been presented at many points in Avicenna's writings as 
congenial with Islam, proved to be so adaptable to the needs of Islamic philosophical 
theology that by the beginning of the twelfth century, people understood by 'philosophy' 
Avicenna's synthesis. Even more generally, although Avicenna was born into the dying 
days of one dynasty (the Samanids), he moved and worked through the halcyon realms of 
the dominant force of the era, the Buyids. Baghdad had lost much of the political and cul- 
tural prestige it had enjoyed in the tenth century, and the dynamics of political hegemony 
in the Islamic world were driving from the East through to the West. 
Finally, it must be borne in mind that although places like Khurasan and other eastern 
realms quickly became almost wholly Avicennan, what that means is much more complex 
than appears on the face of it. None of these logicians, so far as I am aware, adopted the 
Avicennan syllogistic in its entirety, though most adopted Avicenna's three most charac- 
teristic doctrines. So these logicians nearly all agreed that the syllogistic divides broadly 
into conjunctive and exceptive; they further agreed that the hypothetical syllogistic is im- 
portant, and nearly all devoted analyses to aspects of the hypothetical syllogistic. That 
said, they did not necessarily agree on precisely what it is that matters most about the hy- 
pothetical syllogistic, or how exactly it relates to the categorical syllogistic. Secondly, the 
logicians in these regions nearly all delivered a syllogistic system that uses an Avicennan 
absolute proposition. Thirdly, they all investigated propositions read under some or all of 
Avicenna's conditions. This is the sense in which these logicians are Avicennan. 
Baghdad logic, by contrast, did not prosper. One thing that did not limit its influence 
was the fact that it was a Christian school in an Islamic society, constituted mainly by 
Christians, with only a few Muslims such as Alfarabi and Abfi-Sulaymfin as-Si~;istanl 
among its members. Avicenna's disciples included a Zoroastrian and a Christian; philos- 
ophy throughout the Islamic world tended to be accepted, by those people who accepted it 
at all, as a discipline which would attract people from various faith-communities. Again, 
it was not internal dissension that weakened Baghdad; in spite of the sectarian differences 

554 
Tony Street 
between the various Syriac confessions, it appears that in Baghdad a collegial and cordial 
spirit prevailed [Zimmermann, 1981, page cxii]. In fact, Christian and Muslim logicians 
faced parallel opposition within their respective faith-communities, and the apologia for 
logic was a genre they were both forced to write (for a Christian example, see [Rescher, 
1963f]). 
Baghdad was unlucky in the successors it had to Alfarabi. Yah.yg ibn-'Adi wrote ex- 
tensively and competently on logic, although he apparently argued that modal logic was 
ill-conceived [Endress, 1977, chapter 3, and page 51]. The only Baghdad philosopher 
Avicenna admired was Alfarabi; the rest of the Syriac Christians he dismissed as wooden- 
minded in logic (see above page 535). He famously and witheringly said of Ibn-a.t-Tayyib, 
his contemporary and head of school in Baghdad, that his work was best sent back to the 
bookseller, whether or not a refund was offered [Gutas, 1988, page 68]. Alfarabi had been 
a continuation of the Syriac tradition, but Ibn-at-T. ayyib was a mere replication of it. (Of 
course, this is merely to repeat Avicenna's judgement and, as Lameer reminds us, we have 
yet properly to check Ibn-a.t-Tayyib's writings; see [Lameer, 1996, page 96].) Still, for all 
the undoubted decline in its philosophical fortunes, Baghdad still produced a considerable 
logical posterity. The Andalusian Muhammad ibn-'Abdfin (d. c. 995) came to Baghdad to 
study with Abfi-Sulaym~.n, whereupon he went back to Spain and inaugurated a tradition 
of logicians who can only be understood against the tradition of Alfarabi. In fact, what 
modal logic we can guess was being taught in Baghdad was probably the modal logic we 
find in early Spain (see below pages 561 & 567). 
For the most part, the Baghdad school continued to concentrate on a range of tasks 
among which exegesis, or really, summary, figured prominently. If Galen's logic was :still 
read at all, it was here in Baghdad--Avicenna had followed Alexander, and dismissed 
him as "the man who was strong in medicine but weak in logic" ([Shehaby, 1973b, page 
5]). But even in Baghdad teaching changed after Avicenna. Avicenna's philosophy was 
the most significant intellectual challenge the Baghdad philosophers had to face, and even 
during Avicenna's lifetime, they tried to meet that challenge. After Avicenna a new strain 
is apparent in Baghdad logic. References and reflexes can be found in writings from 
Baghdad in which the Avicennan position is set down and then dismissed. This apolo- 
getic becomes a new theme in the Baghdad school, and subsequently in Spain. In the 
end, however, even among the Syriac Christians, Avicenna's system prevailed (see e.g. 
[Jannssens, 1937]). 
4 
LOGIC AND THE ISLAMIC DISCIPLINES 
The Islamic disciplines include law and jurisprudence, Koranic exegesis, analysis of tra- 
ditions relating to the Prophet, theology and grammar. Together these disciplines func- 
tion to determine the Islamicity of the spiritual and public life of a society. The central 
doctrines and techniques of these disciplines reached what later came to be considered 
their classical formulation by the end of the second Abbasid century, which was about 
the same time that a truly naturalized Arabic logic was being achieved. People began to 
ask whether logic was a discipline constituted in ways similar to the Islamic disciplines, 
whether it was useful for the Islamic disciplines, whether, indeed, it was even compatible 

Arabic Logic 
555 
with them. Some of Alfarabi's logical writings are attempts to answer these questions: 
he linked logic into an ancient tradition, and showed great concern to make its technical 
terms perspicuous to speakers of pure Arabic, both important matters in the constitution 
of an Islamic discipline; he was concerned to make the forensic utility of logic obvious; 
and he stressed its parallels to grammar (see above page 536 ft.). 
The single most important voice in the arguments over the centuries about logic and its 
relation to the Islamic disciplines is that of the famous jurist and theologian, Abfi- .HS.mid 
al-ff3azS.1i (d. 1111). Some fifty or so years after Avicenna's death, GazfilT argued that 
logic was both licit and useful for theology and jurisprudence. In this he was following 
the example of Alfarabi. The clarity of Gazfili's prose style and the depth of his spiritual 
insights have won him enormous prestige in the Islamic community. His arguments that 
there is nothing inimical to religious belief in logical studies derived much of their force 
from that prestige. He did not end the attacks on logic, but his arguments in support of 
logic are probably the most decisive factor in its inclusion as a subject for study in the 
madrasa. 
Logic and grammar 
What sort of resistance did logic face? The most frequently cited 
example of the clash between the Islamic disciplines and logic is the debate in Baghdad 
conducted between Abfi-Sa'id as-Sirg.ff (d. 978) and Alfarabi's senior colleague, Abfi- 
Bigr Mattfi (d. 940). The study of this debate is now a something of a minor industry 
within the field of Islamic studies, and it is undoubtedly important for revealing how logic 
was received among some of the educated classes of Baghdad at the end of the translation 
movement described in section 2 above. The debate was convened by the vizier, who 
invited Abfi-Bigr to defend the value of Aristotelian logic relative to that of the Arabic 
grammatical tradition. Abfi-Sa'Td, a young but promising grammarian, stepped forward 
to put the case for grammar, and won the debate by acclaim, humiliating Abfi-Bigr in 
the process. It should be said, however, that important as the debate may have been, and 
much studied as it is, there continues to be scholarly disagreement as to what point it is 
that Abfi-Sa'Td was trying to make. One account of Abfi-Sa'~d's attack has him defending 
the ambient Platonism of Baghdad against the rising peripateticism of Abfi-Bigr and his 
colleagues [Mahdi, 1970]; more commonly, he is taken to represent the practitioners of 
the Islamic disciplines and their worries about the far-reaching claims made for logic 
([Elamrani-Jamal, 1983, pages 61-71 ]; briefly in [Arnaldez, 1960-], at length in [Endress, 
1986]). It has also been pointed out that we may be trying to extract more from the debate 
than the occasion of its convention (an amusement for the vizier) allows [Frank, 1991]; 
whatever the specific points in Abfi-Sa'[d's arguments, one is left with the impression that 
logic is not so much dangerous as merely laughable. 
In the debate, we find Abfi-Sa'[d again and again chiding Abfi-Bigr for his bad Arabic, 
and for his naive confidence that knowledge of logic can somehow protect him from error 
in thinking and end dispute in philosophy. 
The world remains after Aristotle's logic as it was before his logic. Resign 
yourself, therefore, to dispense with the unattainable, since such a thing is 
wanting in the creation and nature of things. If, therefore, you were to empty 

556 
Tony Street 
your minds of other things, and devote your attention to the study of the 
language in which you are conversing and disputing with us, and instruct 
your friends in words which the speakers of that language can understand, 
and interpret the books of the Greeks in the style of those who know the 
language, you would learn that you can dispense with the ideas of the Greeks 
as well as you can dispense with the language of the Greeks. [Margoliouth, 
1905, pages 115-116] 
Abfi-Sa'id's most stinging taunts were directed against the technical jargon that Abfi- 
Bigr and his colleagues were using, which Abfi-Sa'id showed to be more a hindrance 
than a help to clear thinking. He also mocked the claims the philosophers made for the 
importance and utility of logic. Among other things, he cast doubt on the coherence of 
their claims that there is a higher grammar, common to all languages. 
Logic and theology 
The theologians of tenth-century Baghdad also studied argument- 
forms, and had an elaborate set of terms to classify arguments as good or bad. These 
terms, however, map so precisely onto Stoic terms and function in such a similar way that 
it has been concluded that theological logic almost certainly derives from Stoic logic [van 
Ess, 1970]. That said, the process by which Stoic logic came to Baghdad is far from clear, 
and it is only on the grounds of structural and terminological similarity that the claim 
can be made. (To get an idea of how speculative these assessments of Stoic origin are, 
see [Shehaby, 1973a] and especially the discussion following it; see now [Gutas, 1994].) 
Whatever their origin, theologians had methods to evaluate arguments which were not 
Aristotelian. 
Still, it is one thing to have a system for evaluating arguments, but quite another to say 
that no other system should be studied; yet that is what some theologians did argue. We 
can get some idea of why they did so from the great fourteenth-century intellectual histo- 
rian, Ibn-Haldfin (d. 1406). Ibn- _Haldfin had himself written a short treatise on logic in his 
younger days, and there are many references to logic running through his Prolegomena 
[Ibn- _Haldfin, 1958]. He was, in short, an interested and quite probably competent witness 
to the state and history of logic in his time. The passage he wrote devoted solely to logic 
divides into two sub-histories, one on the Organon in the Islamic world, and the other on 
the tensions between the logicians and the theologians. 
It should be known that the early Muslims and the early speculative theolo- 
gians greatly disapproved of the study of this discipline. They vehemently 
attacked it and warned against it. They forbade the study and teaching of 
it. Later on, ever since GazfilT [d. 1111] and Fah_ra ddTn ar-RfizT [d. 1210], 
scholars have been somewhat more lenient in this respect. Since that time, 
they have gone on studying logic, except for a few who have recourse to the 
opinion of the ancients concerning it and shun it and vehemently disapprove 
of it. Let us explain on what the acceptance or rejection of logic depends, so 
that it will be known what scholars have in mind with their different opin- 
ions... ([Ibn-_Haldfin, 1858, page 113.13-u]; cf. [Ibn-_HaldOn, 1958, pages 
143-144]) 

Arabic Logic 
557 
Ibn-Haldfin went on to give a short history of Islamic theology, the arguments that it 
developed in defence of the articles of faith, and the atomistic and nominalist metaphysics 
which was simultaneously refined to support those arguments, that is to say, classical 
kal~m atomism. 
It then came to be the opinion of Ag'ar~, B~.qill~.nL and Isfar~.'Tni [famous 
exponents of the classical kal~m], that the evidence for the articles of faith 
is reversible in the sense that if the arguments are wrong, the things proven 
by them are wrong. Therefore, B~qill~ni thought that the arguments for the 
articles of faith hold the same position as the articles of faith themselves and 
that an attack against them is an attack against the articles of faith, because 
they rest on those arguments. ([Ibn-_Haldfin, 1858, page 114.13-16]; cf. [Ibn- 
H_ aldfin, 1958, pages 144-145]) 
But Aristotelian logic, Ibn- _Haldfin went on, assumes the five universals and the common- 
places for topical reasoning, and assumes further that they have an extramental existence. 
This assumption is incompatible with the theologians' denial that universals have a real 
existence. If the theologians are right, then 
... all the pillars of logic are destroyed. On the other hand, if we affirm their 
existence, as is done in logic, we thereby declare wrong many of the premises 
of the theologians. This, then, leads to considering wrong their arguments for 
the articles of the faith, as has been mentioned before. This is why the early 
theologians vehemently disapproved of the study of logic and considered it 
innovation or unbelief, depending on the particular argument declared wrong 
by the use of logic. 
However, recent theologians since Gaz~li have disapproved of the idea of the 
reversibility of arguments and have not assumed that the fact that the argu- 
ments are wrong requires as its necessary consequence that the thing proven 
by them be wrong. They considered correct the opinion of logicians concern- 
ing intellectual combination and the outside existence of natural quiddities 
and their universals. Therefore, they decided that logic is not in contradic- 
tion with the articles of faith, even though it is in contradiction to some of 
the arguments for them. In fact, they concluded that many of the premises 
of the speculative theologians [who followed classical kalfim] were wrong. 
For instance, they deny the existence of atomic matter and the vacuum and 
affirm the persistence of accidents and so on. For the arguments of the theolo- 
gians for the articles of the faith, they substituted other arguments which they 
proved to be correct by means of speculation and syllogistic reasoning. They 
hold that this goes in no way against the orthodox articles of faith. This is 
the opinion of R~zL CJaz~lL and their contemporary followers. ([Ibn-_Haldfin, 
1858, page 115.13-116.8]; cf. [Ibn-_Haldfin, 1958, pages 146-147]) 
In other words, Gazfili and R~zi were worried at equating the credibility of their faith 
with the credibility of kal~.m atomist theory. It is the theological decision to overturn 

558 
Tony Street 
the theory of the reversibility of arguments which found space for logical studies in a 
theological education. 
That at least is Ibn-_Haldfin's account. It suffers from some problems which cannot be 
considered here (though compare the account in [Marmura, 1975]). In any event, Gazali 
not only argued in defence of logic, and used it in his theological works; he went further 
and argued in The Just Balance [Gaz~li, 1959] (translated [Brewster, 1978; McCarthy, 
1980], and studied [Kleinknecht, 1972]) that the Koran sanctioned its use, if in slightly 
coded language. But the fact that theologians condoned it may not have been the deciding 
factor in the acceptance of logic. 
Logic and law 
The law is sometimes said to be the most important of the Islamic disci- 
plines. Lawyers had been reflective about their system of reasoning, and analogy (which 
they called qiyds, the same word used by the logicians for 'syllogism') as well as other 
techniques were the centre of a series of sophisticated discussions. Gazfili was first and 
foremost a lawyer, and held his chair in S~fi'i jurisprudence at the Niz~.miyya in Bagh- 
dad from 1091. By showing legal arguments ultimately to depend on the syllogism, and 
by prefacing his last juridical summa, The Distillation of the Principles of Jurisprudence 
[Gaz~.li, 1938], with a logical treatise, Gazfili did more than any other earlier scholar to 
have logic made part of madrasa studies. 
In Distillation, Gaz~.li referred to two of his earlier works on logic, The Touchstone 
for Speculation [Gaz~li, 1966] and The Yardstick of Knowledge [Gaz~.li, 1961b], both of 
which he wrote after writing his famous Intentions of the Philosophers [Gaz~li, 1961a]. 
Intentions is in fact a pretty close Arabic paraphrase of Avicenna's Persian Philosophy for 
'Al~t 'addawla, which contains a very elementary treatment of logic (English translation, 
[Avicenna, 1971]). In assessing Gazfili as a logician it must be said that, from a formal 
point of view, he never rises above Intentions. 
The first section of Touchstone follows the structure of Intentions, but in the second 
and third sections, Gaz~.li's interest in cognitive aspects of premises, in the pragmatics 
of argument, and in legal problems, comes to the fore. Throughout the book, there is a 
concern to find new ways of putting the philosophers' terms of art, ways that correspond 
to terms used in the Islamic disciplines (though Gaz~.li was careful to point out when there 
are differences between logical and grammatical usage). In Touchstone, Gazfili had more 
fully than any other logician up to that time gone into the problems of naturalising logical 
terminology; and he had more comprehensively shown how it can contribute to the prag- 
matic needs of juristic reasoning. At the end of Touchstone, Gaz~li advised his readers to 
go to his Yardstick of Knowledge for fuller treatment of the material covered. Yardstick 
does indeed give a much fuller exposition of the subject, with all the technical terms nor- 
mally used by the philosophers. None the less, the goals of Yardstick are identical with 
those of Touchstone: 
We shall make known to you that speculation in juristic matters (al-fiqhiyyat) 
is not distinct from speculation in philosophical matters (al-'aqliyydt) in 
terms of its composition, conditions, or measures, but only in terms of where 
it takes its premises from. [Gaz~.li, 1961b, page 28.2-4] 

Arabic Logic 
559 
The questions that were important for Avicenna in his reading of Alfarabi, and which 
came to be important generally for the major logicians of the post-Avicennan tradition (as 
examined in section 5 below), did not matter at all for CJaz~lL Even the more advanced 
Yardstick, though mentioning the distinction between _dggti, wasff and temporal (waqtO 
readings in propositions, and the modalities [CJaz~li, 1961b, pages 88-90], never con- 
siders how they contribute to an inference. There is never a doubt raised about whether 
the unmodalised proposition (the only kind CJaz~.l[ considered) will function like the as- 
sertoric in the early books of the Prior Analytics. The relation between the categorical 
and hypothetical syllogistic is treated insouciantly (the categorical "is sometimes called 
an iqtirgmr syllogism, sometimes a ~,azmY' [Cjaz5.1~, 1961b, page 98.14-apu]), the hypo- 
thetical syllogistic is exemplified only by unanalysed propositions [CJaz~.lL 196 lb, pages 
111-114], and the deduction involving a contradiction is treated without any reference to 
the hypothetical syllogistic [CJazfili, 1961b, page 114]. 
I think a few conclusions may be drawn from these considerations. For all Ibn-_Haldfin 
says that theological reasons made logic acceptable to CJaz~li, juridical considerations 
seem more significant. CJaz~.lFs contribution to logic was mainly on the level of defus- 
ing objections to its study by domesticating its jargon, and showing by legal examples 
its utility [Hallaq, 1990, page 315]. Although CJazgli is sometimes said to be Avicennan 
[Rescher, 1964, page 49], this is true only in an attenuated sense. Even though his trea- 
tises derive their logical content from Philosophy for 'Ala 'addawla, his significant work 
was done in the spirit of Alfarabi's apologetics. He is in this sense more Farabian than 
Avicennan. Further, his work was not paradigmatic for later theologians. Other theolo- 
gians began to study logic from the twelfth century onwards, but they did not all study it 
in the same way, or for the same purposes. This is particularly clear from a comparison 
of CJazfilFs interests with those of Rfizi (see below page 572 ft.). CJaz~.l~ was a promoter 
of logic, but not a practitioner. Other, later theologians were often both. 
Continued oposition to logic 
CJaz~li's achievement was not the end of all opposition to 
logic among Muslim scholars, though future attacks on logic never seriously affected the 
study of the discipline. We find pious opposition taking a number of forms. One famous 
example is a legal opinion issued by Ibn-as-S. al~h. (d. 1245) on the reprehensibility of 
logical studies. 
As far as logic is concerned, it is a means of access to philosophy. Now 
the access to something bad is also bad. Preoccupation with the study and 
teaching of logic has not been permitted by the law-giver, nor has it been 
suggested by his Companions or the generation that followed him, nor by 
the learned imams, the pious ancestors, nor by the leaders or pillars of the 
Islamic community whose example is followed. God has protected them 
from its danger and its filth, and cleansed them of its uncleanness. The use 
of the terminology of logic in the investigation of religious law is despicable 
and one of the recently introduced follies. Thank God, the laws of religion 
are not in need of logic. Everything a logician says about definition and 
apodictic proof is complete nonsense. God has made it dispensable for those 

560 
Tony Street 
who have common sense, and it is even more dispensible for the specialists in 
the speculative branches of jurisprudence. [Goldziher, 1981, pages 205-206] 
Perhaps the most famous opponent of logic is the fideist jurist, Ibn-Taymiyya (d. 1328), 
who was writing near the end of the period covered in this chapter. Ibn-Taymiyya wrote 
a lengthy condemnation of the use of logic, Refutation of the logicians, which in a later 
abridged form has been translated into English [Hallaq, 1993]. Logic is merely distracting 
where sound intuition can hit the mark; so much for the claims made about the univer- 
sal utility of logic. On the more specific claim that syllogistic reasoning is valuable for 
jurisprudence, Ibn-Taymiyya has nothing but derision. In fact, 
their distinction between a categorical syllogism and analogywthat the for- 
mer is capable of leading to certainty while the latter to nothing but probability-- 
is invalid. In fact, whenever one of them leads to certainty so does the other, 
and whenever one of them leads to nothing but probability the other does 
likewise. When the evidence results in certainty or in probability, this is so 
not because its form is syllogistic and not analogical, but rather because the 
syllogism contains conclusive evidence. If either an analogy or a syllogism 
encompasses a matter that entails a certain judgement, then certainty is at- 
tained. [Hallaq, 1993, page 125] 
For all his contempt for logic, Ibn-Taymiyya never impugned the formal aspects of the 
syllogistic, which had come by his day to be the major focus of the logical treatise. But 
what is the value of this formal study? 
The validity of the form of the syllogism is irrefutable ... But it must be 
maintained that the numerous figures they have elaborated and the condi- 
tions they have stipulated for their validity are useless, tedious, and prolix. 
These resemble the flesh of a camel found on the summit of a mountain; the 
mountain is not easy to climb, nor the flesh plump enough to make it worth 
the hauling. [Hallaq, 1993, page 141 ] 
5 
LOGIC AFTER AVICENNA 
As has been noted (see page 552 f. above), Avicenna came to exercise an extraordinary 
influence over subsequent generations of philosophers. For many logicians, their work 
has to be understood as an attempt to extend or modify the Avicennan system. These 
logicians no longer referred to the Prior Analytics as they went about their tasks, but to 
Pointers and Reminders. Again, as has been noted, I refer to a logician as 'Avicennan' 
if he adopted the three central modifications Avicenna introduced into the formal syllo- 
gistic: the Avicennan truth-conditions for the absolute proposition; the readings under 
which Avicenna read modal and temporal propositions; the division of the syllogistic into 
conjunctive and exceptive syllogisms--though this way of deciding whether or not a lo- 
gician is Avicennan has the consequence of making quite a few logicians Avicennan who 
none the less direct trenchant criticism against Avicenna. The Avicennan logicians con- 
trast most starkly with those logicians for whom the primary task was the recovery of a 

Arabic Logic 
561 
true Aristotelianism; Averroes was the major, though not unique, representative of this 
tradition. But by the time Averroes came to grapple with the Aristotelian logical texts, 
the Avicennan system was so dominant that the points to which Averroes had to direct 
most of his exegetical energies had been determined for him by that system. Averroes 
was something of an Avicennan in spite of himself. 
There are other approaches to the writing of logical treatises in this period which are 
less easily categorised. Some of the Syriac Christians continued to write logical com- 
mentaries much as they always had, seemingly with little or no reference to Alfarabi or 
Avicenna. Other logicians in Baghdad in the twelfth century certainly had access to Avi- 
cenna's writings, and Alfarabi's manuscripts may well still have been available in Bagh- 
dad in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Given the few and stereotypical references 
to Alfarabi among the later logicians working in Iran and further east, however, we must 
wonder whether his manuscripts were available there. A tradition of logical studies in 
Spain directed much of its attention to Alfarabi's writings, and perhaps had less access 
to the Avicennan texts. By the end of the twelfth century, the only traditions that really 
mattered were the Averroist and the Avicennan. But by the end of the thirteenth century, 
only the Avicennan mattered. 
5.1 
Spain and the Averroist project 
Early logical studies in Spain 
Logic was first taught in Muslim Spain, so the biobibli- 
ographers would have it, when a Andalusian, Muhammad ibn-'Abdfin (d. c. 990), studied 
in Baghdad under Abfi-Sulaym~n as-Si~ist~.nL and then returned to his homeland to start 
teaching the subject there (see generally [Dunlop, 1955]). Ibn-'Abdfin was among the 
teachers of Abfi-'Abdall~.h al-Katt~n~ (d. 1029) who in turn was one of the teachers in 
logic of Ibn-Hazm (d. 1064), a man more famous for his work in poetry, jurisprudence 
and theology, than for his logic. Still, his book, An approach and introduction to logic 
(at-Taqrrb li-hud~d al-man.tiq wa-mad_haluhu), is interesting because it is another effort to 
make Aristotelian logic acceptable to Muslim jurists (for a summary, see [Chejne, 1984]). 
This is very like the project of CJazfili, and of Alfarabi. But Ibn-Hazm was, like ~Jaz~li, 
more a religious scholar than a logician, and his contemporaries and immediate successors 
tended to belittle his logical achievements. Ibn-'Abdfin was also among the teachers of 
the teachers of Ibn-B~.~,~,a (d. 1138) and Averroes (d. 1198), an altogether more glorious 
line of logicians. 
Before turning to Ibn-Bfi~,~a and more particularly Averroes, it is interesting to note a 
treatise we have by one of Ibn-B~.~,~,a's contemporaries, Abfi-s.-S. alt of Denia (d. 1134). 
Abfi-s.-S. alt's presentation of the Aristotelian modal system in his Setting minds straight 
has been edited by Gonzfilez Palencia and its results noted by Rescher [Gonz~ilez Pa- 
lencia, 1915; Rescher, 1963a]. Abfi-s.-S. alt stated the assertoric syllogistic [Gonzfilez Pa- 
lencia, 1915, pages 20-29], then developed his modal syllogistic by setting down ex- 
actly the same moods and mixes we find in Aristotle, in exactly the ordering of the Prior 
Analytics [GonzS.lez Palencia, 1915, pages 29-46] (with two exceptions, being uniform 
necessity moods and mixed necessity and problematic moods; but Abfi-s-S. alt explained 
how to get an Aristotelian conclusion for each). Abfi-s.-S. alt's treatment of conversion 

562 
Tony Street 
[Gonz~ilez Palencia, 1915, page 21] betrays no concern for the Avicennan counterexam- 
pies. He devoted two pages to the hypothetical syllogistic, giving it only with unanalysed 
propositions [Gonz~ilez Palencia, 1915, page 46-47]; and he did not call on it to explain 
the workings of a deduction involving a contradiction [Gonz~ilez Palencia, 1915, page 
48]. I think his treatise gives us an opportunity to see the standard treatment of the later 
Baghdad school, and of the pre-Averroist school in Spain. It is nothing more than a set of 
notes summarizing early parts of the Prior Analytics. 
Ibn-B~.~;a was regarded by no less than Ibn-_Haldfin as a philosopher of the calibre of 
Avicenna, Alfarabi and Averroes. He was seen by later scholars as inaugurating a new 
and more rigorous era of logical studies in Spain. I do not think that the present state of 
the field is such that we are able to judge Ibn-B~a's logical writings. None the less, he 
obviously consecrated a great deal of effort to writing commentaries on Alfarabi's logical 
works (see for example [Alfarabi, 1986a]; a brief summary is given [Gutas, 1993, pages 
54-55]). In this he prepared the ground for Averroes' early logical training. 
Averroes and the logical tradition 
It is beyond dispute that the major logician writing 
in Muslim Spain was Averroes. Averroes has a vast output. Some of his work was directed 
to the familiar task of showing the study of logic to be not only licit but actually incumbent 
on Muslims [Hourani, 1961, pages 44-47]. Specifically on the Prior Analytics, we have a 
middle length commentary and a collection, The Essays [Averroes, 1983b], which address 
specific problems in the Aristotelian tradition. (For his logical writings, see [Gutas, 1993, 
pages 55-56].) The Essays are very focused, and what follows derives from them. 
The main point I hope to emerge here is what it means to say that Averroes wrote in the 
Farabian tradition. It is much harder to consider Averroist logic (and Averroist philosophy 
generally) than Avicennan logic, because Averroes was constantly revising his system. 
Throughout his career, and even more ardently at the end, Averroes was trying to preserve 
the insights of Aristotle. In the Essay on the modalities of conclusions following from the 
modalities ofpremises [Averroes, 1983b, pages 176-186], Averroes wrote: 
These are all the doubts in this matter. They kept occurring to us even when 
we used to go along in this matter with our colleagues, in interpretations by 
virtue of which no solution to these doubts is clear. This has led me now 
(given my high opinion of Aristotle, and my belief that his theorization is 
better than that of all other people) to scrutinize this question seriously and 
with great effort. [Averroes, 1983b, page 181.6-10] 
As a corollary of this constant revision, Averroes was changing his opinion and assess- 
ment of Alfarabi. This can obscure the extent to which his work derives from that of 
Alfarabi. Even though Averroes came to his logic by way of the Farabian treatises, he 
went on to distance himself from Alfarabi as his sense of the Aristotelian tradition began 
to emerge more clearly. In his early days, Averroes wrote in one of his short works on 
Physics that people wanting to understand the discipline should first learn some logic, 
preferably from one of Alfarabi's books [Elamrani-Jamal, 1995, page 51 ]. But at the end 
of his scholarly life, Averroes had reached a different assessment of Alfarabi, an assess- 
ment which we find in his Essays: 

Arabic Logic 
563 
One of the worst things a later scholar can do is to deviate from Aristotle's 
teaching and follow a path other than Aristotle'smthis is what happened to 
Alfarabi in his logical texts, and to Avicenna in the physical and metaphysical 
sciences. ([Averroes, 1983b, page 175.6-8]; cf. [Elamrani-Jamal, 1995, page 
52]) 
Averroes, that is to say, decided that Alfarabi was not Aristotelian enough (at this specific 
point, due to Alfarabi's ampliation of the subject-term and the resulting misformulation 
of the dictum de omni; see above page 549 f.). 
As I say, Averroes' statements about Alfarabi can be misleading. As will emerge in 
the next two sub-sections, Averroes followed Farabian inspiration for important elements 
that feature in all of his syllogistic systems, and that become characteristic of systems 
which may be termed Averroist. We are faced with the irony that Avicenna claimed 
Alfarabi as his only worthy predecessor writing in Arabic, and then differed from him in 
every major point in the syllogistic, while Averroes upbraided Alfarabi's logical mistakes, 
but developed ideas he found in Alfarabi's writings into some of his most influential 
contributions to logic. 
Averroes on absolute and modal propositions 
In two essays in particular, Averroes 
may be seen to be working under Farabian inspiration, and against the Avicennan system. 
One of these essays is given by its editor the title, A criticism of Avicenna's doctrine on 
the conversion of premises, the other, On the absolute proposition. 
In his essay on the conversion of propositions, Averroes developed his distinction be- 
tween reading a proposition, and more specifically a term, as either per se (bi_d-_d(~t) or per 
accidens (bil-'ara.d) (a distinction noted and studied in [Lagerlund, 2000, pages 32-35] 
and [Knuuttila, 1982, pages 352-353]). This strategy is motivated in the first place by the 
conversion of the contingent proposition, which, to preserve the Aristotelian claim, has 
to convert as a contingent proposition. The discussion opens by considering the coun- 
terexample all men are contingently writing, which on the face of it should convert to 
some who write are necessarily men. Averroes developed his solution, and then went on 
to consider the parallel discussion between Avicenna and Alfarabi, which was directed to 
the counterexample all animals are contingently sleeping (see above page 550). Alfarabi 
tried to save the conversion as a contingent proposition by reading it with a reduplicative 
phrase: all animals are contingently sleeping in so far as they are sleeping. Avicenna 
rejected this move, arguing that the proposition with the reduplicative phrase is not the 
same as the original proposition which was to be converted. Averroes argued that, on the 
contrary, the original proposition implicitly contains the reduplicative phrase, 
because the animal can only be sleeping in so far as it is sleeping and not in so 
far as it is a horse or a donkey or the various other species which sleep. Since 
this is the case, the condition is implicit whether it is expressed or not. The 
two propositions are one and the same, I mean, that in which the condition 
is expressed and that in which it is not. The fact that the condition is part of 
the predicate is self-evident, because the animal is not contingently sleeping 

564 
Tony Street 
in so far as it is actually sleeping; but rather, if it is [sleeping], then [it is so 
due to an aspect had] in potentiality. 
If this is the case, then the one actually sleeping in so far as it is actually 
sleeping is contingently an animal. But it is accidental for it that if it is an 
animal necessarily in so far as it is sleeping potentially, then it is a neces- 
sary* animal. So this premise is necessary per accidens and contingent per 
se. So if we say every [creature] sleeping is an animal, and we understand 
from it every [creature] potentially sleeping, it is necessary per se; but if we 
understand from it every [creature] actually sleeping, then it is necessary per 
accidens, contingent per se. Since every animal is contingently sleeping has 
the sense that it is contingent that it is sleeping actually, not potentially, then 
were we to understand from it the one sleeping potentially, the premise is 
necessary not contingent. Thus one must understand in the conversion of the 
contingent the [creature] actually sleeping, and in the conversion of the nec- 
essary the [creature] potentially sleeping. This view is correct, and it contains 
the solution to the doubt raised regarding the conversion of the necessary as 
a necessary. [... ] 
As for the doubt raised relative to the necessary, the solution is known from 
what Alfarabi said regarding the possible. 
This doubt had to be singled out for treatment due to the prominence of Avi- 
cenna's questioning of it. [Averroes, 1983b, pages 104.4-105.apu] 
I think Alfarabi equivocated in his modal usage between the convertend and the converse, 
and I think that Averroes did too in his modified version of the solution (which I have 
omitted from the quotation above). Still, the distinction between per se and per accidens 
is important in logical systems inspired by Averroes, and this passage serves to show that 
Averroes followed Alfarabi in adopting the distinction, the operation of which he then 
extended. 
Averroes was, in this important respect, Farabian. He was, more importantly, not Avi- 
cennan in his modal logic, which he built on top of the assertoric syllogistic. In his Essay 
on the absolute proposition, he set down Avicenna's conditions for reading a necessary 
proposition [Averroes, 1983b, pages 120.11-121.5] and how they relate to different def- 
initions of the absolute; "this is all just confusion and disorder" [Averroes, 1983b, page 
122.1 ]. Averroes' own positions on the assertoric as he conceived it over his career are too 
complex to be stated compendiously. Two aspects of his position may however be noted. 
The first is that Averroes wanted to keep the conversions set down for the assertoric in 
the early books of the Prior Analytics, and thought that the distinction between the per se 
and the per accidens reading would help him. The second is that he was forced ultimately 
to admit that Aristotle's examples of assertoric propositions could not all be fitted on to 
the same set of truth-conditions, and he came at one point to speak of three assertorics, 
the mostly-assertoric, the leastly-assertoric and the equally-assertoric [Averroes, 1983b, 
pages 117.apu-118.2]. Both of these aspects of the Averroist position were considered 
subsequently by at least one logician working within his tradition. 

Arabic Logic 
565 
Averroes on the hypothetical syllogistic 
Like Avicenna, Averroes was concerned to 
investigate the interrelation between the categorical and hypothetical syllogistics. His 
essay on this, Discourse on the categorical and hypothetical syllogistic, with a criticism 
of the conjunctive syllogistic of Avicenna, is deep and complex, and awaits serious study. I 
want merely to note some superficial points regarding the lines of argument he developed 
to underline another broad aspect of his logic which is Farabian. 
Firstly, and unsurprisingly, Averroes' major goal in the essay is to show that Aristotle 
was correct in his views on the hypothetical syllogistic, and that "these syllogisms are not 
to be analysed into the figures" ([Badawi, 1948/52, vol. 1, pages 217.u-218.2]; cf. Prior 
Analytics 50~ 
Averroes took himself to have proven that the hypothetical is indeed 
ineliminable and irreducible to the categorical, and his essay concludes: 
So it has become clear that every syllogism and every syllogistic discourse is 
either hypothetical or categorical or a compound of the two (and that is called 
reduction (_half)) according to what Aristotle said in the Prior Analytics. And 
that is what we intended to explain. [Averroes, 1983b, page 207.apu-u] 
But Averroes was not merely interested in proving Aristotle right. He also wanted to 
defend Aristotle against any charges of carelessness in not treating the hypothetical syllo- 
gistic more fully. He did not, according to Averroes, because the hypothetical can prove 
no primary Question, and is consequently redundant in scientific writing: 
For this reason, Aristotle discarded it and did not set it down in the Prior 
Analytics, since his primary intention in the Prior Analytics was to enumerate 
the syllogisms essentially useful in demonstration. [Averroes, 1983b, page 
197.6-8] 
There is much here with which Avicenna would have agreed, even though he belonged to 
the tradition which believed that the hypothetical had sufficient importance that Aristotle 
had written another treatise devoted to it. 
Secondly, Averroes was able to deal with what Alfarabi had written on the hypotheti- 
cals briefly--he thought that Alfarabi was sloppy with his terms, and should have attended 
more carefully to an important distinction. 
It is clear from what we have said that the kinds of real hypothetical syllo- 
gisms are only syllogisms equivocally. The correctness of what Aristotle said 
emerges, that by them no unknown Question is made evident, and that they 
are properly part of the Topics. The commentators are agreed on this point. 
But their statements become confused when answering why [Aristotle] left 
the hypothetical syllogistic out of the Prior Analytics. What [Aristotle] said 
regarding them is that they do not produce a primary Question, and they be- 
long properly to the Topics. It appears that this sense relative to the matter 
of the real hypothetical did not become clearly distinguished for them; we 
find Alfarabi saying in his Posterior Analytics: "As for those demonstrations 
composed in the hypothetical, the relation of their parts is the relation of 
those composed in the categorical." But the causes [for production] in the 

566 
.Tony Street 
hypothetical are the repeated parts of the premises. These [inferences that 
Alfarabi is talking about] are not real hypotheticals, but merely hypotheti- 
cal by equivocation. Since he did not distinguish this matter with regard to 
them, he was therefore not separated from this doubt. [Averroes, 1983b, page 
197.9-18] 
Lastly, Averroes was not prepared to recognize the Avicennan system of conjunctives 
and exceptives (see above page 545 f.). Some of his arguments have to do with epistemic 
matters, and are philosophically the most interesting part of the essay, though beyond the 
scope of this chapter. This part of the essay concludes: 
Most of the well-known book of this man is full of this sort of thing, both 
relating to matters logical, and to other matters. Whoever wants to begin in 
these arts should avoid his books, for they will mislead rather than guide him. 
[Averroes, 1983b, pages 199.u-200.3] 
Averroes then moved on from epistemic claims to the division of the syllogistic into con- 
junctives and exceptives, first offering a summary of its propositions [Averroes, 1983b, 
pages 200.4-202.8]. He tried to show that the conjunctives all collapse into categoricals. 
The wonder is that Avicenna posited both these matters together, I mean, 
he conceded that every hypothetical premise can be reduced to a categorical 
premise (and similarly that every hypothetical Question can be reduced to a 
categorical), and then went on to posit that syllogisms composed of hypo- 
theticals are different from syllogisms composed of categoricals. [Averroes, 
1983b, page 205.18-21] 
This is sufficient for present purposes: Averroes felt able to rectify the Farabian system, 
but was convinced that Avicenna's system puts forward redundant propositions which can 
more perspicuously be eliminated. 
Averroist logicians 
I am not sure whether anyone has assembled all the elements of 
a system with which Averroes would have been content at one or other stage in his 
life. Important elements in four approaches he followed at various times in his career 
are presented in [Elamrani-Jamal, 1995], and one systematic overview has been given 
in [Manekin, 1993]. We know that structurally similar systems, especially that of Kil- 
wardby, came to be important in the middle of the thirteenth century in the Latin West, 
although the route by which they got there is not entirely clear [Lagerlund, 2000, pages 
32-35]. Debate still goes on about how Averroes' texts were transmitted [Burnett, 1999]; 
whether the Jews were the only path for that transmission matters rather less than the fact 
that they were one path. Whatever, Averroes' contemporary Maimonides (d. 1204) was 
not part of this processmEfros hesitates between whether Avicenna or Alfarabi was the 
greater influence on Maimonides [Maimonides, 1937/38, pages 19-21 ]. (I doubt whether 
the form of Maimonides' tract is such that we can ever really answer that question.) But 
later Jewish scholars such as Gersonides (d. 1344) were certainly reading Averroes, and 
adopted many, though not all, of his solutions. 

Arabic Logic 
567 
Levi ben Geshom said: Inasmuch as we saw some things in Aristotle's Book 
of the Syllogism as understood by the philosopher Averroes that appear to us 
to be incorrect--namely, in the conversion of modal sentences and the mode 
of the conclusion of modal syllogisms, simple and mixed--we have seen fit 
to investigate the truth of these matters in this book. [Manekin, 1992, pages 
53-54] 
Even more important than the lines of transmission is the fact that Averroes was trans- 
missible at all. Because he addressed himself so directly to the Aristotelian corpus, he fell 
squarely within the problematic on which the Latin scholars were fixing their attention. 
This is why Averroes figured so much more in the West than the Avicennan logicians 
ever did. It was not a question of availability of texts, but of common interest. Latin and 
Hebrew writers, however, fall outside the confines of this chapter. 
By contrast, Averroes rarely appears in later Arabic treatises on logic. One of those rare 
appearances is in an epistle on modal propositions which has been edited [E1-Ghannouchi, 
1971 ], but never studied beyond that edition, to the best of my knowledge. Ibn-Malih. ar- 
Raqq~.d, about whom we know nothing beyond the name, wrote an epistle, On absolute, 
possible and necessary propositions, in which he referred to Avicenna and Averroes and 
their solutions to the various problems mentioned above. 
This is a strange little text, and I am not sure if it merely relays the stock Baghdad 
response to Avicenna's counterexamples, or something different and more developed. 
Whatever the provenance of its doctrine, the epistle is motivated by the fact that "people 
have raised doubts against Aristotle regarding the conversion of propositions, especially 
Avicenna" [E1-Ghannouchi, 1971, page 207.u], doubts which can be laid to rest by induc- 
tively ascertaining the matter in Aristotle's examples and limiting his claims by these non- 
formal criteria. In answering Avicenna's objections, however, Averroes has been driven 
to distinctions which are unAristotelian. On one of Averroes' distinctions regarding the 
absolute, Ibn-Malih says 
All those who sought to solve this problem imposed on it matters which 
are not fitting for the doctrine of Aristotle, especially Averroes. He did not 
conceive the absolute proposition [properly], and in consequence he made 
three kinds of absolute: the most-part, the least-part, and the in-between, as 
is the situation with the possible. [E1-Ghannouchi, 1971, page 209.20-21] 
These distinctions mean that the Averroist absolute "is not the absolute of the Philoso- 
pher" [E1-Ghannouchi, 1971, page 209.24]--sufficient grounds to reject the Averroist 
absolute. The cult of Aristotle did not die with Averroes, at least not entirely" nor did its 
members entirely concur with Averroist doctrines. 
5.2 
Rescher's 'Western school' 
This and the following section sketch the interests and pedagogical affiliations of the 
post-Avicennan logicians in Baghdad and the realms east of Baghdad. As mentioned in 
the introduction to this chapter, this is where I think Rescher's historical model of Arabic 

568 
Tony Street 
logic is least helpful and needs to be set aside. I recapitulate the important elements of 
that account, because doing so provides the point of departure for this and the next sub- 
section. I offer what seems to me to be the correct version of developments below (see 
page 579). 
Rescher's history of later Eastern logic 
According to Rescher, from the mid-eleventh 
century Avicenna's writings determined the course of philosophical doctrines and discus- 
sions in the realms east of Baghdad. But in the early twelfth century, a major philosopher, 
Abfi-l-Barak~t al-Ba[gd~di (d. 1165), began systematically to challenge these doctrines. 
The spirit in which he did so is characterized as Farabian, which in turn made his logical 
writings somewhat resemble the work of the Andalusian logicians. Further, his impact 
was such in Baghdad and further east that one may speak of a school of logicians once 
again writing in the way of Alfarabi or, at least, challenging Avicenna's logic in ways 
congenial with Alfarabi's writings. One of the most important scholars to be influenced 
by Abfi-l-Barak~t was Fah_raddin ar-R~zi (d. 1210), a prolific Western logician; he taught, 
among others, Afdaladdin al-Kfigi (d. c. 1213). So powerful was the influence of the 
Western refutation of Avicennan logic that it was not until Nasiraddin a.t-T, fisi (d. 1274) 
that a convincing set of counter-arguments in support of Avicennan logic was produced. 
In constructing these counter-arguments, .TQsi was working within what Rescher calls the 
Eastern tradition, badly debilitated but holding on to solutions of, among others, 'Umar 
ibn-Sahl~n as-Sawi (d. 1145). Such was T. fisT's achievement that by the early fourteenth 
century there were two great schools, the Eastern and the Western. The reconciliation 
of these two schools in the fourteenth century by (among others) Qutbaddin ar-Razi at- 
Ta.htfini (d. 1365) was the most important logical event of the period. 
There is an abbreviated variant of this history given in another study by Rescher 
[Rescher, 1967a], which dates the origin of the Western school to R~.zL The abbrevi- 
ated version may be rejected for a subset of the reasons that lead to the rejection of the 
longer account in [Rescher, 1964]. 
Obviously, if there had been a distinct Western school of logicians including R~zi and 
Kfigi, this would be an important consideration in setting about the study of their logical 
writings. The account of the Western and Eastern schools, however, suffers from some 
problems, and considering these problems serves to reveal a more complex reality. Briefly, 
the problems are that (1) Abfi-l-Barak~t was not simply reviving Farabian logical doctrine, 
or even mainly reviving such doctrine; (2) there is no record of a school originating with 
Abfi-l-Barak~t" but anyway (3) RfizT did not follow his doctrine, at least not in the modal 
or the hypothetical syllogistic. There is no pedagogical succession from which one may 
discern a Western school beginning with Ab~-l-Barak~t and being carried on by R~.zi. 
In any event, the Eastern school was not clearly distinct from the Western in terms of 
doctrine; (4) R~zi was closer, logically speaking, to T~si than to either Abfi-l-Barakfit or 
Alfarabi. Further, (5) R~zi was actually an important, if not the most important, route 
by which Tfisi came to receive and understand earlier logical writings--not merely the 
writings of Alfarabi, but those of S~wi as well. Examining the way that the logicians in 
question relate to one another and to earlier scholars reveals a picture more complex than 
that of two schools clashing. In the remainder of this sub-section, I examine problems (1) 

Arabic Logic 
569 
and (2) with Rescher's account noted above, and I examine the further problems in the 
following sub-section. 
Abfi-l-Barakfit al-Bagdfidi's logic 
AbO-l-Barak~t al-Bagdfidi (d. 1165), who is referred 
to by Rescher as Ibn-Malk~, was Jewish by birth, from a small town near Mosul. Abfi- 
1-Barakfit moved to Baghdad and, in old age, he converted to Islam. His great work is 
The tried and tested book, apparently modeled loosely on Avicenna's Cure. He interacted 
with the Avicennan tradition in complex ways, some of which will appear in what follows. 
According to Tanakabuni, a nineteenth-century Persian writer, his work had a major im- 
pact on Fah_raddin ar-R~zi, most especially on Rfizi's Eastern investigations (al-Mab~.hi_t 
al-ma~riqiyya), a work which does not touch on the logic. Further, on this account, if 
NasTraddin a.t-Tfisi had not countered the writings of R~zT, Avicennan philosophy would 
have been discarded [Pines, 1960-]. Whatever truth there may be in this account for the 
history of Islamic philosophy generally, it does not hold for the logic. 
And so to aspects of Abfi-l-Barak~t's logic. Abfi-l-Barakfit mentioned, but was largely 
indifferent to, the wasfi readings; most of what he did has to do with modals in the _d~t~ 
reading. Secondly, though he was working in ways that are influenced by and yet dif- 
ferent from both Alfarabi and Avicenna, Avicenna is incomparably the predominant in- 
fluence. No one after Avicenna could contribute to the Arabic logical tradition without 
paying attention to what he had written. But Abfi-l-Barakfit did more than merely men- 
tion Avicenna to refute him--he accepted a number of arguments and inferences from the 
Avicennan account, implicitly rejecting the related Farabian arguments. 
One of the best opportunities to examine a move typical of those Abfi-l-Barakfit made 
is in his argument to save the e-conversion of the absolute proposition against Avicenna's 
counterexample (see above page 548 ft.). Abfi-l-Barakfit warned people against being like 
one 
according to whose view, imprecise as it is, the e-proposition does not convert 
as an e-proposition (as Aristotle had said). He gives an example for that view: 
laughter may be negated of every person actually at a certain time, so that is 
an absolute negation. Yet it does not convert, that is, its converse is not 
true (that no one laughing is a man, for rather, everyone laughing is a man). 
But he has not considered his words 'at a certain time' and 'actually'. The 
absolute is absolved (mutlaq) of these and other matters; no given time is 
mentioned in it, nor any condition. Rather the predicate and the subject are 
mentioned, and the quantifier in an affirmative, and the particle of negation 
in a negative, without anything further. If [the proposition] is said like that, 
then the example offered is not credible, since no one who conceives things 
accurately on hearing it would accept no man is laughing as an absolute 
statement because [each man] is not laughing at some times, while he would 
accept that every man is laughing because [each man] is laughing at some 
times. So the form of the words in affirmation does not convey perpetuity, 
yet in negation the form does convey perpetuity, such that the negation has to 
be a negation in accordance with that. 

570 
Tony Street 
Reflect on these words, and how they fall in with comprehensibility and 
conceivability---dispense with all they go on about, and ascertain the cor- 
rectness of Aristotle's doctrine in his extremely clear words that do without 
the subtleties used above. [Bagd~di, 1357 A.H., pages 120.20-121.8] 
Abfi-l-Barakfit accepted the Avicennan truth-conditions for the a-proposition in the ab- 
solute, and merely argued against rejecting the 'conventional' truth-conditions for the 
e-proposition (that is to say, his a- and i-propositions are like proposition 10 in appendix 
two, and his e- and o-propositions are like proposition 5). Ab~-l-Barakfit preserved the 
immediate inferences of the Aristotelian assertoric, but he did it while accepting Avicen- 
nan truth-conditions for the absolute a-proposition. 
So much for the first move in the Avicennan modification of the assertoric syllogistic. 
AbQ-1-Barakfit went on to give the accounts not only of conversion, but also of assertoric 
contradiction, to be found in the first seven books of the Prior Analytics. He then moved 
on to the modals. Unlike Alfarabi, and after him Averroes, however, Abfi-l-Barak~t did 
not use reduplicative propositions to get the conversion of the two-sided possible as a 
two-sided possible. In fact, he came to the same conversions for his modals that Avicenna 
proposed, rejecting those defended by Alfarabi and Averroes [Ba~;dfidi, 1357 A.H., pages 
121-122]. Abfi-l-Barak~.t later in his treatise gives the syllogistic moods with both the 
assertoric second figure, and the fourth figure [Bagdfidi, 1357 A.H., page 125 f.; page 
148 ft.]. 
Abfi-l-Barak~t accepted the Avicennan division of the syllogistic into conjunctive and 
exceptive. He also quantified and negated his conditional propositions like Avicennan 
conditionals. He was largely indifferent, however, to the hypothetical syllogistic, and 
belonged to the tradition sceptical of positing a lost 'Aristotelian' treatment of the hy- 
pothetical syllogistic, a tradition represented more than two centuries before by Alfarabi 
(see above page 543). 
Regarding syllogisms which are from hypothetical propositions, Aristotle 
only made mention of the exceptive in his book. What touches on conjunctive 
[hypothetical] syllogisms, both pure, and mixed with categoricals, is clear 
from what he says, and the sound mind will recognize them from what has 
been said. He omitted mentioning them in his book either due to how little 
benefit they are in the sciences, and he disliked the thought of dwelling on 
them; or because he relied on the fact that minds which have come to know 
the categoricals may conclude from them to [the hypotheticals], so that you 
will recognize them from what you have come to know in the categoricals; 
or [he omitted mention of them] for both [reasons]. A certain later scholar 
said that Aristotle had written a special book on them which had not been 
translated into Arabic; this is baseless conjecture. Had he wanted to mention 
them, why did he move them from here, their proper place? Anyway, there is 
not enough concerning them that would merit a separate book with separate 
principles and conclusions. [Bagdfidi, 1357 A.H., page 155.11-18] 
Further, Abfi-l-Barakgt did not analyse the proofs by reduction using the distinction 
[Bagd~.di, 1357 A.H., page 188.11-12]. 

Arabic Logic 
571 
We can hardly claim that Abfi-l-Barakfit represents a modification of the Avicennan 
system in the spirit of Alfarabi. He did not adopt any of the Farabian solutions attacked by 
Avicenna in The Cure (noted above, page 547 ft.), and he accepted the modal conversions 
that Avicenna specified. He also accepted the Avicennan division of the syllogistic into 
conjunctive and exceptive, though he did not emphasize or use it as much as Avicenna 
did. It is true that he was not like other Avicennan logicians, described in the next section, 
who were particularly interested in the extensions of the wasff readings. Nor was he a 
precursor to what Averroes did, and although an Aristotelian, his Aristotelianism is much 
more textually attenuated than that of Averroes. 
'Abdalla.tif al-Bagdgdi 
That said, there is at least one scholar in Baghdad, somewhat 
later than Abfi-l-Barak~.t, who did direct his philosophical project towards a recovery of 
Aristotle by way of Alfarabi. This philosopher was the rather idiosyncratic 'Abdallatif 
al-Bagdfidi (d. 1231), who, having studied Avicennan philosophy, went from Baghdad 
westwards, travelling widely. On his travels, he met scholars who convinced him that the 
philosophy he had studied was not as good as Alfarabi's. He came to write more along 
Farabian than Avicennan lines, and apparently composed a number of commentaries on 
Alfarabi's works [Gutas, 1993, page 50]. This is very interesting, although it must be said 
that we do not to this day have in published form a logical treatise by 'Abdallatif. What we 
do have is a manuscript in Brusa which may well be vital, not merely for understanding 
'Abdalla.tif, but also for reconstructing Alfarabi's lost Long commentary on the Prior 
Analytics. The relevant part is paraphrased by Stern as follows: 
Some particular points in Aristotle's logic have been criticised, but it turned 
out he was right and his critics did not understand his meaning; this has been 
explained by al-F~.r~bi in his great commentary on the Prior Analytics. It 
is altogether a great mistake to think that the modern works are clearer in 
exposition or style than those of the ancients. [Stern, 1962, page 63] 
Until we reassemble the logical writings of 'Abdallatif, we can do little more than note 
that at least one scholar worked in a Farabian rather than an Avicennan line. 
5.3 
The Avicennan tradition 
Neither Abfi-l-Barakfit nor 'Abdallatif represents a larger school which had returned to 
Farabian doctrine, at least in the syllogistic. Nor was Fah_raddin ar-R~.zi the representative 
of a school at war with the school to which the great Nasiraddin at-TOs~ belonged. In 
dealing with this second set of objections to Rescher's claim for a Western school (that 
is, objections 3, 4 and 5 at page 568 above), I propose to show two things" in terms of 
the later reception of Avicennan logic, Rfizi was rather more one of Tfisi's sources than a 
target for criticism, and, secondly, in terms of substance, Rfizi and Tfisi were interested in 
broadly the same questions and came to roughly the same answers. In short, I approach the 
material here firstly source-critically, and then in terms of its substantive logical doctrine. 

572 
Tony Street 
R~zi, T,~si and the logical tradition 
In coming to terms with the scholarly relation 
between Rfizi and Tfisi, one has first to negotiate a tendency in studies on the history 
of Islamic philosophy to overstress the differences between the two men. This arises 
in large part because of the excoriating attacks made by Tfisi in commenting on Rfizi's 
Validated philosophy of the ancients and the moderns (Mu.hassal afkFtr al-muta'a_h_hir~n 
wal-mutaqaddim~n), a text which does not deal with the logic. But Tfisi had at least a 
grudging admiration for R~zi's commentary on Pointers. This was so in spite of the fact 
that it is often said in histories of Islamic philosophy that Tfisi thought Rfizi's commentary 
was a "di~.tribe not a commentary" [Fakhry, 19832, page 320, to cite one of many possible 
examples]. What Tfisi wrote is this: 
Among those who have already commented on this book is the eminent and 
erudite Fah_raddin, prince of the controversialists, Muh.ammad ibn-'Umar 
ibn-al- .Husayn al-_Ha.tib ar-Rfizi. He made an effort to explain as clearly as 
possible everything in it that was hidden, and strove to express in the best 
way that which was obscure; he followed in hot pursuit of what was meant, 
and, in searching out what was deposited therein, he reached the furthest path 
of penetration. He was excessive, however, in responding to Avicenna in the 
course of his essay, and in refuting his principles overstepped the bounds of 
justice. By these efforts he only detracted from his own work, and because 
of them a certain wit has called his commentary a diatribe. [TQsi, 1971, page 
112.1-6] 
Tfisi thought Rfizi's commentary was overly oppositional in expositing Avicenna's sys- 
tem, but when TQsi was asked to write a commentary on Pointers himself, he said of its 
notoriously laconic doctrinal payload: "I gained it from the first commentary, mentioned 
above, and from other famous books..." [Tfisi, 1971, page 112.18-19]. 
I have dwelt on this because I think it is why Rescher came to decide that R~zi and 
Tfisi were at loggerheads in the logic. They were not, even though they may have been 
in metaphysics. More important than any explicit appraisal of Rfizi by TQsi, however, is 
how they both approached the logical tradition and its problems. As it turns out, T~si 
named the scholars he was drawing on, and how he differed from them. The logicians 
to whom T~si referred may be divided into three groups, groups which are mentioned 
to serve different functions in the course of T. ~si's exposition. The first group of logi- 
cians he mentioned consists of Greeks from classical times and late antiquity: Aristotle, 
Theophrastus, Eudemus, Alexander, Themistius, Porphyry. The second group, or really 
pair, of logicians mentioned is made up of Avicenna and Alfarabi (T~si rightly took 'the 
eminent later scholar' of The Cure to be Alfarabi). There are, lastly, four scholars whose 
names are invoked, who either died somewhat before Tfisi was writing, or were his con- 
temporaries. The oldest of these scholars is 'Umar ibn-Sahl~n as-Sfiwi (d. 1145) [Brock- 
elmann, 1936-1949, Supplementary volume I, page 830], who wrote Insights into logic 
for NasTraddrn [S~wi, 1898]. The next oldest source quoted by Tfisi is Rg.zi. The third 
logician is Af.daladdin K~gi---death-dates for K~gi vary widely, from 1213 or 1214 to the 
early fourteenth century, but the earlier date seems preferable [Chittick, 1982-]. Rescher 
has Kfigi as Rfizi's student, though there is little evidence to support this [Rescher, 1964, 

Arabic Logic 
573 
page 68]. K~i's second longest work is an Arabic treatise on logic called the Clear Path 
[K~gi, ]. The last of the logicians mentioned is Atiraddin al-Abhari (d. 1264)" Abhari 
studied under Kam~laddin ibn-Yfinus, who was probably also Tfisi's teacher. Abhari 
wrote a number of logical works, among them the famous Introduction to logic [Calver- 
ley, 1933]. Sadly, I have not seen any of Abhari's longer works on logicmI think none 
has been printed. 
I list these sources because it allows us to examine which sources Tfisi shared with 
Rfizi, and whether he read them in the same way that R~.zi did. R~.zi did not mention 
the Greek logicians (at least on my reading), but he did mention both Alfarabi and S~wi. 
Before I turn to how R~.zi read these logicians, and influenced Tfisi's reading of them, I 
should say that although Razi did not mention the Greeks whom Tfisi mentioned, he did 
deal with all the logical doctrines that TQsi addressed in referring to the Greeks. (I return 
to this point; see below page 577 f,) 
R~zi referred to Alfarabi by name to bring out his doctrine of the ampliation of the 
subject-term. I don't think he made such a reference in Gist or his longer commentary 
on Pointers, but in his Summary of philosophy and logic, he wrote that "Alfarabi claimed 
that in all Js one should not consider the occurrence of actual Js, but rather what may 
be describable as J" [R~.zi, a, folio 23a.13]. In the longer commentary on Pointers itself 
he gave the Alexandrian proof for e-conversion without, however, ascribing it to anyone 
[R~zi, b, folio 41b.12 et seq.]. Tosi gave accounts of precisely these Farabian doctrines 
(the ampliation of the subject-term [TQsi, 1971, page 282.1-4]; e-conversion [Tfisi, 1971, 
page 325.8-12]). Both men, that is to say, were reading exactly the same things out 
of Alfarabi, or perhaps relaying the same thingsmI wonder if either had actually read 
Alfarabi. 
Again, T. fisi read S~.wi the same way R~zi did. At every point that Tfisi consulted S~wi 
in his commentary, R~.zi had preceded him. In treating the conversion of the wasfi non- 
perpetual, Tfisi wrote almost verbatim [Tfisi, 1971, page 328.5 et seq.] what we find in 
R~zi [R~.zi, b, folio 4 lb.pu et seq.]; so too for the first-figure syllogisms with mixed wasfi 
and _daffpremises (compare [Tfisi, 1971, page 400.12 et seq.] and [R~.zi, b, folio 53b.pu et 
seq.]), and for the second-figure syllogisms with the same mix (compare [Tfisi, 1971, page 
416.19 et seq.] and [Rfizi, b, folio 57b.18 et seq.]). In fact, I doubt that Tfisi had actually 
read S~.wi for himself, because he credited R~zi with coining the term 'conventional' 
('urfiyya), even though we find it in S~wi [Sfiwi, 1898, page 73.5] (although there of 
course it may be being used pre-technically). 
None of this is surprising; it is exactly what Tfisi announced he would do at the be- 
ginning of his commentary. To picture Tfisi and Sfiwi in an Eastern school, doing things 
logically different from Rfizi~this just misrepresents what was going on. Further, R~.zi 
and Tfisi were both closer to each other than either of them was to Avicenna. Clinging to 
the idea of an Eastern and a Western school makes it difficult to understand why schol- 
ars who appear as either Eastern or Western are doing such similar things (and things so 
different from what Abfi-l-Barakfit was doing), and why 'Easterners' draw so freely on 
'Westerners' and vice versa. Rescher's account of the Western school [Rescher, 1964, 
page 57] needs to be rejected. 

574 
Tony Street 
Along with the rejection of the 'clash of the schools', we need further to reject the 
reconciliation of the schools in the Arbitration between the two commentaries [Tah. t~ni, 
1375 AH solar] by Qutbaddin ar-R~zi at-Ta.htfini (d. 1365). (My comments here do not 
in any way go to what Ta.ht~ni may or may not have been doing in the physics and meta- 
physics.) There are about forty references in T. fisi's commentary on the logic of Pointers 
to Rfizi, and they clearly did differ on many points. But following Tahtfini's Arbitration 
as it goes through the logic, one cannot fail to be struck by how often Tah. tani had nothing 
to say on the points of difference and, on those few occasions he did say something, how 
rarely it consituted a synthesis or reconciliation of two seemingly incompatible views. As 
it happens, attitudes of some logicians in Iran and further east differed from the attitudes 
of others, in a way I will examine below. There were not, however, two schools differing 
fundamentally on matters of substantive logical doctrine. 
No logician after Avicenna defended the Avicennan syllogistic pure and simple. 
Changes were put forward for (among other things) the _d~tff propositions, the wasff propo- 
sitions, the temporals (waqtiyydt), and the analysis of the proof by reduction. I note some 
aspects of each in turn, but I stress that these notes fail badly in conveying the depth and 
range of logical analysis of each aspect, because they are limited to the discussions which 
issued in the doctrine of the madrasa texts. It is this development of logic which was said 
by Ibn- _Haldfin to be penetrating, constituting a discipline in its own right (see below page 
580); the same development was compared by Ibn-Taymiyya to carrion (see above page 
560). 
_D~ff propositions 
It was noted (see page 552 above) that Avicenna's syllogistic with 
_ddff premises includes some puzzling inferences or, more strictly, sets of puzzling infer- 
ences. Take, for example, the claim that absolute a- and i-propositions (see proposition 
10 in appendix 2) convert as absolute i-propositions, that one-sided possible a- and i- 
propositions convert as one-sided possible i-propositions, and yet that syllogisms with 
possible minors and absolute majors produce. In fact, syllogisms with possible minors 
are central to the development of Avicenna's system. There may well be a way to show 
the compatibility of all the inferences Avicenna proves, but I cannot see what it is. More 
importantly, nor could the thirteenth-century logicians. Early on, efforts were made by 
Fah_raddTn ar-R~zi to save most of Avicenna's modal syllogisms, seemingly by taking 
the subject-term to ampliate to the possible. This meant having the absolute a- and i- 
propositions convert as possibles (see e.g. [R~zL 13552 A. H., page 24.16-20]). 
I am not sure if the inferences in R~zFs alternative system actually square any better 
than Avicenna's, but in any event, no one seems to have adopted his approach. By the 
time Tfisi's student Na~maddin al-K~tiN (d. 1276) was writing, it is clear that scholars 
had come to agree that syllogisms with possible minors do not produce, at least not if the 
propositions are read according to the ordinary way of taking the subject-term. K~tiN 
put forward the following distinction" In a world where it so happens that there is no 
geometrical figure apart from triangles, all figures are triangles is true. If, however, we 
are concerned not with how things happen to be, but with how meanings relate, all figures 
are triangles is untrue, even in that world where it so happens that all figures are triangles. 
The subject-term was to be read in the first way. 

Arabic Logic 
575 
Tfis~ and K~.tibi differed from R~zi over how to take the subject-term, and the K~tibi 
view won out, at least in the later tradition that has so far been examined in modern 
studies. In Mu.hammad ibn-Fay .dall~h a~-Sirw~.nT (ft. 15th century?), for example, we find 
Avicenna characterised as taking the subject-term as referring to that which is "actual, 
that is, at a given time, whether it be at the time of the judgement, or in the past, or in the 
future" [Sirw~ni,, folio 96a.6-10], a characterisation which would be less problematic 
if it were not directly linked to the untrue claim that Avicenna did not allow possible 
affirmative propositions to convert. Strange to say, R~zi was more Avicennan than K~tib~ 
on this point. It is a major point, affecting the fabric of the entire _dgtr syllogistic; K~.tibi's 
decision means that all first-figure syllogisms with possible minors fail to produce, and 
all the syllogisms which depend on these mixes for their proofs also fail. And Rfizi was 
not just defending syllogisms with possible minors in an act of commentatorial charity" 
we find him committed to them not only in his commentaries on Avicenna [R~zi, 13552 
A. H., pages 33-34] but also when he is speaking in his own voice, in The summary of 
philosophy and logic [Rfizi, a, folio 46b.9]. 
We should note one other point of comparison between the thirteenth-century logicians 
and Avicenna in their presentation of the syllogistic with _ddtr modal premises, which has 
to do with their respective concern for Aristotelicity. Avicenna mentioned the perpetual 
(proposition 5 in appendix two) in his development of the syllogistic only when giving 
the contradictory of the absolute, but at no other place. I can only speculate about the rea- 
son for this, but I think it is because Avicenna's presentation is developed in conversation 
with Aristotle's account, and thus he can find no place for a perpetual, because there is no 
perpetual in the Prior Analytics. Whether or not I am right about this, it is none the less 
true that the short thirteenth-century accounts have the perpetual as a proposition fully 
investigated throughout the presentation. Further, some of the converses of _d~t~ propo- 
sitions are no longer _ddtr propositions (these points should become clear by comparing 
appendices one and two). I think all of this is symptomatic of increasing indifference to 
the Aristotelian account (see further page 577 below). 
Was.ff propositions 
All the logicians I have read were agreed that there were seri- 
ous problems with Avicenna's account of propositions in the descriptional reading (the 
wa.sfiyyfit). Avicenna claimed, among other things, that the contradictory of all Js are 
always Bs while Js is some Js are always not Bs while Js (it is not clear to me that this is 
what Avicenna actually claimed, but anyway, this is what he was taken to have claimed). 
Among the limited sources I have examined, this concern began with Sfiw~ [SfiwT, 1898, 
page 70.10 et seq.], and his approach to the problem is reflected in Rfizi's Gist [RfizT, 
13552 A. H., page 22.1-4]. It is interesting to follow the concerns about Avicenna's 
claims that a perpetual in the was.ff reading is contradicted by another perpetual in the 
wa.sff reading as they gradually gather clarity and, ultimately, technical terms to describe 
the concerns. By the time of Tfis~, it was taken as settled that a solution had been reached, 
and that the descriptional perpetual (a wasff reading, proposition 6 in appendix two), must 
be contradicted by a wasfi absolute, called by Tfisi mutlaqa wasfiyya [Tfisi, 1971, page 
313.8] (proposition 7 in appendix two). KS.tibi called it the .hrniyya [Kfitib$, 1854, page 
16.8], though it is not given in his treatise as one of the propositions in the preliminary list- 

576 
Tony Street 
ing..H~niyya is adopted as the usual term for the proposition in the subsequent literature 
[Sirwfini,, folio 86a.12], and it joins the other propositions in the preliminary listing. We 
can be sure that Abhari was also working on questions to do with the wasfi propositions, 
because Tfisi mentioned in passing that he took a conventional existential o-proposition to 
convert (this is not a point Abhari makes in his Introduction, and I cannot check it). Avi- 
cenna's claims regarding the wasfi readings have been the subject of a recent study which 
proceeds by adopting an understanding of the proposition proposed by Tfis~ [Thom, ]. 
In the case of the _dat~-readings and the perpetual, the thirteenth-century logicians were 
indifferent to the fact that Aristotle had not used a perpetual in his account in the Prior 
Analytics. In treating the wasff readings, they betray no feeling of pressure to find a propo- 
sition which conforms to the immediate inferences required of the Aristotelian assertoric. 
Nor are they primarily interested in syllogisms with purely wasfi premises, which I think 
was Avicenna's primary concern, but with the ways mixes of wasff and _dctt~ readings 
produce. This takes up a later and less central concern of Avicenna. 
Temporals 
One of the extrinsic conditions on a proposition which occurred in Avi- 
cenna's list was the as-of-now. Avicenna used it once in the course of his exposition to 
save the Aristotelian account of contradiction9 Tfisi's student K~.tibi introduced it into the 
propositions "into which it is usual to inquire," using it to produce a modalized proposi- 
tion. Much later, the temporals were exhaustively analysed by Sirw~ni (see appendix two, 
propositions 3, 4, 8, 9, 12, 14, 17, 18, 22 and 23). As with the wasfi-readings, however, 
the thirteenth-century logicians were not concerned to use the as-of-now to preserve the 
Aristotelian account, and changed its truth-conditions so it no longer squared even with 
the way Avicenna used it. 
Proofs by reduction 
Another point that needs to be considered is how the Avicennan 
logicians dealt with the proof by reduction9 (I will not try to describe their extensive exam- 
ination of the hypothetical syllogistic.) S~.wi took it to be a combination of a conjunctive 
and an exceptive [S~wi, 1898, page 104.pu-u], just as Avicenna had. R~zi followed S~wi 
and Avicenna on this point [R~zi, 13552 A. H., page 43.17-18]. But K~gi, on the re- 
lation between the categorical and the hypothetical syllogistics, differed from Avicenna 
and offered an alternative analysis which is treated sympathetically and, I think, actually 
adopted by Tfisi and subsequent logicians whom he influenced. 
K~.gi's argument seems to me to amount to no more than an argument by assertion, 
though perhaps more sensitive and acute study of the problem will turn up a different 
conclusion. What K~i concluded is: 
The deduction involving a contradiction is an exceptive syllogism whose mi- 
nor premise is hypothetical with a compound antecedent, and whose major 
premise is categorical, being the contradictory of the consequent. So it pro- 
duces the contradictory of the first proposition of the two parts of the an- 
tecedent of the minor. This is its form: 
If Zayd is writing, and everyone who is writing moves his fingers, 
then Zayd is moving his fingers; 

Arabic Logic 
577 
But Zayd is not moving his fingers; 
Therefore Zayd is not writing. [Kggi,, folio 72a.1-5] 
Kfigi felt compelled to put forward his alternative view of reduction because of arguments 
which had become common. 
The reason for this disquisition is to alert people to the truth of the matter 
concerning how a deduction involving a contradiction is composed. This is 
because what is to be understood from a certain verifying scholar is other 
than what we have mentioned. He said rather that this is not the case, but that 
the deduction involving a contradiction is composed of two syllogisms, one 
conjunctive and the other exceptive; just as when it is said that the hypothet- 
ical proposition is composed of two categorical propositions, from which it 
is to be understood that the hypothetical proposition is something other than 
these two. The deduction involving a contradiction is not like that--it is just 
an exceptive; it is an exceptive syllogism whose minor premise is composed 
of two categorical propositions sharing a term, from the granting of which 
there follows as a consequent of the first proposition with its two parts, and 
the major premise, a categorical proposition which contradicts the antecedent 
of the minor. This has been determined before, and illustrated. [K~.~[,, folio 
7 lb.u-72b. 13] 
It is worth noting the form of K~.~Fs claim. He did not derive his view of the matter from 
the Averroist critique, or from its antecedents. 
The cult of Avicenna 
Tfisi seems to have adopted Kfigi's analysis of the reduction. It 
is instructive to note what he took to be Avicenna's reasons for taking the view he did on 
the hypothetical syllogistic. 
Aristotle placed the deduction involving a contradiction among the hypothet- 
ical syllogisms, yet in his writings there were only exceptive hypotheticals; 
consequently most logicians simply called [the exceptive] a hypothetical syl- 
logism. 
However, Avicenna thought that the conjunctive hypotheticals had been treated 
in a separate text which was not translated into Arabic. [This was] simply an 
assumption which Avicenna was compelled to hold due to his good opinion 
of Aristotle. When the later logicians wanted to analyse this syllogism, and 
reduce it to the above-mentioned syllogisms, that analysis was difficult for 
them to accept, and they differed completely from Avicenna. [Tfisi, 1971, 
page 453] 
This exemplifies the way that TfisT approached the Avicennan system, and how his 
approach differed from Rg.zi's. The difference is even starker when Tfisi mentioned Greek 
philosophers at another important point in his commentary, as will emerge. 
Tfisi was among the many who accepted the modifications to Avicenna's doctrines 
regarding the was.f( propositions. Unlike other scholars, however, Tfisi did so while at 

578 
Tony Street 
the same time presenting Avicenna as responding to an ancient peripatetic debate re- 
garding what place the absolute proposition has in scientific discourse. Avicenna's kinds 
of absolute proposition (corresponding roughly to propositions 6, 10, 20 and 24 in ap- 
pendix 2), Tfisi claimed, find places for the various doctrines of Aristotle, Themistius and 
Theophrastus, and Alexander [Tfis[, 1971, pages 268.pu-269.20]. The problem is that 
the _dSt~-reading of the absolute does not find contradictories or convert as an Aristotelian 
assertoric, so Avicenna stipulated a reading of the absolute that he thought did. Tfisi 
wrote" 
What spurred him to this was that in the assertoric syllogistic Aristotle and 
others sometimes used contradictions of absolute propositions assuming them 
to be absolute; and that was why so many decided that absolutes did contra- 
dict absolutes. When Avicenna had shown this to be wrong, he wanted to 
give a way of construing those [examples from Aristotle]. [TOsi, 1971, page 
312.5-7] 
The modified, convertible absolute proposition presented by Avicenna is also able, ac- 
cording to TOsi, to accommodate the opposing interpretations of the absolute proposition 
put forward by Theophrastus and Alexander. 
We have mentioned that the validating scholars of this art had two views in 
explaining the absolute. The first of them is that it includes the necessary, as 
Themistius held, and that is the general. The second is that it does not include 
the necessary, as Alexander held, and that is the special. Avicenna wanted 
to show that each of the two views could be specified in the way which he 
puts forward here, so that it is compatible with contradiction in the absolute 
according to both of the two views. 
His explanation is that the conventional can be taken to cover the necessary, 
and be general; or it can be taken not to cover the necessary, and be spe- 
cial. The conventional general absolute agrees with the first view; and the 
special.., agrees with Alexander. [Tfisi, 1971, pages 313.16-314.6] 
On the fact that Avicenna took such pride in the fact that his two readings of the proposi- 
tions allowed him to square a set of examples where other logicians had failed (see above 
page 551), T0si wrote: 
He means the majority of logicians were not able to escape the consequences 
of their doctrine, that is, that absolutes contradict absolutes. This is because 
they were not able to construe the absolute mentioned in the First Teaching 
in all places according to their doctrine. Among relevant examples in the 
First Teaching are the absolutes All who wake sleep and All who sleep wake, 
and others like them which cannot be construed as conventional. Similarly in 
usage, since the First Teaching used the absolute where it is not possible to 
use the conventional. [Tfisi, 1971, pages 314.12-315.2] 
There are no references to Greek scholars in the corresponding passages in RfizT's texts 
(at least on my reading). Both scholars were convinced that Avicenna's system needed 

Arabic Logic 
579 
repair by either extension or restriction, and both proceeded to implement such changes, 
sometimes Tfis~ more than R~z~ (especially for example in the_ddtg propositions). But R~.z~ 
made his changes with little outward show of respect; at one point in Gist, for example, 
we find him saying" 
Once you have come to understand what I have mentioned here, you will 
realise that this commentary, in spite of its brevity, is more explanatory and 
rigorous than what is in Avicenna's book, in spite of its length. [R~.zi, 13552 
A. H., page 22.14] 
Tfisi, by contrast, nearly always found a way to justify the position Avicenna had adopted. 
That is the role the Greek authors play in his commentarymthey indicate where Avi- 
cenna's doctrine is open for contestation and reinterpretation, while saving Avicenna from 
any charge of logical error. 
Post-Avicennan logic in Baghdad and further east 
At this point, I offer a short and 
tentative outline of the history of post-Avicennan logic in Baghdad and further east. 
In Baghdad, attention continued to be paid to the ways Aristotle had organised his 
logic and proved his inferences, though by 1150 at the latest it was clear that Avicennan 
counterexamples had problematized the Aristotelian account. We can assume that A1- 
farabi's texts were being read in Baghdad, though the fact that someone like 'AbdallatTf 
al-Bagd~d~ had to learn his Farabian logic outside of Baghdad shows that the tradition of 
reading these texts was growing ever weaker. References to Alfarabi among these logi- 
cians are so stereotypical that we must wonder if his texts were available at all. By the 
time of Barhebraeus (d. 1286), even the Syriac Christians had become Avicennan. 
Further east, by the first half of the twelfth century, an Avicennan tradition was well ad- 
vanced in the process of modifying Avicenna's system. The Avicennan tradition may be 
called 'Avicennan', as has been mentioned, because it accepted the division of the syllo- 
gistic into the conjunctive and exceptive, it accepted the conditions proposed by Avicenna 
as the relevant ones within which to investigate modalities and temporalities, and it ac- 
cepted the stipulation of truth-conditions for the absolute such that it was contradicted by 
a perpetual. This tradition proceeded with little or no reference to the Aristotelian corpus, 
at least in its early days, producing a modified system by the end of the thirteenth century 
which by and large continued to be accepted down till well into last century. Among some 
of its later adherents, the tradition started to refer once again to the writings of Aristotle; 
these references are associated with a cult of Avicenna which used the Greek references as 
a way to excuse some of Avicenna's less easily defended moves. But scholarly courtesy 
to the great Avicenna in no way prevented changes being made to his logical system. 
5.4 
The Handbooks of the Madrasa 
At roughly the same time that a consensus was emerging that the major questions in Avi- 
cenna's formal syllogistic had been settled, the madrasa was reaching a period of institu- 
tional stability and influence. Gazfil~'s opinion that logic was useful for Muslim scholars 
was an important factor in having the subject included in the syllabus of the madrasa. The 

580 
Tony Street 
doctrine of the madrasa handbooks was determined by the Avicennan tradition described 
in the last section. We can be fairly sure that this was the dominant tradition by the mid- 
thirteenth century not only from the fact that even the Syriac Christians used Avicennan 
logic, but also from the account of the great polymath, Ibn- _Haldfin, who wrote about some 
of the important handbooks of the time. 
The emergence of the handbooks 
Ibn-_Haldfin received his training in logic from these 
handbooks, and in his Prolegomena, he described both the changes in emphasis over 
the years within the discipline of logic, and which books were used in teaching. After 
describing the composition of the Organon and the logical issues each part of it addresses, 
the Prolegomena continues: 
Its sections came to be nine; and all were translated in the Islamic commu- 
nity, and the philosophers dealt with [these books] by commentary and expo- 
sition. Alfarabi did [this], and Avicenna, and Averroes among the Andalusian 
philosophersmAvicenna wrote The Cure, in which he took in all seven philo- 
sophical disciplines. Then the later scholars came and changed the technical 
terms of logic; and they appended to the investigation of the five universals 
its fruit, which is to say the discussion of definitions and descriptions which 
they moved from the Posterior Analytics; and they dropped the Categories 
because a logician is only accidentally and not essentially interested in that 
book; and they appended to On Interpretation the treatment of conversion 
(even if it had been in the Topics in the texts of the ancients, it is none the 
less in some respects among the things which follow on from the treatment 
of propositions). Moreover, they treated the syllogistic with respect to its 
productivity generally, not with respect to its matter. They dropped the inves- 
tigation of [the syllogistic] with respect to matter, which is to say, these five 
books: Posterior Analytics, Topics, Rhetoric, Poetics, and Sophistical Falla- 
cies (though sometimes some of them give a brief outline of them). They 
have ignored [these five books] as though they had never been, even though 
they are important and relied upon in the discipline. Moreover, that part of 
[the discipline] they have set down they have treated in a penetrating way; 
they look into it in so far as it is a discipline in its own right, not in so far 
as it is an instrument for the sciences. Treatment of [the subject as newly 
conceived] has become lengthy and wide-ranging--the first to do that was 
Fah_radd~n ar-R~z~ and, after him, H_ fina~T (on whose books Eastern scholars 
rely even now). On this art, H_ fina~ has written The Disclosure of Secrets, 
which is long, and an abridgement, The Short Epitome, which is good for 
teaching, and another abridgement, The Digest, which in four folios takes up 
the cruces and principles of the discipline--students use it frequently to this 
day and benefit from it. 
The books and ways of the ancients have been abandoned, as though they had 
never been... ([Ibn-_HaldOn, 1858, pages 112.8-113.12]; cf. [Ibn-_HaldQn, 
1958, pages 142-143]) 

Arabic Logic 
581 
The formal syllogistic, Ibn-Taymiyya's camel carrion, survived the ending of interest in 
the 'material' disciplines. Ibn-_Haldfin dated this change from RS.zi's work, though it is 
apparent already in S~wi's Insights and even in Avicenna's Pointers and Reminders. 
The other scholar in Ibn-_Haldfin's account is Muhammad ibn-N~.mwar al-_Hfina~i 
(d. 1249), who had been a judge in Cairo. I think the point Ibn-_Haldfin was trying to 
make in mentioning his treatises is that logicians writing in the West were doing logic 
so well that even logicians in the East had to take notice. An examination of his Digest 
reveals just what Ibn-_Haldfin meant when he talked about the change in focus and depth 
of treatment. Of fourteen pages, the first three are given over to utterances, universals, 
definitions and descriptions; all the rest are given over to the formal study of propositions 
and the syllogistic. The presentation of the different kinds of propositions begins on 76a, 
and proceeds by laying out the modalities and temporalities (necessity and perpetuity and 
their duals), goes on to the readings (_ddt~-and wasjq), and then the temporal constants (the 
temporal and the spread). Mention is made of the different doctrines on the absolute, and 
of the different doctrines on how the subject-term can be taken. What we find, in short, 
is precisely the same sort of approach to the propositions that we find in RS.zi and Tfisi 
though it is important to stress that the doctrine presented is not uniquely that of RS.zi, but 
rather reflective of the main options in his and Tfisi's tradition. Again, in the division of 
the syllogisms, _Hfina(~i adopted the Avicennan distinction between conjunctive and ex- 
ceptive, though it is impossible to gauge from his reference to reduction [ _Hfina(gi,, folio 
77a.11-13] how he analysed it. Proportionally, an extraordinary amount of attention is 
devoted to the conditionals [H_ fina~,, folio 78a-80a]. 
Two standard texts 
It was two contemporaries of _Hfina~, however, who wrote the 
treatises most widely used as introductions to the subject over the centuries: Abhaff (see 
[Gutas, 1993, page 63 note 161]) and Kfitibi (see [Katibi, 1854]). In Calverly's transla- 
tion, Abhaff's Introduction comes to eight pages [Calverley, 1933]. In much the same 
way as Avicenna's introductory Philosophy for 'Ald'addawla [Avicenna, 1971 ], it is is 
very elementary and general. Aside from the fact that it divides the syllogistic into the 
conjunctive and exceptive, it could come from just about any tradition derived from Peri- 
patetic logic. But it presents its logic in the order and with the terms that make it the 
perfect preliminary to a more difficult text. 
For most students through the centuries that text was KfitibFs Logic for Samsadd~n 
[Kfitibi, 1854]. In Sprenger's edition it comes to twenty-nine pages. It has been trans- 
lated, mostly by Sprenger and Kaye, and by Rescher [Rescher, 1967b]. The whole text is 
probably ready for a new translation, complete with annotations and the semantics due to 
Rescher and vander Nat [Rescher and vander Nat, 1974] (given in appendix two below). 
I offer a rapid sketch of the book. 
K~tib~ did not compare logic to grammar. But he wrote that to acquire the demon- 
strative sciences and come in contact with the angelic intelligences, the loftiest pusuit for 
man, one cannot do without logic [K~tibi, 1854, page 1.5-7]. K~tibi went on by intro- 
ducing the terms tasawwur and tasdrq in the first section of his treatise [KatibT, 1854, 
page 2.5-7], naming the subject-matter of logic as "the objects of cognition, both concep- 
tual and prone to assent" (al-ma'lamdtu t-tasawwuriyya wat-tasdrqiyya) [KfitibT, 1854, 

582 
Tony Street 
page 2.18]. The theory of definition deals with conception, while the theory of proof 
deals with assent [K~.tibi, 1854, page 2.u]--this is straightforwardly Avicennan. There 
is no reference to the reduction of legal arguments to the syllogism, and the context the- 
ory is confined to the section on syllogistic matter (17 mawgtddi l-qiy~ts~tt). That said, the 
equation of merely presumed matter (ma.zn~n) with rhetoric would have signalled clearly 
where juristic arguments were thought to fit into the theory. 
Like Abhari, K~tibi accepted the division of the syllogistic into conjunctive and excep- 
tive, though the text does not devote much attention to conjunctive hypotheticals, nor to 
the Avicennan analysis of the deduction involving a contradiction. The text then presents 
a version of the assertoric syllogistic that squares with Aristotle's account, but goes on to 
say that this will not work for the absolute proposition. KfitibT's subsequent account of the 
syllogistic with the various modalities and temporalities in both the _d~ff and wasfi read- 
ings is a modification and extension of Avicennan ideas. Overall, his logic is Avicennan 
only in the attenuated sense that TfisT's logic is. 
Kfitibi and his teacher Tfisi also had complicated discussions about a number of ab- 
struse points of logic, discussions which, though recorded, probably only ever attracted 
the attention of a few scholars (for example, Logical Discussions; see [Mohaghegh and 
Izutsu, 1974, pages 279-286]). By contrast, Logic for SamsaddFn was read by nearly 
every student. One may reflect that it was (~az~.li who had made its inclusion in the cur- 
riculum possible, even though the treatise deals with logical points that are almost entirely 
absent from GazfilT's treatises. It is ironic that a scholar with interests confined to the ma- 
terial application of logic had done more than anyone else to find a permanent place for a 
treatise dealing with entirely formal questions. 
6 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
These concluding remarks are, strictly speaking, more of an apology for the narrow focus 
and relentlessly historical emphasis of this chapter, and for the tentative nature of its 
claims. To trace a set of logical discussions from fragments written in Abbasid times 
through to the introductory madrasa texts of the late thirteenth century entails finding a 
topic common to all the texts. That common topic, the syllogistic, is apt for study due 
to the existing scholarship. I further think (to repeat my introductory comments) that 
tracing such a common topic is worthwhile above all because it begins the process of 
delineating the framework of logical traditions which in turn determine the system that is 
the primary object of discussion and dispute for any given logician. The very first thing 
to do when setting out to study an Arabic logical work is to assign the work to its proper 
systematic context, that is, the texts it addresses and the methods by which it engages with 
those texts. I cannot say that Muslim scholars adhered to the traditions apparent in the 
syllogistic when they contributed to other areas of logic, but I think it is likely that they 
did, and that the historical account put forward in this chapter may serve provisionally for 
the study of other debates. 
Here then is a summary of the points made in this chapter regarding the syllogistic 
traditions. The account differs most significantly from Rescher's in speculating that Avi- 
cenna belonged to an existing tradition already fundamentally different from Alfarabi's, 

Arabic Logic 
583 
and in rejecting his claims regarding a 'Western' school of logic [Rescher, 1964, chapters 
five and six]. 
Syllogistic traditions 
Alfarabi was the first truly independent logician writing in Ara- 
bic. We may discern three factors in his writings. Above all, he was a product of late 
Alexandrian Aristotelianism, and drew, however remotely, on the texts and techniques of 
that tradition. These he modified in response to the fact that he was a Muslim scholar 
working on a foreign and pagan intellectual tradition. Lastly, Alfarabi came to be con- 
scious of how badly the Aristotelian corpus was served by the interpretations in the exist- 
ing Alexandrian and Syriac works. This led Alfarabi to try to revive a true Aristotelian- 
ism after a period of rupture, which he did by writing commentaries on Aristotelian texts. 
Though we no longer have the commentary on the first part of the Prior Analytics, we can 
reconstruct his treatment of the conversion of contingent propositions from references in 
the works of Avicenna and Averroes. In this treatment, Alfarabi tried to let the Aristotelian 
text stand by finding an appropriate stratagem (in this case, a distinction prefiguring the 
Averroist distinction between reading a term per se or per accidens). Alfarabi in his 
moments of exegetical exertion was fairly dismissive of the 'commentators', presumably 
members of the Syriac tradition from which he distanced himself. 
Avicenna had, broadly speaking, the same philosophical ancestry as Alfarabi, and 
claimed Alfarabi as his most eminent forebear after Aristotle. Avicenna's prominence 
among logicians in Iran and further east roughly parallels that of Alfarabi among the 
Baghdad logicians. Many of his doctrines which seem idiosyncratic to us are not in the 
writings of the Baghdad scholars, and are presented as though they are already known 
to his readers. This procedure may indicate that he was simply modifying an existing 
tradition, different from that of Baghdad. In any event, Avicenna's syllogistic differed 
radically from Alfarabi's, and he set out some important points in his system by explicitly 
stating what was wrong with Alfarabi's corresponding doctrine. The single most impor- 
tant factor determining these differences was the fact that whereas Alfarabi thought that 
the Aristotelian text would, with sufficient attention, yield a coherent system, Avicenna 
thought that he already knew the coherent system, and used it to identify obscure parts of 
the text. Alfarabi bent his system to the text, Avicenna bent the text to his system. 
In his logical writings, Avicenna covered the same territory as Alfarabi's Aristotelian 
commentaries. Avicenna did not go on, however, to deal to the same extent that Alfarabi 
had with the problems of relating logic to the Islamic disciplines. That strand in Alfarabi's 
logical writings was taken up by various Andalusian logicians, and by CJaz~li. (3az~l~ 
prepared the ground for the institutional acceptance of logic, a Farabian task, but he did 
it by basing his formal treatment on the elementary section of Avicenna's Philosophy 
for 'Ald'addawla. ffJazNi's work on the syllogistic, however, was so superficial as to be 
negligible. 
(3azfili is a special case, because he wrote primarily as a jurist and a theologian. But 
by his death in the twelfth century, two logical traditions had emerged, one Farabian, the 
other Avicennan. The finest representative of the Farabian tradition was the Andalusian 
Averroes, who in his syllogistic developed doctrines found in Alfarabi's writings. In fact, 
Averroes tells us he took from Alfarabi the distinction between the per se and per acci- 

584 
Tony Street 
dens. But Averroes' relation to Alfarabi is complex. As Averroes developed the incipient 
Aristotelianism of Alfarabi, he became increasingly less satisfied with the Farabian an- 
swers to exegetical problems, and sought more global solutions which gave every part 
of the Aristotelian text due weight. This is an extension of the Farabian attitude to the 
Aristotelian text, in which every position adopted is intrinsically defeasible in the face of 
a better stratagem. The other scholar to whom Averroes made constant reference, aside 
from Aristotle, is Avicenna: Avicenna had problematized the Aristotelian system, and 
thereby determined those points on which Averroes had to dwell longest. 
The other logical tradition, the Avicennan, had by the early twelfth century at the latest 
come to identify problems and cruces in Avicenna's syllogistic which were to occupy 
the tradition thereafter. Avicennan logicians ceased to consider anything other than the 
system Avicenna had used in judging Aristotle's logic and, though referring to Avicenna 
generally as 'the most eminent of the later scholars', never treated his texts or doctrines 
as immune to criticism and modification. Some representatives of the tradition, such as 
R~zi, were even fairly scathing about Avicenna's expositions, though in the late thirteenth 
century others began to refer reverentially to Avicenna and find ways to explain away his 
logical errors. This did not, however, prevent them from modifying his logical system 
exactly the same way as the earlier Avicennan scholars. 
The twelfth century saw the clear delineation of the Farabian and Avicennan traditions, 
each of which paid attention to the other's founder, but rarely to his epigones. The twelfth 
century also saw other writers referring to Alfarabi, Avicenna and Aristotle. These writers 
in some cases tended more to an Avicennan systematic, such as Abfi-l-Barakfit al-Bagd~di, 
in other cases, to a more Farabian, such as 'Abdallat~f al-BagdfidL At least in the case of 
the former, however, there is no evidence that his syllogistic was developed further by 
his students, and it really speaks past the interests of the mainstream Avicennan tradition. 
Neither scholar enjoyed a posterity. Even the Farabian tradition guttered, and after the 
middle of the thirteenth century, the Avicennan tradition had come to predominate in the 
Muslim world. The Farabian tradition had been weakened by its continued fixation on the 
non-Muslim Aristotle; although Avicenna worked in conversation with Aristotle and the 
later peripatetics, logicians after him worked directly on the system against which he had 
measured Aristotle. 
Avicenna was in one respect too successful in naturalizing the study of Aristotelian 
logic. Though the Averroist approach was intrinsically less stable and mired in a Greek 
past, it turned out to be transportable, because it spoke directly to the problematic of Latin 
writers after the coming of the logica moderna. Avicennan logics by contrast were only 
translated much later (see e.g. [Brockelmann, 1936-1949, Sup. vol. I, page 845]), and 
aroused no interest. The problem was that it was no longer obvious which parts of the 
Avicennan system were commensurable with the Aristotelian. It is a problem which still 
plagues the study of his logic, and research needs to be directed to clearing the ground 
preparatory to making such assessments. 
The work ahead 
I hope that I have conveyed some sense of how many tasks await atten- 
tion in the study of medieval Arabic logic. Even in the narrow range of material examined 
in this chapter, there is much to be done. There has been no sustained effort to reconstruct 

Arabic Logic 
585 
Alfarabi's modal syllogistic (though Lameer has announced he is preparing such a study); 
there has been no plausible interpretation given of Avicenna's modal syllogistic, and there 
are still many problems in understanding his hypothetical syllogistic; we have no over- 
all picture of what Averroes was doing; and the other post-Avicennan logicians are, with 
two exceptions among writers on the syllogistic, largely uncharted territory. And this is 
in the syllogistic, one of the logical disciplines which has been relatively well treated in 
the scholarly literature. This is not to say that there are not valuable studies in the other 
logical disciplines; there are (see appendix three for lists of such work), but they suffer 
from even worse gaps in coverage. 
Of the many, many logical issues left out of consideration in this chapter, one is par- 
ticularly noticeable by its absence, and a few words are in order as to why. I have made 
no attempt to identify the modal notions which lie behind the syllogistic systems of the 
various authors. Averroes' modal notions have been compared with the broader range 
of options explored in the middle ages [Knuuttila, 1982, pages 352-353], and a lengthy 
study has been made of Avicenna's conception of the modalities [B~ick, 1992]. These are 
valuable contributions. As a matter of procedure, however, I think the preliminary task 
should be to lay out as precisely as possible the syntactic outline of any given system, and 
only then investigate its underlying conceptions of modality. 
The most unfortunate consequence of concentrating on the syllogistic, however, is that 
it leads to minimizing consideration of how Islam influenced the constitution of logic in 
its realms. It has been noted in the course of this chapter how apologetic tendencies drove 
early logicians like Alfarabi to argue for logic's utility for and complementarity with the 
Islamic disciplines of grammar, theology and jurisprudence, and how later theologians 
and jurists like Cjazfil~ came to accept these arguments. But there are many more, and 
more complex, issues to take into account in studying the relation between Islam and 
logic. The great historical task is working out the precise clashes between the Islamic 
disciplines and philosophy which left the logical treatises as narrowly focussed as they 
are, and finding the genres which took over treatment of these previously logical topics. 
This is really the key point for future research, because as each book of the Organon 
gave way to a competing Islamic discipline (as for example topics gave way to gtdgtb al- 
ba.h_t, and rhetoric to 'ilm al-ma 'gmD, aspects of the original Aristotelian discipline either 
transmuted or decomposed into other disciplines. And if ever we can appreciate those 
changes, we can speak not only of the contributions of Muslim scholars to logic, but also 
of the contributions of logic to Islamic culture. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I have incurred a number of debts in writing this chapter, and it is a pleasant duty to 
acknowledge them here. Most of all, I am indebted to Dimitri Gutas, who kindly read 
and commented on an earlier version of this chapter. His suggestions have saved me 
from numerous mistakes and omissions. Henrik Lagerlund and Christopher Martin also 
read an earlier version of this chapter, and I am grateful to them for their suggestions. 
I regret that I was not able to deal comprehensively with a number of the points they 
raised, and can only hope that future research will make studies on Arabic logic more 

586 
Tony Street 
satisfying for those who work on Western logic. There are a number of other people who, 
though not having read the chapter, have helped in its construction in one way or another. 
They did so generally in the course of looking at earlier attempts I have made to study 
Arabic logic, and making me aware of relevant manuscripts, studies I had overlooked, 
or various mistaken conceptions. So, thanks to: Ahmad Hasnawi, Dominic Hyde, James 
Montgomery, Ahmed al-Rahim, and David Reisman. Lastly, as with all who work in the 
field of Arabic logic, I owe a vote of thanks to Nicholas Rescher, both for his pioneering 
work, and for his generous words of encouragement. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Afnan, 1964] S. Afnan. Philosophical terminology in Arabic and Persian. Leiden, 1964. 
[Alexander, 1971] Alexander. Ffn'ikgts al-muqaddamgtt, pages 55-80. Beirut, 1971. 
[Alfarabi, 1958] Alfarabi. Kitgtb al-Qiy(ts as-sager, volume 16 of Revue de la Facult( de Langues, d'Histoire, 
et de G(ographie de L'Universit( d'Ankara. Ankara, 1958. Edited M. Tiirker, pages 214--286. 
[Alfarabi, 1986a] Alfarabi. al-Mantiq 'inda l-FgtrgtbT: Kitgtb al-Burhdn wa-Kitab Sargt 'it al-yaq~n; ma 'a ta 'dl~q 
ibn-Bag~,a 'algt l-Burhgm. Beirut, 1986. Edited by M. Fakhry. 
[Alfarabi, 1986b] Alfarabi. Kit(tb al-Qiy(ts as-sa~,?r. Beirut, 1986. In al-Mantiq 'inda l-Fgtrgtbf, edited by R. 
al-'Ajam, in three volumes; vol 2, pages 65-93. 
[Aouad and Rashed, 1999] M. Aouad and M. Rashed. Commentateurs "satisfaisants" et "non satisfaisants" de 
la Rh(torique selon Averroes. In Endress and Aertsen [1999], pages 83-124. 
[Amaldez, 1960-] R. Arnaldez. Man.tik.. In Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd edition, volume 6, pages 442-452. 
Leiden, 1960-. 
[Averroes, 1983a] Averroes. Commentarium medium in Aristotelis Priorum Analiticorum libros recensum tex- 
tis Arabicis initiavit M. Kassem, complevit, revidit et adnotationibus illustravit C. E. Butterworth adjuvante 
A. ttariri. Cairo, 1983. 
[Averroes, 1983b] Averroes. Ras~'il falsafiyya. Maqgdgtt fi l-mantiq wal-'ilm at-tab~'~ li-abr l-walM ibn-Rugd. 
Casablanca, 1983. Edited by J. 'Alawi. 
[Avicenna, 13312 A.H.] Avicenna. Kitgtb an-Na~,~t. Cairo, 13312 A.H. Edited by M. Kurdi. 
[Avicenna, 1952] Avicenna. Kitgtb ag-Sif(t" al-Madh_al. Cairo, 1952. Edited by M. el-Khodeiri, G. Anawati, 
E el-Ahwani. 
[Avicenna, 1959] Avicenna. Kit(tb ag-Sif~'" al-Maqal(tt. Cairo, 1959. Edited by M. el-Khodeiri, G. Anawati 
et al. 
[Avicenna, 1964] Avicenna. Kitgtb ag-Sif~" al-Qiy~s. Cairo, 1964. Edited by S. Zayed and I. Madkour. 
[Avicenna, 1971 ] Avicenna. Treatise on logic. The Hague, 1971. Translation of D(mig-Ng~ma by F. Zabeeh. 
[Avicenna, 19712 ] Avicenna. al-lg(tr(tt wat-tanb~hgtt. Cairo, 19712. Edited by S. Duny~, in four volumes, with 
Tfisi's commentary at the bottom of page. 
[B~ick, 1992] A. B~ick. Avicenna's conception of the modalities. Vivarium, 30:217-255, 1992. 
[Badawi, 1948] A.R. Badawi. Arista 'inda l-'arab. Cairo, 1948. 
[Badawi, 1948/52] A.R. Badawi. Mantiq Aristft. Cairo, 1948/52. 3 volumes. 
[Bagdfidi, 1357 A.H.] Bagd~di. al-Kit(tb al-Mu'tabarfi l-hikma. Hyderabad, 1357 A.H. Edited by S. Yal- 
takaya. 
[Barnes, 1985] J. Barnes. Theophrastus and hypothetical syllogistic. In W. Fortenbaugh, P. Huby, and A. Long, 
editors, Theophrastus of Eresus, pages 125-141. New Brunswick and Oxford, 1985. 
[Bergstr~isser, 1925] G. Bergstr~isser. 
Hunain Ibn Is.h(tq iiber die syrischen und arabischen Galen- 
Obersetzungen. Leipzig, 1925. Abhandlungen ftir die Kunde des Morgenlandes, xvii, Band 2. 
[Black, 1990] D.L. Black. Logic and Aristotle's Rhetoric and Poetics in medieval Arabic philosophy. Leiden, 
1990. 
[Black, 1991] D. L. Black. Aristotle's 'Peri hermeneias' in medieval Latin and Arabic philosophy: logic and 
the linguistic arts. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary volume 17:25-83,1991. 
[Black, 1998] D.L. Black. Logic in Islamic philosophy. In Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, volume 5, 
pages 706-713. London, 1998. 
[Brewster, 1978] D. P. Brewster. 
The Just Balance. 
Lahore, 1978. Translation of (3azfili's al-Qistds al- 
mustaq~m. 

Arabic Logic 
587 
[Brock, 1993] S. Brock. The Syriac commentary tradition. In Burnett [1993], pages 3-18. 
[Brockelmann, 1936-1949] C. Brockelmann. Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur. Berlin, 1936-1949. Two 
volumes, and three supplementary volumes. 
[Burnett, 1993] C. Burnett, editor. Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts, London, 1993. 
[Burnett, 1999] C. Burnett. The "sons of Averroes with the emperor Frederick" and the transmission of the 
philosophical works of Ibn Rushd. In Endress and Aertsen [1999], pages 259-299. 
[Calverley, 1933] E.E. Calverley. AI-Abhari's "Ts~ghQji ti 'l-man.tiq". In The Macdonald presentation volume, 
pages 75-85. Princeton, 1933. 
[Chejne, 1984] A. G. Chejne. Ibn Hazm of Cordova on logic. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 
104:57-72, 1984. 
[Chittick, 1982-] W. Chittick. B~b~ Afdal. In Encyclopaedia lranica, volume 3, pages 285-291. Tehran, 
1982-. 
[Daiber, 1999] H. Daiber. Bibliography of Islamic philosophy. Leiden, 1999. 2 volumes. 
[D~ni~paZQh, 1978] M.T. D~ni~paZfih. al-Mantiq libni l-Muqaffa'. H. udad al-mantiq libn Bihr~z. Tehran, 1978. 
[D~ni~paZQh, 1989] M.T. D~ni~pa~Qh. al-Man.tiqiyygtt lil-Fgtrgtbf. Qum, 1989. 3 volumes. 
[Dunlop, 1955] D. M. Dunlop. Philosophical predecessors and contemporaries of Ibn B~jjah. The Islamic 
Quarterly, 2:100-116, 1955. 
[Dunlop, 1956] D.M. Dunlop. A1-F~r~bi's introductory risgda on logic. Islamic Quarterly, 3:224-235, 1956. 
Edition and translation of Alfarabi's Risgda suddira biha l-kitgtb. 
[E1-Ghannouchi, 1971 ] A. E1-Ghannouchi. "Des propositions modals", 6pitre d' Ibn Mah-h al-Raqq~d. Arabica, 
18:202-210, 1971. 
[Elamrani-Jamal, 1983] A. Elamrani-Jamal. Logique aristotdlicienne et grammaire arabe (~tude et docu- 
ments). Paris, 1983. 
[Elamrani-Jamal, 1989-] A. Elamrani-Jamal. Alinfis. In Goulet [1989-], pages 151-152. 
[Elamrani-Jamal, 1995] A. Elamrani-Jamal. Ibn Rued et les Premiers Analytiques d'Aristote: aperqu sur un 
probl~me de syllogistique modale. Arabic Sciences and Philosophy, 5:51-74, 1995. 
[END, ] 
[Endress and Aertsen, 1999] G. Endress and J. A. Aertsen, editors. Averroes and the Aristotelian tradition. 
Leiden, 1999. 
[Endress and Gums, 1992-] G. Endress and D. Gums. A Greek and Arabic lexicon: materials for a dictionary 
of the medieval translations from Greek into Arabic. Leiden, 1992-. 
[Endress, 1977] G. Endress. The works ofYa.hygt ibn 'Ad~. Wiesbaden, 1977. 
[Endress, 1986] G. Endress. Grammatik und Logik. Arabische Philologie und griechische Philosophie im 
Widerstreit. In B. Mojsisch, editor, Sprachphilosophie in Antike und Mittlealter, pages 163-299. Amster- 
dam, 1986. 
[Fakhry, 19832 ] M. Fakhry. A History of Islamic philosophy. New York, 19832 
[Fortenbaugh and others, 1992] W. Fortenbaugh et al. Theophrastus of Eresus. Sources for his life, writings, 
thought and influence. Leiden, 1992. Volume 1. 
[Frank, 1991] R.M. Frank. Review of B. Mojsisch, Sprachphilosophie in Antike und Mittelalter (Amsterdam, 
1986). Journal of the American Oriental Society, 109:356-360, 1991. 
[(3az~li, 1938] (]az~li. al-Mustasf~ min 'ilm al-usal. Cairo, 1938. 
[0az~li, 1959] (]az~li. al-Qistgts al-mustaq~m. Beirut, 1959. Edited by V. Chelhot. 
[Oaz~.li, 1961a] 0az~li. Maqgtsid alfalasifa. Cairo, 1961. Edited by S. Duny~. 
[0az~l~, 1961b] (3azSli. Mi'yar al-'ilm. Cairo, 1961. Edited by S. Duny~ as Mantiq tahgtfut al-falgts~fa. 
[0az~lL 1966] (3az~lT. Mihakk an-nazar. Beirut, 1966. Edited by M. Na's~nL 
[Goichon, 1951] A.-M. Goichon. Livre des directives et remarques. Paris, 1951. 
[Goldziher, 1981] I. Goldziher. The attitude of orthodox Islam toward the "ancient sciences". In Studies on 
Islam, translated and edited by M. L. Swartz, pages 185-215. Oxford, 1981. 
[Gonz;ilez Palencia, 1915] C. A. Gonz~ilez Palencia. Rectificacirn de la mente. Madrid, 1915. Edition and 
translation of Abfi-s-S. alt's Taqw~m a_d-_dihn. 
[Goulet, 1989-] R. Goulet, editor. Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques. Paris, 1989-. 
[Gutas, 1982-a] D. Gums. F~r~bi and Greek philosophy. In Encyclopaedia Iranica, volume 8, pages 219-223. 
Tehran, 1982-. 
[Gums, 1982-b] D. Gums. F~r~bi: Biography. In Encyclopedia lranica, volume 8, pages 208-213. Tehran, 
1982-. 
[Gums, 1983] D. Gums. Paul the Persian on the classification of the parts of Aristotle's philosophy: a milestone 
between Alexandria and Bagdhd. Der Islam, 60:231-267, 1983. 
[Gums, 1987-88] D. Gums. Avicenna's ma_dhab. With an appendix on the question of his date of birth. 
Quaderni di Studi Arabi, 5--6:323-336, 1987-88. 

588 
Tony Street 
[Gums, 1988] D. Gums. Avicenna and the Aristotelian tradition. Leiden, 1988. 
[Gums, 1993] D. Gums. Aspects of literary form and genre in Arabic logical works. In Burnett [1993], pages 
29-76. 
[Gums, 1994] D. Gums. Pre-Plotinian philosophy in Arabic (other than Platonism and Aristotelianism): a 
review of the sources. In W. Haase and H. Temporini, editors, Auf~tieg und Niedergang der ROmischen Welt, 
pages 4939-4973. "Berlin and New York", 1994. 
[Gums, 1998] D. Gums. Greek thought, Arabic culture. London and New York, 1998. 
[Gums, 1999] D. Gums. The 'Alexandria to Baghdad' complex of narratives. A contribution to the study of 
philosophical and medical historiography among the Arabs. Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica 
medievale, pages 155-193, 1999. 
[Gyekye, 1972] K. Gyekye. The term istithna" in Arabic logic. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 
92:88-92, 1972. 
[Hallaq, 1990] W.B. Hallaq. Logic, formal arguments and formalization of arguments in Sunn~ jurisprudence. 
Arabica, 87:315-358, 1990. 
[Hallaq, 1993] W.B. Hallaq. Ibn Taymiyya against the Greek logicians. Oxford, 1993. 
[Hasnawi, 1985] A. Hasnawi. F~bi et la pratique de l'ex6g~se philosophique. Revue de synthkse, 117:27-59, 
1985. 
[Hourani, 1961 ] G. Hourani. Averroes on the harmony of religion and philosophy. London, 1961. A transla- 
tion.., of Ibn Rushd's Kitab fasl al-maq~tl. 
[Hugonnard-Roche, 1993] H. Hugonnard-Roche. Remarques sur la tradition arabe de l'Organon d'apr~s le 
manuscrit paris, Biblioth~que nationale, ar. 2346. In Bumett [ 1993], pages 19-28. 
[Hugonnard-Roche, 1999] H. Hugonnard-Roche. Averroes et la tradition des Seconds Analytiques. In Endress 
and Aertsen [1999], pages 172-187. 
[H_Qna~i, ] H_~na~i. al-Gumal. British Library codex Add. 9624, ft. 73b-80a. 
[Ibn-Abi-Usaybi'a, 1882] Ibn-Abi-Usaybi'a. 'Uyan al-anb~t' Cairo, 1882. Edited by A. Mtiller, 2 volumes 
bound as one. 
[Ibn-H_aldfin, 1858] Ibn-H_aldfin. ProlggomOnes d'Ebn-Khaldoun: texte arabe (troisi~me partie). Paris, 1858. 
Edited by M. Quatrem~re. 
[Ibn-H_ aldfin, 1958] Ibn-H_aldfin. The Muqaddimah oflbn Khaldan. London, 1958. 3 volumes, translated by F. 
Rosenthal. 
[Ibn-Nadim, 1871/72] Ibn-Nad~m. al-Fihrist. Leipzig, 1871/72. Edited by G. Fltigel, J. Rodiger & A. Mialler. 
[Inati, 1981] S.D. Inati. lbn S~nCt. Remarks and admonitions. Part one." logic. Toronto, 1981. 
[Inati, 1996] S.D. Inati. Logic. In S. H. Nasr and O. Leaman, editors, History oflslamic Philosophy, volume 2, 
pages 802-823. London, 1996. 
[Jabre et al., 1996] F. Jabre, R. al 'Ajam, S. Dgheim, and G. Gihamy. Encyclopedia of Arabic terminology of 
logic (Mawsfi'a mus.talah. ~t 'ilm al-man.tiq 'inda 1-'arab). Beirut, 1996. 
[Jabre, 1999] F. Jabre. al-Nass al-kgtmil li-mantiq Arista. Beirut, 1999. 2 volumes. 
[Jannssens, 1937] H. Jannssens. L'entretien de la sagesse. Introduction aux Oeuvres Philosophiques de Bar 
Hebraeus. Liege, 1937. 
[Janssens, 1991] J. Janssens. An annotated bibliography on Ibn S~na. Louvain, 1991. 
[K~tibi, 1854] K~tibi. ar-Ris~da ag-Samsiyya. 
In A. Sprenger, editor, Bibliotheca lndica; a collection of 
Oriental works. No. 88. First appendix to the Dictionary of the Technical Terms used in the Sciences of the 
Mussulmans, containing the Logic of the Arabians. Calcutta, 1854. 
[K~gi, ] K~I. al-Minhgt~ al-mubfn. Cambridge University Library, MS Browne D.19(10); Persian text is 
published in M. Minuvi and Y. Mahdawi, Musannafat Af.dal al-D~n... KEtshan~ (Tehran 1337 AH solar), 
logic at pages 477-582. 
[Kindi, 1950] Kindi. Kammiyya kutub Arist.atalis. Cairo, 1950. Edited by Abfi Rida, in Rasgt'il al-Kind~ 
al-falsafiyya (3 volumes), volume 1, pages 181-191. 
[Kleinknecht, 1972] A. Kleinknecht. Al-Qistas al-Mustaqfm. Eine Ableitung der Logik aus dem Koran. In 
Stern et al. [1972], pages 159-188. 
[Kneale and Kneale, 1962] W.C. Kneale and M. Kneale. The development of logic. Oxford, 1962. 
[Knuuttila, 1982] S. Knuuttila. Modal logic. In A. Kenny N. Kretzmann and J. Pinborg, editors, Cambridge 
history of later medieval philosophy, pages 342-357. Cambridge, 1982. 
[Lagerlund, 2000] H. Lagerlund. Modal syllogistics in the Middle Ages. Leiden, 2000. 
[Lameer, 1993] J. Lameer. Aristotelian rhetoric and poetics as logical arts in medieval Islamic philosophy. 
Bibliotheca Orientalis, L no. 5/6:563-582, 1993. A review article of Black, Logic and Aristotle's Rhetoric 
and Poetics in medieval Arabic philosophy. 
[Lameer, 1994] J. Lameer. Al-Fgtrabf and Aristotelian syllogistics: Greek theory and Islamic practice. Leiden, 
1994. 

Arabic Logic 
589 
[Lameer, 1996] J. Lameer. The Organon of Aristotle in the medieval oriental and occidental traditions. Journal 
of the American Oriental Society, 116:90-98, 1996. 
[Madkour, 19692 ] I. Madkour. L'Organon d'Aristote dans le monde arabe. Paris, 19692. 
[Mahdi, 1965] M. Mahdi. Review of Rescher's Development of Arabic logic. Islamic Studies, 4:449-450, 
1965. 
[Mahdi, 1970] M. Mahdi. Language and logic in classical Islam. In yon Grunebaum [1970], pages 51-83. 
[Maimonides, 1937/38] Moses Maimonides. Maimonides' treatise on logic (Maq~lah fi-sin~'at al-man.tik): 
The original Arabic and three Hebrew translations. Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Re- 
search, 8:1-65, 1937/38. Edited and translated by I. Efros. 
[Manekin, 1992] C.H. Manekin. The Logic ofGersonides. Dordrecht, 1992. 
[Manekin, 1993] C.H. Manekin. Modal logic and the theory of modality in Gersonides. Iyyun, The Jerusalem 
Philosophical Quarterly, 42:347-381, 1993. 
[Margoliouth, 1905] D. S. Margoliouth. The discussion between Abu Bishr Matta and Abu Sa'id al-Sirafi on 
the merits of logic and grammar. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, pages 79-129, 1905. 
[Marmura, 1975] M. Marmura. Ghazfili's attitude to the secular sciences and logic. In G. Hourani, editor, 
Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science, pages 100-111. Albany, 1975. 
[Marmura, 1983] M. Marmura. Review of Zimmermann's Al-Farabi's Commentary and Short Treatise on 
Aristotle's De lnterpretatione. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 103.4:763-764, 1983. 
[Mar6th, 1989] M. Mar6th. Ibn S~n(t und die peripatetische "Aussagenlogik". Leiden, 1989. 
[McCarthy, 1980] R. J. McCarthy. Freedom and fu!filhnent: An annotated translation of al-GhazgdVs A1- 
Munqidh min al-Dal~l and other relevant works of al-Ghazdl~. Boston, 1980. 
[Mohaghegh and Izutsu, 1974] M. Mohaghegh and T. Izutsu, editors. Collected texts and papers on logic and 
language. Tehran, 1974. 
[Peters, 1968] F.E. Peters. Aristoteles Arabus. Leiden, 1968. 
[Pines, 1960-] S. Pines. Abfi 'l-Barak~t. In Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd edition, volume 1, pages 111-113. 
Leiden, 1960-. 
[Pines, 1996] S. Pines. A parallel in the east to the "logica vetus". In The Collected Works of Shlomo Pines, 
volume 3, pages 262-266. Jerusalem, 1996. 
[R~zi, a] R~zi. al-Mula_h_hasfi 1-hikma wal-mant, iq. British Library codex Or. 2360. 
[Rfiz~, b] Rfizi. Sarh al-lg(tr(tt. Cambridge University Library codex Or. 746(10). 
[R~zi, 13559` A.H.] R~zT. Lub(tb al-I~(tr(tt. Cairo, 13552 A. H. Edited by A. 'A.tiyya. 
[Rescher and vander Nat, 1974] N. Rescher and A. vander Nat. The theory of modal syllogistic in medieval 
Arabic philosophy. In N. Rescher, R. Manor, et al., editors, Studies in modality, pages 17-56. Oxford, 1974. 
[Rescher, 1963a] N. Rescher. Abfi-'l-Salt of Denia on modal syllogisms. [1963e], pages 87-90. 
[Rescher, 1963b] N. Rescher. al-Kindi's sketch of Aristotle's Organon. [1963e], pages 28-38. 
[Rescher, 1963c] N. Rescher. Arabic logic: a brief account. [1963e], pages 13-20. 
[Rescher, 1963d] N. Rescher. Avicenna on the logic of 'conditional' propositions. [1963e], pages 76--86. 
[Rescher, 1963e] N. Rescher. Studies in the History of Arabic Logic. Pittsburgh, 1963. 
[Rescher, 1963f] N. Rescher. A tenth-century Arab-Christian apologia for logic. [1963e], pages 55-63. 
[Rescher, 1964] N. Rescher. The Development of Arabic Logic. Pittsburgh, 1964. 
[Rescher, 1967a] N. Rescher. Arabic logic. In The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, volume 4, pages 525-527. 
New York, 1967. 
[Rescher, 1967b] N. Rescher. Temporal modalities in Arabic logic. Dordrecht, 1967. 
[Sabra, 1965] A. I. Sabra. Review of Rescher's Al-Fgtr(tbVs Short Commentary on Aristotle's Prior Analytics 
(Pittsburgh 1963). Journal of the American Oriental Society, 85:241-243, 1965. 
[Sabra, 1980] A. I. Sabra. Avicenna on the subject matter of logic. Journal of Philosophy, 77:746-764, 1980. 
[S~wi, 1898] Sfiwi. al-Bas(t'ir an-na.s~riyyaff 'ihn al-mantiq. Cairo, 1898. Edited by M. 'Abduh. 
[Shehaby, 1973a] N. Shehaby. The influence of Stoic logic on al-Jass~s's legal theory, pages 61-85. Dordrecht, 
1973. 
[Shehaby, 1973b] N. Shehaby. The propositional logic of Avicenna; a translation from al-Shiffi': al-Qiy~s with 
introduction, commentary and glossary. Dordrecht, 1973. 
[Sirw~ni, ] Sirw~n~. Sarh at-takmflfil-mantiq. British Library codex Or. 12405. 
[Stem et al., 1972] S. M. Stem, H. V. Brown, et al., editors. Islamic Philosophy and the Classical Tradition, 
Oxford, 1972. 
[Stem, 1962] S. M. Stem. A collection of treatises by 'Abd al-Latff al-Baghdfidi. Islamic Studies, 1:53-70, 
1962. 
[Street, ] T. Street. An outline of Avicenna's syllogistic. Archivfiir Geschichte der Philosophie. Forthcoming. 
[Street, 2000] T. Street. Toward a history of syllogistic after Avicenna: notes on Rescher's studies on Arabic 
modal logic. Journal oflslamic Studies, 11.2:209-228, 2000. 

590 
Tony Street 
[Street, 2001] T. Street. 'The eminent later scholar' in Avicenna's Book of the Syllogism. Arabic Sciences and 
Philosophy, 11:205-218, 2001. 
[Tah.t~nL 1375 AH solar] Taht~nT. al-lg~rgtt wat-tanbgh~t, with two commentaries. Qum, 1375 AH solar. 3 
volumes. 
[Thom, ] P. Thorn. An Avicennan extension of Aristotle's modal syllogistic. Paper delivered at the Ist interna- 
tional conference of SIPRIn, Tehran, 1999. 
[Thorn, 1996] P. Thom. The logic of essentialism. Dordrecht, 1996. 
[Tfisi, 1971 ] Tfisi. Sarh at-l~gtrdt. Cairo, 1971. Published with Avicenna's al-lg~tr~tt. 
[van Ess, 1970] J. van Ess. The logical structure of Islamic theology. In von Grunebaum [1970], pages 21-50. 
[von Grunebaum, 1970] G.E. von Grunebaum, editor. Logic in classical Islamic culture, Wiesbaden, 1970. 
[Walzer, 1962] R. Walzer. New light on the Arabic translations of Aristotle. pages 60-113. Oxford, 1962. 
[Ziai, 1990] H. Ziai. Knowledge and Illumination: A study of SuhrawardVs Hikmat al-Ishr~q. Atlanta, 1990. 
[Zimmermann, 1972] F.W. Zimmermann. Some observations on al-F~bi and logical tradition. In Stern et al. 
[1972], pages 517-546. 
[Zimmermann, 1981] F.W. Zimmermann. AI-Farabi's Commentary and Short Treatise on Aristotle's De In- 
terpretatione. Oxford, 1981. 
[Zimmermann, 1986] E Zimmermann. The origins of the so-called Theology of Aristotle. In J. Kraye, W. E 
Ryan, and C. B. Schmitt, editors, Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages, pages 110-240. London, 1986. 
APPENDICES 
A 
AVICENNA'S MODALS 
Modalized propositions are represented (from left to right) by a modal operator, followed 
by the predicate, the subject, and a superscripted letter indicating quantity and quality. 
The modal operators are as follows: X stands for an absolute (mut.laqa) proposition, A 
for a perpetual (dd'ima), M for a possible (mumkina) and L for a necessary (.darariyya). 
The default reading is _ddtr; wasfi readings are indicated by a superscripted w to the right 
of the modal operator. Premise-sets are given in order of major, minor and conclusion (if 
applicable). All references to Pointers may be checked in [Inati, 1981], which gives the 
Arabic page numbers in the margin. 
Purely d~ff premises 
Xx A eontradictories 
See [Avicenna, 19712, pages 307-308]. 
X~ bj ~ ~ Abj ~ 
X1 bj e ~ Abj i 
X1 bj i ~ Abj ~ 
Xl bj~ ~ Abj~ 
(Square for M1L is isomorphic; see [Avicenna, 19712, pages 318-319].) 
X2A contradictories 
See [Avicenna, 19712, pages 309-311] 
X2bj a ~ Abji V Abj ~ 
X2bj e ~ Abj i V Abj ~ 
X2bj i ~ Abj a V Abj ~ 
X2bj ~ ~ Abj a V Abj ~ 

Arabic Logic 
591 
(Square for M2L is isomorphic; see [Avicenna, 19712, pages 319-320].) 
Perfectfirstfiguremixes 
XXX, XLX, LXL, LLL, MMM, MXM, MLM. Proofs 
for some second-figure moods also assume AXA and ALA. See [Avicenna, 19712, pages 
387-397]. 
X conversions 
X e-conversion fails. XI a- and i-propositions convert as X1 i-propositions. 
X2 a- and i-propositions convert as X1 i-propositions. See [Avicenna, 19712, pages 321- 
333] 
Substituting M1 for X1 and M2 for X2 gives all M conversions; see [Avicenna, 19712, 
pages 338-340] 
L conversions 
L e-proposition converts as L e-proposition. L a- and i-propositions 
convert as M i-propositions. See [Avicenna, 19712, pages 334-337] 
Further development 
In the first figure, there are two imperfect mixes: LML, XMM. 
See [Avicenna, 19712, pages 391-395]. 
In the second figure, the following are proved: LLL, XLL, LXL, MLL, LML. 
Premise pairs XX, MM, XM and MX all fail to produce. See [Avicenna, 19712, 
pages 403-407] 
In the third figure, the following are proved: XXX, LLL, LXL, XLX, MMM, 
XMM, MXM, LML, MLM. See [Avicenna, 1971 "9, pages 423-426] 
Wasff premises 
Avicenna introduces the wasfi as one of his stratagems (along with the temporal) to find 
a proposition which will have a contradictory and a converse "in its own kind". (The 
temporal is only considered for contradiction and conversion, and for nothing else.) He 
takes the wasfi e-proposition (say) to convert as a wasfi e-proposition, and to be contra- 
dicted by a wasfi i-proposition. He makes no mention of the temporality being different 
between the contradictories, and refers to these wasfi propositions as 'absolutes'. Pure 
wasfi premises will produce all fourteen moods in the three figures. 
In Pointers, Avicenna also investigates _d~tr-wasfi mixes, proceeding from Barbara 
LWLL. 
If the major is absolute, and the time of its assertion is as long as the subject 
remains described by whatever it is described by, then the conclusion will be 
necessary, because J is B always, and it has been posited that B, as long as 
it is B, is A; so J is always A--so here the conclusion is necessary and the 
major absolute. [Avicenna, 13312 A.H., pages 57-58] 

592 
Tony Street 
B 
LATER MODAL LOGIC 
There is no purely _ddtr logic among the later logicians, in that _dat~-premises in some cases 
convert as wa.sfi propositions. X A contradictories are all as in Avicenna, and are still 
isomorphic with the tables for M L propositions. Perfect first-figure mixes differ most 
significantly in that all syllogisms with possible minors fail. X conversions are the same 
as according to Avicenna, but M propositions all fail to convert. L conversions are all dif- 
ferent; an L e-proposition converts as A e-proposition, and L a- and i-propositions convert 
as A w i-propositions. Temporals are treated extensively, but none matches Avicenna's 
use, nor do they work as assertorics. 
The wa.sfi propositions are differentiated fully as to modality and temporality. 
Absolute wasff contradictories 
AWbj ~ 7~ X~bj ~ 
A~bj ~ ~ XWbj ~ 
AWbj ~ ~ X~bj e 
AWbj ~ 7~ XWbj a 
Absolute wasff conversions 
X~jb i. 
AWbj e converts to AWjbe; AWbj a and AWbj i convert to 
Syllogisms 
The rule for productivity in the first figure is given as follows; note that it 
includes the wasfi propositions: 
(1) The minor premise must be one of the seventeen actuals. 
(2) If the major is not one of (DC), (VC), (oC& ,-~ V,f), then the mode of the 
conclusion is that of the major. 
(3) If the major is one of these four, then the mode of the conclusion is like 
that of the minor except that 
(a) the restriction of the conclusion is same as the restriction of the major 
[and] 
(b) the conclusion is necessitated if and only if both the minor and the major 
are. 
(4) All other moods are non-productive. [Rescher and vander Nat, 1974, page 
36] 
Rescher's semantics 
I give here the names of the propositions, with examples and symbolic rendition, due to 
Rescher and vander Nat. It may prove a helpful reference for the propositions referred to 
throughout the text. Note that we cannot be sure that all Avicennan logicians meant the 
same thing by a given proposition. It is certain that Avicenna did not mean his proposi- 
tions to be taken this way. 

Arabic Logic 
593 
Rescher and vander Nat begin their representation by putting forward Rt as the ba- 
sic operator for realization-at-time-t (which is described more fully in N. Rescher and 
A. Urquhart Temporal logic (New York and Vienna, 1971) at pages 31-32), and then use 
it to make the following abbreviations: 
7Q, = RT-(Q~) 
SQ, = Rs(Q,) 
3Qx = (3t)Rt(Q~) 
VQ~ = (Vt)Rt(Q~) 
They go on to say: 
aTQ~ = aRT(Q~) 
D,gQ~ = ans(Q~) 
3OQ~ = (3t)aR~(Q~) 
V[3Q~ = (Vt)[3Rt(Qx) 
OT-Q~ = <>nT(Q~) 
oSe~ = <>ns(e~) 
3OQ~ = (3t)on~(e~) 
V<>Q~ = (vt)<>n~(e~) 
In our symbolizations of modal propositions, we shall systematically sup- 
press the temporality condition (s relation to the existence of the subject. 
Concerning the symbolic rendition of modes, we take notice of the following 
points. First, in adopting the symbolic machinery we have, we assume that 
all the usual quantificational and modal rules hold. Secondly, in the g-modes 
the existence condition has been suppressed; fully stated, (DE) (All A is B), 
for example, would be (Vx)[(3t)RtA~ D (Vt)DRt(A~ D Bx)]. Thirdly, the 
modes 7- and S are special time-instantiations, with regard to the existence 
of the subject, and accordingly, we here use 'T' and 'S' as time-constants. 
[Rescher and vander Nat, 1974, page 32] 
With these preliminaries in hand, they then go on to offer symbolic renditions of the 
various a-propositions as presented in a late text [Sirw~ni, ] as follows ([Street, 2000] 
gives all Arabic terms used to present and define these propositions, and in the order here 
presented, though note that the translation there of wasfi as 'composite' is wrong, and I 
would now adopt the Sprenger/Rescher terms for the propositions): 
The propositions 
1. L: Absolute necessary (DC): 
(Vx)[3A~ ~ VDB~] 
All men are rational of necessity (as long as they exist). 
2. LW: General conditional (UC): 
(Vz){3Ax D VD(Ax D Bx)] 
All writers move their fingers of necessity as long as they write. 
3. Absolute temporal ([37-): 
The moon is eclipsed of necessity at the time when the earth is between it and the 
sun. 
4. Absolute spread ([35): 
(Vx) [3Ax D DSBx] 
All men breathe of necessity at some times. 

594 
Tony Street 
5. A: Absolute perpetual (Vg): 
(Vx)[3A~ D VB~] 
All men are rational perpetually (as long as they exist). 
6. AW: General conventional (VC): 
(Vx)[3A~ D V(A~ D B~)] 
All writers move as long as they write. 
7. XW: Absolute continuing (3(:): 
(Vx)[3Ax D 3(A. D B~)] 
All writers move while they are writing. 
8. Temporal absolute (7-): 
(Vx)[3A~ D TB~] 
All writers move at the time they are writing. 
9. Spread absolute (S): 
(Vx)[3A~ D aBe] 
All men breathe at certain times. 
10. Xl: General absolute (3g): 
(Vx)[3Ax D 3B~] 
All men breathe (at some times). 
11. Possible continuing (~C): 
(Vx)[3A~ D 3~(Ax D Bx)] 
All writers move with a possibility while they are writing. 
12. Temporal possible (O'-F): 
(Vx){::IA~ D O7-B~] 
The moon is eclipsed with a possibility at the time when the earth is between it and 
the sun. 
13. MI: General possible (~g): 
(Vx)[3Ax D =tOB~] 
All writers move with a possibility (at some time). 
14. Perpetual possible (OS): 
(Vx)[ZlA~ 5) OSB~] 
All men breathe with a possibility at all times. 
15. Non-perpetual necessary (Og& ~ Vg): 
(Vx){ZtA~ D [VOB~& ,-~ VB~I} 
16. Special conditional (OC& ,-~ Vs 
(Vx){3A~ D [VO(A~ D B~)& ,-~ VBx]} 
17. Temporal (OT& ,-~ V8): 
(Vx){=IAx D [OTBx& ,-- VB~]} 

Arabic Logic 
595 
18. Spread (t3S& ,-~ Vg): 
(W){3A  
[OSB  : ~ VB ]} 
19. Non-perpetual perpetual (k/g& ~-, k/g): 
,-., VB ]} 
20. Special conventional (VC& ~., rE): 
(Vz){3Ax D [V(A, D B~)& ~ VBx]} 
21. Non-perpetual continuing absolute (3C& ,-~ k/g): 
(k/z){3A, D [3(A,&Bx)& ,-~ k/B~]} 
22. Non-perpetual temporal absolute (T& ,-~ k/g): 
(k/z){3A, D [TBx& ,,~ k/B,]} 
23. Non-perpetual spread absolute (S& ,-~ k/g): 
~ VB ]} 
24. X2: Non-perpetual existential (3,f& ,-~ Vg): 
(Vz){3A, D {3B~& ~ VB~]} 
25. Non-necessary existential (3,f& ~ Dg): 
26. M2: Special possible (Og& ~ Dg): 
(Vz){3Ax D [3OBx& ~ VDBx]} 
C 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 
The best general introduction to the history of Arabic logic is still, sadly (given its age), 
[Rescher, 1964]. All of the individual logicians listed in its concluding register demand 
serious further study. 
General bibliographical resources 
The best place to start for a comprehensive list 
of logical studies is now [Daiber, 1999], updated against Index Islamicus and Bulletin 
de philosophie mddidvale. The bibliographies of major medieval scholars are listed in 
[Daiber, 1999], but note on Avicenna especially [Janssens, 1991]. A new bibliography 
covering the articles, books and editions of more recent years is under preparation. 
Terminology 
There is as yet no sure guide to the technical terms used by logicians 
writing in Arabic; [Jabre et al., 1996] is extremely helpful, though has some limitations, 
especially for terms relating to the modal syllogistic. [Endress and Gutas, 1992-] will ulti- 
mately provide the most important materials for a complete lexicon. Each sub-discipline 
within logic has its own set of technical terms. The following works include valuable 
glossaries: [Black, 1990; Shehaby, 1973b; Zimmermann, 1981]. [Street, 2000] is wrong 
in translating was~ as 'composite', but still gives important references that need to be 

596 
Tony Street 
worked into any putative future lexicon for post-Avicennan usage. [Street, ] presents the 
consecrated phrases by which logicians put forward propositions, proofs and so forth. In- 
dividual logicians occasionally have contingent or idiosyncratic usage. Thus especially 
the early logicians tend to change terminology fairly readily [Lameer, 1994]. The i~rdqr 
logicians (who worked in the tradition founded by the twelfth-century logician and meta- 
physician, Suhrawardi) had their own terms, a number of which are decoded in [Ziai, 
1990]. 
Translation movement, and genres 
The translation of each work within the Organon 
is treated in [Goulet, 1989-], though note the following important works which have come 
out since its publication: [Black, 1991] for On Interpretation, [Hugonnard-Roche, 1999] 
for demonstration, and [Aouad and Rashed, 1999] for the rhetoric. 
The genres in which the logicians wrote have been studied in [Gutas, 1993], but this 
study really stops at the fourteenth century, and many genres which should properly 
should be thought logical have yet to be examined. 
Short treatments (as for example on the heap and the liar paradox) have yet even to be 
listed as they occur through the literature. 

THE TRANSLATION 
OF ARABIC 
WORKS 
ON 
LOGIC INTO LATIN IN THE MIDDLE 
AGES 
AND THE RENAISSANCE 
Charles Burnett 
In the Middle Ages, and again in the Renaissance, several Arabic texts on logic 
were translated into Latin. These included not only works by Arabic philosophers, 
Avicenna, Algazel, Alfarabi and Averroes, but also texts originally written in 
Greek, i.e. the Organon or corpus on logic by Aristotle, on which all Medieval 
and Renaissance texts were ultimately based. 1 While one can understand how 
Latin translations of Arabic works on mathematics, medicine, astrology and other 
practical sciences could useful, it is more difficult to imagine how texts on logic 
written in, and for, a Semitic language could make much sense in a language 
which is completely unrelated to it. 
For Aristotelian logic is, of course, very 
much language based. Moreover, while Latin scholars were lacking scientific texts 
in mathematics and medicine, they already had good translations and detailed 
expositions of at least the first half of the Organon (Aristotle's corpus of logical 
writings, with the Introduction--Isagoge--of Porphyry), made by Boethius in the 
early sixth century. And, when they wished to complete the Organon, they were 
able to do so by translating the texts directly from the Greek. In the mid-twelfth 
century James of Venice is credited with the translating the Topics, the Prior and 
Posterior Analytics with 'authentic expositions', and we have from the twelfth 
century, translations from Greek of the Topics and the Posterior Analytics (twice). 
And yet we find Gerard of Cremona translating the latter work from Arabic in the 
same century, and in the thirteenth century all Averroes' Middle Commentaries 
on the Organon were translated. Why was there any need to do this? This is the 
question that shall be addressed in this paper. 
First, however, one should give some idea of the extent of the translation of logi- 
cal texts from Arabic into Latin (sometimes through the intermediary of Hebrew). 
The earliest such translations were made in Toledo in the mid-twelfth century. 
First, there are those of Gerard of Cremona, the doyen of the translators working 
1For an overview of the Latin versions of Aristotle made in the Middle Ages, see B. G. 
Dod, 'Aristoteles Latinus', in The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, eds N. 
Kretzmann, A. Kenny and J. Pinborg, Cambridge University Press, 1982, pp. 43-79. 
Handbook of the History of Logic. Volume 1 
Dov M. Gabbay and John Woods (Editors) 
@ 2004 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved. 

598 
Charles Burnett 
in Toledo, who lived from 1114 to 1187. 2 He translated the Posterior Analytics, 
together with two texts related to the work: the commentary by Themistius, and 
a work entitled 'On the syllogism' (the main topic of Aristotle's work) by Alfarabi 
(d. 950). Then, there are those associated with an archdeacon in Toledo Cathe- 
dral, Dominicus Gundissalinus, and a Jewish scholar called Abraham ibn Daud. 
Ibn Daud came to Toleda as an exile from Islamic Spain in ca. 1160, and sought 
the patronage of the Archbishop of Toledo that for translating the great philosoph- 
ical encyclopedia of Avicenna, the Shifa', giving as a specimen translation of the 
opening section 'On Universals'. 3 His suggestion was presumably accepted, for we 
soon find him collaborating with Dominicus on other parts of the Shi/a', including 
the whole of the jumal on logic. Dominicus collaborated with another scholar 
John of Spain 
in translating the 'Aims of the Philosophers' of Algazel. This 
was largely derivative from another philosophical compendium of Avicenna, the 
Danishpazeh. Avicenna's and Algazel's logical works were extremely popular in 
the Islamic world, and had virtually replaced the original works of Aristotle on 
which they were ultimately based. 
In Cordoba in the late twelfth century, there was, however, an isolated attempt 
amongst a small group of philosophers to return to Aristotle. Aberrant though this 
was in the history of Islamic philosophy, its impact on Western philosophy was im- 
mense. For the group included Averroes (Ibn Rushd) whose Long Commentaries, 
Middle Commentaries and Epitomes of Aristotle's works started to become known 
to Latin scholars within a few years of his death in 1198. Among these works were 
the set of Middle Commentaries on the Organon (Talkhis al-Mantiq), which be- 
gan with a commentary on Porphyry's Isagoge, and included (as was normal in the 
Arabic context) the Rhetoric and Poetics. 4 The first three texts of these Middle 
Commentaries- those on the Isagoge, the Categories and the De interpretatione 
were almost certainly translated by William of Luna in Naples, in the 1220s. 5 
William of Luna is likely also to have translated the Middle Commentaries on the 
Prior and Posterior Analytics. William must have had some connection with the 
new university of Naples which had been founded by the Holy Roman Emperor, 
Frederick II, in 1224. Frederick himself was very interested in Arabic logic, since 
he persuaded the Mamluk Sultan to send one of the most distinguished Islamic 
philosophers to his court in Palermo, Siraj ad-Din al-Urmawi, where 'he wrote a 
2For the following paragraph I am indebted to H. Hugonnard-Roche, 'Les oeuvres de logique 
traduites par G@rard de Cr@mone', in Gerardo da Cremona, ed. P. Pizzamiglio, Annali della 
Biblioteca statale e libreria civica di Cremona, XLI, 1990, Cremona, 1992, pp. 45-56. See also 
C. Burnett, 'The Coherence of the Arabic-Latin Translation Program in Toledo in the Twelfth 
Century', Science in Context, 2001 (in press). 
3See D. N. Hasse, Avicenna's De anima in the Latin West, London: The Warburg Institute, 
2000, pp. 4-7. 
4See D. Black, Logic and Aristotle's Rhetoric and Poetics in Medieval Arabic Philosophy, 
Leiden: Brill, 1990. 
5See Commentum Medium super libro Peri Hermeneias Aristotelis translatio Wilhelmo de 
Luna Attributa, ed. R. Hissette, Leuven: Peeters, 1996, pp. 1"-4". 

The Translation of Arabic Works on Logic... 
599 
book on logic for him' (We do not know what this may have been). ~ After Fred- 
erick's death in 1250, his son Manfred continued his intellectual interests, and, if 
'the translator of king Manfred' is the same as Herman the German, one can see 
a continuation of the project for translating Averroes. For Hermann the German, 
on his return to Toledo, translated the commentaries on the Rhetoric and Poetics 
in 1256. 
The interest in Arabic texts on logic continued in Spain in the thirteenth century. 
For the Dominican, who taught Arabic and Hebrew in the Dominican studium in 
Barcelona, Ramon Marti, quotes (apparently directly from the original Arabic), 
from Galen's Book on Proof, and Averroes's Commentary on the Topics, 7 and Ra- 
mon Llull, the indefatigable preacher and pamphleteer, wrote his own adaptation 
(from the Arabic) of Algazel's logic, in Catalan verse, s 
At the same time as William of Luna was translating Averroes into Latin, 
Jacab Anatoli translated the Middle Commentaries on the Isagoge, Categories, 
De interpretatione, and Prior and Posterior Analytics into Hebrew. He too was 
working in Naples, and specifically thanks Frederick II for his patronage. Anatoli 
belonged to a family of Jewish translators, the Tibbonids, who translated other 
texts of Averroes. This Hebrew tradition of Averroes's works impinged on the 
Latin tradition from the late fifteenth century onwards, when Hebrew texts of 
Arabic works began to be translated into Latin. The culmination of this process is 
represented in the most elaborate and 'definitive' edition of the works of Aristotle 
in Latin, first printed with great pomp and ceremony by the Giunta brothers in 
Venice in 1550-52, 9 and reprinted several times thereafter. Accompanying the 
Latin texts of Aristotle were the commentaries of Averroes, as the title proclaims: 
'Aristotelis omnia quae extant opera... Averrois cordubensis in ea opera omnes qui 
ad haec usque tempora pervenere, commentarii' ('All the extant works of Aristotle 
... and all the commentaries on these works of Averroes of Cordova which have 
survived to these times'). 1~ To give an example of the richness of this publication, 
one may list of the works included in the volumes on logic" 
6c. Burnett, 'The "Sons of Averroes with the Emperor Frederick" and the Transmission of the 
Philosophical Works of Ibn Rushd', in Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition, eds. G. Endress 
and J. A. Aertsen, Leiden: Brill, 1999, 259-99 (p. 267) and D. N. Hasse, 'Mosul and Frederick 
II Hohenstaufen- Notes on Atfiraddin A1-Abharii and Sirg.~add~n al-Urmawi', in Occident et 
Proche-Orient: Contacts scientifiques au temps des Croisades, eds. I. Draelants, A. Tihon and 
B. van den Abeele, Turnhout: Brepols, pp. 145-63. 
rThe citation from the 'Book on Proof' occurs within a long passage translated by Marti 
from ar-Razi's Doubts on Galen, edited in C. Burnett, 'Encounters with Razi the Philosopher: 
Constantine the African, Petrus Alfonsi and Ramon Marti', in Pensamiento medieval hispano: 
homenaje a Horacio Santiago-Otto, Madrid" CSIC, 1998, pp. 974-92. 
SC. Lohr, 'Raimundus Lullus' Compendium Logicae Algazelis', Ph. D., Freiburg im Breisgau, 
1967 and id., 'Logica Algazelis. Introduction and Critical Text', Traditio, 21, 1965, pp. 223-90. 
9Aristotelis Stagiritae ornnia quae extant opera...Averrois 
Cordubensis in ea opera 
ornnes.., commentarii, ed. G. B. Bagolini, 11 vols, Venice: Giunta, 1550-52. 
l~ 
C. Burnett, 'The Second Revelation of Arabic Philosophy and Science: 1492-1562' in 
Islam and the Italian Renaissance, eds A. Contadini and C. Burnett, London" The Warburg 
Institute, 1999, pp. 185-98. 

600 
Charles Burnett 
1. Porphyry's Isagoge, the Categories, and De interpretatione with the Middle 
Commentary of Averroes and Levi Gersonides's 'supercommentary', both 
translated by Jacob Mantinus. 
2. The Prior Analytics, with Averroes's Middle Commentary as translated by 
Johannes Franciscus Burana. 
3. The Posterior Analytics, with Averroes's Large Commentary in three trans- 
lations from Hebrew, those of Abraham de Balmes, Johannes Franciscus 
Burana and Jacob Mantinus. These translations are set out in three paral- 
lel columns, up to the point where Mantinus's 'golden' (aureus) translation 
finishes morte preventus, and continues to the end in two columns, cover- 
ing in toto 1,136 pages! Also, Averroes's Middle Commentary translated by 
Johannes Franciscus Burana. 
4. Averroes's Epitomes and Questions concerning the whole of logic, translated 
by Abraham de Balmes. 
5. This is followed by an extraordinary series of letters on specific topics in logic, 
attributed without reserve to Arabic authors, also translated by Burana: 
Averroes, Epistola de primitate praedicatorum in demonstrationibus 
Abualkasis Benadaris (i.e. Abu'l-Q~sim ibn Idris), Quaesita de 
notificatione generis et speciei. 
Alhagiag bin Thalmus (i.e. Ibn Tuml~s), Quaesitum 
Abuhalkasim Mahmath ben Kasam (i.e. Abu'l-Q~sim Muhummad 
ibn Q&: sim), Quaesitum 
Abuhabad Adhadrahman ben Iohar (Ab~ 'Abdarrah. m~n ibn Jawh~r 
?), Epistole 
6. The Topics and Sophistici Elenchi with Averroes's Middle Commentaries 
translated by Abraham de Balmes, and an incomplete translation of the 
Middle Commentary on the Topics by Jacob Mantinus. 
Thus we can see that there was considerable interest in Arabic logic, especially in 
the court of Frederick II, and among Aristotelian philosophers in the mid-sixteenth 
century. The Medieval translations of the Middle Commentaries of Averroes do 
not survive in many manuscripts, with the exception of that on the Poetics, which 
served instead of Aristotle's original Poetics throughout the Middle Ages. Nev- 
ertheless, the manuscript evidence only partially reflects the popularity of a text. 
For Roland Hissette, who has produced the most detailed edition of any of these 
commentaries so far (that on the De interpretatione) has shown that, although 
only three manuscripts survive, the work was used in 1229 by an early master 
in the university of Paris, Iohannes Pagus, by two Danes also studying in Paris, 
Martin and John of Dacia, and at least one anonymous writer; in the Renaissance 

The Translation of Arabic Works on Logic... 
601 
its potential readership was large, since it was included in twelve editions of Aris- 
totle's works printed between 1483 and 1560. li 
Moreover, references in Albert 
the Great and brief surviving fragments show that, aside from Averroes' commen- 
taries, Alfarabi's summaries of at least the Categories, and the De interpretatione, 
and his commentaries on the Prior and Posterior Analytics were known in Latin 
in the Middle Ages. 12 Moreover, a summary of the Posterior Analytics had been 
included in the Arabic encyclopedia known as the Brethren of Purity and was 
translated into Latin with an attribution to Alkindi. 13 But the fact that these 
logical texts had an Arabic origin caused problems to Latin scribes and readers. 
First of all, it must be pointed out that, for the majority of translators in the 
Middle Ages, including Gerard, Gundissalinus, and William of Luna, an extremely 
literal translation of the original was the deliberate aim. The result was 'barbaric 
Latin', as was frequently pointed out by Renaissance humanists. 
(Only Llull's 
poetic paraphrase of Algazel's logic falls outside this extreme literality). Examples 
of this 'barbarous' Latin are the use of 'invenire' (the root W-J-D; literally 'to 
find') for 'esse' ('to be') 
hence 'inventum' (literally 'the found thing') for 'the 
existent thing' 
and 'intentio' ('ma'n~', meaning both 'meaning' and 'subject') 
for 'thing'. i4 One may compare the translation of William of Luna with that of 
Jacob Mantinus, where the relevant words are italicized: 15 
William of Luna, ed. Hissette, p. 3: Et nomen et verbum similantur inten- 
tionibus simplicibus, que non sunt vere neque false, et sunt ille que inveniuntur 
preter divisionem et compositionem: verbi gratia: sermo noster 'homo' et 'albedo' 
quoniam, cum non coniungitur ei 'invenitur' aut 'non invenitur', non est adhuc 
neque verum neque falsum; sed significat quidem rem cui innuitur preter quod 
disponatur res illa per verum et faisum. Et propter hoc sermo noster 'hyrococerus' 
et 'acnhagaribach' non disponitur per verum neque falsum, dum non coniungitur 
cure eo sermo noster 'invenitur' aut 'non invenitur', aut absolute aut in tempore, 
11 Commentum Medium, ed. Hissette, pp. 4*-7* and 19"-24". 
12M. Grignaschi, 'Les traductions latines des ouvrages de la logique et l'abr~g~ d'Alfarabi', 
Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littdraire du moyen dge, 39, 1972, pp. 41-107. 
i3Edited by A. Nagy in Die philosophischen Abhandlungen des Ja'qub ben Ishaq al-Kindi, in 
Beitr@e zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, 2, 1897, pp. 41-64. 
14A. Maierfi, 'Influenze arabe e discussioni sulla natura della logica presso i latini fra XIII 
e XIV secolo' in La diffusione delle scienze islamiche nel medio evo europeo, ed. B. Scarcia 
Amoretti, Rome: Accademia nazionale dei Lincei, 1987, pp. 243-267. 
i5Charles Butterworth translates the Arabic as follows: 'The noun and the verb resemble 
uncombined ideas which are neither true nor false, that is, the ones which are taken without 
being combined or separated. An example of that is our saying "man" and "whiteness". For 
as long as "exists" or "does not exist" is not joined to it, it is neither true nor false. Instead 
it signifies a designated thing, without that thing having truth or falsehood attributed to it. 
Therefore, neither truth nor falsehood can be attributed to our saying "goat-stag" and "griffon" 
unless "exists" or "does not exist" is joined to it -- whether without qualification or according 
to a particular time 
and we then say "a goat-stag is existent", "a goat-stag is not existent" 
or "a goat-stag exists or does not exist"': C. E. Butterworth, Averroes' Middle Commentaries 
on Aristotle's Categories and De interpretatione, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983, 
p. 126. 

602 
Charles Burnett 
et dicatur 'hyrcocervus inventus' 
invenitur' aut 'non invenitur'. 
, 'hyrcocervus non inventus' , aut 'hyrcocervus 
Mantinus, ed. Giunta, I, fol. 68v: Nomen autem et verbum similia sunt rebus 
simplicibus, quae neque verum neque falsum significant, eo quod sunt sine aliqua 
compositione vel divisione, ut homo vel album, quoniam, si non additur ei 'est' 
vel 'non est', tunc nec verum neque falsum significat. Sed significat rem individ- 
uam, sine tamen aliquo vero vel falso. Et ideo cum dicimus 'hircocervum' aut 
'chimeram', neque verum neque falsum significamus, nisi addiderimus eis 'est' vel 
'non est' sive simpliciter vel secundum tempus, et dicamus 'hircocervus est' vel 
'non est', vel 'chimera fuit' vel 'non fuit'. 
Examples from Gerard of Cremona's translation of the Posterior Analytics show 
another characteristic of the Greek-Arabic-Latin transmission. 
Arabic cannot 
form compound words. So hypothesis becomes 'as.1 mawdfi' ('placed root'), which 
naturally becomes in Gerard's translation 'radix posita', and enthymema becomes 
'qiy~s mud. mar' 'secret/covered syllogism' which yields 'syllogismus occultus' (This 
use of 'syllogismus' is obviously confusing). 16 
As a result of the success of the translating-enterprise in Toledo, this literary 
style, including the use of the same Latin translations of the same Arabic terms, 
was employed for all translations from Arabic. It is evident that Scholastic philoso- 
phers of the Middle Ages were accustomed to the style and the peculiar meanings 
of the words, to an extent that we find difficult to appreciate. Scholars such as 
Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas have a remarkably accurate understanding 
of the doctrines of Averroes, Avicenna and the other Arabic philosophers, even 
though they only knew them through Latin translations, and they would differ- 
entiate (for example) between the instances where 'inventum' meant 'found' and 
where it simply meant 'existing', or 'intentio' meant 'intentio' or simply 'a thing, 
the subject'. Nevertheless, there are aspects of the Latin translation which would 
have confused, or would have been unintelligible even to them. One is in the same 
passage quoted above. For the mythical beast 'hyrcocervus' ('goat-stag') men- 
tioned in Aristotle's text, Averroes, quite sensibly, added the nearest equivalent 
in Arabic mythology: the "anq~' mughrib' 
'the phoenix/griffon that excites 
the curiosity'. William of Luna simply transiliterates this unintelligible word into 
Latin ('anchagaribach' 
in fact, suggesting that he read a variant not attested 
in the Arabic MSS: "anq~' ghar~ba' 
'the strange phoenix'), which soon became 
corrupted in the Latin manuscripts and editions: 'anchagaribach, anquaganba, 
anquagauba, auquagariba etc.' Mantinus, however, does for his Latin audience 
what Averroes had done for his Arabic readers: he finds an equivalent which is 
familiar to them, in this case, the chimera. 
16For more details see Hugonnard-Roche, 'Les oeuvres de logique', pp. 50-51. 

The Translation of Arabic Works on Logic... 
603 
Another example where a literal translation from Arabic produced incompre- 
hension is a discussion of the use of cases in the noun: 17 
William of Luna, ed. 
Hissette, p. 
7: Et nomen etiam, cum genitivatur aut 
accusativatur aut mutatur mutatione alia huiusmodi, non dicitur nomen absolute, 
sed nomen declinatum...differentia est inter declinatum et non declinatum (et 
illud est in casu 'u' in lingua arabica)... 
Mantinus, ed. Giunta, I, fols. 69v-70r: Nomen preterea cum est in genitivo, 
vel accusativo, vel alio casu, vel mutatur aliqua alia simili mutatione, tunc non 
dicitur simpliciter nomen, sed nomen casuale... Interest tamen inter obliquum et 
non obliquum nomen, ut in lingua Arabic patet ... 
Here, William of Luna probably produced an accurate translation of the Arabic 
text ('the case (ending in} 'u'), but this already confused the scribes, who wrote 
'in carl' (vel. sim.), and Mantinus simply glossed over the phrase. 
The problem with the Latin transmission of the Middle Commentaries of Aver- 
roes in general can be summarised as follows: 
Averroes' intention in the Middle Commentaries is to paraphrase Aristotle's 
text (without directly quoting it), in a way that both brings out the logical se- 
quence of Aristotle's arguments (hence his use of the 'Porphyrian tree' for the 
arrangement of the subject matter in these commentaries), and makes the subject 
matter intelligible to an Arabic audience, is 
The literal Latin translations of the Middle Commentaries make no concession 
to their audience. In some Arabic-Latin translations the translator adds a marginal 
gloss explaining the meaning of certain things specific to the Arabic language and 
culture, while not changing the text itself. There is little evidence that this was 
done by William of Luna. 
The most obvious example of this mode of transmission can be seen in the case of 
the Middle Commentary on the Poetics, which, as mentioned above, served instead 
of Aristotle's Poetics for the entire Middle Ages. Aristotle had included many 
examples of Greek poetry to illustrate his text. Averroes systematically replaced 
these examples with well-chosen illustrations from Arabic poetry. Hermann the 
German, when translating Averroes's text into Latin, did not substitute examples 
from Latin poetry, but faithfully translated all the excerpts from Arabic poems 
17Butterworth (p. 128) translates: 'Moreover, when a noun is put into the accusative or 
genitive case or altered in some similar way, it is not said to be a noun in an absolute sense, 
but an inflected noun... The difference between the inflected noun and the uninflected noun -- 
which, in the speech of the Arabs, is the noun in the nominative case (literally: the case ending 
with 'u')... ' 
lSSee J. Puig Montada, 'Averroes' Commentaries on Aristotle: to Explain and to Interpret', in 
the proceedings of I1 commento filosofico nell'Occidente latino (saec. XIII-XV), Firenze-Pisa, 
19-21 Oct. 2000 (in press). 

604 
Charles Burnett 
into Latin, thus unintentionally producing the only Latin anthology of Arabic 
poetry in the Middle Ages. 19 
Moreover, in respect to recovering the text of Greek works on logic, the Arabic 
can be seriously misleading. For example, the Arabic texts of the Posterior Ana- 
lytics and the commentary on it by Themistius have been shown by Hugonnard- 
Roche to be paraphrases of the Greek texts, and indeed it is this paraphrase that 
was also used by Averroes. One result of this paraphrase was a distortion of Aris- 
totle's own conception of the role of logic/dialectic in respect to the science. 2~ 
According to the teaching of Aristotle, logic examines but does not prove the first 
principles. The Arabic version of the Posterior Analytics that Gerard translated, 
on the contrary, stated that the ars dialectica attempts to demonstrate the com- 
mon propositions in each science. So, given the ambiguities introduced by Latin 
translations of Arabic logical texts in the Middle Ages, what were the reasons for 
translating them in the first place? 
The question can be answered most easily, perhaps, in the case of Gerard of 
Cremona. In the context of Toledo in the twelfth and, indeed, thirteenth century, 
there was no question of translating anything from Greek. Rather, Arabic culture 
was so dominant, and so advanced in the area, that the task was simply to replicate, 
as far as possible, that culture in Latin. Moreover, both Gerard of Cremona and 
Gundissalinus had a model-curriculum on which to base their replication: i.e. the 
Classification (or Enumeration) o/ the Sciences of Alfarabi, which both scholars 
translated. Alfarabi not only provided a template for the subjects to be covered in 
a course of 'philosophy' in the Aristotelian sense, but also referred to the textbooks 
to be used in that course. The second chapter of Alfarabi's book (after a chapter 
on grammar) was on logic ('dialectica' Gerard; 'logica' Gundissalinus), and in it 
he systematically went through the subject-matter of the Isagoge, the Categories, 
etc. finishing with the eight books of the Topics, and the Prior and Posterior 
Analytics. For Alfarabi logic is a necessary propaedeutic to the other divisions of 
philosophy dealt with in the work: Mathematics, Physics, Metaphysics and the 
moral sciences. Gerard translated Arabic texts in all these subjects, and there is 
good evidence that he taught 'Arabic science in Latin' (as one could say) in Toledo, 
where he is referred to as 'dictus Magister'-i.e. 'the Teacher par excellence'. 
Gerard would have known the necessity for logic as a basis for the study of 
mathematics (in particular, geometry) from another text which he translated, and 
which was well-known to his students (socii), who quote from him, namely Ah. mad 
ibn Yfisuf ibn Ibr~hTm al-Daya's Letter on Ratio and Proportion. 21 The subject 
of the text i~ geometry, but ibn Yfisuf starts with a long preface, taking the form 
19See W. F. Boggess, 'Hermannus Alemannus' Latin Anthology of Arabic Poetry', Journal o/ 
the American Oriental Society, 88, 1968, pp. 657-70. 
2~ 
'Les oeuvres de logique', pp. 52-4. 
21Ibn YDsuf lived in Cairo in the late ninth and early tenth century, and served the Tulunid 
Sultans there. 

The Translation of Arabic Works on Logic... 
605 
of a conversation between geometricians of different kinds, supposedly infront of 
the Prince that he serves. The whole point of the conversation is to demonstrate 
that logic is a necessary propaedeutic to geometry. Having practical knowledge of 
mathematics, or knowing the theoretical texts off by heart, is not sufficient; one 
must understand the principles of the art, which can only be gained by having 
recourse to a higher art, namely logic. 22 
It is in this context that one must see the endeavour of Gerard of Cremona 
himself. He had no need to translate the texts of the 'old logic' which had been 
known since the translations of Boethius, but he felt compelled to translate from 
the available Arabic version the Posterior Analytics, especially since it was partic- 
ularly relevant to the arguments used in science, dealing with the different kinds 
of syllogism, the rules for different kinds of argumentation, and in particular the 
rules for demonstrative argument, whose importance in the work is indicated by 
the Arabic title for the Posterior Analytics --' kit~ al-Burh~n' -- for which Gerard 
gave the literal translation De demonstrationibus. In addition, however, Gerard 
translated, still from Arabic, the commentary of the late-fourth-century Greek 
philosopher, Themistius, on the Posterior Analytics, 23 as a help for understanding 
Aristotle's notoriously difficult text. The bibliography of Gerard's works composed 
just after his death in 1187 also mention 'Alfarabi De syllogismo', which has not 
been identified in Latin, but is presumably Alfarabi's commentary (or part of such 
a commentary) on the Posterior Analytics. The priority of logic in a curriculum of 
philosophy is further indicated by the fact that the socii of Gerard, in compiling 
a list of his works after his death, put logic first. 
For William of Luna, unfortunately, we can only guess why he undertook the 
translation of Averroes' Middle Commentaries, since he wrote no dedications, and 
we have no references to his activities. All that I can suggest is that, after it 
had become known to Jewish and Christian scholars that Averroes had para- 
phrased (in the Middle Commentaries) and written word-for-word expositions (in 
the Large Commentaries) on the whole range of Aristotle's works, these scholars 
felt it important to put all the Commentator's works into Hebrew and Latin. This 
was appropriate, especially since the expositions of Aristotle of the ancient Greek 
philophers were only known fragmentarily (Byzantine philosophers were, at the 
same time as Averroes, attempting to fill the gaps), and Averroes was known to 
use as the starting point of his own commentary, that of Alexander of Aphrodisias, 
and also brought into discussion the comments of other Greek philosophers, such 
as Themistius and Philoponus. 
Thus we can see the translation of Averroes's 
Middle Commentaries of the logical texts as part of a much larger enterprise, and, 
indeed, the manuscript and printing edition of these works show that they trav- 
elled exclusively with other commentaries by Averroes. In addition to this, we can 
22See C. Burnett, 'Dialectic and Mathematics according to Ahmad ibn YOsuf: A Model for 
Gerard of Cremona's Programme of Translation and Teaching?" in Langage, sciences, philoso- 
phic au ziie sidcle, ed. J. Biard, Paris: Librairie philosophique J. Vrin, 1999, pp. 83-92. 
23A direct translation of this work from the Greek was not made until 1481. 

606 
Charles Burnett 
point to a particularly strong interest in Islamic logic in Frederick II's entourage, 
encouraged by the patronage and example of the emperor himself. 24 
In the Renaissance, we can see an even greater desire for~ comprehensiveness, 
when all the commentaries of Averroes on Aristotle's Organon, and much Arabic 
logic besides, were included in the Giunta edition of 1550-52. Only: in recent times 
has such an intensive interest in texts on Arabic logic been revived. 
A CKN OWLED G EMENTS 
I am grateful for the advice of Dag Nikolaus Hasse and Dimitri Gutas. 
24See p. *** above. 

INDEX 
A (quantifier, all), 248 
'Abdallat.ff al-Bagd~dL 571,579, 584 
Abelard, 530, 551 
Abhar~ (Atjradd~n), 573,576,581,582 
Ab~-l-Barak~t al-Bagd~d~, 529, 539, 
568-571,573, 584 
Abfi-Bi~r Matt~, 531, 532, 534, 537, 
555, 556 
Ab~-N~h., 531 
Ab~-Sa'~d as-S~r~ff, 537, 555, 556 
Abfi-s.-S. alt, 561 
Abfi-Sulaym~n as-Si~ist~nY, 532,553, 
554, 561 
Abfi-Yah.y~ al-Marwaz~, 532 
accent, 37, 84, 86, 95 
accident, 37, 41, 84, 87, 96 
Ackrill, J. L., 119 
ad hominem, 48, 82 
ad hominem proof, 81 
affirmation, 120-122, 125, 132, 133, 
149, 154, 156, 158 
affirmation sentences, 159 
affirmative sentences, 159 
AI (antecedent interchange), 250 
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 533-535, 
542,543,548,549,554, 572, 
578 
Alexander the Great, 28 
Alfarabi, 527-529,532-545,547-550, 
553-555,559,561-566,568- 
573, 579, 580, 582-585 
.~l~nfis, 533 
Allen, J., 36 
ambiguity, 30 
Ammonius, 533 
amphiboly, 37, 84, 85, 95 
analysis, 214, 241 
Anaxagoras, 101 
A (and), 249 
answerer, 76 
Ap-con (apodeictic conversions), 267 
Ap-con(pa) (apodeictic conversions per 
accidens ), 268 
Ap-opp (apodeictic oppositions), 266 
Ap-sub-a (apodeictic subalternations), 
267 
apodeixis, 108 
Apology, 103 
apophansis, 121,126, 144 
applied logic, 42, 45 
argument, 115 
argument conversion, 78 
argument pattern, 115, 166 
argumental conversion, 38 
argumentation, 115 
argumentational skill, 136, 137 
Aristotle, 2, 9, 17, 19, 20, 24, 39, 40, 
56, 60, 67, 72, 81, 91, 93, 97, 
234, 235,531,533, 535,536, 
539, 542-545,547, 549,550, 
552,553,555,561-565,567, 
569-572,575-579, 582-584 
Aristotle's dialectical treatises, 56 
Aristotle's fallacies, 57 
Aristotle's formal language, 128 
Aristotle's Lyceum, 32 
Aristotle's Thesis, 68, 69 
arithmetic, 139 
arithmetical demonstration, 139 
artificial language, 143 
AS (antecedent strengthening), 250 
A~'arL 557 
~- (assertion sign), 249 
assertion axioms 
A0-A4, 249, 265, 285 
A5-A14, 265,285 

608 
A15-A28, 285 
A29, 299 
assertion transformation rules 
ARI(US), 266, 286 
AR2(MP), 249, 266, 286 
AR3(DDI), 249, 266, 286 
AR4(DN), 266, 286 
ARI(US), 249 
Athanasius of Balad, 530 
Averroes, 526-529,537, 542-545,549, 
561-567,570,571,580,583- 
585 
Avicenna, 527, 528, 532-555, 558- 
585,590-592,595 
axiom, 139 
axiomatic discourse, 136 
axiomatic systems, 248, 279 
axiomaticists, 105, 106 
axiomatized deductive system, 105 
BXqillXnL 557 
Barbara, 116,175, 186,188,210,211, 
214, 215, 234 
Barbara (A3), 249 
Barbara LXL (AS), 265 
Barbara QQQ (A15), 285 
Barbara XQM (A19), 285 
Barhebraeus, 579 
Barnes, J., 32, 39, 51, 55, 81, 220, 
222 
Baroco, 157, 177, 186-188, 210, 211, 
215, 229 
Baroco LLL (Ag), 266 
Baroco NNN, 53 
base conditions, 271 
for J-models for L-X-M (B l-B6), 
272 
for Q-models for QLXM' (BQ1- 
BQ8), 294 
for T3-models for L-X-M (B1, 
B2, BT3-B5), 278 
basic principles of all being, 110 
Becker, A., 260-262,284 
begging the question, 37, 84, 92, 96 
belongs to every, 129 
belongs to no, 129 
belongs to some, 129 
BIC (biconditional rule), 251 
Bocardo, 157, 178, 186-188,211,215 
Bocardo LLL (A10), 266 
Bocardo NNN, 53 
Bochefiski, I. M., 104, 251 
Boethius, 56, 81 
Boger, G., 48, 97 
Bolzano, 64 
Bolzano's Ableitbarkeit, 65 
Bonitz, H., 75 
Bryson, 140 
Camestres, 177, 184, 186-188, 211, 
215, 228 
categorical sentence, 117, 129, 132, 
142-144, 165, 166, 168, 172 
Categories, 30, 31, 41,115, 118, 121, 
153, 159 
category mistake, 152 
CC (complementary conversions), 290 
CC(pa) (complementary conversions 
per accidens ), 290 
cd (the contradictory of), 282 
Celarent, 116,176, 186,188,210,211, 
214, 215 
Celarent XQM (A20), 285 
Cesare, 176, 186-188,211,215 
Cesare LXL (A6), 266 
chain condition, 279-282, 286, 305 
challenge, 57 
Cherniss, H., 34 
Chrysippus, 543 
Church, A., 106 
classical, 59 
Cohen, C., 85, 89, 93 
combination, 155, 158 
combination of words, 37, 84, 85, 95 
common notion, 112 
common notions in Elements, 113 
common noun, 124 
complete syllogism, 175, 218 

completeness, 20, 113, 247, 278, 279, 
281,298, 299 
compound statements, 94 
computation, 38 
Con (assertoric conversions), 250 
Con(pa) (assertoric conversions per ac- 
cidens ), 251 
concludence, 191 
concludent pattern, 116 
concludent premiss pattern, 202 
conclusion, 174 
conditional proof, 47 
connexive logic, 280 
consequence of, 53 
consequent, 37, 84, 89, 96 
consistency, 113 
contentious argument, 83 
contentious argumentation, 140 
contradiction, 230 
contradiction error, 88 
contradictories, 134-136,156, 159,231 
contradictory, 51, 155,162 
contradictory sentence, 135 
contraries, 135, 136, 147, 153, 154, 
156 
contrariety, 153, 230 
contrary, 155, 162 
contrary sentence, 135 
contrasted instances, 237 
conversion, 69, 220 
conversion per accidens, 180 
conversion per accidens rule, 181 
conversion rule, 180 
conversion rules, 166 
Cooke, H. P., 119 
Copi, I., 85, 89, 93 
Corcoran, J., 31, 32, 34, 53, 55, 64, 
73, 104, 105, 114, 149, 208, 
234, 248, 279, 281 
correlative, 155 
counter-ex falso, 72-75 
countermodels, 247, 257, 277, 289, 
296, 299 
Cresswell, M., 248,251,258,260,284 
609 
cut, 49 
CW (consequent weakening), 251 
D-syllogism, 74 
D-valid, 74 
Darapti, 177, 186-188, 211 
Darii, 116, 176, 186, 188, 201, 209- 
211,214, 215 
Darii LXL (AT), 266 
Darii QMQ (A29), 299 
Darii QQQ (A16), 285 
Darii QXQ (A18), 285 
Datisi, 186-188, 211,215 
Datisi (A4), 249 
DDI (definiens and definiendum in- 
terchange, 249 
decision procedures, 247, 262, 263, 
282, 283, 305,306 
declarative sentence, 120, 122 
deducibility, 113 
deducibility rule, 50 
deducible from, 53 
deduction, 107, 115, 226 
deduction apparatus, 117 
deduction rules, 178 
deduction system, 166 
deductionists, 105 
deductive method, 108 
definition, 15, 16, 41 
demonstration, 5, 55, 108, 111,139 
demonstration error, 91 
demonstration leading into an absur- 
dity, 228 
demonstrative knowledge, 107 
demonstrative science, 144 
demonstrative syllogisms, 74 
denial, 121, 122, 132, 149, 154, 156, 
159 
denotation, 155 
derived rules for assertions 
DR1 (RV), 25O 
DR2(AI), 250 
DR3(AS), 250 
DR4(CW), 251 

610 
DR5(BIC), 251 
DR6(SE), 252 
derived rules for rejections 
R-DR1 (R-RV), 254 
R-DR2(R-AI), 254 
R-DR3(R-AW), 254 
R-DR4(R-CS), 254 
R-DR5 (R-SE), 254 
R-DR6(R-II), 255 
determinate sentences, 159 
dialectical argument, 35, 57 
dialectical premiss, 57 
dialectical problems, 35 
dialectical proposition, 35 
dialectical structures, 46 
dialegestha, 57 
direct, 52 
direct deduction, 166, 229 
direct proof, 227 
direct syllogism, 53 
Disamis, 178, 186-188, 211,215 
discovery, 2 
distribution, 104 
Ditisis, 178 
division of words, 37, 84, 85, 95 
DN (double negation), 266 
does not belong to some, 129 
Dorion, L.-A., 32, 83, 137 
Dyonisius Thrax, 6 
E (-~ I), 249 
Eaton, R. M., 104, 208 
ecthetic proofs, 60 
Eemeren, F. H. van, 57 
Elements, 112 
elenchus, 75 
empeiria, 23 
endoxa, 35, 36, 41, 93 
entailment, 45 
epistem~, 23 
epistemics, 107 
equivocation, 30, 37, 84, 95 
eristic argument, 75, 76 
Euclid, 109, 112 
Euclidean geometry, 17 
Eudemus, 543, 572 
Euler diagrams, 263 
ex falso, 69, 71 
ex falso quodlibet, 65 
existential import, 150, 157 
expert, 57 
extension, 164 
extra dictionem, 37, 87 
extra dictionem fallacy, 84 
extra-dictione, 88 
fallacy, 33, 37, 46, 48, 77, 88, 96, 97, 
115, 140 
post hoc, ergo propter hoc, 89 
ambiguity, 85 
begging the question, 46, 91 
many questions, 46, 93 
noncause as Cause, 77 
falsifying refutation, 82 
falsity, 149, 151 
Felapton, 177, 211,215 
Felpton, 186-188 
Ferio, 116, 176, 186, 188, 209, 210, 
215 
Ferio LXL (A8), 266 
Ferio XQM (A21), 285 
Ferison, 178, 186-188, 211,215 
Festino, 177, 186-188, 210, 211,215 
first figure, 197, 209, 210, 214, 223 
first-order logic, 59 
follows from, 53 
form, 18, 22 
form of expression, 86 
formal deducibility, 216, 226 
formal language, 142, 143, 235 
Formation rules 
for L-X-M (FRI'-FR5'), 265 
for Q-L-X-M (FRI'-FR5'), 285 
for LA (FR1-FR3), 249 
forms of expression, 37, 84, 86, 96 
Forster, E. S., 32, 137 
four-valued logic, 247, 259 
Frede, M., 31 

Frege, G., 22, 31, 67, 252 
Frege-Russell logic, 105 
Fregean, 56 
Furley, D. J., 32 
Gabbay, D., 97 
Galen, 531-533, 543, 554 
0az~lT (Abfi-H. ~mid), 555-559, 561, 
579, 582,583, 585 
Geach, P. T., 247, 257, 261-265 
generic syllogisms, 38 
Gentzen conditions, 49, 71 
Gentzen logic, 49, 50, 58, 59 
Gentzen's structural rules, 53 
Gentzen, G., 49, 71 
Gentzen-deducibility, 50 
Gentzen-implication, 51 
Gentzen-validity, 50, 59 
genus, 41 
geometry, 109, 112 
Gersonides, 566 
good argument, 47 
good-looking argument, 47 
Gorgias, 14, 29 
Graham, D.W., 34 
grammar, 23, 120 
Green-Pederson, N. J., 34, 56 
Grootendorst, R., 57 
Hacker, E. A., 184 
Hamblin, C. L., 33, 57, 86, 96 
Hansen, H. V., 32, 33, 45, 77, 88, 90, 
95, 97 
Hempel, C., 2 
Heraclitean Rule, 29 
Heraclitus, 8, 29, 101 
Hintikka, J., 32, 46, 57 
Hippocrates, 101,140 
Hitchcock, D., 48, 49, 64, 76, 97 
Homer, 3, 86 
Hughes, G. E., 248, 251,258, 260 
_Hfinat~T (Muh. ammad ibn-N~mwar), 580, 
581 
H. unayn, 529, 531-533 
hypostatization of proof, 114 
611 
hypotheses, 52 
hypothetical syllogism, 52, 71 
~= (invalid), 272 
~=Q (Q-invalid), 295 
A-introduction rule, 40 
i conversion rule~ 182 
I (quantifier, some), 248 
Iamblichus, 533 
Ibn-B~a, 561,562 
Ibn-al-BihrTz, 531 
Ibn-Haldfin, 525, 538, 539, 556-559, 
562,574, 580, 581 
Ibn-H. azm, 561 
Ibn-Malih. ar-RaqqXd, 567 
Ibn-al-Muqaffa', 530, 533 
Ibn-an-Nadim, 533 
Ibn-NX'ima, 531 
Ibn-as.-S. alxh., 559 
Ibn-SuwXr, 532,533, 535 
Ibn-Taymiyya, 526, 560, 574, 581 
Ibn-at.-T. ayyib, 531,554 
Ibn-Zur'a, 532 
--+ (only if), 248 
e+ (iff), 249 
ignoratio elenchi, 37, 84, 88, 89, 96 
Iliad, 3 
immediate inferences, 266 
imperfect syllogistic forms, 38 
implication, 49 
impossibility, 150 
in dictione, 37, 84, 88 
incompleteness, 20, 218 
inconcludence, 188,191,193, 194, 196 
inconcludent pattern, 116 
inconsistency, 71 
inconsistent sets of wffs, 305 
indeterminate sentence, 147, 159, 194 
indirect deduction, 229 
indirect proof, 52 
indrecti deduction, 166 
induction, 107 
inference, 17, 49 
informal axiomatic system, 109 

612 
informal proof of invalidity 
by contrasted instances, 255 
from the ambiguity of a particu- 
lar proposition, 257 
interrogative exchange, 57 
intuitionistic deduction, 180 
intuitionistic-like logic, 66 
invention, 2 
irreflexive, 50 
Ish. ~q, 531-533 
Isfar~n~, 557 
J~skowski, S., 53 
Jaeger, W., 34 
John Philoponus, 533, 535 
Johnson, F., 252,261,265, 271,277- 
280, 282 
Joseph, H. W. B., 104, 184 
Kam~ladd~n ibn-Yfinus, 573 
Kant, I., 101 
Kapp, E., 31 
K~T (Afd. aladdTn), 568,572,573,576, 
577 
K~tibT (Na~maddTn), 529, 574-576, 
581,582 
Katt~nT (Abfi-'Abdall~h), 561 
Keynes, J. N., 104, 208 
Kilwardby, 566 
KindT, 529, 531,535 
Kneale, M., 3, 15, 31, 32, 264, 265 
Kneale, W., 3, 15, 31, 32 
knowing, 103 
L (necessity operator), 265 
A (necessarily), 262 
law of non-contradiction, 145, 231 
Lear, J., 31, 34, 52, 56 
linear logic, 66 
Locke, 81 
Locke's ad hominem, 76 
logial consequence, 113 
logic, 2, 3, 15, 18, 21, 23 
logical, 31 
logical consequence, 107, 230, 234 
logical consequences, 216 
logical constants, 129, 142-144, 146, 
148 
logical equivalence, 127 
logical forms, 38 
logical structures, 56 
logical syntax, 53, 136 
logically perfect language, 142 
logically true conditional proposition, 
105 
logos, 29, 31,121,122, 144 
Lukasiewicz, J., 31, 53,104, 208,247- 
249,252,253,255-260,263- 
266, 279, 280, 284-286, 295 
M (-1 L-~), 265 
M (possibility operator), 285 
Mahdi, 531 
Maimonides, 566 
major premiss, 174 
major term, 174 
Manders, K., 4 
many questions, 37, 84, 96 
material cause, 90 
mathematical calculation, 107 
mathematical necessities, 73 
mathematical truth, 73 
mathematics, 2, 21, 112 
McCall, S., 68, 73,247, 258-262,265, 
266,270-272,277-281,283- 
290, 293, 303, 306 
meaning, 145, 146 
medical proof, 140 
Meredith, C. A., 280 
metalinguistic placeholders, 142 
metalinguistic study of grammar, 118 
metalogical deduction, 106, 187 
Metaphysics, 102, 110, 113-115, 118, 
142 
Meth, 59, 69 
method of completion, 179, 236 
method of contrasted instances, 179, 
188 
method of counterargument, 191 

method of division, 18, 20 
middle term, 173, 174, 223, 225, 226 
Mignucci, M., 34, 53 
Mill, J. S., 86, 93 
Miller, J. W., 104, 208 
Min, 54, 56, 60-63, 70, 72, 75 
minimality requirement, 65 
minor premiss, 174 
modal logic, 73 
model, 117 
models 
J-models, 278, 279 
Q-models, 294-299, 301,302 
T3-models, 278 
modern symbolic logic, 21 
modified method of contrasted instances, 
192-194 
modus ponens, 38, 53, 60, 69, 116 
modus tollens, 38, 53 
Modus Tollens (R-D), 253 
monism, 23 
monotonicity, 69-71 
Moravcsik, J., 27, 97 
MP (Modus Ponens), 249 
Muh. ammad ibn-'Abdfin, 554 
myth, 3 
n +, 272 
n-, 272 
name (onorna), 41 
natural deduction, 53 
natural deduction system, 105 
natural deduction systems, 248, 279 
natural language, 119, 143 
nature of definition, 16 
necessary truth, 72, 74 
necessitation, 58 
necessitation because of, 70 
necessitation from, 70 
necessities, 71,150 
negation, 125, 158 
negative sentences, 159 
neopythagoreans, 31 
neutrovalid, 116 
613 
Nicomachean Ethics, 102, 103, 107 
no-retraction rule, 77 
nomological necessity, 73 
non-cause, 96 
non-cause as cause, 37, 84, 89 
non-classical, 59 
non-existence, 159 
non-falsifying refutation, 82 
non-formal necessity, 73 
non-logical constants, 143 
Non-Circ, 54, 56, 60-64 
nonlogical necessary truths, 71 
nonmonotonic, 50 
nonmonotonic logic, 66 
nonmonotonicity, 65 
Normore, C. G., 60 
Nortmann, U., 260 
-- (not), 248 
noun, 119, 120 
O (~ A), 249 
object langauge deduction, 106 
object language, 143, 166 
On Interpretation, 30, 31, 40, 115, 
118, 120, 121,124, 126, 127 
On Sophistical Refutations, 27, 31, 33, 
35, 36, 41, 42, 47, 48, 76, 81, 
88, 96, 118, 136, 139, 142, 
149 
one-one principle, 39 
one-premiss conversion rule, 166 
one-premiss conversion rules, 180 
one-premiss rule, 166 
onoma, 41 
ontology, 31 
operational rules, 50, 59 
Opp (assertoric oppositions), 251 
opposite, 155 
o (overlaps), 272 
# (possibly), 262 
paninvalid argument pattern, 202 
paninvalidity, 196 
panvalid pattern in Prior Analytics, 
215 

614 
panvalidity, 115, 180, 210 
paraconsistent logic, 65, 66 
paralogismos, 37, 85 
Parmenidean Rule, 29 
Parmenides, 9, 23, 29 
Parry, W. T., 184, 208 
Partative sentences, 159 
partial attributive, 130, 169 
partial privative, 130 
partial sentence, 160 
partial syllogisms, 209 
pathological metaphysics, 29 
pathological philosophy, 29 
Patterson, R., 73, 260 
Patzig, G., 31,104, 208 
PC (AO), 249 
per impossible argument, 52 
per impossibile syllogism, 53 
per impossibile, 71 
perfect difference, 153 
perfect or complete syllogism, 112 
perfect proof, 47 
perfect rule, 47 
perfectibility thesis, 47 
petitio principii, 92 
Phaedo, 103 
phasis, 121 
Philoctetes, 8 
physicists, 31 
Pinto, R. C., 88, 95 
Plato, 5, 7, 9, 14, 18, 22, 24, 27, 41, 
535,555 
Plato's Academy, 32 
Plato's Euthydemus, 75 
Platonic method, 18 
plural propositions, 39 
+, 272 
Porphyry, 533, 539, 572 
Port Royal Logic, 104 
possession, 155, 158 
possibility, 150 
possible, 150 
possible worlds semantics, 260 
Posterior Analytics, 31, 70, 110, 118, 
124, 144 
Powers, L., 29, 37, 97 
predicable, 41 
predicate term, 174 
predication, 22, 225 
Prem-t-, 55, 56, 60-63 
premiss, 38 
premiss-acceptability, 43 
premiss-consequence, 43 
premiss-pair pattern, 116 
premiss-relevance, 43 
premiss-selection rule, 77 
principle of consistency, 230 
principle of non-contradiction, 111 
principles of deductive reasoning, 110 
Prior Analytics, 31, 34, 38, 48, 54, 
68, 71, 82, 117, 118, 121, 
124, 148 
Prior Analytics, 106-108, 179 
Prior, A. N., 208, 283-285 
privation, 155, 158 
privative particular syllogism, 177 
probative deduction, 166 
problem, 41 
problgma, 133, 137, 214, 224 
Prometheus, 101 
proof, 5 
proof ad hominem, 81 
proofs by ecthesis, 261,279, 280 
proper restrictions, 60 
proposition, 38, 39, 76, 88, 126 
propositional logic, 105 
propositions, 94 
Protagoras, 29 
protaseic argument, 40, 54 
protasis, 38, 40, 123, 126 
Pythagoras, 101 
Pythagoreans, 31 
q, 272 
Q (contingency operator), 284, 285 
Q-con (ordinary contingency conver- 
sions), 289 
Q-inconsistent sets of wffs, 306 

Q-sub-a (contingency subalternations), 
289 
Q-sub-o (contingency subordinations), 
291 
G, 306 
q+, 272 
q-, 272 
quality, 104 
quantity, 104 
question-answer dialogue, 57 
questioner, 76 
questioning games, 33 
Quine, W. V., 13, 67 
QXQ-AAE-1 (A17), 285 
R-AI (rejection by antecedent inter- 
change), 254 
R-AW (rejection by antecedent weak- 
ening), 254 
R-CS (rejection by consequent strength- 
ening), 254 
R-D (rejection by detachment), 253 
R-DDI (rejection by definiens and de- 
finiendum interchange), 254 
R-DN (rejection by double negation), 
266 
R-II (rejection by implication intro- 
duction), 255 
R-RV (rejection by reversal), 254 
R-S (rejection by Stupecki's rule), 253 
R-SE (rejection by substitution of equiv- 
alents), 254 
R-US (rejection by uniform substitu- 
tion), 253 
Ramsey, F., 22 
R~z~ (Fahradd~n), 529,556, 557, 559, 
568, 569,571-581,584 
R~z~ (Muh. ammad ibn-ZakariyX), 535 
real definitions, 17 
real-nominal distinction, 17 
reckoning, 38 
reductio, 228 
reductio ad impossible, 80 
reductio deduction, 166 
615 
reductio proof, 157 
reductio proof, 210 
reduction, 209, 211,214 
Re/, 77, 78, 80 
reflexivity, 49, 69 
refutation, 57, 75, 76, 81, 88, 90, 92 
reinterpretation, 242 
(rejection sign), 249 
rejection axioms 
R1,253, 266 
R2-R4, 266 
rejection transformation rules 
Ral(R-US), 253, 266 
RR2(R-D), 253, 266 
RR3(R-S), 253, 266 
RR4(R-DDI), 254, 266 
RR5(R-DN), 266 
relevance logic, 247, 280, 281 
relevant logic, 65, 66 
relevant premisses, 70 
reputable opinion, 57 
reputable premisses, 41 
Rescher, N., 262 
restriction, 54 
restriction-conditions, 56 
rhema, 41 
Rhetoric, 149 
Rist, J. M., 32 
Robinson, R., 34 
Ross, W. D, 255-257, 284, 289, 290, 
303 
Ross, W. D., 32, 81, 104, 208 
Routley, R., 69 
rule of deduction, 116 
rules of inference, 12 
RV (reversal), 250 
$4, 59 
$5, 59 
$5 (system), 261 
Salmon, W., 4 
Sarah_sL 531 
satisfaction-failure profiles, 63 

616 
S~wi ('Umar ibn-Sahl~n), 568, 572, 
573, 575, 576, 581 
schematic letters, 142, 143 
scheme of argument, 30 
scientific knowledge, 107, 114, 140 
Scott, D., 34, 49 
SE (substitution of equivalents), 252 
Searle, J.R., 72 
second figure, 201,208, 210, 224 
secundum quid, 37, 84, 87, 96 
self-necessitation, 70 
semantic necessities, 72 
semantic rules, 275,276 
Rte-AW, 276 
RV=-RV, 276 
semantics, 53,113,145,162,163, 166, 
247, 255,257, 260,261,271, 
273 
sentence, 120 
sentence having a subject that does 
not exist, 159 
sentence having a subject that exists, 
159 
sequent calculus, 50 
Sergius of Re~'ayna, 530 
set-piece argument, 42, 43 
Severus Sebokht, 530 
Shoesmith, D.J., 66 
simple conversion, 168 
simple declarative sentence, 122 
Simplicius, 533 
single-premiss argument, 92 
single-premissed syllogism, 55 
singular sentence, 160 
singular sentences, 159 
Sirw~n~ (Muh. ammad ibn-Fayd, all~h), 
575,576 
Smiley, T. J., 31, 53, 66, 104, 105, 
114,208,248,252,258,279- 
283, 305 
Smith, J. M., 55, 56 
Smith, R., 39, 40, 104, 105,248,257, 
261,279, 280, 284 
Snell, B., 3, 5, 10, 11, 13, 14 
Socrates, 28 
Solmsen, F., 32 
solo argument, 58 
Sophist, 7, 9, 29 
sophistical refutation, 36, 46, 57, 82, 
83 
sophistical refutations, 36 
sophistry, 18 
Sophocles, 8, 101 
soundness, 113, 278, 289, 295, 299 
speculative science, 31 
standard treatment, 96 
Steinthal, H., 23 
Stephanus, 533 
Stoics, 525, 526, 543, 544, 556 
strategy, 30 
Strawson, 23 
structural rules, 59 
Sub-o (subordinations), 268 
subalterns, 220 
subject matter, 30 
subject term, 174 
substitution, 242 
Sugihara, T., 262 
sullogismos, 108, 116 
superfluous premiss, 61 
superordinate argument, 49 
superstructural conditions, 271 
for valuations relative to J-models 
(Sl-S6), 272 
for valuations relative to Q-models 
(S1-S10), 295 
for valuations relative to T3-models 
($1-$6), 278 
syllogisity, 50, 51 
syllogism, 38, 41, 46, 55, 90, 92, 104, 
105, 116, 137, 225,226, 235 
syllogism in the broad sense, 38 
syllogismos, 51, 53, 78 
syllogisms 
apodeictic, 247, 257, 282,303 
assertoric, 247, 257, 258,260,263, 
265,277, 280-283, 305 
contingent, 247, 257, 283, 285, 

286 
syllogisms-as-such, 76 
syllogisms-in-use, 76 
syllogistic argument, 16 
syllogistic deduction, 17 
syllogistic deduction rules, 113 
syllogistic deduction system, 107 
syllogistic entailment, 60 
syllogistic error, 88 
syllogistic form, 106 
syllogistic implication, 54 
syllogistic logic, 10, 19, 21, 142 
syllogistic rule, 47 
syllogistic validity, 60 
syllogisty, 65 
syntax, 113, 231,247, 255, 257, 263, 
272, 273, 276 
system $5, 261 
systems 
AP, 280, 282 
G, 262-264 
L-X-M, 247, 258, 260, 265, 269- 
273,277-279,281,283, 285, 
286, 295 
LA, 247, 257, 265, 266, 285,295 
LM, 247, 258, 259, 264 
Q-L-X-M, 247, 258,285-289,303, 
306 
QLXM', 247, 288-290, 294, 295, 
299, 302,303, 305, 306 
systems of strict implication, 59 
Szabo, M. E., 49 
tables 
countermodels for LLL ... MLX 
syllogisms, 273 
countermodels for QMQ ... QQM 
syllogisms, 299 
countermodels for QQQ ... LQM 
syllogisms, 289 
McCall's table 12 for Aristotle's 
judgments about the contin- 
gents, 289 
tables for models 
617 
Wll - WI4,273-276 
M 5 -- -/~ 11, 296-298 
M 12 - ./~ 16, 301-302 
Ta_d~ri, 533 
Tah. t~ni (Qut.baddin ar-R~zi), 526,529, 
568, 574 
Tarski, A., 7, 64, 149, 234 
techng, 23 
term logic, 21,142 
the wise, 57 
Themistius, 533-535, 572 
Theodore, 531,533 
Theophilus of Edessa, 531 
Theophrastus, 533,543,549,550,572, 
578 
theory of grammar, 40 
theory of validity, 41 
thesis, 51, 76, 88 
thesis of propositional simplification, 
40 
third figure, 201,208, 224 
Thom, P., 31, 53, 261,271,277, 279, 
284, 289 
Thomason, S. K., 271,276-278, 297 
Thompson, M., 9 
Thompson, P., 64 
Timaeus, 5 
Timothy, 531 
topic, 30 
topic-neutral, 36 
Topics, 35, 41-43, 118, 136 
traditional fallacies, 32 
transitivity, 49, 69 
truth, 149, 151 
truth conditions, 144 
truth preservation, 66 
truth value, 143 
truths of logic, 71 
Tfis~ (Nas.Tradd~n), 529,568,569,571- 
579, 581,582 
two-premiss rule, 166 
two-premiss syllogism, 188 
two-premiss syllogism rule, 169, 183 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

