 
 
Harmony‐Seeking 
Computations 
 
A Science of Non‐Classical Dynamics Based on the 
Progressive Evolution of the Larger Whole 
 
CHRISTOPHER ALEXANDER 
 
 
 
 
All illustrations are to be found at the end of the paper, starting on page 61. 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Harmony-Seeking Computations: 
a Science of Non-Classical Dynamics based on 
the Progressive Evolution of the Larger Whole 
CHRISTOPHER ALEXANDER 
University of California, Berkeley, and University of Cambridge 
I should like to record my thanks to Susan Stepney, for her very extraordinary 
patience and insight in editing and discussing this paper with me, while it was 
prepared for publication  
In this paper, I am laying out a new form of computation, 
which  focuses on the harmony reached in a system.  This kind of 
computation in some way resembles certain recent results in 
chaos theory and complexity theory.  However, the orientation of 
harmony-seeking computation is toward a kind of computation 
that finds harmonious configurations, and so helps to create 
things, above all, in real world situations: buildings, towns, 
agriculture, and ecology.  
This way of thinking about computation, though mathematical 
at base, is closer to intuition and artistic feeling than the processes 
we typically describe as “computations”.  It is also more useful, 
potentially, in a great variety of tasks we face in building and 
taking care of the surface of the Earth, and quite different in 
character since it is value-oriented, not value-free.  It has 
everything to do with beauty.  The harmony that is sought in these 
computations is indeed what we otherwise call “beauty”.  But the 
result of harmony-seeking computations are not merely pretty or 
artistic. In most cases, they are also better functionally and 
technically.  That is why they are important. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 1 
 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Examples are taken from farming, art, architecture, biology, 
physics, astrophysics, drawing, crystallography, meteorology, 
dynamics of living systems, and ecology. 
 
PREFATORY REMARKS 
Overview 
The scientific importance of harmony-seeking computations arises in 
three ways. 
First, there are a number of natural phenomena, especially those 
occurring in complex systems, that are approximated by present-day 
explanations, but which have annoying mismatches with reality.  In a few 
cases that I describe in this paper, for example Acetabularia (pages 19-21), 
snow crystal formation (pages 44-46), cloud formations (pages 37-39), 
simulation of tree growth (pages 39-40), cosmology of large-scale structure 
in the universe (pages 25-29), and group formations in bird flight  (pages 35-
37), there is a substantial possibility that the discipline of harmony-seeking 
computation can contribute something to solving puzzles and unanswered 
questions where solutions have not, so far, come successfully from the fields 
themselves.  
Second, there are cases where the conscious use of harmony-seeking 
computations improves on current practice of design, planning, and ecology, 
in fields where it is our business to make beautiful and harmonious 
structures, but where, too often, contemporary architects and planners using 
current techniques fail to do this (for example, wind turbines (negative) 
pages 17-19, Tokyo apartment building (positive and negative) pages 22-23, 
Boston housing (positive) pages 47-50, drawing by Nakano (positive) pages 
23-24, tree bole seat (positive) pages 13-14). 
Third, there are other cases where study of traditional building processes, 
and the structures they generate, give insight into the nature of the harmony-
seeking computations themselves (for example, St Mark’s Square (pages 32-
33), hayricks (pages 16-17), the Parthenon (page 43-44)). 
This paper is based on results first presented in the four-volume work The 
Nature of Order.1  The essential results, providing the underpinning for the 
current paper, are the following:  There is a structure, visible in any given 
part of the world, which we may call the wholeness. The wholeness is an 
abstract mathematical structure, existing in space.  It captures what we may 
loosely consider as the global structural character of a given configuration, 
in itself and in relation to the world around it.  The wholeness is a structure 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 2 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
that exists at many levels of scale, and covers the interrelationships of the 
configurations at different scales.  The primary entities of which the 
wholeness structure is built are centers, centers that become activated in the 
space as a result of the configuration as a whole.  Centers typically have 
different levels of strength or coherence.  The coherence of a configuration 
is caused by relationships among centers.  In particular, there are 15 kinds of 
relationships among centers that increase or intensify the strength of any 
given center.  These 15 properties are listed below, and define the way that 
configurations within a configuration help each other.  Within this scheme, 
unfolding of new configurations is a natural process, and can be understood 
and followed.  We thus have a basis for making computations about 
unfolding.  These are somewhat similar to the bifurcations that have been 
observed and analyzed in complex non-linear systems,2 but they are much 
richer and more complex than the theory of bifurcations can at present 
contemplate.  Unfolding occurs as a result of wholeness-extending (W-E) 
transformations.  These W-E-transformations are combinations and 
sequences of 15 possible spatial transformations based on the 15 properties 
that determine how coherent centers may be built from one another.  An 
advanced computational theory of these W-E transformations does not yet 
exist, but it is my aim here to show how unfolding is built from these 
transformations, and how the outline of a new (computational) theory of 
unfolding can be established. 
In this context the term “wholeness-extending” relates to preserving and 
extending the structure of wholeness.  The term “structure-preserving” is 
sometimes used in mathematics to refer to transformations that preserve 
some particular structural aspect of a given system, but by convention this 
particular aspect may be arbitrarily chosen.  In my use of the term, it means 
that the given transformation preserves the whole, and is not arbitrary, but 
dependent on the observer’s ability to see the whole. 
Wholeness 
To make more explicit what the term “wholeness” means, I describe the 
phenomenon of wholeness as it appeared in a series of psychological 
experiments.  In studies performed at the Harvard Center for Cognitive 
Studies some years ago, my co-workers and I discovered a curious 
phenomenon.3  When confronted with simple black and white strips, and 
asked to arrange them according to their relative similarities, different 
perceivers chose one of two very different strategies.  These two possible 
strategies for looking at similarity are illustrated below:  
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 3 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
 
Figure 1    Sequential-digital: Reading the strips left to right  
Figure 2      Figural-holistic:  Seeing the strips as patterns 
 
In Figure 1  we see five columns, organized and defined by a left-right 
reading of the patterns, somewhat akin to the Dewey decimal system of 
organizing books in a library or a system of ordering binary numbers 
according to their left right reading.  The right hand end of each pattern 
plays virtually no part in placing it on the board, and the right hand ends are 
random with respect to black and white.  The left hand end in each group 
starts with the same figure, two black squares in the first column, or one 
black square in the second column, and so on.  The gestalt, or pattern as a 
whole, plays no part in the arrangement of the strips on the board. 
In Figure 2, we see various groups, and what ties together the patterns in 
a group, is the overall kind of pattern they have.  One group has steady 
alteration of black and white squares.  Another has a single chunk of black, 
with chunks of white on either side.  Here the basis of classification is just 
the opposite from what is going on in Figure 1.  The patterns are grouped 
according to their overall configuration, as a whole. 
Now, one may observe that these figural arrangements are more 
interesting. To a scientist, it is plain that this way of looking at the figures is 
more useful in the study of physical systems, such as the pattern of emerging 
galaxies, or the morphological development of embryos.  As such we may 
consider the figural classification as deeper, or more interesting.  The 
sequential basis for classifying patterns might interest a computer 
scientistconcerned with binary codes, but otherwise will be relatively less 
interesting, and less likely to be important. 
However, our experiments revealed a remarkable fact. Our experimental 
subjects were young women students at Radcliffe college, and, by definition 
therefore, intelligent, analytical, and selected for good performance in 
academia.  About 85% of these Radcliffe students chose the sequential kind 
of arrangement.  Only about 15% used the figural kind of arrangement.  
The form of classification used by each student was spontaneous, and not 
“led” in any way by the experimenters.  The experimental instructions asked 
only that they play with the strips on the gray board supplied, and place 
those that look similar near each other on the board.  Each student made a 
unique and different kind of arrangement – no two were exactly the same. 
But they fell into these two sharply different kinds of arrangements. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 4 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
It was startling to find out that Harvard Radcliffe students with high IQ, 
and high academic performance, should spontaneously tend to create 
arrangements that were based not on the inherent figural configurations in 
the material they were looking at, but instead on an arbitrary classification 
scheme that was external to the nature of the material.  This was especially 
startling in light of the fact that either scientific training or artistic training 
would tend to look towards the figural aspect of the strips as their most 
salient feature.  
A further interesting fact emerged.  We became interested in the 
possibility of training people to see the figural aspects of the strips.  Because 
of our experiments we had invented, in effect, a way of calibrating a 
perceiver’s way of looking at the strips, by objectifying their mode of 
perception in the arrangement that perceiver created, and using that 
arrangement as a definition of how that person was seeing the world. 
We therefore began a second series of experiments in which we tried to 
give people various pre-experiment tasks, selected, we thought, in such a 
way that they would tend to induce “figural” perception in the subject.  One, 
for example, was “creative play” in which subjects were encouraged to make 
beautiful arrangements with the strips.  Others involved cognitive tasks of 
various kinds.  After giving training to the subject, we would then ask them 
to make the arrangement on the gray board, always grouping patterns which 
“looked alike to them”.  We always used subjects who had never seen the 
material before, so there was no residue from an earlier experience.  
To our surprise virtually none of these techniques (we tested more than a 
dozen different ones) had any appreciable effect on the way the subjects 
perceived the strips.  In the end we discovered only one technique that had 
an effect.  In this technique  we showed each subject a single one of the 
strips, flashed on a screen, by itself, and allowed them to study it and absorb 
its character.  We then put on the screen, for only half a second, an array in 
which the same 35 strips were tightly packed in a random fashion, and 
offered the subject 5¢ if they could find the one we had been showing them.  
After a few attempts our subjects learned to do this.  It was quite impossible 
to do it by reading the strips one at a time.  One could read no more than a 
couple before the array disappeared off the screen.  The only way to find the 
targeted strip was to do the opposite: instead of an earnest focused type of 
perception, one had to lean back, mentally, and try to see the whole board in 
a single glance.  This required great concentration, but was inherently 
unfocussed and relaxed if it was to work.  When people learned this 
technique (which they discovered spontaneously – we never explained it to 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 5 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
anyone) they were then able to see the targeted strip, and tell us where it was 
in the array, and so earned their 5¢.  
The experiment gave us a strong indication that there is such a thing as 
“seeing the whole”.  And that the “whole”, or “wholeness”, that is seen is, 
plainly, an objectively present structure.  It is not always easy to have the 
ability to see it, and students trained in analytical thinking are less likely than 
others to be able to see it at all: we found in other experiments that both very 
young children, and the mentally retarded, had much greater facility for 
seeing wholeness than the highly educated Radcliffe students.  To teach 
someone to see the wholeness, one had to break down the analytical habits 
of a lifetime of education.4   
The ability to see the wholeness is a prerequisite for the material 
contained in this paper.  It is also, I believe, a prerequisite for seeing many of 
the key phenomena that are now an essential part of physics and biology, 
just as it is a prerequisite for seeing  art with understanding.  
Fifteen Properties of Wholeness 
In The Nature of Order, I have once again taken up the study of 
wholeness that had first occupied me in these Harvard experiments 40 years 
earlier.5  Among other fundamental aspects of wholeness I focus on certain 
structural features which appear to be underpinning the wholeness structure, 
as it appears in the geometry of physical things. In The Nature of Order  I 
report on  my observations of 15 structural features that appear again and 
again in coherent systems, and appear to play a major role in establishing the 
wholeness of these systems. The 15 are summarized very briefly here.  
1. 
STRONG CENTERS.  Wholeness is composed of centers, and centers arise 
from wholeness.  A given wholeness is coherent to the extent that the 
centers in it are coherent.6  Centers are recursive in structure.  Each 
center that exists acts to strengthen other centers, larger and smaller.  
2. 
LEVELS OF SCALE.  When a configuration contains centers, these centers 
are associated with centers at a range of sizes that occur at well-marked 
levels of scale.  The scale jumps between levels are small: in coherent 
systems the centers of different sizes are often in size-ratios of 2 to 1, 3 
to 1 and 4 to 1.  If the jumps are larger – for example 10 to 1 or 100 to 1 
– without intermediate levels, the coherence tends to fall apart. This 
means that in coherent structures, the ladder or hierarchy of levels has 
evenly spaced rungs, and is continuous and smooth. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 6 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
3. 
THICK BOUNDARIES.7  Strong centers typically, though not always, have 
thick boundaries around them.  These thick boundaries may exists in 1-, 
2- or 3-D, and are themselves made of smaller centers that have the 
levels of scale relation to the larger centers being surrounded.  These 
boundaries typically form a transition zone of interaction, allowing 
physical, chemical, or biological processes to occur without 
contaminating the centers being surrounded.  The boundary is often on 
the order of one scale jump smaller than the thing it surrounds, thus may 
be equal to the diameter or half the diameter of the thing surrounded. 
Boundaries help form the field of force that creates and intensifies a 
center; they surround, enclose, separate and connect. 
4. 
ALTERNATING REPETITION.  When repetition of similar centers occurs in 
a coherent system, the centers typically alternate with a second system 
of centers, thus forming a double system of centers with a beat or 
rhythmic alternation, from the positive space between the repetitions. 
Centers intensify other centers by repeating in a rhythm; when a second 
system of centers also repeats, in parallel, it intensifies the first system 
by providing a kind of counterpoint, or opposing beat. 
5. 
POSITIVE SPACE.  In coherent systems, there is no “background”, or 
figure and ground.  Instead, every bit of space is coherent, well shaped; 
and the space between coherent bits of space are also coherent and well-
shaped.  Thus every bit of space swells outward, is substantial in itself, 
and is never the leftover from an adjacent shape – like ripening corn, 
each kernel swelling until it meets the others, each one having its own 
positive shape caused by its growth as a cell from the inside.  The 
positiveness of space is difficult to pin down exactly, but it is like a 
weak kind of convexity, or quasi-convexity.  In systems where the space 
is positive, the principal elements of space are nearly all quasi-convex, 
and the pieces of space between these elements are also quasi-convex. 
6. 
GOOD SHAPE.  This describes a particular, coherent quality of the 
particular shapes that occur in or around a coherent center.  This kind of 
“good” shape is somewhat unusual, and is marked by the fact that the 
shape itself is made up from multiple coherent centers which together 
form the shape, and of other coherent centers which together form the 
shape of the space around the shape. 
7. 
LOCAL SYMMETRIES.  Strong centers often have strong symmetries, and 
local parts of space with strong symmetries are typically strong centers. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 7 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
This feature binds together smaller centers within the whole, further 
creating coherence. 
8. 
DEEP INTERLOCK AND AMBIGUITY.  This occurs where coherent centers 
are “hooked” into their surroundings, making it difficult to disentangle 
the center from its surroundings.  Often there are ambiguous zones 
which belong both to the center and to its surroundings, again making it 
difficult to disentangle the two. 
9. 
CONTRAST.  Every center relies to some degree on the contrast of 
discernible opposites, and on its differentiation from the ground where it 
occurs.  It is intensified when the ground, against which it is contrasted, 
is clarified and itself becomes made of centers: all this differentiation 
arises from the degree or sharpness of contrast that is attained.  Note, 
though, that too-sharp a degree of contrast is offset by NOT-
SEPARATENESS, below. 
10. GRADIENTS.  Centers are generated and strengthened by gradients of 
size, shape, or quality.  Thus any quality among a system of centers that 
varies systematically produces a gradient, and this gradient, by pointing 
to a particular center, helps to build that center and to intensify its 
coherence. 
11. ROUGHNESS.  In coherent structures we usually find a rough 
arrangement and repetition of centers rather than exact repetition in 
shape, spacing and/or size.  Thus apparently similar centers are different 
according to context, allowing each part to be adapted to the geometric 
constraints around it, thus modifying details of the repeating structure as 
it needs to be.  Texture and imperfections are generated, and in part 
create the possibility of true uniqueness and life.  
12. ECHOES.  Within coherent configurations there are often deep underlying 
similarities or family resemblances among the elements.  These 
similarities are often characterized by typical angles, and typical curves, 
so that they generate what appear to be deeply related structures, 
sometimes so deep that everything seems to be related. 
13. THE VOID.  In the most profound centers that have perfect wholeness, 
there is often at the heart of the structure a void that is large, 
undifferentiated, like water, infinite in depth, surrounded by and 
contrasted with the clutter of the structure and fabric all around it. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 8 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
14. SIMPLICITY AND INNER CALM.  Essential to the completion of a coherent 
whole is a quality of simplicity.  Every structural feature that is 
unnecessary has been removed, so that the remaining structure has 
slowness, majesty, quietness.  Everything superfluous has gone. 
15. NON-SEPARATENESS.  Connectedness; we experience a living whole as 
being at one with the world around it, not separate from it.  This means 
that when not-separateness exists, visible strands of continuity of line, 
angle, shape, and form, connect the inside of a living center with the 
parts of the world beyond that center, so that it is, ultimately, impossible 
to draw a line separating the two. 
 
These 15 properties are thoroughly explained in Book 1: The 
Phenomenon of Life.8  In Book 2: The Process of Creating Life, these 
structural features are also shown to form a basis for the structure-preserving 
transformations that create life and coherence as configurations unfold.9
INTRODUCTION 
The central issue of this paper is geometric adaptation.  In many real 
world systems, both in nature, and in those places where human beings form 
communities with animals, plants, and other human beings, the central 
observable is a close-knit adaptation of the system elements, usually arising 
over time, and most often expressed in the intricate geometry of the system. 
This close-knit geometric adaptation has not yet been a major focus of 
scientific study, because it eludes simple algorithmic formulations.10  That is 
not because it is more complex, or too complex to be modeled.  It happens, 
rather, because the elements of such adaptation are so extremely simple, and 
so rooted in common sense, that they nearly elude the algorithmic and 
algebraic formulations that we view, wrongly, as more sophisticated.  
For example, if a farmer places a row of fence posts, then runs a top rail, 
braces it here and there where it seems needed, allows it to relate in natural 
ways to declivities in the ground, or to the present of nearby trees, this is 
supremely ordinary; it is characterized entirely by common sense, and often 
by the farmer’s ability to pay attention to the situation of each post, each 
rock, each bit of soil, each slope – and do it right.  But this oh-so-simple 
process eludes algorithmic formulation, because algorithmic formulation is 
inappropriate, not tailored to this tasks, and almost certainly unhelpful in 
grasping what is really going on. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 9 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
That is not to say that such a sensitive fence-building process is childish 
or unimportant.  On the contrary, the character of this minute, step-by-step 
adaptation is vitally important, and we have been ignoring it at our peril.  
But we do not presently have a model that emulates this process.  As a 
result, the ability to perform in the real world according to such a process 
has been worn away and destroyed by processes that are largely bureaucratic 
– often too bureaucratic – but also, in their essence, algorithmic.  The 
planners, building officials, construction companies, engineers, who have 
redefined everyday processes during the last 100 years, have been working 
in a broad context of algorithmic thinking and yes-no thinking.  And they 
have, without explicitly intending to, destroyed a far more subtle process.  
Until that subtle process is acknowledged, and redefined in modern terms, 
it will not have the status it requires to play an effective role in modern 
society.  The deep adaptation that nourishes the physical world requires this 
kind of adaptation.  And this adaptation process, if we choose to think of it 
as computation, is a highly sophisticated computation, yet performed on real 
sticks and stones, and nevertheless potentially huge in the depth and subtlety 
of its results. 
The progress of an evolving (unfolding) natural landscape, or the 
development of an embryo, have similar qualities.  As cell division 
progresses, new cells take shape within the context of the surrounding cells, 
and, at the same time, adapt, so that they are shaped by these surroundings, 
and simultaneously play an active role in shaping their surroundings.  Again 
this process has not been modeled.  One reason for that is the prevailing 
assumption that what is going on in the world is too often a nearly random 
aggregation of simple mechanical processes, with no special coordination or 
behavior as a whole.  Within that view, there is little to be learnt from 
studying the process.  It is just number crunching, without new insight. 
But this view is, I believe, mistaken.  The movement forward of the 
adapting cells, and the progressive adaptations that take place as each part 
rubs up to its neighbors, shapes them, and is shaped by them, coordinates the 
whole.  Some profound coordination of the whole is occurring.  I do not 
think this coordination is “merely” the effect of multiple random events and 
effects.  There are strong reasons to think that this aggregation of apparently 
random  events is, instead, a very highly organized larger structure-
preserving process, in which the process in the large, does progressively pay 
attention to the whole, reflect the whole, and extend and make more 
beautiful the whole. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 10 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
To avoid confusing the reader, I must enter a clarification here. 
Throughout the four volumes of The Nature of Order, I have used the phrase 
“structure-preserving” to describe the transformations which move a system 
forward in time.11 However, as a result of many discussions, I have 
concluded that possibly the phrase “structure-preserving” is not quite right.  
What I am referring to is a structure-confirming, structure-enhancing, 
structure-extending, structure-strengthening, structure-sensitive process.  
Mere “preserving” sounds rather too static and simplistic for the more active 
unfolding that is actually going on.  We might better call them “wholeness-
extending”, and I have chosen to use this improved terminology throughout 
this paper. 
That is what makes it worth studying.  It is a kind of computation, 
entirely unfamiliar to conventional mathematics, but a computation 
nonetheless, and one that reaches profound results.  By observing this kind 
of computation going on, and then, hopefully understanding it well enough 
to simulate it, we may lead to a new era of our ability to think. 
 
In this paper, I rely heavily on examples.  This is partly because the 
subject of harmony-seeking computations is difficult, and one builds a sense 
of its feasibility by considering many kinds of examples from different 
spheres, and slowly grasping the general propositions that underlie all of 
them.  It is also because harmony-seeking computations occur in nature, and 
can also occur in human creative processes.  The constant awareness of these 
two very different spheres, and the process of comparing them, is what, 
above all, makes this kind of computation interesting. 
 
HARMONY-SEEKING COMPUTATIONS  
Relation of a Given Computation to the Larger Whole Beyond It 
In the examples I give, the essential thing, an essential feature of the 
process described, is that the new configuration that is created does 
something to participate in, strengthen, extend, and enlarge the force or 
“presence”, of some larger configuration that stands in the world around it.  
In many cases, this larger configuration is not itself amenable to change 
during the “computation”, but it does nevertheless enter in as a crucial 
factor.  
If a lane exists, connecting two villages, and the road between them is 
then asphalted one day, the new wider and harder road is primarily affecting 
the configuration of these two villages, a tract of land much larger than the 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 11 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
lane itself.  Indeed, the new road may (according to its position in the region) 
also affect and strengthen an even larger part of the region’s economic 
network.  We recognize this as a fundamentally useful act. 
A played musical note is most effective according to the degree that it 
develops a melodic line, a rhythm, or a harmony.  If it does all three 
simultaneously, it will be most effective of all.  Once again, we recognize 
the usefulness of this act. 
These are simple cases.  Other cases involve creation of the most highly 
organized and complex wholes.  These have, so far, eluded us in science.  
Even the exciting and useful theories of bifurcation, symmetry breaking, 
chaos, and generative algorithms, have not yet deeply plumbed the meaning, 
or the origin, of true complexity.   
All this is obvious, hardly more than the most ordinary common sense.  
Yet, obvious or not, the extraordinary fact remains that this kind of adaptive 
process (the farmer building his fence with respect for the land) does not 
currently have an acknowledged part to play in present day theories of 
algorithms, in developmental biology, in architecture, nor even in system 
theory.  It is just not part of the mental models in our tool bag that we 
currently address and use. 
Once we take this seriously, and add knowledge and perception of this 
type of transformation to our kit of tools, it will be natural to contemplate the 
possibility of a kind of computation that examines possible moves forward 
from a given state of a system, tests them, and evaluates the extent to which 
each of these moves participates in and adds to the larger wholes in the 
world around it, then chooses the most effective, the most harmony creating, 
the most successfully whole-creating!  Such a process of computing, if it can 
be attained, would be enormously powerful, and powerful in its implications. 
The Essence Of Harmony-Seeking Computation 
The essence of the harmony-seeking computation lies in the following.  It 
creates new configurations, unknown configurations, and good ones, by 
taking off from a known configuration, but without (necessarily) requiring 
the input of human creativity. The process itself is creative. 
Consider a given configuration with certain features that are visible, and 
which, in the main, define whatever whole, or wholeness, we see in the 
configuration.  But, in addition, in every configuration there are also traces, 
hints, of dim structures, not yet fully developed, but existing in a latent form, 
“between the lines” of the configuration.  What happens in harmony-seeking 
computation is that some process “notices” these latent structures, and 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 12 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
enhances them, develops them.  Sometimes what develops may be relatively 
modest with respect to the size of the entire configuration.  At other times, 
very, very large structures may also be latent in a configuration, and these 
large structures are enhanced.  If the whole-seeking computation identifies 
this latent larger whole, and strengthens it, so that what was before only 
barely visible, now becomes strong and easily visible, the configuration will 
seem, to an untrained eye, to have gone in a new direction all by itself.  It is 
this process that is the essence of all harmony-seeking computation. 
Example 1: Embryogenesis 
Consider an example of embryogenesis, a growing mouse foot.  Here is 
how it grows in four days, from the 12th day to the 15th day.  Each stage 
contains within it some structure that is defined, and some that is for the time 
being a vague and fuzzy mass of jelly, which anticipates the shape of the 
next step, which then consolidates and solidifies what was merely latent only 
hours before. 
 
Figure 3   Step by step development of a mouse foot 
 
What are some of the transformations that constitute the wholeness-
preserving character of these moves?  The form is governed by an axis from 
the attachment to the body to the tip.  In the second slide we see the 
emergence of a STRONG CENTER at the tip itself, forming a thick BOUNDARY 
(in one dimension) to the arm, together with a dark fork that has emerged 
within the jelly.  This center is then accentuated by the appearance of a 
GRADIENT leading to the fingers, and this gradient is then embodied in the 3rd 
and 4th slides by LEVELS OF SCALE, CONTRAST, and LOCAL SYMMETRIES, and 
finally finding expression in the GOOD SHAPE of the whole.  
Example 2: A Bench Around A Tree 
Consider the example of a growing willow tree, and the act of the 
landowner who chooses to build a bench around the base of the trunk.  The 
bench places a BOUNDARY around the tree.  Compared to the size of the 
trunk, this is a tiny act, a tiny step.  But the bench starts from the cylinder of 
the three trunks, puts a small ring-shaped structure around it (the seat).  We 
may say that the possibility of this seat was inherent in the previous 
structure, latent there, and that the bench builder simply made explicit and 
more solid the structure that was present in a weak and latent form, at the 
base of the willow tree, already. 
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 13 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Figures 4A, 4B and 4C   A delightful seat around a tree, being woven in 
basket form and then finished with turf 
Figure 4D   The finished seat 
 
I mean this literally, not metaphorically.  The ring-shaped structure that 
later finds embodiment and physical form in the seat, is already present 
before the seat is built, in the ring-shaped system of symmetries and sub-
symmetries of the space around the tree, because they are induced by the 
presence of the trunk and its roughly cylindrical shape.  This statement is the 
crux, and in this statement – when it is generalized – lies the mathematical 
kernel of what I have to say in this paper.  
In each of these two examples, the mouse foot, and the bench around the 
willow tree, these steps build on the structure that is there before; they do 
not destroy it or interfere with it, but rather enhance it, elaborate it, deepen it.  
As a result, what arises has wholeness, coherence, and beauty.  That is the 
trick, in a nutshell.  By continuously preserving and enhancing the existing 
structure, a beautiful thing arises, naturally.  Yet, because each whole is 
unique, and the idiosyncrasies lying latent in it are also unique, the new 
whole that springs from this process is unpredictable, original, and 
creative.12
To perform this trick we must ask rather more precisely what it means to 
take steps that intensify the latent structure that is present in a configuration. 
Can we define this idea precisely enough, so that we can start doing it on 
purpose? 
STRUCTURE OF WHOLENESS 
The idea that every given geometric configuration might have its own 
“wholeness” seems odd at first.  However, there is a real and definable 
mathematical structure underlying any configuration that captures, or “is”, 
the structure of the whole configuration, its global structure.  Over the 
course of years I have begun to call this structure the wholeness.  It is not 
uniquely defined (mainly because the structure is so difficult and complex to 
describe in precise detail), but it is definite, and various attempts to represent 
this structure approximately, if they are any good, all have something in 
common.  There is a deeper, global “something” there.13
I first began to recognize this possibility in experiments undertaken at the 
Harvard Center for Cognitive Studies in the early 1960s (described above, in 
the preface).  These experiments were inspired by the early 20th-century 
gestalt psychologists – Wertheimer, Koehler, Koffka and others – who wrote 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 14 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
extensively about the perception and cognition of wholeness and of wholes 
in the world around us.14  In the early 1960s, Huggins and I used various 
experimental techniques to find out how different perceivers see 
configurations.15  The essence of the technique was to ask people to group 
different patterns according to their degrees of similarity. It became clear 
that there are broadly two kinds of perceivers, those who see patterns 
holistically, and those who see the patterns according to analytical 
classifications.  The perceivers who saw analytically were in the majority, 
about 85%.  The perceivers who saw holistically were in the minority – 
about 15%; these perceivers grouped patterns according to their overall 
figural character. 
However, as explained on pages 3-6 of the prefatory remarks, it was clear 
that the figural perception was somehow more real, while the analytical 
perception was arbitrary, and made according to arbitrary invented schemes.  
The figural quality was inherent in the material. The ability to perceive 
figurally was therefore of enormous importance.  
I discovered, later, that it is possible to train people to perceive figurally; 
but it takes a good deal of effort to overcome what I believe is a culturally 
induced tendency (especially among academic people) to be analytical – and 
thus perhaps understandable among Radcliffe students.  
In broad terms, we may say that the global configuration is a structure of 
the main features of the configuration – in particular when it is seen as a 
whole.16  During the same series of experiments, I made a significant 
discovery.  The coherence of the different configurations could be measured 
by counting the number of locally symmetric sub-configurations it 
contains.17  This measure gives results in strong agreement with 
experimental results from cognition, memory, perception and so on.  Thus a 
configuration and its structure do depend, in some considerable degree, on 
the nesting of LOCAL SYMMETRIES and on the structure of the system of locally 
symmetric subsets that occur in it.  The fact that a simple measure (the 
number of locally symmetric subsets) to some extent characterizes the 
different configurations, lends further weight to the idea that for a given 
configuration, the wholeness is something real. 
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 15 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
EXAMPLES OF HARMONY-SEEKING COMPUTATIONS IN 
DIFFERENT DISCIPLINES  
Example 3: Hayricks in a Field 
The photograph shows two modest hayricks placed in a rolling field in 
Romania18.  The placement is done in such a way as to complement the land, 
to enrich the land; it is humble, self effacing, there is no ego visible, only 
concern that the land and its harmony should be enlarged. 
 
Figure 5  Hay ricks in Romania 
 
How is one to characterize what is happening here?  What is it, that we 
see, and recognize as so supremely successful?  Of course, the placement is 
primarily practical.  The hay ricks are placed on almost-level spots, but ones 
which have a very slight slope so that they can drain.  But there are many 
subtle harmonies, also visible.  The ricks are on the same scale as the trees 
on the ridge; the trees gently surround and enclose the place where the ricks 
are; the rolling quality of the land, with its dips and hollows, and the hedges 
and trees as they are placed, is respected.  The two hayricks are placed with 
considerable care, on slight outcrops of land, so that the hayrick is not only 
kept dry, and free from rot, but it actively enhances and emphasizes the 
slight bumps in the land.  In addition, the actual structure of the hayricks 
themselves (each rick a tree of light timber, with hay piled up on it), mirrors 
and echoes the character of the grass land and of the surrounding vegetation. 
Below, I show a sketch, which in very broad-brush terms, approximates 
the wholeness present in that place.  
 
Figure 6   Impressionistic depiction of  the wholeness structure in the 
land 
 
The wholeness includes the sinuous curves, the kinds of shapes which are 
present in the field, the dips and hollows, the surrounding trees, the trees 
along the ridge, and the fallen down enclosing fence below.  I believe that 
the people who tended the land, placed the trees forming a hedge on the 
ridge, allowed the hollows in the land, and who built and placed these 
hayricks were, consciously or unconsciously, performing a harmony-seeking 
computations every time they worked the land.  There are ECHOES of shape 
and size between land and hayricks, ECHOES of a certain kind of curve, 
LOCAL SYMMETRIES in the ricks themselves, the placing of the ricks 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 16 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
emphasizes naturally occurring STRONG CENTERS that are generated by 
shelves and flattened places, bounded so that the hayricks nestled in the land, 
are subdued and congruent, and inside the structure which exists.  The 
hayricks are kindly to the land, but they are placed with enormous care.  
They follow the wholeness of the land itself.  The ricks fit into the land 
because of the way they function and because of what they are made of. In 
order to function well, they have to sit on a locally flat surface that is uphill 
from where water collects, and downhill from the crest of the hills so that the 
effort it takes to stack the hay is minimized. They are made of hay, the 
material produced by the place, so their scale, color and form are the same as 
their surroundings. Nothing foreign is introduced into the place for the sake 
of function alone. Form and function together are part of the wholeness of 
the place. The wholeness is a harmonious structural and geometric quality 
within the whole. 
 
   
 
In the examples that follow, I begin describing, structurally, what is it that 
has taken place to generate such harmony, and what it is in other cases that 
has caused the breakdown of harmony. 
Example 4: Giant Wind Turbines on the Danish Coast. 
Let us look at what 20th- and 21st-century thinking about engineering and 
design often does.  The thinking is rationalized, usually, by more or less 
algorithmic formulations of various kinds.  However, when these 
computations about subtle and delicate wholes are rationalized according to 
current ways of thinking, they usually go wrong as far as respect for the 
larger underlying background structure is concerned.  The subtlety and depth 
of the existing global structure in a landscape is not so easily recognized by 
technological thinking.  For example, in the photograph, the land has a 
global wholeness that is made of layered, nested flat plates, a two 
dimensional system of plates.  However, the ecologist who placed the two 
giant turbines was evidently unconcerned about creating harmony with this 
structure.  
 
Figure 7   Wind turbines on the flat north coast of Denmark 
 
       
Figure 8A    Diagram of the wholeness before construction of the turbines 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 17 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Figure 8B   Diagram of the wholeness  after construction of the turbines 
 
Cover up the two towers on the photograph, so that you can see the land 
as it was before they were placed there.  It is hard to see it, because the 
towers are so obtrusive, and so alien to the kind of structure that is there. 
When an ecologist becomes too concerned with one aspect of sustainability 
(the importance of wind energy, as in this case), and then plants 300 foot 
high windmills on an ocean front, destroying the landscape in the process – 
this is no longer a W-E-transformation, but rather a well-meaning but ill-
judged algorithmic computation of some inappropriate kind about cost 
benefit.  In this case, the wholeness and the structure of the place have been 
severely damaged.  Sometimes, the place, its landscape and its internal 
adaptations – often the result of centuries of patient work – are irredeemably 
destroyed. 
In the coastal landscape where the Danish turbines have been placed, the 
structure that was there before is flat like a disc, a great flat disc, the size of 
the bay, flatted at the edge where the waves meet the sand and the grassland 
just beyond it.  This enormous gentle discus-shape, perhaps half a mile 
across, is suddenly violated by the two vertical structures, sprouting turbine 
blades  dumped on it.  The two massive vertical things have no relation to 
the structure of the subtle disc that lay in the land before.  The slash of the 
new straight road is at odds with the curves of the land. And, in the 
foreground there are two teeny little sheds that look lost and forlorn, too. 
The building site is not even harmonious with itself. Altogether, the structure 
has been violated. 
Compare what is happening in the hayrick example, and in the turbine 
example.  In the case of the hayricks, the process of placing them has left the 
previously existing structure alone, indeed the process enhances it, 
strengthens it, increase its harmony.  But in the case of the turbines, their 
shape and placement are at odds with the previously existing structure, they 
damage it, they destroy it. 
What is the “it” that is being left alone in the first case and is being 
damaged and destroyed in the second case?  It is the wholeness, that system 
of centers existing in the geometry of each place, which give it its character, 
shape, organization, rhythm, feeling, and global configuration and relation to 
the land around it.  One may describe the relation of the action to the 
wholeness like this: in the first case, the injection is friendly, helpful: what is 
there is healed, complemented, and continued; in the second case, the 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 18 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
injection is violent, disrespectful, and structurally at war with the land that 
was there before. 
My judgment about these two injections is not a romantic yearning for an 
idyllic past, but a structural judgment about something that is objectively 
present in one case, and missing in the other.  It is also true that wholeness-
enhancing processes allow growth and extension to continue while the others 
freeze things and inhibit improvement. One injection respects what is there, 
the other does not.  And these structural judgments are about phenomena 
that are essentially mathematical in character.  It is not just a question of 
feeling, but also a question of structural congruence, or the lack of it, that 
exists between an existing structure and an injected structure which has been 
brought into it. 
We very much need to understand more about this kind of structural 
respect. 
In order to understand the idea of harmony-seeking computations better, 
it is useful to examine a wide series of examples of such computations, most 
of them occurring in the real physical world.  We may also call them whole-
seeking computations, or healing computations.  The following examples are 
taken from the fields of biology, architecture, ecology, embryology, 
decorative arts, town planning, entomology, symmetry breaking, and 
astrophysics. 
Example 5.  Evolution of the whorled cap of Acetabularia  –  6 steps 
This example is taken from Brian Goodwin’s work on the morphogenesis 
of Acetabularia, a single-celled alga which takes the form of a stem with a 
cupped whorl at the end.  Goodwin has studied the growth of this form, and 
the series of transformations that generate the form of the completed alga.19
 
Figure 9   Whorls forming at the tips of developing Acetabularia 
 
Figure 10   Goodwin’s five diagram sequence 
 
The key morphogenetic sequence that Goodwin describes are illustrated 
in his five-diagram sequence above, showing the stem bulging and then 
making the whorl.  It goes as follows: 
1 to 2. A hemisphere,  formed by the bulging upward growth of the cell   
⎯⎯⎯
t u r n s  i n t o→ a hemisphere with a small centrally symmetric swelling on top 
(an ogee curve). 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 19 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
2 to 3.The hemisphere with a small centrally symmetric swelling  on top 
⎯⎯⎯
t u r n s  i n t o→ an elongation of the swelling forming a neck. 
3 to 4. The hemisphere with the elongated narrow neck  ⎯⎯⎯
t u r n s  i n t o→ a 
neck with a flattened top, upper end. 
4 to 5. The flattened neck on top of the hemisphere, grows a ring of small 
projections (a whorl) that ultimately turn into the umbrella shape visible in 
the completed algae. 
5 to 6. The whorl formed around the top of the cylinder grows outward 
⎯⎯⎯
n o w
 
t u r n s  i n t o→ a full umbrella-like ring of small projections that ultimately 
turn into the umbrella shaped cap visible in the completed algae. 
 
As Goodwin says, strongly and repeatedly in his writings on the 
Acetabularia example, this growth sequence is generated by natural physical 
phenomena.  It has relatively little to do with DNA or genetic guidance.  
What is happening is a naturally occurring and inevitable progression of 
morphological transformations that arise directly from the geometry and 
dynamics of the form itself, to generate the next geometry.20
It is highly significant that a prominent biologist has begun taking the 
emphasis of morphogenesis away from the influence of DNA, and has begun 
to see the morphogenesis as an autonomous process in the geometry itself.  
There is an interesting sequel to this story.  When Brian first showed me 
the diagrammatic sequence illustrated above, I asked him if the progression 
from round-ended neck to flat-topped neck was correct.  Why do you ask? 
he said.  I said that, looking at this purely from the point of view of 
structure-preserving transformations, I would have expected something 
different.   
It seemed to me very unlikely that a round topped structure could 
transform into a flat-topped structure.  There is nothing like the flat top latent 
in the configuration.  There is a ring latent in a hemispherical configuration, 
but further down the curve.  If you have a rounded hill, or hemispherical end 
of a neck-like structure, there is, inherent in that configuration, a latent 
structure something like a shoulder, which is incipient near the top of the hill 
and just below it (see left-hand sketch below).  In the right-hand photo 
below, we see such a structure on the prehistoric Wittenham Clumps near 
Oxford.  It evidently was, for the builders who made these mounds, a natural 
way to continue the smooth structure of a rounded hill.  Somehow this point 
of inflexion in the curve of the hill is a natural development from the smooth 
curve. 
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 20 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Figures 11A and 11B   One of the Wittenham clumps near Oxford and A 
diagram of the structure created on the mound by the prehistoric 
embankment 
 
If you are in doubt that it is “natural”, consider two possible 
transformations of a hemispherical hill.  A just flattens the top by squashing 
it into a flat surface.  B introduces a band below the top, with two points of 
inflection in the curve, as shown below.  Ask yourself which of these leaves 
the hill alone more, and preserves the global structure of the hill better.  I 
think that you will agree that it is B.  It is in this sense that B is more natural 
than A.  
So I said to Brian, referring to his Acetabularia diagrams: If such a 
configuration were latent, and did then transform to create such a ring-like 
shoulder, then that shoulder, not the top, would be the most likely place 
where whorls and other irregularities might naturally form.  So I asked him 
again, Are you sure that the real morphogenesis of Acetabularia doesn’t go 
like that, rather than the way your diagram portrays it?  Like this: 
 
Figure 12   My analysis of the developmental sequence, based on W-E-
transformations 
 
Brian laughed, and told me: You are absolutely right: that is what actually 
happens – I just got the diagram wrong.  
This story sheds interesting light on the way sophisticated harmony-
seeking computations may be able to help both observational biology, and 
theoretical biology, and structural modeling and simulation. We come back 
to this later.  The important point for now is that it is possible to make 
accurate statements about what structures are latent at a given phase of 
morphogenesis; and it is therefore possible to say, objectively, how things 
are likely to unfold. 
Look again at the photograph of the Acetabularia, and look inside the 
caps: there is indeed a remaining hillock, not a flat, just as my whole-seeking 
computation predicted.  At the time I made the prediction, I had never seen 
enough detail of Acetabularia to know about this kind of cross-section.  My 
guess arose solely from wholeness considerations, and from thought about 
what would be structure-preserving. 
 
Figure 13   Enlarged photograph of Acetabularia showing hillocks, not  
flats, at the center of the  whorls 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 21 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Example 6.  Two possible plans for a five–story apartment building in 
Tokyo 
    
Figure 14A and 14B   Two possible plans for the five story Emoto 
apartment building in Tokyo,  South is at 10.30 pm. 
 
Figure 14A shows a plan for this apartment building in Tokyo, done by a 
student.  Figure 14B plan shows the five-story apartment building that I 
subsequently built on the site.21  Though typical of many architectural 
projects in 1987 (the era of the project), the student’s plan plainly lacks the 
wholeness-preserving quality of the final plan.  The layout process for the 
final design has about fifty structure-preserving steps, described in detail in 
the reference.22  
The plan as built complements and intensifies the wholeness of the site.  
This is clear from just looking at the ground plan alone.  However, to 
emphasize what this really means, and to illustrate the deeper structures that 
are involved, I describe some specific features of the global structure that 
existed in that place, and that were solidified and complemented by the 
building placed there.  Some of the structural features of the original site are: 
The center formed by the Y-configuration of the fork; The curving nature of 
the two branches; The space between the forks, and its specific V-shape; The 
southern spot hit by the sun. 
The new building, when injected into this site, does the following things 
that help to accentuate and strengthen these structural features of the place: 
• 
The sharp end is given a snub nose, creating a place in front of it (it 
became the entry to a shop). 
• 
The front gardens of ground floor apartments are placed to form a 
boundary between the building and the street.  
• 
Since the boundary is of uniform width, the space of the street is 
maintained and continues its positive shape. 
• 
The building is wrapped around the sunny south-facing spot on the site, 
making sunny space for all the apartment owners. 
• 
On upper floors an inner layer of galleries and terraces form a boundary 
to this place. 
 
As these various features are consolidated, they form a coherent structure, 
in which each feature supports and helps the others.  Marked among this 
coherence is the presence of positive space throughout, even in a 
geometrically complex configuration; the fact that there are levels of scale 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 22 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
within the structure; the focus of major centers to the structure, each with its 
own strength and beauty. 
 
Figure 15   The completed Emoto apartment building 
 
The process of building, and injecting, this structure into the 
configuration of the site, and designing and planning and building the entire 
five story-complex, I view altogether as a complex computation.  It takes the 
initial configuration (the site) as its starting point, then transforms the 
configuration, by about 50 steps, finally ending with the configuration 
illustrated.  Although the work of an architect of this kind would be 
conventionally viewed as an artistic act, hence as an arbitrary and “private” 
process, I believe this to be seriously in error.  In the process illustrated here, 
each step is based on the configuration that is there at the moment before, 
and the latent structures that exist, and then makes one step forward that 
specifically, and carefully, strengthens or supports, and evolves naturally out 
of,  the structure that was there before.  
Example 7.  An ornament drawn by Hiro Nakano – 6 steps 
On the next page there is a much simpler example – just the evolution of 
a sketch – but following the same kind of process. The sketch starts with a 
row of evenly spaced dots. Then, it goes like this: 
 
• 
Make a circle around alternate dots. (ALTERNATING REPETITION) 
• 
Intensify these new centers with an additional circle, and also make a 
much smaller circle around every other dot. (STRONG CENTERS, 
ALTERNATING REPETITION) 
• 
Take the bigger circles and subdivide each into eight sectors, four plain, 
and four that are fan-shaped alternating with the plain ones. Give each 
fan-shaped sector a special shape to emphasize it and give it more detail. 
(GOOD 
SHAPE, 
LEVELS 
OF 
SCALE, 
ALTERNATING 
REPETITION, 
BOUNDARIES). 
• 
Add a strong dark, shaded band, to connect the larger circles with the 
smaller ones they alternate with more strongly. (CONTRAST, NOT 
SEPARATENESS, LOCAL SYMMMETRIES). 
• 
Add two additional lines, making borders to frame the dark band, and 
thus creating a still stronger sense of unity. (BOUNDARIES, NOT  
SEPARATENESS). 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 23 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
• 
Darken the central band much more, and blacken the flower shaped 
quadrants of the inner large circles. (CONTRAST). 
 
In the sketch, through this very simple sequence of six steps, we see the 
growth of a coherent and sophisticated structure, from extraordinarily simple 
moves.  The names given in parentheses at the end of each step (above), are 
references to the 15 properties and transformations, defined in The Nature of 
Order.23 As we see later, these properties and transformations play a 
fundamental role in the creation of all wholeness. 
 
Figure 16   Six W-E-transformations leading to the creation of a new 
ornament 
 
This example is instructive because it is complex enough to be 
interesting; we get a vision, for the first time among these examples, how 
recursive use of these transformations on the emerging centers, and on the 
centers that the transformations themselves generate, is potentially a 
complete and very powerful process, perhaps one capable of generating all 
complex configurations in their totality. 
However, there are still many years of work needed to generalize this 
harmony-seeking computation process in an effective and operational form 
for the broad range of problems we may wish to apply it to. 
Example 8.  Historical evolution of St Mark’s Square – 10 cycles 
 
Figure 17   Plan of St Mark’s  Square 
 
Figure 17 shows  the plan of St. Mark’s Square, Venice, one of the most 
famous and beautiful public places in the world.  This marvelous and highly 
complex structure grew, steadily, over a period of about a thousand years. 
What happened there may be best understood as a series of harmony-seeking 
computations, carried out at intervals, with intense and deliberate care.  
Although the series of growth cycles shown below is historically accurate, I 
cannot be certain that the nature of the activity undertaken at each stage was 
exactly what I have indicated.  However, I am fairly certain that it must have 
gone roughly as I suggest: the fact that it is possible to define a coherent and 
rather simple paradigm for each cycle of activity, and that in their essentials 
they are all the same, is remarkable, and strongly suggests that what 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 24 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
happened was indeed something along the lines of the underlying 
computation I have proposed.24  
 
Figures 18A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J   Ten cycles of W-E-transformations in 
the history of 1000 year development of St Mark’s Square 
 
In every cycle, there are three entities at work:  
 
1. The configuration in the large, roughly the size of the whole of the 
frame, although focus of attention is usually on an area about half the 
size of the illustrated frame – shifting from cycle to cycle. 
2. The particular latent center, shown pink, which is the latent center that 
most calls for elaboration and development.  The area of the latent 
center is usually slightly larger than the pink area: the pink shows its 
focus. 
3. One or more smaller centers, shown blue area, that are built in order to 
strengthen and make more forceful the presently weak latent center.  
Placing these blue centers is always done in such a way to strengthen 
both the previously latent center, and the large configuration that is 
helped as a structure by the elaboration and articulation of the pink. 
 
The procedure goes like this:  Find the latent center that is most salient, 
that seems most likely to strengthen the wholeness of the larger 
configuration.  Act locally, in such a way that this latent center gets 
strengthened, and so that this strengthening helps, also, to strengthen the 
largest whole.  Repeat this cycle ten times over a period of about 1000 years, 
(roughly once per century), and the result was St Mark’s Square as we know 
it today.  This rule explains (or generates) the ten actual cycles of 
construction and improvement which occurred around St. Mark’s  from 
600AD to 1600AD. 
Example 9.   Formation of Giant Voids in the Universe: a Very Large 
Example of a Generated Wholeness 
In recent years, attention of cosmologists has focused on the truly 
enormous structures of galaxies and galactic clusters in the universe, now 
called filaments.  Subsequently, even greater attention has been  focused on 
the voids that seem to be encircled by these filaments.  The filaments are 
typically hundreds of millions of light years long, and tens of million of light 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 25 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
years thick.  The voids are often hundreds of millions of light years in 
diameter.  
 
Figure 19   Shechtman et al, the Las Campanas Redshift Survey,1996,  showing 
voids and filaments 
 
The image above is one of the early pictures of the distribution of 
galaxies and galaxy clusters that for the first time clearly showed us that 
these voids and filaments existed.25  One of the remarkable things about the 
voids is that they appear to be convex, and quasi-spherical.  To me that 
implies the presence of some active principle pushing outwards.  In terms of 
the language of wholeness, the existence of  THE VOID  (a general structure 
existing at all scales, and not specific to astrophysics and cosmology), and of 
thick  BOUNDARIES, and of the scale ratio given by LEVELS OF SCALE, is to be 
expected in all wholeness, since these are three of the 15 main ways in 
which coherent structure typically occurs.  Further, the astrophysical voids 
seem to be close packed, rather like soap bubbles, and, like soap bubbles, 
where the bubbles meet, there is a film where the boundary material is 
concentrated.  In just this way, the galaxies are spread out in linear filaments.  
 
Figure 20   Artist’s sketch of the 3D structure, showing roughly how the ring-like 
filaments lie in space, on the surface of the voids 
 
The so called Great Wall is 500 Mpc long, 200 Mpc wide, and 15 light-
years thick. (1500 million light-years long, 600 million light-years across 
(band) and 15 million light-years thick. Filaments are typically 70 to 150 
Mpc in length. (200 to 500 million light-years). Voids are 10 to 150 Mpc (30 
to 500 million light-years  in diameter). The actual physical size of one of 
these voids, is unimaginably huge, about 100 million light years. It is in 
miles,  186,000 * 3600 * 365 * 24 * 100,000,000 = 5865696 * 106 * 108  ≈ 6 
* 106  * 106 * 108  =  6 * 1020  miles.  A jet plane flying at 600 mph, would 
take 1014  years to cross this void – something like 5000 times the age of the 
universe itself.  I say this to emphasize the huge size of the voids that we are 
talking about, and in particular to draw attention to the fact that if the void is 
that huge, the ring thickness could in principle be almost anything, and the 
ratio of ring thickness to ring diameter could (hypothetically) have a large 
range of possible values.  
Yet that is not what we observe.  One of the structure’s most unexpected 
features is the ratio of filament thickness to void diameter, about 1 to 10, 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 26 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
roughly one order of magnitude.  Why is this interesting?  Because the 
filaments could have been much thinner compared with the diameter of the 
voids, or could have been fatter compared with the voids.  There is no a 
priori reason for the ratio to be in the range of 1:10 (one order of 
magnitude).  It could just as easily be 100 or 1000 or 1,000,000 – that is, 2 or 
3 or 6 orders of magnitude.  Why is the ratio of filament thickness to void 
diameter on the order of one order of magnitude?  The next picture, a 
simulation by George Lake and Tom Quinn, shows this structure more 
clearly.26
 
Figure 21   The Lake-Quinn simulation 
 
Stated differently, what possible reason could there be that the rings 
around such a colossally enormous, almost impossibly huge-to-our-
understanding, structure in the universe should have roughly the same 
geometric proportion as a gold wedding ring or as a rubber band?  Is this not 
pushing coincidence?  In the absence of any current theory that might give 
us a predictive model of the relative size (unless one fits the parameters just 
to get the result we observe), it is worth speculating whether the universe 
itself – its action – is (among other things) making harmony-seeking 
computations, and that the result of these computations is the system of 
voids and filaments we see, because it so closely parallels our own cognitive 
and intuitive sense of the relative dimension of a typical ring’s thickness and 
the diameters of the space that it surrounds.   
What exactly do I mean by this?  I mean that there is a certain class of 
mathematical structures, in space itself, that has features that, for spatial and 
computational  reasons, gradually appear in space – because of the geometry 
of space itself, not because of what we know as forces.  
This hypothesis provides us with something very much like teleology, 
without being teleology at all.  It strongly indicates that there is inherent, in 
space itself, a motion caused by the whole that can be understood in 
mathematical terms that are in principle quite simple.  Even very small 
modifications of space cause a reshuffling, or reorganization, of the entire 
system of local symmetries, sometimes extending far beyond the point 
where the disturbance occurred.  This new global configuration introduces 
new latent centers that were not present before, sometimes far from the 
original disturbance.  If harmony-seeking computations then draw out and 
strengthen the latent centers that were at first only dimly present, we then see 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 27 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
how space itself, by virtue of its geometric organization, can call out, or pull 
out, new configurations.   
I say that this process is “like” teleology, because it provides the system 
with a constantly moving goal that forms new structures all the time.  It does 
not come merely from the dynamic trajectories of the past.  At the same 
time, it is not at all like the teleology that scientists quite properly reject, 
because the orientation or arrow of the system’s next move comes from the 
current state of system itself, not from a future or external hand.  It is an 
internally fueled trajectory, caused by the phenomenon of the geometrical 
whole: precisely that thing that has so far escaped us.  
Next time you are in the bath, try stirring the foam that lies on the surface 
of  the bathwater.   Very often you will see that the foam moves in ringlike 
swirls on the surface of the water, and once again the roughly circular 
swirling ring-shapes that are formed have a diameter to thickness ratio in the 
range of about one order of magnitude.  I do not believe the ring ratio merely 
fits a cognitive niche.  Rather, I suspect that there are, deep in geometry of 
space, reasons why ring-like structures with this kind of ratio are likely to 
occur.  In current jargon, rings of this particular ratio might be viewed as 
attractors in some phase space.  However, the discovery of geometric 
attractors in the solutions to systems of dynamic equations is, in my view, 
only one particular manifestation of the far more general harmony-seeking 
computations that occur naturally in three-dimensional space.  The tendency 
for such structures to occur might be shared over a very wide range of 
circumstances, and the voids and ring-filaments in the cosmos might form in 
shapes similar to the foam in the bath, not for dynamic reasons having to do 
with physics, but for mathematical reasons having to do with the structure of 
space itself. 
But if we accept that the harmony-seeking computation is based on 
transformations that are (for whatever reason) largely congruent with human 
cognition and mentality, then we may not be silly to consider such a process 
as an explanatory process even in the most outlandish structures.  
This supposes then that there may be mathematical reasons that generate 
circles or ring-like filaments whose thickness is just about one order of 
magnitude smaller than their diameter.  There is, at the moment, no 
astrophysical theory that would predict this result – at least none that I know 
of – but, from the point of view of harmony-seeking computation, there is a 
possibility that the cognitive simplicity of about this ratio for a ring-structure 
could suggest that it might have to be so for mathematical or quasi-
mathematical reasons. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 28 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Is this strange?  Yes indeed, to our ears it is very strange.  Yet is it more 
strange than Pauli’s exclusion principle, when that was first put forward?  I 
do not think so.  A purely geometric harmony-seeking computation might 
explain at least one aspect of the structure better than any current physical 
theory.  Does it seem unlikely?  Perhaps.  But in the absence of better 
computations,  I do not think it can be considered entirely useless.  At the 
very least, some reason needs to be found why such processes, congruent 
with cognition, might occur in structures at the scale of the universe and at 
the scale of human beings, and why the ring-ratios of both tend to be the 
same. 
 
WHOLENESS-EXTENDING TRANSFORMATIONS 
Viewing The Previous Examples as Computations  
The previous examples all show, or suggest, the possibility of some kind 
of harmony-seeking computations at work in a variety of systems.  In all 
cases, there is some kind of wholeness-extending process at work, mainly 
geometric in nature, sometimes intellectually graspable, sometimes not so 
clear.  Apparently, as a result of this wholeness-extending (or W-E-) process, 
at each step the generated configuration moves a given configuration 
towards a slightly more harmonious, more coherent, state than it was in 
before. 
If we choose to do so, we may regard all these examples – physical 
processes, simulations, and actual paper and pencil exercises – as 
computations, each of which takes its system forward, step by step, from an 
existing state W1 to W2, W3, … Wi , Wi+1, and so forth, increasing structure 
and harmony and wholeness in the system as it goes.  These steps are 
carefully calculated, normal in many spheres of human experience and in 
many natural systems.  Some of them are done by animal instinct; some by 
human instinct; some by adherence to a certain tribal sensibility; some by 
concern for ecology.  Many occur naturally (without human intervention) as 
part of the behavior of some complex physical system.  
In the various examples given in this paper, I have used the word 
computation with a variety of different, though related meanings: 
• 
Intuitive computations, made intuitively, by human craftsmen:  hayricks; 
the bench around the tree; the construction of St Mark’s Square. 
• 
Conscious computations, made consciously by a designer, according to 
a consciously used scheme that calls for certain actions to be performed 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 29 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
in sequence:  the Emoto apartment building in Tokyo; the ornamental 
drawing by Nakano.  
• 
Natural computations, possessing explanatory power for straightforward 
scientific problems that have not yet been solved:  the development of 
the whorl tips of Acetabularia; geese flocking to form a V-shape. 
● 
As yet half-formulated harmony-seeking computations, which may be 
implicit in the behavior of different complex systems, and which, if so, 
would shed important light on the nature of the phenomena: the 
formation of giant voids in the unfolding of the cosmos; the formation 
of blue sky and clouds with their respective complementary positive 
space; the growth of tree limbs in such a way as to create positive space 
between the limbs.  
In these cases we might also simply talk about the system behavior, 
and the rules according to which system behavior develops.  It is 
perhaps odd to call them computations: but if we wish to simulate the 
system behavior that leads to harmonious results, we may need to use 
such a computation as the explanation of the physical system’s 
behavior. 
 
In a generic sense they are all computations. But in nearly all these cases 
they are not recognizable as computations in quite the way we presently 
understand calculations or algorithms.  This does not make them trivial, it 
makes them fascinating.  There are reasons to believe that a fundamental 
kind of process is at work in all these cases.  If we can examine these 
computations, and begin to understand or extract the underlying way they 
work – all of them together – and if we succeed in getting the gist of this 
type of computation, we may find a way towards a powerful new way of 
computing that is guided by emerging harmony, and by a motion towards 
harmony. 
So I view these examples as computations, because, after 20 years of 
work, it has slowly become clear that they all embody some kind of single 
process, or function, that has the capacity, starting with an arbitrary 
configuration, to reach a better and more harmonious configuration.   
Although the idea of a W-E-transformation is, for the moment, still 
somewhat loosely defined, there is a considerable degree of similarity 
between the different examples – in the way that they work and in what they 
accomplish.  I conclude that it is reasonable to think of the examples as 
exemplars of the operation of a single type of mathematical function, or 
computation, at work. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 30 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
To learn to see these examples as embodiments of a single type of 
computation, we must now work harder to be specific about what this deep 
seated type of computation might be, how it might work, and how, above all, 
we can put it to work, in cases where we seek better organization, better 
harmony, better deep adaptation and better coherence for some real-world 
configuration. 
Experimental Confirmation 
My own cognitive experiments show strong agreement among observers 
as to comparative judgments regarding what steps are wholeness-extending  
and what steps are not.27  A step is a harmony-seeking step if it preserves or 
extends the wholeness structure.  When asked to judge different possible 
steps, starting from a given configuration, in terms of the degree to which 
the steps are W-E (wholeness-extending) or not, people seem to agree – 
based on their intuitions, or on their own cognition.  This alone strongly 
suggests that the quality of “being W-E” is to some degree objective.  It 
gives a strong hint that the phenomenon reflects an underlying physical 
reality. 
It is also true that if we ask people taking in part in such an experiment to 
make (in their own chosen terms) any kind of structural diagram in which 
they try to capture the wholeness of the thing they are looking at, before 
judging which steps forward from it are structure-preserving and which are 
not, the level of agreement between observers in judging what is W-E and 
what is not, goes up strongly.  People who have performed such a private 
diagram-making process, even though their diagrams are not alike, then 
agree more strongly with one another about what steps forward from that 
structure are W-E.  This occurs even though the making of a diagram that 
describes the structure is a private matter, and people are given no special 
instructions about how to do it, and the different diagrams people make are 
unlike.  It seems to be enough that after simply attempting to represent the 
structure, they can then judge more reliably what is structure-preserving and 
what is not.  This, once more, is evidence that the phenomenon of W-E is 
real and objective as a phenomenon, with objective structural content. 
The W-E Postulate: Always Helping a Larger Whole to Form 
How may we formulate, mathematically, the character of the wholeness-
extending  steps which occur in the examples? 
In each case there is a whole, W, and within the whole a latent center that 
is being modified, transformed, shaped, or reshaped, by a certain step.  This 
latent center is the focus of the transformation, and the latent center sets the 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 31 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
boundary of the geometrical and physical transformations that are then 
actively being undertaken.  Call this focal latent center L. 
At the same time there is a larger whole, often an order of magnitude 
bigger than L. The transformation which is  wholeness-extending, preserves 
the structure of W, and to do so modifies L, and modifies it in relation to the 
whole context around it.  Thus the output from this step is a modification 
geometrically within L, but it is a function of both L and W.  In addition, 
there is a sense in which L is being fitted to W, it is being made to fit W, to 
be congruent with W, adapted to W, harmonious with W.  Further, in 
modifying  L in this way, new centers are created within and around  L.  We 
refer to these new centers as  Ni. 
To undertake this transformation in such a way that it is indeed a 
wholeness-extending transformation, the various  Ni  are generated by 15 
generic types of transformation acting on  L.  These are the 15 principal 
center-creating and structure-preserving transformations. 
 These are 
enumerated and defined in considerable detail in chapter 2 of The Nature of 
Order, Book 2 (The Process of Creating Life),28 and in chapters 5 and 6 of 
The Nature of Order, Book 1(The Phenomenon of Life).29
The W-E -Transformations o St Mark’s Square 
Now look back at figure 18.  Here, in each cycle, the pink area is a latent 
center we may refer to as L, the next building to be built is built inside   L, 
and the larger context of the whole St. Mark’s area is W.  However, there is 
now a subtlety.  In a particular step, we know what L is, because we are 
looking back in time and see what the step was.  But the people who actually 
did the step were not, at the time, so clear.  They could not know what L 
was, until examination of the context and the larger whole revealed it to 
them.  And there is a further subtlety.  The context W is not something so 
vague and general as the whole St. Mark’s area.  It is, rather, a particular 
area within St. Mark’s square, where the latent center L has been identified 
as being in need of improvement, or presenting itself for elaboration and 
strengthening.  This latent center L, which plays a crucial role in the 
wholeness-extending transformations, and the detailed effects are created by 
the 15 transformations acting together. So it is actually the immediate local 
context of  L that then gives rise to the step that transforms  L. 
Alternatively we might say that it is each latent center L, once identified, 
that is the entity to be transformed, and the transformation is to be done in 
such a way as to strengthen L in its ability to help and make cohesive the 
larger context W.  The particular bits of building needed to carry out the 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 32 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
transformation are the various buildings and partial buildings Ni that are 
generated by the action of the transformations. 
 
Figure 22   A second look at one of the W-E-cycles in St Mark’s Square 
 
Here, for example, the red ellipse is L, the latent center formed by the 
three buildings around it.  To confirm and strengthen L, the blue building 
mass is built, thus forming a stronger rectangular space, by enclosure, and 
establishing continuity with the buildings on the right of the latent 
configuration. 
 
HARMONY-SEEKING RATHER THAN “EMERGENCE”  
In recent years, conventional scientific wisdom has begun to see 
emergence of complex structure as a result of coupled local atomic events 
generating larger wholes through interaction.  I do not think that this 
approach adequately accounts for the world’s ability to generate highly 
ordered complex phenomena.  Instead, I believe we must find a way of 
accounting for the specific generation of structure, in deeper ways than we 
have done so far.  Concretely, I now compare the doctrine of emergence, 
with the richer notion that in many cases there is a whole-based, harmony-
seeking process that works by continually strengthening latent centers and 
by operating on the wholeness that exists, to generate a new and deeper 
wholeness.  
It has nowadays become almost commonplace to explain how geese fly in 
formation30, how ants accomplish complex tasks together31, or how slime 
mold (apparently an uncoordinated aggregate of cells) is able to move 
coherently as a whole32.  In most cases, the explanation is, in some form or 
other, that the individual “cells” copy the behavior or action of their nearest 
neighbors; in many cases this ultra-simple rule of action explains 
considerably coherent movements of the larger body of cells.33  In other 
more complicated cases, the atomic actions of individual cells are coupled, 
and the coupling helps more complex forms of behavior to occur in the 
group.34  In either case, the resultant aggregate seems to be acting as a 
whole.  This has become known as “emergence”. 
However, to be sure we are talking sense when we say these things, and 
to avoid exaggerating what we seem to have discovered under the rubric of 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 33 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
emergence, it is important to analyze just what we mean by “acting as a 
whole” in these kinds of cases. 
When health, or wholeness, or harmony, exists in a part of the world, 
what is under discussion is always the relationship of a given system to the 
larger world beyond that system.  So the issue is not merely whether a group 
of elements act together.  What is important is that when the elements are 
grouped together to form a system, the resulting system either does or does 
not act in such a way as to heal, or sustain, or improve, the coherence and 
health of the yet larger system around it, some part of the world outside and 
beyond  the group, some system of which this group of elements is a part. 
The emergence phenomenon is a two-fold relationship, between a set of 
elements and a group they form.  The harmony phenomenon is a three-fold 
relationship, between a set of elements, the group they form, and the 
helpfulness of the ensuing group to the world beyond the group.  Thus: 
 
Emergence, a two level relationship                       Harmony, a three 
level relationship 
 
                            
 
Figure 23   Emergence, a two level relationship                       Figure 24   
Harmony, a three level relationship 
 
In the left hand diagram we have a group of elements, and because of  
their interactive coupling they act as a whole, represented by the outer circle.   
In the right hand diagram we also have a group of coupled elements that act 
as a whole because of the coupling, but in addition, this whole acts to 
support or help some feature of the larger system, represented by the 
outermost circle. 
The system on the left is interested only in itself.  It does nothing to help 
the world beyond it, and does not contribute harmony or health to the world 
beyond it.  The system on the right is not only embedded in the bigger black 
ring: it helps that ring, and establishes harmony between the smaller ring of 
rings and the largest ring, so that the smaller ring is well adapted to the 
larger, and the large one benefits from the smaller. 
What Does it Mean for One System to Help a Larger System? 
Let us return to the example of St Mark’s Square.  At each cycle the 
process (through human agency) identifies a latent center in the larger 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 34 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
configuration.  This latent center is an area which is present, but weak, and 
which, if strengthened, would improve the coherence of the whole.  The area 
immediately around that latent center is healed or made more whole by the 
injection of the repaired latent center. 
Abstractly we may express this concept through the following diagram. 
The red area is a latent center, a weak center which has the capacity to heal 
the blue area beyond it: and it is able to do so by creation of the smaller 
white centers – they are built to create coherence in the red center.  However, 
the key point is that the healing will not take place, unless the red center 
then also helps to heal the larger blue center beyond it. 
 
 
Figure 25   Key condition for the healing to take place in a W-E-
transformation 
 
This is not really obscure.  But as a key point, it is sometimes lost in the 
current flurry of attention that “emergence” nowadays draws unto itself.  
Example 10.  Flying Geese and the V-formation 
Many boid simulations, due to Reynolds and others, essentially provide 
particle models in which the particles fly about, avoid each other, all go in 
the same direction, flock, play: altogether, simulate some of the behavior of 
birds in a fairly realistic fashion.35   When used to model bird flock behavior 
in general, there is a surprising realism in some of these models.  However, 
simulations of this type do not do as well when it comes to generating the 
characteristic V-formations of migrating Canada geese36.  
Much has been made of the fact that when in the V-formation, Canada 
geese increase their flying range by about 70%, because they use less 
energy, because of the vortex interactions.  When aircraft arrange themselves 
in similar V-formations, a similar energy saving is experienced.  But that 
does not explain how the V-shape actually comes about in the case of 
migrating geese. 
I have looked at several boid simulations that demonstrate the flocking of 
birds.  Seemingly random motions quickly give way to groups of birds that 
fly together and in the same direction, while maintaining a typical spacing 
distance from the other birds.  That does not in itself generate the V-
formation.  Those cases that I have seen where a V-formation is claimed, or 
made to appear have all, in my experience, built this configuration implicitly 
within the rules that govern the birds motion. 
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 35 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Figure 26     The V-formation of Canada Geese          Figure 27   Each 
bird flies in the outer wake of the bird ahead of it, since that is the spot 
which takes the least energy –just  like riding a bike behind a bus, to catch a 
ride from the negative pressure in  the airflow. 
 
Let us consider what real geese may be doing.  Reynolds’ three basic 
boids rules (most frequently given) are these: 
 
• 
If you are about to crash into another bird, turn around. 
• 
If you are far away from other birds, head towards the nearest bird.  
• 
Otherwise, fly in the same direction as the bird next to you.37 
 
This system of three rules generates general flocking very well, in fact to 
an extent that seems amazing the first time you see it.  But these three rules, 
alone, do not create a persistent, stable, V-formation.  To do that we need to 
add two further rules: 
 
• 
Try to fly in sweet spot of the wake of the nearest bird (which they can 
do because they can sense the change in pressure and the easier ride in 
that position). The optimum positions are in the outer wake, off-center 
from the axis -- not merely close to, or in the same direction as, the 
nearest bird.38 
• 
If you are the leader and get tired (you are the only bird not getting the 
energy advantage), then drop away, and let another bird takes your place 
as leader.   
 
There is a rule of follow the leader (though boid enthusiasts deny it), but 
the leader is not an arbitrary “king”.  Instead the wake rule means that birds 
follow one another, without electing a leader; but at any one time there is a 
temporary leader who gets defined by the fact that it is the only bird not 
behind another bird.  Being in this position is tiring, and birds try to avoid it.  
So there is no permanently elected leader, but there is always a temporary 
leader, and that temporary leader keeps changing.  
When we add these rules, two things happen.  The dynamics do now 
generate a stable V, and the rules of action require that the birds compute or 
calculate in a way that makes a local center (the bird’s own body) work to 
help a larger center (the V-formation as a whole), thus demonstrating the 
action of the basic rule I have mentioned earlier. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 36 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
That can only be understood, and generated, by using a computation 
which looks at the growth of the whole, and the emerging structure of the V-
configuration as a whole.  It is likely, I think, that the real situation cannot in 
principle be modeled properly without a harmony-seeking transformation. 
That is because the real computation needed to generate the V requires a 
computation which explicitly relates the individual to the whole.  
The current enthusiasm for “emergence” as evidenced in boid-like 
computer games and simulations does little to unravel the real and more 
subtle problems of the whole and its organization, which hinges (almost 
always) on the way that small parts work to help a larger whole, and the 
ways that the larger whole also shapes and modifies the action of the smaller 
parts. 
The real issue is that the emergence that is being attributed to the birds 
(when they are viewed as mechanisms) is not as marvelously dumb or 
mechanistic as some mechanistic emergence enthusiasts like to think.  The 
fact is that to produce the V-formation, the birds themselves have to perform 
a harmony-seeking computation, in the way that they act to relate themselves 
to the larger whole, and to help that larger whole.  The fact that the birds 
themselves perform this harmony-seeking computation is the essence of the 
situation. 
Example 11.  Clouds and the Positive Space which Arises Between Them 
In the following photographs we see various examples of cloudy skies. 
We are familiar with the shapes of clouds, and do not need to look at them 
just now.  Instead look at the shape of the blue sky between the clouds.  I 
have recently begun to study this blue sky carefully, and have began to 
notice (with something of the eye of a painter) that the blue patches are 
nearly always well-shaped.  These are extremely different from the childlike 
cotton wool cloud formations we perhaps carry in our minds as a picture of 
the way clouds are (especially cumulus), where the clouds are objects and 
the sky is background. 
 
Figure 28   Cotton wool clouds: the clouds are objects and the sky is background. 
Figure 29    The real thing, a very different structure 
 
Look at the real example in the photograph below.  
 
Figure 30   Clouds and the sky between them, as they appear in nature 
    
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 37 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
In every one of these cases, the blue sky is made of definite and positive 
shapes (POSITIVE SPACE).  For a painter this notion is straightforward: a 
picture cannot be good unless all the spaces and components and fragments, 
have their own positive shape.  But this positive space is quite tricky to 
formulate in mathematical terms.  The idea of POSITIVE SPACE is something 
like convexity.  In mathematics, a convex body is one which has the 
property that for any straight line that connects two points inside the body, 
all the remaining points in between, along that line, also lie entirely inside 
the body.  Positive space is space that is, in shape, coherent, it is formed of 
positive, somewhat convex lumps that have definite and recognizable shape, 
but it is less tightly constrained than mathematical convexity – hence quasi-
convex.  
 
Figure 31   The blue systems are clearly visible here as having their own 
shape and character 
 
There is no a priori reason to expect such POSITIVE SPACE to appear in the 
space between the clouds (seen in projection as blue sky).  Yet, watching 
clouds blowing and changing minute by minute, they maintain the positive 
space of the blue, as well as the positive space of the white and gray clouds 
themselves, at each instant. 
 
This may be expressed by a simple idea: the blue sky is not a mere 
background for the white clouds, but rather the space that we see as empty 
(or blue in projection) is itself an actual system, or dynamic object, acting on 
its own, and has its own shape and behavior, just as the white part (the 
cloud) does.   
So how may we explain what nature is doing in these cases?  Somehow 
the positiveness of space appears in the space between the clouds, but not for 
reasons obviously connected with the energetics of the system.  Instead the 
system simply seems to have a disposition to have this positive space appear.  
What is causing it, and how does it work? 
What we see in two dimensions in projection, is actually a three-
dimensional phenomenon.  The easiest way to imagine it, is to consider both 
the white bits, and the blue bits, as quasi-convex bodies.  Somehow, as the 
clouds evolve, it is a co-evolving system in which this loose packing of 
differently sized blue and white quasi-convex bodies is maintained nearly all 
the time.  Such a changing dynamic packing of irregular sized cells could be 
a more complex 3D analog of Taylor vortices or Benard convection.  On this 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 38 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
page I show two simulations from the laboratory of Professor Michael Cross 
at Caltech, demonstrating stages of Benard-like formations in a medium, one 
under the impetus of the Swift-Hohenberg equation, and one under the 
impetus of the complex Ginsburg-Landau equation.39  They are far more 
regular that clouds.  Still, one can see how the positive space could come 
about as a result of more complex interactions stemming from these kinds of 
effects, and possibly driven, in addition, by some iterative rule similar to the 
POSITIVE SPACE transformation. 
     
Figure 32   Configuration arising from the Swift Hohenberg equation      
Figure 33   Configuration arising from application of the complex 
Ginsburg Landau equation 
 
Although this is not (in this form), as far as I know, part of the presently 
accepted physics of the cloud system, it is exactly what one would expect 
from a more accurate harmony-seeking computation, which has, as one of its 
most important structure-preserving transformations, the continuous  
maintenance of POSITIVE SPACE at every step, reflecting the fact that the 
space we see as blue sky between clouds, has its own rules of formation 
which are active systems maintaining their own coherence, and which thus 
shape the space of the cloud systems as much as being shaped by them. 
  
Example 12   The Branching Shapes of Real Life Trees and the Positive 
Space between the Branches 
The nature of positive space, as an active principle, which plays a major 
role in harmony-seeking computations, may be understood further by 
looking at the growth of trees.  If we look at a tree we see volumes of 
positive space between the branches: it is visible, for example, in the left 
hand drawing below, which is a realistic drawing of a real tree.  So, 
apparently, the empty space between the branches must, like the blue sky, 
have “energy”, a driving force for it to be a definite “thing”.  How exactly 
might this be explained?  The space between the branches has no obvious 
energy to push and create its positiveness.  Nor does this idea yet have an 
accepted mathematical formulation in L-system theory, which focuses 
exclusively on the growth of branches, twigs and leaves.  
              
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 39 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Figure 34   A sketch of mine showing a real tree as it typically is in 
winter, and strongly showing the positive space generated between the tree’s 
branches 
Figure 35    On the right: a context-sensitive L-system simulation of tree 
growth in two adjacent, interacting trees. The spaces between branches still 
lack the intensity as centers caused by the action of each volume of space as 
a system in  its own right 
Prusinkiewicz has made great progress by simulating tree growth through 
the use of L-systems, and has recently developed “environmentally-
sensitive” simulations, which create more realistic structure, which develops, 
in part, according to neighbouring conditions.40  Yet all the L-system 
simulations that I have seen, including Figure 35,  lack the positive character 
of the space between the branches shown in Figure 34. For example, see 
drawing on the right, above. 41
One can readily account for the positive space phenomenon as it occurs in 
trees.  The twigs and leaves in a growing tree are phototropic: they look for 
the light.  Simultaneously, the tree also needs air and breeze, and the leaves 
and twigs and branches modify their growth to allow the passage of air, and 
to avoid crowding of leaves which deny them water and light.  Thus, the 
“empty” volumes of space which nestle among the leaves are highly 
sophisticated systems, as necessary to the tree as the complementary 
organization of limbs and branches that provides structural strength and the 
flow of sap.  As in all systems of positive space, the one system 
complements the other.  Both are necessary to the tree’s living character.  In 
this case, observation of the harmony-seeking calculations performed by the 
action of the tree teaches us more about the tree as a system, and allows us, 
if we choose to do it, to write more convincing algorithms of a tree’s 
morphogenesis. 
I wonder if an extended new type of L-system might be constructed, 
which allows two parallel and complementary systems (1) the branch and 
leaf system and (2) the space volumes between the branches,  to evolve and 
unfold in parallel, and in a way that makes each the inverse or geometric 
complement of the other?    
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 40 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
WHOLENESS-EXTENDING TRANSFORMATIONS AND 
SYMMETRY BREAKING  
The Possibility that Wholeness-Extending Transformations are Deep 
Generalizations of Symmetry-Breaking. 
One of the most familiar analyses of the evolution of natural phenomena 
and configurations is the one that Ian Stewart and Martin Golubitsky have 
popularized: The phenomenon of symmetry breaking in geometry, not only 
in systems of equations and variables.42
Example 13. Dewdrops On A Spider’s Thread or on a Stem 
The explanation of symmetry breaking as an output from various natural 
phenomena, leading to interesting morphological results, is by now well 
known.  The regular spacing of dewdrops on a spider’s web is one case that 
Stewart and Golubitsky have discussed extensively.  Crudely put, the water 
coated on a spider’s web thread starts out as a uniformly coated cylinder of 
water, made roughly uniform in thickness by surface tension.  When the 
surface tension starts to break up the continuity of the coating, it leads to a 
configuration that falls apart, but still repeats at least some of the symmetries 
present in the continuous cylinder, since there is no reason for all those 
symmetries to be removed as well.  
This idea is very similar to the idea of a structure-preserving 
transformation.  We have a structure: the infinite translational symmetries of 
the cylinder along the thread, and the rotational symmetries of the cylinder 
around the thread.  As this system moves to a fragmented version (caused by 
the action of the  surface tension, or by jiggling of the thread), the simplest 
end product is the configuration that destroys the least possible number of 
symmetries, or maintains as many of the remaining symmetries as possible. 
Golubitsky and Stewart’s most recent work on symmetries in the equation 
systems of bifurcation theory, continue such ideas.43   
But this one particular way of preserving the structure of what is there is 
very limited indeed, compared with all the possible ways of preserving and 
enhancing structure.  In addition, even the symmetry-breaking interpretation 
of what is going on in the simple dewdrop example is geometrically too 
limited.  Each dewdrop takes on local spherical symmetries and axial 
symmetries normal to the thread, and symmetries parallel to the thread but 
not aligned with it, that are not present in the symmetry scheme of the 
infinite cylinder.  
   
Figure 36   Dewdrops on a spiders web 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 41 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
 Figure 37   Dewdrops on a grass stem 
 
In my view, the symmetry-breaking idea is not yet, by itself, sufficiently 
profound to be useful as a general theory explaining real-world complex 
configurations, or to account for harmony-seeking phenomenon.  As I have 
said earlier, it has been postulated that “the” wholeness consists, in part, of 
the entire system of overlapping local symmetries at a wide variety of scales 
in a configuration.44  We therefore need to have a view where somehow the 
underlying structure of all these symmetries, working together, is preserved.  
And further, the centers that are present in a given wholeness are not all 
LOCAL SYMMETRIES.  Other centers are formed by GRADIENTS, ECHOES, 
THICK 
BOUNDARIES, 
DEEP 
INTERLOCK, 
POSITIVE 
SPACE, 
NOT 
SEPARATRENESS, and so on.  These other properties and the entire structure, 
too, have to be preserved when a harmony-seeking computation starts with a 
currently existing structure, and finds its way to a stronger structure that is 
latent in this overall configuration, and can be brought out by a few 
transformations. 
In summary, we may say:  A wholeness-extending transformation is a 
more complex and richer version of the phenomenon whose simplest cases 
have in recent years been called “symmetry breaking” or “symmetry 
reduction”.  This nomenclature is rather over-simplified, and does not do 
justice to the real potential complexity of the underlying phenomenon.  A 
W-E-transformation is a transformation that moves a complex configuration 
forward, retaining as much of its wholeness structure as possible, and 
drawing new structure from the latencies within the wholeness itself.  In so 
doing the configuration usually becomes richer and more complex in 
unforeseeable ways that benefit the larger whole although this can happen 
without intervention by a decision-maker. 
Local Symmetry Production 
Indeed, even in the well-known cases of symmetry reduction, what we 
actually see, if we look closely, is symmetry elaboration.  The infinite 
Euclidean 3D-space does indeed lose some global  symmetries, that is part 
of what goes one. But at the same time, other, new local symmetries are 
generated or strengthened where none existed before.  This is a better picture 
of how harmony-seeking computations work.  The failure to see it, comes, I 
think, from the fact that in recent years the symmetry structure of the plane, 
or of the 3D-continuum, has been viewed too simply through the symmetries 
of the whole.  It has not been sufficiently clear that there are, hidden in the 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 42 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
plane, or in the continuum, an infinite number of  smaller local sets, all over 
the place, some of which are themselves symmetrical, while others are not. 
There are, in the world, thus an infinity of systems of smaller and smaller 
symmetries that occur in these nested sets.45  What happens when a whole 
evolves under harmony-seeking computations, is that many of these smaller 
symmetries are generated or strengthened where the latencies are strongest, 
thus gradually generating a hierarchical nesting of local symmetries at 
different levels of scale.  
 
We may see the result of such a process in many famous buildings, for 
example in the Parthenon. The Parthenon is of course symmetrical in the 
large. That is obvious, and is these symmetries most people see when they 
first look at it. But when we examine all the locally symmetric sets, large, 
medium, and small, we find a truly astonishing number: the columns, the 
spaces between columns, the flutes of the column, the capitals, the metopes, 
the triglyphs, abacus, stylobate, entablature, guttae, steps, etc. The building 
is deceptively simple, yet the enormous number of locally symmetric sets in 
the configuration is the highest of all those measured by Salingaros among a 
considerable range of famous buildings. In general his findings are that the 
buildings with the most profound qualities, are those for which this density 
of local symmetries is highest. 
 
Figure 38   Salingaros studied 25 famous buildings by counting the 
number and density of local symmetries, according to the measure proposed 
in NOO, also adding further elaborations to estimate the density of 
symmetries. He found that of the buildings he studied, the Parthenon had the 
highest count of local symmetries, and was highest in symmetry density.  
 
This pervasive presence of many local symmetries, sometimes 
overlapping,  is particularly visible in some cognitive experiments on black 
and white strips my colleagues and I did some years ago.46  The left hand 
illustration shows the experimentally derived rank order of coherence, of 
thirty-five such strips, as measured by a variety of independent cognitive and 
perceptual tasks.  Those at the top are (by a variety of experimental 
measures) found to be cognitively most coherent; those at the bottom least 
coherent.  After two years puzzling over the experimental results, I found 
that this rank order is predicted almost exactly by counting the number of 
local subsymmetries in each pattern.  The strips at the top (such as the one 
labeled 15) have nine local symmetries, those near the bottom have five, and 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 43 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
the others lie in between (see accompanying diagram, which enumerates the 
nine local symmetries  in pattern 15 and the five symmetries in pattern 13). 
 
Figure 39   The local “subset” symmetries that occur in a system of 35 
different strips 
 
What is most significant is that the presence of these local “subset” 
symmetries in the pattern, and the number of them, appear to cause what is 
seen as coherence.  This structure is obviously not a product of symmetry 
breaking.  It is an example of multiple symmetry production.  In 
innumerable cases, especially in organic development, local symmetries 
(limb-buds for example) are created, and this is one of the most important 
phenomena in organic development.  
In order to understand this source of harmony, it is necessary to see the 
symmetries as part of a system of overlapping nested sets, in space, each of 
which may take on local symmetries or not, within its own local frame.  One 
view of a harmony-seeking computation, in this context, is that it is a type of 
computation that injects as many overlapping local symmetries as possible, 
into a finite framework.  Salingaros has shown that such compressed systems 
of local symmetries are present precisely in the acknowledged great 
buildings especially of ancient society.47  In his computations, the top scorer 
for presence of local symmetries, with some additional refinements coming 
from others of the fifteen properties, was the Parthenon. 
Example 13.  Snow Crystals 
Another rich source of information about the partial deficiencies of 
algorithmic computations in morphological matters lies in the attempts to 
simulate snow crystal formation. Snow crystal growth has been simulated 
with partial success by Diffusion Limited Aggregation (DLA) methods, and 
by cellular automata (CA) methods.  So far, the results of these simulations 
pale when compared with the extraordinary variety seen in real snow 
crystals.  Bentley photographed some 5,000 snow crystals during his 
lifetime, and his precise and exquisite photographs show us the kinds of 
structures which a successful computation must be able to create.48  In 
particular, we see extraordinary LOCAL SYMMETRIES, DEEP INTERLOCK, 
POSITIVE SPACE, and GOOD SHAPE, in snow crystals, at levels that are 
common in works of art.  These features do show up, but only weakly, in the 
results of the DLA or CA simulations so far published. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 44 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
The currently prevailing theory of snow crystal growth says that the 
crystal grows outward, from a small hexagonal plate that is the starting 
point.  The six-fold symmetry occurs in the six arms, so it is hypothesized, 
because the conditions of temperature and spatial constraint are essentially 
the same along each of the six radial axes – at a given moment in the history 
of its growth. Thus even though changing, the configuration is roughly the 
same on each arm as the growth moves steadily outward.  Hence the high 
level of morphological similarity from arm to arm.  This idea has been put 
forward with clarity by Libbrecht in the Department of Physics, at Cal 
Tech.49  
But there are serious anomalies.  If you examine the left-hand crystal 
illustrated below, you see that in addition to the six-fold symmetries that are 
indeed present, there are other symmetries.  Most noticeable is an alternating 
pattern: three arms have one pattern, and the other three alternating with 
them, have another.  This may be seen in the moth-like figures that occur on 
the three arms that are 120 degrees apart.  The second illustration, a simple 
plate crystal, shows another fascinating aberration.  Again, we have 
relatively uniform six-fold symmetry, centered on the six vertex axes as 
usual.  However, if we look at the outer edges of the hexagon, along the 
three faces pointed to by the arrows, we see that they sides have a different 
symmetry: a shape that has two ogive S-curves (rather like a valance on the 
top of an 18th-century cupboard) just along the outer edge of the hexagon.  
This new symmetry is not only three-fold instead of six-fold, but it is based 
on three axes that are edge-centered, not vertex-centered.  In another 
example published by Bentley, there is a configuration where a figure that 
appears within a conventional six sided plate, shows up only twice, 180 
degrees apart, thus introducing an anomalous symmetry (see lower 
photograph).50  
These non-six-fold phenomena do not seem to be explained by 
Libbrecht’s assumption that the crystal’s growth is all caused by uniform 
temperature variations on all six arms at the same time.  Instead, there must 
be some mechanisms that generate a variety of symmetries, and it seems that 
it is the symmetries themselves which need to be the focus of the operation, 
not the growth. 
    
Figure 40 and Figure 41 Two snowflakes with three-fold symmetries 
(axial and face-oriented) that appear within the six-fold scheme. 
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 45 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
Figure 42   A two-fold symmetry, appearing( as if by chance) within the 
six-fold scheme. 
 
These three examples of alternating three-fold symmetry and two-fold 
symmetry require some other explanation than simple growth outward under 
time-dependent spatially uniform temperature changes.  Some larger W-E-
transformation is entering into the computation.  Clearly this highly ordered 
regularity cannot be explained by similarities merely caused by uniform 
temperature conditions from axis to axis.  The three axes of symmetry  now 
coming forward are not a subsystem of the original six growth axes, but 
three new ones that are interlaced among them.  I believe (but have not yet 
shown how) the phenomenon can be explained by strongly invoking the 
LOCAL SYMMETRIES transformation, but not as a part of the simple kind of 
growth mechanism described by Libbrecht.  Libbrecht’s simulation may be 
seen at work on his website.51  Long ago, further information was obtained 
by Ukichiro Nakaya, who observed and photographed thousands of snow 
crystals, and also experimented by growing them under controlled 
conditions.52  In any case, it seems that only a model based on a nested, 
multi-level system of symmetries and axes of symmetry can ultimately 
provide an adequate explanation.  Such a model may be a step towards a 
capability of modeling the general character of highly ordered structure at 
many levels simultaneously.  
WHOLENESS-EXTENDING TRANSFORMATIONS AND 
COMPLEXITY THEORY 
A Small Modification Needed in the Work of the Modern Masters and 
Complexity Theory 
What I have said in the forgoing, can be simply summarized. Consider 
the modern masters: Benoit Mandelbrot, Brian Goodwin, Ian Stewart, 
Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz, Deborah Gordon, Craig Reynolds.  We must, 
and do, take off our hats to them.  But if we examine the contributions made 
to complexity theory, we see that while making enormous strides, and 
placing our discipline on its first legs, it must also be said that each of them 
has fallen slightly short in one all-important respect.  All of them, as far as I 
know, have tried to explain complex emergence as a product of coupled 
interactions among local events.  Yet, when one examines in detail what is 
actually going on, and what is emerging, it turns out in every case that there 
is some aspect of the emerging whole that cannot be properly explained by 
this approach.  The aberrations are small, but they are not small enough to be 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 46 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
overlooked.  Though they aspire to explain the whole that emerges through 
analytical means, in fact it is just that whole – the real whole in the world 
that makes us marvel in the first place – that is propelled by a second whole-
driven process, which is both whole-driven and whole-oriented.   
I reiterate: this whole-seeking or harmony-seeking process is not 
teleological, not goal-seeking.  Instead, it comes about because of a new type 
of operation performed on the structure that exists, that brings to fruition a 
larger, unexpected, and unanticipated new structure of wholeness, in each 
individual case.  The existence of such a computation, and its operation in 
virtually every creative process in nature and in art, perhaps embodies the 
real creativity of the universe at work.  
I believe there is a realistic chance that this creative kind of emergence 
(different from the emergence currently under discussion), where the whole 
inspires the emergent structure, and gives it direction, can, at least in part, be 
encompassed by a computational formula, by a rational and attainable, 
though very new, mathematical formulation. 
This hinges on the construction of a formalism in which nested systems 
of symmetries and centers are acted on by the transformations I have 
described, and where the future (the (t+1)-trajectory in phase space) is 
determined by action on the latent structures already present at time t, where 
these latent structures, too, are couched and described in terms of 
symmetries and centers. 
 
USING HARMONY-SEEKING COMPUTATIONS IN BUILDING 
DESIGN 
In natural systems we may expect, and in human-created urban systems 
we may decree, that when things are “okay”, harmony-seeking computations 
are occurring. 
Next I show a plan for a new housing project, in Massachusetts, where 
the working through of the plan, was done consciously, by following a 
sequence of harmony-seeking computations, in the fashion sketched in the 
paper. 
Example 13.   A Housing Project for 200 Apartments in Boston, 
Generated by Harmony-Seeking Computations 
 
Figure 43   Perspective overview of a Boston project with some 200 
condominums 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 47 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
 
Cycle 1. The process starts with a triangular brown-field site in 
Somerville, 5.5 acres in area, between a railroad line, a bike path, and an 
existing neighborhood → The first step in the computation then identifies 
latent centers in the site: the bike path, along the south side, Warwick avenue 
along the west, and Lowell Street in the south east corner. 
 
Figure 44A   Step 1 
 
Cycle 2. latent centers in the site: the bike path, along the south side, 
Warwick avenue along the west, and Lowell Street in the south east corner.  
→  The computation then identifies a connection and pedestrian precinct 
generates a curved line, more or less a median through the triangle of the 
site, but curving slightly and leading to stairs at the east end where there is a 
20 foot rise to Lowell street. 
 
Figure 44B   Step 2 
 
Cycle 3.  Consideration of  density suggests that the environment can 
become wholesome and enjoyable, only if entirely pedestrian, thus 
connecting this new area to the surround neighborhood and making it useful. 
 
Figure 44C   Step 3 
 
Cycle 4.  The articulated pedestrian spine now has, as its most obvious 
latent centers, the areas on either side of it. To place 200 dwellings in this 
limited area, and to do it in such a way that people have pleasant gardens, for 
their own use, and for the neighbors who may like to enjoy these gardens, 
leads to a form of organization where houses are laid in long thin strips 
around useful open spaces. The gardens should, typically, have a diameter 
on the order of some 100 feet; the buildings in strips should have a depth of 
some 25 feet; the building height would then be 2 and 3 stories.   
 
Figure 44D   Step 4 
 
Cycle 5. The abstract and schematized grid-like array, is characterized by 
two parameters, courtyard diameter, and building thickness. However, its 
regularity is not essential or even good: indeed it needs to be adapted to the 
site boundaries in such a way as to generate coherent courtyards and 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 48 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
pedestrian 
space, 
while 
leaving 
building 
volumes 
simple. 
This 
transformation requires the use of  ROUGHNESS, LOCAL SYMMETRIES, DEEP 
INTERLOCK, NOT SEPARATENESS, GOOD SHAPE and INNER CALM. Application 
of these transformations in concert achieves the necessary computation at 
this stage. 
 
Figure 44E   Step 5 
 
Cycle 6.   More careful adaptation. The schematic arrangement of the 
previous cycle, now gives way to a series of shapes which pay more detailed 
attention to each individual garden, as a shape in itself, using GOOD SHAPE, 
LOCAL SYMMETRIES, POSITIVE SPACE, THE VOID, and ALTERNATING 
REPETITION, so that the whole is coherent, and feels like one thing.  
 
Figure 44F   Step 6 
 
In addition, the boundary where this neighborhood meets and abuts other 
neighborhoods is modified by BOUNDARIES, DEEP INTERLOCK,  and 
ALTERNATING REPETITION, so that it becomes a thickened semi permeable 
membrane, capable of allowing people who want to talk a stroll, to pass in 
and out comfortably, yet also maintaining a certain privacy for the interior of 
the neighborhood.  
 
 
Figure 45   Final plan, after the six steps I have described, and a further  
twenty, comparable steps (not illustrated here) 
 
In the plan above we see the beginning and the framework for a further 
harmony-seeking process.  The plan shows 200 households on a five acre 
site, each house potentially unique, and where the pattern of gardens, 
walkways and road access have been laid down so as to protect the harmony 
of the adjacent neighborhood, and project the immediate environment for 
500 people. 
The Uniqueness of Each Region in the Generated Structure 
One aspect of the generated structure for Somerville is highly significant.  
If we examine the structure generated by the harmony-seeking computations, 
we see that each part, though similar in broad structural character to others, 
is unique.  That comes about because the application of the computation to 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 49 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
even slightly differing contexts inevitably produces morphologically different  
results. Furthermore, even a slight difference of contexts, will, after a few 
cycles of wholeness-extending transformations, will magnify the difference, 
and lead to very substantially different configurations. This is extremely 
important, and is the origin of uniqueness in the world. A world with 
genuine, and profound uniqueness at every spot, will arise whenever 
harmony-seeking computations govern the unfolding. 
For example, at the largest level of scale, each of the dozen or so 
courtyard gardens has a different shape and configuration.  That occurs not 
because differences are arbitrarily inserted to be cute, but because the 
application of the principal transformations (POSITIVE SPACE, LOCAL 
SYMMETRIES, 
ECHOES 
and 
GRADIENTS, 
ALTERNATING 
REPETITION, 
CONTRAST), generates a different configuration for each one according to its 
starting point – that is, according to its context. 
       
Figure 46   Different gardens in the project, each with its unique 
character and atmosphere 
 
 
Figure 47   Detailed view of the houses and apartments, showing the 
detailed adaptation and variety which arises from the use of harmony-
seeking computations 
 
Still more exciting is that the same quality of uniqueness and subtle 
differentiation continues to smaller and smaller scales.  The detailed 
configuration of terraces, entrances, paths, lawns, stairs and archways, 
produces unique results in each part of the larger whole, and in each part of 
the individual gardens.  This is not from a shallow desire to make each thing 
different for its own sake (sometimes the driving force behind the more 
commercial postmodern housing developments).  It occurs because the effect 
of harmony seeking computations, on only slightly different starting 
conditions, is to generate entirely new and different configurations, but all 
members of a fairly simple family.  
CONCLUSIONS 
A Single Conclusion From These Studies 
There is a single all-important conclusion to be drawn from all these 
studies.  Atomistic, bottom-up computations cannot adequately describe 
what is really happening in the world, and, furthermore, do not describe 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 50 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
those especially important processes that heal the world, that bring order into 
configurations in the land, in nature, in buildings deeply adapted to the land, 
and also deeply adapted in their internal structure.  
The issue is recursive.  It is not only large-scale configurations that need 
to benefit from this insight.  Every configuration, at every level, is working 
to help the coherence of some larger configuration in which it is embedded.  
This runs up and down the ladder of scales, and must do so in any living 
world.  A successful computation will emulate this upwards- and 
downwards-reaching process.  Purely bottom-up forms of calculation, not 
invoking this principle, will always remain too sterile to be real or profound. 
What is the Underlying Process Involved in These Harmony-Seeking 
Computations 
I am not only proposing that we consider these many real world systems 
as computational processes.  I am saying that we need to find out how they 
work, and how, in particular, they work to allow the unfolding of structure, 
under the impact of wholeness.  This requires a form of representation that is 
new.  It has been sketched, in broad brushstrokes, in Books 1 and 2 of The 
Nature Of Order.  We now need to work at finding ways of describing this 
kind of unfolding in more well-defined mathematical and computational 
terms.  
That will be a very long job.  My colleagues and I have, in the last few 
years, gained intuition and insight into the nature of the harmony-seeking 
computations.  But we are far from understanding them in detail.  That 
enormous task must now be undertaken, hopefully by many dedicated 
scientists together. 
I must repeat that the phenomena I am talking about cannot simply be 
grouped under what is loosely called emergence.  The emergence of wholes 
in the world does not come about by autonomous processes that happen to 
aggregate themselves to form wholes.  Rather they are the wholeness-
extending processes I have described. 
Wholeness-Extending Transformations 
In all these real-world examples, there is a common phenomenon.  We 
may describe it by saying that the steps of the computation are W-E 
(wholeness-extending)-transformations which follow this scheme.  Each W-
E-transformation operates on one wholeness to produce another wholeness. 
It does it in such a way as to preserve or embellish or enhance the global 
structure of the first wholeness. 
 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 51 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
W1 ⎯⎯⎯⎯
WE1→ W2  ⎯⎯⎯⎯
 WE 2→ W3  ⎯⎯⎯⎯
 WE 3→ W4 ⎯⎯⎯⎯
 WE 4→ 
 
The mathematical description of an W-E-transformation is not yet fully 
known.  However, there is abundant evidence to show that the concept of 
being W-E is well-defined and objective, in the sense that different observers 
largely agree among that different possible transformations of a given whole, 
which ones are more W-E and which are less so.  
Models of the Wholeness in a Given Configuration? 
To establish the character of W-E-transformations, we begin with five 
postulates about the structure of wholeness:  
Postulate A1.  In any configuration we see certain salient wholes, or 
centers.  Each of these wholes is an identified, spatially contiguous subset of 
the configuration that corresponds to something we see, or experience, as an 
“entity”. 
Postulate A2.  The sub-configurations may be spatially nested, or 
overlapping, or disjoint. 
Postulate A3.  Each sub-configuration has a measure associated with it, 
the degree of coherence, or saliency within the larger whole. 
Postulate A4.  Certain latent centers may be very low saliency, almost 
invisible, but are nevertheless coherent configurations in their own right, 
created by others in the configuration. 
Postulate A5.  The wholeness is defined as the system of configurations, 
each one specifying its coherence, and each connected with other 
configurations which are part of it, or of which it is a part. 
 
And three postulates about the definition of W-E: 
Postulate B1.  A transformation is considered to be W-E if it elaborates 
existing centers or latent centers, and does not introduce new centers that 
violate or ‘cut across’ existing centers. 
Postulate B2.  The best latent center to work on is the latent center whose 
improvement or repair, will (probably) do the most to increase the coherence 
of the whole configuration. 
Postulate B3.  A successful W-E transformation must always have 
morphological impact on the structure of some larger whole.  
A Few Randomly Chosen Examples of Harmony-Seeking Computations 
 
Figure 48    → T H I C K  B O U N D A R I E S, T H E  V O I D   →  L E V E L S  O F  S C A L E, 
A L T E R N A T I N G  R E P E T I T I O N, L O C A L  S Y M M E T R I E S 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 52 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
 
 
Figure 49    → S T R O N G  C E N T E R S, L E V E L S  O F  S C A L E   → L O C A L  
S Y M M E T R I E S 
 
 
Figure 50    → T H I C K  B O U N D A R I E S, T H E  V O I D   → G R A D I E N T S,  
L E V E L S  O F  S C A L E, A L T E R N A T I N G  R E P E T I T I O N, E C H O E S 
 
 
Figure 51  →P O S I T I V E  S P A C E   → G R A D I E N T S,  L E V E L S  O F  S C A L E   → 
P O S I T I V E  S P A C E 
 
 
  Figure 52  →S T R O N G  C E N T E R   → L E V E L S  O F  S C A L E   → D E E P  
I N T E R L O C K, L O C A L  S Y M M E T R I E S   
 
 
Figure 53    →G R A D I E N T S   → S I M P L I C I T Y   → P O S I T I V E  S P A C E   → 
L O C A L  S Y M M E T R I E S   → C O N T R A S T 
 
 
The Paradigm Being Followed in Each W-E-Transformation 
Each of these examples is relatively simple: the same paradigmatic cycle 
is followed each time.  
• 
Frame 1: a configuration 
• 
Frame 2: identifies the locus and extent of some latent center in that 
configuration – one which, if consolidated, would help the whole to 
become more coherent. 
• 
Frame 3: establishes smaller centers to embody and solidify that latent 
center. 
 
The steps taken in going from frame 1 to frame 2, and the steps taken in 
going from frame 2 to frame 3, are always some conglomerate of the 15 
fundamental W-E-transformations. 
We may also see how symmetry elaboration is happening at each step.  
At each step, the space is being differentiated, holistically, by an injection of 
local symmetries.  It is possible, as I have said earlier, to view this injection 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 53 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
of local symmetries as symmetry breaking.  The symmetries that appear, in 
most cases, appear because other symmetries, often an infinity of other 
symmetries, are struck out, leaving the coherent form we see.  Because of 
this symmetry breaking aspect, the injecting of local symmetries is structure-
preserving, not structure-destroying.   
This is an extremely significant fact.  However, it slightly obscures the 
core of what is going on to think of it, exclusively, in this way. 
Operationally, it is more illuminating to focus on the fact that local 
symmetries of various kinds are being created.  But the kinds of local 
symmetry being created, when created well, do always enhance the 
underlying structure of what was there before. 
Operationally, and emotionally, such a procedure is creating structure in a 
new way.  It may be done by an artist, with an intuitive grasp of the 
underlying latent structure, at each step in the unfolding of the whole.  Or it 
may be done by an engineer.  Socially speaking, this is a new kind of 
process, a new function for an artist, and a new challenge to engineers, 
architects and planners of all kinds.  This new kind of work demands 
enormous concentration and attention.  
The intuitive act is nevertheless a computation, and we may be able to pin 
down what kind of computation it is.  Then, if we can succeed in making a 
harmony-seeking computation, even perhaps one day helped by a computer 
working in a new way to achieve similar holistic results, that will be because 
the thing we recognize intuitively as coherent or whole, is, mathematically, a 
particular recursively generated structure of symmetries and centers which 
have the 15 properties in them.  It is this underlying structure that allows the 
human mind, and natural processes, both, to follow this path and to seek 
wholeness in the way they do.  Most important, we may become conscious 
about this process, and consciously use this kind of  computation to improve 
the coherence and harmony of our world. 
Fact and Value 
The architectural examples and the example of the cosmological structure 
of voids and filaments bring the potentially extraordinary nature of harmony-
seeking computations into sharp focus. 
In the parlance of 20th century thought, designing a building is a matter of 
personal taste; it has essentially nothing to do with fact.  On the other hand, 
the dynamics that lie behind the distribution of matter in the universe is 
undoubtedly a matter of fact, although the facts may be still poorly 
understood and much debated.  
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 54 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
No matter how subtle my perception of a building design and its harmony 
might be, the idea that I treat its structure as a matter of fact, may seem 
absurd to present day scientists, if they follow the canon of 20th century 
thought.  It is an article of contemporary faith, that the goodness of a 
building is a matter of taste, not fact.  The harmony of the building cannot be 
(according to 20th century thought) a matter of fact in any sense.  The mental 
protocols of 20th century thinking have forbidden it. 
Here we come to the profound change that has been lying in wait for 21st 
century science.  It is a matter of historical record that scientists of earlier 
eras – indeed, many of the great scientists of earlier eras – had no difficulty 
whatever thinking of the great harmony that existed in the world.  
Pythagoras’s phrase “the harmony of the spheres” was not an idle one.  
Newton, as a matter of record, considered the progress of the universe, in the 
large and in the small, to be entangled, inevitably, with a movement towards 
harmony, and with the greater harmony of the world as a necessary 
underpinning for the discoveries of science.53  Leibniz, Kepler, and others 
thought the same. 
Considering a building as a matter of taste strongly limits our ability to 
understand its harmony.  Considering the evolution of the universe as a 
mechanical product that can best be modeled through value-neutral means, 
also strongly limits our ability to understand the ensuing harmony, and in 
large-scale cases like this one creates a real possibility that we shall 
ultimately fail to understand the physics. 
These two statements may seem hard to swallow.  But the possibility of 
harmony-seeking computations ventures, precisely, into this forbidden 
domain.  It is challenging, undoubtedly, to succeed in defining and 
expanding this kind of concept sufficiently well, so that it can become an 
effective part of the way we think about the world.  But it may play a 
considerable part in reopening a door that has been closed for too long. 
A New Science of Harmony-Seeking Computation: When and Where? 
A 
new 
science 
of 
harmony-seeking 
computation 
and 
W-E-
transformations can make amenable to computation phenomena that are, for 
the moment, altogether beyond the reach of currently available 
computational methods.  It can help to open doors to the global quality of 
harmony, figural goodness, ecological health and structural coherence as a 
computable feature of configurations. 
One first practical item on the agenda is to provide well-defined and 
precise versions of the 15 transformations in The Nature Of Order.  Though 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 55 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
easy to state, this is a remarkably difficult task, for three reasons. Firstly, the 
15 properties, though defined with some level of precision, remain 
somewhat elusive.  Defining computational operations that can induce these 
properties in arbitrary configurations is a challenging task. Secondly, it is 
difficult to define them as transformations, since this presupposes a language 
of configurations that is amenable to the transformations. Thirdly, some of 
the transformations are easier than others to define operationally in 
sufficiently concrete terms.  For example, LOCAL SYMMETRIES, THICK 
BOUNDARIES and LEVELS OF SCALE are relatively easy.  POSITIVE SPACE and 
ECHOES are harder.  SIMPLICITY AND INNER CALM and NOT SEPARATENESS 
are among the most difficult.   
Despite these difficulties, I am fairly sure that the task of dealing with all 
15 transformations can be accomplished by a small team in the next five 
years, and that it should then open the door to a full fledged, though 
elementary, 
version 
of 
a 
first-draft 
science 
of harmony-seeking 
computations.  First steps have already been taken.54
I hope the idea of harmony-seeking computation may then sit alongside 
other methods as a new tool in an armory of well-founded computational 
techniques to be used when appropriate.  It is likely to be appropriate 
whenever a computational task is defined more by issues of adaptation, 
health, wholeness, and wellness, with reference to the position some system 
in some still larger whole, or perhaps even by a desire for beauty, or life, or 
elegance.  
All these might one day play a key role in very general kinds of 
computation.  Science, architecture, biology, ecology, physics, cosmology – 
and computation – may all be the better for it. 
NOTES 
                                                           
1  Christopher Alexander, The Nature of Order, Four Volumes, Center for Environmental 
Structure Publishing, Berkeley, California, 2002-2005. Abbreviated  in subsequent notes as 
NOO. 
2  Martin Golubitsky and Ian Stewart, The Symmetry Perspective, Basel, Birkhauser, 2001. 
3  Christopher Alexander and A.W.F. Huggins, “On Changing The Way People See”, 
Perceptual And Motor Skills, Vol. 19, July, 1964, pp. 235-253. 
4  Ibid, 1964. 
5  Alexander, op.cit, 2002-2005. 
6    Coherence of a center, and strength of a center are two ways of referring to the same quality 
that centers have in greater or lesser degree. The degree of this quality that is present in a 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 56 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
                                                                                                                            
center, indeed in any whole, can be measured by empirical methods described extensively in 
NOO Book 1, chapters  
7    In NOO, the property is called simply BOUNDARIES. I have since begun using the phrase 
THICK BOUNDARIES, since it more clearly distinguishes the boundaries which work most 
effectively to create coherence, and also eliminates confusion with the common 
mathematical use of the word boundary as a dimensionless interface.  
8  The Nature of Order, Book 1 The Phenomenon of Life,  pages 143-296. 
9  The Nature of Order, Book 2 The Process of Creating Life,  pages 65-84. 
10  Studies of co-evolution and ecological evolution have certain moved in this direction. But 
they have rarely concentrated on the geometry of the evolving system as the key variable of 
interest. 
11   NOO, Book 2 (especially chapter 2), and Books 3 and 4 throughout. 
12  Susan Stepney was kind enough to raise this question: What if the existing structure is ugly? 
Can it be made beautiful by this process (a la sand in an oyster) or should one not start from 
there? The answer is, in varying degrees, both. In nature since the structure generally grows 
from almost pure homogeneity, the beauty is there from the beginning, and continues there 
as the system evolves. Among humanly made urban landscapes, where ugliness is common, 
it is tempting to teardown and start again: however, I usually resist this temptation, and 
leave much of the ugly part, pruning out only the worst. When wholeness-extending 
transformations are applied to this pruned ugly place, it soon brings the system back to 
order, and leads to more wholesome results.   
13  See the discussion of four Matisse self portraits, The Phenomenon of Life, page 97.   
14  Max Wertheimer,  Wolfgang Koehler, Kurt Koffka.. etc. 
15  Christopher Alexander and A.W.F. Huggins, “On Changing The Way People See”, 
Perceptual And Motor Skills, Vol. 19, July, 1964, pp. 235-253. 
16  Hochberg J. & McAlister E. (1953) A Quantitative Approach to Figural "Goodness." 
Journal of Experimental Psychology 46, 361-364. 
17  Christopher Alexander and Susan Carey, "Subsymmetries", Perception And Psychophysics, 
Vol. 4 (2), February, 1968, pp. 73-77. 
18  Photograph of hayricks in Romania by Radu B. Chindris 
19  Gerry Webster and Brian Goodwin, Form and Transformation, Cambridge University Press, 
1998, pages 193-216. 
20  Form and Transformation, op cit. pages 209-230. 
21  The Emoto Building, in Komagome, Tokyo, illustrated in The Nature of Order, Book 3, 
pages 166-73.  
22  Op.Cit. The fifty steps are summarized on pages 167-71.  
23  See The Nature of Order, Book 1, chapter 5, and Book 2, chapter 2. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 57 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
                                                                                                                            
24  Historical data and additional analysis of the evolution of St. Mark’s Square are provided in 
Books 2 and 3 of The Nature of Order:  Book 2, The Process of Creating Life, pages 251-
55, and Book 3, A Vision of a Living World, pages 5-7. 
25 Steve Shechtman et al., Astrophysical Journal, 470, 1996, page 172. 
26  Simulation and photograph by George Lake and Tom Quinn, published in  Greg Bothun, 
Modern Cosmological Observations and Problems, Taylor and Francis, 1998, figure 3.1. 
27  Nature of Order, Book 2, pp.51-84, especially page 59. 
28  Christopher Alexander, The Process of Creating Life, Berkeley, California, Center for 
Environmental Structure Publishing, 2003, pp. 18-84. 
29  Christopher Alexander, The Phenomenon of Life, Berkeley, California, Center for 
Environmental Structure Publishing, 2002, pp. 143-296. 
30  Cathryn J Polinsky, Flight Simulation of Flocking Geese Using Particle Set Animation, 
Swarthmore College, May 1999 
31  Deborah Gordon, Ants at Work: How an Insect Society is Organized, New York, Free Press, 
1999. 
32  slime mold references. 
33  All reported in Stephen Johnson, Emergence, New York 2001. 
34  Debra Niehoff, The Language of Life, Joseph Henry Press, Washington DC, 2005 
35  Craig Reynolds, Flocks, Herds, and Schools: A Distributed Behavioral Model,  the 
SIGGRAPH '87 boids paper. 
36  Cathryn J Polinsky, Flight Simulation of Flocking Geese Using Particle Set Animation, 
Swarthmore College, May 1999 
37  Mitchel Resnick et al, StarLogo 2.1, Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
2004. 
38  Lene K. Hjertager, Bjørn H. Hjertager, Niels G. Deen, Tron Solberg, Measurement of 
turbulent mixing in a confined wake flow using combined PIV and PLIF, Submitted to the 
Can. J. of Chem. Eng., 2003. A sophisticated algorithm would have to model the 
aerodynamics to identify the sweet spot. A much simpler (and more easily constructed) 
algorithm will merely need to identify the cone of angles in the wake, where the sweet spot 
is like to appear, and give positioning in that cone a high probability. 
39  Michael Cross, “Pattern Formation in non equilibrium systems”, course notes from Cal Tech 
Physics 161b, 2000. See http://www.cmp.caltech.edu/~mcc/Patterns/index.html 
40   Radomir Mech and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz   “Visual Models of Plants Interacting with 
Their Environment”  Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada, also Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 96 (New Orleans, Louisiana, August 4−9, 1996). In 
Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference Series, 1996, ACM SIGGRAPH, pp. 
397−410. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 58 

H A R M O N Y-S E E K I N G  C O M P U T A T I O N S 
                                                                                                                            
41  Simulation of a tree by H. Honda, Description Of The Form Of Trees By The Parameters Of 
The Treelike Body: Effects Of The Branching Angle And The Branch Length On The Shape Of 
The Tree Like Body, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 31: 331-338, 1971 
42  Ian Stewart and Martin Golubitsky, Fearful Symmetry, New York and London, 1988. 
43  Martin Golubitsky and Ian Stewart, The Symmetry Perspective, Basel, Birkhauser, 2001. 
44  Reference to definition of wholeness 
45  Many physical examples of the presence, and density, of local symmetries in a structure is 
described in NOO, Book 1, pages 186-234. 
46  Christopher Alexander and Susan Carey, "Subsymmetries", Perception And Psychophysics, 
Vol. 4 (2), February, 1968, pp. 73-77. 
47 Salingaros, Nikos A. (1997). "Life and Complexity in Architecture From a Thermodynamic 
Analogy" in Physics Essays, vol. 10, pp. 165-173 
48  Wilson A. Bentley, Snow Crystals, containing more than 2400 snow crystal images, was 
published by McGraw-Hill, 1931, but has long been out of print. A soft cover copy, 
identical in all respects, can be obtained today from Dover Publications, Inc. 
49  Kenneth G. Libbrecht, and Patricia Rasmussen, The Snowflake,  Colin Baxter, 2004. 
50    
51  For some simulation processes, see the website SnowCrystals.com, created by Kenneth G. 
Libbrecht, in the Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology.  
52  Ukichiro Nakaya, Snow Crystals: Natural and Artificial, Harvard University Press, 1954. 
53  Michael White, Isaac Newton: The Last Sorcerer, London, Fourth Estate, 1997. 
54  See for example, Salingaros, Nikos A. (1997). "Life and Complexity in Architecture From a 
Thermodynamic Analogy" in Physics Essays, vol. 10, pp. 165-173; Christopher Alexander 
and Stuart Cowan, “The Field of Wholeness:A Mathematical Model”, in progress, 2006; 
Cees der Groot, First Steps In a SiteLayout Program written In Squeak, 2004; Salingaros, 
Nikos, A Scientific Basis for Creating Architectural Forms, Journal of Architectural and 
Planning Research 15 (1998), pages 283-293. 
IJUC FOR PUBLICATION v 29.doc  Page 59 

IJUC illustrations 
 
 
Figure 1    Sequential-digital: Reading the strips left to right  
 
 
Figure 2    Figural-holistic: Seeing the strips as patterns 
 
 
Figure 3   Step by step development of a mouse foot 
 
 
Figures 4A, 4B and 4C   A delightful seat around a tree, being woven in basket form 
and then finished with turf 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4D  The finished seat 
 
Figure 5  Hay ricks in Romania 
 
 
 
Figure 6   Impressionistic depiction of the wholeness structure  in the land 
 
    
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 2 

 
Figure 7   Wind turbines on the flat north coast of Denmark 
 
 
Figure 8A   Diagram of the wholeness before construction of the turbines 
Figure 8B   Diagram of the wholeness  after construction of the turbines 
 
 
Figure 9   Whorls forming at the tips of developing Acetabularia 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 3 

 
Figure 10   Goodwin’s five diagram sequence 
 
 
Figures 11A and 11B   One of the Wittenham clumps near Oxford and A diagram of 
the structure created on the mound by the prehistoric embankment 
 
 
 
Figure 12  My analysis of the developmental sequence, based on W-E-transformations 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 4 

 
Figure 13   Enlarged photo of Acetabularia showing hillocks, not flats, at the center 
of the whorls 
 
  
 
Figure 14A and 14B   Two possible plans for the five story Emoto apartment building 
in Tokyo. South is at 10.30 pm. 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 5 

 
Figure 15   The completed Emoto apartment building 
 
 
Figure 16   Six W-E-transformations leading to the creation of a new ornament 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 6 

 
Figure 17   Plan of St Mark’s Square 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 7 

 
 
 
 
 
Figures 18A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J   Ten cycles of W-E-transformations in the history of 
1000 year development of St Mark’s Square 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 8 

 
Figure 19   Shechtman et al, the Las Campanas Redshift Survey,1996,  showing voids 
and filaments 
 
Figure 20   Artist’s sketch of the 3D structure, showing roughly how the ring-like 
filaments lie in space, on the surface of the voids 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 9 

 
Figure 21   The Lake-Quinn simulation 
 
 
Figure 22   A second look at one of the W-E-cycles in St Mark’s square 
 
   
 
Figure 23   Emergence, a two level relationship  
Figure 24   Harmony, a three level relationship 
 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 10 

 
Figure 25   Key condition for the healing to take place in a W-E-transformation 
 
 
Figure 26     The V-formation of Canada Geese 
 
 
Figure 27   Each bird flies in the outer wake of the bird ahead of it, since that is the 
spot which takes the least energy –just like riding a bike behind a bus, to catch a ride 
from the negative pressure in the airflow. 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 11 

 
Figure 28   Cotton wool clouds: the clouds are objects and the sky is background  
Figure 29   The real thing, a very different structure 
 
 
 
Figure 30   Clouds and the sky between them, as they appear in nature 
 
 
Figure 31  The blue systems are clearly visible here as having their own shape and 
character 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 12 

 
Figure 32   Configuration arising from the Swift Hohenberg equation      
Figure 33  Configuration arising from application of the complex Ginsburg Landau 
equation 
 
   
 
Figure 34  A sketch of mine showing a real tree as it typically is in winter, and 
strongly showing the positive space generated between the tree’s branches 
Figure 35  On the right: a context-sensitive L-system simulation of tree growth in two 
adjacent, interacting trees. The spaces between branches still lack the intensity as 
centers caused by the action of each volume of space as a system in  its own right. 
 
 
 
Figure 36   Dewdrops on a spiders web 
Figure 37   Dewdrops on a grass stem 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 13 

 
 
Figure 38   Salingaros studied 25 famous buildings by counting the number and 
density of local symmetries, according to the measure proposed in NOO, also adding 
further elaborations to estimate the density of symmetries. He found that of the 
buildings he studied, the Parthenon had the highest count of local symmetries, and 
was highest in symmetry density. 
 
 
Figure 39   The local “subset” symmetries that occur in a system of 35 different strips 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 14 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 40 and Figure 41  Two snowflakes with three-fold symmetries (axial and face-
oriented) that appear within the six-fold scheme. 
 
 
 
Figure 42   A two-fold symmetry, appearing (as if by chance) within the six-fold 
scheme. 
 
 
Figure 43   Perspective overview of a Boston project with some 200 condominums 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 15 

 
Figure 44A   Step 1 
 
 
Figure 44B   Step 2 
 
 
Figure 44C   Step 3 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 16 

 
Figure 44D   Step 4 
 
 
Figure 44E   Step 5 
 
 
Figure 44F   Step 6 
 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 17 

 
Figure 45   Final plan, after the six steps I have described, and a further twenty 
comparable steps  (not illustrated here) 
 
 
Figure 46   Different gardens in the project, each with its unique character and 
atmosphere 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 18 

 
Figure 47 Detailed view of the houses and apartments, showing the detailed 
adaptation and variety which arises from the use of harmony-seeking computations 
 
 
Figure 48    → THICK BOUNDARIES, THE VOID  →  LEVELS OF SCALE, ALTERNATING 
REPETITION, LOCAL SYMMETRIES 
 
 
Figure 49    → STRONG CENTERS, LEVELS OF SCALE  → LOCAL SYMMETRIES 
 
 
Figure 50    → THICK BOUNDARIES, THE VOID  → GRADIENTS,  LEVELS OF SCALE, 
ALTERNATING REPETITION, ECHOES 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 51   → POSITIVE SPACE  → GRADIENTS,  LEVELS OF SCALE  → POSITIVE 
SPACE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 52   → STRONG CENTER  → LEVELS OF SCALE  → DEEP INTERLOCK, LOCAL 
SYMMETRIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 53    → GRADIENTS  → SIMPLICITY  → POSITIVE SPACE  → LOCAL 
SYMMETRIES  → CONTRAST 
 
IJUC illustrations-corrected.doc   Page 20 

