12
willing to discover how further layers might be accessed.
By encoding sensitive data into physical abstractions it 
might be possible to conduct informed discussions about 
the real world meaning of datasets within specifc contexts
– without having to access or share the data itself all the 
time. Data veiling could offer a form of signposting or 
symbolically representing data without having to reveal its 
full detail. Shifting our focus from data to the patterns and 
meanings we can interpret from it.
Reciprocity, Care and Safety
Over the past two and a half years my attention has 
been largely taken up with my role in the UnBias project, 
and in particular, devising practical and pragmatic ways to 
foster both an awareness of bias, trust and fairness in 
algorithmic systems, and how to “do ethics”. ‘AI Ethics’ 
went mainstream in 2018 and there is now huge interest 
in how those companies which build digital technologies 
and services (especially those involved in AI and machine 
learning) can deliver responsible innovation through 
ethical design and development processes.
The egregious harms to democracy, as well as to 
individuals, which have been exposed in the past few years
(the Snowden revelations, or the Cambridge Analytica 
scandal etc) give this a tremendous urgency. More and 
more systems and decisions seem to be being automated, 
1
Hiding in Plain Sight
This booklet draws together some of the many strands 
that have led to starting, with Professor Tom Corby, a new 
project, “Materialising Data, Embodying Climate Change”, 
and a new transdisciplinary research group – the 
“Manifest Data Lab” – at Central Saint Martin’s University 
of the Arts London.  In this piece I will make links across 
what may often seem like a wildly divergent practice – 
from collaborating with people in the jungle of Papua 
New Guinea, to working on tech ethics and policy 
interventions, to building experimental communications 
platforms, to making abstract sculptures from data, to 
facilitating workshops with refugees in languages I don’t 
speak with people who have experienced traumas I can 
barely comprehend.
For me there is a clear trajectory and purpose, which 
centres on inspiring agency in others. I believe that the 
answers we need to address our problems – as individuals,
as communities, as peoples, as a species – are all around 
us, hiding in plain sight. The greatest asset we have, as 
human beings, is our imagination – with it we can devise 
solutions to whatever we encounter that holds us back, 
or create new problems for ourselves. Everyone is born 
with it, and its abundance is the true wealth of our 
societies and cultures. Humans have a terrible penchant 
13
with all the damaging effects long-predicted becoming day-
to-day reality. Whilst human consciousness is able to deal 
with contradictory states and can make informed 
judgements that refect the complexity of contexts and 
situations, we are yet to devise machines that can handle 
such complexity themselves. Perhaps this is an inherent 
weakness of the binary mathematics they are built on?
Increasingly the evidence emerges not only of systemic 
bias being found in automated systems (mostly trained on 
inherently biased datasets), but also of how such systems 
are amplifying pre-existing biases and prejudicial outcomes 
which have the greatest impact on the most vulnerable in 
society. I fear that the kinds of automation offered by 
AI/Machine learning, based essentially on inferences drawn
from incomplete and prejudicial datasets, might only ever 
be a zero-sum game that inevitably leads to a “statistical…
regression to the mean” (quoted from Professor Alan 
Blackwell, below).
“The danger is not the creation of systems that 
become maliciously intelligent, but of systems that are
designed to be inhumane through neglect of the 
individual, social and political consequences of 
technical decisions.”
Alan Blackwell, “Interacting with an Inferred World: 
The Challenge of Machine Learning for Humane 
Computer Interaction“

1
2
3
4
5
6
2,4,6,8,10,12
made with www.bookleteer.com from proboscis
22
challenge some of the power structures in society that 
have remained inert in the face of growing ecological 
emergency for almost my whole lifetime. 
We have a duty of care for future generations, and for 
all the other forms of life we share this planet with. 
The answers remain before us, hiding in plain sight – 
we just have to be brave enough to adopt them and 
adapt our own desires to cope with the changes ahead.
Despair is not an option:
Anticipate the worst;
Hope for the best;
Cope with what comes;
Tread lightly on the earth.
London, February 2019
3
George and I did in 2016. It also draws heavily on Tom’s 
long collaboration with Gavin Baily and the British 
Antarctic Survey creating artworks with climate data, 
such as Southern Ocean Studies and Northern Polar Studies. 
It has been a long haul to get here – I frst began exploring
ideas with Tom in early 2016 around our shared desire to 
explore how we could engage people with the complex 
data being generated by multiple interacting climate 
phenomena (e.g. sea temperature; sea salinity; polar ice 
extents; methane and other gas levels; krill population etc).
For more than a generation, mainstream media coverage 
of climate change issues have rarely strayed from focusing 
on just a single issue – such as the ozone layer, and then 
CO2 levels – yet it is now clear that it is the interaction 
of multiple climate phenomena that are driving the 
changes we seek to control or, at least ameliorate.
I have also had years of discussions with my friend, the 
flmmaker and anthropologist, Juan Francisco Salazar at 
Western Sydney University about how the Lifestreams 
process could engage with data about the Antarctic. Juan 
has made several trips to the Chilean Antarctic base over 
the years, and completed a feature-length documentary, 
Nightfall on Gaia, there in 2015. Our discussions have often
revolved around how to make the changes that are 
directly perceptible in more remote and fragile ecological 
2
for externalising imagination and corralling it in things, 
systems and structures. Yet it is ever at hand when we 
need it, even when we are convinced that we do not 
possess it. It fows like a river through our lives – one that
we may dip into from time to time, or immerse ourselves 
within and be carried along wherever it fows.
Right now we face the implications of our species’ failure 
to act for a generation in the face of mounting evidence 
that unconstrained climate change is inevitable and will 
bring unfathomable disruption to all life on earth. It falls to
our imaginations to grapple with these issues – to imagine 
different paths, to free ourselves from tired old ways of 
doing things. We must seize the opportunity to shake off 
the social and cultural shackles that have persisted in 
privileging a small demographic’s imaginations and abilities 
as being more worthwhile or valuable than those of 
others. I hope with this new project not just to inform, 
but to inspire people to act.
Materialising Data is a major three year research project 
funded by the AHRC which will build on the legacy of the 
Lifestreams project which I led back in 2012 (with Stefan 
Kueppers), my 2014 Creativeworks Entrepreneur-in-
Residence award with Professor George Roussos at 
Birkbeck University of London and the experiments with 
data manifestation and Parkinson’s Disease which Stefan, 
Hiding in Plain Sight
Giles Lane
2020-01-26 & © Giles Lane
Published by Proboscis
gileslane.net
https://bkltr.it/36nQTP
S

20
One of the key fgures in the Combine was Mike Cooley, 
whose 1980 book, Architect or Bee? The Human Price of 
Technology, sets out a clear vision for human-centred, 
socially useful design and production. His thoughts on 
‘augmented and symbiotic systems’ in favour of 
automation or classical AI systems are particularly brilliant.
Cooley proposes that such technologies be created 
to enhance human capabilities, not replace them. He 
describes the path to expertise as being one which 
increasingly expands on the basic rules acquired along 
the learning journey adding intuition, insight and 
imagination as one’s experience grows. The goal he 
suggests is for technologies to enable and augment 
everyone’s capacities, not to de-skill people merely to 
increase the proft share for managers and owners. He 
calls for humane technologies that not only increase our 
abilities to make things, but to appreciate life, freedom and
choice as well. In one example, Cooley writes of designing 
expert medical systems in the 1980s which,
“provide an interaction between the ‘facts of the 
domain’ and the fuzzy reasoning, tacit knowledge, 
imagination and heuristics of the expert, and no 
attempt is made to reduce all these aspects to a rule-
based system – the system is seen as something that 
aids rather than replaces the expert.”
5
appreciation not just of the extraordinary range of world 
views that exist (outside the bubble of Western, 
industrialised culture), but also of the kinds of knowledge 
that exist – particularly those that rely on human senses 
beyond the visual and aural for meaning-making : such as 
those of touch, smell, taste, proprioception to name a few. 
An important insight came to me after my frst visit to 
Reite village in 2012, not long after we had generated the 
initial set of “lifecharms” or data objects for Lifestreams. 
I wrote about this in two posts in 2013 on Tactile Poetry 
and Digital Alchemy. James’ writing has also been an 
infuence on my thinking, especially his essays Drum and 
Voice (2002), Leaving the Magic Out (2012) & The Death 
of a Drum (2015). My experiences in the village have also 
exposed me to how direct and perceptible climate change
is to people who live within nature and the natural world 
– seasonal weather patterns do not come reliably; plants 
are not ready to harvest at the usual times; animals, birds 
and sea creatures are slowly disappearing. All this is 
increasing year on year, and is the daily reality for people 
living traditionally in the forest and on the coast.
Back in September 2017 I wrote up many of my ideas and 
aspirations for melding these different strands of my work 
in a post – Sensing Climate Change Through Empathic 
Encounters. Almost a year and a half has passed and it 
21
Although not long, the scope of this book is vast and is 
full of insights into the operation of power in society, 
politics, business and industry as well as offering practical 
suggestions for how to address it creatively and with 
intelligence. It is a vision for empowering people to act 
for mutual beneft, in sympathy with the ecosystem 
which sustains us. 
As we grapple with the choices ahead of us for democracy
and ecological sustainability, we could do worse than take 
a few leaves from this book:
“The choices are essentially political and ideological 
rather than technological. As we design technological 
systems, we are in fact designing a set of social 
relationships, and as we question those social 
relationships and attempt to design systems 
differently, we are then beginning to challenge, in a 
fundamental way, power structures in society.”
My hope for the Materialising Data project is that we can 
fnd new ways to create empathic encounters with the 
urgent, complex reality of climate change for people 
to whom it is not yet as directly appreciable as it is for 
those living closer to nature. 
In challenging the dominant modes and forms of how we 
make meaning from data, I hope that we too can begin to 
4
sites, such as Antarctica, accessible in a tangible and tactile 
way to people living in the urban industrial world, where 
experiences of the natural world have been muted by 
human intervention and our connection to nature is 
fundamentally disrupted.
The data manifestation trajectory goes back way further 
too – to a concept of “tangible souvenirs from digital 
experiences” which I frst formulated during the Urban 
Tapestries project in 2003. At the time I realised that 
engaging with people from a diverse set of social, 
educational, cultural and economic circumstances would 
need the creation of hybrid forms of communication and 
expression (both digital and physical) which would allow 
people to engage and participate in ways they are 
comfortable with. This concept further evolved over the 
years into experiments with sound and tactile interfaces 
(e.g. the “Rumbler” and “Sensographs” of the Sensory 
Threads project) as well as paper-based outputs (e.g. 
automatically generating StoryCubes or DIFFUSION eBooks 
from digital assets with the bookleteer.com API).
My experiences working with another anthropologist, 
James Leach, and the villagers of Reite in Papua New 
Guinea on creating the “Traditional Knowledge Reite 
Notebooks” project, (TKRN 2012-19) have also been of 
crucial importance in extending my thinking and 

18
then it seems to me that we must reinvigorate 
constitutional democracy with transparent rights and 
laws, as well as accessible education and information 
about what they mean and how they affect people. 
That way we can truly take care of each other.
Inspiring and Stimulating Others
Despite the focus of my new project on climate change, 
I’ve barely touched on it here and it is, to my mind, the 
most critical issue we face as a species living in a fragile 
ecology. My preoccupation with agency is, though, at the 
very heart of how I think we can inspire and stimulate the 
kinds of societal change necessary to preserve as much of 
life on earth as we can. I am neither an ecologist nor a 
climate activist, but I believe that each person must fnd 
within their own skillset and area of work and life the 
means to contribute positively to such change. Not just in 
terms of our personal habits of consumption, but in the 
effect that our work can have on others and the processes
we live within. As an artist and designer, I feel it is my duty 
to achieve this the best way I can – by inspiring others 
and, ideally, stimulating them to be hopeful and to take 
agency for themselves.
I have also been inspired by coming across a remarkable 
initiative that took place in the UK in the 1970s – the 
Lucas Plan. Faced with the threat of massive redundancies 
7
For years I have kept a saying of the American designer, 
Charles Eames, close to my heart – “Innovate as a last 
resort” – and a copy of the 1953 Eames India Report close 
to hand. I recommend watching the wonderful flm, Goods, 
in which Charles Eames gives a talk on the manifest joy to 
be found in the practical simplicity of everyday things – 
often overlooked but always within reach of our 
perception.
Engagement and Occlusion: data-veiling
Three years ago, in March 2016, I was invited to present a 
provocation at a workshop on ethics and responsible 
innovation in data science hosted by the Alan Turing 
Institute. It was an opportunity to demonstrate the ideas 
behind data manifestation to a large (50+) audience of 
researchers from a variety of disciplines all concerned 
with ethics in digital innovation. My Lifestreams colleague, 
Stefan Kueppers, was by then beginning his PhD with 
George Roussos at Birkbeck and working as a research 
assistant on the CloudUDPRS project, devising a mobile 
app to enable Parkinsons patients to self-monitor their 
motor tests. As part of the trial, we 3D printed a series 
of lifecharm shells generated from 4 different patients’ data
to demonstrate qualitative differences in the individual 
experiences of Parkinsons that were masked by scoring 
similarly on the Unified Parkinsons Disease Rating Scale – 
which is used to determine care & therapy packages. 
19
the shop stewards of several unions representing workers 
at Lucas Aerospace formed a ‘Combine’ to develop an 
alternative business and industrial plan for the company. 
This was based on producing ‘socially useful products’ 
(at the time 50% of Lucas’ products were parts for 
military hardware) and around 150 such products were 
proposed by the workers, based on existing skills, tooling 
and capabilities. Ultimately they were dismissed by the 
management board. Never-the-less, the initiative inspired 
many other outcomes and initiatives – some of which 
continue to this day. (Incidentally, many of the then 
experimental products are now mainstream). 
I recommend watching the trailer for Steve Sprung’s 
forthcoming documentary, The Plan, or an original 1978 
documentary made by the Open University/BBC. 
To me the Lucas Plan represents an example of what 
happens when people begin to take agency for them-
selves and reimagine some of the basic premises about 
what it means to be responsible for their actions – for 
the things they produce as a worker in a frm or 
institution, for the impact this has on society and the 
environment. With this sort of thinking and action we 
might yet reconfgure our society and industry towards 
a trajectory that minimises the impact on the ecosystem 
and life in general, and mitigates some of the worst 
excesses of the past for a sustainable future.
6
seems a good moment to revisit them in the light of my 
other activities – including developing the UnBias Fairness 
Toolkit – at the start of this new juncture. All these 
projects share my key aim of stimulating agency, trust and 
reciprocity, themes which I have also written about before
(in Reciprocities of Trust 2014 and in Reciprocally Entangled 
2015) in different contexts, such as my collaborations with
Professor Lizzie Coles-Kemp’s Collective Securities group 
at Royal Holloway University of London and Professor 
Marina Jirotka’s Human Centred Computing group at the 
University of Oxford. And lastly, but certainly not least, 
my long collaboration with Canadian artist and curator 
Andrew Hunter (since 2007) and the creative discussions 
and activities that have sustained us through periods of 
intensive work and in the fallow times between.
The following sections bring together various threads 
of my work; it is a mélange of ideas in development, the 
very new and those which have been simmering gently 
for years. Something which links across all of them is 
‘hiding in plain sight’ – the suggestion that what we seek 
is often already in front of our eyes, but occluded or 
hidden from our perception. Sometimes because ‘we 
cannot see the wood for the trees’, sometimes because 
an obsession with novelty and innovation blinds us to 
what already works well. 

16
Valley mantra of “move fast and break things”. 
Digital Safety rather than Digital Security – proactive 
efforts that care for rather than retrospectively seek 
redress for harms already done.
What I like so much about this approach is that it builds 
trust based on reciprocity – when we know that people 
are exercising a duty of care on all our behalfs, we trust 
that they will do their best to not harm others. Trust is 
both formed through, and builds on, relationships and the 
performance of the values that underpin them, not simply 
through transactions. For this reason I remain highly 
skeptical of the utopian claims for ‘smart contracts‘ that 
have surrounded the blockchain hype in recent years. 
Whilst they may offer some benefts in terms of 
automating certain types of exchange, I see specifc 
dangers in attempting to reduce all kinds of complex 
relationships and exchanges to contractual standards 
based on transactions. What of trust? What of reciprocal 
obligations and fundamental rights? There is always a 
tension between human rights and contract law – an 
asymmetry where the weaker party is often induced to 
sign away their rights for incommensurate benefts to the 
advantage of the stronger party. Unless we have robust 
institutions and frameworks for the protection of the 
vulnerable, and people have access to education and 
9
engineering) or be able to ascertain its context from the 
object itself. I refer to this approach as “data veiling” – 
or hiding in plain sight.
My own experience of helping family members and friends
through chronic illness necessitating treatment at different
hospitals and clinics, illustrated how often – and insecurely
– patient data needs to be shared between multiple 
parties and sites. Often this means patients having to carry
paper records of their data with them to every meeting; 
sending paper copies by post or emailing unencrypted 
attachments across the internet. The opportunities for 
private and extremely personal data to leak out into the 
wider world are rife, constant and a clear threat to 
individuals given the intense interest in acquiring private 
medical data now being shown by the companies at the 
heart of digital technology and AI/machine learning.
Data-Veiling in this way could be an alternative means to 
achieve cybersecurity – allowing people to carry a physical
expression of their data in a way that prevents the source 
data being directly accessible. It could allow us to discuss 
with others what the data implies or means by virtue of 
establishing sensory grammars that help us interpret the 
shapes and forms. It is unlikely that the source data could 
be reverse engineered from the physical form, because the
(Lifestreams) method of generating the data object is not 
17
information about their rights and values, we will forever 
be at the mercy of those who corral power and wealth 
for themselves, and seek to buy their way out of 
obligations to others through unbalanced contracts 
and negotiating power.
Who gains from a world where we are increasingly 
encompassed by contracts that privilege transactional 
relationships? In which social domain are such contracts 
disputed and settled? Traditionally lawyers and those who 
can afford to be litigious have been the gatekeepers and 
prime movers in contractual situations. Smart contracts 
may seek to subvert this nexus, but will they really 
democratise these processes or simply alter the 
landscape of who holds the upper hand in favour of 
the programmers – and their employers – who are able 
to understand and manipulate the arcane new languages 
that evolve with them?
It seems to me that human rights and concepts like duty of
care and the precautionary principle are a critical baseline 
that are collective in nature – i.e they support everyone in
society regardless of status or situation. In contrast to this
are contracts and transactional systems which inevitably 
privilege negotiations for those already invested with 
power and resources. If we truly want a fair and just 
society, supported by tools and technologies that we trust,
8
These were given out to the workshop participants as 
tangible souvenirs of digital measurements that allow us 
to perceive the innate differences in the experiences of 
Parkinson’s that these four people have, above and beyond
their similar scores on the rating scale.
My talk provoked a number of interesting conversations 
about the applicability of data manifestation as a means 
of communicating information on different levels. 
There were a number of privacy and cybersecurity 
experts present with whom I began to speculate on the 
potential for data manifestation (i.e. expressing data in 
physical forms) as a novel mode of cybersecurity – 
especially in the feld of medial ethics and patient data. 
I proposed that encoding patient data in physical forms 
might be a useful means of allowing data to be 
transported and ‘shared’ with different people – such as 
a patient discussing their conditions with a physician. 
In such a situation both parties can interpret the data 
object and use it to have an informed conversation 
because they already understand the context in which 
the patient’s data was collected and from which the data 
object has been created. 
However, and crucially, a third party intercepting the 
data object would simply be unable to access the source 
data from which the object was generated (e.g. via reverse

14
The mainstream narrative for increasing automation 
has for a long time revolved around “effciency” – that 
machines are more effcient than people, they cost less, 
are somehow ‘neutral’ etc etc. We need to closely 
interrogate such narratives and expose their fallacy for 
what it is: a mask to cover the reality of where that vast 
bulk of the benefts fowing from such automation go. 
This is hardly a new situation – for hundreds of years 
people whose ways of life and agency have been 
undermined and eroded by capital and automation 
have tried to resist what is essentially a subjugation. 
Their descendants created unions, cooperatives and 
formed mutual societies to win back some of their lost 
agency and initiative, but history shows us it is a recurring 
theme, for which almost each generation has to fnd new 
answers and approaches.
We are also beginning to see the end of another narrative 
that has specifcally woven itself around digital 
technologies – that innovation should be unfettered by 
regulation, and that the digital tech industries are creating 
change faster than laws and regulations can keep up with 
them. We live in a time where a corporatist agenda seems 
to have gained a triumphal ascendancy, and where mantras
like “information wants to be free” are posed against a 
picture of a heavy-handed state endlessly creating red-tape
11
(such as magic or sorcery) which cannot be freely shared 
or discussed openly. Thus documentation (or expression 
in some kind of object through design) might serve as a 
signpost to those who do have the knowledge, indicate 
the lineage that their knowledge has been acquired 
through and, how transmission to others might occur 
(through some form of ritual exchange).
In the village I visit in PNG, when referring to practices 
and phenomena which Westerners would call magic, 
people slip from speaking in Tok Pisin (the common 
national language) into their own local language (Nekgini –
spoken by less than a thousand locals) and into ‘hap-tok’ 
(“half speech”) – a kind of allusive mode of speaking 
around a subject without discussing it directly. The ability 
to participate in and understand the meaning behind such 
discussions would demonstrate either knowledge itself, 
and the ability to understand how to ‘read’ the signposts 
being referred to, or to the constraints under which such 
knowledge could be acquired from those who have it. 
Porer Nombo, one of the village elders who James has 
worked with for over two decades, suggested something 
along these lines when giving a presentation about the 
ethno-botanical book he co-wrote with James, Reite Plants 
(as reported in James’ essay, Leaving the Magic Out). 
To me, this is another kind of hiding in plain sight – 
documenting part of a story and including clues for the 
15
to frustrate the innovators and entrepreneurs who are 
cast as the only ones who create new value in society. 
Such narratives are as hollow and self-serving as those 
which reduce all values to the purely monetary and refuse
to account for key human values such as kindness, love, 
generosity, happiness, play, pleasure and joy.
Returning the the theme of hiding in plain sight, I have 
drawn great inspiration from the work of William Perrin 
and Professor Lorna Woods on the concept of duty of care
in social media regulation for the Carnegie UK Trust. 
They look back to the groundbreaking UK Health And 
Safety legislation of 1974 which harmonised protections 
for workers across all industries and workplaces under a 
general duty of care, and extended those duties to pro-
active harm anticipation and reduction through due 
diligence to the rest of society. 
Their suggestion is to build a new regulatory framework 
which draws upon the well-established principles of 
Health and Safety legislation to create a proactive duty of 
care on providers of digital services and platforms for 
harm reduction. This would shift the emphasis from the 
current post hoc situation where liability is assessed and 
punished only after harm has been experienced, to an a 
priori approach based on taking care as a frst principle. A 
fundamentally diametric approach to the infamous Silicon 
10
parametric but a series of structured mutations. 
The method fows different data streams together in 
the generation process which cause variations in the 
growth shape as they interact with each other. This is 
also notwithstanding additional variations introduced in 
the 3D printing process itself, such as surface smoothing 
and slight reductions in resolution depending on the type 
of material used to fabricate the object – such as metals, 
plastic, ceramic etc.
Data-veiling also has echoes with work I’ve been doing 
in Papua New Guinea (PNG) with indigenous people to 
document traditional knowledge. In such communities 
what Westerners think of as knowledge is understood 
and practiced in very different ways; knowledge is often 
acquired through complex rituals that make manifest 
personal status within the community and situate a 
person within a network of relationships. Having and 
using knowledge is a demonstration of power and ability.
In the West, information generally becomes knowledge 
through its alienation from context into books and other 
forms of transactable documentation (such as flms, digital 
fles etc) that facilitate universal replicability. This is very 
different to cultures for whom knowledge seems to reside
in how relationships are performed between people, place
and things. For instance, there may be specifc practices 

