Black Deprivation in Naughty 
Dog’s The Last of Us Remas-
tered and The Last of Us Part II
Journal of Games Criticism
Volume 5, Bonus Issue A
Melvin G. Hill
Abstract
In recent years, several content creators and game developers have attempted to 
engage the complexities of re-articulating, re-creating, and re-narrating black 
subjectivity being-in-the-digital-world as a way of proactively creating more 
diverse and authentic representations. Though these developers’ earnest efforts 
are appreciated and valued, their strenuous attempts sometimes fail to reassess 
what Black existence means, furthermore, what the existential implications are 
in and out of the gaming world. This essay examines black subjective demise as 
a philosophical reflection of the white gaze, providing a context in which black 
characters in The Last of Us and The Last of Us Part II are shaped through 
Naughty Dog’s whiteness, which sustains what I call black deprivation. Both games 
not only expose the normative order of whiteness and its existential impact upon 
digital black bodies but also expose the ideological constructions of blackness and 
practices of white prejudice discourse.
1
© 2022 by the Journal of Games Criticism, http://www.gamescriticism.org
Introduction
As a new strain of discourse, the black game sphere may be described as a realm of game 
culture where black protagonists are unapologetic lead characters in premier games and ma-
jor franchises. From the moment of its emergence during “the Obama phenomenon,” black 
protagonists have materialized as a 21st-century neo-narrative about race and the meaning of 
blackness, forging an essential place in the consciousness of white mainstream gaming com-
 
Author Biography
Melvin G. Hill is a Professor of English Studies in the Department of English and Modern 
Foreign Languages at the University of Tennessee, Martin. He earned his PhD from Illinois 
State University. His most recent publication is Black Bodies and Transhuman Realities: Scien-
tifically Modifying the Black Body in Posthuman Literature and Culture (2019) and his current 
project, still under development, is tentatively titled The ‘Improbable Experiment’: Representa-
tion of Blackness in Video Games During the Obama Age.

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 2
munities. In a larger sense, the black game sphere presents a new way of seeing race and 
blackness as it challenges the game industry’s biased cultural norms. Several notable content 
creators and game developers have attempted to engage the complexities of re-articulating, 
re-creating, and re-narrating black subjectivity being-in-the-digital-world as a way of proac-
tively visualizing more diverse and authentic representations. Several games foster immer-
sion and engagement with black protagonists such as New Orleanian assassin revolutionist 
Aveline de Grandpré in Ubisoft’s Assassin’s Creed III: Liberation (2012/2014), the falsely con-
victed History professor Lee Everett in Telltale Games’ The Walking Dead, Season One (2012), 
revengeful Vietnam War veteran Franklin Clay in Hangar 13’s Mafia III (2016/2017/2020), 
legendary assassin Billie Lurk in Arkane Studio’s Dishonored: Death of the Outsider (2017), 
and android rebel ‘Markus’ in Quantic Dream’s Detroit: Become Human (2018/2019). These 
games, and several others, engage in the authenticity and agency of blackness which cuts 
against the grain of conventional stereotypes. However, more games continue to perpetuate 
and marginalize blackness at the expense of maintaining the status quo of whiteness.
Widespread historical stereotype discourse of the black body encounters the gaming space, 
maintaining first and foremost that derogatory images of blackness remain intact. As such, 
the digital black body as a discursive text embodies racial stereotypes repetitively embedded 
within game development pragmatics. Bell and Harris (2016) point out that the “black body 
is a text to be read and/or interpreted by audiences internationally, in person, at home, on 
television, in the community, at work, or even at school” (p. 138). The black body as a text 
is imposed upon through the perception of the white gaze, struggling to transcend white 
fiction and imagination. The most influential conceptions of blackness in the white imagina-
tion involve seeing the black body through false narratives, according to which value judg-
ments are created and maintained. 
In confronting the racial reality concerning digital black bodies in console video games, it 
is vitally important to use as a criteria insights from Yancy and Fanon. Yancy (2008) pro-
vides a philosophical treatment of the black body in the context of whiteness in America and 
unearths the mechanisms of racism by explaining the hegemonic power of whiteness and 
the white gaze. According to Yancy, the white gaze “constructs the black body against the 
backdrop of a racist discursive regime of ‘truth’” (p. 91). In Black Skin, White Masks (2008), 
Fanon echoes the sentiments of Sartre, stating that the “white gaze fixes blackness, mark-
ing it with a slur and epidermal character, thus sealing blackness into itself” (as cited in 
Drabinski, 2019, p. 8). As such, the black body becomes a negotiated product within white 
spaces, reproducing a ‘truth’ woven by the pillars of whiteness—the history of racism and 
the culture of stereotypes—which functions as the normalcy of blackness. This invention of 
‘truth’ through the lens of the white gaze “possesses the power to unveil, ‘to dissect,’ ‘to lay 
bare,’ the unknown [and] ‘fixes’ the black [body] in [its] place, ‘steadies’ [it], in order to decode 
and comfortably recode [it] into its own systems of representations” (Yancy, 2008, p. 93). 
The black body is constrained within and unable to transcend the parameters of the consci-
entious white imagination and inextricable white gaze.	 	

JGC 5(A)
Hill 3
The culture of creating the black body’s inability to transcend the parameters of whiteness 
in gaming spaces is what I call ‘black deprivation’ where black characters are restricted from 
any potential of autonomous value and erode the longevity of black existence to justify white 
preservation. This familiar game culture is part of ideological constructions of blackness and 
practices of white prejudice discourse. As such, black deprivation is identifiable in several 
games such as Telltale Games’ The Walking Dead, Season One (2012) and Quantic Dream’s 
Heavy Rain (2010). For example, in The Walking Dead, Season One, gamers play the role of 
African-American professor Lee Everett who encounters volatile white masculinity as he 
interacts with two white southerners, Larry and Kenny. Both white characters are discon-
tented with Lee, which is fueled by his past (convicted of a crime), race (African American), 
and social class (university professor). However, during the game, Lee demonstrates his 
intelligence, devotion, and leadership to not only ensure Clementine’s survival (the little girl 
that Lee protects) but also protect Larry, Kenny, and other white survivors who have joined 
the group. Despite Lee’s meaningful presence in the game, he dies due to an infection after 
season one, emphasizing that his survival is less important than the white characters who 
are prioritized and survive. 
Another instance where the black body is subjugated to black deprivation is in Quantic 
Dream’s psychological thriller game Heavy Rain (2010). Players take on the role of four pro-
tagonists to solve a series of child murders committed by the “Origami Killer.” As white FBI 
Agent Norman Jayden, players encounter Jackson “Mad Jack” Neville, a junkyard operator 
and the main suspect in the theft of a 1983 Chevrolet Malibu. The narrative’s representation 
of Jackson interweaves the historical and social perceptions of black masculinity as dark, bur-
ly, and threateningly fearful. In one of the uncanny scenarios between Jackson and Norman, 
the men engage in a verbal altercation that morphs into a physical brawl. Norman struggles 
but eventually defeats Jackson as Jackson’s loose clothing is caught in the crawler grooves of 
an unattended moving heavy tractor. Jackson vigorously petitions for help, but Norman ig-
nores his plea and walks away. The Jackson and Norman scenes explicitly yoke together the 
historical and social diametric representation of “savage” versus “civilized,” “inferior” vers-
es “superior,” and “black” versus “white.” Heavy Rain demonstrates that black masculinity 
carries with it “images of pain, suffering, and death” as the presence of blackness labors and 
dies to maintain white existential longevity (Gray, 2020, p. 68).  
In the same vein, Naughty Dog’s The Last of Us (2013) and The Last of Us Part II (2020), 
created and directed by Neil Druckman, best illustrate black deprivation in games for several 
reasons. First, both games’ persistent racial problematics with blackness seem to exemplify 
stereotypical western culture, creating a more impactful picture of black deprivation than 
found in The Walking Dead (2012) and Heavy Rain (2010). Second, both games received 
numerous accolades in the United States and across Europe, such as BAFTA Games Awards 
for Best Games, BAFTA Games Awards for Action and Adventure, BAFTA Games Awards 
for Best Story, Writers Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Video 
Game, Game Award for Best Anticipated Game, and the impressive list continues. Not only 

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 4
did both games receive overwhelmingly positive reviews, but they experienced universal 
success—The Last of Us Part II sold over four million copies, and The Last of Us sold over 
17 million copies. Precisely, their wide-ranging notoriety suggests more exposure to gamers 
which is more reason to probe Naughty Dog’s lack of responsibility to avoid perpetuating the 
stereotypical constructs widely associated with people of color. The Last of Us and The Last of 
Us Part Two up the ante by adding more stereotypical imagery to the racist construct already 
present in previous games, re-enforcing the images graphically and tonally.  
One has to wonder, are there subtexts to these post-pandemic survivalist games? Do these 
games speak to ‘Us’ on some level as humans? Are these games existential commentary 
about which ‘Us’ matters and which ‘Us’ does not? Perhaps most importantly, are these 
games cautionary tales for the other ‘Us’ as humans to rethink the world in which we at-
tempt to survive? The conversation surrounding these questions is essential, especially in 
such a time of racial unrest.  
This essay attempts to probe these questions through the lens of black deprivation and 
challenge content creators, developers, and writers to reframe how black characters are 
scripted in video games. It is not the scope of this essay to dwell on all of Naughty Dog’s 
games, although one can see the intersection between black deprivation and Uncharted 4: A 
Thief’s End (2016), Uncharted: A Lost Legacy (2017), and The Last of Us: Left Behind (2014). 
The Last of Us and The Last of Us Part II games expose black deprivation, the normative order 
of whiteness, its existential impact upon digital black bodies, the ideological constructions of 
blackness, and practices of white prejudice discourse.
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us Remastered
Naughty Dog’s popular and critically acclaimed brutal post-pandemic game, The Last of Us 
(2013), was released exclusively for Sony’s Playstation 3 video game console with remastered 
version for the Playstation 4 (2014). The game offers two white protagonists as central play-
able characters: Joel, a 40-year-old survivor and father figure, and Ellie, a 14-year-old orphan. 
The Last of Us Remastered narrates the experiences of Joel and Ellie as he escorts her through 
a post-apocalyptic America in the wake of a worldwide pandemic that metamorphoses infect-
ed humans into cannibalistic creatures known as “the Infected.” The game explicitly fore-
grounds the elusive nature and important implications of human survival in a competitive 
and hostile environment. 
The game includes three secondary black NPCs: Henry and his younger brother, Sam, are 
roaming survivalists with short-lived lives; And Marlene, the leader of the Fireflies militia, is 
entangled in a deadly exchange with Joel before he finally kills her. Naughty Dog’s inclusion 
of these black characters has received minimal attention and criticism. However, Russworm 
(2017) criticizes Naughty Dog in “Dystopian Blackness and the limits of racial empathy 
in The Walking Dead and The Last of Us,” claiming that “TLoU most evidently satisfies an 

JGC 5(A)
Hill 5
uncritical multiculturalist imperative to merely include diverse characterizations in game 
worlds” (p. 112). From Russworm’s perspective, Naughty Dog has included these characters 
only to treat them as, using Yancy’s term, “standing-reserve”: raw materials waiting to be 
used [and] exploited […] through whiteness, or as Heidegger would call it, “available equip-
ment” (Yancy, 2008, p. 185). The following exposition briefly demonstrates how Naughty 
Dog’s post-pandemic project fails to create a narrative where Black survivalists become a site 
of value and meaning, and as a result, are unable to transcend their world.
Concealed in the Title: ‘Us’
The game’s title, The Last of Us Remastered, is the first apparent attempt to build an account 
based on the familiar idea of who would survive a dystopian world. The crucial adjective Last 
instantly calls attention to itself as it indicates a position in a particular situation, integral 
to the substantive noun that reinforces and emphasizes the visual on the game case cover: 
Joel and Ellie. As such, the game’s title can be read, in part, with a linguistic twist, in which 
its meaning is taken to assert specific knowledge and can be metaphorically interpreted to 
mean something different. The word Us brought together with the image of Joel and Ellie, 
who are assigned both implicit knowledge and distinctive meaning, underscores Darwinism 
and emphasizes a bias towards whiteness that serves as an axiological code and is within the 
context of the title and also the content of the game. As such, the image of Joel and Ellie seen 
with the title represents a fixed racialized taxonomy that connects them as survivors whose 
whiteness allows them to overcome existential crises during a pandemic. Moreover, there is 
linguistic tension between the literal meaning and the metaphorical meaning of the word 
Us. 
The tension concealed in the meaning of the word Us reveals conceptual oppositions that re-
inforce a particular notion of who matters. The persistence of whiteness to exist rather than 
die is seen on the cover and experienced throughout the game. The unseen that is seen on 
the cover and implied in the word Us is the notion that blackness is not meant to survive, or 
black people are not meant to inherit a future beyond their lived condition. This horrifying 
phenomenon is expressed in the game’s narrative as Henry, Sam, and Marlene are confront-
ed by situational disadvantages relative to not surviving, while Joel and Ellie are scripted 
to transcend the zombie apocalypse as irreversible supererogation survivalists. As Gordon 
(1997) observes, a presence-absence dichotomy in the term Us and its literal and implied 
meanings explicitly reveal that “black presence is absence and white presence is presence 
lead to a skewed logic. Rules that apply to white [digital] bodies, by virtue of bad faith, sub-
stantiated identity of being-what-it-is, change when applied to black [digital] bodies” (p. 73). 
The black presence of Henry, Sam, and Marlene are not sources of existential expansion and 
meaningful narration within the context of the game. One way to make this point apparent 
is to examine the existential inessentiality of the three black NPCs. 

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 6
Black Survivalists’ Deaths: Sam and Henry
In Chapter 5: “Pittsburg,” Joel and Ellie unexpectedly encounter Henry and Sam, who, like 
them, desperately escaped unrelenting attacks from ruthless ambushers and the onslaught 
of the Infected. Henry offers an ethical welcoming, as he acknowledges the capacity for 
managing their survival is greater together as he utters one of the principles of Darwinism: 
“Survival of the fittest” (Naughty Dog, 2014). The brothers prove to be the most logical candi-
dates for survival, particularly Henry, who portrays black subjectivity as complex, intelligent, 
knowledgeable, and resourceful. Perhaps, the designated leader of the group, Henry, should 
be praised for his actions as he provides food and shelter, develops an escape plan, helps 
ward off hunters, and saves Joel’s and Ellie’s life. However, Naughty Dog’s racialized con-
sciousness demonstrated through Joel’s conviction reveals their important endorsement of 
white patriarchy and masculinity as chosen qualities of the hero. Joel’s unflinching sense of 
conviction is caused by his failure to foster a continuous role of power and authority. In fact, 
Joel challenges Henry’s moral judgment and ethical commitment at every turn. Perhaps, 
worse than that, Joel witnesses how Ellie finds solace under the leadership of Henry as she 
adheres to his direction and desires a friendship with Sam. 
At this juncture, Naughty Dog seems to refrain from including nonwhite characters as 
significant practitioners in the survival of human history. As a result, they reimagine black 
subjectivity and later portray Henry as a nihilist overwhelmed by a sense of despair, disap-
pointment, and meaninglessness. Henry’s autonomous agency is no longer a site of value, 
creating and maintaining profound levels of existential stability for himself and Sam. Exis-
tential nihilism promotes a state of hopelessness, judging human life as meaningless and 
existing without purpose. Existential nihilism provides a paradigmatic frame for describing 
Henry’s existence without ontology, which is particularly understood in Chapter 6: “Sub-
urbs” when Joel and Ellie reunite with Henry and Sam after the group separated during 
an ambush. Several cutscenes later, towards the bleak ending of the chapter, Sam viciously 
attacks Ellie, pummeling her to the floor, revealing to Henry and Joel (and the gamer) that 
Sam has been infected. Joel shuffles for his weapon to deal with the human/nonhuman 
predicament:
JOEL: Shit. He’s turning.
HENRY: That’s my fuckin’ brother!
JOEL: Screw it! 
This particular cutscene exemplifies how Ellie is an exclusive concern for Joel. However, 
beneath it all, Henry understands his brother through the concept of “double vision”—the 
term coined by Hayes III—that allows him to see Sam’s black subjectivity and what Sam 
has become. Henry’s urgent obligation to save his brother was necessary as he undoubtedly 
understood that it would mean killing him. For Henry, it meant to render his brother, Sam, 
visible by making his becoming the Infected invisible.

JGC 5(A)
Hill 7
In the final cutscene, Henry points his pistol towards Joel and then, unexpectedly, shoots 
himself. Henry’s death is problematic because it destroys any possibility for real meaning. 
In Camus’s Caligula (1958), a character called Cherea observes that “what’s intolerable is 
to see one’s life being drained of meaning, to be told there’s no reason for existing” (p. 30).  
Cherea’s statement is indicative of Naughty Dog’s sole purpose for Henry. It is crucial to 
bear in mind a cluster of troubling questions: How is it possible that Henry has moved from 
existential survivalist to existential nihilist by the end of the chapter? How does Naughty 
Dog justify affirming digital black life and simultaneously rejecting digital black subjectivity? 
How can Henry not imagine himself beyond the death of his brother, Sam, but Joel could 
survive after the death of his daughter, Sarah? Such contradictions reveal how Naughty Dog 
equates blackness, Henry and Sam, with despair, nihilism, and death. As such, Naughty 
Dog’s “key story decisions exacerbate the flawed tradition of conflating black identity with 
the pathos of sacrifice and suffering” (Russworm, 2017, p. 119). They defy any attempt for 
Henry to transcend his nihilism. However, a shift in the game’s narrative could have scripted 
Henry’s existence to be meaningful and purposeful as he embodies the words of Camus: “In 
the darkest depths of our nihilism, I have sought only for the means to transcend nihilism” 
(Cruikshank, 1960, p. 3). As Naughty Dog has demonstrated, Henry and Sam’s quest to sur-
vive was necessary but not sufficient.
Similarly, Naughty Dog asserts the necessity for black female subjectivity to ensure hu-
manity’s survival. Marlene, the final antagonist in the game and principal leader of the 
underground group, the Fireflies, is a secondary character who has a significant role in the 
game’s larger narrative. Naughty Dog sets Marlene as a self-confident leader who embodies 
an expression of liberation and radical subjectivity. Certainly, Marlene’s purpose has been to 
protect Ellie as promised to her mother, Anna, regardless of the cost and exercise options for 
the greater good of the Fireflies and humanity. This uncharted ground of analysis requires 
mapping Marlene’s shift from an indispensable ally to an inessential antagonist. Although 
Marlene’s narrative is intricately linked to Joel, she disrupts the long-standing structures of 
the white male hero; therefore, her death is inevitable.  
Marlene’s Shift: Indispensable Ally to Inessential Antagonist
An excellent place to begin this analysis is with the descriptive clarity of Marlene. Like other 
characters in the game, little is known about Marlene before the widespread outbreak. Mar-
lene emerges as a central figure in pivotal moments of the story, such as her and the Fire-
flies’ violent resistance against totalitarian military regimes, her willing collaboration with 
Joel’s brother, Tommy, to survive their new reality, her distinctive moral reasoning to provide 
parental care for Ellie after the death of Anna, and her existential dilemma to save humani-
ty understanding that the degree of risk would override Ellie’s life. On this score, Marlene’s 
character is distinctively interwoven with traits of courage, reliability, and temperance, all of 
which are convincingly demonstrated in the game. Notwithstanding, Naughty Dog’s per-
ception creates a context of illusion through the juxtaposition of Marlene and Joel, fostering 

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 8
spaces where Marlene—despite all logic—is intentionally denied any claims to the status of 
heroine. From this perspective, Naughty Dog allows Marlene to transcend the ramification 
of several deadly situations only to collapse in deference to white masculinity during the 
most significant moment in the game.
Near the end of the narrative, Marlene and Joel encounter each other for the final few se-
quences. It is important to remember that Marlene requested that Joel deliver Ellie to the 
Fireflies located at the capitol building prior to this moment. They would escort Ellie to Salt 
Lake City, where the Fireflies have a more extensive operating system, including a medical 
facility. After Joel and Ellie arrive at the medical facility, he is greeted by Marlene, who has 
taken Ellie to another part of the facility. Here, where the remaining scenes cut against the 
solidarity between Marlene and Joel, Marlene explains that Ellie is immune to the fungal 
virus, and her blood could be a vaccine to cure humankind, but as a result, Ellie would die.
Interestingly, Marlene experiences a genuine moral dilemma where she is challenged by two 
choices knowing that she can preserve only one: her responsibility as the leader of the Fire-
flies and the potential to save humankind and remaining steadfast to her promise to Ann to 
keep Ellie safe. Joel attempts to contest Marlene’s decision as other Fireflies suggest that she 
kills Joel. In her refusal to kill him, she has one of her soldiers escort him out of the building 
after their verbal exchange. 
Joel has perceived his position as one of objectified status in his encounters with Marlene. It 
seems evident that Joel’s actions throughout the game concerning black characters are nei-
ther pristine nor unambiguous. However, Naughty Dog casts him as the heroic figure, which 
might have to do less with heroism and more with “symbolically embodying white racial 
superiority” at the expense of black subjectivity and agency (Nama, 2011, p. 10). To overcome 
the implicit challenge to white masculinity, Joel embraces his relationship to violence as he 
overpowers a soldier and goes on a killing rampage throughout the facility searching for 
Ellie. After he secures Ellie, Joel and Marlene’s final encounter unfolds. The essence of this 
sequence is an encounter of systematic constructs. For Joel, the encounter is an event that 
maintains the status quo, continuing the biased tradition of the prevailing white masculine 
hero. For Marlene, she desires to save humanity and enact her humanity against an an-
ti-black world.
Their inevitable deaths complete the existence of these three digital black bodies in the 
game. It is important to emphasize that Naughty Dog’s act of black deprivation suggests 
that the existence of Sam, Henry, and Marlene are better off dead than alive. In “A Litany for 
Survival” (1978), Lorde’s final line is most befitting within the context of the game: “We were 
never meant to survive” (p. 31-32). Like the white imagination, Naughty Dog fails to envision 
the possibility of their survival, signaling that both black humanity and longevity are not 
vital options. Unfortunately, the gamer has limited him or herself to the spectacle and enter-
tainment of digital black deaths. In Woke Gaming: Challenges to oppression and social justice 

JGC 5(A)
Hill 9
(2018), Gray and Leonard (2018) lament, “the humanity of Black lives is lost, reducing life to 
the spectacle of Black death” (p. 6). Naughty Dog, or more specifically, Druckmann, employs 
the act of black deprivation to produce positive conclusions for white characters Joel and 
Ellie. Despite explicit expressions and well-intentions to include the diverse ethnicity of Sam, 
Henry, and Marlene, The Last of Us Remastered still perpetuates widespread sentiments that 
are only visualized through the white gaze.
The Continuum of Black Deprivation in The Last of Us Part II
The Last of Us Part II (TLoU II) plunges gamers five years later into Naughty Dog’s drasti-
cally decimated post-pandemic wasteland, one which measures human nature and morality 
against the disintegrating structure and frailty of human culture. The narrative strategy in 
the game serves as a lens to examine central characters’ controversial decisions within a 
descriptive moral framework as the game consistently asks gamers to counter what it means 
to be human with what it means to be moral in such a chaotic world as characters “try to 
adhere to a more beneficial sense of their moral code” (Green, 2016, p. 747). Druckmann 
attempts the paradoxical: sympathetic immorality. The game offers gamers a diametrically 
polar experience to the first installment. As Druckmann explains, “The first game, at the 
very core, was trying to tap into this primal feeling that a parent has for their child. This un-
conditional love. How do we create a game that captures that? This game [The Last of Us Part 
II] tells a very complementary story” (Newton, 2018). 
The story breaks with the central theme from The Last of Us in crucial ways, proffering 
instead for more horrific gameplay through forms of hate, morality, and violence. Much of 
the emphasis of human morality is on Ellie and Abby, a member of the Washington Libera-
tion Front and the daughter of Dr. Anderson who Joel murdered in TLofU. It is striking that 
two prominent secondary black characters Nora Harris, a trained medical officer, and Isaac 
Dixon, the leader of the Washington Liberation Front (WLF), are not characterized in terms 
of “human morality.” This section argues that the continuum thesis from the previous game, 
black deprivation, manifests itself in Nora and Isaac, who are marked by their measure of 
human morality. 
Gamers encounter the main protagonist Ellie who is 19 years old and lives in a reconstruct-
ed settlement in Jackson, Wyoming. She and Joel, now in his mid-fifties, live peacefully 
amongst other survivors in the thriving and tranquil community. Still, there is the constant 
imminent threat of the infected and continuous terrifying dangers of treacherous factions. 
The story’s tone shifts when Ellie is forced to witness Abby Anderson brutally kill Joel. This 
atrocious event sends Ellie on a relentless journey to enact her retributive justice at any cost. 
As she hunts those individuals responsible for Joel’s death, the lines between good and evil, 
right and wrong, justice and injustice, heroine and villain, and forgiveness and condemna-
tion are blurred; thus, challenging gamers, as Druckmann intended, to consider their no-
tions of moral laws. It is this emphasis on moral quandaries that become particularly apro-

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 10
pos with characters, most notably Ellie, as the game “seeks to show the immensely complex 
morality and emotional depth of human beings” (Chinn, 2020). While a measure of human 
morality occurs between Ellie and white characters in the game, it would be a mistake to 
ignore Nora and Isaac’s depictions of human morality despite their scripted deprivation and 
temporality.
Nora and Isaac’s Depictions of Human Morality
One of the earlier memorable and fruitful portrayals of human morality occurs during a 
cutscene when Ellie searches for Nora at Lakefield Hospital in Seattle. Pointing the gun at 
her, Ellie begins to question Nora about Abby’s location. During their brief verbal exchange, 
Nora creates an opportunity to escape. After an intensive chase, overcoming WLF soldiers, 
and avoiding the infected, Ellie confronts Nora again. Ellie stands over her in a threatening 
posture while again pointing her pistol and questioning her about Abby’s location. The sig-
nificance of this moment is captured in Nora’s dialogue: “We could have killed you” (Naugh-
ty Dog, 2020). This dialogical entry makes Nora’s moral language a point of departure as it 
provides the gamer with a sense of her moral thinking. Nora’s five words are important in 
two specific ways. First, her statement suggests favoring human life or, at the very least, not 
unnecessarily disposing of it. Nora has the capacity to display in her conduct and communi-
cation appropriate moral virtues. Second, the statement implies that living in an inhumane 
world does not negate the human act of acknowledging and demonstrating a moral concern 
for either friend, foe, or stranger. The statement proves that Nora can exercise moral capacity 
and moral judgment that produce a humane outcome. As the only black woman character in 
the game, Nora symbolizes moral thought and is not so much deprived or warped by Ellie’s 
vengeance as she is marked and shaped by her humanity. However, Naughty Dog scripted 
her death as an acceptable casualty of Ellie’s violent revenge.
It is significantly worth noting that Nora did not have to become a victim of Ellie’s relentless 
and graphic violence. A couple of chapters earlier, Nora was exposed to the virus that would 
have eventually turned her into the infected. Nevertheless, The Last of Us universe is not con-
ducive for black women characters to survive, but they become existentially expendable. For 
example, if we revisit The Last of Us and the expansion pack, Left Behind, we will recognize 
that Naughty Dog’s apparent strategy is to create “images contrasting white female bodies 
with black ones in ways that reinforced the greater value of the white female icon” (hooks, 
1992, p. 64). Indeed, it is unfortunate that Nora dies because of Ellie’s revenge and justice; 
however, Nora’s agency begs questions about moral choice, performance, and responsibility. 
Continuing this engagement of black moral invisibility requires providing an analytical 
recognition of Isaac Dixon. Dixon has been referred to as the “secondary antagonist” in 
the game, depicting him as “ruthless,” dangerous, and “willing to torture innocent people” 
(Sakellariou, 2020). This type of scripting of Dixon is detrimental to identity meaning-mak-
ing because it continues to “perpetuate societal fears about black men” and overall “delimits 

JGC 5(A)
Hill 11
black folk, devaluing their humanity” (Gray, 2020, p. 68). Despite obvious stereotypical de-
scriptors, there appears to be a nexus between Dixon and his moral duty that pushes against 
the boundaries of the script. It is necessary to define the morality of duty before unpacking 
two scenes where his morality is visible to avoid seeing Dixon through the white gaze. 
By all accounts, “a morality of duty is one that requires each individual to demonstrate con-
cerns for the interests of others” (Gyekye, 2011). Commander Isaac Dixon occupies morality 
of duty principles as emphasized through his “compassion, solidarity, reciprocity, coopera-
tion, interdependence, and social well-being” in the game (Ibid.). These essential principles 
can be seen after Anderson returns to their home base and is escorted by Manny Alverez, 
a close friend of Abby, to meet with Isaac. During this moment, Isaac is intensely coercing 
an individual as Abby and Manny enter the room. The scene’s emphasis is the intimate 
moment between Isaac and Abby as he expresses to her the consequences for Owen killing 
Danny, two fellow members of the WLF. As Abby advocates for Owen, Dixon points out that 
“this is bigger than any of us…Definitely bigger than Owen” (Naughty Dog, 2020). An awk-
ward silence emerges as he eats an apple. After contemplating the situation, Dixon reveals 
his moral thinking, “If he [Owen] turns up, then fine. I will give him the benefit of the doubt, 
and we will get to the bottom of it. I need you, Abby. Yeah?” Isaac’s statement, focusing on 
the situation’s complexities, suggests that he juxtaposes the reconfiguration of the morality 
of duty against the imposed human nature created by the hostile environment in which he 
lives. Yet, he is compassionate towards Abby and benevolent towards Owens. Isaac is not 
reshaped by the dangerously cruel world’s inhuman obduracy and resists it in many ways.
The last scene of emphasis charts Isaac’s second confrontation with Abby as she protects 
Lev, a former member of the primitive cult and antagonistic faction, the Seraphites, from 
an onslaught of violence that awaits him. In doing so, gamers witness the complex inter-
weaving of Isaac’s moral tendencies toward Abby. With a gun in hand, the intense moment 
unfolds between them:
Isaac: Move out of the way. We will deal with you [Abby] back home.
Abby: He [Lev] is not one of them. Please…
Isaac: Abby, move…
Abby: God damn it, he’s just a kid!
Isaac: You have three seconds to get away from that Scar. One…
Abby: You really going to shoot me?
Isaac: Two…

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 12
Abby: I’m not fucking moving.
Although brief, the moral mapping performed in this scene can be understood through the 
next frame. Isaac silently stares at Abby, contemplating his next move as he attempts to low-
er his gun. Although there is some uncertainty about what will happen next, gamers can see 
that Isaac has some hesitation about pulling the trigger and killing Abby. The practical in-
terpretation of this moment lends itself to moral virtue as the concern for others. But before 
gamers can witness Isaac’s intentions, he is shot and killed by a Scar, disposing of another 
black character of value.
Isaac’s investment in the principles of the morality of duty, with a couple of notable excep-
tions, stands in contrast to Naughty Dog’s beloved protagonist, Ellie, who seemingly dis-
regards any moral codes as she embarks on her revenge tour. The fixity of Isaac limits any 
possibility or potentiality for black transcendence, enabling him to deify the game’s cultural 
and racial bias as he attempts to restore precisely black agency and subjectivity within a 
post-pandemic world.
Conclusion
As I have posited, the black bodies in Naughty Dog’s The Last of Us Remastered and The Last 
of Us Part II are created, designed, and scripted to maintain a whiteness thesis. Both games 
embody cultural norms of whiteness that share a common ideological core organized around 
a racialized discourse. Asserting the treatment of black bodies in these two games does not, 
in any way, negate the possibility of cultural change. The meaning-making of blackness 
poses a vital challenge to even progressive game developers like Naughty Dog in this new de-
cade of gaming. Scholars within game culture and game studies have argued for the neces-
sity of including authentic and positive accounts of diverse communities who are too often 
misrepresented. Without such a practice, the game industry will continue to reproduce and 
reanimate an overly negative and biased representation of ethnic, gender, racial, and sexual 
identities. If we are to continue to play and analyze games, we must locate and share the 
positive cultural potential that is buried within video games. 
Despite its failings, the gaming industry’s future has the opportunity to be as bright or bleak 
as the imagination of the creators and developers. Continually regurgitating and virtually 
reproducing the digital constructs of white prejudice discourse in video games will only 
reinforce one-dimensional, stereotypical black characters trapped within pixelated param-
eters, evidence of the developer’s conscious subscriptions to biased discourse, or subcon-
scious subjugated archetypes that emerge on the virtual page. Through complex systems, 
video games incorporate ludology to satisfy gamers’ desire to escape reality to a virtual world 
where they can experience power and control. Though one would think that video games 
would offer a medium in which blacks can achieve power and control, it is a fleeting gaming 
experience as their virtual contexts of reference are black characters that are either i) non 
playable and without lines or ii) non playable with lines that ultimately die. Notwithstanding, 

JGC 5(A)
Hill 13
there are impactful changes that game culture can undertake to shift from black deprivation 
to transcending the stereotypical tropes of Black characters.
Seminal to creating transcendence in black characters is changing the demographics of the 
creators and developers that produce the games; in short, employ more black creators and 
developers. To illuminate the necessity to change hiring practices as a primary step toward 
change, one must acknowledge that racial bias in games is reflective of conscious or subcon-
scious biases of the creator and developer, which helps to explain and understand why black 
characters are created through stereotypical tropes that involve nihilism, death, pain, detach-
ment, and intellectual unsophistication, to name a few. Consider these statistics about game 
developer demographics. According to the International Game Developers Association, 81% 
of the game developers identify as “white/Caucasian/European” versus 7% identifying as 
“Hispanic/Latinx” and 2% identifying as “Black/African-American/African/Afro-Caribbean” 
(Weststarr, Kwan, & Kumar, 2019, p. 13).  The expectation of black character images beyond 
what has become customarily formulaic without changing the demographics of creators and 
developers is naïve at best and missing the problem, which will, at worst, continue the prop-
agation of those same images in some form. This way, the transcendence of black characters 
beyond stereotypical tropes begins with hiring more black creators and developers who can 
offer different experiences inspiring different protagonists/agonists, storylines, narratives, 
and gaming experiences. 
Secondly, the gaming industry must produce more black playable characters with solid 
narratives. Unfortunately, the scant availability of black playable characters also reflects the 
demographics of game creators and developers, who are limited by their experiences. In-
creasingly, gamers devote significant amounts of time within virtual spaces, which can be 
captivatingly deceptive in conveying reality through digital images supported by narrative.  
Digital images and narratives mixed with music deliver a pathos that evokes either empathy 
or apathy for the playable and nonplayable characters. Empathy becomes associated with the 
hero/heroine of the game. In this respect, the gamer subconsciously learns to connect to and 
empathize with the white playable character. Simultaneously, they learn that only the white 
playable character is acceptable in terms of heroism, worthy of life, and capable of humanity, 
despite the apparent opposite conveyed by Elli in TLOU II. By applying a positive value judg-
ment upon white playable characters coded as heroes, the gamer makes converse judgments 
about non playable black characters that are alternatively subjugated or demonized. If not 
convinced by this philosophical argument for the need to employ more black creators and 
developers, the gaming industry must acknowledge that many gamers are Black and Latinx. 
In “The Era of White Male Games For White Male Gamers Is Ending,” Packwood, co-found-
er and executive director of Gameheads, notes that “[r]oughly 57% of video game players in 
the U.S. between the ages of 6 and 29 will be people of color in less than ten years” (Quartz, 
2018). So, from the standpoint of cultivating the future of gaming, it would behoove gaming 
companies to start producing more playable characters to enrich the present gaming experi-
ence and the rising future demographic of Black gamers. 

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 14
Thirdly, black character transcendence in video games requires solid non-stereotypical 
storylines and images. The importance of discontinuing stereotypical digital images is 
far-reaching when considering the fact that children as young as six years old begin their 
nascent journey into the gaming world. Depending on their games, digital images teach 
young gamers to employ similar value judgments through subjective lessons about right 
and wrong, problem-solving, gender roles, gender bias, sexual identity, social hierarchies, 
and other disposable tropes. As the gamer ages, these once subjective tropes evolve from 
nuanced and ambiguous to blatantly layered stereotypical digital images and narratives. Fur-
thermore, the importance of discontinuing stereotypical narratives and images can be estab-
lished when noting that games created with these digital images and narratives are global as 
we live in a technologically interconnected global gaming world that transmits these images 
instantaneously and iteratively as desired, adding to their pervasiveness. Linking stereotypi-
cal storylines and images conveyed in games with perpetuated stereotypes that exist in many 
other forms of media that approbate pejorative images of black bodies, video games have be-
come another acceptable medium to use in coding and solidifying the black body as inconse-
quential, unnecessary, and a blight against humanity that must be subjugated or annihilated. 
One only has to peruse any news medium to understand this point concretely.
The gaming industry has within its power to disrupt the conveyance of black deprivation as 
the preferred trope for black characters. Instead of focusing on stereotypes, it would be as 
easy to create complex black characters that evolve internally and externally, exhibit restraint 
and depth, experience weakness and strength, display cleverness and intelligence, are hope-
ful and experience trepidation, are protectors and avengers, and the list goes on.
References 
Arkane Studios. (2017). Dishonored: Death of the Outsider.
Bell, G. C. & Harris, T. M. (2016, August). Exploring representations of black masculinity 
and emasculation on NBC’s parenthood. Journal of International and Intercultural 
Communication, 10(2), pp. 135-152. 
Camus, A. (1958). Caligula. New York: Knopf.
Chinn, B. R. (2020, June 28). The Last of Us 2: An emotionally complex gaze into cruelty. 
Medium. https://medium.com/permanent-nerd-network/the-last-of-us-2-an-emotion-
ally-complex-gaze-into-cruelty-9addfdc6477f
Cruickshank, J. (1960). Albert Camus and the Literature of revolt. Oxford University Press.
Drabinski, J. (2019). Frantz Fanon. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-

JGC 5(A)
Hill 15
phy. PDF Format, pp. 1-16. The Metaphysics Research Lab.
Gordon, L. R. (1997). Existential dynamics of theorizing black invisibility. In L. R. Gordon 
(Ed.), Existence in black: An anthology of black existential philosophy, (pp. 69-79), Rout-
ledge. 
Gray, K. L. (2020). Intersectional tech: Black users in digital gaming. Louisiana State University 
Press.
Gray, K. L. & Leonard, D. J. (2018). Introduction: Not a post-racism and post-misogyny prom-
ised land: Video Games as instruments of (in)justice. In K. L. Gray & D. J. Leonard 
(Eds.), Woke gaming: Challenges to oppression and social justice, (pp. 3-23), University of 
Washington Press.
Green, A. M. (2016, Nov.). The Reconstruction of morality and the evolution of naturalism in 
the last of us. Games and Culture, 11(7–8), pp. 745–763, doi:10.1177/1555412015579489.
Gyekye, K. (2011). African Ethics. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. E. N. 
Zalta (Ed.). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall/ entries/african-ethics/  
Hangar 13. (2016/ 2017/ 2020). Mafia III. 2K Games.
hooks, b. (1992). Black looks: Race and representation. South End Press.
Lorde, A. (1978). A litany for survival. The Black unicorn: poems, pp. 31–32. Norton. 
Nama, A. (2011). Super black: American pop culture and black superheroes. University of Texas 
Press.
Naughty Dog. (2020). The last of us: Part II [Sony Playstation 4]. Sony Interactive Entertain-
ment.
Naughty Dog. (2017). Uncharted: The Lost Legacy. Sony Interactive Entertainment. 
Naughty Dog. (2016). Uncharted 4: A Thief’s End. Sony Interactive Entertainment.
Naughty Dog. (2014). The last of us: Remastered [Sony Playstation 4]. Sony Interactive Enter-
tainment.
Newton, C. (2018, June 14). The Last of us part II will be a tale of revenge, its director says. 
The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/14/17464690/last-of-us-part-2-neil-

JGC 5(A)
Black Deprivation in The Last of Us 16
druckmann-interview-e3-2018
Packwood, D. (2018, Oct. 31). The era of white male games for white male gamers is ending. 
Quartz. https://qz.com/1433085/the-era-of-white-male-games-for-white-male-gamers-
is-ending/ 
Quantic Dreams. (2018/ 2019). Detroit: Become Human. Sony Interactive Entertainment.
Quantic Dreams. (2010). Heavy Rain. Sony Computer Entertainment.
Russworm, T. M. (2017). Dystopian blackness and the limits of racial empathy. In J. Mal-
kowski & T. M. Russworm (Eds.), Gaming representation: Race, gender, and sexuality in 
video games, (pp. 109–128), Indiana University Press. 
Sakellariou, A. (2020, Aug. 21). Last of Us: Part 2 players never saw abby’s real history with 
Isaac. Screenrant, https://screenrant.com/last-us-2-isaac-abby-betrayal-seraphite-
scars/ 
Telltale Games. (2012). The Walking Dead, Season One.
Ubisoft. (2012/2014). Assassin’s Creed III.
Weststarr, J., Kwan, E., & Kumar, S. (2019, Nov. 20). Developers satisfactory survey 2019: 
Summary report. International Game Developers Association. PDF Format, pp. 1–38. 
Yancy, G . (2008). Black bodies, white gazes: The Continuing significance of race. Rowman & 
Littlefield Publishers.

