Philosophical Review
Visual Geometry
Author(s): James Hopkins
Source: The Philosophical Review, Vol. 82, No. 1 (Jan., 1973), pp. 3-34
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of Philosophical Review
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2184237 .
Accessed: 11/04/2011 18:22
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Duke University Press and Philosophical Review are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to The Philosophical Review.
http://www.jstor.org

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
I 
K 
ANT thought Euclid's geometry true of everything spatially 
intuitable. This implied that only Euclid's geometry- 
Euclidean figures or a Euclidean space-could 
be seen, imagined, 
or visualized. To many, including 
modern philosophers, this 
has seemed true. Thus Frege: 
Empirical propositions hold good of what is physically or psychologi- 
cally actual, the truths of [Euclidean] geometry govern all that is 
spatially intuitable, whether actual or product of our fancy. The 
wildest visions of delirium, the boldest inventions of legend or poetry... 
all these remain, so long as they remain intuitable, still subject to the 
axioms of geometry. Conceptual thought can after a fashion shake off 
that yoke, when it assumes, say, a space ... of positive curvature. To 
study such conceptions is not useless by any means; but it is to leave 
the ground of intuition entirely behind. If we do make use of intuition 
even here as an aid, it is still the same old intuition of Euclidean space, 
the only space of which we can have any picture [Foundations, 
p. 20].1 
Bennett: 
If we restricted ourselves to what could be "imagined" or seen at a 
glance, then perhaps we should be bound to regard space as Euclidean 
. . .it is not clear how we could see at a glance that two straight lines 
intersect twice: it seems that if both intersections are seen at once, then 
at least one of the lines must look curved [Kant's Analytic, p. 3I].2 
And Strawson: 
Consider the proposition that not more than one straight line can be 
drawn between two points. The natural way to satisfy ourselves of the 
1 Frege, The Foundations of Arithmetic, trans. by Austin (Oxford, 1950). 
2Jonathan Bennett, Kant's Analytic (Cambridge, I967). Bennett's position is 
more complex than might be inferred from the passage quoted. He is opposing 
"that preoccupation with the visual which has weakened and narrowed 
epistemology for centuries," and he says of the passage, "I am not sure this is 
right, perhaps because I am not sure what I mean by 'must look curved.'" 
3 

truth of this axiom of phenomenal geometry is to consider an actual or 
imagined figure. When we do this it becomes evident that we cannot, 
either in the imagination or on paper, give ourselves a picture such that 
we are prepared to say of it both that it shows two distinct straight 
lines, and that it shows these lines as drawn between the same two 
points [The Bounds of Sense, p. 283].3 
Surely what Bennett and Strawson say here is true. We cannot 
see or picture two definitely straight lines between two points. 
Given two points we can picture one definitely straight line be- 
tween them; but any other we picture will be curved. For exam- 
ple: 
So it seems we can form the Euclidean but not the non-Euclid- 
ean picture. Similarly in other cases: we picture triangles of the 
same shape but different sizes, whose angles equal two right 
angles. Such are Euclid's, and we can imagine no others. So our 
pictures do suggest, as Frege believed, that we see, imagine, or 
picture anything whatever as Euclidean-as 
spatially disposed, and 
hence geometrically describable, in no other than Euclid's terms. 
This belief is part of the content of the Kantian theory that 
the form of outer sense is Euclidean. Also it was a source of Kant's 
conviction that Euclid's propositions were known true a priori. 
Kant assumed that geometric proof required construction on a 
figure. He thought the proved propositions synthetic because this 
construction was a synthesis to be contrasted with the analysis of 
concepts. He thought them known a priori because the construc- 
tion was not taken from experience. And the construction, the 
picture, inevitably yielded Euclidean results. 
3 P. F. Strawson, The Bounds of Sense (London, I966). All quotations from 
Strawson are from this book, and only their page number is cited in the text. 
This view illustrated by Strawson and Bennett has been surprisingly common. 
See Ewing's A Short Commentary 
to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (London, 1938), 
p. 45, for his statement and that from Johnson's Logic; also the text and notes to 
"Empiricism and the Geometry of Visual Space" in Grunbaum, Philosophical 
Problems of Space and Time (New York, I963), for references to Carnap and 
others. W. & M. Kneale seem to discuss it in The Development 
of Logic (Oxford, 
I962), p. 385. 
4 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
[M]athematical knowledge ... is knowledge gained by reason from the 
construction of concepts ... I construct a triangle by representing the 
object which corresponds to the concept either in the imagination 
alone, in pure intuition, or in accordance therewith also on paper, in 
empirical intuition, in both cases completely a priori, without having 
borrowed the pattern from any experience [Critique, Kemp-Smith 
translation, p. 577].4 
Frege knew of modern developments in geometry and had more 
sophisticated reasons for regarding Euclidean propositions as 
synthetic. Yet he seems to have thought them known a priori, 
solely because they alone could be intuited. "In calling the truths 
of geometry synthetic and a priori 
[Kant] revealed their true 
nature."5 
Now it is commonplace that Kant's beliefs about geometry 
have been superseded. The refinement of geometry as an abstract 
science has made clear that construction on a figure has no such 
role in proof as Kant supposed. The discovery of non-Euclidean 
geometries has been taken to show that the truth or falsity of 
Euclid's description of space is an empirical matter. And it is 
widely accepted that the successful use of a non-Euclidean geom- 
etry in Einstein's theory of relativity-in 
which, for example, 
there may be two straight lines (two paths as short as, or shorter 
than, any other) between two points-has 
established that Eucli- 
dean geometry is as a matter of fact false of physical space. 
4Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. by Kemp-Smith (London, i963). 
Compare Mill, System of Logic (London, 1843), II, v, 5: "The foundations of 
geometry would therefore be laid in direct experience, even if the experiments 
(which in this case consist merely in attentive contemplation) were practiced 
solely upon what we call our ideas, that is, upon the diagrams in our minds." 
6 Frege, Foundations, pp. I o I f. According to Reichenbach the shadow of this 
view remains. 
"The relativity of geometry has been used by neo-Kantians as a back door 
through which the a priorism of Euclidean geometry was introduced into 
Einstein's theory: if it is always possible to select a Euclidean geometry for the 
description of the universe, then the Kantian insists that it is this description 
which should be used, because Euclidean geometry, for a Kantian, is the only 
one that can be visualized" (A. Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, 
ed. by Schilpp 
[New York, 1959]). 
1 
On the relativity of geometry see below, pp. 27-28; the argument of the 
paper shows the irrelevance of this Kantian insistence. 
5 

Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries contain inconsistent 
statements about straight lines. So on a consistent interpretation 
of "straight line" only one geometry can be true. On interpre- 
tations which are common, plausible, and scientifically useful, the 
geometry of space according to Einstein's theory is not in general 
Euclidean. Einstein writes: 
Euclidean geometry does not hold even to a first approximation in the 
gravitational field, if we wish to take one and the same rod, independ- 
ently of its place and orientation, as a realization of the same interval.6 
And Barker describes the situation as follows: 
Suppose a closed three-sided figure is laid out, its sides being determined 
by light rays, or by paths along which measuring rods need be laid 
down the fewest times, or by paths along which stretched strings lie. 
According to the theory of relativity we must predict that in the pres- 
ence of a gravitational field the sum of the angles of this figure will be 
greater than two right angles. We must also predict that between any 
two separate points there will, in the presence of gravitational fields, be 
more than one path divisible into overlapping sub-segments along 
which a measuring rod need be laid down a minimum number of 
times to get from end point to end point, and so forth. 
Many ... would say that the theory of relativity proves space to be 
Riemannian rather than Euclidean in its general form. Einstein 
himself is the outstanding representative of this viewpoint, which he 
expressed in a more general form in his often-quoted dictum "As far 
as the laws of mathematics refer to reality they are not certain; as far as 
they are certain they do not refer to reality."7 
6 Einstein, 
he Principle of Relativity (London, 1923), 
p. i6i. 
7 S. F. Barker, Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy (New York, I968), III, 288. I think 
there are not multiple paths between every pair of points, but only certain 
pairs. Also, Barker is describing only one kind of field. In others the metrical 
situation is neither so definite nor so direct an extension of everyday technique. 
According to Reichenbach there are gravitational fields in which the geometry 
given by light rays differs from that given by rods; and in some fields in which 
there is not a unique light path between points, the metrical situation is so 
indeterminate it hardly seems useful to speak of lines in an ordinary sense at all. 
(See The Philosophy of Space and Time [New York, 1958], ch. 27; all textual 
references to Reichenbach are to this book, and only their page number is 
given.) 
6 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
But here, surely, is a problem. It seems that science has given 
reason for believing that Euclidean geometry is false, that physical 
space may most accurately be described by a non-Euclidean 
geometry. Yet examples lead us to suppose that the only space we 
can imagine, picture, or visualize, is one described by Euclidean 
geometry. But the space it seems we must picture as Euclidean is 
the same space as that which, on scientific grounds, is judged non- 
Euclidean. And why, one might ask, can we not picture our space 
as science gives reason to believe it is? How are we constrained to 
see, imagine, or visualize it in terms of a theory inconsistent with 
what we might believe true of it on scientific grounds? 
II 
It may be thought relevant that there are familiar ways of 
representing a non-Euclidean space. Popular scientists and 
mathematicians sometimes draw gently curving arcs, which may 
intersect twice, to represent non-Euclidean straight lines. Again, 
the surface of a sphere provides a model for a Riemannian (non- 
Euclidean) space. An arc of a great circle is the shortest path 
between two points on the surface of a sphere; and many propo- 
sitions about lines and figures in a Riemannian space hold for 
great circles and spherical figures. Thus there may be two great 
circle paths between (antipodal) points, the sum of the angles of a 
closed figure bounded by three great circles is more than two 
right angles, and so forth. 
Diagrams and models of this kind are often invoked in connec- 
tion with the problems of picturing non-Euclidean space. But 
clearly they cannot help us picture space as non-Euclidean. For 
arcs on paper and great circles on a sphere both are, and are seen 
or pictured as, curved lines. So in using such a diagram or model, 
we picture curved lines, but not straight lines, intersecting twice. 
And it gets us no further to try to picture space as in accord with the 
diagram, or on the model of the sphere. In failing to picture distinct 
straight lines intersecting twice, we fail to imagine straight lines 
with the relevant characteristics of the diagram or model. So we 
thereby fail to picture in accord with the diagram or on the model 
of a sphere. 
7 

There is a deeper and more sophisticated approach to visualiz- 
ing the non-Euclidean. Philosophers and mathematicians, among 
them Reichenbach,8 describe visibly non-Euclidean worlds. Their 
descriptions are meant to enable us to form imaginative pictures 
of the worlds. 
Since in either Euclidean or non-Euclidean geometry a straight 
line is the shortest path between two points, it is clear that which 
lines in a given manifold are straight will be determined by 
measurement. So it is possible, for example, to describe a world 
in which we see two paths between two points and find both to be 
straight, say by measuring with rods rigid by every test to show 
both equal and any alternative longer. 
With descriptions of this kind in mind, persons often claim to 
form non-Euclidean pictures. But on investigation it seems we 
cannot really do so. Consider, for example, lines such as a and b. 
a 
We have an interpretation, consistent with Euclid, of how a and 
b look. On the face of it, and without any special story in mind, we 
see or picture a as curved, b as (approximately) straight. Now 
suppose we try to imagine a world in which both are straight- 
that is, equal and shorter than any alternative between their 
intersections. 
We can, for example, picture a and b as being measured to give 
this result. But this is not yet imagining them straight. For it is no 
different from imagining rods to grow in measuring a or shrink in 
measuring b to give the result. So imagining a equal to b is not yet 
distinguished from imagining a curved but measured equal to b 
by unstable instruments. As regards the length or straightness of a 
and b we have imagined nothing new. Our picture, our way of 
seeing their length or straightness, has not changed. So no different 
description is justified. 
8 See Reichenbach, esp. chs. 9, 10, 
I I, 13. He does not discuss the problem 
mentioned above, although sometimes he seems close (pp. 47, 9 1) and provides 
material for its solution. 
8 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
It adds nothing to speak of the rods, or the unit of measure, as 
staying the same in measuring a and b to show them equal. What 
is in question is whether we actually picture this. Even if we add 
other pictures, and imagine rods rigid by other tests in other 
contexts, we are still required to picture them rigid in measuring 
a and b equal. As long as our picture of a and b does not change, we 
cannot do so. 
So it seems no matter what story we tell, or what additional 
pictures we form, we do not picture anything different from that 
with which we began-namely, a curved and b straight. So we do 
not picture a situation different from the Euclidean. Thus even by 
means of this more sophisticated approach, we do not succeed in 
picturing a non-Euclidean situation. 
A comparison may make this clearer. There are cases in which 
two ways of seeing, between which we can change, are available. 
We can picture other lines on paper-a duck/rabbit, say-first one 
way (as a duck), then another (as a rabbit). Here the way of seeing 
does change, and there is an experience of change of sight. The 
change can be induced by giving descriptions or by interpolating 
other pictures. With our way of seeing geometrically it is not like 
this. We cannot first see a as longer than b, then see them as equal. 
Here no change occurs and no pictures or descriptions induce one. 
Reichenbach calls such a change in the way of picturing lengths 
as would constitute non-Euclidean picturing an adjustment in 
congruence or an emancipation from Euclidean congruence. Thus 
he says in a parallel case that during the adjustment "one can 
forget that from the viewpoint of Euclidean geometry these 
distances are different in length" (p. 56). But we cannot forget that 
a and b are different in length and see them as equal. This shows, 
in Reichenbach's terms, that no adjustment or emancipation 
from Euclidean congruence takes place. And Reichenbach says 
"so long as we cannot emancipate ourselves from Euclidean con- 
gruence ... non-Euclidean relations can only be mapped on the 
visualized Euclidean space" (p. 57). It follows that our visualized 
space remains Euclidean. 
So we are left with the difficulty of picturing space as other 
than Euclidean. This may explain what Frege meant, when he 
said of the study of non-Euclidean geometry: 
9 

If we do make use of intuition even here, it is still the same old intuition 
of Euclidean space, the only space of which we can have any picture 
for, as he continues, 
only here the intuition is not taken at its face value, but as sylloolic of 
something else; for example we call something straight or plane, which 
we actually intuit as curved. 
III 
This difficulty, among others, is sharply presented by the 
final section of The Bounds of Sense. Strawson there espouses a 
carefully qualified analogue of Kant's theory of geometry. He 
introduces the notion of a phenomenal figure as a correlative of 
Kant's object in pure intuition. 
Kant said it did not matter whether "construction of a (spatial) 
concept in pure intuition" took place with the aid of a figure drawn on 
paper or simply in the imagination. Now the visual imagination cannot 
supply us with physical figures. But it can supply us with what, for 
want of a better word, I will call phenomenal figures. The straight 
lines which are the objects of pure intuition are not physical straight 
lines. They are, perhaps, phenomenal straight lines. They are not 
physical objects or physical edges which, when we see them, look 
straight. They are rather the looks physical things have when, and in so 
far as, they look straight. An arrangement of physical lines or edges may 
look triangular. But it is not the physical lines, so arranged, which 
constitute the triangle which is the object of pure intuition. It is rather 
the triangular look they have, the phenomenal triangle which they 
present [p. 282]. 
This suggests that "X is a phenomenal straight line (triangle, 
etc.)" is to be read as "Xis the look a thing has if it looks a straight 
line." A similar account can be given for Strawson's other phenom- 
enal items, such as visual images (pp. 282, 287) and objects of 
sight, described as seen (the picture we give ourselves when we 
draw a geometric diagram). 
These are distinct items-visual 
images, for example, are not the 
appearances of things-and 
their assimilation has caused confusion 
I0 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
in the philosophy of perception. Here the assimilation serves a 
likeness. In a large range of cases we should apply or withhold 
many of the same predicates, among them descriptions of shape 
and color, in describing the appearance of X; X, as it appears, is 
seen, imagined, or visualized; the visual image had in seeing or the 
image had in remembering, imagining, or visualizing X; and so 
forth. This links the disparate items brought under the concept of a 
phenomenal object, and gives the examples under discussion their 
suggestion of scope. 
Strawson wishes to use phenomenal figures, so far as possible, 
to provide an interpretation for geometry. This essentially requires 
that for "straight line" in a geometry we read "phenomenal 
straight line," and so forth, so far as possible. On this interpretaton 
a geometry is true so far as statements in it concerning straight 
lines are true of phenomenal straight lines and so forth; and this 
will be determinable when the corresponding facts about the way 
things appear, and so forth, are. 
Strawson shows Euclidean statements true of phenomenal 
figures by the exercise in visualization similar to Bennett's already 
quoted. He concludes: 
It seems that Euclidean geometry may also be interpreted as a body of 
unfalsifiable propositions about phenomenal straight lines, triangles 
etc.; as a body of a priori propositions about appearances of these kind, 
and hence, of course, as a theory whose application is restricted to such 
appearances [p. 286]. 
Only phenomenal geometry, he stresses, is necessarily Euclidean. 
Physical geometry is not: 
according to modern physics, the possibility that the structure of space 
is non-Euclidean is something more than a bare possibility ... 
it 
appears that the findings of astro-physics are more easily accommo- 
dated by a theory of space inconsistent with the Euclidean [p. 280]. 
Thus according to Strawson one geometry is true of physical 
space while another, inconsistent with it, is true of phenomenal 
space, of the way things look or are seen spatially. Indeed he 
criticizes Kant for not providing for such a possibility. 
I I 

Kant's fundamental error lay in not distinguishing between Euclidean 
geometry in its phenomenal interpretation and Euclidean geometry in 
its physical interpretation. Because he did not do this, he supposed that 
the necessity which truly belongs to Euclidean geometry in its phenom- 
enal interpretation also belongs to it in its physical interpretation. He 
thought the geometry of physical space had to be identical with the 
geometry of phenomenal space [p. 285]. 
In contrast, on Strawson's account, physical and phenomenal 
geometry need not be the same. One is the apparent geometry of 
spatial things or the geometry of their appearances; the other 
is the geometry of spatial things themselves. For the two to differ, 
then, is for things to appear systematically to have one geometry 
while in fact having another. This is the possibility it was Kant's 
fundamental error to overlook. 
But again, such a possibility is surely a strange one. Surely 
if it were so, if there were such a systematic contradiction between 
spatial appearance and spatial reality, it would require explana- 
tion. How could the form of outer sense differ from the form of 
outer things? 
IV 
The source of difficultyis the assertion thatweshould apply Euclid- 
ean predicates and withhold non-Euclidean ones in describing 
phenomenal figures. Philosophical writers have suggested, alter- 
natively, that this assertion is false, or that it is true, but so expli- 
cable in familiar and un-Kantian terms as to remove the difficulty. 
Lucas writes: 
Ewing (I938) and Strawson (i966) have attempted to save Kant's 
account of geometry by maintaining that it is a priori true at least of 
phenomenal geometry-the geometry of our visual experience-that is 
Euclidean. But this is just what the geometry of appearances is not. 
Let the reader look up at the four corners of the ceiling of his room, and 
judge what the apparent angle at each corner is; that is, at what angle 
the two lines where the walls meet the ceiling appear to him to inter- 
sect each other. If the reader imagines himself sketching each corner in 
12 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
turn, he will soon convince himself that all the angles are more than 
right angles, some considerably so. And yet the ceiling appears to 
be a quadrilateral. From which it would seem that the geometry of 
appearance is non-Euclidean, with the angles of a quadrilateral 
adding up to more than 3600. And so it is.9 
The impression that phenomenal geometry is Euclidean should 
not be yielded so easily. Really this case is more naturally de- 
scribed in Strawson's (Euclidean) than Lucas' (non-Euclidean) 
terms. We can, as Lucas implies, describe an image or appearance 
by means of a sketch or two-dimensional projection.'0 In sketching 
(the appearance of) the corners of his ceiling, the reader may 
draw, produce on paper, angles visibly greater than right angles; 
and in this sense he can say the corners appear obtuse angles. In 
sketching (the appearance of) his ceiling, the reader may draw a 
quadrilateral; and in this sense he can say his ceiling appears 
quadrilateral. But in no sketch will the reader draw a quadrilat- 
eral with four visibly obtuse angles. None can be drawn. So the 
reader will not, in this sense, describe his ceiling, or anything 
else, as having the appearance of a quadrilateral whose angles add 
up to more than 360 degrees. This description might be got only 
by mixing different descriptions of different projections. Rather it 
9J. R. Lucas, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 20 (i969), 
6. On 
one interpretation of what Lucas says, the case is comparable to that treated by 
Strawson at pp. 290-291. 
Lucas also distinguishes the space of our ordinary 
experience, which presumably we inhabit, from that which our physical 
theories are about. But he gives no reason for this distinction, and on the face of 
it, it is implausible. 
10 Craig, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 20 
(i969), 
121-134, 
explains the use of projection in this context. "Suppose we are looking at some 
figure. Whatever it may be, and irrespective of whether it 'looks Euclidean' or 
not, there will be a projection of it, as we see it, on to a Euclidean plane.... 
So whatever the nature of the figure, our sense impressions of it could, by this 
criterion, be said to be Euclidean, or at any rate, not to be non-Euclidean. 
This is a necessary proposition; but a very weak one." I do not wish to claim 
that there could be no use for "looks non-Euclidean" or that no picture 
whatever might some way be describable as showing two straight lines inter- 
secting twice. Escher's drawings, as Craig points out, might be said to look 
geometrically or logically impossible, or to show impossible situations. I don't 
know what pictures like this a clever artist might produce, or what arguments a 
philosopher might give to support that description. But I think such a case will 
be distinguishable from those I discuss. 
13 

seems that the reader who goes by projections will say his ceiling 
appears a quadrilateral of 360 degrees. The most natural de- 
scription of any diagram or projection will be Euclidean; the lines 
will not be found to deviate from Euclid's description. 
The natural account for descriptions given by means of draw- 
ings or projections holds more generally. The notion of looking 
X, for example, is fundamentally connected with that of looking 
to be X, so that how a thing looks is connected with how it might 
be judged to be. Where whether something is X can be told by 
looking, "looks X" often simply means either "looks to be X" or 
"looks like a thing which looks to be X, in ways relevant to judging 
whether it is X." The latter holds trivially with the former; and often 
it can be expanded to "looks as things which are X typically do, in 
ways relevant to judging whether they are X." Such appearance- 
world relating uses of "looks," "appears," and so forth, are 
complex and varied. But it seems that in none of them should we 
say that something looked non-Euclidean. We do not know what 
it would be for something to look to be non-Euclidean, or to 
look so as to lead us to judge it non-Euclidean, or to look as non- 
Euclidean things typically do, in ways relevant to judging them 
non-Euclidean. 
Nagel, by contrast, does allow that "we find we cannot form 
our images except in conformity with the Euclidean axioms." 
He thinks this explicable in familiar terms: 
When we perform experiments in imagination upon straight lines, in 
what manner are these lines envisaged? We cannot employ any arbi- 
trary images of lines in the experiment. We must construct our images 
in a certain manner. However, if we examine the mode of construction 
in those cases in which we allegedly intuit the imagined figures as 
Euclidean, we soon notice that the Euclidean assumptions are tacitly 
being used as the rules of construction. 
For example, we can certainly 
imagine two distinct lines with two points in common. But such lines do 
not count as straight lines, simply because they do not satisfy the Euclid- 
ean requirement of straightness, so that we seek to form our images so as 
to satisfy those requirements . .. accordingly, if the Euclidean postulates 
serve as rules for constructing our mental experiments, it is not at all 
surprising that the experiments inevitably conform to the rules. In 
short, if Euclidean axioms are used as implicit definitions, they are 
14 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
indeed a priori and necessary because they then specify what sorts of 
things are to be counted as their own instances." 
The suggestion is that our images satisfy Euclidean axioms 
because we use the axioms as implicit definitions of the charac- 
teristics of the items we construct, and hence as rules to which 
their construction conforms. As Reichenbach says, "the images by 
which we visualize geometry are always so adjusted as to corres- 
pond to the laws we read from them" (p. 44). This must mean, for 
example, that we refuse to count imagined lines as straight, solely 
because they violate Euclid's axioms of straightness. This sugges- 
tion is unfounded. Consider Nagel's example: 
we can certainly imagine two distinct lines between two points. But 
such lines do not count as straight lines, simply because they do not 
satisfy the Euclidean requirement for straightness. 
If we do draw or imagine such lines, we can judge both curved, 
or one straight and the other curved. These judgments do accord 
with the Euclidean axiom that straight lines do not intersect 
twice. They cannot, however, be based solely on the axiom. The 
axiom alone entails only that not both lines are straight; it could 
not yield the judgment that both were curved, or that one was 
straight or another curved. Clearly we can make such judgments. 
We therefore judge in accord with some criterion other than the 
Euclidean axiom. The criterion seems obvious: length. When we 
judge that both lines are curved, say, we judge that both are 
longer than some other which might be produced; in other cases 
we judge that only one is. In general, so far as visual judgments 
(including those we have discussed) are concerned, one criterion 
of straightness suffices. We can say a line between two points is 
straight if it is a line than which no other is shorter. This criterion 
of straightness is common to both Euclidean and non-Euclidean 
geometries. So its use does not constitute the use of Euclid's 
axioms as implicit definitions. The fact that our images satisfy 
11 Nagel, The Structure of Science (London, i96i), 
pp. 224-225. Nagel gives a 
lucid account of what Strawson calls the "positivist view" of geometry. He and 
Reichenbach may have felt that only in this way could the Euclideanness of 
phenomenal geometry fit the positivist view. 
I5 

Euclid's axioms cannot, therefore, be explained by saying that 
in forming images we use the axioms as implicit definitions.12 
Some other explanation is required. 
V 
Strawson also attempts to explicate the Euclideanness of phe- 
nomenal geometry as a priori; and in this he is involved in an un- 
conventional account of some geometric propositions. 
He outlines what he calls "the positivist account" of geometry, 
developed to clarify the role of analytic and empirical propositions 
in geometry to oppose the Kantian suggestion that geometric pro- 
positions are both synthetic and a priori. The formalization of a 
geometry shows the theorems deducible from the axioms on the 
strength of their logical expressions alone; so the conditionals con- 
necting axioms and theorems can be regarded as logical, necessary, 
or a priori propositions, but not as empirical or synthetic. The 
axioms and theorems may be taken as uninterpreted, and hence 
not determinate propositions; or they may be regarded as, for 
example, physically interpreted, and hence as empirical or synthetic 
propositions, but not necessary or a priori. (Strawson mentions in 
passing "a variant of the positivist view," in which "we do indeed 
secure the necessity of our axioms and theorems; but only by 
qualifying our announced physical interpretation of the non- 
logical expressions of the theory by the rule that nothing whatever 
is to count as a falsification of the axioms or theorems." This is 
similar to the approach Nagel describes as using the axioms as 
implicit definitions.) Thus, according to the positivists, in geom- 
etry there are necessary (logical, a priori) propositions and there 
12 Someone might wish to urge that the proper description of some seen or 
imagined lines was that the two looked (were imagined) equally short and 
shorter than any alternative. Here one could hardly use the Euclidean axiom 
to force the judgment that one or both must look curved, or say that the image 
had been constructed in accord with the axiom; for both are conceded to look 
or be straight (short) in Euclidean terms, and equal. Such a description fits with 
the indeterminacy thesis argued below, p. 22 ff. It might be claimed that some- 
one who refused to give this non-Euclidean description in an appropriate case 
was using the Euclidean axioms implicitly; but this would be difficult to estab- 
lish. 
i6 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
are empirical (synthetic) ones, but none which can be regarded as 
both. 
Now Strawson says that the positivist account is "in a sense 
true." But he believes also that a consideration of phenomenal 
geometry shows it to be in a sense inadequate. He summarizes his 
outline: 
The positivist view offers us two ways of looking at the propositions of 
Euclidean geometry: as formulae in an uninterpreted calculus; or as 
the body of logically connected empirical propositions which result 
from a physical interpretation of the fundamental expressions of the 
formulae [p. 285]. 
and to it opposes his description of phenomenal geometry: 
what we have had to notice is that there is a third way, different from 
either of these, which is also possible and which the positivist view 
neglects ... Euclidean geometry may also be interpreted as a body of 
unfalsifiable propositions about phenomenal straight lines, circles, etc. 
As a body of a priori propositions about spatial appearances of these 
kinds and hence as a theory whose application is restricted to such 
appearances [p. 286]. 
Two connected features here distinguish Strawson's third way 
of regarding geometry from the positivist view. First, the geometri- 
cal terms in the axioms are given a phenomenal, as opposed to a 
physical, interpretation. Second, the phenomenally interpreted 
axioms are unfalsifiable, a priori propositions, rather than falsi- 
fiable, empirical ones. Strawson emphasizes this latter feature. 
Elsewhere he speaks of the "phenomenally analytic," and of 
Kant's proper recognition of "the necessity which truly belongs to 
Euclidean geometry in its phenomenal interpretation." 
It is unclear precisely how, or how far, Strawson takes these 
features as marking off a genuinely distinct and neglected way of 
regarding geometry. On the surface they do not. The positivists 
neglected neither phenomenal geometry nor the possibility that its 
propositions were a priori. Reichenbach wrote at length about 
geometric visualization; and he and Nagel, as we saw, describe a 
phenomenal interpretation of Euclidean geometry as true a priori 
within the framework of what Strawson calls the positivist view. 
'7 
2 

Strawson's description of phenomenal analyticity does distinguish 
his from the positivist view. Hesays, in ostensibly familiar terms, that 
phenomenal propositions are true in virtue of meanings. But these, 
unfamiliarly, are "essentially phenomenal, visual meanings. . . 
essentially pictureable meanings." Proof in phenomenal geometry 
involves "a phenomenal exhibition of meanings," in which "phe- 
nomenal figure-patterns can be elaborated to exhibit an extensive 
system of relations between phenomenal spatial concepts" (p. 286). 
We cannot, either in the imagination or on paper, give ourselves a 
picture.... 
Such an impossibility used to be expressed by saying that 
such axioms are necessarily true because self-evident. This left the 
character of the necessity, of the impossibility, insufficiently explained. 
We can explain it by saying that the axioms are true solely in virtue of 
the meanings attached to the expressions they contain, but these 
meanings are essentially phenomenal, visual meanings, essentially 
pictureable meanings. Any picture we are prepared to give ourselves of 
the meaning of "two straight lines" is different from any picture we are 
prepared to give ourselves of the meaning of "two distinct lines between 
two points" [p. 283]. 
This is not Nagel's positivistic unfalsifiability, and a positivistic 
account of truth in virtue of meaning (rules of use, and so forth) 
would render irrelevant the visual images Strawson emphasizes. 
But where it is distinct, Strawson's account is elusive. The 
expressions "phenomenal exhibition of meanings," and so forth, 
by themselves convey little beside echoes of the notion that an 
object such as a mental image could be the meaning of a term. 
Strawson's use takes us no further. He passes from, for example, 
"picture showing two straight lines" to "picture of the meaning of 
'two straight lines,' " without separating the two. This leaves us 
unable to distinguish a phenomenal exhibition of meanings from a 
plain exhibition of phenomenal figures. 
This in turn leaves obscure the purported grounding of phenom- 
enally analytic truths. For an exhibition of phenomenal figures, 
like one of physical objects, could naturally be taken to support no 
more than the claim that a certain geometry was contingently true 
of the exhibited objects. Again, the visualizing which Strawson 
calls a phenomenal exhibition of meaning Nagel calls an experi- 

VISUAL GEOMETRT 
ment in the imagination. It is hard to see why Strawson's de- 
scription should be preferred.'3 
The difficulty with Strawson's account at this point closely 
resembles that of Kant's account of the intuitional foundation of 
a -synthetic a priori proposition. This is an exegetic felicity. 
Strawson intends his account to mirror Kant's. He hopes partly to 
vindicate Kant's belief that "The construction of concepts in pure 
(i.e. non-Empirical) intuition" is a source of geometric knowledge, 
by showing how "Kant's theory of empirical intuition can be 
construed as a reasonable account of the nature of geometry in its 
phenomenal interpretation" (pp. 277; 283-284). It is to this end 
that he compares proof by consideration of a phenomenal figure to 
Kant's construction in intuition. Now, the synthesis or empirical 
element in construction is the source of Kant's mathematical 
synthetic; so no wonder we feel it to conflict with Strawson's 
geometric a prior. 
A belief that geometric proof can in part essentially be accom- 
plished by construction or exhibition of a figure may explain some 
features of Strawson's and Kant's descriptions. If construction 
were part of demonstration it would perhaps be appropriate to 
speak of the construction or exhibition of concepts, meanings, or 
conceptual connections. If construction were essential to demon- 
stration, if it could not be eliminated or replaced by statement, it 
would be difficult to distinguish proof from experiment, or exhibi- 
tion of meanings from exhibition of objects. 
Of course it seems that construction or exhibition can have no 
role at all in proof. By a proof we understand a set of statements, 
premises and conclusion. If the premises do not entail it, the 
conclusion is not yet proved, construction or no; if they do, nothing 
further is needed. So a construction or exhibition is either impotent 
or otiose. 
13 Another move to meaning in this case is quoted by Mill from Bain (System, 
II, v, 5): "We cannot have the full meaning of straightness, without going 
through a comparison of straight things among themselves, and with their 
opposites, bent or crooked objects. The result of this comparison is, inter alia, 
that straightness in two lines is seen to be incompatible with enclosing a space; 
the enclosure of a space involves a crookedness in one of the lines." The idea 
that understanding meaning involves being able to treat cases is a good one; but 
the feature here attributed to meaning was surely induced from the cases. 
'9 

More generally, it seems, as on the positivist view, that there 
is no reason to differentiate kinds of necessity among a priori 
propositions; and that we could find no foundation outside lan- 
guage for the necessity there is in proof. Consequently it seems 
there is no specific phenomenal necessity, nor could there be any 
such explanation of it as Strawson attempts to provide. 
This means we find no explanation of phenomenal necessity 
either within or without the positivist view. There is no problem 
here. For there is no reason to accept the assumption, underlying 
both Strawson's account and that of Nagel and Reichenbach, that 
phenomenal propositions are necessarily true. 
Rather it seems that we should take phenomenal geometry 
simply on a par with physical geometry, and hold that its propo- 
sitions, if true, are contingently true. For, schematically, if putting 
"physical straight line" for "straight line" in a geometry produces 
a contingent theory about physical straight lines, then putting 
"phenomenal straight line" should produce a contingent theory 
about phenomenal straight lines. Nothing in the nature of the case 
forestalls this. 
We cannot picture two straight lines between two points. A 
color-blind person, or one lacking certain experiences, may be 
unable to picture anything red, and no one can picture other than 
certain colors. We should presumably say these latter were empiri- 
cal propositions, contingent on persons' experience or powers of 
discrimination. Why not the former? 
Statements about the imagination may suggest the a prior. 
They are verifiable by introspection, not examination of the 
world (compare Strawson, p. 282). 
No alternative to their 
truth can be imagined (in the sense that we cannot, even by trying 
very hard, imagine what in fact we cannot imagine; nor what 
another whose power exceeds ours imagines; and so forth). These 
resemble Kant's grounds for calling propositions a priori and give 
the designation a certain fitness. But as features of contingent 
propositions about imagination they cannot make a proposition 
a priori in any sense contrasting with the contingent or empir- 
ical. 
Thus we can regard phenomenal propositions as contingent, and 
hence as fitting in the positivist framework. A further description 
20 

VISUAL GEOMETRr 
of their contingency follows upon the resolution of the paradox 
with which we began. 
VI 
This paradox was that it seems we must picture space as 
Euclidean, whereas on scientific grounds we may judge it non- 
Euclidean. It seems odd that we cannot picture things as they 
are, that rather we are constrained to picture the contradic- 
tory of what we might have scientific reason to think true. This 
was exemplified by Strawson's acceptance of a necessarily Euclid- 
ean geometry of the visual, together with a non-Euclidean 
geometry of space. So it will be appropriate to begin by noting 
what he says about the latter. 
The testing of Euclidean geometry by observation and measurement 
shows its theorems to be verified with an acceptable degree of accuracy 
for extents of space less than those with which astro-physics is concerned; 
but for astro-physics itself, a different physical geometry, inconsistent 
with the Euclidean, is found to accommodate observation and measure- 
ment more easily [p. 286]. 
The situation alluded to here is not that one geometry is true 
of small regions while another, inconsistent with it, is true of large 
regions. This could not be the case. Large regions are composed of 
small regions; and if one spatial region is Euclidean, and another 
adjoining region is Euclidean, then the larger region composed of 
the combined adjoining regions must also be Euclidean. So if we 
regard large regions as non-Euclidean, we cannot regard the small 
regions composing them as Euclidean. We must regard them 
as strictly, if undetectably, non-Euclidean.'4 
14Lucas argues that "it is a necessary condition of our being able to apply the 
concept 'same shape though different size' that our geometry should be Euclid- 
ean," and that hence "the price of abandoning Euclidean geometry would 
be the loss of an important respect in which things can be similar to or different 
from one another ... we should no longer be able to classify by shape." But 
clearly we can regard Euclidean geometry as false and still take things as 
comparable in respect of shape and indeed, for all practical purposes, as having 
the same shape but different sizes. It suffices to regard things as (non-Euclidean 
21 

The fact is that the inconsistencies between the two geometries 
typically yield empirically detectable differences only in appli- 
cation to very large regions. In a small region considered in 
isolation, observation and measurement may fit equally well with 
either geometry. Here one can loosely say of either, as Strawson 
says of the Euclidean, that it is "verified with an acceptable 
degree of accuracy." At this degree of accuracy, however, one 
geometry is not verifiable in opposition to another which contra- 
dicts it. The purported verification is equally the verification of 
contradictory theories. Nevertheless, there may be good reason 
for regarding such a region as genuinely, if (locally) undetectably, 
non-Euclidean, as opposed to Euclidean. For it may be part of a 
large region which is detectably non-Euclidean. And this, as 
Strawson says, appears to be the case. 
With this in mind, let us reconsider the assertion that phenom- 
enal geometry is Euclidean. The relevant phenomenal figures 
are visual and mental images and the looks of things. The latter 
are Strawson's paradigms; their geometry is easy to determine. 
Thus phenomenal straight lines are "the looks physical things 
have when, and insofar as, they look straight." By "physical 
things" here are meant "physical lines or edges" examples of 
which are taut strings, light paths, and lines on paper. Three 
intersecting physical lines form a physical triangle, the look of 
which is a phenomenal triangle. The phenomenal triangle is 
Euclidean if the look of the physical one is; and this, presumably, 
is true if the physical triangle looks Euclidean. 
It follows at once that phenomenal geometry is not Euclidean. 
For such a phenomenal figure as the look of a physical triangle is 
not. No physical triangle looks Euclidean as opposed to non- 
Euclidean. The difference made by the assumption that a physical 
triangle is Euclidean as opposed to non-Euclidean is visually 
undetectable. It therefore looks just as much non-Euclidean as 
and) approximately Euclidean. The strength of the approximation, in fact, 
makes the Euclidean concepts as usable as any. 
The facts and connections Lucas cites do not prove his contention that we 
must regard things as Euclidean. Together with the approximate truth of 
Euclidean geometry, however, they partly explain its outstanding naturalness 
and historical pre-eminence. Some such explanation is surely better than 
Strawson's in terms of phenomenal necessity. 
22 

VISUAL GEOMETRY 
Euclidean. Local observation and measurement fit equally with 
Euclidean and non-Euclidean assumptions; so it is not surprising 
that the looks of things fit equally with both assumptions. To say 
this is to say that these phenomenal figures fit both equally. 
Similarly for images: just as visually indiscriminable items have 
the same look, so the same image represents them indifferently. 
Phenomenal figures are therefore no more Euclidean than 
non-Euclidean. So phenomenal geometry is not Euclidean. 
Rather it is neutral or indeterminate. 
(This line of thought requires the geometry of phenomenal items 
to be tied, as in Strawson's account, to the geometry that things are 
seen or imagined to have. Otherwise it is quite opaque what 
geometrical ascriptions to phenomenal items would mean, or 
how they could non-arbitrarily be made-let alone made with 
precision sufficient to differentiate geometries visibly indistinguish- 
able in application. So it could hardly be argued that if the 
geometrical properties of phenomenal items were made indepen- 
dent, phenomenal geometry might still prove Euclidean.) 
How, then, can we account for the plausibility of the suggestion 
that phenomenal geometry is Euclidean, and for the thought- 
experiments which seemed to establish phenomenal axioms? 
Partly the explanation is simple. Euclid's geometry is familiar 
and approximately true. We naturally describe in familiar terms, 
and where measurement is concerned we correctly speak more or 
less imprecisely. We therefore naturally and correctly describe 
figures in Euclidean terms-just as, say, we call a line segment an 
inch long, despite the fact that its length may not be very precisely 
determinable, and not excluding the possiblity that N such seg- 
ments, where N is large, should produce a line greater than 
N inches long. "Euclidean" here really means no more 
than "approximately Euclidean"; and although "Euclidean" 
and "non-Euclidean" are contradictories, "approximately Euclid- 
ean" and "non-Euclidean" are here true together. It is easy 
to forget that approximation is involved and so to suppose, errone- 
ously, that in this use "Euclidean" contradicts "non-Euclidean." 
Hence a belief that things as they are look Euclidean, and that to 
look non-Euclidean they would have to be or look different, so as 
to fit contradictory descriptions. Or that our images represent 
23 

Euclidean figures only, so that a different geometry would require 
different images. 
Thus, for example, someone might try to picture a non-Euclid- 
ean triangle by starting with an image of a triangle assumed to be 
of i8o degrees, and trying to increase an angle without bending a 
side. This would prove somewhat frustrating; and it would be to 
overlook the fact that an image determines no exact angular sum 
for an imagined triangle. Since points and lines can be pictured 
only in terms of areas or their (imperfectly determinable) boun- 
daries, any geometric image will be ambiguous. Here the same 
image can equally represent invisibly dissimilar alternatives, 
Euclidean and non-Euclidean. So no further picturing is required. 
The indeterminacy may be overlooked also because of unreflect- 
ing exaggeration of the ability to picture. We can picture what we 
cannot see, either the very small or the very large, far or near. The 
capacity may seem unrestricted by size or distance; we can choose 
whatever scale for our pictures we please. One may feel, for exam- 
ple, that it should be possible to draw or imagine any simple 
figure, of any size, in space; and hence to picture figures on the 
astral scale, or with regard to the minute differences, relevant to 
the verification of non-Euclidean geometry. 
One may also feel that we ought somehow be able to form 
pictures, different from any we have, of the non-Euclidean; or, 
failing this, that our imagery is unambiguously Euclidean. If it is 
possible to picture with a precision or on a scale relevant to 
detecting non-Euclidean phenomena, it should be possible to 
picture detectably non-Euclidean phenomena; and our imagery 
remains as Euclidean when constructed with reference to an 
astral scale as when referred to the middle-sized or the very small. 
In fact we simply do not picture relevantly here. It is true we 
can imagine or draw what we cannot see; but what we can imagine 
accurately, or picture accurately in general, has limitations con- 
nected with sight. 
Suppose, for example, we wish to represent two stars and the 
distance between them by dots and a blank space on a sheet of 
paper.15 The dots can be related in circumference as the stars. But 
15 I explicitly treat only two-dimensional pictures seen from straight on. This 
seems adequate to account for visualization of geometric figures, Mill's 
24 

VISUAL GEOMETRRT 
if the stars are sufficiently far apart in relation to their size, we will 
be able to form no picture in which their size is shown accurately 
in relation to their separation-in which, that is, the size of the 
dots is to the distance between them as the size of the stars is to the 
distance between them. For the dots may be so related that from 
any given point, if they are large enough to be seen then they will 
be so far apart that both cannot be seen at once. So if dots and 
distances are in scale, the picture cannot be taken in. If we want a 
picture which like a mental or visual image can be taken in at 
once, we can make it only by enlarging the dots in relation to their 
separation. The picture will then show stars larger in relation to 
their separation than those we set out to represent. Here, owing 
to the imperfection of sight, the only picture we can have is out 
of scale. 
Or consider a very long pair of straight railroad tracks, to be 
pictured, as from above, by parallel lines. The rails will be a few 
inches wide and a few feet apart, but thousands of miles long. No 
picture will show us their width and separation in relation to their 
length. In no picture, that is, will the relations of length, thickness, 
and separation of the lines be the same as those of the rails. We are 
not capable of seeing lines related in length and thickness as such 
rails; we can see only relatively thicker lines. Consequently, any 
picture we can take in will show lines thicker in relation to their 
length than the rails we set out to picture; and similarly the sepa- 
ration of the rails will be shown out of proportion to their width or 
length. 
A simple principle is involved. If a picture is to be taken in, 
the elements (for example, dots, lines) which compose it must be 
simultaneously visible. They will therefore have certain spatial 
properties and relations. Scale pictures like geometric diagrams 
show spatial situations by the spatial characteristics of their 
elements. Those characteristics required by considerations of scale 
may conflict with those needed for visibility. A distortion results 
from the sacrifice of scale to visibility. Similarly for images. Just as, 
say, there will be a maximum ratio of length to thickness consistent 
with the visibility of (the representation of) a line, there will be 
"diagrams in the mind." I think analogous considerations would apply to 
other kinds of pictures and models. 
25 

such a relation for any visualized line.16 And as the maintenance of 
this ratio for visible pictures means that certain spatial relations 
cannot be pictured accurately, for images it means that they cannot 
be imagined accurately. This systematic possibility of distortion 
entails, among other things, that the ambiguity of images between 
Euclidean and non-Euclidean cannot be resolved by change of 
scale. 
Someone may, for example, think he can picture Euclidean 
parallel straight lines. For simplicity, and to fix what is meant by a 
line, suppose he pictures such a pair of lines as could be drawn on 
a blackboard, a few feet apart and a few yards long, at the maxi- 
mum ratio of length to thickness. Now it can be pointed out that 
his picture of these lines does not differ from one of lines which 
would meet if extended, say for a few miles. The picture does not 
exclude this possibility, so it does not show the lines as parallel. He 
may reply that he can regard the lines as extended; he can exclude 
the possibility that the lines he pictures would meet if extended, by 
picturing them as long as he likes. This is really the assertion that 
he can change the scale of his image to represent longer lines. But 
as the scale is changed, the picture ceases to show the disposition 
of lines. As the length represented increases so does the width and 
hence the area shown covered by what was to be a line; and noth- 
ing in the changed picture will be capable of showing how lines 
such as could be drawn on a blackboard are disposed. If a picture 
is to show lines of a certain kind its scale must be limited; if its 
scale is limited it cannot show the lines as parallels, or in general as 
Euclidean. So pictures, like sight, remain geometrically indeter- 
minate, whatever our intentions as to their precision and scale. 
In fact the limits of accuracy in imagination seem directly tied 
to those of picturing by visible pictures, and so indirectly to sight. 
Roughly, we should not expect to find a person capable of imagin- 
ing a spatial situation accurately unless he was, or had been, capa- 
16 Lines of this kind are components of the most familiar geometrical 
diagrams. You might have another kind of visual geometry, say using areas 
shown by color patches, and represent lines by color edges. Similar consider- 
ations regarding accuracy still apply. There will be limits on the kind of color 
areas visualizable and the indeterminacy of the visible location of a color edge 
will mean that it can be treated as I treat (areas representing) lines here. 
26 

VISUAL GEOMETRr 
ble of seeing an accurate visible representation of it. If a person 
were unable to see any pair of dots related in size and separation 
as a pair of stars or bits of dust he was attempting to visualize, we 
should expect to find that he could not visualize their size and 
separation accurately either. If he said he could not, the matter 
would presumably be settled. It would puzzle us if, knowing 
what was involved, he said he could; and in default of very special 
testimony, we should have no reason to accept his claim-we 
should reject it, or not know what to do with it. From this it seems 
we are justified in assuming that what persons can imagine accu- 
rately is limited to what they can see accurate pictures of, which in 
turn is determined by their powers of sight. 
VII 
The limits of geometric imaginability and their connection with 
contingency and necessity can now be more fully set out. The main 
points are perhaps as follows. 
It seems (again roughly) that if a person can see items as of a 
certain kind, there is reason to accept his claim so to picture them. 
So if things are seen as they are, phenomenal geometry will 
depend upon how things are and how precisely they can be seen. 
The phenomenal geometry of someone able simply to see the non- 
Euclidean character of our space would be accordingly non- 
Euclidean. That of someone with perfect sight in a Euclidean 
world would be Euclidean; and of someone even with imperfect 
sight but in a visibly non-Euclidean world, non-Euclidean. As 
stressed, the geometry of imperfect sight in an unobvious world 
will be indeterminate. 
These other phenomenal geometrics are, explicably, not ours. 
As has been shown we cannot form the non-Euclidean pictures of 
our space we might have with more powerful sight. Nor can we 
simply alter our way of seeing distances and shapes to what it might 
be in a different world. But now this latter inability can be described 
a bit further by reference to some abstract features of geometry. 
Determining the geometry of space requires comparing dis- 
tinct spatial intervals. This is typically thought of as accomplished 
27 

by the use of standards of length, such as a portable rod which 
realizes a certain interval and whose coincidence relations with 
other objects and intervals provides their measure. Measurement 
then consists in the establishing of these coincidence relations. 
A given set of coincidence relations among rods, objects, and 
intervals generally can be interpreted in terms of measure and 
geometry in various ways. In particular, the relations can yield 
one set of measurements and one geometry if the interval realized 
by a standard rod is taken as everywhere the same, other measure- 
ments and another geometry if the interval is taken to vary with 
the position and orientation of the rod. The differences in measure- 
ments will result in the relations' determining different sets of inter- 
vals congruent or equal. And with one set of intervals congruent 
the geometry will be Euclidean, with another, non-Euclidean."7 
Since this indeterminacy arises in interpreting the facts of 
coincidence on the basis of which measurements are assigned and 
geometry assessed, it cannot be resolved by any further recourse to 
measurement or geometry. Still, the coincidence relations them- 
selves may fix the geometry, by practically ruling out the assump- 
tion that the length of the standard varies. For to retain the same 
size can be little more than to retain the same size in relation to 
things in general. So if coincidence relations among the standard, 
bodies, and items with size in general are unvarying, the standard 
is (to be regarded as) rigid. Given such rigidity, congruence 
becomes simply coincidence with a standard. 
(Here, as one might say, the harmony of things with size can 
fix geometry despite indeterminacy. Einstein was inclined to 
assimilate the non-Euclidean geometry of a gravitational field to 
such a case,18 and philosophers of science, among others, have 
followed him. But the cases are not entirely comparable. For in 
Einstein's theory a gravitational field changes the coincidence 
relations-the relative shapes and sizes-of bodies of different 
shape and size.19 In the field things are non-Euclidean measured 
17 See Grunbaum for exegesis of these matters. 
18 The Theory of Relativity (London, i920), 
pp. 85-86. Einstein's simplified 
analogue treats only of the coincidences of rods, and so ignores other bodies. 
19 See Swinburne, Space and Time (London, i968), 
pp. 92-93. 
I do not think 
his description of "the original interpretation" of the general theory applies to 
the paper of Einstein's to which he refers. 
28 

VISUAL GEOMETRr 
by small rods where these are taken as rigid. But no harmony of 
coincidence relations forces us to take small rods as rigid. Con- 
sequently the choice between geometries must be made on less 
obvious grounds. 
Perhaps Einstein can be seen partly as giving the simplest 
account of local measurement and its most direct embodiment in 
geometry. Given the fundamental role of local measurement in 
Einstein's physics and in the verification of physical theory 
generally, this procedure seems appealing; its justification would 
be complex.) 
Now as an expression of the indeterminacy of geometry, we have 
(a) It is possible to describe a world as Euclidean or non- 
Euclidean, depending upon which of its intervals are 
taken as congruent or equal 
while also a world will be fixed as Euclidean or as non-Euclidean 
if found so by measurement using standards whose relative size, 
like the relative size of things in general, stays constant. And this is 
not arbitrary: the bodies, and so forth, of such a world are to be 
regarded as rigid on conceptual grounds. 
Still, in consequence of (a), 
(b) It is possible to describe a non-Euclidean (Euclidean) 
world of rigid bodies as a Euclidean (non-Euclidean) 
world of bodies changing dimensions with position and 
orientation, but in such a way that their coincidence 
relations stay constant. 
Since they stress only the relations of geometric descriptions, 
these principles might loosely be called logical. Now suppose we 
apply them to the descriptions under which things are seen, and so 
to visual geometry, by putting "see" and "seen" for "describe" 
and "taken" in (a) and "see" for "describe" in (b). We then have 
modified, visual principles, to the effect (a) that it is possible to 
see things as Euclidean or non-Euclidean depending upon which 
intervals are seen as congruent and 1(b) that it is possible to see 
a non-Euclidean rigid world as Euclidean changing and vice versa. 
29 

These visual principles could be variously interpreted. The 
possibility of seeing something under a description might be taken 
simply as given by its being so describable. The visual principles 
would then be versions or rephrasings of (a) and (b), and hence 
(loosely) logical statements. Or they might be taken as substan- 
tive claims-for 
example, about persons' abilities to see things as 
falling under alternative geometric descriptions. Here the prin- 
ciples would 
be contingent 
statements, 
and possibly false. 
Now Reichenbach's discussion of geometric visualization pivots 
on such principles. He says, in accord with (a): 
Space as such is neither Euclidean nor non-Euclidean ... it becomes 
Euclidean if a certain definition of congruence is assumed for it ... 
if a different definition is introduced.... 
Space becomes non-Euclid- 
ean. 
He holds that we visualize with a Euclidean definition of 
congruence. This is only because our world is so nearly Euclidean: 
if things were different our way of seeing would change in accord 
with the possibilities of (b), interpreted visually: 
if in daily life we dealt occasionally with rigid bodies that adjusted 
themselves to a non-Euclidean geometry.... At first we would have the 
feeling that objects changed when transported ... 
After some time 
we would lose this feeling and no longer perceive any change ... we 
would have adjusted our visualization [to a non-Euclidean geometry; 
PP. 54-55]. 
This is an example of the essential change. Since we are adjusted 
to Euclidean congruence, and since non-Euclidean visualization 
means visualization adjusted to a non-Euclidean congruence, we 
need only undergo such a change of sight or visualization, such an 
adjustment of congruence, to accomplish non-Euclidean visuali- 
zation. Thus Reichenbach gives a principle of visual adjustment of 
congruence corresponding to (a): 
Whoever has successfully adjusted himself to a different congruence 
is able to visualize non-Euclidean structures as easily as Euclidean 
[P. 55 
30 

VISUAL GEOMETRr 
He takes this as supporting a substantive claim: 
The mathematician is thus correct in saying that he has become accus- 
tomed to visualize non-Euclidean geometry [p. 53]. 
This he applies, as we saw earlier, to the interpretation of geo- 
metric drawings. 
Although this account of what is involved in non-Euclidean 
visualization requires a number of assumptions (for example, 
about the identification of images, the propagation of light, and so 
forth) it is appealing and seems informative. But it does not 
support Reichenbach's belief that persons can actually visualize 
non-Euclidean geometry. Neither the fact that our way of seeing 
depends upon how things are, nor reasonable speculation about 
how we should adapt if things were different, shows that as things 
are we can see or visualize in any other than the familiar approx- 
imately Euclidean (or weakly non-Euclidean) mode. We cannot. 
For, as I have argued, the change in visual congruence on 
which this account of non-Euclidean visualization pivots does not 
occur. No one in fact experiences a change of sight relevant to 
seeing or visualizing in non-Euclidean terms. It seems in conse- 
quence that those who claim non-Euclidean visualization do not 
actually accomplish it. Rather they visualize in familiar terms 
while describing their images non-Euclideanly. 
(This is easily recognized in one of Reichenbach's own exam- 
ples. He says the small drawing known as Klein's model of a non- 
Euclidean space can be "truly a visualization of Lobatchewsky's 
space" since "it is possible to adjust to the other congruence." But 
in order to accomplish the visualization we must forget everything 
outside the circle ... we must imagine ourselves in the circle and 
remember that the periphery cannot be reached in a finite number of 
steps [p. 58]. 
3' 

There is no telling in what such a visualization might consist- 
to what visual image could such descriptions [involving infinity, 
being inside, and so forth] meaningfully be applied? and how 
might it relate to the drawing ?-and we simply have no idea of a 
change of sight which might accomplish it. Really, Reichenbach 
must picture the circle just as we do. Hence the notion of change 
to an alternative visualization, and with it the notion of non- 
Euclidean visualization, has been given no content. Its emptiness 
is perhaps hidden by the ornamentation of Reichenbach's 
analysis.) 
This conclusion might of course be refuted by the testimony 
of visualizers; but so far as I know, no testimony of any weight has 
been given. 
VIII 
There remains the fact which caught the attention of Bennett 
and Strawson-that we cannot picture two straight lines between 
two points. 
It may seem obvious that since the visibly determinable spatial 
features of objects fit both geometries, appearance must also; and 
it follows naturally that picturing will be consistent with both. 
Some images are clearly neutral in this way. It is easy to regard 
an image or picture of a triangle, for example, as consistent 
with both geometries and hence as showing either equally. But 
no image shows equally the Euclidean situation of one straight 
line and the non-Euclidean situation of two straight lines, between 
two points. The pictures we have on the face of it show only the 
Euclidean phenomenon. 
This perhaps explains the peculiar impression of intuitive 
self-evidence associated with the axiom; and its consequent central 
role in producing the conviction that phenomenal geometry is 
Euclidean.20 But it is itself explicable in terms of the kind of 
distortion in picturing encountered already. In consequence it can 
20 This axiom is usually given as a likely candidate for intuitive self-evidence. 
See, e.g., Einstein, in Feigl and Sellars, Readings in the Philosophy of Science 
(NewYork, I 953), p. I 96. 
32 

VISUAL GEOMETRr 
be seen to have no bearing, either on the axiom or on the claim 
that phenomenal geometry is Euclidean. 
Consider the situation Barker describes: between two very 
distant points are two paths measuring equally short and shorter 
than any other, which light rays follow and along which taut 
cords lie.21 
Suppose we wished to picture it. One way, illustrating the 
principle involved, would be to stretch a suitably large sheet of 
paper between the points and make a picture by drawing along 
the lines. Now clearly this picture could not be seen. Someone far 
enough away to see both points would be too far off to see the 
lines, which would be minute in comparison to the sheet. The only 
way to make anything visible here would be to thicken the lines. 
But then they would overlap before becoming large enough to be 
seen. So two lines could not be seen. Owing to the distortion 
required to make the lines visible, the only way to make two lines 
visible would be to bend one away from the other. Then one line 
would be and appear curved. Hence the only usable (visible) 
pictures fail to show two lines, or show one curved. The same is 
true, for like reasons, of our images and other pictures. 
So really there is no accurate picture of the situation described. 
Paths of the required ratio cannot be pictured. Because of their 
relative thickness, the areas which can be pictured cannot mirror 
the disposition of lines; and in this case the particular form of 
distortion leaves no alternative but pictures easily interpreted as 
showing Euclidean lines. It is like the transformation of a delicate 
design painted over with a thick brush. 
Since no picture here is capable of showing the disposition of 
lines in space, none shows these lines as Euclidean. Just as no 
picture could show two straight lines between two points if they 
were there, so no picture shows the one and only straight line there 
is. At this scale and in this case we can only disregard our images; 
we cannot take them as showing how things are. So despite the 
impression, our images are not really Euclidean; rather they are 
too crude to serve. 
21 Only very long lines would be empirically distinguishable. But presumably 
the argument would apply locally as well. 
33 
3 

Ix 
So, finally, nothing constrains us to picture space in terms 
of a superseded theory. The impression is only the result of mis- 
leading pictures. We can neither picture every spatial situation nor 
change our way of picturing at will; but still we see and picture 
consistently with Euclidean and non-Euclidean theories. Possibly 
this is not obvious, but it ought not be surprising. It has always 
been clear that the observations required to tell between physical 
geometries could not be made by unaided sight. 
JAMES HOPKINS 
King's College, Cambridge 
34 

