
HOUSE OF DEBT


HOUSE OF DEBT
how they (and you) caused the 
great recession, and how we can prevent it 
from happening again
ATIF MIAN AND AMIR SUFI
The University of Chicago Press Chicago and London

Atif Mian is professor of economics and public policy 
at Princeton University.
Amir Sufi  is the Chicago Board of Trade Professor of Finance 
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Th e University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
Th e University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
©  by Atif Mian and Amir Sufi 
All rights reserved. Published .
Printed in the United States of America
                 
ISBN- : - - - -  (cloth)
ISBN- : - - - -  (e- book)
DOI: ./chicago/..
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Mian, Atif, – author.
House of debt: how they (and you) caused the Great Recession, 
and how we can prevent it from happening again / Atif Mian 
and Amir Sufi .
pages; cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN ---- (cloth: alk. paper) — 
ISBN ---- (e-book) . Financial crises—United 
States. . Consumer credit—United States. . Debtor and creditor—
United States. . Foreclosure—United States. . Financial crises—
Prevention. . Foreclosure—United States—Prevention. . Global 
Financial Crisis, –. I. Sufi , Amir, author. II. Title.
HB.M 
.ʹ—dc  
o Th is paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z.- 
(Permanence of Paper).

To our parents, for always being there
To Saima and Ayesha


CONTENTS
1 A Scandal in Bohemia 
PART I: BUSTED
2 Debt and Destruction 
3 Cutting Back 
4 Levered Losses: Th e Th eory 
5 Explaining Unemployment 
PART II: BOIL AND BUBBLE
6 Th e Credit Expansion 
7 Conduit to Disaster 
8 Debt and Bubbles 
PART III: STOPPING THE CYCLE
9 Save the Banks, Save the Economy? 
10 Forgiveness 
11 Monetary and Fiscal Policy 
12 Sharing 
Acknowledgments 
Notes  Index 


1: A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA
Selling recreational vehicles used to be easy in America. As a but-
ton worn by Winnebago CEO Bob Olson read, “You can’t take sex, 
booze, or weekends away from the American people.” But things 
went horribly wrong in , when sales for Monaco Coach Corpo-
ration, a giant in the RV industry, plummeted by almost  percent. 
Th is left  Monaco management with little choice. Craig Wanichek, 
their spokesman, lamented, “We are sad that the economic environ-
ment, obviously outside our control, has forced us to make . . . diffi  -
cult decisions.”
Monaco was the number- one producer of diesel- powered motor 
homes. Th ey had a long history in northern Indiana making ve-
hicles that were sold throughout the United States. In , the 
company sold over , vehicles and employed about , 
people in Wakarusa, Nappanee, and Elkhart Counties in Indiana. 
In July , , workers at two Indiana plants of Monaco Coach 
Corporation were let go. Employees were stunned. Jennifer Eiler, 
who worked at the plant in Wakarusa County, spoke to a reporter 
at a restaurant down the road: “I was very shocked. We thought 
there could be another layoff , but we did not expect this.” Karen 
Hundt, a bartender at a hotel in Wakarusa, summed up the diffi  -
culties faced by laid- off  workers: “It’s all these people have done for 
years. Who’s going to hire them when they are in their s? Th ey 
are just in shock. A lot of it hasn’t hit them yet.”

2 C H A P T E R  O N E
In  this painful episode played out repeatedly throughout 
northern Indiana. By the end of the year, the unemployment rate 
in Elkhart, Indiana, had jumped from . to . percent. Almost 
twenty thousand jobs were lost. And the eff ects of unemployment 
were felt in schools and charities throughout the region. Soup 
kitchens in Elkhart saw twice as many people showing up for free 
meals, and the Salvation Army saw a jump in demand for food and 
toys during the Christmas season. About  percent of students in 
the Elkhart public schools system had low- enough family income 
to qualify for the free- lunch program.1
Northern Indiana felt the pain early, but it certainly wasn’t alone. 
Th e Great American Recession swept away  million jobs between 
 and . More than  million homes were foreclosed. If it 
weren’t for the Great Recession, the income of the United States 
in  would have been higher by $ trillion, around $, per 
household.2 Th e deeper human costs are even more severe. Study 
aft er study points to the signifi cant negative psychological eff ects 
of unemployment, including depression and even suicide.  Workers 
who are laid off  during recessions lose on average three full years 
of lifetime income potential.3 Franklin Delano Roosevelt articu-
lated the devastation quite accurately by calling unemployment 
“the greatest menace to our social order.”4
Just like workers at the Monaco plants in Indiana, innocent by-
standers losing their jobs during recessions oft en feel shocked, 
stunned, and confused. And for good reason. Severe economic 
contractions are in many ways a mystery. Th ey are almost never 
instigated by any obvious destruction of the economy’s capacity to 
produce. In the Great Recession, for example, there was no natural 
disaster or war that destroyed buildings, machines, or the latest 
cutting- edge technologies. Workers at Monaco did not suddenly 
lose the vast knowledge they had acquired over years of training. 
Th e economy sputtered, spending collapsed, and millions of jobs 
were lost. Th e human costs of severe economic contractions are 
undoubtedly immense. But there is no obvious reason why they 
happen.

A  S C A N D A L  I N  B O H E M I A  3
Intense pain makes people rush to the doctor for answers. Why 
am I experiencing this pain? What can I do to alleviate it? To feel 
better, we are willing to take medicine or change our lifestyle. When 
it comes to economic pain, who do we go to for answers? How do 
we get well? Unfortunately, people don’t hold economists in the 
same esteem as doctors. Writing in the s during the Great De-
pression, John Maynard Keynes criticized his fellow economists for 
being “unmoved by the lack of correspondence between the results 
of their theory and the facts of observation.” And as a result, the 
ordinary man has a “growing unwillingness to accord to econo-
mists that measure of respect which he gives to other groups of 
scientists whose theoretical results are confi rmed with observation 
when they are applied to the facts.”5
Th ere has been an explosion in data on economic activity and 
advancement in the techniques we can use to evaluate them, which 
gives us a huge advantage over Keynes and his contemporaries. 
Still, our goal in this book is ambitious. We seek to use data and 
scientifi c methods to answer some of the most important ques-
tions facing the modern economy: Why do severe recessions hap-
pen? Could we have prevented the Great Recession and its con-
sequences? How can we prevent such crises? Th is book provides 
answers to these questions based on empirical evidence. Laid- off  
workers at Monaco, like millions of other Americans who lost their 
jobs, deserve an evidence- based explanation for why the Great Re-
cession occurred, and what we can do to avoid more of them in the 
future.
Whodunit?
In “A Scandal in Bohemia,” Sherlock Holmes famously remarks that 
“it is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. Insensibly 
one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit 
facts.”6 Th e mystery of economic disasters presents a challenge on 
par with anything the great detective faced. It is easy for economists 
to fall prey to theorizing before they have a good understanding of 

4 C H A P T E R  O N E
the evidence, but our approach must resemble Sherlock Holmes’s. 
Let’s begin by collecting as many facts as possible.
When it comes to the Great Recession, one important fact jumps 
out: the United States witnessed a dramatic rise in household debt 
between  and — the total amount doubled in these seven 
years to $ trillion, and the household debt- to- income ratio sky-
rocketed from . to .. To put this in perspective, fi gure . shows 
the U.S. household debt- to- income ratio from  to . Debt 
rose steadily to , then there was a sharp change.
 Using a longer historical pattern (based on the household- debt- 
to- GDP [gross domestic product] ratio), economist David Beim 
showed that the increase prior to the Great Recession is matched 
by only one other episode in the last century of U.S. history: the 
initial years of the Great Depression.7 From  to , there was 
an explosion in both mortgage debt and installment debt for pur-
chasing automobiles and furniture. Th e data are less precise, but 
calculations done in  by the economist Charles Persons suggest 
that outstanding mortgages for urban nonfarm properties  tripled 
Figure 1.1: U.S. Household Debt- to- Income Ratio

A  S C A N D A L  I N  B O H E M I A  5
from  to .8 Such a massive increase in mortgage debt even 
swamps the housing- boom years of – .
Th e rise in installment fi nancing in the s revolutionized the 
manner in which households purchased durable goods, items like 
washing machines, cars, and furniture. Martha Olney, a leading 
expert on the history of consumer credit, explains that “the s 
mark the crucial turning point in the history of consumer credit.”9 
For the fi rst time in U.S. history, merchants selling durable goods 
began to assume that a potential buyer walking through their door 
would use debt to purchase. Society’s attitudes toward borrowing 
had changed, and purchasing on credit became more acceptable.
With this increased willingness to lend to consumers, house-
hold spending in the s rose faster than income.10 Consumer 
debt as a percentage of household income more than doubled dur-
ing the ten years before the Great Depression, and scholars have 
documented an “unusually large buildup of household liabilities in 
.”11 Persons, writing in , was unambiguous in his conclu-
sions regarding debt in the s: “Th e past decade has witnessed 
a great volume of credit infl ation. Our period of prosperity in part 
was based on nothing more substantial than debt expansion.”12 
And as households loaded up on debt to purchase new products, 
they saved less. Olney estimates that the personal savings rate for 
the United States fell from . percent between  and  to 
. percent from  to .
So one fact we observe is that both the Great Recession and 
Great Depression were preceded by a large run- up in household 
debt. Th ere is another striking commonality: both started off  with 
a mysteriously large drop in household spending. Workers at Mo-
naco Coach Corporation understood this well. Th ey were let go in 
large part because of the sharp decline in motor- home purchases in 
 and . Th e pattern was widespread. Purchases of durable 
goods like autos, furniture, and appliances plummeted early in the 
Great Recession— before the worst of the fi nancial crisis in Sep-
tember . Auto sales from January to August  were down 

6 C H A P T E R  O N E
almost  percent compared to , also before the worst part of 
the recession or fi nancial crisis.
Th e Great Depression also began with a large drop in household 
spending. Economic historian Peter Temin holds that “the Depres-
sion was severe because the fall in autonomous spending was large 
and sustained,” and he remarks further that the consumption de-
cline in  was “truly autonomous,” or too big to be explained 
by falling income and prices. Just as in the Great Recession, the 
drop in spending that set off  the Great Depression was mysteri-
ously large.13
The International Evidence
Th is pattern of large jumps in household debt and drops in spend-
ing preceding economic disasters isn’t unique to the United States. 
Evidence demonstrates that this relation is robust internationally. 
And looking internationally, we notice something else: the bigger 
the increase in debt, the harder the fall in spending. A  study 
of the Great Recession in the sixteen OECD (Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co- operation and Development) countries by Reuven Glick 
and Kevin Lansing shows that countries with the largest increase 
in household debt from  to  were exactly the ones that 
suff ered the largest decline in household spending from  to 
.14 Th e authors fi nd a strong correlation between household- 
debt growth before the downturn and the decline in consumption 
during the Great Recession. As they note, consumption fell most 
sharply in Ireland and Denmark, two countries that witnessed 
enormous increases in household debt in the early s. As strik-
ing as the increase in household debt was in the United States from 
 to , the increase was even larger in Ireland, Denmark, 
Norway, the United Kingdom, Spain, Portugal, and the Nether-
lands. And as dramatic as the decline in household spending was 
in the United States, it was even larger in fi ve of these six countries 
(the exception was Portugal).
A study by researchers at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 

A  S C A N D A L  I N  B O H E M I A  7
expands the Glick and Lansing sample to thirty- six countries, bring-
ing in many eastern European and Asian countries, and focuses on 
data through .15 Th eir fi ndings confi rm that growth in house-
hold debt is one of the best predictors of the decline in household 
spending during the recession. Th e basic argument put forward in 
these studies is simple: If you had known how much household debt 
had increased in a country prior to the Great Recession, you would 
have been able to predict exactly which countries would have the 
most severe decline in spending during the Great Recession.
But is the relation between household- debt growth and recession 
severity unique to the Great Recession? In , long before the 
Great Recession, Mervyn King, the recent governor of the Bank of 
England, gave a presidential address to the European Economic As-
sociation titled “Debt Defl ation: Th eory and Evidence.” In the very 
fi rst line of the abstract, he argued: “In the early s the most se-
vere recessions occurred in those countries which had experienced 
the largest increase in private debt burdens.”16 In the address, he 
documented the relation between the growth in household debt in 
a given country from  to  and the country’s decline in eco-
nomic growth from  to . Th is was analogous to the analysis 
that Glick and Lansing and the IMF researchers gave twenty years 
later for the Great Recession. Despite focusing on a completely dif-
ferent recession, King found exactly the same relation: Countries 
with the largest increase in household- debt burdens— Sweden and 
the United Kingdom, in particular— experienced the largest de-
cline in growth during the recession.
Another set of economic downturns we can examine are what 
economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff  call the “big 
fi ve” postwar banking crises in the developed world: Spain in , 
Norway in , Finland and Sweden in , and Japan in .17 
Th ese recessions were triggered by asset- price collapses that led to 
massive losses in the banking sector, and all were especially deep 
downturns with slow recoveries. Reinhart and Rogoff  show that all 
fi ve episodes were preceded by large run- ups in real- estate prices 
and large increases in the current- account defi cits (the amount 

8 C H A P T E R  O N E
borrowed by the country as a whole from foreigners) of the coun-
tries.
But Reinhart and Rogoff  don’t emphasize the household- debt 
patterns that preceded the banking crises. To shed some light on 
the household- debt patterns, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor 
put together an excellent data set that covers all of these episodes 
except Finland. In the remaining four, the banking crises empha-
sized by Reinhart and Rogoff  were all preceded by large run- ups in 
private- debt burdens. (By private debt, we mean the debt of house-
holds and non- fi nancial fi rms, instead of the debt of the govern-
ment or banks.) Th ese banking crises were in a sense also private- 
debt crises— they were all preceded by large run- ups in private 
debt, just as with the Great Recession and the Great Depression in 
the United States. So banking crises and large run- ups in house-
hold debt are closely related— their combination catalyzes fi nancial 
crises, and the groundbreaking research of Reinhart and Rogoff  
demonstrates that they are associated with the most severe eco-
nomic downturns.18 While banking crises may be acute events that 
capture people’s attention, we must also recognize the run- ups in 
household debt that precede them.
Which aspect of a fi nancial crisis is more important in deter-
mining the severity of a recession: the run- up in private- debt bur-
dens or the banking crisis? Research by Oscar Jorda, Moritz Schu-
larick, and Alan Taylor helps answer this question.19 Th ey looked 
at over two hundred recessions in fourteen advanced countries 
between  and . Th ey begin by confi rming the basic Rein-
hart and Rogoff  pattern: Banking- crisis recessions are much more 
severe than normal recessions. But Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor 
also fi nd that banking- crisis recessions are preceded by a much 
larger increase in private debt than other recessions. In fact, the ex-
pansion in debt is fi ve times as large before a banking- crisis reces-
sion. Also, banking- crisis recessions with low levels of private debt 
are similar to normal recessions. So, without elevated levels of debt, 
banking- crisis recessions are unexceptional. Th ey also demonstrate 

A  S C A N D A L  I N  B O H E M I A  9
that normal recessions with high private debt are more severe than 
other normal recessions. Even if there is no banking crisis, ele-
vated levels of private debt make recessions worse. However, they 
show that the worst recessions include both high private debt and 
a banking crisis.20 Th e conclusion drawn by Jorda, Schularick, and 
Taylor from their analysis of a huge sample of recessions is direct:
We document, to our knowledge for the fi rst time, that throughout 
a century or more of modern economic history in advanced coun-
tries a close relationship has existed between the build- up of credit 
during an expansion and the severity of the subsequent recession. . . . 
[W]e show that the economic costs of fi nancial crises can vary con-
siderably depending on the leverage incurred during the previous ex-
pansion phase [our emphasis].21
Taken together, both the international and U.S. evidence reveals 
a strong pattern: Economic disasters are almost always preceded by a 
large increase in household debt. In fact, the correlation is so robust 
that it is as close to an empirical law as it gets in macroeconomics. 
Further, large increases in household debt and economic disasters 
seem to be linked by collapses in spending.
So an initial look at the evidence suggests a link between house-
hold debt, spending, and severe recessions. But the exact relation 
between the three is not precisely clear. Th is allows for alterna-
tive explanations, and many intelligent and respected economists 
have looked elsewhere. Th ey argue that household debt is largely 
a sideshow— not the main attraction when it comes to explaining 
severe recessions.
The Alternative Views
Th ose economists who are suspicious of the importance of house-
hold debt usually have some alternative in mind. Perhaps the most 
common is the fundamentals view, according to which severe re-

10 C H A P T E R  O N E
cessions are caused by some fundamental shock to the economy: 
a natural disaster, a political coup, or a change in expectations of 
growth in the future.
But most severe recessions we’ve discussed above were not pre-
ceded by some obvious act of nature or political disaster. As a 
result, the fundamentals view usually blames a change in expec-
tations of growth, in which the run- up in debt before a recession 
merely refl ects optimistic expectations that income or productivity 
will grow. Perhaps there is some technology that people believe will 
lead to huge improvements in well- being. Severe recession results 
when these high expectations are not realized. People lose faith that 
technology will advance or that incomes will improve, and there-
fore they spend less. In the fundamentals view, debt still increases 
before severe recessions. But the correlation is spurious— it is not 
indicative of a causal relation.
A second explanation is the animal spirits view, in which eco-
nomic fl uctuations are driven by irrational and volatile beliefs. It is 
similar to the fundamentals view except that these beliefs are not 
the result of any rational process. For example, during the hous-
ing boom before the Great Recession, people may have irrationally 
thought that house prices would rise forever. Th en fi ckle human 
nature led to a dramatic revision of beliefs. People became pessi-
mistic and cut back on spending. House prices collapsed, and the 
economy went into a tailspin because of a self- fulfi lling prophecy. 
People got scared of a downturn, and their fear made the downturn 
inevitable. Once again, in this view household debt had little to do 
with the ensuing downturn. In both the fundamentals and animal- 
spirits mind- sets, there is a strong sense of fatalism: a large drop in 
economic activity cannot be predicted or avoided. We simply have 
to accept them as a natural part of the economic process.
A third hypothesis oft en put forward is the banking view, which 
holds that the central problem with the economy is a severely 
weakened fi nancial sector that has stopped the fl ow of credit. Ac-
cording to this, the run- up in debt is not a problem; the problem is 

A  S C A N D A L  I N  B O H E M I A  11
that we’ve stopped the fl ow of debt. If we can just get banks to start 
lending to households and businesses again, everything will be all 
right. If we save the banks, we will save the economy. Everything 
will go back to normal.
Th e banking view in particular enjoyed an immense amount 
of support among policy makers during the Great Recession. On 
September , , President George W. Bush expressed his great 
enthusiasm for it in a hallmark speech outlining his administra-
tion’s response.22 As he saw it, “Financial assets related to home 
mortgages have lost value during the house decline, and the banks 
holding these assets have restricted credit. As a result, our entire 
economy is in danger. . . . So I propose that the federal government 
reduce the risk posed by these troubled assets and supply urgently 
needed money so banks and other fi nancial institutions can avoid 
collapse and resume lending. . . . Th is rescue eff ort . . . is aimed at 
preserving America’s overall economy.” If we save the banks, he 
argued, it would help “create jobs” and it “will help our economy 
grow.” Th ere’s no such thing as excessive debt— instead, we should 
encourage banks to lend even more.
* * *
Th e only way we can address— and perhaps even prevent— eco-
nomic catastrophes is by understanding their causes. During the 
Great Recession, disagreement on causes overshadowed the facts 
that policy makers desperately needed to clean up the mess. We 
must distinguish whether there is something more to the link 
between household debt and severe recessions or if the alternatives 
above are true. Th e best way to test this is the scientifi c method: 
let’s take a close look at the data and see which theory is valid. Th at 
is the purpose of this book.
To pin down exactly how household debt aff ects the economy, 
we zero in on the United States during the Great Recession. We 
have a major advantage over economists who lived through prior 

12 C H A P T E R  O N E
recessions thanks to the recent explosion in data availability and 
computing power. We now have microeconomic data on an abun-
dance of outcomes, including borrowing, spending, house prices, 
and defaults. All of these data are available at the zip- code level for 
the United States, and some are available even at the individual 
level. Th is allows us to examine who had more debt and who cut 
back on spending— and who lost their jobs.
The Big Picture
As it turns out, we think debt is dangerous. If this is correct, and 
large increases in household debt really do generate severe reces-
sions, we must fundamentally rethink the fi nancial system. One 
of the main purposes of fi nancial markets is to help people in the 
economy share risk. Th e fi nancial system off ers many products that 
reduce risk: life insurance, a portfolio of stocks, or put options on 
a major index. Households need a sense of security that they are 
protected against unforeseen events.
A fi nancial system that thrives on the massive use of debt by 
households does exactly what we don’t want it do— it concentrates 
risk squarely on the debtor. We want the fi nancial system to insure 
us against shocks like a decline in house prices. But instead, as we 
will show, it concentrates the losses on home owners. Th e fi nancial 
system actually works against us, not for us. For home owners with 
a mortgage, for example, we will demonstrate how home equity is 
much riskier than the mortgage held by the bank, something many 
home owners realize only when house prices collapse.
But it’s not all bad news. If we are correct that excessive reliance 
on debt is in fact our culprit, it is a problem that potentially can 
be fi xed. We don’t need to view severe recessions and mass unem-
ployment as an inevitable part of the business cycle. We can deter-
mine our own economic fate. We hope that the end result of this 
book is that it will provide an intellectual framework, strongly sup-
ported by evidence, that can help us respond to future recessions— 
and even prevent them. We understand this is an ambitious goal. 

A  S C A N D A L  I N  B O H E M I A  13
But we must pursue it. We strongly believe that recessions are not 
inevitable— they are not mysterious acts of nature that we must ac-
cept. Instead, recessions are a product of a fi nancial system that fos-
ters too much household debt. Economic disasters are man- made, 
and the right framework can help us understand how to prevent 
them.


 PART I
BUSTED


 2: DEBT AND DESTRUCTION
All of us face unforeseen threats that can alter our lives: an unex-
pected illness, a horrible storm, a fi re. We understand we need to 
be protected against such events, and we buy insurance to be com-
pensated when these events happen. Th is is one of the most com-
mon ways we interact with fi nancial markets. It is far better for the 
fi nancial system as a whole to bear these risks than any one indi-
vidual.
One of us (Amir) grew up in Topeka, Kansas, where the threat 
of tornadoes has long been hardwired in people’s minds. From an 
early age, Kansans go through tornado drills in schools. Kids pour 
out of classrooms into hallways and are taught to curl up into a ball 
next to the wall with their hands covering their heads and necks. 
Th ese drills are done at least twice a year; school administrators 
know they must be prepared for a tornado striking out of the blue. 
Similarly, home owners in Kansas prepare for tornadoes by mak-
ing sure their insurance policy will pay them if, God forbid, their 
home is destroyed in a tornado. Money can’t make up for the loss of 
one’s home, but it ensures that a family can begin rebuilding their 
lives during such a desperate time. Insurance protects people— this 
is one of the primary roles of the fi nancial system.
A collapse in house prices, while presumably not dangerous in 
terms of injury or death, presents another serious unforeseen risk 
to home owners. For many Americans, home equity is their only 

18 C H A P T E R  T W O
source of wealth. Th ey may be counting on it to retire or to help pay 
for a child’s college education. A dramatic decline in house prices 
is just as unexpected as a tornado barreling down on a small town 
in Kansas. But when it comes to the risk associated with house 
prices, the fi nancial system’s reliance on mortgage debt does the 
exact  opposite of insurance: it concentrates the risk on the home 
owner. While insurance protects the home owner, debt puts the 
home owner at risk. Here’s how.
The Harshness of Debt
Debt plays such a common role in the economy that we oft en for-
get how harsh it is. Th e fundamental feature of debt is that the bor-
rower must bear the fi rst losses associated with a decline in asset 
prices. For example, if a home owner buys a home worth $, 
using an $, mortgage, then the home owner’s equity in the 
home is $,. If house prices drop  percent, the home owner 
loses $,— their full investment— while the mortgage lender 
escapes unscathed. If the home owner sells the home for the new 
price of $,, they must use the full proceeds to pay off  the 
mortgage. Th ey walk away with nothing. In the jargon of fi nance, 
the mortgage lender has the senior claim on the home and is there-
fore protected if house prices decline. Th e home owner has the 
 junior claim and experiences huge losses if house prices decline.
But we shouldn’t think of the mortgage lender in this example 
as an independent entity. Th e mortgage lender uses money from 
savers in the economy. Savers give money to the bank either as de-
posits, debt, or equity, and are therefore the ultimate owners of the 
mortgage bank. When we say that the mortgage lender has the se-
nior claim on the home, what we really mean is that savers in the 
economy have the senior claim on the home. Savers, who have high 
net worth, are protected against house- price declines much more 
than borrowers.
Now let’s take a step back and consider the entire economy of 
borrowers and savers. When house prices in the aggregate collapse 

D E B T  A N D  D E S T R U C T I O N  19
by  percent, the losses are concentrated on the borrowers in the 
economy. Given that borrowers already had low net worth before 
the crash (which is why they needed to borrow), the concentra-
tion of losses on them devastates their fi nancial condition. Th ey 
already had very little net worth— now they have even less. In con-
trast, the savers, who typically have a lot of fi nancial assets and 
little mortgage debt, experience a much less severe decline in their 
net worth when house prices fall. Th is is because they ultimately 
own— through their deposits, bonds, and equity holdings— the se-
nior claims on houses in the economy. House prices may fall so far 
that even the senior claims take losses, but they are much less se-
vere than the devastation wrought on the borrowers.
Hence, the concentration of losses on debtors is  inextricably 
linked to wealth inequality. When house prices collapse in an 
economy with high debt levels, the collapse amplifi es wealth in-
equality because low net- worth households bear the lion’s share of 
the losses. While savers are also negatively impacted, their relative 
position actually improves. In the example above, before the crash 
savers owned  percent of the home whereas the home owner 
owned  percent. Aft er the crash, the home owner is completely 
wiped out, and savers own  percent of the home.
Debt and Wealth Inequality in the Great Recession
During the Great Recession, house prices fell $. trillion— this 
was enormous, especially considering the annual economic output 
of the U.S. economy is roughly $ trillion. Given such a massive 
hit, the net worth of home owners obviously suff ered. But what 
was the distribution of those losses: how worse off  were borrowers, 
actually?
Let’s start with an examination of the net- worth distribution in 
the United States in .1 A household’s net worth is composed of 
two main types of assets: fi nancial assets and housing assets. Finan-
cial assets include stocks, bonds, checking and savings deposits, 
and other business interests a household owns. Net worth is de-

20 C H A P T E R  T W O
fi ned to be fi nancial assets plus housing assets, minus any debt. 
Mortgages and home- equity debt are by far the most important 
components of household debt, making up  percent of all house-
hold debt as of .
In  there were dramatic diff erences across U.S. households in 
both the composition of net worth and leverage (amount of debt). 
Home owners in the bottom  percent of the net- worth distri-
bution— the poorest home owners— were highly levered. Th eir 
leverage ratio, or, the ratio of total debt to total assets, was near 
 percent (as in the example above with a house worth $,). 
Moreover, the poorest home owners relied almost exclusively on 
home equity in their net worth. About $ out of every $ of net 
worth was in home equity, so poor home owners had almost no 
fi nancial assets going into the recession. Th ey had only home  equity, 
and it was highly levered.
Th e rich were diff erent in two important ways. First, they had 
a lot less debt coming into the recession. Th e richest  percent of 
home owners had a leverage ratio of only  percent, compared to 
the  percent leverage ratio of the poorest home owners. Second, 
their net worth was overwhelmingly concentrated in non- housing 
assets. While the poor had $ of home equity for every $ of other 
assets, the rich were exactly the opposite, with $ of home equity 
for every $ of other assets, like money- market funds, stocks, and 
bonds. Figure . shows these facts graphically. It splits home own-
ers in the United States in  into fi ve quintiles based on net 
worth, with the poorest households on the left  side of the graph 
and the richest on the right. Th e fi gure illustrates the fraction of 
total assets each of the fi ve quintiles had in debt, home equity, and 
fi nancial wealth. As we move to the right of the graph, we can see 
how leverage declines and fi nancial wealth increases.
 Th is isn’t surprising. A poor man’s debt is a rich man’s asset. 
Since it is ultimately the rich who are lending to the poor through 
the fi nancial system, as we move from poor home owners to rich 
home owners, debt declines and fi nancial assets rise. As we men-
tioned above, the use of debt and wealth inequality are closely 

D E B T  A N D  D E S T R U C T I O N  21
linked. Th ere is nothing sinister about the rich fi nancing the poor. 
But it is crucial to remember that this lending takes the form of 
debt fi nancing. When the rich own the stocks and bonds of a bank, 
they in turn own the mortgages the bank has made, and interest 
payments from home owners fl ow through the fi nancial system to 
the rich.
Figure . summarizes key facts that are important to keep in 
mind as we enter the discussion of the recession. Th e poorest home 
owners were the most levered and the most exposed to the risks of 
the housing sector, and they owned almost no fi nancial assets. Th e 
combination of high leverage, high exposure to housing, and little 
fi nancial wealth would prove disastrous for the households who 
were the weakest.
How the Poor Got Poorer
From  to , house prices for the nation as a whole fell  
percent. And they stayed low, only barely recovering toward the 
end of . Th e S&P , a measure of stock prices, fell dramati-
cally during  and early , but rebounded strongly aft er-
Figure 2.1: Leverage Ratio for Home Owners, 2007, by Net Worth Quintile

22 C H A P T E R  T W O
ward. Bond prices, as measured by the Vanguard Total Bond Mar-
ket Index, experienced a strong rally throughout the recession as 
market interest rates plummeted— from  to , bond prices 
rose by more than  percent. Any household that held bonds 
coming into the Great Recession had a fantastic hedge against the 
economic collapse. But, as we have shown above, only the richest 
households in the economy owned bonds.
Th e collapse in house prices hit low net- worth households the 
hardest because their wealth was tied exclusively to home equity. 
But this tells only part of the story. Th e fact that low net- worth 
households had very high debt burdens amplifi ed the destruction 
of their net worth. Th is amplifi cation is the leverage multiplier. 
Th e leverage multiplier describes mathematically how a decline in 
house prices leads to a larger decline in net worth for a household 
with leverage.
To see it at work, let’s return to the example we’ve been using, 
where a home owner has  percent equity in a home worth 
$,, and therefore a loan- to- value ratio of  percent (and 
therefore an $, mortgage). If house prices fall  percent, 
what is the percent decline in the home owner’s equity in the home? 
Here’s a hint: it’s much larger than  percent! Th e home owner 
had $, in equity before the drop in house prices. When the 
prices drop, the house is only worth $,. But the mortgage is 
still $,, which means that the home owner’s equity has been 
completely wiped out— a  percent decline. In this example, the 
leverage multiplier was . A  percent decline in house prices led 
to a decline in the home owner’s equity of  percent, fi ve times 
larger.2
From  to , house prices across the country fell by 
 percent. But since poor home owners were levered, their net 
worth fell by much more. In fact, because low net- worth home 
owners had a leverage ratio of  percent, a  percent decline in 
house prices completely wiped out their entire net worth. Th is is a 
fact oft en overlooked: when we say house prices fell by  percent, 

D E B T  A N D  D E S T R U C T I O N  23
the decline in net worth for indebted home owners was much larger 
because of the leverage multiplier.
Taken together, these facts tell us exactly which home owners 
were hit hardest by the Great Recession. Poor home owners had 
almost no fi nancial assets; their wealth consisted almost entirely of 
home equity. Further, their home equity was the junior claim. So 
the decline in house prices was multiplied by a signifi cant leverage 
multiplier. While fi nancial assets recovered, poor households saw 
nothing from these gains.
Figure . puts these facts together and shows one of the most 
important patterns of the Great Recession. It illustrates the evolu-
tion of household net worth for the bottom quintile, the middle 
quintile, and the highest quintile of the home- owner wealth distri-
bution. Th e net worth of poor home owners was absolutely ham-
mered during the Great Recession. From  to , their net 
worth collapsed from $, to almost zero. Th is is the leverage 
multiplier at work. Th e decline in net worth during the Great Re-
cession completely erased all the gains from  to . Th is is 
exactly what we would predict given the reliance on home  equity 
and their large amount of debt. Th e average net worth of rich 
home owners declined from $. million to $. million. While the 
dollar amount of losses was considerable, the percentage decline 
was negligible— they were hardly touched. Th e decline wasn’t even 
large enough to off set any of the gains from  to . Th e rich 
made out well because they held fi nancial assets that performed 
much better during the recession than housing. And many of the 
fi nancial assets were senior claims on houses.
 High debt in combination with the dramatic decline in house 
prices increased the already large gap between the rich and poor in 
the United States. Yes, the poor were poor to begin with, but they 
lost everything because debt concentrated overall house- price de-
clines directly on their net worth. Th is is a fundamental feature of 
debt: it imposes enormous losses on exactly the households that 
have the least. Th ose with the most are left  in a much better relative 

Figure 2.2: Home- Owner Net Worth, Poorest, Median, and Richest Quintiles

D E B T  A N D  D E S T R U C T I O N  25
position because of their senior claim on the assets in the economy. 
Inequality was already severe in the United States before the re-
cession. In  the top  percent of the net- worth distribution 
had  percent of the wealth in the economy. Th is was up from 
 percent in . In  the share of the top  percent jumped 
to  percent, which is consistent with the patterns shown above. 
Th e rich stayed rich while the poor got poorer.
Many have discussed trends in income and wealth inequality, 
but they usually overlook the role of debt. A fi nancial system that 
relies excessively on debt amplifi es wealth inequality. While there 
is much to learn about the causes of inequality by looking into the 
role of debt, our focus is on how the uneven distribution of losses 
aff ects the entire economy.
The Geography of Net- Worth Destruction
Th e crash in house prices during the Great Recession had a strong 
geographic component, and our research relies on this.3 Th e coun-
ties with the sharpest drops in net worth were located in California 
and Florida. Other pockets of the country also had very large 
drops, including counties in Colorado, Maryland, and Minnesota. 
Counties in the middle of the country, such as those in Kansas, 
Oklahoma, and Texas, largely escaped the housing collapse.
In some areas of the country, the decline in housing net worth 
was stunning. In four counties in the Central Valley of northern 
California— Merced, San Joaquin, Solano, and Stanislaus— the fall 
in house prices led to a  percent drop in net worth. And all four 
counties were already below the median net worth in the United 
States in . Prince Georges County, Maryland, just north of 
Washington, D.C., saw a  percent decline in net worth, and it was 
also well below the national median.
In  the median household in Merced County, about  
miles southeast of San Francisco, had an income of $,, which 
made it relatively poor compared to other areas of California. From 
 to , fueled by lending to households with low credit 

26 C H A P T E R  T W O
scores, house prices in the county rose by  percent. Home own-
ers responded by borrowing aggressively, and household debt in-
creased by  percent. When the housing market turned sour, the 
consequences were disastrous. Merced County saw a decline in 
home equity of  percent from  to .
For many households during the Great Recession, the value of 
their homes dropped below the amount still owed on the mort-
gage. Home owners then became “underwater” or “upside- down” 
on their mortgage and actually had negative equity in their home. 
If they chose to sell, they had to pay the diff erence between the 
mortgage and the sale price to the bank. Faced with this dire cir-
cumstance, home owners could either stay in their homes and owe 
the bank more than their homes were worth, or walk away and let 
the bank foreclose.
Many chose to stay. In ,  million properties—  percent of 
all properties with a mortgage— had negative equity.4 Even though 
we know these numbers well, we are still shocked as we write them. 
Th ey are truly stunning and worth repeating: home owners in  out 
of every  residential properties with a mortgage in the United 
States were underwater. In the Central Valley counties mentioned 
above, there were four zip codes with more than  percent of home 
owners underwater. For Merced County, the number was  per-
cent. Many other home owners walked away, allowing the bank to 
foreclose. Walking away, of course, was not costless. Failing to pay a 
mortgage payment shattered one’s credit score. Further, foreclosures 
led to a vicious cycle that further destroyed household net worth.
Foreclosures and Fire Sales
Th e negative eff ects of debt during the Great Recession extended 
far beyond the indebted. When house prices collapsed, problems 
related to excessive leverage infected the entire economy. Th e spill-
over eff ects included higher unemployment and a failing construc-
tion sector. But the most direct consequence was the startling rise 
in foreclosures. Economists have long appreciated that debt aff ects 

D E B T  A N D  D E S T R U C T I O N  27
everyone when asset prices collapse. A fi re sale of assets at steeply 
discounted prices is the most common reason why. A fi re sale is a 
situation in which a debtor or creditor is willing to sell an asset for 
a price far below its market value. In the context of housing, this 
typically happens aft er a foreclosure: when a bank takes the prop-
erty from a delinquent home owner, they sell it at a steeply dis-
counted price.
Aft er the sale, other home buyers and appraisers use the fi re- 
sale price to estimate the prices of all other homes in the area. As 
a result, the prices of all the homes in the area suff er. Even home 
owners with no debt at all see the value of their homes decline. 
Consequently, fi nancially healthy home owners may be unable to 
refi nance their mortgages or sell their home at a fair price. Over the 
last few years, many home owners in the United States have been 
shocked by a very low appraisal of their home during a refi nanc-
ing. Th is low appraisal was typically the direct result of an appraiser 
using a fi re- sale foreclosure price to estimate the value of all homes 
in the neighborhood.
Some of the most insidious eff ects of debt fi nancing are called 
the externalities of foreclosure. In the jargon of economists, a nega-
tive externality occurs whenever there are negative eff ects on other 
people from a private transaction between two parties. In a fore-
closure, the bank selling the property does not bear the negative 
eff ects of a fi re sale that all the other home owners in the area do. 
As a result, the bank is perfectly willing to sell at a lower price, even 
though society as a whole would not want the bank to do so.
Foreclosures greatly exacerbated the housing downturn during 
the Great Recession. In  and , foreclosures reached his-
torically unprecedented levels. Th e last peak before the Great Re-
cession was in , when about . percent of all mortgages were 
in foreclosure. During the Great Recession, foreclosures were three 
times higher: about  percent of all mortgages were in foreclosure 
in . Daniel Hartley has estimated that between  and  per-
cent of all home sales in  and  were foreclosures or short 
sales.5

28 C H A P T E R  T W O
In research with Francesco Trebbi, we estimated some of the 
negative eff ects of foreclosures.6 We used the fact that some states 
have more lenient foreclosure policies than others. In some states, 
for example, a lender must go through the courts to evict a delin-
quent borrower from a home. Other states require no court action, 
and, as one would expect, foreclosures are much faster in these 
states. As a result, there were far more foreclosures in some states 
than others during the Great Recession due to this fact alone, and 
this diff erence can be used to estimate the eff ects of foreclosures on 
local economies.
Aft er following a similar trajectory from  to , house 
prices fell much more in states where foreclosure was easier. States 
that required a judicial foreclosure saw house prices fall  percent, 
whereas states not requiring judicial foreclosure saw house prices 
fall more than  percent. Figure . shows house prices over time 
in both types of states— the sharp relative decline in house prices 
in states not requiring a judicial foreclosure is clear.7 Using this dif-
ference across states, our research concludes that house prices de-
clined by . percentage points for every  percent of home owners 
going into foreclosure between  and . Further, by pull-
ing down house prices, foreclosures dampened consumption and 
home building.
 Debt- induced fi re sales are not limited to the housing market. 
Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny emphasize the importance of 
fi re sales following the leveraged- buyout wave of the late s.8 In 
that episode, companies with extremely high leverage were forced 
to sell assets at steeply discounted prices, which then lowered the 
value of collateral for all businesses. John Geanakoplos has writ-
ten extensively on the impact of fi re sales.9 His work demonstrates 
how default means that an asset is transferred from someone for 
whom it’s worth a lot (the borrower) to someone for whom it’s 
worth much less (the lender). Th e lender does not want the prop-
erty, and the borrower cannot aff ord it. As a result, the lender is 
forced to sell the asset at a depressed price. Th is leads to a vicious 
cycle. Defaults rise when asset prices collapse. But the rise in de-

D E B T  A N D  D E S T R U C T I O N  29
faults leads to depressed fi re- sale prices as lenders unload the asset. 
Th is leads to even more defaults as even lower prices induce more 
borrowers to default.
When the housing bubble burst, there was undoubtedly a need 
for reallocation of resources in the economy. Too many renters had 
become home owners. Too many home owners had moved into 
homes they could not aff ord. Too many homes had been built. But 
when the crash occurred, the debt- ridden economy was unable to 
reallocate resources in an effi  cient manner. Instead, debt led to fi re 
sales of properties, which only exacerbated the destruction of net 
worth.
Debt: The Anti- Insurance
Th ere are about , residential fi res in the United States every 
year.10 If a family loses their house to a fi re, the loss can be devas-
tating. Th ey will have to restart their lives from scratch, children 
Figure 2.3: Foreclosures and House Prices

30 C H A P T E R  T W O
may have to delay or completely give up on college, and certain 
medical needs may go unaddressed because the family can no lon-
ger aff ord such expenditures. Tornadoes and fi res are examples of 
a number of such risks that we face every day. It makes no sense 
for individuals to bear these risks. Instead, a sound fi nancial sys-
tem should allow us to collectively insure one another against such 
risks that are beyond the control of any one person. It is a relatively 
small cost for us to protect each other on a regular basis, and the 
gains benefi t everyone in the long run. When a family is able to 
move forward aft er a disaster, they can properly take care of their 
kids and can continue working. Our overall economic productivity 
and happiness are higher.
Debt is the anti- insurance. Instead of helping to share the risks 
associated with home ownership, it concentrates the risks on those 
least able to bear it. As we have shown, debt signifi cantly ampli-
fi ed wealth inequality during the Great Recession. It also depressed 
prices through foreclosures. And once the decline in house prices 
destroyed the net worth of indebted home owners, one conse-
quence proved disastrous— they stopped spending.

A powerful narrative of the Great Recession focuses on the col-
lapse of Lehman Brothers in September . Allowing the bank 
to go bankrupt, the argument goes, was a “colossal error,” and the 
failure to save it triggered the global economic downturn.1 In an 
article on the causes of the Great Recession, Jacob Weisberg of the 
Daily Beast described it as “near- consensus” that “a global reces-
sion became inevitable once the government decided not to res-
cue Lehman Brothers.”2 Th is narrative is closely tied to the banking 
view articulated in chapter . According to this view, the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers froze the credit system, preventing businesses 
from getting the loans they needed to continue operating. As a 
result, they were forced to cut investment and lay off  workers. In 
this narrative, if we could have prevented Lehman Brothers from 
failing, our economy would have remained intact.
The Consumption- Driven Recession
Is the collapse of Lehman Brothers the linchpin of any theory of the 
recession? Let’s go back to the data. One of the facts that jumped 
out in chapter  is that the Great Recession was consumption- 
driven. Let’s look more closely at the timing and magnitude of the 
spending declines.
3: CUTTING BACK

32 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
Th e decline in spending was in full force before the fall of . 
Th e National Bureau of Economic Research dates the beginning 
of the recession in the fourth quarter of , three quarters before 
the failure of Lehman Brothers. Th e collapse in residential invest-
ment and durable consumption was dramatic well before the events 
of the fall of . What happened in the fall of  no doubt ex-
acerbated economic weakness, but it should not be viewed as the 
primary cause.
Let’s take a closer look at durable consumption and residential 
investment. Durable goods are those products that a consumer ex-
pects to last for a long time, like autos, furniture, appliances, and 
electronics. Residential investment refl ects both new construction 
of housing units and remodeling of existing units. Both new con-
struction and remodeling are a function of household demand for 
housing services. As a result, residential investment is best viewed 
as another form of household spending on durable goods.
Th e collapse in residential investment was already in full swing 
in , a full two years before the collapse of Lehman Brothers. In 
the second quarter of , residential investment fell by  percent 
on an annualized basis. In every quarter from the second quarter 
of  through the second quarter of , residential investment 
declined by at least  percent, reaching negative  percent in the 
fourth quarter of  and the fi rst quarter of . Th e decline in 
residential investment alone knocked off  . percent to . percent 
of GDP growth in the last three quarters of .
While spending on other durable goods did not fall quite as early 
as residential investment, it still fell before the heart of the banking 
crisis. Compared to , furniture purchases in  were down 
. percent, and expenditures at home- improvement stores were 
down  percent. Spending on appliances was still up  percent in 
, but the growth was signifi cantly lower than the  percent 
growth in  and .
Looking within the year of , however, provides important 
insights. Th e heart of the banking crisis began in September , 
when both Lehman Brothers and AIG collapsed. So by focusing 

C U T T I N G  B A C K  33
on January through August, we can estimate the pre- banking- 
crisis spending decline in . As a benchmark, we want to com-
pare spending in January through August  to that in January 
through August , because retail sales are seasonal. A clear pat-
tern emerges. In , auto spending was down  percent, furni-
ture spending was down  percent, and home- improvement ex-
penditures were down  percent. Th ese declines were all registered 
before the collapse of Lehman Brothers. So the sharp reduction in 
household spending on durable goods had to have been triggered 
by something other than the banking crisis. Th e Monaco Coach 
Corpo ration example from chapter  is consistent with this evi-
dence. Remember, large layoff s in the plants in northern Indiana 
occurred in the summer of , before the peak of the banking 
crisis. Indeed, demand for motor homes collapsed in  and early 
, before Lehman Brothers failed.
Of course, the decline in overall household spending in the third 
and fourth quarters of  was unprecedented. During these two 
quarters, overall consumption as measured by the National Income 
and Product Accounts (NIPA) declined by . percent. Th is was the 
largest two- quarter drop in NIPA- measured consumption in the 
historical data, which go back to . Th e only other period that 
even comes close is that of the fi rst and second quarters of , 
when consumption fell by . percent. Th e collapse in consump-
tion began before the end of , but it no doubt accelerated dur-
ing the banking crisis.
However, looking more closely at the banking- crisis period sug-
gests that, even then, consumption was the key driver of the re-
cession. NIPA breaks down the total output of the U.S. economy, 
or GDP, into its subcategories of consumption— investment, gov-
ernment spending, and net exports— and gives data on how much 
each contributes to overall GDP growth. We are particularly inter-
ested in the contributions of consumption and investment to GDP 
growth during the Great Recession. We split investment into resi-
dential investment and non- residential investment. Th e former re-
fl ects investment in housing services (both new construction and 

34 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
remodeling), while the latter refl ects business investment in plants, 
capital goods, computers, and equipment.
Businesses and banks, as opposed to households, play the domi-
nant role in the argument that troubles in the banking sector 
caused the recession. Under this argument, when Lehman Brothers 
collapsed, banks tightened credit, which forced businesses to mas-
sively cut non- residential investment and lay off  workers. But the 
evidence from the NIPA accounts contradicts this argument. Resi-
dential investment was a serious drag on GDP growth even before 
the banking crisis. And the contribution of consumption was also 
negative in both the fi rst and second quarters of , which is 
consistent with the evidence above demonstrating that weakness 
in household spending preceded the banking crisis. In fi gure ., 
we present this evidence for the Great Recession, which formally 
began in the fourth quarter of . Th e fi gure splits out the contri-
butions to total GDP growth from consumption, residential invest-
ment, and non- residential investment. As it illustrates, residential 
investment and consumption were the main drivers of weakness 
for the fi rst three quarters of the recession.
 But even more importantly, notice what happened during the 
worst part of the recession. In the third quarter of , the col-
lapse in GDP was driven by the collapse in consumption. Non- 
residential investment contributed negatively to GDP growth, but 
its eff ect was less than half the eff ect of consumption. Further, in 
the fourth quarter of , consumption again registered the larg-
est negative contribution to GDP growth. It wasn’t until the fi rst 
and second quarters of  that business investment contributed 
most negatively to GDP growth.
Th e timing implicates household spending as the key driver of 
the recession, not the eff ects of the banking crisis on businesses. 
Job losses materialized because households stopped buying, not be-
cause businesses stopped investing. In fact, the evidence indicates 
that the decline in business investment was a reaction to the mas-
sive decline in household spending. If businesses saw no demand 
for their products, then of course they cut back on investment. To 

C U T T I N G  B A C K  35
explain the decline in business investment at the end of  and 
beginning of , there is no need to rely on the banking crisis.
However, while the aggregate U.S. data demonstrate a clear pat-
tern— consumption was the key driver of the recession— they alone 
do not perfectly distinguish the cause of the decline in spending. 
Perhaps the decline happened in anticipation of a banking crisis? 
Perhaps people somehow knew they were likely to be laid off  in the 
future, so they cut back on durable purchases even before the reces-
sion began? Or perhaps the early decline in spending was driven by 
irrational fears? In the rest of this chapter, we use geographic data 
to explore the decline in household spending during the recession. 
Th ese data allow us to see exactly where spending declined. As we 
will show, patterns emerge that help us make sense of why spend-
ing plummeted so dramatically.
Where Spending Declined3
We know from the previous chapter that some areas of the country 
were hit much harder by the housing collapse than others. House-
Figure 3.1: What Drove Recession? Contributions to GDP Growth

36 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
holds in Florida, for example, faced an average decline of  percent 
in their net worth from the housing collapse, whereas households 
in Texas saw an average decline of only  percent. In the Central 
Valley of northern California, net worth collapsed by  percent. 
Examining data at a more specifi c level allows us to see whether the 
decline in housing wealth was the key driver of spending declines, 
as opposed to other factors like the collapse of Lehman Brothers. If 
the decline in net worth of indebted households was the key driver 
of the recession, we should expect household spending to fall much 
more steeply in areas that experienced the largest declines in hous-
ing net worth. And these drops should begin early in the recession.
We split counties in the United States into fi ve quintiles based 
on the decline in net worth from  to  due to the collapse 
in house prices. Each quintile contains  percent of the total U.S. 
population. We call the quintile with the largest decline in net 
worth “large net- worth- decline counties,” and we call the quintile 
with the smallest decline in net worth “small net- worth- decline 
counties.” Large net- worth- decline counties were located in many 
states, including California, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Michigan, 
and Virginia. Small net- worth- decline counties were also wide-
spread across the country.
Large net- worth- decline counties lost an average of  percent 
of net worth, while small net- worth- decline counties lost almost 
exactly  percent. Recall that the decline in net worth coming from 
the housing crash can be decomposed into two factors: the decline 
in house prices and the leverage multiplier. As a result, areas of the 
country with higher debt burdens experienced a much larger per-
centage decline in net worth even for the same percentage decline 
in house prices. Large net- worth- decline counties were not just 
counties where house prices collapsed. Instead, they were counties 
that had a combination of high debt levels and a collapse in house 
prices.
From  to , large net- worth- decline counties cut back 
on consumption by almost  percent. Th is was massive. To put it 
into perspective, the total decline in spending for the U.S. economy 

C U T T I N G  B A C K  37
was about  percent during these same years. Th e decline in spend-
ing in these counties was four times the aggregate decline. In con-
trast, small net- worth- decline counties spent almost the exact same 
amount in  as in . Figure . shows spending in large 
and small net- worth- decline counties. (Both series are indexed to 
.) Even as early as , a large gap opened up between spend-
ing by counties with large and small declines in net worth. Clear 
signs of the recession emerged very early in counties hit with a 
negative net- worth shock. But  was the year in which the dif-
ference accelerated substantially. In fact, in counties with only a 
small decline in home- equity values, household spending actu-
ally rose from  to . If we examine only U.S. counties that 
avoided the collapse in net worth through , we wouldn’t even 
see much evidence of a recession. In contrast, spending in areas 
with a large decline in net worth collapsed in .
 Of course, the eff ects of the economic disaster were ultimately 
felt even in areas that avoided the collapse in net worth. Aft er ris-
ing from  to , spending in  fell by almost  percent 
in counties with the smallest decline in net worth. But the decline 
Figure 3.2: Spending in Large and Small Net- Worth Decline Counties

38 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
in these counties in  doesn’t invalidate the importance of the 
shock to net worth. When spending fell in large net- worth- decline 
counties, the damage was not limited. It spread throughout the 
entire country. (We return to this point in chapter  when we dis-
cuss unemployment during the Great Recession.)
Th e tremendous eff ect of net- worth declines on spending can 
be seen very clearly by zeroing in on the colossal housing mess in 
the Central Valley in California. As mentioned earlier, four coun-
ties with steep drops in house prices— Merced, San Joaquin, So-
lano, and Stanislaus— witnessed a decline in net worth of about 
 percent. Th e spending response was dramatic, as spending in 
these counties fell by  percent from  to . Much of this 
occurred very early in the recession. Compared to the summer of 
, auto purchases in the summer of — before the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers— were already down  percent. Th e banking 
crisis in the fall of  cannot explain why spending had already 
fallen so steeply in the Central Valley in the summer of .
Th e geographic pattern is sharp. Areas of the country suff ering 
a collapse in net worth pulled back much earlier and much more 
strongly than areas that didn’t. We attribute this to the decreased 
net worth of indebted households. But even if one believes other 
channels were more important, the pattern in fi gure . dampens 
alternative hypotheses. Whatever one wants to blame for the severe 
recession, it must be consistent with the strong geographic pattern 
in the spending data.
What’s Debt Got to Do with It?
In November , James Surowiecki wrote an article titled “Th e 
Deleveraging Myth” in his infl uential New Yorker column, in which 
he claimed that debt was not the main reason household spending 
had collapsed during the Great Recession. Instead, he argued that 
the decline in house prices alone, even in the absence of debt, easily 
explained weakness in consumer spending. As he put it, “It’s well 
established that when housing prices go up people feel richer and 

C U T T I N G  B A C K  39
spend more. . . . But when housing prices go down people cut their 
spending by the same amount in response. Th at means that— even 
if consumers had no debt at all— we’d expect a dropoff  in consump-
tion.”4
Th is argument is a common one that we have heard when pre-
senting our research: a housing- wealth eff ect alone, even in a world 
without debt, can explain why household spending declined by so 
much when house prices collapsed. However, in our view, there are 
two problems with this argument. First, recall the foreclosure ex-
ternality we described in the previous chapter. Foreclosures have a 
dramatic eff ect on house prices. In the absence of debt, there would 
have been no foreclosures, and house prices would not have fallen 
as much as they did. We will quantify the eff ect of foreclosures on 
spending later in the book, but the important point is that we can-
not treat the decline in house prices as independent of debt.
Second, in the pure housing- wealth- eff ect view, the distribution 
of net worth is unimportant. Th e collapse in house prices would 
be disastrous for household spending regardless of which house-
holds bear the loss. As we outlined in the previous chapter, debt 
concentrates the losses on those with the least net worth. Th is begs 
the question: Does the fact that debt forces losses on the lowest 
net- worth borrowers amplify the eff ect of house- price declines on 
spending? In the pure housing- wealth- eff ect view, it does not. In 
the debt- centric view, it does.
Let’s look at the data. Th e geographic patterns in spending show 
that the negative shock to net worth caused people to spend less. 
In economic jargon, the spending response is called the marginal 
propensity to consume, or the MPC, out of housing wealth. Th e 
MPC out of housing wealth tells us how many dollars less an indi-
vidual spends in response to a wealth shock. For example, if an in-
dividual responds to a $, fall in home value by cutting spend-
ing by $, then the MPC is ($/$, =) $. per $. Th e 
larger the MPC, the more responsive the household is to the same 
change in wealth. In the pure housing- wealth- eff ect view, everyone 
has the same MPC and hence debt does not matter.

40 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
Our research estimates an MPC out of housing wealth during 
the recession on the order of  to  cents per dollar. In other words, 
if an individual’s house price fell by $, during the Great Re-
cession, the individual cut spending on average about $ to $. 
Given the aggregate decline in home values of about $. trillion, 
our estimate implies that the decline in home values led to a $ 
to $ billion decline in retail spending, which is a very large 
amount.
But this estimate is only the average MPC across the entire 
population. It does not tell us who cut back the most. If debt mat-
ters for spending over and above the pure housing- wealth eff ect, 
we should expect a higher MPC out of housing wealth for indebted 
households. Or, in other words, a household with more debt would 
respond to the same decline in house prices by cutting back more 
aggressively on spending.
Th is is a crucial point, so here is a simple example to clarify. Two 
households live next door to each other. Th ey had identical homes 
in , both worth $,. Household D (for Debt) had an 
$, mortgage, which they borrowed from household N (for No 
debt), and household N had no mortgage at all. So in , house-
hold D had a home equity of $, and a leverage ratio of  per-
cent. Household N had a home equity of $,, a leverage ratio 
of  percent, and a fi nancial asset (the mortgage) worth $,.
From  to , house prices in their neighborhood fell 
 percent, or $,. So in , both Household D and N had 
a home worth $, instead of $,. Both lost $, of 
home equity from  to . Th e mortgage of Household D re-
mained worth $,. Household N owns the mortgage, but there 
is no change in its value. Th erefore, both households saw a total 
drop in their wealth of $, driven completely by the change 
in home equity. Household D has remaining net worth of $,, 
whereas Household N has remaining net worth of $,, com-
prised of $, of home equity and the $, mortgage asset.
Th e key question is: Which household cut spending by more? 
Both lost $,. If the decline in spending is just a housing- 

C U T T I N G  B A C K  41
wealth eff ect, then debt is irrelevant for understanding how much 
home owners cut spending in response to a decline in wealth. In 
our example, this translates to saying that both household D and 
N had the same MPC out of housing wealth. In this view, if both 
households have the same MPC of ., then both households cut 
spending by $. If these two households have the same MPC, 
then debt indeed does not matter. Only the decline in home values 
is relevant.
But what should we expect if debt does matter? If debt amplifi es 
the eff ect of house- price declines on spending, we would expect 
to see a higher MPC for household D than household N. In other 
words, the indebted household pulls back on spending more for 
the exact same decline in home value. If household D has a higher 
MPC than household N, then the distribution of leverage matters 
when house prices collapse. If the house- price decline concentrates 
losses on the people with the most debt, then the eff ects on their 
consumption will be especially severe.
Th e MPC of households is also relevant for thinking about the 
eff ectiveness of government stimulus programs for boosting de-
mand. When the government sends out stimulus checks to spur 
consumer demand, as it did in both  and , policy makers 
want to understand how much of the stimulus check will be spent. 
Th e policy will be considered more eff ective if individuals spend a 
larger share of the checks, which would happen if individuals who 
get the checks have higher MPCs.
More than a Wealth Effect
Our research directly tests if the MPC varies by household income 
and leverage by focusing on zip- code- level information on auto 
purchases. Zip- code- level data lets us go inside counties that saw 
large net- worth shocks and see if they cut spending the most dur-
ing the Great Recession. More specifi cally, our research estimates 
how much a household with high leverage versus low leverage cut 
spending on autos in response to the same dollar value decline in 

42 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
house prices. In other words, our research estimates how the MPC 
out of housing wealth varies with household leverage during the 
Great Recession.
Th e results are dramatic and strongly indicate that Household D 
in the example above would cut back far more than Household N. 
In the real world, a household with a loan- to- value ratio of  per-
cent or higher in their home in  had an MPC out of hous-
ing wealth that was more than three times as large as a household 
with a loan- to- value ratio of  percent or lower. For example, in 
response to a $, decline in home value, households with an 
LTV higher than  percent cut spending on autos by $. House-
holds with an LTV lower than  percent cut spending on autos 
by less than $. For the exact same dollar decline in home value, 
households with more debt cut back on spending more aggres-
sively. Figure . shows the MPC estimates across the distribution 
of leverage. Th ere is a strong relation: the higher the leverage in the 
home, the more aggressively the household cuts back on spending 
when home values decline.
 Th e higher MPC out of housing wealth for highly levered house-
holds is one of the most important results from our research. It im-
mediately implies that the distribution of wealth and debt matters. 
During the Great Recession, house- price declines weren’t the same 
for households with high leverage versus those with low leverage— 
they fell the most for households that had the highest leverage. As 
we discussed in the last chapter, these were households with low 
net worth and all of their wealth tied to home equity. As a result, 
the collapse of the housing market was especially toxic for them. 
Not only did house prices fall, but they fell most for households 
with the highest MPC out of housing wealth. Put another way, the 
decline in spending from  to  would have been far less 
severe if house prices fell more for households with low debt levels 
and a large amount of fi nancial assets.5
Th e MPC diff erences across the population can also help us 
understand other spectacular asset- price collapses, like the burst-
ing of the dot- com bubble in the early s. We shouldn’t for-

C U T T I N G  B A C K  43
get that this represented a huge loss in wealth. From  to , 
households in the United States lost $ trillion in fi nancial asset 
value, mostly from the decline in stocks. Th is is remarkably similar 
to lost housing wealth during the Great Recession. Yet despite this 
dramatic decline in fi nancial wealth during the tech bust, house-
hold spending barely budged. In fact, household spending grew 
from  to  by  percent. Th is was lower than the  percent 
growth in household spending from  to , but it was no-
where near the decline in spending of  percent from  to .
So the bursting of the tech bubble resulted in a huge loss of 
household wealth but had little eff ect on household spending, 
while the bursting of the housing bubble during the Great Reces-
sion had a great eff ect. Why? Th e diff erential MPCs shown above 
provide the answer: tech stocks were owned by very rich house-
holds with almost no leverage. As of , almost  percent of all 
stocks in the United States were owned by the top  percent of the 
net- worth distribution. And these households had a leverage ratio 
of only  percent (that is, these households had only $ of debt for 
Figure 3.3: MPC Based on Housing Leverage Ratio

44 C H A P T E R  T H R E E
every $ of assets). Rich households with little debt tend to have 
a very low MPC out of wealth. As a result, we shouldn’t be sur-
prised that the bursting of the tech bubble had almost no impact 
on spending.
A comparison of the tech- bubble and housing- bubble collapses 
off ers a useful lesson as we move forward. Asset- price declines are 
never a good thing. But they are extremely dangerous when the 
asset is highly levered. Th e combination of high debt levels and a 
sharp asset- price decline results in a massive decline in spending.
A Summary of the Evidence
We started this book with a challenging puzzle: economic contrac-
tions lead to painful job losses, but we don’t understand exactly 
why. Solving any mystery requires a collection of facts. We have 
now shown a number of facts that help uncover the mechanism 
leading to these economic catastrophes. In the next chapter, we will 
outline the exact theory that we believe explains why severe reces-
sions happen. But fi rst, we want to summarize the evidence so far 
presented.
Th e initial piece of evidence is that severe economic downturns 
are almost always preceded by a sharp run- up in household debt. 
Th is was true of the Great Recession and the Great Depression in 
the United States. It was also true of many of the worst economic 
contractions in Europe in the last decade. Even back in , schol-
ars recognized the strong relation between the severity of reces-
sions and the increase in household debt that preceded them. Fur-
ther, recessions are triggered when household spending collapses.
Another important fact is how debt distributes losses when asset 
prices like home values collapse. During the Great Recession in 
the United States, the housing bust disproportionately aff ected low 
net- worth, highly indebted home owners. Indebted home owners 
bore the fi rst losses associated with the collapse in house prices; 
as a result, they saw a massive collapse in their net worth. Th e fi -
nancial system’s reliance on debt means that those with the most 

C U T T I N G  B A C K  45
wealth were protected when house prices fell, while those with the 
least were hammered. Wealth inequality, which was already severe 
before the Great Recession, increased substantially from  to 
.
When one sees the geography of spending patterns, the mys-
terious collapse in consumption during the Great Recession isn’t 
so mysterious. Counties with high household- debt burdens and a 
large decline in house prices cut back sharply on spending when 
home- owner net worth was decimated. Counties that avoided 
the collapse in net worth saw almost no decline in spending even 
through . Eventually, however, even counties that avoided the 
collapse in housing saw a decline in spending.
Finally, debt is critical to understanding the collapse in con-
sumption. It amplifi es the loss in home values due to the foreclo-
sure externality, and it concentrates losses on the indebted house-
holds that have the highest marginal propensity to consume.
As we mentioned at the beginning of this book, people like those 
laid off  in northern Indiana deserve an evidence- based explanation 
for why they lost their jobs during the Great Recession. We now 
have a collection of facts that brings us closer to providing such 
an explanation. In the following chapters, we propose a theory of 
economic contractions that can explain why debt leads to severe 
economic contractions, and why millions of jobs are lost as a result.

4: LEVERED LOSSES: THE THEORY
Hal Varian, the chief economist at Google and a professor emeri-
tus of economics at the University of California, Berkeley, believes 
in the power of data. “Between the dawn of civilization and ,” 
he said in a recent interview, “we only created fi ve exabytes of in-
formation; now we’re creating that amount every two days.” He has 
famously pronounced that “the sexy job in the next  years will be 
statisticians.” Varian also understands that the explosion of data re-
quires increased skill in interpreting them. As he put it, “Th e ability 
to take data— to be able to understand it, to process it, to extract 
value from it, to visualize it, to communicate it— that’s going to 
be a hugely important skill in the next decades.”1 As you’ve prob-
ably guessed, we share Varian’s passion for data, which is why we’ve 
spent the last three chapters collecting facts to help us understand 
the cause of severe economic downturns. But we also agree with 
Varian’s message on the skills required to interpret data correctly.
Th e ability to interpret data is especially important in macro-
economics. Th e aggregate U.S. economy is an unwieldy object— it 
contains millions of fi rms and households. Th eir interactions with 
each other are like an ecosystem where one party’s actions aff ect 
everyone else. With the information explosion described by Varian, 
one could collect an infi nite number of data points to fi gure out 
what is going on. What actions are driving the economy? Whose 

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  47
behavior is most important? What actions could help resuscitate 
economic activity? But unless an economist can put some structure 
on the data, he or she will drown in a deep ocean of numbers trying 
to answer these questions.
Which brings us to the importance of an economic model. 
Macro economists are defi ned in large part by the theoretical model 
they use to approach the data. A model provides the structure 
needed to see which data are most important, and to decide on the 
right course of action given the information that is available. Th is 
chapter presents the core economic model in this book, a model 
we refer to as the levered- losses framework. It is motivated by the 
facts we have uncovered so far. We need a model that rationalizes 
why recessions are preceded by a large rise in household debt and 
why they begin with a dramatic decline in spending. Th e theory we 
present connects these dots to explain why a collapse in asset prices 
when an economy has elevated debt levels leads to economic disas-
ter with massive job losses.
In our explanation of the levered- losses framework, we start 
with the standard benchmark frictionless macroeconomic model, 
which we have referred to before as the fundamentals view.2 We 
view this model as unrealistic and unable to explain severe eco-
nomic contractions. But it is nonetheless important to understand 
before delving into the levered- losses framework. Only by under-
standing the fundamentals view can we appreciate the departures 
from it that cause economic disasters.
The Fundamentals View and Robinson Crusoe
Th e basic idea behind the fundamentals view is that the total out-
put, or GDP, of the economy is determined by its productive ca-
pacity: workers, capital, and the technology of fi rms. Th e economy 
is defi ned by what it can produce, not by what is demanded. Total 
production is limited only by natural barriers, like the rate at which 
our machines can convert various inputs into output, the number 

48 C H A P T E R  F O U R
of working hours in a day per person, and the willingness of people 
to work versus relax. Th is is sometimes called the supply- side view 
because it emphasizes the productive capacity, or supply, of re-
sources.
Given the emphasis on the supply side of the economy, eco-
nomic fl uctuations in these models are driven by changes in the 
economy’s productive capacity. For example, one of the crucial 
building blocks of the fundamentals view is the “Robinson Cru-
soe” economy, which is an economy with just one person, Robin-
son Crusoe, and one good, coconuts.3 Th e production of coconuts 
is determined by the number of coconut trees (“capital”) and the 
amount Robinson Crusoe chooses to work to get the coconuts 
from the trees (“labor supply”). Th e GDP of this economy is the 
total number of coconuts produced given capital and labor supply.
What causes a severe contraction in output in this simplifi ed 
economy? Any shock to the island that destroys productive capac-
ity. A hurricane is an obvious example. If a hurricane hits the island 
and destroys a large number of coconut trees, then the production 
of coconuts falls considerably. Th e economy goes through a “re-
cession” characterized by lower coconut consumption, where the 
decline in consumption is driven by the hurricane’s destruction of 
productive capacity. Th e output of the economy is determined by 
the available resources for production, not by any shift  in demand.
Further, unless productive capacity is diminished, it is very dif-
fi cult to understand why Robinson Crusoe would all of a sudden 
choose to massively cut coconut consumption. In the absence of 
some disastrous event, the only reason Robinson would cut coco-
nut consumption would be a change in his preferences or beliefs. 
For example, perhaps he wakes up one morning and decides he 
would prefer to delay eating coconuts until later in life. Or perhaps 
he has a belief that a hurricane is coming, so he needs to save up on 
coconuts. Th ese kinds of shocks are diffi  cult to measure and, in our 
view, hard to justify in practice.
Th e fundamentals view has a diffi  cult time explaining severe 

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  49
contractions in advanced economies. Severe contractions are al-
most never associated with an obvious shock to the productive ca-
pacity of the economy. For example, no severe calamity such as war 
or natural disaster initiated the Great Depression, the Great Reces-
sion, or the current economic malaise plaguing Europe. Th ere was 
no loss of technological capacity. We did not forget how to make 
cars, airplanes, or houses. And while the price of real estate crashed 
during each of these episodes, we did not witness a destruction of 
homes or buildings. Severe recessions are triggered even when no ob-
vious destruction of productive capacity occurs.
Th e failure of the fundamentals view can be boiled down to two 
main issues. First, severe recessions are not initiated by some ca-
lamity that destroys the productive capacity of the economy. Th ey 
are set off  when asset prices collapse and households sharply pull 
back on spending. Second, in the fundamentals view, even if we 
have some shock that causes a decline in spending, there is no obvi-
ous reason why the economy would suff er. Th at is, lower spending 
in the fundamentals view does not lead to contraction or job loss. 
Remember, output in the fundamentals view is determined by the 
productive capacity of the economy, not by demand. In response to 
a sharp decline in consumption, the economy in the fundamen-
tals view has natural corrective forces that keep it operating at full 
capacity. Th ese include lower interest rates and consumer prices, 
which we explain further below. Obviously, however, these correc-
tive forces weren’t able to keep the economy on track.
Signifi cant departures from the fundamentals view are needed 
to explain severe contractions, and any theory that departs from 
the fundamentals view must address these key issues. An alter-
native theory must explain why households sharply pull back on 
spending, and why the cut in spending is so destructive for total 
output. Why doesn’t the economy adjust to lower spending? Why 
does economic output decline? Why do people lose their jobs? Th e 
levered- losses framework answers these questions and is strongly 
supported by the data. Let’s go through it.

50 C H A P T E R  F O U R
The Levered- Losses Framework4
Th e fi rst ingredient of the levered- losses framework is diff erences 
across the population due to debt. Th ere are borrowers and savers 
in the economy, and the borrowers have substantial leverage. Th ey 
borrow in the form of debt contracts from savers, and these debt 
contracts require an interest payment each period. Th e debt con-
tract gives the saver the senior claim on the assets of the borrower. 
Or, in other words, in the event that the borrower does not pay, the 
saver has the right to foreclose on the assets of the borrower. If 
the house price falls and the borrower sells, he must still pay back 
the full amount of the mortgage. Th e borrower has the junior claim 
on the home and therefore experiences the fi rst losses associated 
with any decline in house prices.
Borrowers tend to be households that have low net worth, which 
is exactly the reason they have to borrow to buy a home. Savers 
tend to be households that have high net worth. In the model, the 
savers lend directly to the borrowers, which is equivalent to saying 
the rich lend to the poor. In reality, of course, the savers put their 
money into a bank, a money- market fund, or direct holdings of 
fi nancial assets such as stocks. Th at money fi nds its way into mort-
gages for the borrower. Th e point remains: Savers, through their 
fi nancial holdings, have the senior claim on the underlying houses. 
Th e rich are protected against house- price declines not only be-
cause they are rich but also because they have a senior claim on 
housing.
Th e second ingredient of the levered- losses framework is a shock 
to the economy that leads to a sharp pullback in spending by debt- 
burdened families. Th is shock can be viewed generally as any event 
that lowers the net- worth position of levered households or makes 
it more diffi  cult for them to borrow. Practically speaking, a collapse 
in real estate prices is almost always the shock. As we showed in 
chapter , the collapse in house prices during the Great Recession 
destroyed the net worth of indebted households.
Th e spending impact of the fall in real estate prices is amplifi ed 

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  51
in the levered- losses framework due to two eff ects. Th e fi rst is the 
concentration of losses on those who have the highest spending 
sensitivity with respect to housing wealth: debtors. Th e second is 
the amplifi cation of the original house- price shock due to foreclo-
sures.
When debt concentrates losses on indebted households, there are 
several reasons why they stop spending. One is that they must re-
build their wealth in order to make sure they have money to spend 
in the future. For example, consider a married couple in their late 
fi ft ies approaching retirement. Th ey had  percent  equity in their 
home that they were planning on using to fi nance their retirement, 
either by downsizing and selling their home, or by taking out a 
home- equity loan. When house prices collapse by  percent and 
their home equity disappears, they are in dire straits. Th ey no lon-
ger have suffi  cient wealth to cover their planned spending in retire-
ment. As a result, they cut spending in order to build up  savings.5
Beyond the immediate eff ect of wanting to save more due to 
lost wealth, levered households also cut back on spending due to 
tighter constraints on borrowing. For example, levered households 
no longer have suffi  cient home equity to use as collateral for bor-
rowing. Th ey are also likely to have a hard time refi nancing into a 
lower mortgage interest rate. Th ese tighter borrowing constraints 
depress spending by indebted households. Th e overall decline in 
spending in the levered- losses framework is larger than it would be 
if the housing losses were more equally distributed across the popu-
lation. As we have demonstrated in chapter , the spending of in-
debted households is more sensitive to housing- wealth losses than 
the spending of savers. In other words, savers can absorb losses 
much more easily without reducing their spending.
Th e second channel through which debt amplifi es the impact of 
housing shock is the foreclosure externality discussed in chapter . 
If the initial decline in house prices is large enough, some of the in-
debted home owners may owe more on their house than it is worth. 
Underwater households are much more likely to default on their 
mortgage payments, either because the payment becomes prohibi-

52 C H A P T E R  F O U R
tively expensive or because of strategic motives. Regardless, these 
defaults lead to foreclosures that in turn lead to further reductions 
in house prices. Spending cuts driven by the initial decline in home 
values are further amplifi ed as foreclosures push house prices fur-
ther down.
While we have focused on the example of creditor and debtor 
households in our levered- losses framework, the intuition applies 
more broadly. For example, the borrower may be a country, such as 
Spain, that has borrowed substantially from another country, such 
as Germany. A fall in house prices in Spain in this example forces 
Spanish households to cut back sharply on spending for the same 
reasons discussed above. Germany is protected from the house- 
price declines because Germans have the senior claim on the Span-
ish housing stock.
We have now described how a large decline in spending occurs 
in the levered- losses framework, a decline that the fundamentals 
view cannot easily explain. But as we pointed out above, there is an 
additional failure of the fundamentals view we must address. In the 
fundamentals view, the economy has natural corrective forces that 
keep it operating at full capacity, even if there is a severe decline in 
spending.
How Does the Economy Try to React?
Th e fi rst way that the economy tries to prevent economic catastro-
phe when indebted households cut back is through a sharp reduc-
tion in interest rates. As borrowers rebuild their balance sheets by 
reducing borrowing, the demand for savings in the economy rises. 
Th is pushes interest rates down as money fl ows into the fi nan-
cial system where nobody is borrowing. Eventually, interest rates 
should become low enough to induce businesses to borrow and 
invest, which should help make up for lower consumer spending. 
Further, savers in the economy, those less aff ected by the decline 
in house prices, should be induced to spend more— extremely low 
interest rates should encourage savers to buy a new car or remodel 

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  53
their kitchen. Th is process is aided by the central bank, which typi-
cally responds to a crisis by pushing down short- term interest rates. 
Spending by savers and investment by businesses should fi ll in for 
the gap left  by borrowers cutting back, and the aggregate economy 
should escape unharmed.
Th e economy also tries to prevent economic catastrophe through 
the goods market: when spending collapses, businesses reduce 
prices. As prices decline, buyers should eventually return to the 
mar ket. Similarly, for a smaller country that relies heavily on ex-
ports, a decline in domestic spending will lead to exchange- rate 
depreciation, which makes that country’s exports less expensive 
to foreigners and should boost domestic output. All together, the 
combination of lower interest rates, lower domestic prices, and a 
depreciated currency is how an economy tries to handle a massive 
negative demand shock from indebted households.
But we already know that these adjustments don’t work. In the 
Great Recession, the economy was unable to react to the massive 
demand shock from indebted households. Th ere must be frictions 
that prevent these adjustments— frictions that amplify the decline 
in spending by levered households into a nationwide recession with 
high unemployment.
The Frictions
Th e most well- known friction is called the zero lower bound on 
nominal interest rates.6 Th e zero lower bound means that interest 
rates cannot get low enough to actually induce savers in the 
economy to start buying. If interest rates cannot decrease enough, 
the gap in spending left  by levered households cutting back re-
mains unfi lled. Th is is also referred to as the “liquidity trap,” be-
cause when an interest rate is kept at zero when it needs to be nega-
tive, people save their money in liquid instruments such as cash 
and U.S. government treasury bills. Instead of spending, savers 
hoard money in risk- free assets.
Th e zero lower bound on interest rates exists because the gov-

54 C H A P T E R  F O U R
ernment issues paper money— cash— which cannot have a nega-
tive return.7 We normally value cash for its transaction purposes: 
paying the babysitter or the parking valet at a restaurant. But cash is 
also an asset. You could theoretically hold all of your assets in cash. 
If you put all of your money into cash, what is the worst interest 
rate you could possibly get? Th e answer:  percent. In the absence 
of infl ation, cash will always yield an interest rate of  percent for 
the investor, and it is risk- free. Given that any investor could always 
hold a risk- free asset (cash) and be guaranteed a return of  per-
cent, no asset can ever have a negative expected nominal return. 
Th is means there is a zero lower bound on interest rates: no nominal 
interest rate in the economy can be below  percent.
Suppose instead savers were charged for saving money in the 
bank. If you put $ in today, you get only $ out in a year. In 
such a situation, the saver would be induced to buy goods instead 
of save— why let money rot in the bank when you could buy a 
new home or car? Savers would consume in response to negative 
interest rates, therefore helping to off set the decline in spending by 
borrowers.
But the zero lower bound on interest rates prevents interest rates 
from becoming negative. In the example above, if a bank tried to 
charge you $ for putting money in a deposit account, you would 
take the money and put it in your safe at home, which would guar-
antee you a  percent return— hence, the zero lower bound. As a 
result, the economy is stuck in a liquidity trap. Borrowers cannot 
spend as they rebuild their balance sheets and face severe borrow-
ing constraints. Savers refuse to spend because interest rates are not 
suffi  ciently negative to induce them to consume.8 Economic activ-
ity then becomes demand- driven. Anything that can induce house-
holds in the economy to spend will increase total output. It should 
come as no surprise that almost every major economic contraction 
in history is associated with very low nominal interest rates. As 
we write, interest rates on short- term U.S. treasury bills have been 
 percent for fi ve years.
Infl ation is an obvious way of getting real interest rates into 

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  55
negative territory. Infl ation acts similarly to a bank charging a saver 
for holding cash. For now, we will ignore infl ation (but will return 
to it in the policy section of the book in chapter ).
What about lower consumer prices? Shouldn’t they make people 
want to spend? Th e answer again is no, and a decline in consumer 
prices may even make the problem worse. Lower prices are pos-
sible only if fi rms lower their costs— by reducing wages. However, 
a wage cut crushes indebted households who have debt burdens 
fi xed in nominal terms. If an indebted household faces a wage cut 
while their mortgage payment remains the same, they are likely to 
cut spending even further. Th is leads to a vicious cycle in which 
indebted households cut spending, which leads fi rms to reduce 
wages, which leads to higher debt burdens for households, which 
leads them to cut back even further. Th is was famously dubbed the 
“debt- defl ation” cycle by Irving Fisher in the aft ermath of the Great 
Depression.9
Th ere are several other important frictions that prevent the 
economy from adjusting to a severe spending shock. For example, 
borrowers tend to buy diff erent types of products than savers. If 
borrowers start buying less, the economy would need to ramp 
down production of goods that borrowers like and ramp up pro-
duction of goods that savers like. Th ere are frictions in the realloca-
tion process. Th e economy may need to transfer workers from the 
construction sector to other sectors. It may need to transfer work-
ers from local retail to industries exporting to other countries in 
an eff ort to boost output via depreciation.10 It may need to trans-
fer spending from borrowers to savers. Generally, any friction that 
prevents such reallocation will translate the decline in spending by 
levered households into a severe economic recession with high un-
employment.
We Are in This Together
When debtors sharply pull back on household spending, frictions 
such as the zero lower bound prevent savers from making up for 

56 C H A P T E R  F O U R
the shortfall. But the disastrous economic eff ects of lower demand 
are not borne uniquely by debtors— they spread through the entire 
economy. Levered losses aff ect even those who never had any debt 
during the boom.
Th e most devastating knock- on eff ect of lower demand driven 
by levered losses is a massive increase in unemployment. Even 
workers living in areas completely immune from the housing bust 
lose their jobs because of the decline in household spending. Th e 
Monaco Coach Corporation is a useful example. Northern Indiana 
didn’t have high debt levels or even a large collapse in house prices. 
Why did these workers lose their jobs?
Tackling the reasons for high unemployment is a serious chal-
lenge. Even today, macroeconomists continue a long and heated 
debate on the reasons for and even the existence of involuntary un-
employment. Standard macroeconomic models struggle with in-
voluntary unemployment because wages should adjust to shocks in 
order to equate the amount that households want to work (“labor 
supply”) with the amount that fi rms want to hire (“labor demand”). 
Involuntary unemployment can only exist in a macroeconomic 
model if there are some “rigidities” that prevent wages from ad-
justing and workers from fi nding jobs.
We’ll start with a simple example to illustrate employment dy-
namics in the face of levered losses.11 Suppose an economy is made 
up of two islands, Debtor Island and Creditor Island. Everyone 
on Debtor Island has very large debt burdens, whereas no one on 
Creditor Island has any debt. Households on both Debtor Island 
and Creditor Island consume two goods: autos and haircuts. Autos 
can be traded between Debtor Island and Creditor Island, whereas 
haircuts cannot. In other words, employment in the auto industry 
on each island is a function of total demand on both Debtor and 
Creditor Islands, whereas employment in barbershops depends 
only on the number of haircuts demanded on the local island. We 
assume that people cannot move across the islands; they are stuck 
where they are.

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  57
Let’s suppose that house prices collapse on Debtor Island. Le-
vered losses lead to a sharp pullback in spending on cars and hair-
cuts on that island. If wages and prices fl exibly adjust, what should 
we expect to happen? Demand for haircuts comes only from those 
living on Debtor Island; as a result, lower demand for haircuts will 
push down the price of haircuts. Th is will in turn push down the 
wage of barbers on Debtor Island. Barbers don’t like lower wages, so 
many barbers will quit to go work in the auto industry.
But more workers in the auto industry will also push down 
wages at the auto plant until the wages in the auto plant and the 
barbershop are equalized. Auto manufacturers will have more 
available workers, so they will pay them less. For Debtor Island, the 
end result will be higher employment in the auto industry, fewer 
barbers, and lower wages. But total employment will not change. 
Workers will move out of barbershops and into the auto industry, 
and they will be forced to accept lower wages.
Creditor Island is connected to Debtor Island through the auto 
industry. So even though Creditor Island has not experienced le-
vered losses, it will nonetheless be aff ected. Wages fell on Debtor 
Island in the auto industry, which allows auto manufacturers on 
Debtor Island to sell cars more cheaply. Because autos produced 
on Debtor Island can be sold on Creditor Island, Creditor Island 
manufacturers must respond by also lowering auto prices— and 
the wages paid to autoworkers. On Creditor Island, autoworkers 
respond to lower wages by leaving the auto plant to become bar-
bers. But of course, this pushes down the wage of barbers until it is 
again equalized with the lower wage in the auto plant. Even in this 
example in which wages and prices fl exibly adjust, Creditor Island 
households are directly aff ected by levered losses on Debtor Island. 
Th ey must now accept lower wages.
But much more severe problems exist if wages and prices do not 
fully adjust. Let’s suppose we have full price and wage rigidity, so 
neither prices nor wages adjust in the face of lower demand from 
Debtor Island households. When house prices collapse on Debtor 

58 C H A P T E R  F O U R
Island, households again cut spending on autos and haircuts. Auto 
plants and barbershops will bring in less revenue, and they will 
need to cut costs. But if they cannot lower wages in response to this 
decline in demand, both auto plants and barbershops will be forced 
to lay off  workers. Debtor Island experiences a sharp increase in 
unemployment.
But here is the crucial insight: Creditor Island also suff ers high 
unemployment. When Debtor Island households cut back on auto 
spending, Creditor Island auto plants have lower demand for their 
cars from Debtor Island, and therefore lower revenue. If they can-
not lower costs by lowering wages, they will fi re workers. Fired au-
toworkers will try to get hired at the barbershop, but the inability of 
wages to decline will prevent them from getting a job. As a result, 
workers on Creditor Island become unemployed even though they 
never had any debt at all.
Th is simple example assumes wage rigidity to prevent the reallo-
cation needed to maintain full employment. Debtor Island workers 
need to switch from barbershops to the auto industry, and Credi-
tor Island workers need to switch from the auto industry to bar-
bershops. When a local economy suff ers a demand shock, workers 
need to be reallocated from sectors catering to local demand to sec-
tors catering to external demand. Flexible wages would allow this 
reallocation to occur, while rigid wages prevent it. But of course, 
there are many other frictions that would serve the same role. In 
this example, if barbers need extensive training to become auto-
workers and vice versa, we would also see a rise in unemployment 
when the demand shock occurred.
We do not mean to give the impression that fl exible wages are 
the solution. We have already seen how a reduction in wages for in-
debted households exacerbates the spending problem due to what 
Irving Fisher calls the “debt- defl ation” cycle. Th e bottom line is 
that very serious adjustments in the economy are required when 
levered households cut spending. Wages need to fall, and workers 
need to switch into new industries. Frictions in this reallocation 
process translate the spending decline into large job losses.

L E V E R E D  L O S S E S  59
Reallocation?
A common argument put forward during the contraction is that 
we should rely on the reallocation process to save us from disaster. 
Allow wages to fall and workers to reallocate, the argument goes. 
But this approach faces enormous obstacles. Th e economy requires 
quick adjustment in response to such a massive decline in spend-
ing. Any friction that prevents quick adjustment will hurt the entire 
economy. A more eff ective approach would prevent the sharp de-
cline in spending by targeting the levered- losses problem directly. 
Th is will be a major theme of our policy recommendations later in 
the book.
Th e important lesson from this example is that we are in this 
mess together. Even households in the economy that stayed away 
from toxic debt during the boom suff er the consequences of the 
collapse in household spending during the bust. For example, many 
auto plants in the United States are in areas of the country that 
completely avoided the housing boom and bust: Indiana, Ohio, and 
Kentucky. Yet autoworkers in these states suff ered during the Great 
Recession because highly levered households in other parts of the 
country stopped buying cars. Employment is the most impor-
tant channel through which levered losses propagates through the 
economy. But there are also other channels. When highly levered 
households default on their obligations, foreclosures by banks de-
press house prices throughout the neighborhood. Defaults also 
lead banks to cut back on lending to other households. Th e entire 
country suff ers.
In an economic crisis brought about by levered losses, the 
natural reactions are moral judgment and outrage. A common 
refrain we hear is that irresponsible home owners borrowed too 
much, and they should be made to suff er. But such moralizing dur-
ing the crisis is also counterproductive. Th e problem of levered 
losses quickly spreads throughout the economy; the sharp pullback 
in household spending by levered households aff ects us all.

5: EXPLAINING UNEMPLOYMENT
In January  Senator Bob Corker, a Republican from Tennes-
see, blasted the Obama administration’s proposal to write down 
principal on underwater home mortgages at taxpayer expense. He 
called it “terrible public policy.” His offi  ce released a harsh state-
ment: “[Th e legislation] means Tennesseans and other Americans 
who acted responsibly will be paying for the consequences of reck-
less housing practices in other states like California, Florida, Ne-
vada, and New York, where exotic mortgages and no down pay-
ment loans were most prevalent prior to the  fi nancial crisis.” 
To prevent such bailouts for reckless home owners, Senator Corker 
said, “I intend to introduce a bill this week that says if states like 
California or Florida want to reduce principal on mortgages in 
their states, they can do so themselves with state money, not with 
federal taxpayer dollars.”1
From the perspective of his constituents in Tennessee, would 
helping home owners in hard- hit housing states indeed be “terrible 
public policy,” as Senator Corker argued? Let’s examine the Tennes-
sean economy a bit closer to answer this question. Senator Corker 
was correct that Tennessee mostly avoided the housing boom and 
bust. From  to , house prices in Tennessee rose by only 
 percent, far below the  percent growth in California and Flo-
rida. Households in Tennessee came into the recession with debt 

E X P L A I N I N G  U N E M P L O Y M E N T  61
levels well below the national average, and net worth dropped by 
only  percent during the housing crash.
So Tennessee avoided the housing boom and crash, but does that 
mean they were immune to the disaster in other states? Would Ten-
nesseans be better off  forcing hard- hit households in California and 
Florida to fend for themselves? Th e problem with Senator Cork-
er’s logic is that Tennessee is not an isolated island. Jobs in Ten-
nessee are highly dependent on the performance of the rest of the 
U.S. economy. For example, Tennessee had a thriving auto manu-
facturing industry in . In fact, Tennessee had the sixth high-
est fraction of workers in the auto manufacturing industry of any 
state in the country. In  more than , Tennesseans were 
employed in auto or auto- parts production plants. When a Tennes-
sean auto plant produced a car, that car was almost always sent to 
be sold in another state. And many of these cars were shipped to 
states where the housing crash was especially severe. So when Flo-
ridians massively cut back on auto spending, workers at auto plants 
in Tennessee suff ered the consequences. During the Great Reces-
sion, one out of every four Tennesseans working in the auto manu-
facturing industry lost their job. Th at’s , Tennesseans who lost 
their jobs.
It wasn’t just auto plants. We see a similar pattern with other 
goods produced to be shipped to other parts of the country. In  
Tennessee ranked eleventh in the country in terms of the share of 
workers producing goods meant to be shipped to areas outside the 
state they were working in. From  to , one out every six 
Tennessee workers producing these goods lost their job. Th e sharp 
drop in household spending in California, Florida, Nevada, and 
New York directly aff ected Tennessee workers. We cannot be cer-
tain of the number of jobs in Tennessee that would have been saved 
by policy eff orts to mitigate the housing crisis elsewhere. But the 
view that helping troubled home owners in California and Florida 
was “terrible public policy” from the perspective of Tennesseans is 
suspect. When it comes to problems associated with levered losses, 

62 C H A P T E R  F I V E
it does not matter where you live. As we’ve said, the ripple eff ects 
on the labor market mean that we are all in this together.
Th e previous chapter laid out the levered- losses theory that dem-
onstrates why Senator Corker’s argument is fl awed. We showed 
how a shock to spending on Debtor Island would ultimately lead 
to job losses on Creditor Island through the auto sector. In this 
chapter, we turn to data to fi gure out exactly how many jobs were 
lost because of the destruction in household net worth in the real 
economy. We also uncover the exact frictions that translated the 
large demand shock into the biggest jobs crisis since the Great De-
pression.
Quantifying Jobs Lost
From March  to March , the private sector of the U.S. 
economy shed  million jobs, and the unemployment rate shot up 
to  percent. Th is was unprecedented in recent U.S. history. How 
many of these jobs were lost due to the shock to household net 
worth that we emphasized in the preceding chapters? Our goal here 
is to use the data to answer this question. As we discussed in chap-
ter , household spending from  to  declined by much 
more in highly levered counties that experienced a sharp drop in 
net worth. We want to estimate how many jobs were lost through-
out the economy due to this decline in spending in the hardest- hit 
areas of the United States.
A natural starting point would be to see how many more jobs 
were lost in housing- disaster areas relative to areas that avoided 
the housing downturn. For example, we could show that more jobs 
were lost in California than in Tennessee. But this would be incom-
plete for the same reason that Senator Corker’s logic was fl awed— 
goods bought in housing- disaster areas were produced all over the 
country. Th is presents a serious challenge: How do we estimate the 
number of jobs lost in areas that avoided the housing collapse be-
cause of the decline in spending coming from other parts of the 
country?

E X P L A I N I N G  U N E M P L O Y M E N T  63
We start by splitting employment in the United States into two 
major groups: jobs catering to the local economy and jobs cater-
ing to the national economy. We call jobs that cater to the local 
economy non- tradable jobs. Th ese are in retail and local services, 
such as jobs at restaurants and grocery stores. Th ey depend on 
spending in the local economy. We call jobs catering to the national 
economy tradable jobs. Tradable jobs are those that produce goods 
that are shipped to other parts of the country. Th ese jobs include 
building autos or other durable goods like furniture or home ap-
pliances. Tradable jobs also include building machines meant for 
other businesses to use in their production processes. Th ey depend 
on national spending. Th is is the same measure we used in the Ten-
nessee example above— Tennessee ranked eleventh in the country 
on the fraction of all jobs in the tradable sector.2
As we explained in the Creditor Island– Debtor Island example in 
the last chapter, the levered- losses view of employment makes spe-
cifi c predictions about the location of job losses during the Great 
Recession. We expect to see much larger declines in jobs cater-
ing to the local economy in areas of the country suff ering the net- 
worth shock. However, we don’t expect losses in jobs catering to 
the national economy to be unique to areas with net- worth shocks. 
Instead, we expect to see the decline in jobs catering to the national 
economy spread evenly throughout the country. Observing these 
two joint patterns in the data— non- tradable job losses concen-
trated in hard- hit areas and tradable job losses spread throughout 
the country— would support the levered- losses framework.
Th e auto industry provides an excellent example to illustrate 
this. Th e production and selling of autos utilizes both tradable and 
non- tradable jobs. Workers at an auto plant produce cars meant to 
be sold throughout the country. Th ese tradable jobs are therefore 
reliant on national demand for autos. However, the actual selling 
of cars needs workers at an auto dealership. At some time during a 
purchase, a worker must interact with a buyer, even if only briefl y. 
Non- tradable jobs at a local dealership therefore rely heavily on the 
local demand for autos.

64 C H A P T E R  F I V E
Th e levered- losses framework makes strong predictions on geo-
graphic patterns in auto- industry employment during the Great 
Recession. Th e data should show many layoff s at dealerships in 
areas of the country that experienced the largest drop in net worth. 
We should see fewer job losses at dealerships in areas that avoided 
the housing downturn. And given the enormous decline in de-
mand for autos coming from hard- hit areas, the data should also 
reveal that jobs producing autos or auto parts were lost throughout 
the country. Th e levered- losses framework predicts layoff s at auto 
plants regardless of the local shock to net worth.
Th is is exactly what we fi nd in the data. Th ere was a very strong 
relation between job losses at auto dealers in a county and the size 
of the local net- worth shock. In counties with the largest shock to 
net worth,  percent of jobs at dealerships were lost. Counties with 
the smallest shock saw a decline of only  percent. We know that in-
debted households in hard- hit counties sharply pulled back on auto 
spending. Th is large decline directly aff ected jobs at dealerships. In 
contrast, the decline in spending was more modest in counties that 
avoided the housing shock, especially at the beginning of the reces-
sion. As a result, fewer jobs were lost at dealers in those areas. How-
ever, job losses at plants producing autos were large throughout the 
country. Job losses among auto production workers ranged from  
to  percent across all counties producing autos, completely inde-
pendent of local housing markets.
When we put the evidence together, it tells a compelling story. In 
counties that avoided net- worth decimation, auto sales hardly de-
clined. Jobs at dealerships were safe. Yet workers producing autos 
at plants in these same counties experienced massive layoff s. Th ese 
facts demonstrate that job losses in auto production plants were a 
direct result of the spending shock coming from hard- hit housing 
areas of the country.
Of course, the exact same test can be performed for all jobs, not 
just those in the auto industry. And the evidence is pretty clear. Th e 
decline in non- tradable jobs catering to local demand was much 
larger in indebted counties experiencing the biggest drop in house-

E X P L A I N I N G  U N E M P L O Y M E N T  65
hold net worth. But the decline in tradable jobs catering to national 
demand was widespread across the country. Figure . plots the 
pattern graphically. Just as in chapter , high net- worth- decline 
counties are the  percent of counties that experienced the larg-
est drop in housing net worth during the recession, and low net- 
worth- decline counties are the  percent with the smallest drop. 
As the left  panel illustrates, the drop in non- tradable jobs was 
much larger in counties getting hammered by the housing shock. 
But the right panel demonstrates how tradable jobs were lost at the 
same rate across the country. Regardless of whether there was a 
local housing collapse, jobs producing goods for national demand 
dropped almost  percent across the country.
 Th e pattern in fi gure . didn’t play itself out in only in Tennes-
see. Another good example is Iowa. During the housing boom, 
house prices in Iowa barely rose above the rate of infl ation. And 
Iowans entered the Great Recession with household- debt levels far 
below the national average. From  to , house prices re-
mained constant in Iowa; there was no dramatic housing bust. Fur-
Figure 5.1: Employment Decline during Great Recession

66 C H A P T E R  F I V E
ther, total spending by Iowans actually increased during the Great 
Recession by  percent. Given the strength of the local economy 
in Iowa, we shouldn’t be surprised that almost no jobs catering to 
local demand were lost during the Great Recession. Employment in 
retail outlets and restaurants remained the same. But jobs catering 
to national demand fell by  percent. Despite the strength of the 
local economy, Iowans working in these industries suff ered. Th is is 
exactly what we would expect if levered losses in other parts of the 
country were driving unemployment in Iowa.
Th e pattern in fi gure . underlies our aggregate estimate of 
the total jobs lost in the U.S. economy as a result of the shock to 
net worth coming from the housing collapse. Using a few techni-
cal assumptions, we estimate that  million jobs were lost between 
March  and March  because of levered losses, which rep-
resents  percent of all jobs lost in our sample.3
Frictions, Frictions
As mentioned in the last chapter, according to the fundamen-
tals view, there shouldn’t be such widespread unemployment. In-
stead, the economy has mechanisms that should make it fl exible 
and maintain full employment, even in the face of a large nega-
tive demand shock. For example, in the sectors and locations hard-
est hit, wages should decline. In the Central Valley in California, 
the sharp decline in demand should have lowered wages in restau-
rants, retail outlets, and other jobs catering to local demand. Lower 
wages should have encouraged retail establishments to keep work-
ers rather than fi ring them. And as some workers left  these indus-
tries in search of better wages, this should have lowered wages in 
the exporting sector of the economy.
In theory, wages would get pushed down to the point that ex-
porting companies would fi nd it profi table to set up plants in the 
Central Valley. Th is exporting eff ect is a standard mechanism em-
phasized by economists. When a city or country has a collapse in 
spending, a fl exible economy should be able to adjust by lowering 

E X P L A I N I N G  U N E M P L O Y M E N T  67
wages and making exporting industries more competitive. Another 
adjustment mechanism should have been migration. Perhaps it was 
time for workers to pack up and move to other parts of the coun-
try with a stronger job market. Economists going back to Joseph 
Schumpeter have argued that this “creative destruction” process is 
natural and even healthy. When the economy needs to reallocate its 
production to new activities, workers move in order to take advan-
tage of new opportunities.
But unfortunately, the U.S. economy during the Great Recession 
didn’t work that way, and unemployment persisted. John May-
nard Keynes had it exactly when he wrote: “It may well be that 
the classical theory represents the way in which we should like our 
economy to behave. But to assume that it actually does so is to as-
sume our diffi  culties away.”4 We can’t assume that these mecha-
nisms take care of unemployment. We should instead closely in-
vestigate why they don’t. Put another way, what exactly is it that 
prevents the economy from adjusting in the way we think it should?
We have already mentioned the zero lower bound on nomi-
nal interest rates. But two other frictions jump out from the data: 
wages don’t fall, and people don’t move. A trio of economists at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco studied wage growth from 
 to  and found striking results.5 Wage growth adjusted for 
infl ation actually increased annually by . percent from  to 
. And this happened despite the highest rate of unemployment 
in recent history.
Wages didn’t fall because of what’s called nominal wage rigid-
ity, or a situation in which wages in nominal dollar terms stay con-
stant. Th e San Francisco Fed economists examined the change in 
wages from year to year and found a dramatic spike in the frac-
tion of employees receiving the exact same nominal wage. In other 
words, employers during the Great Recession didn’t cut wages, but 
just kept them either fi xed or increased them slightly. Th e fraction 
of workers receiving the exact same nominal wage from one year 
to the next was higher during the Great Recession than at any other 
point since .

68 C H A P T E R  F I V E
Looking into the diff erences across the country in net- wealth 
shocks, we found some weak evidence of relative downward wage 
adjustment in the hardest- hit areas. Remember, the hardest- hit 
areas of the country witnessed a sharp decline in jobs catering to the 
national economy and the local economy. But the relative decline in 
wages in these areas was quite modest. Th e declines were nowhere 
near large enough to stem the rise in unemployment. In the  per-
cent of counties that were hardest hit by the decline in household 
net worth, the unemployment rate shot up from less than  percent 
to  percent during the Great Recession. It remained above  per-
cent in the summer of , three years aft er the offi  cial end of the 
recession.
With such dismal economic conditions, workers in these areas 
had strong incentives to look for jobs elsewhere. But that also didn’t 
happen. In fact, from  to , the population of hard- hit 
counties grew at exactly the same rate as counties that avoided the 
housing downturn. For example, in the three hardest- hit counties 
of the Californian Central Valley, , workers lost their jobs 
from  to , and the unemployment rate neared  percent. 
And yet the population actually grew slightly from  to . 
Despite the disastrous economic circumstances, people did not 
leave.
Why Unemployment?
Th e facts lead to one convincing conclusion: Th e economy was 
simply unable to adjust to the massive spending shock from levered 
losses. We’ve seen that wages didn’t fall and people didn’t look for 
jobs elsewhere. But why exactly? A large and ongoing body of re-
search continues to grapple with this question. In fact, it was ex-
actly the issue that motivated Keynes to write his new theory in 
— in our view, there is still no satisfying answer explaining it.
One explanation off ered is skills mismatch. Th e basic idea is that 
workers need to be retrained to work in other professions. Charles 
Plosser, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 

E X P L A I N I N G  U N E M P L O Y M E N T  69
put it succinctly: “You can’t change the carpenter into a nurse easily, 
and you can’t change the mortgage broker into a computer expert 
in a manufacturing plant very easily.”6 But the skills mismatch story 
is diffi  cult to reconcile with the widespread employment decline 
in the economy. Workers in every industry and of every education 
level witnessed a large increase in unemployment.
Another explanation is that delayed foreclosures and govern-
ment assistance reduced the incentive of workers to fi nd jobs dur-
ing the Great Recession. For example, Kyle Herkenhoff  and Lee 
Ohanian argue that the ability to skip mortgage payments with-
out being immediately foreclosed upon acts as a type of unemploy-
ment insurance.7 When a worker loses his job, he can choose to 
skip mortgage payments, but he must remain in his current home 
to take advantage of the benefi t. As a result, he has no incentive to 
search for a new job in a diff erent location. Similar arguments have 
been made concerning unemployment insurance and other gov-
ernment benefi ts, which in theory reduce the incentives for laid- off  
workers to take jobs with lower wages. If a laid- off  worker receives 
unemployment- insurance payments, the argument goes, then the 
wage that will induce him to take a job must be suffi  ciently high to 
compensate him for the displeasure of working.
Th ese arguments make sense in theory, but there is surprisingly 
little empirical evidence supporting them. Jesse Rothstein, for ex-
ample, examined the eff ects of unemployment insurance on the un-
employment rate.8 He did fi nd an eff ect: extending unemployment 
insurance did in fact increase the unemployment rate during the 
Great Recession. But the eff ects were very small, with the extension 
of unemployment insurance increasing the unemployment rate by 
only . to . percent compared to the overall increase of almost 
 percent. Johannes Schmieder, Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender 
studied the eff ects of extending unemployment insurance in Ger-
many during booms and recessions.9 Th ey found evidence that the 
eff ects of unemployment insurance that discouraged people from 
fi nding jobs were actually smaller in recessions.
Even if economists can’t explain unemployment, that should not 

70 C H A P T E R  F I V E
cloud the profession’s view of the human consequences. Th ey are 
severe. Steven Davis and Till von Wachter used income data from 
Social Security records to assess the pecuniary costs of unemploy-
ment during recessions.10 Th ey found that a worker laid off  in a 
recession loses income equal to three times his or her annual pre- 
layoff  earnings over the rest of their lifetime. As they point out, this 
is a staggering amount. And that is only the monetary loss. Th e 
non- pecuniary costs— depression, loss of dignity, divorce— may be 
harder to quantify, but they are almost certainly even larger.
Persistently high unemployment imposes devastating costs on 
society. And economists don’t have good answers for why it per-
sists. Our view is quite simple: we must work hard to change the 
economic system so that we avoid the shocks that lead to high un-
employment. Once the levered- losses shock materializes, the sharp 
decline in spending and the painful increase in unemployment 
are almost inevitable. We must address the problem at the source, 
rather than expect the economy to adjust when the shock materi-
alizes.
Levered Losses: A Summary
We started this book with a robust statistical pattern. Th e most se-
vere recessions in history were preceded by a sharp rise in house-
hold debt and a collapse in asset prices. Both the Great Recession 
and Great Depression in the United States followed this script. 
Even looking internationally, we see that the Great Recession was 
much more severe in countries with elevated household- debt bur-
dens. Th e relation between elevated household debt, asset- price 
collapses, and severe contractions is ironclad.
We then presented the levered- losses framework to explain 
this pattern. Th e key problem is debt. Debt amplifi es the decline 
in asset prices due to foreclosures and by concentrating losses on 
the indebted, who are almost always households with the lowest 
net worth in the economy. Th is is the fundamental feature of debt: 
it forces the debtor to bear the brunt of the shock. Th is is espe-

E X P L A I N I N G  U N E M P L O Y M E N T  71
cially dangerous because the spending of indebted households is 
extremely sensitive to shocks to their net worth— when their net 
worth is decimated, they sharply pull back on spending. Th e de-
mand shock overwhelms the economy, and the result is economic 
catastrophe.
Th e evidence from the Great Recession in the United States sup-
ports this framework. Th e collapse in the housing market ampli-
fi ed wealth inequality by destroying the net worth of poor indebted 
home owners. Using geographical variation across the United 
States, we show that the spending decline was concentrated in ex-
actly the counties where the levered- losses shock was largest. Th e 
consequences of the sharp drop in spending spread through the 
entire economy. Even workers in parts of the country that avoided 
the housing bust lost their jobs.
But so far we have avoided a central question: How does an 
economy get into this levered- losses trap in the fi rst place? Or, in 
other words, what generates such a large and eventually unsustain-
able increase in debt? We begin our investigation into these ques-
tions in the next chapter. As we will argue, debt not only amplifi es 
the crash. But it also fuels the bubble that makes the crash inevi-
table. If we want to permanently address the levered- losses prob-
lem, we must understand why debt is so toxic in both the bust and 
the boom.


BOIL AND BUBBLE
 PART II


For a long time, getting a mortgage on the west side of Detroit was 
a real challenge. Neighborhoods like Brightmoor, Five Points, and 
Rosedale Park, among others, have a rich history rooted in the 
birth of the auto industry in America.1 Many of the houses there 
were built in the s, as both blue-  and white- collar workers at 
automobile companies settled in. Th e area thrived into the s 
and s, but then a slow decay began. People began moving out, 
and crime in the s lowered home values. Still, in , these 
west- side neighborhoods were livable, even desirable places to raise 
a family. Median household income was $,, not too far below 
the national average of $,. Some areas of the west side had 
very high poverty rates, but others, like Rosedale Park, had poverty 
rates around the national average. In Rosedale Park, in particular, 
more than half of the population had at least some college educa-
tion.
But it was diffi  cult to get a mortgage to buy a home. Th e re-
cession of  and  hit Detroit hard, where unemployment 
topped  percent. Default rates on mortgages in  reached 
 percent, much higher than the national average of  percent. 
By  Detroit had recovered, but lenders remained wary of ex-
tending mortgages:  percent of all mortgage applications by west- 
side residents were denied. Credit scores were dismal. More than 
 percent of households had a credit score below , which in 
 6: THE CREDIT EXPANSION

76 C H A P T E R  S I X
most lending markets is considered subprime. Nationwide, only 
 percent of households had a credit score that put them in sub-
prime territory.
In the early s, however, something changed, and all of a 
sudden it was much easier to get a mortgage in west Detroit. From 
 to , mortgages for purchasing a home skyrocketed  per-
cent per year. Th e sharp jump contrasted with the paltry  percent 
annual growth in the three preceding years. As one news report put 
it, residents in these neighborhoods “went from  struggling to get 
loans from banks to having loan offi  cers knock on their doors.”2
Mark Whitehouse, a reporter for the Wall Street Journal, stud-
ied the expansion in mortgage lending on the  block of West 
Outer Drive.3 Before , home owners relied upon federal mort-
gage programs or bought their homes outright. But between  
and , more than half a billion dollars in mortgage loans from 
the private sector poured into the zip code containing West Outer 
Drive. Th e lending frenzy got out of control. As Derek Brown, the 
past president of the Detroit Real Estate Brokers Association put it, 
“Everyone was selling mortgages. Th ere were mortgage offi  ces on 
every block. One day bagging groceries and the next day selling my 
mother a mortgage? What the hell is that?”4
Th e dramatic expansion of mortgage availability was not unique 
to the west side of Detroit. For some reason, lenders were expand-
ing mortgage credit much more freely to borrowers who most 
likely would not have been able to get a mortgage otherwise. Th ese 
are referred to as marginal borrowers. Th e expansion of mortgage 
credit to marginal borrowers kicked off  an explosion in household 
debt in the United States from  to . In these seven years, 
U.S. household debt doubled, rising to $ trillion. Th is is how it all 
began.
Before the mortgage- credit boom, you could pretty accurately 
predict what percentage of mortgage applications would be de-
nied in a given zip code by looking at the fraction of people in that 
zip code with a credit score below . Zip codes with the highest 
credit scores had a mortgage- application denial rate of  percent, 

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  77
whereas zip codes with the worst credit scores, like the west- side 
Detroit neighborhoods, had a denial rate of  percent.5 But from 
 to , credit fl ooded into low credit- score zip codes. Mort-
gages originated for home purchase grew  percent per year, com-
pared to only  percent in high credit- score areas. Th is was the 
only period from  to  in which mortgage credit expanded 
so much more dramatically in low credit- score zip codes. Starting 
in , as default rates began to rise, lending collapsed in these 
areas, and by  low credit- score zip codes saw fewer mortgages 
originated than in .
Th e widespread nature of the mortgage- credit expansion was 
impressive. For example, low credit- score zip codes in Chicago 
saw mortgages for home purchase grow by  percent per year 
from  to . High credit- score zip codes saw only  per-
cent growth. Th e corresponding annual growth rates for Minne-
apolis were  percent and  percent. For Baltimore,  percent 
and  percent. For New York City,  percent and  percent. Ag-
gressive credit expansion to marginal borrowers was not isolated 
to Arizona, Nevada, or the west- side neighborhoods of Detroit. 
Th e phenomenon was nationwide. During the boom, mortgage- 
application denial rates in low credit- score zip codes plummeted 
from  percent to less than  percent. Th is is despite the fact that 
applications for mortgages skyrocketed. Th is means more marginal 
borrowers were applying for credit and a higher fraction them were 
getting approved. For high credit- score borrowers, there was only a 
very small decline in the denial rate.
How did the fl ow of credit aff ect the overall housing market? 
Before the credit boom, given their inability to get mortgage credit, 
marginal borrowers were typically renters. Starting in the late 
s and accelerating during the heart of the credit boom, the 
U.S. home- ownership rate increased by a full  percentage points, 
reaching  percent in . Th is may not sound like a lot, but it 
is important to put it into historical context. From the mid- s 
to the mid- s, the home- ownership rate remained very steady, 
between  and  percent. Compared to this, the rise in the home- 

78 C H A P T E R  S I X
ownership rate in just seven years was historic. Th e increase is 
equivalent to almost  million households owning a home in  
that they would not have owned had the ownership rate stayed at 
its historical average. Th e increase, however, was as fl eeting as the 
mortgage- credit boom itself: by  the home- ownership rate was 
back to  percent.
Strong Economic Fundamentals?
In October , as the mortgage- credit boom was reaching its 
frenzied height, then Council of Economic Advisers chairman Ben 
Bernanke touted recent advancements in the U.S. economy. As he 
testifi ed to Congress, “On each of the three indicators of the real 
economy— GDP growth, job creation, and productivity growth— 
the United States in recent years has the best record of any indus-
trial economy, and by a fairly wide margin.” Further, the boom in 
housing and mortgage markets could be explained in large part by 
these advancements: “House prices have risen by nearly  percent 
in the past two years. Although speculative activity has increased 
in some areas, at a national level these price increases largely refl ect 
strong economic fundamentals.”6
Th e belief that strong economic fundamentals were behind 
the mortgage- credit boom is a natural starting point. Why would 
people voluntarily take on more debt unless they thought they were 
going to be wealthier in the future? And then there was the ag-
gregate U.S. evidence: mortgage credit was increasing at the same 
time as workers enjoyed impressive productivity gains. Looking at 
the aggregate evidence, many assumed that the workers benefi t-
ing the most from productivity gains were also the ones borrowing 
more aggressively. But was this assumption true? Did those who 
were taking on unprecedented amounts of debt also have improved 
income prospects? To fi nd out, we need to focus on the marginal 
borrower— or the borrower on the margin who was taking on the 
extra $ trillion of debt during the housing boom.

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  79
Let’s return to west Detroit. From  to , the expansion of 
mortgage credit to neighborhoods on the west side of Detroit was 
unprecedented. Th ese areas were fi lled with marginal borrowers 
getting mortgages. But when we look at income, a striking pattern 
emerges: these same zip codes were actually seeing lower nominal 
income growth— average income fell by almost  percent in these 
zip codes. If we adjust for infl ation, the real buying power of in-
come was declining even more.
Th is is a startling result. As anyone who has ever obtained a 
mortgage knows, the income of a potential borrower almost always 
determines how much a banker is willing to lend. Th e higher the 
income, the more debt the borrower is allowed to carry. But in west 
Detroit, the exact opposite was happening. From  to , bor-
rower income declined, but lenders were willing to give even more 
credit. When it comes to Detroit, the new borrowers were not the 
ones experiencing high productivity gains. Th e situation was com-
pletely the opposite.
And this happened across the United States. Th roughout Ameri-
can cities, credit was pumped into low credit- score zip codes that 
were experiencing declining income growth. Credit was expanding 
at an unprecedented rate in the United States, but it was not fl ow-
ing to households with improved income prospects.7 Th e direction 
of the credit fl ow was particularly dysfunctional during the early 
years of the mortgage boom. From  to , low credit- score 
zip codes saw almost fl at nominal- income growth, which implies 
that real- income growth was negative. High credit- score zip codes 
saw much higher income growth. Th ere was an uptick in income 
for low credit- score zip codes from  to , but this was aft er 
much of the mortgage- credit expansion had occurred.
Th e behavior of lenders from  to  produced a very 
unusual statistical pattern: mortgage- credit growth and income 
growth became negatively correlated. Th at is, areas with lower in-
come growth received more mortgage credit. Our data set spans 
the years – ; it turns out that –  was the only 

80 C H A P T E R  S I X
period in this time frame in which this correlation was negative. In 
all other periods, mortgage- credit growth was positively related to 
income growth, just as we would expect if economic fundamentals 
were driving mortgage growth. But something unusual governed 
the –  credit expansion.
Th e microeconomic evidence is inconsistent with conclusions 
that many reached aft er looking at aggregate data. In the aggre-
gate, mortgage credit grew while the economy strengthened. But 
the circumstances of marginal borrowers were actually getting 
worse as mortgage credit fl ooded into their neighborhoods. Th e 
U.S. economy saw productivity gains, but not where debt burdens 
were growing.
Animal Spirits?
If improvements in income or productivity did not drive the aggres-
sive expansion in mortgage credit, we must look for alternative ex-
planations. One possibility is that the expansion of mortgage credit 
was a result of “animal spirits” or a bubble in the housing market 
that had nothing to do with fundamentals. Perhaps, for some inex-
plicable reason, house prices rose as the bubble formed, and lenders 
simply reacted to this irrational bubble by extending new credit to 
marginal borrowers against the rising value of their homes.
Th e key distinction between a more debt- centric view and the 
animal spirits view concerns the direction of causality. Was there 
an initial expansion in the supply of credit that then fueled a hous-
ing bubble (the debt view)? Or did the housing bubble start inde-
pendently and credit merely followed (the animal spirits view)? If 
the animal spirits view were correct, the expansion and collapse of 
the bubble would have happened even if there had been no debt 
at all. In the animal spirits view, debt is a sideshow, not the main 
culprit.
Can we distinguish between the debt and animal spirits views?8 
Let’s start by examining house prices in low credit- score neighbor-

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  81
hoods, where we already know mortgage credit was expanding dra-
matically. At the peak of the housing boom in , house prices 
in low credit- score zip codes had risen by  percent since . In 
comparison, house prices in high credit- score zip codes had risen 
by only  percent. Figure . plots this dramatic relative growth in 
house prices for low credit- score zip codes between  and . 
(It also illustrates the collapse in house prices aft er , which was 
the focus of the fi rst part of the book.)
 Did debt cause the bubble from  to , or did it simply 
follow it? Th e animal spirits view would point to the pattern in fi g-
ure . and say: “Aha! Lenders were reacting to the housing bubble 
in low credit- score neighborhoods and deciding to lend into them. 
Th e fundamental cause of the lending expansion was irrational ex-
pectations of higher house- price growth in these neighborhoods.” 
But the debt view would say causation runs the opposite way. It is a 
classic chicken- and- egg problem, diffi  cult to solve. Is there a way to 
use the data to tease out which way the causality goes? Yes, there is. 
But to explain how, we fi rst need a brief geography lesson.
Figure 6.1: House- Price Growth, High and Low Credit- Score Zip Codes

82 C H A P T E R  S I X
Cause, Effect, and Housing- Supply Elasticity
Empirical economists oft en face diffi  cult cause- and- eff ect chal-
lenges like the one described above. We attack these problems by 
focusing on variation in the data that allows us to “shut down” one 
of the two channels to see which is actually driving the relation. In 
our context, in order to test whether the growth in debt was driven 
by the house- price bubble or not, we want to somehow shut down 
the possibility of a house- price bubble. If mortgage- debt growth 
occurred despite shutting down the housing- bubble channel, then 
we can be confi dent that the bubble did not create the explosion in 
debt. But how can we eliminate the possibility of housing bubbles? 
Th at is where geography comes in.
Th ere is huge variation across America in its land topology. 
Some cities, like Indianapolis, are built on fl at terrain with no major 
water bodies limiting the expansion of new housing. In areas like 
these, if house prices rise above construction costs, supply responds 
quickly by building more houses. We therefore refer to cities with 
unrestricted, fl at terrain as having an elastic housing supply. On the 
other hand, cities with an inelastic housing supply are those that 
lie on hilly terrain or are surrounded by major water bodies that 
restrict the natural growth of the city. An obvious example is San 
Francisco. If builders want to construct additional housing units 
anywhere near San Francisco, they are restricted by both ocean and 
hills.
Th e housing- supply elasticity of a city is extremely useful for 
separating out the direction of causality between the debt expan-
sion and the housing bubble. Elastic cities like Indianapolis are 
more able to easily build housing units, so house prices can only 
increase so much. As a result, in these cities, we can eff ectively shut 
down the housing- bubble channel. If the mortgage- credit expan-
sion to marginal borrowers occurred even within elastic housing- 
supply cities— where house prices did not grow, and thus there was 
no bubble— then we can be sure that the housing bubble did not 
cause the credit expansion.9

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  83
We carried out exactly this test in our research, using an index 
developed by Albert Saiz from satellite- generated data that esti-
mates the amount of developable land in U.S. cities.10 As theory 
would predict, housing- supply elasticity had a large impact on 
house- price appreciation from  to . From  to , 
inelastic cities experienced slightly higher house- price growth than 
elastic cities. But the real diff erence occurred during the height of 
the boom, from  to . House prices rose by almost  per-
cent in inelastic cities in these fi ve years. In elastic cities, they rose 
only  percent. House prices increased in inelastic cities by more 
than twice those in elastic cities. House- price growth during the 
boom was highly uneven across the country.
If the housing bubble caused credit expansion, then we would 
observe a credit expansion to marginal borrowers only in cities that 
experienced a housing bubble. In other words, since there was no 
substantial house- price bubble in the elastic housing- supply cities, 
we should not observe aggressive expansion in debt in these cities 
if the pure animal spirits view holds. However, the evidence re-
futes the predictions of the pure animal spirits view. Even in elastic 
housing- supply cities with no housing boom, there was an aggres-
sive mortgage- credit expansion to low credit- score borrowers. But 
there was no signifi cant diff erence in house- price growth between 
low and high credit- score zip codes. More credit fl owed into sub-
prime zip codes, but house prices did not increase more than 
average because housing supply expanded.
Th e presence of aggressive credit expansion to low credit- score 
zip codes of elastic cities is very important. It proves that the house- 
price bubble was not driving the growth in mortgage credit. Figure 
. illustrates these patterns.11 Th e top panel demonstrates that there 
was no diff erential house- price growth in high and low credit- score 
zip codes within elastic housing- supply cities. Despite having the 
same house- price patterns, the bottom panel illustrates that mort-
gage credit expanded much more aggressively in low credit- score zip 
codes. Th e growth in mortgage credit for home purchases in elastic 
cities— especially for low credit- score zip codes— had no impact on 

84 C H A P T E R  S I X
house prices due to the geography of these areas. However, the situa-
tion was diff erent in inelastic housing- supply cities where new hous-
ing could not expand with ease. As billions of dollars in new mort-
gage debt fl owed into inelastic housing- supply cities, house prices 
began to skyrocket. Th is was especially true for low credit- score zip 
codes that saw the biggest increase in credit availability.
 House prices in high credit- score zip codes in inelastic cities 
increased by  percent between  and . However, house 
Figure 6.2: Debt and House Prices in Elastic Cities

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  85
prices in low credit- score zip codes increased by twice as much, 
rising  percent over the same period. Aggressive credit expan-
sion to low credit- score areas occurred in both elastic and inelastic 
cities. But house prices in low credit- score zip codes only increased 
in inelastic cities due to geographic constraints on home building. 
Figure . illustrates these patterns. Th ese facts support the argu-
ment that the lending boom fueled house- price growth, not vice 
versa.
Figure 6.3: Debt and House Prices in Inelastic Cities

86 C H A P T E R  S I X
 Home Owners Respond
Th e story we have told so far is incomplete. Before we continue 
looking into what caused such a massive extension of lending to 
marginal borrowers, let’s recall that households in the United States 
doubled their debt burden to $ trillion from  to . As 
massive as it was, the extension of credit to marginal borrowers 
alone could not have increased aggregate household debt by such 
a stunning amount. In ,  percent of U.S. households already 
owned their homes. Many of these home owners were not marginal 
borrowers— most of them already had received a mortgage at some 
point in the past.12
Ethel Cochran, an elderly woman living in Detroit, already 
owned her home when the mortgage- credit boom began. She had 
bought her home with an $, mortgage in , and stayed in 
the same home for the next twenty- fi ve years. Between  and 
, she refi nanced her mortgage fi ve times, ultimately having a 
mortgage in  of $,. When the interest rate reset on her 
mortgage, she was unable to make the payments and faced foreclo-
sure.13 Ethel’s example held for many others. Home owners were 
not passive bystanders watching house prices rise. Instead, they ac-
tively pulled cash out of their homes. So while rising house prices 
didn’t cause the extension of credit to marginal borrowers, but were 
in fact triggered by it, they did have an eff ect on existing home 
owners.
Just how much did home owners borrow when house prices in-
creased? Our research uses the evidence above on housing- supply 
elasticity to answer this question.14 Home owners in inelastic 
housing- supply cities experienced a much larger increase in their 
home- equity value during  to . Th e higher house- price 
growth in inelastic housing- supply cities was not accompanied by 
faster income growth, population growth, or employment growth. 
As a result, we can be sure that more aggressive borrowing by home 
owners in inelastic housing- supply cities was driven by house- price 
growth, not a change in underlying fundamentals.

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  87
If we compare borrowing by home owners in inelastic and elas-
tic cities, we see dramatic diff erences. From  to , home 
owners in inelastic counties increased their debt by  percent 
compared to only  percent for home owners in elastic coun-
ties. Our estimates imply that home owners during the housing 
boom borrowed on average $. for every $ of increase in home- 
equity value. Figure . illustrates the growth in debt among ex-
isting home owners from  to . Borrowing was similar in 
inelastic and elastic cities through , at which point it diverges 
sharply. All of the home owners in fi gure . already owned their 
homes as of . So the borrowing represents money being taken 
out of their existing homes.
 Th e estimates from our research show that over half of the in-
crease in debt for home owners from  to  can be di-
rectly attributed to borrowing against the rise in home equity. Th e 
household- debt crisis in the United States was created in large part 
because home owners responded so aggressively when house prices 
increased. What types of home owners borrowed most aggres-
sively? In our research, we split home owners into the lowest and 
Figure 6.4: Home- Owner Debt, Inelastic and Elastic Housing Supply Counties

88 C H A P T E R  S I X
highest quartiles of the credit- score distribution, and then com-
pared borrowing among high and low credit- score home owners 
in both inelastic and elastic housing- supply counties.
Th e results are quite remarkable. For high credit- score home 
owners, the eff ect of house prices on borrowing during the – 
 period was small. In contrast, the eff ect was enormous for 
low credit- score borrowers. Borrowing for low credit- score home 
owners in inelastic counties grew by  percent from  to ; 
it grew only  percent for low credit- score home owners in elastic 
counties. In response to higher home- equity values, home owners 
with low credit scores borrowed very aggressively. Our estimates 
imply that the lowest credit- score home owners borrowed $. 
cents out of every $ of increased home- equity value.
Home owners didn’t just extract home equity— they spent it. 
While we cannot directly track spending in the data used in the 
study, several results suggest that the money was used for con-
sumption and home improvement. For example, many home own-
ers borrowed against their home equity while having substantial 
debt outstanding on their credit cards. Th ey didn’t use the funds to 
pay down credit card debt, despite very high interest burdens. Fur-
ther, we fi nd no evidence that home owners drawing down equity 
used the cash to buy a new home or an investment property. Survey 
evidence from the Federal Reserve shows that over  percent of 
funds pulled out of home equity are used for either home improve-
ment or consumer expenditures.15
Riding the Bubble
Th e incredibly aggressive borrowing by home owners was instru-
mental in causing the U.S. household- debt crisis. Had home own-
ers reacted passively to higher house prices instead of withdrawing 
funds from their home, the consequences for the overall economy 
would have been far less severe. Most explain the increased bor-
rowing out of home- equity values with the notion of a “housing 
wealth eff ect.” Th is argument holds that an increase in house prices 

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  89
represents an increase in wealth for home owners, and home own-
ers respond to an increase in wealth by borrowing to spend more.
But there is a problem with this argument. Home owners should 
not feel wealthier when the value of their home rises. Th e reason 
is that unlike other investment assets— such as stocks— a home 
owner also “consumes” the home he owns. Everyone must live 
some where, and the price of a home refl ects the price of living. 
Both the value of a home owner’s home and the cost of living go up 
when house prices rise in his neighborhood. Th e value of his home 
rising makes him feel richer, but the higher cost of living makes 
him feel poorer. On net, these two eff ects cancel out.
To see this point, consider cars instead of homes. Suppose an 
individual owns a car and the price of all cars goes up  percent. 
Technically, he has higher net worth because the car is an asset he 
owns. But should he feel richer? Not if he needs a car. While the car 
he owns has increased in value by  percent, he cannot take ad-
vantage of the increase in his “car wealth.” If he sells his car for the 
higher price, he will pocket some additional cash. But if he needs a 
car, then he must buy one at the higher price anyway. As long as he 
needs a car, a higher price of cars does not increase his wealth. He 
must “consume” a car, and such consumption is now more expen-
sive. Th e exact same logic applies to housing.
But we have already seen that home owners did in fact borrow 
aggressively during the –  period.16 Why? One “rational” 
explanation that economists have put forward is the idea of bor-
rowing constraints. Imagine a young professional couple with high 
income prospects. Th ey have two young children at home, and as 
a result the mother has temporarily decided to stay home with the 
kids. However, she expects to go back to work in a few years and 
earn a high income. Th e household in our example temporarily has 
low income but expects much higher income in the future. Th is 
household does not want to cut their spending dramatically just 
because the mother has stopped working temporarily. Th e logical 
solution to this problem would be for the family to borrow. Th ey 
can use borrowed money to consume more today while the mother 

90 C H A P T E R  S I X
is raising the children, and then they can safely pay back the loan 
when the mother returns to work.
Th e idea of a borrowing constraint is that the couple cannot ac-
tually get such a loan. A banker may refuse to grant one. So even 
though they have good income prospects, they are constrained from 
consuming as much as they would like. How can this constraint on 
their borrowing be relaxed? One solution is for the couple to pledge 
something valuable to the bank, like their house. If a constrained 
couple has access to a house with suffi  cient collateral value, they 
can get credit through a home- equity loan. Moreover, if the value 
of their house goes up for some reason, the couple gets access to 
more lending. If the couple was constrained to begin with, an in-
crease in house prices allows them to borrow and spend more than 
before. In this story, the couple is behaving rationally. Th ey con-
sume out of their higher home- equity value because the higher 
value allows them to overcome the borrowing constraints imposed 
upon them by lenders.
But here is the big question: Can we explain the $ trillion of 
new debt taken on by U.S. households between  and  as 
relaxation of borrowing constraints? Do we really believe that all 
this debt was taken out by constrained home owners who expected 
higher incomes? Does this pass the smell test? In our view, it is dif-
fi cult to justify the massive increase in borrowing with this story. 
We already know that the new borrowers during the credit boom 
of the s had declining incomes, and we’ve seen no evidence of 
improving incomes. If a household borrows aggressively today and 
never sees an increase in income in the future, it is hard to explain 
their behavior with the borrowing constraints story.
It is much more likely that aggressive borrowing was driven by 
irrational behavioral tendencies. For example, suppose some con-
sumers have a constant desire to consume immediately at the ex-
pense of their longer- term consumption. Such consumers are oft en 
referred to as “myopic” or “hyperbolic” in economics.17 Th e over-
spending is irrational in the sense that the individual will regret the 
decision in the future. In the language of behavioral economics, the 

T H E  C R E D I T  E X PA N S I O N  91
individual’s future self will come to regret why their present self 
over- consumed today to leave them a pauper in the future.
Myopic consumers have a tendency to borrow excessively. When 
tempted with cheap credit or a cash windfall, they will overspend. 
Th ey may even recognize this personal failing, and they may at-
tempt to restrict themselves through various devices. But the temp-
tation of easily available credit from  to  was likely too 
much to pass up on.18
Whatever the reason, however, consumers who were off ered 
more money by lenders took it. And there were plenty of lenders 
eager to lend. But why would so many lenders all of a sudden want 
to lend to the borrowers who were likeliest to default? We have 
seen that the dramatically increased lending to marginal borrowers 
was not a result of increased earning power or productivity gains, 
or even of rising house prices. Th is is a story that has its roots de-
cades ago and far away from the United States.

7: CONDUIT TO DISASTER
In the early s, lenders in Th ailand went berserk. As foreign in-
vestors sought high interest rates in what appeared to be a stable 
and growing economy, a massive infl ow of capital from overseas 
kicked off  a lending boom. Total debt as a percentage of GDP in 
Th ailand climbed from  to  percent from  to .1 Most 
of the overseas money went into the Th ai fi nancial system, which 
in turn aggressively lent these borrowed funds in domestic mar-
kets. And the lending quickly found its way into real estate. From 
 to , the volume of real estate loans tripled, and there was 
an enormous construction boom of new housing. Just as in the 
United States in the s, the fl ood of lending pushed real estate 
prices to astronomical levels. Lester Th urow recognized a bubble: 
“Bangkok, a city whose per capita productivity is about one twelft h 
of San Francisco, should not have land values that are much higher 
than those in San Francisco. But it did. . . . Grossly infl ated property 
values had to come down.”2
Most investors believed that Th ai banks and fi nancial institutions 
were protected by government guarantees against losses.3 Th ey 
thought that the government could not aff ord to let the banks fail— 
they also knew that many of the fi nancial institutions had strong 
political and family connections to the government. In  Paul 
Krugman summed up what happened:

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  93
Th e problem began with fi nancial intermediaries— institutions 
whose liabilities were perceived as having an implicit government 
guarantee, but were essentially unregulated and therefore subject to 
severe moral hazard problems. Th e excessive risky lending of these 
institutions created infl ation— not of goods but of asset prices. Th e 
overpricing of assets was sustained in part by a sort of circular pro-
cess, in which the proliferation of risky lending drove up the prices 
of risky assets, making the fi nancial condition of the intermediaries 
seem sounder than it was. And then the bubble burst.4
If we hadn’t told you that Krugman was writing in  about 
Th ailand, you might have guessed he was referring to the United 
States in the early s. But while this story does help show the 
universality of our thesis, we’re not including it just because of its 
similarity to the U.S. credit boom. In fact, the Th ai crisis set in mo-
tion a series of events that helped pave the way for the U.S. boom. 
Th ailand is almost , miles from the west- side neighborhoods 
of Detroit, but they are bound together in the vicious cycle of debt 
and destruction.
A Glut of Savings
Th e collapse of the Th ai bubble in  sparked fi nancial crises 
throughout Asia and the rest of the world, aff ecting Malaysia, Indo-
nesia, the Philippines, South Korea, and Russia. It even threatened 
China. When the bubble burst, foreign investors fl ed emerging 
markets. Th ey dumped their securities and refused to renew loans.
Th is was especially dangerous because banks in emerging econo-
mies had borrowed in U.S. dollars. Usually, a central bank can pro-
vide support for banks in its country as a “lender of last resort.” 
Banks fund themselves with short- term liabilities like deposits and 
commercial paper. But they invest those funds into longer- term 
loans. If a bank’s short- term liabilities were all demanded at once, 
it would not be able call back the money it has lent out on a long- 

94 C H A P T E R  S E V E N
term basis. In other words, the mismatch in maturity makes banks 
vulnerable to a run. Even if a bank is fundamentally solvent, a run 
can make its failure self- fulfi lling.
A central bank can prevent self- fulfi lling banking crises by pro-
viding liquidity (i.e., cash) to a bank to protect it from bank runs. 
Just the ability of a central bank to fl ood banks with cash may be 
suffi  cient to prevent runs from happening in the fi rst place, because 
depositors then have faith that their money is protected.
In the East Asian crisis, however, central banks couldn’t fl ood 
the banks with cash because it needed to be in U.S. dollars. Without 
the ability to print dollars, these central banks watched helplessly 
as the domestic banks and corporate sector went bankrupt as for-
eign investors fl ed. Many were forced to seek help from a body that 
did have the power to provide liquidity in the form of U.S. dollars: 
the International Monetary Fund.
Of course, help from the IMF comes with strings attached, and 
forced reliance on the IMF during the crisis left  deep scars on East 
Asian countries. Asians have relatively little representation in the 
governance structure of the IMF— Japan, China, and Korea all have 
lower voting shares in IMF decisions than their GDP shares would 
warrant. Noting this, Franklin Allen and Joo Yun Hong wrote that 
“despite being one of the most successful economies in the sec-
ond half of the twentieth century, the South Koreans were forced 
to raise interest rates and cut government spending. Th is caused 
great economic distress.” Real GDP declined by  percent in , 
and the unemployment rate rose from  to  percent. Allen and 
Hong argued that the high interest- rate policy imposed by the IMF 
was kept “too long, and it consequently infl icted unnecessary pain 
on the economy.”5 East Asian central bankers learned an important 
and costly lesson. To maintain independence and control over their 
economy, they needed to prevent dollar- denominated borrowing 
by their local banks. Moreover, in order to fi ght off  potential runs 
on their currency and banking sectors in the future, they needed to 
maintain a large stockpile, or a “war chest,” of dollars.
Central banks in emerging markets consequently piled into safe 

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  95
U.S. dollar- denominated assets. From  to , central banks 
bought around $ billion annually. From  to , the rate of 
reserve accumulation just about septupled. Th is led to a breathtak-
ing jump in demand for new safe assets, and foreign central banks 
heaped money into U.S. Treasuries. As foreign central banks built 
up their dollar war chests, money poured into the U.S. economy. 
In theory, this fl ow did not have to end disastrously. It could have 
simply pushed down interest rates substantially on U.S. Treasuries, 
leaving the rest of the economy untouched. But the United States 
had more in common with East Asia than markets initially thought. 
Th e rapid infl ow of capital from Asia was not sterile— it turned into 
something malignant.
Securitization
In It’s a Wonderful Life, George Bailey, played by Jimmy Stewart, 
champions the cause of providing home loans as the head of a sav-
ings and loan in Bedford Falls. Th e people he lends to are people 
he knows, people he grew up with. Released in , It’s a Wonder-
ful Life refl ects a time when bankers specialized in local knowledge 
about an area and its people. A bank was very much the commu-
nity’s. People put in their deposits, and the deposits were used to 
make loans. Th ese loans were assets for the banks since, with the 
repayment of the loan and interest, they provide a stream of in-
come over time.
Savings and loans like George Bailey’s served a valuable func-
tion, but they were also vulnerable to local or idiosyncratic risk. If 
a major employer left  a bank’s community, things could get ugly 
quickly. Unemployment would make it hard for borrowers to repay 
their mortgages. Th e bank would bring in less money, and if things 
became bad enough, the bank wouldn’t be able to lend to others in 
the community or even return depositors’ money. Th e traditional 
neighborhood- banking model known to George Bailey was excel-
lent for giving lenders more information about borrowers, but it 
was especially vulnerable to local risks.

96 C H A P T E R  S E V E N
Recognizing this weakness in the mortgage market, in  the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development promoted 
securitization through government- sponsored enterprises (GSEs).6 
Securitization gave local banks a way to sell off  their neighbor-
hood mortgages to the GSEs and avoid worrying about exposure 
to local market risk. In order to minimize the likelihood that banks 
might sell poor- quality mortgages to GSEs, the GSEs mandated 
minimum “conforming” requirements like limits on loan sizes and 
loan- to- value ratios. Th e GSEs bought mortgages from all across 
the United States, but how did they pay for them? By pooling all 
the mortgages and selling fi nancial claims against the pool. Th ese 
claims are mortgage- backed securities (MBS). With these, interest 
payments from the borrowers fl ow through the securitization pool 
to the MBS holders. Th e GSEs kept a cut from the interest pay-
ments to insure MBS holders against the risk of default.
What was key, however, was that an MBS was not a claim on an 
individual mortgage— it was a claim on the entire pool of mort-
gages. As a whole, the entire set of mortgages was extremely diver-
sifi ed, and that minimized idiosyncratic risk. And because GSEs 
also guaranteed the MBS, investors were willing to pay high prices 
for GSE- issued MBS. Securitization turned out to be a highly prof-
itable enterprise for GSEs— as long as there were no widespread 
mortgage defaults.
Th e supply of GSE- issued MBS was limited to “conforming” 
mort gages, which met strict requirements in terms of size and 
credit quality. As the global appetite for safe U.S. debt began to sky-
rocket in the late s, however, these requirements became a con-
straint. Th e increased demand could only be met by the non- GSE 
private market— if only it could somehow create low- risk MBS 
from a pool of non- conforming mortgages. Th e goal was achieved 
through tranching, which slices a pool of mortgages into diff erent 
layers that defi ne how MBS investors line up to receive payments. 
Th e most senior tranche is the safest as it has the fi rst right over 
payments coming from the underlying mortgages. Th e junior 

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  97
tranches are paid only if the senior tranche has been paid its prom-
ised interest rate in full. So the senior tranche is seemingly pro-
tected from default risk by the lower tranches, which are the fi rst 
not to get paid if borrowers default. Th e senior tranches of these 
MBS created outside the GSEs were considered super- safe by inves-
tors and certifi ed by rating agencies as such as well. Th us began the 
“private- label” securitization market.
Securitization was not new, but the explosion of private- label 
MBS was unique, and it was responsible for satisfying the global 
demand for highly rated U.S. dollar denominated debt.7 Private- 
label securitization was vastly diff erent than the traditional GSE- 
based securitization, especially when it came to the risks involved. 
Adam Levitin and Susan Wachter have done excellent work docu-
menting the diff erence. Th ey note that
as long as GSE securitization dominated the mortgage market, 
credit risk was kept in check through underwriting standards, and 
there was not much of a market for nonprime, nonconforming, 
conventional loans. Beginning in the s, however, a new, un-
regulated form of securitization began to displace the standardized 
GSE securitization. Th is private label securitization (PLS) was sup-
ported by a new class of specialized mortgage lenders and securiti-
zation sponsors . . . [the] PLS created a market for nonprime, non-
conforming conventional loans.8
From  to , private- label securitization soared. As a per-
centage of all MBS issued, it increased from less than  to over 
 percent from  to , before collapsing entirely in . 
We discussed in the last chapter how –  was exactly the 
period when a massive increase in mortgage credit was fl ooding 
low credit- quality zip codes. Th e timing of the two events hints that 
they were related. In our research, we directly linked these two pat-
terns by showing that the rate of securitization was much stronger 
in low credit- quality zip codes compared to high credit- quality zip 

98 C H A P T E R  S E V E N
codes. Securitization transformed global capital infl ows into a wild 
expansion of mortgage credit to marginal borrowers. But it was 
only possible if the lenders were sure their funds were protected.
Manufacturing Safe Debt
A cynical view of fi nancial innovation sees it merely as bankers 
fooling investors into buying very risky securities that are passed 
off  as safe. Th ere is substantial research demonstrating that this is 
exactly what private- label securitization was during the housing 
boom. Josh Coval, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Staff ord show that when 
investors buying mortgage- backed securities made small mistakes 
in assessing their vulnerability, securitization enabled banks to am-
plify the eff ect of these mistakes. Th e two most important mistakes 
made were related: investors underestimated the probability of 
mortgage default and the correlation of those defaults.9
Let’s construct a simple example to illustrate what happened. 
Suppose a bank makes a $, loan to a subprime borrower 
who will default with  percent probability. In case of default, the 
bank will recover only $, of the initial loan amount by, say, 
foreclosing and selling the home at a fi re- sale price. But the banker 
must convince the investor that his debt security is super- safe. Th at 
is, the investor must be sure the security will never lose value.
Suppose the bank “tranches” the loan into two $, tranches 
such that the senior tranche gets paid fi rst in case of default. Th is 
super- safe senior tranche has zero risk because it will get paid in 
full even in the case of default. Th e junior tranche is pretty risky, 
because there is a  percent probability that it will lose its full 
value: if the borrower defaults, the house is worth $,, but that 
$, gets paid entirely to the senior tranche holder. By tranch-
ing the loan into two parts, the bank can fi nance half the amount it 
needs from the international demand for super- safe assets.
Can the bank do better? Yes, by combining tranching with pool-
ing. Now suppose the bank makes two $, loans to two dif-
ferent subprime borrowers. Th e bank combines, or pools, these two 

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  99
loans and then tranches the MBS on the pool into a senior and a 
junior tranche of equal face value of $,. As before, the senior 
tranche is risk- free. Even if both mortgages default, each house is 
worth $,; as a result, $, of the total MBS will never lose 
value. Investors demanding super- safe assets will be willing to hold 
the senior tranche.
What is interesting is what happens with the junior tranche. 
In the absence of pooling, when there is just one loan, the junior 
tranche loses  percent of its value with  percent probability. 
However, pooling changes the risk characteristics of the junior 
tranche. Th e junior tranche is now made up of two underlying 
loans. If both borrowers of the two loans default at the same time, 
there is not much value in pooling. However, if the defaults are in-
dependent, there is a lot of value. As we will explain, the correla-
tion of defaults among diff erent mortgages is a crucial parameter 
in estimating how many safe assets can be constructed from the 
mortgage pool.
Let’s suppose the two loans are statistically independent of each 
other: one loan defaulting has no bearing on the likelihood of the 
other loan defaulting. In this case, the junior tranche is much less 
risky. Th ere is only a  percent chance ( percent ×  percent) that 
both loans will default and the junior tranche holders lose every-
thing. Th ere is also an  percent chance that one of the loans will 
default, in which case the junior tranche holders lose  percent 
of their investment. But suppose the bank further tranches the ju-
nior tranche into a senior “mezzanine” tranche and a subordinate 
“equity” tranche with the same face value. Th e mezzanine tranche 
now has much better risk characteristics than the original junior 
tranche. While the original junior tranche would have lost money 
 percent of the time, the mezzanine tranche will lose money only 
 percent of the time, when both of the underlying loans default. If 
just one of the loans defaults, the mezzanine tranche won’t lose any 
money, since it has the senior claim within the junior tranche.
As you may have guessed, this tranching and pooling process 
can continue ad infi nitum. As long as the default likelihoods of the 

100 C H A P T E R  S E V E N
underlying loans are assumed to be independent of one another, 
the bank can reduce the risk of the mezzanine tranche as low as 
the investors or credit- rating agencies demand. In practice, banks 
would pool enough loans so that rating agencies would deem the 
mezzanine tranche “safe,” or give it a triple- A rating. So a securi-
tizing bank can create more and more safe assets. In the extreme, 
the bank can add more loans and do more tranching and pooling 
to eventually claim that  percent of the mortgage- backed secu-
rities in the securitization pool are super- safe, despite the fact that 
the underlying mortgages are quite risky. It could tranche and sell 
up to  percent of its loans to outside investors as super- safe as-
sets, and it would need to put up only  percent of the loan value 
to remain in business.
But the only way this works is if the default probabilities across 
loans are independent. Th at is, it works only if one mortgage default-
ing is unrelated to the default probability of the rest of the mortgages. 
So the correlation of defaults is crucial in determining how much of 
the overall mortgage pool is safe. For example, suppose that all de-
faults are perfectly correlated instead of independent, meaning that 
if one mortgage defaults, they all do. If a defaulted mortgage recov-
ers only  percent of its underlying face value, and investors know 
there is some likelihood that all mortgages will default at the same 
time, they would know there is a likelihood that  percent of the 
money they invested would be lost. In this case, there could never be 
more than  percent of the mortgage pool considered super- safe.
In reality, of course, neither the correlation across loans nor the 
likelihood of default is known with certainty. People are likely to 
have varied beliefs about the correlation and default likelihood 
of the loans. Some investors may be more optimistic than others, 
thinking either that the correlation is low, the likelihood of default 
is low, or both. To those who made mistakes assessing these factors, 
the investments appeared to be extremely safe. Securitization en-
abled banks to exploit these diff erences in beliefs among investors 
and hide the real vulnerabilities of their securities. Th is allowed 
them to create and sell more and more genuinely risky securities 

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  101
that were deemed safe, and to fuel the credit supply to low credit- 
quality borrowers. As Coval and his coauthors put it:
Th is ability of structured fi nance to repackage risks and to create 
“safe” assets from otherwise risky collateral led to a dramatic ex-
pansion in the issuance of structured securities, most of which were 
viewed by investors to be virtually risk- free and certifi ed as such by 
the rating agencies. At the core of the recent fi nancial market crisis 
has been the discovery that these securities are actually far riskier 
than originally advertised.10
Chain of Fools11
Th e problems with private- label securitization of mortgages ran 
even deeper than exploiting mistakes by investors. If mortgage 
originators knew that they could unload poor- quality mortgages 
to investors through securitization at high prices, they could have 
easily been tempted to ease lending standards and lend deliber-
ately to weak borrowers. In other words, private- label securitiza-
tion could very well be the cause of irresponsible mortgage issu-
ance and fraud. Can we test if this is true?
Th e answer comes from a couple of very interesting studies by 
Amit Seru. In the fi rst of these studies— coauthored with Benjamin 
Keys, Tanmoy Mukherjee, and Vikrant Vig— the authors took ad-
vantage of an unusual characteristic of the securitization market. 
When the market decided which mortgages to accept in a mort-
gage pool, it followed a cutoff  rule. Mortgages for which a borrower 
had a credit score above  were likely to be accepted in MBS 
pools, while those for which a borrower had a credit score below 
 were much less likely to be accepted. As a result, while a bor-
rower with a credit score of  is very similar to a borrower with a 
credit score of , the two diff ered markedly in the likelihood that 
their mortgage would be securitized. In economic jargon, there was 
a discontinuous jump in the probability of a mortgage being secu-
ritized at a  credit score.12

102 C H A P T E R  S E V E N
Th e jump in likelihood of securitization at  can be used to test 
if lenders really took advantage of the ability to sell bad mortgages 
through securitization. If lenders were just as stringent in reviewing 
borrowers whose potential mortgages could be securitized (just by 
having a credit score above ) as they were for those whose mort-
gages couldn’t (but whose credit score was just below ), then we 
would expect all mortgages to borrowers with a credit score around 
 to have roughly the same default rates. If anything, mortgages 
to borrowers with a credit score slightly above  should have a 
slightly lower default rate than mortgages below .
However, the authors found just the opposite. Mortgages origi-
nated to borrowers with credit scores just below  actually had 
much lower default rates than mortgages originated to  borrowers 
with credit scores just above . Th is means that the mortgages 
that could be securitized were riskier than the mortgages that 
couldn’t be passed off  through securitization. Th e evidence sug-
gests that securitization directly encouraged irresponsible lending.
How could some mortgages issued to borrowers with roughly 
the same credit score be riskier than others? Or, in other words, 
which kinds of mortgages were most sensitive to originator misbe-
havior in the securitization process? Th e authors found a particu-
larly strong occurrence of low- documentation mortgages, where 
borrowers did not provide confi rmation of their income from a 
payroll stub or the IRS. When the borrower had very little docu-
mentation, securitized mortgages performed especially badly rela-
tive to mortgages retained by the originating bank. Banks were 
much less careful investigating low- documentation borrowers 
when they knew they would sell the mortgage into a securitization 
pool. Th e conclusion is clear: securitization lowered the incentives 
of banks to screen and monitor borrowers.13
Th e second study by Seru, coauthored with Tomasz Piskorski 
and James Witkin, demonstrates how private- label securitization 
blatantly misrepresented the quality of mortgages to investors. 
Th ey found that one in ten mortgage loans in private- label securi-
tization pools were misclassifi ed as owner- occupied despite being 

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  103
investor- owned. Mortgages made on owner- occupied properties 
are considerably less risky— a home owner is more likely than an 
investor to continue paying their mortgage even when the home 
loses substantial value. Passing off  mortgages as owner- occupied 
when they were not was fraud.14 Th e authors show that arrang-
ers of securitization pools systematically underreported mortgages 
for investor- purchased homes in order to make the pool look less 
risky. Further, investors in the MBS were systematically fooled— 
the higher interest rate on the securitization pools where misrep-
resentation was highest did not compensate them for the risk. Th e 
default rates for these misrepresented pools were  percent higher 
compared to otherwise similar mortgages. Investors believed they 
were buying super- safe assets. Instead, they were buying into fraud. 
Another striking fi nding from the study was the depth of fraud 
across the industry. Th e authors found that just about every single 
arranger of securitization pools was engaged in this type of fraud. 
It was endemic to private- label securitization.
Th ese serious problems with securitization fueled an unsustain-
able increase in mortgage credit. Th e parties down the securitiza-
tion chain, especially the ultimate investors, were fooled into taking 
on risk for which they were not properly informed or compensated. 
But part of the blame lies also with the rating agencies. Researchers 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York showed that simple, ob-
servable measures of risk, like low FICO scores or higher borrower 
leverage, added signifi cantly to the accuracy of the credit scoring 
of mortgage- securitization pools in predicting default rates. Or, in 
other words, obvious information was ignored when credit- rating 
agencies assigned ratings to private- label MBS.15
Inevitable Crash
Th e expansion of credit to more and more borrowers who were 
likely to default ended disastrously. Lenders fl ooded low credit- 
quality neighborhoods with credit, despite no evidence of better 
income prospects. Investors buying the MBS fueling this expansion 

104 C H A P T E R  S E V E N
made simple mistakes in their models, and the arrangers of secu-
ritization pools exploited these mistakes. Fraudulent practices in-
fected private- label securitization, and credit- rating agencies were 
either unaware of what was going on or were happy to look the 
other way. By  lawsuits by investors against arrangers were pil-
ing up.16
Eager to create and sell profi table securities, lenders extended 
credit to so many marginal borrowers that they reached a point 
at which they lent to borrowers so credit- unworthy that they de-
faulted almost immediately aft er the loan originated. Once the de-
faults began to rise, the entire game unraveled, and levered losses 
kicked in. Research by Yuliya Demyanyk and Otto Van Hemert 
documents this cycle, showing that the mortgage default crisis 
“that started in  was characterized by an unusually large frac-
tion of subprime mortgages originated in  and  becom-
ing delinquent or in foreclosure only months later” (our empha-
sis). Th ey also found a “deterioration of loan quality” where “the 
average combined loan- to- value (LTV) ratio increased, the fraction 
of low documentation loans increased, and the subprime- prime 
rate spread decreased.” Aft er a comprehensive examination of the 
mortgage default rates in  and , they conclude that “the 
rapid rise and subsequent fall of the subprime mortgage market is 
therefore reminiscent of a classic lending boom- bust scenario.”17
Th e rise in default rates during the recession took the country 
into unprecedented territory. From  to the recent crash, the 
mortgage default rate for the entire country had never risen above 
. percent. By  it spiked above  percent. We do not have his-
torical data on delinquencies before , but we know there was 
no major household default crisis from  to . It is pretty 
safe to say that in the Great American Recession the household- 
default rate reached its highest level since the Great Depression. In 
the same west- side neighborhoods of Detroit that we discussed in 
the last chapter, mortgage default rates reached almost  percent 
in . More than one in fi ve homes was in foreclosure. House 
prices fell  percent from  to , and they remained just as 

C O N D U I T  T O  D I S A S T E R  105
low in . Th ese neighborhoods were decimated by the mortgage 
default crisis.
And how did those super- safe mortgage- backed securities at the 
heart of the credit boom perform? A triple- A MBS originated in 
 worth $ in face value was trading at only $ as of .18 
Investors experienced massive losses on their supposedly super- 
safe investment.
* * *
Th ere is a more fundamental question regarding the blatant fraud 
and misrepresentation in securitization: Could it still have hap-
pened if securitization didn’t claim to produce super- safe debt? 
Would investors have paid more attention if they knew there might 
be some downside risk to their investments? Th is is a diffi  cult ques-
tion. Of course, fraud exists in equity markets as well— Enron in 
the early s is an example. But the fraud associated with debt- 
fueled bubbles is almost always more dramatic and more danger-
ous to the entire economy. History provides example aft er example 
of debt- fueled asset bubbles— founded on fraudulent securities— 
that collapse and take entire economies down. In the next chapter, 
we dig deeper into the true essence of debt and establish why an 
overreliance on it is so universally harmful.

8: DEBT AND BUBBLES
Charles P. Kindleberger was a giant in economics. He joined the 
economics department at MIT in , but not as a freshly minted 
PhD. Instead, his academic career was preceded by close connec-
tions to policy making. He had served as a major in the U.S. Army, 
worked as an economist in the Federal Reserve System, and was a 
leading architect of the Marshall Plan in the State Department aft er 
World War II. So by the time he arrived at MIT, he had already 
made a major impact on western European economies.1 Kindle-
berger’s research style was a bit unusual compared to many of his 
contemporaries, and this likely refl ected his real- world experience 
outside the ivory tower. Instead of proposing theory, he approached 
economic phenomena as a natural scientist would. His colleague 
and Nobel laureate Robert Solow compared Kindleberger to Dar-
win on the Beagle: “collecting, examining, and classifying interest-
ing specimens . . . it was Kindleberger’s style as an economic histo-
rian to hunt for interesting things to learn, not pursue a systematic 
agenda.”2 Th e culmination of Kindleberger’s massive data collec-
tion on bubbles— Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Finan-
cial Crises— is one of the most infl uential books written in eco-
nomic history. Th e book is a tour de force: it covers bubbles going 
back to the tulip mania in the seventeenth- century Netherlands 
to the commercial real estate boom before Japan’s “Lost Decade,” 
to the  fi nancial crisis spurred by the collapse of Long- Term 

D E B T  A N D  B U B B L E S  107
Capital Management. It represents one of the most systematic and 
large- scale explorations of bubbles and fi nancial crises ever written.
The Science of Bubbles
Even though Kindleberger didn’t set out to prove any one theory, 
his close examination of the historical data led him to strong 
conclusions. First, he noticed that the main driver of asset- price 
bubbles was almost always an expansion in credit supply, that is, 
an increased willingness by creditors to lend to borrowers with no 
discernible improvement in income growth. What does an expan-
sion in credit supply look like in the context of housing? Imagine a 
renter walking into a bank and asking for a mortgage to purchase 
a new home. Normally, the banker will immediately inquire about 
the renter’s income. If the banker deems his income too low to sup-
port a large mortgage, she will restrict the size of his mortgage to 
some fraction of the overall value of the home. In many cases, the 
restriction will prevent the renter from buying the home he had 
in mind. Now imagine that for some reason completely unrelated 
to the renter’s income level, the bank decides to give him a much 
larger mortgage at an even cheaper initial interest rate than what 
he would normally receive. For the exact same income, the bank is 
suddenly willing to provide more credit. Th is will likely aff ect the 
renter’s demand for housing; he may, for example, choose to buy 
an even bigger home. If this happens on a wide scale, the increased 
willingness of lenders to provide credit infl ates house prices. For 
the same level of risk, bankers are willing to supply more credit, 
and this leads to house- price growth.
Kindleberger noticed this strong pattern in many episodes, so 
much so that he established the axiom that “asset price bubbles de-
pend on the growth of credit.” He gave numerous examples. Th e 
tulip bubble in the seventeenth- century Netherlands was sparked 
by a form of vendor fi nancing, which is debt between buyers and 
sellers of tulips. Th e canal mania in eighteenth- century Great Brit-
ain was fed by loans from newly established country banks to the 

108 C H A P T E R  E I G H T
entrepreneurs developing the canals. Th is is what was happen-
ing in Detroit. A vast expansion of mortgage credit to borrowers 
otherwise unable to buy a house fueled an enormous house- price 
bubble in neighborhoods with many such borrowers. House prices 
in these areas of Detroit rose by  percent in the decade before 
the housing crash. When it popped, prices collapsed by  percent.
What Is a Bubble?
What should be the price of an asset such as a stock or a house? 
Standard asset pricing theory suggests that it should equal the sum 
of expected payoff s from the asset. For a stock, this is simply the 
expected sum of dividends one receives from holding the stock, ap-
propriately discounted for time and risk. For a house, it is the same 
calculation with implicit rental income, or the income one could 
earn from renting the house.
Do bubbles exist? Th ere have been many instances of rapid price 
growth— like the –  housing boom or the –  In-
ternet boom. Th ese episodes ended in spectacular busts, and it is 
tempting to call them bubbles aft er the fact. But what if the price 
booms were legitimate and based on economic prospects at the 
time? How can one prove the existence of bubbles without a doubt?
In  future Nobel laureate Vernon Smith and his coauthors, 
Gerry Suchanek and Arlington Williams, published a seminal 
paper on the existence of bubbles.3 Th e authors conducted an ex-
periment where participants were each given an initial allotment of 
cash and stocks that they could trade with one another. Th e experi-
ment had fi ft een trading periods. At the end of each trading period, 
the owner of a stock received a dividend payment that could have 
one of four values with equal probability— , , , and — for 
an expected value of  cents. Standard asset pricing theory pro-
vides an exact value for the price of a stock in this example. At any 
point in time, it should equal the expected future dividends from 
the stock. Th erefore, the stock price at the beginning of period  
should be  ×  = $., and it should decline by  cents in 

D E B T  A N D  B U B B L E S  109
every subsequent round. Smith and his coauthors made every one 
of their participants aware of this calculation to make sure they 
understood the security they were trading.
Th e environment in Smith’s experiment was a caricature of the 
true world. It had none of its complexities and uncertainties. Th ere 
was no uncertainty about when the stock would stop paying divi-
dends, or about the maximum or average payment that one could 
receive from the stock. Th ere was no political uncertainty, nor any 
concern about mismanagement of the stock’s cash fl ows. If there 
were ever a market where the stock price should equal the present 
value of expected payments, it was Smith’s lab experiment. Yet the 
authors found something remarkable— an outcome that has been 
repeated many times by various researchers since. Stock prices in 
Smith’s experiment fl uctuated wildly, with prices at times deviat-
ing two to three times away from their fundamental value. Of the 
twenty- two experiments conducted, fourteen saw a stock market 
“characterized by a price bubble measured relative to dividend 
value.”
Th e results bore an uncanny resemblance to the “excess volatil-
ity” phenomena fi rst documented by Robert Shiller in  for the 
U.S. stock market.4 In his seminal paper that led to the creation 
of the fi eld of behavioral fi nance, Shiller showed that stock prices 
moved too much to be justifi ed by the subsequent movement in 
their dividends. Th is phenomenon was later succinctly summa-
rized by Jeff rey Pontiff  in  when he demonstrated that closed- 
end mutual funds were signifi cantly more volatile than the mar-
ket value of the underlying securities.5 Closed- end mutual funds 
hold stocks and bonds like regular “open- ended” mutual funds. 
But the key diff erence is that closed- end mutual funds are traded 
separately— independent of the underlying securities— and have 
their own independent price. Th eoretically, the price of a closed- 
end mutual fund should mimic the total value of its underlying 
securities. But Pontiff  found that this was frequently not the case. 
Prices of closed- end funds deviated from the value of the under-
lying securities.

110 C H A P T E R  E I G H T
All of this suggests that bubbles do exist and that they can make 
prices deviate substantially from their long- run fundamental value. 
But our question is more specifi c: Is there a connection between 
debt and bubbles? Why are real- world examples of bubbles oft en 
accompanied by a run- up in debt, as Kindleberger so comprehen-
sively demonstrated? Th e idea that the price of an asset should 
equal the total revenue one expects to receive from it is intuitive 
and straightforward. Debt plays no role in this calculation. But if 
the people buying the assets are borrowing money to fi nance their 
purchases, as in the episodes that Kindleberger uncovered, is there 
any reason that the price of a stock or a house should be higher? 
Th e price of an asset should depend only on the return one ex-
pects from holding the asset, regardless of how the buyer fi nances 
the asset purchase. Th e Kindleberger insight on the importance of 
debt in bubbles is diffi  cult to reconcile with standard asset pricing 
theory.
If we want to introduce a role for debt in determining asset prices, 
we must move away from standard asset pricing theory. We need 
to consider a world where prices may periodically deviate away 
from the sum total of their future dividend stream— a world in 
which bubbles may exist. Perhaps in such a world, debt matters. 
Th is brings us back to Vernon Smith. Smith augmented his initial 
experiment by allowing his lab traders to buy the stock on mar-
gin, meaning they could borrow money to purchase stocks. Th e 
ability to borrow money should have no impact on the price of an 
asset under standard asset pricing theory, but Smith and his co-
author David Porter found that the availability of debt indeed made 
bubbles even larger.6
Why Does Debt Fuel Bubbles?
Traders buy and sell assets to make money. If buyers know they are 
buying into a bubble that is about to burst, they won’t buy the asset. 
And if there are no buyers for the asset, then the bubble would not 
exist. Logic dictates that a bubble can only exist if the buyers are 

D E B T  A N D  B U B B L E S  111
“optimists” (a gentle word for those with “irrational exuberance”) 
or if the buyers believe there will be a “greater fool” to buy the asset 
in the future when prices are even higher.7
We can now start to build a theory of how debt stokes bubbles. 
John Geanakoplos has investigated how debt enhances the buying 
capacity of optimists, or those who are convinced that asset prices 
will continue to rise. By enhancing optimists’ buying power in the 
future, debt increases the probability that a greater fool will indeed 
be waiting tomorrow.8
Imagine a world with  identical houses for sale. Two types 
of people populate this world: optimists and pessimists. Pessimists 
believe that a house is only worth $,. Optimists, on the 
other hand, believe that the value of a house is  percent higher, at 
$,. So optimists are willing to buy a house for any price that 
is equal to or below this amount. Th is simple model of the world 
assumes “diff erences in beliefs” about asset prices, which, as anyone 
who has discussed house prices with a friend or family member 
knows, is a pretty realistic assumption.
So what will the actual price of a house in this world be? It de-
pends on the number of optimists versus pessimists. If there are 
enough optimists to buy  homes, then the sale price of all homes 
will be $,. But if there aren’t enough optimists and some 
houses must be bought by pessimists, then all houses must sell for 
$,. Th e reason for this is that competition implies that all 
identical houses must sell for the same price. As a result, the market 
price is equal to the lowest price that clears the market, the price 
that guarantees there will be at least  buyers.
Suppose our world begins with no debt. Optimists have to pay 
cash to buy a house. Moreover, let’s say the total wealth of all opti-
mists combined is limited to $. million. As a result, they can buy 
no more than  houses at $, a piece. Th e optimists can’t 
buy all the houses, and the price of houses must therefore drop to 
$, to attract pessimists to buy. Without debt, the price of all 
houses is $,, and optimists buy  houses while pessimists 
buy the remaining  houses.

112 C H A P T E R  E I G H T
How does the introduction of debt fi nancing aff ect the price of 
houses? Suppose we now allow optimists to borrow  percent of 
the value of a house. In other words, for any home purchase, they 
only need to put  percent down in cash before getting the loan. 
Th e ability to borrow dramatically expands the buying power of 
the optimists. For every $ of cash they put in, they can borrow 
$ of debt. Th ey can now leverage their cash of $. million fi ve 
times to buy houses worth up to $. million. In fact, with the 
enhanced purchasing power that debt aff ords, optimists can buy 
all  houses in the market. When we introduce debt, the price 
of a house will be determined by the optimists’ willingness to pay. 
House prices immediately jump to $, each when debt is in-
troduced.9
In the world with debt, optimists buy all the houses. Th ey put 
down  percent, or $,, for each house, and they borrow the 
rest. But who is willing to lend to the optimists? Nobody is willing 
to part with their hard- earned money unless they are sure they will 
get their money back without loss. Since there are only two types 
of people in our world, pessimists must be willing to lend in order 
for optimists to borrow.
Will the pessimists lend? Th e pessimist thinks that a house is 
worth no more than $,, so he believes the optimist is over-
paying. But he is perfectly willing to lend $, to the optimist 
to buy the house for $,. Why? Th e pessimist has the house 
as collateral. In the pessimist’s judgment, the overly confi dent opti-
mist will be forced to part with his down payment once the bubble 
bursts and prices return to their true valuation of $,. But the 
pessimist understands that his money is protected. He made a loan 
of $,, and the house is ultimately worth $,.
In this simple example, debt facilitates an increase in the price 
of assets by enabling optimists to increase their infl uence on the 
market price. Ironically, it is the pessimists— even though they dis-
agree with the valuation of optimists— who make it happen. With-
out help from pessimists, the optimists would not be able to raise 

D E B T  A N D  B U B B L E S  113
the price of a house by  percent. Th is is a crucial lesson when we 
think of assigning blame aft er a crash. We are more than willing to 
blame “irresponsible home owners” who stretched to buy houses. 
But the house- buying binge was only possible given the aggressive 
lending behavior by banks.
Debt raises house prices in the example above, but is this neces-
sarily a bubble? We label people in our economy as either optimists 
or pessimists. Whether the increase in house prices represents a 
bubble depends on which of the two is right. If the optimist is right, 
then house prices will remain at the elevated level, and there will 
be no bursting of any bubble and no crisis. However, if pessimists 
are right, then the increase in house prices will be temporary and 
sometime in the future the bubble will burst.
In addition to facilitating bubbles, debt also helps sustain them— 
for a while at least— due to its impact on expectations. A relaxation 
in access to debt means that more optimists can enter today and in 
the future. Th is bolsters the belief that there will be a greater fool 
who will buy the asset at even higher prices. And the party gets 
even bigger. Th e expectation of a bubble growing even more en-
tices speculators to enter the market in addition to optimists. No-
tice that there is an element of animal spirits in our explanation of 
the housing boom, even when debt plays an important role. Th e 
optimists in our framework can be viewed as irrational buyers of 
homes, willing to pay more and more because they believe house 
prices will rise forever. In this sense, the debt view and the animal 
spirits view are not mutually exclusive.
But the big diff erence is the role of debt. In the debt view, the 
bubble cannot get out of control unless irrational optimists are able 
to get debt fi nancing to sustain it. Further, even rational speculators 
may enter the market if they believe that irrational optimists can 
still get loans as the bubble expands. Debt plays a crucial role. Th e 
distinction is important, because some argue that debt had little 
to do with the house- price bubble in the United States before the 
Great Recession.10

114 C H A P T E R  E I G H T
Why Lend into a Bubble?
As the example above illustrates, lenders are willing to lend only 
because they are convinced that their money is safe. Th ey are sure 
that the underlying collateral protects them even when house 
prices inevitably decline. Debt leads to bubbles in part because it 
gives lenders a sense of security that they will be unaff ected if the 
bubble bursts.
But what if lenders are wrong? What if they are actually exposed 
to this risk? Th e answer is closely related to a phenomenon that Nic-
ola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny call “neglected 
risks.”11 Th ey argue that certain unlikely events can materialize that 
are completely unexpected, because investors neglect the risks that 
they could happen. In the context of the housing crash, many inves-
tors may have neglected the risk of house prices falling more than 
 percent. During the fi nancial crisis, people investing in money- 
market funds may have believed that no fund could ever “break the 
buck,” or pay back less than the nominal amount put in the account.
Obviously, such neglect leads investors to make systematic mis-
takes and exercise poor economic decision- making. But Gennaioli, 
Shleifer, and Vishny show how the fi nancial sector amplifi es this 
neglect and produces a full- blown fi nancial catastrophe. Th e key in-
sight is that bankers will create securities that are vulnerable only to 
these neglected risks. In other words, the securities sold to investors 
will load heavily on the neglected risk itself. For example, if inves-
tors convince themselves that house prices throughout the country 
cannot fall by  percent or more, then bankers will create securities 
that retain their value in every scenario except when house prices 
throughout the country fall by  percent or more. Because these 
securities look riskless to investors, they will be produced in abun-
dance. Th is large expansion in the supply of securities that look 
riskless will fuel an asset- price bubble by allowing optimists to buy 
even more expensive homes. When house prices do in fact fall more 
than  percent, the result is fi nancially catastrophic.
What is the best kind of security to sell to investors who neglect 

D E B T  A N D  B U B B L E S  115
certain risks? Debt. Debt has the unique feature that it convinces 
investors they will be paid back in almost every future scenario. 
An investor buying debt believes what they are holding is safe, in-
dependent of the underlying asset they are fi nancing. Th e fi nan-
cial sector convinces investors that they are holding “super- safe” 
debt even in the clear presence of an asset bubble. Th is helps us to 
understand why Kindleberger found another common historical 
pattern: asset- price bubbles were oft en fueled by debt that looked 
extremely safe. As he put it, “In many cases the expansion of credit 
resulted from the development of substitutes for what previously 
had been the traditional monies.”12 Creditors were convinced that 
new debt instruments were as safe as currency backed by precious 
metal or government guarantees.
Th ere is another lesson behind the neglected- risks framework: 
Debt instruments lead investors to focus on a very small part of 
the potential set of outcomes. As a result, they tend to ignore rele-
vant information; they may even miss blatant fraud. Suppose, for 
example, investors provide a loan to a business. If the investors are 
convinced that their loan will be repaid even if the business man-
ager steals some money from the cash drawer, then the investors 
are willing to ignore the stealing. In contrast, if the investors are eq-
uity investors, meaning that they share the profi ts of the business, 
they will have a strong incentive to detect theft . Debt convinces 
investors that they don’t have to worry about fraud because their 
senior claim on the asset protects them.
In a world of neglected risks, fi nancial innovation should be 
viewed with some degree of skepticism. If investors systematically 
ignore certain outcomes, fi nancial innovation may just be secret 
code for bankers trying to fool investors into buying securities that 
look safe but are actually extremely vulnerable.
* * *
In a cruel twist of irony, Kindleberger passed away in  at the 
age of ninety- two, just as the mortgage- credit boom was starting. 

116 C H A P T E R  E I G H T
He did an interview with the Wall Street Journal the year before 
he died. What market concerned him the most? Housing. As the 
article put it, “Th e object of his greatest fascination today is the 
real- estate market. For weeks, Mr. Kindleberger has been cutting 
out newspaper clippings that hint at a bubble in the housing mar-
ket, most notably on the West Coast.” He wasn’t yet certain, but he 
suspected a housing bubble. He saw one telltale sign: “Banks are 
ready to mortgage more and more and more and more,” he said. 
“It’s dangerous, I think.”13

STOPPING THE CYCLE
 PART III


Spanish housing in the s was the U.S. experience on steroids. 
During the early part of the decade, house prices soared  per-
cent as the household debt- to- income ratio doubled. When house 
prices collapsed, the home equity of many Spanish home own-
ers was completely wiped out, setting in motion a levered- losses 
cycle even worse than the one in the United States. Th e Spanish 
economy foundered, with unemployment topping  percent by 
. Spanish home owners had even worse problems than their 
American counterparts. As in the United States, house- price de-
clines destroyed home equity, and many home owners were 
evicted from their homes. But in Spain a law from  stipulated 
that most Spanish home owners remain responsible for mortgage 
payments— even aft er handing over the keys to the bank. If a Span-
iard was evicted from his home because he missed his mortgage 
payments, he could not discharge his mortgage debt in bankruptcy. 
He was still liable for the entire principal.1 Further, accrued penal-
ties and the liabilities followed him the rest of his life. And bank-
ruptcy registers made it diffi  cult for him to lease an apartment or 
even get a cell phone contract.2
As a result of these laws, mortgage- debt burdens continued to 
squeeze Spanish households even aft er they were forced out of their 
homes. Suzanne Daley of the New York Times reported on the story 
 9: SAVE THE BANKS, 
SAVE THE ECONOMY?

120 C H A P T E R  N I N E
of Manolo Marban, who in  was delinquent on his mortgage 
and awaiting eviction. He expected no relief from his $, 
mortgage even aft er getting kicked out: “‘I will be working for the 
bank the rest of my life,’ Mr. Marban said recently, tears welling 
in his eyes. ‘I will never own anything— not even a car.’”3 Hard- 
handed Spanish mortgage laws spurred widespread condemnation 
and social unrest. Locksmiths and police began refusing to help 
bankers evict delinquent home owners.4 In  Spanish fi refi ght-
ers in Catalonia also announced that they would no longer assist 
in evictions, holding up a sign reading: “Rescatamos personas, no 
bancos”— we rescue people, not banks.
Even outsiders recognized the harshness of Spanish mortgage 
laws: the European Union Court of Justice handed down a ruling 
in  demanding that Spain make it easier for mortgage holders 
to escape foreclosure by challenging onerous mortgage terms in 
court.5 Th e Wall Street Journal Editorial Board— not known as a 
left - leaning advocate for indebted home owners— urged Spain to 
reform mortgage laws to “prevent evicted homeowners from being 
saddled eternally with debt.”6 A number of opposition parties in 
the Spanish parliament attempted to reform the laws governing 
mortgage contracts. But in the end, nothing was done. As we write, 
harsh Spanish mortgage laws remain on the books, and Spain has 
endured a horribly severe recession, comparable to the Great De-
pression in the United States.
So why wasn’t more done to help Spanish home owners? Law-
makers in Spain made an explicit choice: any mortgage relief for 
indebted households would hurt Spanish banks, and the banking 
sector must be shielded as much as possible. For example, if law-
makers made it easier for home owners to discharge their debt by 
walking away from the home, more Spaniards would choose to 
stop paying and walk away. Th is would leave banks with bad homes 
instead of interest- earning mortgages, which would then lead to 
larger overall economic costs. Th e head of the mortgage division 
at Spain’s largest property website put it bluntly: “If the govern-
ment were to take excessive measures regarding mortgage law, that 

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   121
would aff ect banks. It would endanger all of the hard work that has 
been done so far to restore the Spanish banking system to health.”7
Th e New York Times story by Suzanne Daley reported that “the 
government of Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero has opposed . . . let-
ting mortgage defaulters settle their debts with the bank by turn-
ing over the property. . . . Government offi  cials say Spain’s system 
of personal guarantees saved its banks from the turmoil seen in the 
United States.” Th e article quoted the undersecretary of the Hous-
ing Ministry: “It is true that we are living a hangover of a huge real 
estate binge. And it is true that far too many Spaniards have exces-
sive debt. But we have not seen the [banking] problems of the U.S. 
because the guarantees [requiring Spaniards to pay their mortgage 
debt] here are so much better.”8
Still, the extreme preferential treatment given to banks under 
Spanish bankruptcy law was not enough to protect the banking 
sector. Spanish banks steadily weakened as the economy con-
tracted. In July  the Spanish banking system was given a $ 
billion bailout package by Eurozone countries. And it was actually 
backed by Spanish taxpayers.9
So did the policy of protecting banks at all costs succeed? Not 
at all. Five years aft er the onset of the fi nancial crisis, the recession 
in Spain is one of the worst in the entire world. If protecting banks 
at all costs could save the economy, then Spain would have been a 
major success story.
Saving the Banks
When the banking sector is threatened with signifi cant losses, 
markets and policy makers are faced with the inevitable question 
of who should bear the burden. Th e natural solution is that the 
banks’ stakeholders— its shareholders and creditors— should ab-
sorb the losses. Aft er all, they willingly fi nanced the bank and were 
responsible for managing its investments. However, when it comes 
to banks, an alternative argument quickly comes to the forefront. 
Banks are special, we are told by economists, regulators, and policy 

122 C H A P T E R  N I N E
makers. Th e government goes to extreme lengths to save the bank-
ing system, oft en at the expense of the common public.
Th e Spanish story is by no means unique. It was repeated with 
remarkable regularity in the rest of Europe and in the United States 
during the Great Recession. In  the comedian Jon Stewart re-
acted to the bank bailout in the United States by asking a question 
many Americans already had: “Why not take the $ billion and 
give it directly to people— why are we giving it to the banks that 
created this issue?”10 So why are banks so special? Why so much 
urgency to save them at all costs? One possible reason is political: 
Banks are better organized at protecting their interests. However, 
before we consider the political explanation, let’s review the eco-
nomic rationale. Th is requires a basic understanding of the busi-
ness of banking, which is unique in many ways.
A normal business— making furniture, for example— has a 
pretty simple balance sheet. Th e assets of a furniture business are 
the equipment, plants, and machines used to make furniture. A 
furniture company must buy these assets using money from inves-
tors. Some of the money is raised from creditors as debt (through 
bonds, for example). Th e rest comes from shareholders and is 
called equity. Together, the debt and shareholders’ equity make up 
the liabilities of the furniture company. A furniture company makes 
money for its shareholders by producing and selling good furniture 
and paying off  the debt. Th e money left  over represents profi ts to 
the shareholders.
If a furniture company performs poorly, the value of its assets 
declines. Th e equity holders of the furniture company are the fi rst 
to lose. If the furniture company does very badly, eventually even 
the creditors must bear the losses. At that point, the furniture com-
pany goes bankrupt. A bankruptcy judge helps decide whether the 
company should be allowed to continue. If it is, the old sharehold-
ers are wiped out, and the impaired creditors usually get an  equity 
stake in the fi rm that is worth less than the debt claims they had in 
the pre- bankruptcy fi rm. So the creditors lose out, but they were 
aware of the risks they were taking. Th ere is no need for further 

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   123
government intervention or taxpayer bailouts. Th e bankruptcy 
process in the United States works very well for non- fi nancial com-
panies.
For a bank, on the other hand, its assets are not equipment or 
machines, but loans. When a bank makes a loan to a home owner, 
it is listed as an asset on its balance sheet. So the value of a bank’s 
assets is determined by the borrowers’ ability to make payments. 
If the bank’s borrowers all default on their loans, the value of the 
bank’s assets plummets. Just like the furniture company, the bank 
needs money from investors in order to fund its assets— in this 
case, to make loans.
What makes a bank unique is how it gets funding on the liability 
side of its balance sheet. Th e primary liability of most banks is de-
posits. Most depositors don’t think of their money as an investment 
in a bank, but that is exactly what it is. It is a “loan” to a bank that 
can be withdrawn on demand. Th e bank does not keep a deposi-
tor’s money in its vault. It makes loans on the asset side of the bal-
ance sheet using depositors’ money. Th ese loans will be paid back 
over years, even though deposits can be demanded back immedi-
ately. So the business of banking requires that not all depositors 
demand their money at the same time, an idea dramatized in It’s 
a Wonderful Life. Th e rest of the bank’s liabilities consist of non- 
deposit debt and shareholders’ equity. Because depositors are gen-
erally insured and can demand their money back instantaneously, 
the non- deposit debt of a bank is considered junior to deposits and 
is usually called subordinated debt. Shareholders’ equity is the most 
junior claim and in the parlance of banking is called capital.
Suppose a lot of people default on their mortgages and the value 
of a bank’s loans (its assets) drops sharply. Th e abrupt decline im-
pairs fi rst the shareholders’ equity. If the losses are so large that 
equity is totally wiped out, then subordinated debt takes losses. If 
the losses are so large as to jeopardize depositors, then the govern-
ment steps in, guarantees depositors’ money, and closes down the 
bank. Depositors are saved, but equity and subordinated debt are 
wiped out.

124 C H A P T E R  N I N E
Lender of Last Resort
Th e primary justifi cation for protecting the banking system is based 
on the role of deposits in the payment system. Deposits are not just 
a bank liability; they are the means of settling transactions in the 
economy. Further, depositors can pull out their money at any time 
they want. If the value of banking assets falls, spooked depositors 
may all demand their money when they sense the bank is in trou-
ble— a bank run. Bank runs can lead to even healthy banks going 
under. For example, even a depositor in a healthy bank will “run” 
if he believes that other depositors are withdrawing their funds in 
a panic. Th e run dynamic is dangerous. It forces banks to sell as-
sets at prices below market value. It can also damage the payment 
system of a country, which relies on bank deposits: when someone 
writes a check, it is cleared by shift ing deposits from one bank to 
another. Businesses oft en pay their workers from deposit accounts. 
If the value of bank deposits is called into question, the entire pay-
ment system of a country may break down.
It is a well- accepted axiom of banking regulation that the cen-
tral bank must act as a “lender of last resort” to prevent bank runs. 
It can do so by explicitly insuring bank deposits, as the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) does, or by lending freely 
to liquidity- constrained banks. Th e so- called Bagehot Rule, named 
aft er the famous British journalist Walter Bagehot, calls for cen-
tral banks to lend without limit at a penalty rate, to solvent fi rms, 
against good collateral. If a solvent bank faces a run, it can get fi -
nancing from the central bank to meet the deposit withdrawals. If 
the bank is insolvent— meaning the value of its assets is even lower 
than the value of its deposits— then the regulator can step in and 
take over the bank, which is exactly what the FDIC is charged with 
doing. Of course, just the presence of a lender of last resort can pre-
vent runs from happening in the fi rst place.
Th e Federal Reserve took extreme measures in this role during 
the Great Recession. Th ey slashed the rate at which banks could 
borrow from the Fed from . percent to eff ectively zero. Banks 

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   125
could borrow as much as they liked and for free, as long as they 
had collateral to post. Th e Fed also expanded the defi nition of 
who could borrow and what classifi ed as acceptable collateral. An 
entire alphabet soup of new programs was initiated. Th ere was the 
$ billion Term Auction Facility (TAF); $ billion in swap lines 
for foreign central banks; the $ billion Term Securities Lend-
ing Facility (TSLF); the $ billion Primary Dealer Credit Facil-
ity (PDCF); the $ billion Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
(CPFF); and the $ trillion Term Asset- Backed Securities Loan Fa-
cility (TALF).11 Th e largest and longest- lasting program introduced 
by the Fed was the Large- Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) program. 
Also known as “quantitative easing,” it involves the Fed buying 
long- term assets that include agency debt, mortgage- backed secu-
rities, and long- term treasuries from banks. It has been enormous 
by any standard. By the middle of , these Fed purchases had 
increased the size of its balance sheet from around $ billion in 
 to a whopping $. trillion.
Th e fi nancial crisis in the fall of  had an added complica-
tion because banks were funding themselves with very short- term 
fi nancing instruments that weren’t deposits. Much of this short- 
term fi nancing was being provided by money- market funds, which 
were not explicitly guaranteed by the Federal Reserve or the FDIC. 
When investors began running from money- market funds in Sep-
tember , the Treasury Department stepped in to guaran-
tee these funds. Th eir blanket guarantee immediately calmed the 
market, which shows that the government can and should prevent 
runs in the fi nancial sector. We view these policies as advisable and 
fi tting within the appropriate role of the government and central 
bank in preventing crippling bank runs.
Preventing runs requires lending by the Federal Reserve, and in 
the case of money- market funds during the fall of , it even re-
quired lending by the U.S. Treasury. However, this kind of support 
should not be viewed as a bailout. For solvent banks, the money 
will be paid back with interest. For insolvent banks, if the govern-
ment is acting appropriately, long- term creditors and shareholders 

126 C H A P T E R  N I N E
of the bank will be wiped out. Th is leads to the primary policy les-
son of bank support: To prevent runs and preserve the payment sys-
tem, there is absolutely no reason for the government to protect long- 
term creditors and shareholders of banks.
Resuming the Flow of Credit
Support for the banks in the United States during the Great Reces-
sion went far beyond protecting the payment system. Indeed, gov-
ernment policies took money from taxpayers and gave it directly to 
the creditors and shareholders. Pietro Veronesi and Luigi Zingales 
estimated that the equity injections into large fi nancial institutions 
by the Treasury in the fall of  increased the value of bank debt 
and equity by $ billion.12 Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn 
Van Nieuwerburgh examined options on bank stocks and indices, 
and found that “a collective government guarantee for the fi nan-
cial sector” helped signifi cantly boost the price of bank equity.13 So 
while any policy that would have helped home owners was shelved, 
governments bailed out bank creditors and shareholders using tax-
payer money. Why?
President George W. Bush explained the reasoning explicitly in 
his September , , speech to the nation.14 It was an impas-
sioned plea to pass the bank bailout legislation, which he assured 
would “free up banks to resume the fl ow of credit to American 
families and businesses, and this will help our economy grow.” Th e 
banking view goes beyond protecting depositors and the payment 
system. It argues that bank creditors and shareholders must be pro-
tected in order to ensure that banks continue to lend.
If this sounds like a strange argument, it should. Th e fundamen-
tal business of a bank is lending, just as the fundamental purpose 
of a furniture company is to sell furniture. Few economists believe 
that the government should promote the sale of bad furniture by 
stepping in to protect the creditors and shareholders of a poorly 
performing furniture company. So if banks get in the business of 

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   127
producing bad loans, why should the government step in to protect 
incompetent bank managers and their creditors and shareholders?
Th e economic theory behind government protection is that 
banks perform unique services that are diffi  cult to replicate by any 
other institution. Ben Bernanke, long before he was chairman of 
the Federal Reserve, advanced this view most forcefully in his anal-
ysis of the Great Depression. In his view, “intermediation between 
some classes of borrowers and lenders requires non- trivial market- 
making and information- gathering services.” Further, “the disrup-
tions of –  reduced the eff ectiveness of the fi nancial sector 
as a whole in performing these services.” Or, according to Ber-
nanke, bank failures caused lending to collapse, which drove the 
Great Depression.15
Notice the diff erence between the two independent reasons to 
support the banking system. In the fi rst, depositors and the pay-
ment system must be protected. Th is does not require any assis-
tance to long- term creditors or shareholders of banks. In fact, it is 
possible to completely wipe out shareholders and long- term cred-
itors while preserving the integrity of the payment system. Th e 
FDIC has done this many times. But in the second, bank creditors 
and shareholders must be protected because banks have a unique 
ability to lend.
Did the Bank- Lending Channel Cause the Great Recession?
Th e bank- lending view holds that the economy would heal if we 
could just get the banks to lend again. A severe recession is not 
caused by a massive pullback in household spending; fi rms and 
households just need more debt to make it through. Th is is like 
trying to cure a hangover with another binge- drinking episode. 
More debt is not the way to escape a recession caused by excessive 
debt. Do we really think that households and companies desper-
ately want to borrow when the entire economy is collapsing around 
them?

128 C H A P T E R  N I N E
To help answer this, there is evidence from surveys by the Natio-
nal Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB).16 Proponents of 
the bank- lending view are particularly concerned about credit to 
small businesses. Because small businesses rely heavily on banks 
for credit, they will be disproportionately aff ected. Large busi-
nesses, however, can rely on bonds or commercial paper markets 
for debt fi nancing. Th e NFIB is informative because it surveys ex-
actly the small businesses that should be most vulnerable to being 
cut off  from bank lending. Th e survey asks small businesses to list 
their most important concern, where “poor sales,” “regulation and 
taxes,” and “fi nancing and interest rates” are a few of the options. 
Th e fraction citing fi nancing and interest rates as a main concern 
never rose above  percent throughout the fi nancial crisis— in fact, 
the fraction actually went down from  to . It is diffi  cult to 
reconcile this fact with the view that small businesses were desper-
ate for bank fi nancing. On the other hand, from  to , the 
fraction of small businesses citing poor sales as their top concern 
jumped from  percent to almost  percent. As indebted house-
holds cut back sharply on spending, businesses saw a sharp de-
cline in sales. Further, the areas where poor sales were the biggest 
concern were the exact same areas that saw the worst decline in 
household net worth.17
We also explored how the banking view explains unemploy-
ment. As we mentioned in chapter , job losses in industries cater-
ing to local consumer demand were much larger in counties with 
the largest drops in household net worth. If a lack of lending was 
the problem, we would expect these losses to be concentrated in 
small businesses, which depended on bank loans. We found exactly 
the opposite. Companies laying off  workers in these hard- hit coun-
ties were the largest businesses. Th is is more consistent with busi-
nesses responding to a lack of consumer demand rather than an 
inability to get a bank loan.18
Th e true image of unemployment during the Great Recession is 
not of a small mom- and- pop store laying off  workers because they 

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   129
cannot get a bank loan. Instead, it is a large retailer like Target lay-
ing off  workers because indebted households have stopped coming 
to the store. Kathleen Kahle and Rene Stulz, who conducted the 
most comprehensive study of the banking view for public corpo-
rations, off er more evidence refuting the banking view. Th ey show 
that, across the board, fi rms accumulated large stocks of cash on 
their balance sheets and continued to do so during the Great Re-
cession. If a number of fi rms were severely constrained in the sense 
of having excellent investment projects but no banking credit, then 
we would have expected fi rms to use their large cash holdings to in-
vest. Instead, Kahle and Stulz found that they did the opposite and 
conclude that the banking view “cannot explain important features 
of the fi nancial and investment policies of industrial fi rms.”19
Th e aggregate evidence also refutes the bank- lending view. One 
measure of stress within the banking system is the spread between 
the interest rate on short- term fi nancial commercial paper and the 
interest rate on short- term Treasury bills issued by the U.S. govern-
ment. Th e interest rate on short- term fi nancial commercial paper 
refl ects the price a bank pays for obtaining short- term debt fi nanc-
ing. Th e interest rate on short- term Treasury bills refl ects the price 
that the U.S. government pays. When the banking system is under 
severe threat, the price for commercial paper may be much higher 
than the price for Treasury bills.
Th e spread between fi nancial commercial paper and Treasury 
bills spiked in the fall of . Th e higher cost of funds for banks 
would certainly result in higher cost of credit for fi rms that want to 
invest. However, the aggressive interventions by the Treasury and 
the Federal Reserve mentioned above quickly quelled the spike in 
banks’ cost of funds. As early as the end of December , the ab-
normal spread between fi nancial commercial paper and Treasury 
bills completely disappeared. Th e Federal Reserve and the U.S. gov-
ernment successfully stopped the run, which is exactly its primary 
function for the banking system. Th ere is simply no evidence that 
the banking system was under severe stress beyond .

130 C H A P T E R  N I N E
However, despite low levels of stress in the banking system, bank 
loans plummeted in  and . Th is is more consistent with 
the argument that bank lending collapsed because fi rms did not 
want any more credit, which is exactly what we would expect if 
fi rms suff ered from plummeting sales. Figure . shows the rela-
tion between bank distress and bank lending. If anything, banks 
actually provided more cash during the height of the fi nancial crisis 
as fi rms drew down on their lines of credit. Did we see any sharp 
increase in bank lending once banks were safe? No. Bank lending 
collapsed in  and .
 Further, as we have shown earlier in the book, employment col-
lapsed in  and retail spending remained very weak even into 
. Continued weakness in the economy even aft er banks were 
saved contradicts the bank- lending view. Th ere is no evidence that 
banks were under any duress aft er , but the economy still suf-
fered.
Figure 9.1: Distress and Bank Lending

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   131
The Power of the Bank- Lending View
Why has the bank- lending view remained so powerful if there’s so 
much evidence contradicting it? Th e most cynical argument is that 
creditors wield immense political power, and there is certainly evi-
dence to support this. In research we conducted with Francesco 
Trebbi, we found that campaign contributions by fi nancial fi rms 
led congressional representatives to be more likely to vote for the 
bank- bailout legislation. Th is was more than just a correlation. For 
example, we showed that representatives who were retiring were 
less sensitive to bank campaign contributions than those looking 
to get reelected. Some members of Congress desperate to get cam-
paign funds have clearly been bought off  by the fi nancial  industry.20
But we believe there is also a failure of economists to combat 
this view, which is a main reason we decided to write this book. 
Th e bank- lending view enjoys tremendous support among some 
in the economics profession, and they help lodge it into the public 
discussion of policies in severe recessions. Th e entire discourse be-
comes focused on the banking crisis, and potential solutions to the 
household- debt crisis are ignored.
Adam Davidson of NPR’s Planet Money is a brilliant journal-
ist who did some of the best reporting on the fi nancial crisis. In a 
conversation with Senator Elizabeth Warren in May  (who was 
then part of the TARP oversight board), Davidson relayed his opin-
ion on the dominant view among economists:
Th e essential need for credit intermediation [is] as close to accepted 
principles among every serious thinker on this topic. Th e view that 
the American family, that you hold very powerfully, is fully under 
assault . . . that is not accepted broad wisdom. I talk to a lot a lot a 
lot of left , right, center, neutral economists [and] you are the only per-
son I’ve talked to in a year of covering this crisis who has a view that 
we have two equally acute crises: a fi nancial crisis and a household 
debt crisis that is equally acute in the same kind of way. I literally 

132 C H A P T E R  N I N E
don’t know who else I can talk to support that view. I literally don’t 
know anyone other than you who has that view [our emphasis].21
Davidson is a top economics journalist who had serious discus-
sions with many economists and knew of no other expert who sup-
ported what a brief look at the data would have revealed: that ele-
vated household debt was the driving force behind the dramatic 
collapse in household spending. Th is is a failure of the economics 
profession.
Even in hindsight, the intellectual support of the banking view 
remains incredibly strong. For example, one of the central argu-
ments we have made is highlighting the diff erence in the economic 
consequences of the  tech crash and the  housing crash. 
As we discussed in chapter , the main reason why the housing 
crash was so much worse is that the marginal propensity to con-
sume out of a housing- wealth shock is much higher— housing 
wealth is a levered asset held by lower net- worth households. Th e 
rich are the primary owners of tech stocks, and they respond much 
less to a decline in wealth. Th e larger MPC of indebted home own-
ers is crucial for understanding why the housing crash was so much 
worse than the tech crash.
In April , Ben Bernanke was asked how macroeconomics 
should change in response to the Great Recession.22 To answer 
the question, Bernanke pointed to this same fact that the hous-
ing crash was so much worse than the tech crash. But what lesson 
did he draw? “Now the reason it was more damaging, of course, as 
we know now, is that the credit intermediation system, the fi nan-
cial system, the institutions, the markets, were far more vulnerable 
to declines in house prices and the related eff ects on mortgages 
and so on than they were to the decline in stock prices.” He went 
on, “It was essentially the destruction of the ability of the fi nan-
cial system to intermediate that was the reason the recession was 
so much deeper in the second than the fi rst.” Nowhere in his re-
sponse did he mention that the housing crash was worse because it 
directly aff ected low net- worth home owners with very high mar-

S AV E  T H E  B A N K S ,  S AV E  T H E  E C O N O M Y ?   133
ginal propensities to consume out of wealth. We have great respect 
for Chairman Bernanke and his adept handling of the Federal Re-
serve during one of the most diffi  cult times in our nation’s history. 
But even he continued to believe that an impaired ability of banks 
to lend was the main reason for the Great Recession. As we have 
demonstrated in this book, the facts say otherwise.
When a fi nancial crisis erupts, lawmakers and regulators must 
address problems in the banking system. Th ey must work to pre-
vent runs and preserve liquidity. But policy makers have gone 
much further, behaving as if the preservation of bank creditor and 
shareholder value is the only policy goal. Th e bank- lending view 
has become so powerful that eff orts to help home owners are im-
mediately seen in an unfavorable light. Th is is unacceptable. Th e 
dramatic loss in wealth of indebted home owners is the key driver 
of severe recessions. Saving the banks won’t save the economy. In-
stead, bolstering the economy by attacking the levered- losses prob-
lem directly would save the banks.
We don’t believe the banks are unimportant. In fact, research 
we conducted before the Great Recession found that banks play 
a crucial role in intermediating credit. Some of the decline in the 
economy during the heart of the fi nancial crisis was a result of 
problems in the banking sector. But the bank- lending view has be-
come so powerful that it has killed many eff orts that could have 
helped mitigate the crushing household- debt burdens that drove 
the Great Recession. Policy makers have consistently viewed assis-
tance to indebted households as a zero- sum game: helping home 
owners means hurting banks, and hurting banks would be the 
worst thing for the economy.
Housing policy during the Obama administration was severely 
hampered by strong adherence to the banking view. Clea Benson 
at Bloomberg covered President Obama’s approach to housing and 
came to the conclusion that “while his [housing] plan was under-
mined in part by the weak U.S. economic recovery, it also lacked 
broad and aggressive measures. Relief programs have tinkered 
around the edges of the housing fi nance system because Obama’s 

134 C H A P T E R  N I N E
advisers chose early on not to expend political capital forcing banks 
to forgive mortgage debt” (our emphasis).23
Th e same narrative emerges from Kristin Roberts and Stacy 
Kaper’s extensive review of housing policy during the Great Reces-
sion that appeared in the National Journal. From the very begin-
ning of the Obama administration, they wrote, a guiding principle 
in housing policy was that “the government would not force banks 
to modify loans, and any changes made to mortgage terms would 
have to work for investors as well as homeowners.” Members of the 
administration “were motivated time and again by a heartfelt need 
to support banks still struggling to emerge from the fi nancial crisis, 
and to contain the losses faced by lenders and bond investors.”24
In the levered- losses view, using taxpayer money to bail out 
bank creditors and shareholders while ignoring the household- 
debt problem is counterproductive. Remember, the decline in con-
sumer spending is driven by low net- worth indebted home own-
ers. Bank creditors and shareholders are the richest households in 
the economy. A bailout of bank creditors and shareholders pro-
vides valuable taxpayer funds to a group with a very low marginal 
propensity to consume. Th e bank- lending view advocates taxpayer 
gift s to exactly the households that need relief the least.
Th e real reason banks are suff ering is that the recession was 
caused by a collapse in household spending. If we want to save 
the banks, the better approach would be to attack the household- 
leverage problem directly.

Rick Santelli left  no doubt on his stance toward helping indebted 
home owners. Th e CNBC reporter delivered a rant on the fl oor 
of the Chicago Board of Trade in February , just as the new 
Obama administration was settling in. “How about this, Mr. Presi-
dent and new administration?” he asked. “Why don’t you put up a 
website to have people vote on the Internet as a referendum to see 
if we really want to subsidize the losers’ mortgages?” He turned to 
the traders on the fl oor, asking, “How many people want to pay for 
your neighbor’s mortgage that has an extra bathroom and can’t pay 
their bills? Raise their hand.” Th e traders loudly booed. One of the 
traders responded, “It’s a moral hazard!” Th e Santelli rant struck a 
nerve; it is suspected to have played an important role in founding 
the Tea Party movement that dominated the  midterm elec-
tions. Americans were outraged that their irresponsible neighbors 
were being bailed out.1
Th e sad fact is that when Santelli made his speech, very few 
home owners had received debt relief. And they didn’t get a bail-
out aft erward, either. Despite the biggest housing collapse in post– 
Great Depression American history, indebted home owners were 
left  drowning underwater with only minimal assistance from the 
government.
An attempt at helping indebted home owners fi rst came in the 
summer of , when Congress passed the American  Housing 
10: FORGIVENESS

136 C H A P T E R  T E N
Rescue and Foreclosure Prevention Act. It provided the  Federal 
Housing Administration with $ billion to encourage the private 
sector to reduce principal balances on mortgages. It was supposed 
to help , home owners avoid foreclosure. By December 
, it attracted only  applications. None of the money was 
spent. Th e Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Steve 
Preston put the blame squarely on Congress for a poorly con-
structed bill and called the legislation a failure.2
During negotiations on the Emergency Economic Stabilization 
Act in September , many legislators demanded that TARP 
funds be used to help home owners as well as banks. Th e legisla-
tion set up a number of programs to ease household- debt burdens, 
including the Home Aff ordable Modifi cation Program. It was sup-
posed to help  to  million at- risk home owners avoid foreclo-
sure by easing mortgage terms. Five years later, it had led to only 
, permanent modifi cations.3
Th e actual funds spent reducing household- debt burdens from 
TARP were tiny compared to the bank bailouts. Th e Special Inspec-
tor General’s fi rst quarter  report on TARP showed that the 
Treasury spent less than  percent of TARP funds on home- owner 
relief programs. In contrast, it spent  percent of TARP funds to 
rescue fi nancial institutions. As the SIGTARP report pointed out, 
one single bank— the PNC Financial Services Group— received 
as much support as all home owners in the entire country. Th e 
SIGTARP report noted the disparity between the treatment of 
banks and indebted home owners: “Treasury pulled out all the stops 
for the largest fi nancial institutions, and it must do the same for 
homeowners.”4
Even members of the Obama administration have expressed 
frus tration that they didn’t do more on housing and household 
debt. Lawrence Summers, who was President Obama’s powerful 
top economic adviser, admitted in  that “if we made a seri-
ous mistake, the best arguments would be around questions about 
housing.” Former budget director Peter Orszag said that failure 

F O R G I V E N E S S  137
to address housing problems was “a major policy error.” In  
Christina Romer, the former chair of the Council of Economic Ad-
visers, said that more eff orts were needed to help reduce princi-
pal balances for underwater home owners.5 Th e National Journal’s 
review of the Obama administration’s housing policy by Kristin 
Roberts and Stacy Kaper pulled no punches. Th ey summarized 
the housing response as “tepid, half- hearted, and confl icted poli-
cies. . . . It was a disastrous approach that did little for a market in 
free fall or for the millions of Americans still underwater and fac-
ing foreclosure.” Further, “although the federal government would 
spend reams of cash to stanch, to some degree, losses suff ered by 
the fi nancial sector, the auto industry, and state and local govern-
ments, suff ering homeowners would see no relief. . . . Th eir bailout 
never arrived.”6
Economic Rationale for Intervention
To justify government intervention, economists rely on the notion 
of market failures. Th ere were very clear market failures that war-
ranted the facilitation of mortgage- debt restructuring during the 
Great Recession. Th ey can be split into microeconomic and macro-
economic categories. Let’s start with the microeconomic ones.
Foreclosures are bad for everyone. Th ey kick families out of their 
homes, depress house prices, and elicit major losses for lenders, 
who typically want to avoid foreclosure except in extreme circum-
stances. When house prices crash, home owners and lenders have 
a strong incentive to return to the bargaining table and modify 
the loans. Unfortunately, the securitization of mortgages during 
the housing boom made it very diffi  cult to renegotiate mortgages, 
even when everyone would have been better off  by doing so. Re-
member, mortgages during the boom were pooled and tranched 
into mortgage- backed securities (as described in chapter ). A ser-
vicer represented the holders of MBS, and they were responsible 
for administering and renegotiating mortgages. When house prices 

138 C H A P T E R  T E N
crashed, home owners could not turn to a bank to renegotiate the 
mortgage— no bank held the mortgage. Instead, they were forced 
to deal with a servicer, who was oft en unresponsive.
But securitization impeded effi  cient renegotiation of mort-
gages for other reasons, as well.7 Most directly, some securitiza-
tion contracts explicitly prohibited servicers from renegotiating. 
Others imposed severe limits on servicers. Research suggests that 
up to  percent of private- label MBS contained some restriction 
limiting the servicer’s ability to modify mortgages in the securiti-
zation pool.8 Even when it wasn’t explicitly prohibited, the struc-
ture within securitization pools made it diffi  cult to get all parties 
to agree to writing down principal, even if most would benefi t. 
Th e Trust Indenture Act of  stipulated that “modifying the 
economic terms of RMBS required the consent of  percent of 
their holders.”9 If even one MBS holder decided it would be bet-
ter to foreclose than to renegotiate, the servicer’s hands would be 
tied. More generally, the securitization contracts put the servicers 
in a very diffi  cult position. As John Geanakoplos put it: “Modify-
ing the loans has diff erent eff ects on diff erent bondholders. It has 
proved diffi  cult to modify loans in a way that pleases everyone . . . 
there is a complex negotiation that is not taking place, and the 
government needs to intervene to break an impasse for the public 
good.”10
Further, securitization arrangements did not properly incentiv-
ize servicers to do the hard work of modifi cation, even when it was 
to the benefi t of the MBS holders. For example, most agreements 
compensated the servicer for costs of foreclosure, but not for ex-
penses associated with modifi cation.11 Given the magnitude of the 
mortgage default crisis, servicers needed to set up reasonably large 
operations to renegotiate mortgages. But their compensation ar-
rangements did not give them reasons to do so. A research study of 
the Home Aff ordable Modifi cation Program (one of the attempts 
to help indebted home owners mentioned above) by a group of 
top academic and regulatory economists showed these problems 
clearly. Th e HAMP was supposed to give strong incentives to ser-

F O R G I V E N E S S  139
vicers to modify mortgage terms. However, the authors argued that 
the main impediment to successful implementation was the inabil-
ity of servicers to handle large volumes. Th ey conclude by saying 
that servicers’ “low renegotiation activity— which is also observed 
before the program— refl ects servicer- specifi c factors that appear 
to be related to their preexisting organizational capabilities.”12
And there is more serious research that strongly supports the 
argument that securitization impeded effi  cient renegotiation. 
 Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig found that delin-
quent mortgages were more likely to end up in foreclosure if they 
were held in a securitization pool rather than on the balance sheet 
of an individual bank.13 Th e research design of their study ensured 
that the mortgages considered were identical in every other aspect 
except for whether the mortgage was in a securitization pool or 
not. Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben- David, Souphala 
Chomsisengphet, and Douglas Evanoff  used a separate data set but 
reached a similar conclusion: securitization impeded the ability of 
home owners to renegotiate their mortgages. Further, they showed 
that bank- held loans that were renegotiated had much better per-
formance than mortgages in a securitization pool. Not only were 
mortgages more likely to be renegotiated if they were not in a se-
curitization pool, but they were also less likely to see re- default and 
were therefore more profi table to the lender.14
Securitization was not the only reason we saw too little mort-
gage renegotiation. Another is that servicers wanted to solidify a 
reputation as a “tough guy” to prevent more widespread defaults. 
Even if it made economic sense for a servicer to reduce principal 
on a given mortgage, the servicer chose not to out of fear that other 
borrowers would strategically stop paying in order to get a debt 
write- down as well.15 Th ese strategic default problems put a lid on 
private renegotiations even when more restructuring would have 
improved the economy. Because it discouraged the effi  cient rene-
gotiation of mortgages, the mortgage market structure in  was 
horribly suited for the collapse in house prices in the Great Reces-
sion.

140 C H A P T E R  T E N
Macroeconomic Failures
Perhaps no other government offi  cial did more harm to mortgage- 
debt write- down eff orts than Edward DeMarco, the acting direc-
tor of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees the 
government- sponsored enterprises (GSEs) of Freddie Mac and 
Fan nie Mae. Despite evidence from his own researchers that prin-
cipal reduction would have large benefi ts to both the GSEs and tax-
payers, DeMarco obstinately refused to budge on the issue.16 His 
strong stance against principal reduction earned the ire of Secretary 
of the Treasury Timothy Geithner, who wrote a public letter to De-
Marco in July  condemning his stalling on principal- reduction 
eff orts.17 In  a prominent group of state attorney generals took 
the unusual step of publicly calling on President Obama to fi re De-
Marco because of his refusal to help reduce mortgage- debt bur-
dens for underwater home owners.18 Th is was not a partisan issue. 
Even Glenn Hubbard, top economic adviser to  Republican 
presidential nominee Mitt Romney, assailed the incompetence of 
the FHFA in implementing principal write- down and refi nancing 
eff orts.19
DeMarco justifi ed his stance against principal reduction with a 
very narrow focus on the bottom line of the GSEs. Even within 
this narrow dimension, his own researchers contradicted him. But 
there was an even bigger fl aw: his narrow view ignored the macro-
economic failures that a government offi  cial in his position should 
have recognized. Even if aggressive principal reduction had hurt 
the bottom line of the GSEs, it may still have been in the national 
interest to alleviate household- debt burdens. Recall from chapter 
 that the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth during 
the Great Recession was the highest for low- income, highly levered 
households. As we discussed in that chapter, the fall in household 
spending from  to  was severe in part because wealth 
losses were concentrated on exactly these households.
Principal forgiveness would have resulted in a more equal shar-
ing of the losses associated with the housing crash. Debtors and 

F O R G I V E N E S S  141
creditors would have more evenly absorbed the shock to wealth, 
instead of debtors bearing almost all the pain. Given that credi-
tors tend to have high income and low leverage whereas borrowers 
tend to have low income and high leverage, a more equal sharing 
of losses would have transferred wealth from people with very low 
marginal propensities to consume to people with very high mar-
ginal propensities to consume. Th is would have boosted overall de-
mand. A creditor barely cuts spending when a dollar is taken away, 
but a borrower spends aggressively out of a dollar gained. As we 
highlighted in chapter , indebted households had MPCs out of 
wealth that were three to fi ve times larger than others’.
Economic policy should not always try to get dollars to house-
holds with the highest MPC. But severe recessions are special cir-
cumstances because macroeconomic failures prevent the economy 
from reacting to a severe drop in demand. We outlined some of these 
macroeconomic market failures in chapter , which include the zero 
lower bound and other rigidities. When such failures prevent the 
economy from adjusting to such a large decline in consumption, 
government policy should do what it can to boost household spend-
ing. Debt forgiveness is exactly one such policy, and arguably the 
most eff ective, given its role in reducing foreclosures and the very 
large diff erences in MPCs between creditors and debtors.20
One might argue that it is not the job of a private bank to vol-
untarily write down mortgage principal for the wider good of the 
public. However, DeMarco’s position as head of the GSEs was dif-
ferent. Th e GSEs by this time were a public entity and eff ectively 
belonged to taxpayers. It was DeMarco’s responsibility to act in the 
wider interest of the American public and pursue principal write- 
downs. Unfortunately, that wasn’t the case, and the failure to re-
spond adequately to the housing crisis was likely the biggest policy 
mistake of the Great Recession.
Some have argued that debt restructuring would have had little 
benefi t because spending out of housing wealth, even for indebted 
households, is too small to have made a signifi cant contribution to 
GDP.21 Th is is a narrow view. As we explained in the fi rst part of 

142 C H A P T E R  T E N
the book, the collapse in spending by indebted households infected 
the entire economy through foreclosures and employment. Th e evi-
dence from the county- level analysis we discussed in those chap-
ters demonstrates the centrality of elevated household- debt levels 
in explaining the severity of the recession. An aggressive restruc-
turing of household debt early in the Great Recession would have 
slowed plummeting house prices and supported jobs. Th e benefi ts 
would have been far larger than just the additional spending by in-
debted households. In the fi nal chapter of the book, we consider a 
scenario in which housing losses from  to  had been au-
tomatically more evenly distributed between creditors and home 
owners, and we show quantitatively that the Great Recession would 
have been only a mild recession under such a scenario.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, the overwhelming bias 
of economists and policy makers during the heart of the Great Re-
cession was toward saving banks at all costs. But as the economic 
slump continued, the benefi ts of more aggressive household- debt 
write- downs found their way into the economic mainstream. In 
 Harvard economist and president emeritus of the National Bu-
reau of Economic Research Martin Feldstein wrote that the “only 
real solution” to the housing mess was “permanently reducing the 
mortgage debt hanging over America.”22 Top economists who met 
with the president and vice president in  said that the president 
“could have signifi cantly accelerated the slow economic recovery if 
he had better addressed the overhang of mortgage debt left  when 
housing prices collapsed.”23 In  Carmen Reinhart concluded 
that “a restructuring of U.S. household debt, including debt forgive-
ness for low- income Americans, would be most eff ective in speed-
ing economic growth.”24
Lessons from History
Th ere are sound microeconomic and macroeconomic reasons for 
government intervention to restructure household debt during 
a levered- losses episode. U.S. policy makers in the past acted to 

F O R G I V E N E S S  143
soft en the blow on debtors. In fact, the policy response on house-
hold debt during the Great Recession was an outlier.
Th e fi rst economic crisis to hit the United States was in the late 
s, and it shares many similarities with our latest experience. 
Two main forces during the early part of that decade fueled urban 
and rural real estate prices. Th e fi rst was high commodity prices, 
which were driven by strong European demand aft er a series of 
poor harvests overseas. Th e second was an unsustainable expan-
sion of credit by new banks issuing their own currency notes. Th e 
situation was ripe for levered- losses crash. As the historian Mur-
ray N. Rothbard put it: “Th e rise in export values and the mone-
tary and credit expansion led to a boom in urban and rural real 
estate prices, speculation in the purchase of public lands, and 
rapidly growing indebtedness by farmers for projected improve-
ments.”25
Th e tipping point came in , when the Bank of the United 
States precipitated a defl ationary crisis by calling in funds from 
banks to pay off  government debt coming due. Simultaneously, 
commodity prices collapsed due to weaker demand from Europe. 
Th e price of cotton fell  percent from January  to June .26 
Th ese two forces led to a collapse in real estate prices, and leverage 
exacerbated the problems. As Rothbard notes, “One of the most 
striking problems generated by the panic [of ] was the plight 
of debtors. Having borrowed heavily during the preceding boom, 
they were confronted now with calls for repayment and falling 
prices, increasing the burden of their debts.”27 Rothbard wrote 
these words in , but he easily could have been describing the 
Great Recession.
Th at is where the similarities end. In contrast to the Great Reces-
sion, governments in  at the state and national level responded 
aggressively to the needs of indebted individuals, in particular 
farmers. Many state governments immediately imposed moratoria 
on debt payments and foreclosures.28 At the national level, an im-
portant group of debtors were farmers who had purchased public 
land using debt from the federal government.29 In – , Con-

144 C H A P T E R  T E N
gress passed postponement laws allowing debtors to delay making 
payments. In  William H. Crawford, the secretary of treasury 
under President James Monroe, proposed legislation that would 
() allow farmers to relinquish only some of their land while re-
taining title in the rest, () forgive  to . percent of the total 
debt, and () give permission to borrowers to pay sums due in ten 
equal annual installments without interest.30 During the debate on 
the legislation, Senator Ninian Edwards of Illinois passionately de-
fended debtors. As Rothbard writes, “Edwards went into great de-
tail to excuse the actions of the debtors. Th e debtors, like the rest 
of the country, had been infatuated by the short- lived ‘artifi cial and 
fi ctitious prosperity.’ Th ey thought that the prosperity would be 
permanent. . . . He also pointed to the distress prevailing among 
the debtors . . . all highlighting the need for governmental relief.”31 
Th e legislation easily passed Congress.
Th e Great Depression ultimately witnessed strong government 
eff orts to assist debtors. Th e most famous of these programs was 
the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation. Th e HOLC was a taxpayer- 
funded government bank that actually bought mortgage loans 
from private lenders and then made the terms more favorable to 
borrowers. Th e benefi ts to home owners were substantial. Without 
a modifi ed loan, most home owners could not have made prin-
cipal repayments and would have ended up in foreclosure. Fur-
ther, the modifi ed loans sometimes reduced principal and almost 
always reduced the interest rate and extended the maturity. While 
most mortgages originated before the Great Depression had a ma-
turity of only fi ve years, HOLC mortgages had a maturity of fi ft een 
years.32 Th e scale of the HOLC was enormous. By ,  percent 
of American home owners were borrowers from the HOLC. Th e 
most extensive research of the HOLC to date is a recent book by 
Price Fishback, Kenneth Snowden, and Jonathan Rose, Well Worth 
Saving. Th ey conclude by pointing out that while the HOLC in-
volved some losses to taxpayers, the benefi ts to both lenders and 
home owners were signifi cantly larger.33
Another dramatic Depression- era government intervention had 

F O R G I V E N E S S  145
to do with gold. Almost all long- term debt contracts in the United 
States at the time included a clause giving creditors the right to 
demand payment in gold. When the United States went off  the 
gold standard in , the dollar was worth far less in gold than it 
had been. As a result, creditors all wanted to be paid the original 
amount back in gold. But the gold clause in debt contracts was 
abrogated by Congress. Th is meant borrowers could pay back in 
dollars that were worth far less in real terms than what they had 
borrowed. As former Federal Reserve governor Randall Kroszner 
points out, “Th e abrogation of these clauses was tantamount to a 
debt jubilee.” When Congress did this, it was equivalent to a one-
time massive debt- forgiveness program on the order of the entire 
GDP of the country.34
Interestingly, the eff ects of the gold- clause abrogation were quite 
positive for both borrowers and lenders. As Kroszner demon-
strates, both equity prices and bond prices rose when the Supreme 
Court upheld the congressional action. In other words, debt for-
giveness actually made creditors better off . It is likely that we would 
have reached a similar outcome during the Great Recession had 
the government more aggressively facilitated the restructuring of 
household debt.
The Speciﬁ cs
An oft en- made argument is that the Great Recession was inher-
ently diff erent from past episodes, and these diff erences made debt 
forgiveness more complicated from both political and implemen-
tation standpoints. Th ere is truth in this statement, which is why 
we propose policies in chapter  to avoid getting into such a big 
mess in the fi rst place. But it is important to highlight that there 
were many debt write- down proposals that could have been imple-
mented and would have signifi cantly accelerated the recovery.
In October , John Geanakoplos and Susan Koniak pointed 
out inherent fl aws in securitization that made effi  cient renegotia-
tion of mortgages diffi  cult.35 Th ey proposed taking mortgage ser-

146 C H A P T E R  T E N
vicers out of the picture and instead giving government- appointed 
trustees the right to renegotiate mortgages that had been sold into 
securitization, regardless of what the contracts with MBS inves-
tors said. Th e modifi cations would take place between home own-
ers and trustees, and would be allowed to take place only if they 
made economic sense. As they wrote, “Th e blind trustees would 
consider, loan by loan, whether a reworking would bring in more 
money than a foreclosure.” While such government intervention 
would have violated the contracts signed between servicers and 
MBS investors, these contracts were not designed to deal with such 
a massive rise in mortgage delinquencies and therefore needed to 
be scrapped anyway. Further, such an intervention would have cost 
very little taxpayer money— only the trustees would have needed 
to be compensated. Th e proposal would have allowed for more ef-
fi cient renegotiation of mortgages that would have reduced debt 
and left  both home owners and MBS investors better off — at little 
taxpayer cost.
Another proposal put forth at the beginning of the housing crisis 
was the allowance of mortgage cram- downs by judges in Chapter 
 bankruptcy. In a Chapter  bankruptcy, an individual with too 
much debt submits a debt payback plan to a bankruptcy trustee in 
order to reduce his overall debt burden.36 Chapter  bankruptcy 
allows people to reduce debt that is not explicitly secured by some 
collateral. Credit card debt falls into this category. However, in the 
case of a mortgage on a principal residence, Chapter  does not 
allow for a reduction of the principal balance and does not prevent 
foreclosures.37
Th e week before the  election, soon- to- be Vice President 
Joseph Biden told Floridians, “If we can help Wall Street, folks, we 
sure can help Silver Springs Boulevard right here in Ocala. Th at’s 
why we believe we should reform our bankruptcy laws, giving 
bankruptcy judges the authority to reduce the amount of principal 
owed, give them the authority to go out and reset the terms of the 
mortgage so people can stay in their homes.”38 Barack Obama had 

F O R G I V E N E S S  147
sponsored mortgage cram- down legislation as a U.S. senator and 
endorsed it as a presidential candidate in a speech in Arizona.39 But 
a  New York Times article by Binyamin Appelbaum noted that 
the president “repeatedly pressed the pause button” when it came 
to enacting legislation.40 A watered- down version failed to pass the 
Senate in early .
Two widely respected housing experts were in strong support of 
mortgage cram- downs— Doris Dungy and Bill McBride of the Cal-
culated Risk website. Th e blog is one of the most read in economics 
and was among the fi rst to recognize the dangers of the debt- fueled 
housing bubble. As early as October , Dungy made a strong 
case to immediately allow judges to write down mortgage debt in 
bankruptcy.41 Th e benefi ts of cram- down, according to Dungy, 
were “not just as a relief measure for debtors but as a disincentive 
for lenders relaxing credit standards too far.”42 In August , Mc-
Bride noted that “cram- downs in bankruptcy are still an appropri-
ate policy.”43
Mortgage cram- downs would have had major benefi ts for the 
economy.44 Most research indicates that principal write- down is 
the most eff ective way of curing default permanently.45 Principal 
write- downs give owners an equity stake in the home and signifi -
cantly lower payments, both of which provide strong incentives to 
remain solvent. Banks that held mortgages on their own balance 
sheet were most likely to write down principal, and these modifi ed 
mortgages also saw the lowest re- default rates.46
In hindsight, current and former Obama administration offi  cials 
have conceded that failing to write down mortgage debt more ag-
gressively was a mistake. As the National Journal points out, “Two of 
the sidelined options— a policy known as cramdown and a broad- 
based reduction of principal owed on loans— could have been 
game- changers, according to economists inside and outside the 
administration. Even high- level policy offi  cials and advisers read-
ily concede that those options were missed opportunities.”47 Th e 
article quotes Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Shaun 

148 C H A P T E R  T E N
Donovan as saying that failure to implement mortgage cram- down 
“was a missed opportunity. It would have been the right thing to 
do and it could have helped.” Former National Economic Council 
member Peter Swire agrees that it would have made sense for the 
administration to push for cram- down early on: “Cram- down, on 
balance, today, would have been a good idea.”48
Even the IMF believed stronger “consideration should also be 
given to allowing mortgage on principal residences to be  modifi ed 
in personal bankruptcy without secured creditors’ consent (cram- 
downs).”49 In a longer study of several levered- losses episodes, 
the IMF concluded that “bold household debt restructuring pro-
grams . . . can signifi cantly reduce debt repayment burdens and 
the number of household defaults and foreclosures. Such policies 
can therefore help avert self- reinforcing cycles of household de-
faults, further house prices declines, and additional contractions 
in  output.”50
We can also see the benefi ts of mortgage write- downs by look-
ing at other types of debt. A research study by Will Dobbie and Jae 
Song used variation across bankruptcy judges in the willingness 
to write down non- mortgage debt to see how indebted individuals 
responded.51 Th ey found that individuals who received more debt 
forgiveness saw a decline in fi ve- year mortality risk and signifi cant 
increases in both earnings and employment. Th e employment fi nd-
ing is particularly important. It suggests that indebted individu-
als choose to remain unemployed because creditors immediately 
garner any potential income that a new job would bring. Recall 
the story of Manolo Marban in Spain from the last chapter who la-
mented that he would “be working for the bank for the rest of [his] 
life.” By eliminating the debt hanging over an individual’s income 
prospects, debt forgiveness gives people strong incentives to fi nd a 
job, which helps the entire economy. Th e Dobbie and Song study 
used a clever research design that found a clear causal eff ect: giving 
individuals more debt relief causes an increase in their income and 
employment probability.

F O R G I V E N E S S  149
The Hazards of Morality
Th e Santelli rant refl ects a belief among many that underwater 
home owners fi nd themselves in their precarious position because 
they behaved irresponsibly. Just like the trader on the Chicago 
Board of Trade fl oor, many believe that government intervention 
encourages moral hazard— households must be made to suff er so 
that they never again borrow so aggressively. As we discussed in 
chapter , many home owners during the boom did indeed treat 
their homes as ATMs and spent more as a result.
As economists with a strong background in the optimal design 
of fi nancing arrangements, we have a deep appreciation for moral- 
hazard concerns. But in this case, we’re not dealing with moral 
hazard. Moral hazard refers to a situation in which a sophisticated 
individual games a fl awed system by taking advantage of a naive 
counterparty. Th e classic example of moral hazard is someone driv-
ing irresponsibly aft er getting auto insurance because he knows the 
insurance company will pay for an accident. If the auto insurance 
company naively provides unlimited insurance at a cheap price, the 
driver’s moral- hazard problem could become quite severe.
Th is does not explain what happened during the housing boom. 
Home owners were not sophisticated individuals who took advan-
tage of naive lenders because they understood house prices were 
artifi cially infl ated. Th ey weren’t counting on a government bail-
out, and indeed they never received one. In reality, home owners 
mistakenly believed that house prices would rise forever. Perhaps 
this was a silly belief, but the image of a sophisticated home owner 
gaming lenders and the government is wrong. If anything, sophisti-
cated lenders may have taken advantage of naive home owners by 
convincing them that house prices would continue to rise.
Moral hazard doesn’t fi t for another reason: the decline in house 
prices was beyond the control of any home owner in the economy. 
Imagine a home owner who bought a home in Modesto, California, 
in  with a  percent down payment and never extracted addi-

150 C H A P T E R  T E N
tional home equity. No one would accuse the home owner of “bad 
behavior.” Yet this responsible home owner, through no fault of his 
own, experienced the complete loss of his home equity from  
to  and was pushed way underwater by the  percent decline 
in house prices. How is the loss of wealth the home owner’s fault? 
Why should he be punished? Such massive aggregate shocks are 
not any one individual’s fault and are therefore not well described 
by the notion of moral hazard.
Moral hazard also does not easily apply to the main policies we 
advocate, because they are not wholesale taxpayer- funded bailouts 
of home owners. Instead, we advocate a more even distribution of 
housing losses between debtors and creditors. Is a more even dis-
tribution “unfair”? Remember, it is not a wealth transfer to a guilty 
party from an innocent one. Both home owners and creditors were 
culpable in driving the housing boom. Th e question is how to dis-
tribute losses from a bubble gone bad that both helped infl ate. Our 
main argument is that a more even distribution of losses between 
debtors and creditors is not only fair, but makes more sense from a 
macroeconomic perspective.
Another argument we oft en hear is that we are advocating poli-
cies that would keep home owners in homes they cannot aff ord. We 
disagree. A more aggressive restructuring of household debt may 
have made it easier for home owners to sell homes they could not 
aff ord. When a home owner wants to sell his home while under-
water on his mortgage, he must sell it for a price less than what he 
owes the lender. He must therefore bring cash to closing to pay off  
his lender, cash he most likely does not have. Th e only other option 
is default, which is undesirable for many reasons. In this situation, 
many home owners continued making mortgage payments and liv-
ing in a home they could not aff ord. If their debt was restructured 
so they were no longer underwater, many of these same home own-
ers would have sold and moved.
Moral hazard is a serious issue, but we must also recognize the 
extreme circumstances of the Great Recession. When a patient is 
dying of a heart attack, it is not the best time to explain that he 

F O R G I V E N E S S  151
should have eaten less red meat. Most agree that some government 
intervention is necessary when the economy is in free fall. Any gov-
ernment intervention involves redistribution from some individu-
als to others. Bailouts of fi nancial institutions force innocent tax-
payers to bear the burden of irresponsible lending. Fiscal stimulus 
requires future taxpayers to fund current government expenditure.
So the question is not whether government should intervene 
when a severe recession strikes. Th e real question is which inter-
vention is most eff ective in raising output and reducing unemploy-
ment. We outlined the government’s urgency to protect the banks 
in the previous chapter. In this chapter, we discussed the possible 
alternative of debt forgiveness— a policy that was not pursued by 
the government. In the Great Recession, the government also relied 
on fi scal and monetary policy to combat economic weakness. How 
eff ective were these policies? Can we rely on a combination of fi s-
cal and monetary policy as an alternative to debt forgiveness? Th e 
next chapter explains how fi scal and monetary policy fi t into our 
levered- losses framework.

11: MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY
In the fi rst four years of the Great Depression, prices and wages 
fell a remarkable  percent. Households had accumulated huge 
debts, and such rapid defl ation devastated the overall economy. 
Wages fell precipitously, but debt obligations remained the same 
in dollar terms. So households that already cut back on spending 
due to high debt were forced to cut back even more. During the 
Depression, debt and defl ation created a deadly mix that amplifi ed 
the levered- losses forces we’ve discussed.
Debt and defl ation are natural partners in crime. When indebted 
households cut spending, stores cut prices to boost overall sales. 
However, this is sustainable only if the fi rms that lower prices also 
lower wages to reduce costs. Th us lower demand translates into 
lower wages, which exacerbates the problem further by increasing 
households’ debt burdens compared to their income. Th is forces 
households to cut back on spending even further. And so on.
Th e great American economist Irving Fisher called this vicious 
cycle “debt defl ation.” As he put it in , “I have . . . a strong con-
viction that these two economic maladies, the debt disease and the 
price- level disease, are, in the great booms and depressions, more 
important causes than all others put together.”1 His was a distribu-
tional argument. Because debt contracts are fi xed in dollar terms, 
defl ation makes it more onerous for the borrower to repay his 
debts. On the other side, the creditor gains from defl ation because 

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  153
he can purchase more goods from the same interest payment he re-
ceives on his loan. Defl ation is a mechanism that transfers purchas-
ing power— or wealth— from debtors to creditors.
So if defl ation takes purchasing power away from debtors, does 
infl ation help soft en the blow by giving purchasing power back to 
debtors? In principle, yes. An increase in prices and wages makes 
it easier for borrowers to use their higher wages to pay back their 
fi xed- debt obligations. Likewise, higher prices reduce the value 
of interest payments to creditors. Th e higher marginal propensity 
to consume for debtors means that such a transfer in purchasing 
power is benefi cial for the overall economy— debtors spend out of 
an increase in purchasing power more than creditors cut spending 
in response to the same loss. Which brings us to the importance of 
monetary policy. By the logic above, if monetary policy can pre-
vent defl ation and support infl ation, it can reduce the ill eff ects of 
a debt- driven recession.
During the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve didn’t pre-
vent defl ation, and it has been roundly criticized. Milton Friedman 
and Anna Schwartz, for example, in their  classic, A Mone-
tary History of the United States, chastised the Fed for keeping the 
money supply too tight and failing to prevent defl ation. On the oc-
casion of Milton Friedman’s ninetieth birthday in , Ben Ber-
nanke— a former professor of economics at Princeton and an ex-
pert on the Great Depression— publicly pledged: “I would like to 
say to Milton and Anna: Regarding the Great Depression. You’re 
right, we did it. We’re very sorry. But thanks to you, we won’t do 
it again.”2
Bernanke proved to be a man of his word. When the real test 
came in  and , the Fed’s spigots fl owed uninhibited. (See 
the long list of steps taken by the Fed in chapter .) Th e Fed’s ag-
gressive approach indeed helped prevent a repeat of the defl ation-
ary spiral of the Great Depression. Still, we did not see higher in-
fl ation during the Great Recession, even though it would have 
lowered the macroeconomic damage of debt. Why didn’t the Fed 
simply infl ate away the levered- losses problem?

154 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
A Magic Inﬂ ation Button?
Unfortunately, no central banker has a magic button they can 
simply push to create infl ation. Preventing defl ation is one thing; 
generating signifi cant infl ation is much harder. In fact, when an 
economy suff ers from excessive debt burdens and fi nds itself at the 
zero lower bound, the ability of monetary policy to push up prices 
becomes severely impaired. Even beyond the well- documented 
limitations imposed by the zero lower bound, the levered- losses 
problem substantially weakens the power of monetary policy.
To understand why, we must look into the details of how the 
Federal Reserve operates. Th e most direct way to get infl ation is 
through a large increase in the amount of currency in circula-
tion. As more money chases the same amount of goods and ser-
vices, prices and wages must rise. Th e monetary base of the United 
States includes both currency in circulation— the coins and bills 
we usually think of as money— and bank reserves. Bank reserves 
are cash held within the banking system, both as currency in bank 
vaults and as deposits that banks hold with the Federal Reserve.
Bank reserves are not currency in circulation. When the Fed 
wants to increase the monetary base, it purchases securities 
(usually U.S. Treasuries) from banks and pays them with bank re-
serves. In other words, the Fed creates bank reserves, not currency 
in circulation.3 An increase in bank reserves leads to an increase in 
currency in circulation only if banks increase lending in response 
to the increase in reserves. If banks don’t lend more— or, equiva-
lently, if borrowers don’t borrow more— an increase in bank re-
serves doesn’t aff ect money in circulation. Th is is what happened in 
the Great Recession. Th e aggressive actions taken by the Fed com-
prised lending to banks— this increased bank reserves and low-
ered interbank interest rates, but it had a limited eff ect on actual 
lending, and therefore a limited eff ect on currency in circulation. 
As shown in chapter , bank lending plummeted during the Great 
Recession— just as bank reserves skyrocketed.
Many readers may be surprised, but it is true: the Federal Re-

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  155
serve does not have direct control over currency in circulation. It 
does not print money; it prints bank reserves. Following the Great 
Depression, a group of prestigious economists, including Irving 
Fisher, were furious about this lack of control and strongly advo-
cated policies to give full authority to the Fed. Th ey wrote, “[Cur-
rent policies] give our thousands of commercial banks power to 
increase or decrease the volume of our circulating medium by in-
creasing or decreasing bank loans and investments. Th e banks thus 
exercise what has always, and justly, been considered a prerogative 
of the sovereign power.”4 Th e economists were unable implement 
their policies, however, and the same problem plagued monetary 
policy in response to the Great Recession seventy years later.
In the context of a levered- losses recession, relying on banks to 
increase lending severely weakens monetary policy. Remember, in 
a levered- losses episode, households and even businesses struggle 
to pay back debt, and banks suff er high default rates. In such a 
situation, banks don’t want to supply more loans, and households 
don’t want additional debt. So just when monetary policy needs 
more lending to put currency into circulation, natural forces in the 
economy discourage lending.5
We can see just how this happened in the Great Recession by 
comparing the growth of bank reserves with currency in circula-
tion. In the fi ve months from August  to January , bank 
reserves increased by ten times— from $ billion to $ billion— 
which refl ects the extremely aggressive stance of the Fed. Aggres-
sive monetary policy continued through , with bank reserves 
over $ trillion as we write.
Currency in circulation increased, but only by a modest amount 
compared to the increase in bank reserves. Figure . illustrates 
this pattern. Aggressive monetary policy moved bank reserves sig-
nifi cantly, but there was only a minor knock- on eff ect on the cur-
rency in circulation. Banks not wanting to lend and households 
not wanting to borrow limited the eff ectiveness of monetary policy. 
Th e Fed avoided defl ation, but there’s likely no way it could have 
generated signifi cant infl ation.

156 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
 Th e impotence of central bankers during a levered- losses epi-
sode is not unique to the Great Recession in the United States. Th e 
pattern in fi gure . also held in the Great Depression, as pointed 
out by both Paul Krugman and Peter Temin.6 And Richard Koo 
showed that both continental Europe and the United Kingdom 
during the Great Recession witnessed a similar increase in bank re-
serves while currency in circulation remained constant. Th e same 
holds true for Japan from  on.7 Central banks fi ght a levered- 
losses recession by fl ooding the banking system with reserves, but 
nobody wants to lend or borrow. One proposal would be to try 
even harder to get banks to lend. But we saw the problems with this 
approach in chapter . It doesn’t make economic sense for banks 
to lend into an economy plagued with too much debt. More debt is 
not the solution to a debt problem.
A better approach would be to allow central banks to directly 
inject cash into the economy, bypassing the banking system alto-
Figure 11.1: The Monetary Base during the Great Recession

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  157
gether. Th e most extreme image that comes to mind is the chair-
man of the Federal Reserve authorizing helicopter drops of cash. 
Th e idea of directly injecting cash into the economy may at fi rst 
seem crazy, but reputable economists and commentators have sug-
gested exactly such a policy during severe economic downturns.8 
Ben Bernanke, only a few years before he was chairman of the 
Fed, suggested helicopter drops for Japanese central bankers in the 
s, earning the nickname “Helicopter Ben.”9 Financial Times 
columnist Martin Wolf wrote in February  that “the view that it 
is never right to respond to a fi nancial crisis with monetary fi nanc-
ing of a consciously expanded fi scal defi cit— helicopter money, in 
brief— is wrong. It simply has to be in the toolkit.”10 Willem Buiter 
used rigorous modeling to show that such helicopter drops would 
in fact help an economy trapped at the zero lower bound on nomi-
nal interest rates.11 It would be best if the helicopters targeted in-
debted areas of the country to drop cash. Th e exercise would have 
positive eff ects similar to the debt restructuring we proposed in the 
previous chapter.
As you may have guessed, dropping cash from helicopters is only 
an analogy. In reality, the Fed potentially could inject cash by print-
ing money and paying teachers’ salaries, for example. However, the 
problem is that it is against the law for the Fed to print money and 
hand it out to people. Currency is technically a liability of the gov-
ernment, and the issuance of any government liability is a fi scal 
action that only the Treasury can undertake. Th is explains why the 
Federal Reserve must exchange bank reserves for securities. Th ey 
are not allowed to put currency or bank reserves into circulation 
without taking a security in return. Moreover, do we believe that 
central bankers would take such actions even if they had the au-
thority? In most advanced economies, central bankers build their 
careers on the conservative credentials of infl ation busting. It is 
hard to imagine them happily dropping cash on cities throughout 
the nation. We’ll return to this point later in the chapter.

158 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
The Interest- Rate Channel
Increasing the monetary base is not the only way central bankers 
try to spur economic activity in a crisis. Th ey also lower interest 
rates that may not be up against the zero lower bound. For example, 
during the Great Recession and aft erward, the Federal Reserve ag-
gressively purchased mortgage- backed securities in order to push 
down mortgage interest rates facing households. Th e belief was that 
cheaper rates on outstanding mortgages and other loans through 
which households would spend would kick- start the economy.
However, households that normally have the highest marginal 
propensity to consume out of loans either cannot or do not want 
to borrow more. Remember, in a levered- losses episode, borrowers 
experience a massive shock to their wealth. Many of them are un-
derwater on their homes or have very low credit scores as a result 
of default. Most are desperate to rebuild their balance sheets by sav-
ing, and the last thing they want is additional debt. Of those who 
do want to borrow, most are shut out of the credit market, which in 
a crisis lends only to those with pristine credit histories.
While the interest rate on thirty- year mortgages went down 
from . percent in July  to . percent in July , banks sig-
nifi cantly restricted the range of borrowers who could benefi t from 
the lower rates. As a result, in March ,  percent of borrowers 
with a thirty- year fi xed- rate mortgage were paying an interest rate 
of  percent or more, despite the fact that market mortgage interest 
rates were only . percent.12
Indebted home owners couldn’t get lower mortgage rates, so 
monetary policy during and aft er the Great Recession was much 
less eff ective. To refi nance an existing mortgage, most banks re-
quire that a home owner have substantial equity in their home. But 
when house prices collapsed, so did home owners’ equity. In Ari-
zona, Florida, and Nevada— where more than  percent of home 
owners were underwater— the propensity to refi nance was the 
lowest in the country. Figure . illustrates this correlation for all 
states in .

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  159
 Further, when home owners refi nanced their existing mort-
gages during the Great Recession, they did not take cash out. In 
fact, the fraction of refi nancing in which the home owner took out 
additional equity was lower in  than at any other point since 
. Figure . shows the fraction of all refi nancing where a home 
owner took cash out. During the housing boom it exploded, as 
home owners aggressively pulled equity out of their homes, and 
then plummeted from  to , just as the Federal Reserve 
tried to spur more borrowing with lower interest rates.
 During a levered- losses scenario, banks refuse to lend and house -
holds avoid borrowing. Th e same problems that hinder central 
bankers’ attempts to increase currency in circulation also thwart 
their ability to spur household borrowing. Monetary policy is un-
able to resuscitate the debt cycle.
Figure 11.2: Underwater Home Owners and Mortgage Reﬁ nancing, 2010

160 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
Inﬂ ation Expectations
When central bankers expand bank reserves in a levered- losses re-
cession, there is no increase in lending or borrowing, and a se-
vere and long economic slump ensues. But eventually the economy 
may recover, and if the central bank keeps interest rates very low, 
banks will resume lending and this will spark infl ation. Some argue 
that if the general public expects infl ation in the long run, then the 
economy may benefi t even in the short run. According to this view, 
infl ation expectations may be able to generate increased spend-
ing even when the economy is up against the zero lower bound. 
Recall from chapter  that interest rates may need to be negative 
to induce some households to spend more. In other words, to get 
households to spend, they would need to be charged for saving in-
stead of spending. Raising infl ation expectations helps get a nega-
tive interest rate.
For example, suppose you save $, in a bank account that 
pays zero interest. If you expect the price of the goods you plan to 
Figure 11.3: Disappearance of Cash- out Reﬁ nancings

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  161
buy in the future to rise, the future buying power of your $, in 
the bank declines. In other words, in terms of the real goods you 
purchase, infl ation leads to a negative interest rate on your bank 
deposit. Th is will encourage you to spend rather than save, thereby 
increasing aggregate demand. If the Fed can just get you to believe 
that infl ation will eventually emerge, the infl ation expectations 
view holds that this can boost the economy.
Th e problem with this argument, however, is that it assumes 
that household spending is very sensitive to changes in real interest 
rates. While this may be true in normal circumstances, a levered- 
losses episode may sever the link. In an economy with excessive 
debt and a collapse in asset values, indebted households are forced 
to massively cut spending, and they are cut out of credit markets 
even if they wanted to borrow. As a result, even negative interest 
rates won’t boost spending substantially.
But let us suppose that household spending would respond to 
higher infl ation expectations. A serious problem remains: it is ex-
tremely diffi  cult for central banks to create higher infl ation expec-
tations in a levered- losses recession. Households will only expect 
higher infl ation if the central banker commits to allowing infl ation 
even when the economy recovers and escapes the zero lower bound 
on nominal interest rates.
But central bankers’ reputations are built on fi ghting infl ation. 
Given this, the general public expects that the central bank will 
step in to take the reserves out of the system when the economy be-
gins to recover. If central bankers cannot be trusted to allow infl a-
tion when the economy recovers, then the economy gets no bene-
fi ts from higher infl ation expectations. As Paul Krugman famously 
wrote about the Japanese Lost Decade, “Monetary policy will in 
fact be eff ective if the central bank can credibly promise to be ir-
responsible . . .” (our emphasis).13 We would go further. Monetary 
policy makers would need to commit to being very irresponsible 
to generate infl ation expectations in the midst of a levered- losses 
downturn. When the crash materializes, households sharply reduce 
spending. In the face of massively depleted demand, the natural re-

162 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
action by businesses would be to cut prices and wages. Th is is ex-
actly what happened during the Great Depression. Once again, the 
natural forces of the economy move against infl ation and toward 
defl ation during a severe economic downturn. Monetary policy 
fi ghts an uphill battle.
Are central banks willing to act irresponsibly enough to win? 
Th e evidence suggests no. Th e European Central Bank has been 
conservative in its approach, as has the Bank of England. Th e Fed-
eral Reserve has pushed the envelope with aggressive quantitative 
easing and conditional guidance language in its statements. But 
as former chair of the Council of Economic Advisers Christina 
Romer put it, “Th e truth is that even these moves were pretty small 
steps . . . the key fact remains that the Fed has been unwilling to do 
a regime shift . And because of that, monetary policy has not been 
able to play a decisive role in generating recovery.”14
Relying on monetary policy to generate infl ation through expec-
tations may work beautifully in macroeconomic models. But rely-
ing on the irresponsibility of central bankers is a losing strategy. We 
cannot count on them to magically fi x the debt problem.
What about the Fiscal Alternative?
Unlike “Keynesian” theories, the levered- losses framework we have 
developed focuses on the source of the demand shock, which leads 
naturally to policies that directly attack the problem of excessive 
household debt. Nonetheless, government spending during a se-
vere economic downturn helps because it increases aggregate de-
mand. Most economists agree that in normal times government 
spending has little eff ect on the economy, because it crowds out 
private spending and because households understand that they 
eventually have to pay higher taxes to fi nance the spending. If any-
thing, government spending may hurt in normal times because 
it distorts incentives through taxation. But when frictions like 
the zero lower bound keep the economy depressed, government 
spending fi nanced with debt can have positive economic eff ects.

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  163
Substantial evidence shows the short- run benefi ts of fi scal 
stimulus, especially when the economy is up against the zero lower 
bound. Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson examined the eff ect on 
state- level GDP of defense- spending shocks to states over the past 
fi ft y years. Th ey found large eff ects. One dollar of defense spend-
ing generated $. of economic output. As they write, “Our esti-
mate provides evidence in favor of models in which demand 
shocks can have large eff ects on output.”15 Two other independent 
studies found positive benefi ts of the American Recovery and Re-
investment Act passed in . Using variation across states in the 
funds received from the legislation, both found meaningful eff ects 
on jobs.16
So fi scal stimulus can help, and eff orts to impose austerity in 
the midst of a levered- losses episode are counterproductive. 
However, in our view, fi scal stimulus is much less eff ective than 
household- debt restructuring when the fundamental problem with 
the economy is excessive private debt. Th e most eff ective policy 
puts cash into the hands of those who will spend the most of it, 
and indebted home owners have an extremely high marginal pro-
pensity to consume. Th e greater eff ectiveness of debt restructuring, 
as compared to fi scal stimulus, emerges in some of the most in-
fl uential “Keynesian” models of the Great Recession. For example, 
Gauti Eggertsson and Paul Krugman wrote an infl uential theo-
retical study in which the levered- losses view plays an important 
role. A main takeaway is that “a rationale for expansionary fi scal 
policy [emerges] naturally from the model.”17 But in their model, 
the economy hits the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates 
because indebted home owners are forced to drastically cut spend-
ing. In the context of their model, an immediate restructuring of 
household debt would help avoid the liquidity trap in the fi rst place 
by avoiding the sharp drop in demand. Krugman is a strong propo-
nent of household- debt restructuring.18
Fiscal stimulus is a clumsy alternative. Unless the fi scal stimulus 
takes the form of principal forgiveness, it doesn’t target the right 
population.19 Further, government spending must eventually be 

164 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
paid for by someone through taxes. Unless those taxes fall on cred-
itors in the economy who were responsible for the housing boom, 
fi scal policy fails to replicate the transfer from creditors to debtors 
that most eff ectively boosts aggregate demand. Put another way, 
the most eff ective fi scal stimulus would be one in which the gov-
ernment taxes creditors and provides the funds to debtors. But why 
do we need fi scal stimulus? Mortgage cram- downs in bankruptcy, 
for example, would accomplish the same goal without getting taxa-
tion involved.
Fiscal policy is an attempt to replicate debt restructuring, but it 
is particularly problematic in the United States, where government 
revenue is raised from taxing income, not wealth.20 Th e creditors 
whom the government should tax tend to be the wealthiest people 
in the economy, which is why they are able to lend to borrowers. 
But the wealthy do not necessarily have high incomes; similarly, 
those with high incomes are not necessarily wealthy. For example, 
a retired investment banker may have no income but high wealth, 
whereas a young professional couple may have high income but 
low wealth. Th ink of the young professional couple just starting 
their post– graduate school jobs. Th ey have high income but almost 
no wealth. Th eir MPC out of income may be very high: they expect 
a steady stream of high income but need to make large capital in-
vestments upfront on things like furnishing their fi rst apartment. 
Taxing them will hurt the economy. Also, by taxing income, the 
government distorts incentives for working, perhaps leading one of 
the professionals in the relationship to stay out of the labor force. 
All these problems suggest that a tax code that relies on taxing in-
come will be much less eff ective at solving the levered- losses prob-
lem compared to household- debt restructuring.
Finally, debt restructuring preserves incentives in the market-
place. As we argued in chapter , every levered- losses disaster is 
preceded by an asset- price bubble that creditors fuel with easy debt. 
Th ey bear some responsibility for the ensuing catastrophe, and im-
posing some losses on them disciplines an actor that helped cause 
the crisis in the fi rst place. Taxpayers are rightfully indignant when 

M O N E TA R Y  A N D  F I S C A L  P O L I C Y  165
asked to pay for the mistakes of others, and forcing creditors to 
bear losses should be more politically acceptable than most forms 
of fi scal stimulus. Economist Hans- Werner Sinn expressed this ex-
actly when writing with indignation on the crisis in Europe, where 
German taxpayers were being asked to bail out banks. As he put it, 
“A bailout doesn’t make economic sense, and would likely make the 
situation worse. Such schemes violate the liability principle, one of 
the constituting principles of a market economy, which holds that 
it is the creditors’ responsibility to choose their debtors. If debtors 
cannot repay, creditors should bear the losses.”21
Political Paralysis
In the last three chapters, we’ve evaluated the potential policies that 
governments may implement when a levered- losses crisis hits. Sav-
ing the banks at any cost is counterproductive. Monetary policy 
and fi scal policy help, but are inferior to a direct attack on house-
hold debt, which is aft er all the main problem. Restructuring debt 
will most eff ectively boost an ailing economy.
While it is useful to discuss which policies are best when a crisis 
hits, such a discussion ignores the gargantuan elephant in the room: 
if we have learned anything about politics in the past few years, we 
should know that partisan confl ict poisons governments during 
severe economic contractions. When it is needed most, policy is 
impotent. For example, the electorate in the United States became 
extremely polarized during the Great Recession. Th e emergence of 
groups like the Tea Party movement and Occupy Wall Street exem-
plify a broader trend: during the heart of the Great Recession, the 
fraction of the population in the United States calling themselves 
moderate plummeted.22
In research with Francesco Trebbi, we show that the political 
polarization in the United States over the past seven years was the 
rule, not the exception.23 More specifi cally, we examined political 
polarization in the aft ermath of fi nancial crises from  to  
in seventy countries.24 When a crisis materializes, the fraction of 

166 C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
the population calling themselves centrists falls sharply. In its place 
is a large increase in the share of extremists, on both the left  and 
the right.
In turn, fi nancial crises move political systems toward more 
fragmented legislatures and political scenarios. Governments are 
less able to form viable coalitions, and political disintegration be-
comes the norm. Even if every economist in the world agreed on 
the correct policies, we would not be able to count on governments 
to enact them. Th e debt- ceiling debacle of the summer of , the 
sequestration of , the failure of the U.S. government to imple-
ment any meaningful legislation in the past few years— these are 
not exceptions, but instead represent how the government becomes 
impotent when the economy collapses. We cannot rely on offi  cials 
to nimbly implement the right policies when a levered- losses reces-
sion strikes. We must somehow have mechanisms in place that au-
tomatically help the economy respond when asset prices collapse.
Debt is a horrible instrument because of its infl exibility: it re-
quires intervention aft er the fact to help more equally distribute 
the losses associated with a crash. Because of political polarization, 
such intervention is unlikely. And the time, energy, and resources 
wasted in fi ghting over debt restructuring can be costly. In the next 
chapter, we argue that the vicious levered- losses cycle can be bro-
ken only if we fundamentally alter the way in which households fi -
nance themselves. We must have mechanisms in place that help us 
avoid levered- losses crises in the fi rst place. We can enjoy the fruits 
of the fi nancial system only if we move away from a system so ad-
dictively reliant on debt.

Th e college graduating class of  had little time to celebrate their 
freshly minted diplomas. Th e severe recession smacked them with 
the harsh reality of looking for a job in a horrible labor market. 
For college graduates at the time, the unemployment rate was over 
 percent.1 When they entered college in , none of them could 
have predicted such a disastrous situation. Since , the unem-
ployment rate for college graduates had never exceeded  percent.
Th e bleak jobs picture threatened the livelihood of recent gradu-
ates for another reason: many left  college saddled with enormous 
student- debt burdens. Driven by the allure of a decent salary with 
a college degree, Americans borrowed to go to school. Outstanding 
student debt doubled from  to , and by  total student 
debt in the U.S. economy surpassed $ trillion.2 Th e Department of 
Education estimated that two- thirds of bachelor’s degree recipients 
borrowed money from either the government or private lenders.3
Unfortunately for the  graduates, debt contracts don’t care 
what the labor market looks like when you graduate. Regardless of 
whether a graduate can fi nd a well- paying job, they demand pay-
ment. Student debt is especially pernicious in this regard because it 
cannot be discharged in bankruptcy. And the government can gar-
nish your wages or take part of your tax refund or Social Security 
payments to ensure that they get paid on federal loans.4
Th e combination of unemployment and the overhang of student 
12: SHARING

168 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
debt hampered demand just when the economy needed it most. 
Recent college graduates with high student debt delayed major pur-
chases, and many were forced to move back in with their parents.5 
As Andrew Martin and Andrew Lehren of the New York Times put 
it, “Growing student debt hangs over the economic recovery like 
a dark cloud for a generation of college graduates and indebted 
dropouts.”6 Many reconsidered the benefi ts of college altogether. 
Ezra Kazee, an unemployed college graduate with $, of stu-
dent debt, was interviewed for a story on student- loan burdens. 
“You oft en hear the quote that you can’t put a price on ignorance,” 
he said. “But with the way higher education is going, ignorance is 
looking more and more aff ordable every day.”7
The Risk- Sharing Principle
Th e student debt debacle is another example of the fi nancial system 
failing us. Despite the high cost of a college degree, most econo-
mists agree that it is valuable because of the wage premium it com-
mands. Yet young Americans increasingly recognize that student 
debt unfairly forces them to bear a large amount of aggregate eco-
nomic risk. Debt protects the lender even if the job market dete-
riorates, but graduates are forced to cobble money together to pay 
down the loan. Forcing young Americans to bear this risk makes 
no economic sense. College graduates were thrown into dire cir-
cumstances just because they happened to be born in , twenty- 
two years before the most disastrous labor market in recent history. 
Why should they be punished for that? Rather than facilitate the 
acquisition of valuable knowledge, a fi nancial system built on debt 
increasingly discourages college aspirations.
Both student debt and mortgages illustrate a broader principle. 
If we’re going to fi x the fi nancial system— if we are to avoid the 
pain ful boom- and- bust episodes that are becoming all too fre-
quent— we must address the key problem: the infl exibility of debt 
contracts. When someone fi nances the purchase of a home or a 
college education, the contract they sign must allow for some shar-

S H A R I N G  169
ing of the downside risk. Th e contract must be made contingent on 
economic outcomes so that the fi nancial system helps us. It must 
resemble equity more than debt.8
Th is principle can be seen easily in the context of education. Stu-
dent loans should be made contingent on measures of the job mar-
ket at the time the student graduates. For example, in both Austra-
lia and the United Kingdom, students pay only a fi xed percentage 
of their income to pay down student loans. If the student cannot 
fi nd a job, she pays nothing on her student loan. For reasons we 
will discuss, we believe a better system would make the loan pay-
ment contingent on a broader measure of the labor market rather 
than the individual’s income. But the principle is clear: recent grad-
uates should be protected if they face a dismal job market upon 
completing their degrees.9 In return, they should compensate the 
lender more if they do well.
Th e disadvantage of debt in the context of student loans is not 
a radical left ist idea. Even Milton Friedman recognized problems 
with student debt. As he put it, “A further complication is intro-
duced by the inappropriateness of fi xed money loans to fi nance in-
vestment in training. Such investment necessarily involves much 
risk. Th e average expected return may be high, but there is wide 
variation about the average. Death and physical incapacity is one 
obvious source of variation but probably much less important than 
diff erences in ability, energy, and good fortune.”10 Friedman’s pro-
posal was similar to ours: he believed that student- loan fi nancing 
should be more “equity- like,” where payments were automatically 
reduced if the student graduates into a weak job environment.
Making fi nancial contracts in general more equity- like means 
better risk sharing for the entire economy. When house prices rise, 
both the lender and borrower would benefi t. Likewise, when house 
prices crash, both would share the burden. Th is is not about forcing 
lenders to unfairly bear only downside risk. Th is is about promot-
ing contracts in which the fi nancial system gets both the benefi t of 
the upside and bears some cost on the downside.
Financial contracts that share more of the risk would help avoid 

170 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
bubbles and make their crashes less severe. Recall from chapter  
how debt facilitates bubbles by convincing lenders that their money 
is safe, and how this leads them to lend to optimists who bid prices 
higher and higher. If lenders were forced to take losses when the 
bubble pops, they would be less likely to lend into the bubble in the 
fi rst place. Th ey would be less likely to be lulled into the false sense 
of security that debt dangerously off ers. Charles Kindleberger saw 
time and time again that bubbles were driven by investors’ believ-
ing that the securities they held were as safe as money. We must 
break this cycle.
We have also shown that when borrowers are forced to bear the 
entire brunt of the crash in asset prices, the levered- losses cycle 
kicks in and a very severe recession ensues. If fi nancial contracts 
more equally imposed losses on both borrowers and lenders, then 
the economy would avoid the levered- losses trap in the fi rst place. 
Th is would force wealthy lenders with deep pockets to bear more 
of the pain if a crash materializes. But their spending would be 
less aff ected, and the initial demand shock to the economy would 
be much smaller. In the context of housing, a more equal sharing 
of losses would also help avoid the painful cycle of foreclosures. If 
fi nancial contracts were structured appropriately, we could avoid 
foreclosure crises entirely.
In chapter , we advocated policies that would help restructure 
household debt when a crash materializes. But intervening aft er 
the fact requires political will and popular support, both of which 
are absent during a severe recession. Th e contingent contracts we 
propose here would automatically accomplish many of these goals. 
And they would preserve incentives because all parties would 
understand what they were signing up for. In the next section, we 
propose a specifi c mortgage contract that includes these features, 
which we call the shared- responsibility mortgage. As we will dem-
onstrate, had such mortgages been in place when house prices col-
lapsed, the Great Recession in the United States would not have 
been “Great” at all. It would have been a garden- variety downturn 
with many fewer jobs lost.

S H A R I N G  171
Shared- Responsibility Mortgages
As we discussed in chapter , a standard mortgage contract forces 
the borrower to bear the full burden of a decline in house prices 
until his equity is completely wiped out. A shared- responsibility 
mortgage (SRM) has two important diff erences: () the lender 
 off ers downside protection to the borrower, and () the borrower 
gives up  percent capital gain to the lender on the upside.11 We go 
through a simple example here to see how it works.
Consider a home owner, Jane. She uses a $, down pay-
ment to buy a house worth $,, leaving her with a mortgage 
of $,. Suppose the value of her house drops to $,. In a 
standard thirty- year fi xed- rate mortgage contract, Jane loses all of 
her home equity, which was probably most of her savings. She faces 
two choices at this point. She can give the keys of the house back to 
the bank, or she can continue making her mortgage payment de-
spite these payments not adding a dime to her equity in the house. 
Neither of these options is particularly attractive for Jane. However, 
the core point of the levered- losses framework is that both of these 
options are terrible for the rest of us. Th e decline in home value leads 
Jane to pull back massively on spending, and this pullback will be 
exacerbated if she continues to pay her mortgage. If she allows the 
bank to foreclose, house prices are pushed down further, accelerat-
ing the vicious cycle of lost wealth.
How could a shared- responsibility mortgage help? If house prices 
remain the same or rise, the interest payment on Jane’s SRM would 
remain the same. For example, if the current thirty- year mortgage 
rate were  percent, then Jane would be required to make the same 
mortgage payment of $, to her lender every year under the 
SRM, just as under the typical fi xed- rate mortgage.12 Also like a 
fi xed- rate mortgage, a portion of Jane’s $, payment will go 
toward interest and the remainder toward principal. Th e amortiza-
tion schedule, the rate at which her mortgage balance goes down 
over the thirty years, remains exactly the same in an SRM as in a 
standard fi xed- rate mortgage.

172 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
Th e key diff erence between the SRM and typical mortgage is that 
the SRM provides downside protection to Jane in case the value of 
her home goes down from the value when she purchased it. Th is 
is accomplished by linking Jane’s mortgage- payment schedule to 
her local house- price index. Linking the downside protection to 
Jane’s local house- price index instead of just her home avoids the 
possibility of Jane deliberately neglecting her home to lower her 
mortgage payments.13 Another benefi t of using a local house- price 
index is its widespread availability. A number of fi rms— like Core-
Logic, Zillow, Fiserv Case- Shiller- Weiss, and the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency Local— produce these indexes, many of them at 
the zip- code level. Further credibility could be added to these in-
dices by adopting a commonly accepted framework for construct-
ing them, and a government or industry watchdog could be collec-
tively responsible for ensuring their authenticity. Making payments 
contingent on public indices is nothing new. For example, many 
countries have adopted payments that are linked to some index of 
infl ation. Th e U.S. government itself issues infl ation- indexed gov-
ernment bonds for which interest payments fl uctuate depending 
on an infl ation index.
Th e downside- protection provision works by proportionately 
reducing Jane’s mortgage payment in case the housing index falls 
below the level it was when Jane purchased her property. For ex-
ample, if her local house- price index is  when she buys the 
home, and falls by  percent by the end of her fi rst year of own-
ership, Jane’s mortgage payment in her second year would decline 
 percent, to $,. While Jane’s mortgage payment declines 
by  percent in the example above, her amortization schedule 
would remain the same. As a result, even though she will make a 
lower payment, her mortgage balance goes down according to the 
original formula. Th is in eff ect means that Jane is given an auto-
matic principal reduction when house prices in her area fall below 
her purchasing level. In our specifi c example, if Jane’s house- price 
index remains at  for the remaining twenty- nine years of her 

S H A R I N G  173
mortgage, she will have received a  percent forgiveness in princi-
pal by the end of her thirty years.
However, on average, house prices are expected to grow. It is 
therefore likely that aft er falling to , Jane’s house- price index will 
rise again and at some point will surpass the original mark of . 
As the local house- price index gradually recovers, Jane’s mortgage 
payments will also gradually increase. Once her local house- price 
index crosses , her mortgage payment will once again revert to 
the full payment of $,.
Interest rates tend to fall during recessions. As a result, exist-
ing adjustable rate mortgages off er some protection by automati-
cally lowering the interest rate when the economy sputters. But the 
downside protection of SRMs is much more signifi cant. Not only 
does Jane experience a lower interest payment, but she also expe-
riences a decline in the principal balance of the mortgage, which 
leaves her with some equity in the home.
Th is downside protection comes at the expense of the lender. So 
the lender will need to charge a higher upfront interest rate to com-
pensate for the downside risk. How large is the upfront cost? Th e 
cost of providing downside protection depends on expected house- 
price growth and house- price volatility. If house prices typically 
grow at a brisk pace, then the cost of providing the downside pro-
tection is low. On the other hand, if house prices are very volatile, 
then there is a higher chance that at some point they might drop 
below the purchase level for the mortgage. In this case, the cost of 
the protection would be high.
Using a standard fi nancial formula, one can calculate the cost 
of providing downside protection for given house- price growth 
and volatility. House prices in the United States have historically 
grown at an annual rate of . percent, with a standard deviation 
of . percent. Th ese numbers imply that lenders will charge about 
. percent of the initial mortgage amount as downside protec-
tion fee from the borrower. However, we can eliminate this extra 
charge by giving the lender a small share in the upside as well. In 

174 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
particular, an SRM should also provide the lender with a  per-
cent share of the capital gain whenever Jane sells or refi nances her 
house. Th e  percent capital- gain rule is a small charge for Jane, es-
pecially considering that capital gains on owner- occupied housing 
are otherwise tax- free. Jane therefore gets to keep  percent of her 
home’s capital gain.
Th e lender does not have to worry about when Jane chooses to 
sell her house. As long as the lender issues a diverse set of mort-
gages, it will receive a steady stream of capital gain payments. In 
particular,  to  percent of the existing housing stock is sold every 
year. We can once again use a fi nancial formula to calculate the 
benefi t to the lender from the capital- gains provision. Historical 
average house- price growth implies that a  percent capital- gain 
rule more than compensates the lender for the downside protec-
tion. On net the lender comes out ahead by . percent of the ini-
tial mortgage amount. Th e costs of SRMs are even lower if one takes 
into account the reduction in house- price volatility as a result of 
the risk- sharing. If SRMs are adopted at a large scale in the United 
States, house- price volatility— particularly the probability of a big 
collapse— is likely to go down. We discuss the reasons for this de-
cline in more detail in the next section.
Quantifying the Beneﬁ ts of SRMs
SRMs provide an important mechanism needed to solve the 
levered- losses problem. Th e downside protection to borrowers will 
help stave off  dramatic declines in demand, and the shared capital 
gains on the upside will compensate lenders. But what would be 
the exact benefi ts of SRMs in terms of spending and jobs? An ad-
vantage of our data- intensive approach is that we can off er a real-
istic estimate. In what follows, we ask the following question: How 
bad would the Great Recession have been had all home owners had 
SRMs instead of standard mortgages?
Th e immediate consequence of SRMs in the face of house- price 
declines is that the wealth of low to middle net- worth Americans 

S H A R I N G  175
would have been protected. Recall from chapter  how low net- 
worth indebted households were hit hardest by the housing col-
lapse in the Great Recession. Th e downside protection in SRMs 
would have guaranteed everyone at least the same percentage of 
home equity as they had had when they initially purchased the 
home.
For example, under an SRM, if a house with an $, mort-
gage drops in value from $, to $,, then the mortgage 
interest payment also drops by  percent, which means the mort-
gage value drops by  percent (if house prices are expected to 
remain low). As a result, the new mortgage value would be $,. 
Th e home owner retains $, of equity in a $, home, 
which is  percent. Notice that the home owner bears a loss; their 
home equity declines from $, to $,. But the loss is far 
smaller than with a standard debt contract, with which their full 
$, would have been lost. As a result, the United States would 
have been protected from the large increase in wealth inequality 
that it witnessed between  and .
But the advantages of SRMs go much further. Th ey would have 
benefi ted everyone by protecting the entire economy against fore-
closures and the sharp drop in aggregate spending. A primary eco-
nomic benefi t of SRMs would have come from avoiding foreclo-
sures. Th e downside protection embedded in SRMs implies that the 
loan- to- value (LTV) ratio would never have gone higher than what 
it was at origination. For example, if a home owner buys a home 
with a  percent down payment, he is guaranteed to have at least 
a  percent equity in the house regardless of future house- price 
movements.
If all mortgages in the economy had been structured as SRMs, 
we would never have had so many home owners underwater. Even 
if someone could not have aff orded to make monthly payments 
anymore, they would not have gone into foreclosure. Since they 
had equity in the house, they would have been better off  selling 
the house and pocketing the home equity. SRMs would have elimi-
nated the incidence of a large- scale foreclosure crisis. Interestingly, 

176 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
this feature of SRMs also would have reduced the magnitude of the 
housing crisis itself. Th e prevention of foreclosures would have led 
to a smaller fall in house prices between  and .
In the research with Francesco Trebbi that we discussed in chap-
ter , we quantifi ed the eff ect of foreclosures on house prices. Our 
analysis revealed that house prices fell by . percentage points for 
every  percent of home owners who went into foreclosure between 
 and . SRMs would have prevented most of the . per-
cent of houses that went into foreclosure and would have reduced 
the fall in house prices by . percentage points between  and 
. Actual house prices fell by  percentage points over this 
period. So by preventing foreclosures, SRMs could possibly have 
saved a staggering  percent of total housing- wealth loss— or 
$. trillion.
In turn, ameliorating the decline in housing wealth would have 
had two positive knock- on eff ects on the economy: higher house-
hold spending and fewer job losses. Chapter  discussed the im-
pact of reduced housing wealth on household spending. Th e results 
show that households cut back six cents of spending in –  
for every dollar of housing wealth lost. Using this estimate, an in-
crease of $. trillion in housing wealth would have translated into 
$ billion of additional household spending.
Th ere also would have been an additional but subtle impact 
of SRMs on overall spending. Chapter  also demonstrated that 
households with low wealth and high leverage have a higher mar-
ginal propensity to consume. SRMs would have helped cushion the 
blow of a decline in housing wealth by passing some of the losses 
on to lenders, who have a signifi cantly smaller marginal propen-
sity to spend. Such a transfer of wealth would have led to an over-
all increase in consumer spending. How much? In the SRM sce-
nario, we estimate housing wealth would have fallen by $ trillion, 
or $. trillion less than the actual decline of $. trillion between 
 and . Alternatively, housing wealth would have fallen 
only  percent of the actual decline experienced between  
and .

S H A R I N G  177
Since creditors would have shared the downside risk, some of 
this loss would have been transferred to them from borrowers. We 
can estimate the impact on creditors using zip- code data on the 
actual decline in home value and the average loan- to- value ratio 
for home owners. In the alternative scenario with SRMs, we assign 
 percent of the actual decline in home values to each zip code. We 
also conservatively assume that borrowers made just a  percent 
down payment on their mortgages. Th rough the downside pro-
tection of SRMs, borrowers who put a  percent down payment 
toward their mortgages would still have kept  percent of the eq-
uity of the home. A signifi cant number of mortgages were origi-
nated with a down payment higher than  percent, but we’re using 
 percent as a conservative estimate of the equity that borrowers 
had in their houses. Th rough the SRMs, no one’s equity would have 
fallen below  percent of the value of their house, and their loan- 
to- value ratio would not have exceeded  percent.
Th e guarantee that the LTV ratio cannot exceed  percent tells 
us how much of the mortgage amount would have needed to be for-
given. Th at is, it tells us how much of the housing wealth loss would 
have been passed on to the lender on the SRM. We estimate that 
about . percent of single- family outstanding mortgages would 
have been written down under the downside protection provided 
by SRMs. Since there was $. trillion in single- family mortgages 
at the end of , this would have translated into a $ billion 
wealth transfer from creditors to borrowers.14 Th e wealth transfer 
translates into a fi nancial loss for lenders and a net housing- wealth 
gain for borrowers.
Proponents of the banking view might respond that $ billion 
of losses on the fi nancial sector would do extreme damage to the 
economy. However, as we have argued, the idea that fi nancial fi rms 
should never take losses is indefensible. Th ey are in the business of 
taking risk. Also, in a world with SRMs, it is likely that investors 
who hold them would not be so levered themselves. We seek to 
encourage an entire fi nancial system more equity- dependent and 
therefore able to absorb losses.

178 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
Th e estimated marginal propensity to spend out of fi nancial 
wealth is negligible, while the marginal propensity to consume out 
of housing wealth for levered, underwater home owners is very 
high. We estimate that the MPC for underwater home owners is 
about twice the average MPC.15 Using a gain of $. in spending 
per dollar of wealth transferred to borrowers, we arrive at a spend-
ing gain of $ billion for the $ billion in wealth transferred to 
borrowers in the SRM scenario.
Overall, a world with SRM mortgages as of  would have 
seen $ billion in extra spending from higher housing wealth and 
$ billion in extra spending from the transfer of wealth from low 
MPC lenders to high MPC borrowers. Th e total increase in aggre-
gate spending would have been $ billion, which represents sub-
stantial stimulus to the overall economy. To put things in perspec-
tive, the government stimulus program of  added $ billion 
of additional government spending in the short run. Th e SRM re-
gime would have provided an automatic stimulus that is almost 
half the government stimulus program— without any increase in 
government debt.
Preventing Job Loss
Another key advantage of SRMs is that by shoring up aggregate de-
mand in the worst part of the recession, they would have protected 
jobs as well. We can use the results from chapter  to estimate how 
many jobs would have been saved due to the direct boost in de-
mand from SRMs. Th e decline in spending between  and  
compared to the long- run trend for the United States was $ bil-
lion, and we showed that  million of the jobs lost were a direct 
result of this spending decline. If SRMs would have led to an im-
provement in consumer spending of $ billion, then that would 
have translated to almost  million fewer jobs lost between  
and .
However, the calculation above is incomplete, since each saved 
job further contributes toward overall spending, thereby creating 

S H A R I N G  179
a virtuous cycle that augments the original spending increase. Th e 
result is what economists call a “multiplier eff ect.” Th e question of a 
spending multiplier has received a lot of attention in economics in 
the context of the government- spending multiplier, which measures 
the extent to which government spending boosts economic output 
over and above the direct impact of the increase in government 
spending. Some of the most careful work in this literature comes 
from Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson of Columbia University, 
who estimate a government- spending multiplier of . on average. 
However, they estimate that the multiplier is signifi cantly larger— 
between . and .— during periods of high unemployment, such 
as – .16
Th at spending multiplier refers to an increase in government 
spending fi nanced by an increase in future tax revenues. However, 
the spending boost under the SRM regime would not have been 
accompanied by expectations of higher taxes. It would have been 
driven by an increase in private spending. As such, the spending 
multiplier due to SRMs could have been potentially larger than the 
government- spending multiplier. Regardless of the exact size of the 
multiplier, SRMs would have substantially mitigated the severity of 
the recession. If we use a spending multiplier of , then the spend-
ing decline would have been only $ billion instead of $ bil-
lion and  million jobs would have been saved. If we use a spending 
multiplier of , the recession would have been almost completely 
avoided.
Additional Beneﬁ ts
Th e benefi ts of SRMs extend beyond the immediate economic 
gains. In particular, SRMs would also help prevent bubbles. Th e 
downside protection in SRMs would lead lenders to worry about 
future movements in house prices. If house prices plummet in the 
near future, then more recently issued mortgages would generate 
the greatest loss for the lender. Th e lender would have to be very 
mindful about potential “froth” in local housing markets, espe-

180 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
cially for newly originated mortgages. If lenders fear that the mar-
ket might be in a bubble, they would raise interest rates for new 
mortgages in order to cover the cost of the increased likelihood 
of loss. SRMs would therefore provide an automatic market- based 
“lean against the wind.”
Another advantage is that home owners would have to think 
carefully before doing cash- out refi nancing. If home owners refi -
nance in a booming housing market to take extra cash out of their 
home equity, they would need to pay  percent of their net capital 
gain to the existing lender fi rst. Th is would be a useful discipline on 
borrowers, especially in light of evidence that many home owners 
excessively binged on debt as cash- out refi nancing became easier.
Why Don’t We See SRMs?
Th e government provides large tax subsidies to debt fi nancing, 
and this encourages a fi nancial system overly reliant on debt con-
tracts. In particular, interest payments on debt are tax deductible. 
Th e government thus pushes the fi nancial system toward debt fi -
nancing, even though debt fi nancing has horrible consequences for 
the economy. Th e mortgage market in particular is dominated by 
the government and distorted by its tax policy. Th e most domi-
nant players in the mortgage market are Freddie Mac and Fannie 
Mae. Th ey decide which mortgage contract is going to dominate 
the mortgage market, and the rest of the market follows. For ex-
ample, the thirty- year fi xed- interest- rate mortgages were intro-
duced by the government- sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and are 
rather unique to the United States.17
Th e importance of government in determining the fi nancial 
contracts that households use is evident in the United Kingdom. 
In  the United Kingdom government launched the “Help to 
Buy” program, which provided what David Miles calls an “equity 
loan.” If a household provides a  percent down payment and ob-
tains a  percent fi rst mortgage, the government provides a  per-
cent equity loan, where the value of the loan is fi xed at  percent 

S H A R I N G  181
of the home value. As a result, if the home falls in value, so does 
the principal balance on the equity loan. Th e equity loan in our 
view is not as desirable as SRMs because of the presence of the fi rst 
mortgage and more limited risk- sharing if house prices fall. Home 
owners in the “Help to Buy” program can still go underwater if 
their house price falls signifi cantly, and the combination of the fi rst 
mortgage with the equity loan likely infl ates house prices. But, as 
David Miles shows through a series of calculations, the Great Re-
cession in the United Kingdom would have been far less severe had 
they been in place. Th e program has proved immensely popular 
with very high volume of equity loan issuance, which shows how 
government choices dictate what fi nancial contracts prevail in the 
marketplace.18
Tax policy is another factor that limits innovation in the 
mortgage industry. Th e home- owner mortgage- interest deduc-
tion encourages home owners to borrow using traditional mort-
gage contracts. Th e SRM contract— because of its risk- sharing 
qualities— would likely not qualify as a “debt instrument” and 
would therefore not have the same preferential tax treatment as 
standard mortgages. In fact, the IRS only gives the deduction if the 
party obtaining the fi nancing— a home owner or shareholders of a 
corporation— is “subordinate to the rights of general creditors.”19 
To get the tax advantage, a home owner must bear the fi rst losses 
when house prices fall.
We can’t really know whether something like shared- responsibility 
mortgages would emerge organically if the government didn’t so 
strongly support standard mortgages. But the bias of current gov-
ernment policy is important. It means we cannot claim that the ab-
sence of SRMs in the marketplace is evidence of their ineff ectiveness.
But Debt Is So Cheap!
Moving beyond the mortgage market, the fi nancial system in 
general relies so heavily on debt because it allows those who want 
fi nancing— like people buying a home, banks raising fi nancing for 

182 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
loans, or companies building new plants— to get funds at a low 
cost. Moving away from a debt- based fi nancial system, some argue, 
would hurt the economy because it would raise the cost of  fi nancing.
Debt is cheap because the government massively subsidizes its 
use. We’ve discussed the interest- expense tax deduction, but the 
subsidies are ubiquitous. Th e entire fi nancial system is based on 
explicit or implicit government guarantees of the debt of fi nancial 
intermediaries. Deposit insurance encourages banks to have sub-
stantial short- term debt (deposits) in their capital structure. Im-
plicit subsidies to debt fi nancing encourage fi nancial institutions— 
especially the large ones— to fi nance themselves almost exclusively 
with debt. Debt may look cheap to private parties, but the associ-
ated expenses are borne by others— taxpayers. And we shouldn’t 
be surprised that fi nancial intermediaries, who are themselves in-
centivized to use so much infl exible debt fi nancing, would lend to 
households using the same infl exible debt contracts.
Further, as we have argued throughout the book, debt fi nancing 
has harmful side eff ects that are not borne by the parties in a con-
tract— or negative externalities. Th ese include the fi re sale of as-
sets below market prices (like foreclosures) and massive aggregate 
demand shocks (a lot of people cutting back spending) that throw 
the economy into recession. Th ese large negative externalities are 
borne by the entire economy, even though debt fi nancing may look 
cheap to individual parties.
In our view, the massive subsidies to debt fi nancing explain why 
our fi nancial system is so addicted to it. But some economists argue 
that debt is an optimal contract for other reasons, and that this ex-
plains why it is so cheap. One explanation is that it solves a costly 
moral hazard. For example, a student loan that demands repay-
ment regardless of the graduating student’s future income encour-
ages the student to work diligently toward the highest- paying job 
possible. In contrast, if the student- loan payment depended on the 
student’s income, the student would have a weaker incentive to fi nd 
a high- paying job. Why work hard when the bank gets some of my 
income, and there are no penalties for not working?

S H A R I N G  183
When it comes to outcomes that an individual can’t control, 
however, the argument doesn’t hold water. A student can con-
trol how hard she works in school, but she cannot control what 
the labor market looks like when she graduates from college. Th e 
equity- like contracts we propose here, such as SRMs, would be 
contingent on a measure of risk that the individual cannot control. 
In the case of the SRM, the contract would provide downside pro-
tection linked to a local house- price index, not the exact house of 
the owner. For student loans, the contract would require a lower 
interest payment if the job market deteriorates, not the income of 
the individual. Contracts that are contingent on risks beyond the 
control of the individual completely avoid the moral- hazard prob-
lem while providing the insurance a borrower needs.
Another common argument for why debt is cheap is that inves-
tors demand super- safe assets. In other words, investors are willing 
to pay a premium for assets that never change in value. Such as-
sets can only be created if the borrower bears all the risk. If equity- 
like contracts become more dominant, then investors who desire 
super- safe assets will demand a very large premium to hold them.
But why should investors be unwilling to take risks as long as they 
are guaranteed a high expected return? Investors are the wealthiest 
households in the economy, and therefore the sector that should be 
most willing to bear risk as long as they are properly compensated. 
We readily admit that there is substantial evidence that investors 
show an extreme desire to hold what appear to be super- safe as-
sets. But this is likely driven by the same government subsidies 
to debt fi nancing we have already mentioned. For example, when 
the fi nancial crisis peaked in September , the U.S. Treasury 
stepped in to guarantee money- market funds. Now all investors 
know that money- market funds enjoy an implicit guarantee from 
the government. Th eir “desire” to put cash into a money- market 
fund is not some primitive preference. Th ey are simply responding 
to a government subsidy.
Also, even if investors do exhibit innate preferences for super- 
safe assets, the government should directly cater to the demand, 

184 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
not the private sector. Th e closest thing most economies have to 
a truly super- safe asset is government debt. If the private sector 
demands super- safe assets, let the government supply it.20 As dis-
cussed in chapter , relying on the private sector for super- safe 
assets has toxic consequences, and those assets are almost never 
super- safe. Research by Annette Vissing- Jorgensen and Arvind 
Krishnamurthy highlights how fi nancial crises are preceded by 
the banking sector trying to produce super- safe assets when short- 
term government debt is in short supply. Th e banking sector’s at-
tempt at supplying riskless assets inevitably fails, leading to a fi nan-
cial crisis.21
Sharing Risk More Broadly
Th e risk- sharing principle underlying SRMs applies in many other 
contexts. For example, during the Great Recession, countries in 
Europe with particularly high debt burdens, such as Ireland and 
Spain, suff ered a much worse recession than countries that had 
been lending to them, such as Germany. Why? Partly because of 
infl exible debt contracts, which forced losses on debtor countries 
while creditor countries remained protected. Th e levered- losses 
framework applies directly to the international system just as it 
does within the United States.
Th e debt that a country issues is called sovereign debt, and it 
has the unfortunate catch that the amount owed does not change 
even if the country experiences a very severe recession. Even if the 
economy plummets and unemployment rises above  percent, as 
it has in Spain, the same interest payments on sovereign debt must 
be paid. A country with debt written in its own currency can reduce 
the real value of the interest payments by infl ating, but countries 
that had adopted the euro did not have such an option. One pro-
posal is for countries to leave the euro and revert to their own cur-
rency. However, given that leaving the euro would lead to default 
on all euro- denominated debt, an exit could destroy an economy.

S H A R I N G  185
In a world of more fl exible sovereign fi nancing, such a dra-
matic course of action would be unnecessary. Mark Kamstra and 
Robert Shiller have proposed sovereign bonds where the coupon 
payment— the regular payment that countries make to inves-
tors— is linked to the nominal GDP of the country.22 Such a bond 
is more equity- like because the investor experiences profi ts that 
vary with the fortune of the country, much like an equity holder 
receives higher or lower dividends depending on earnings of a cor-
poration. In the case of Spain, such fi nancing would act as an auto-
matic stabilizer: that is, payments on the bonds would immediately 
fall when the Spanish economy collapsed, providing some relief to 
Spaniards.
Kenneth Rogoff , one of the world’s leading experts on fi nancial 
crises, blames sovereign fi nancial crises squarely on the infl exibil-
ity of debt contracts. As he notes, “If [advanced economy] govern-
ments stood back and asked themselves how to channel a much 
larger share of the imbalances into equity- like instruments, the 
global fi nancial system that emerged might be a lot more robust 
than the crisis- prone system we have now.”23
Th ere are no doubt complications that arise with such instru-
ments. Should the payments be linked to GDP growth or the level 
of GDP? How can we ensure that the country doesn’t manipulate 
the GDP numbers to lower their coupon? But these complications 
should not cloud the overarching goal: to make the international 
fi nancial system one that more effi  ciently shares macroeconomic 
risk instead of ineffi  ciently concentrating it on the most vulnerable 
countries.
Th e banking system also needs more risk- sharing, something 
Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig have articulated.24 Th ey call for 
regulators to require more equity fi nancing at fi nancial institutions, 
which would help insulate the fi nancial system from the horrible 
shocks we have seen in the recent past. If the banking system was 
funded with more equity, then banks would not be forced to de-
fault on debt when their assets fell. More equity would help pre-

186 C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
vent banking panics and make it less necessary for central bankers 
to intervene.
A Financial System that Works for Us
Many of the proposals we are making may sound radical. Th is is 
because the fi nancial system is so far from where it should be. As 
it currently stands, the fi nancial system forces all the risk on the 
households that can least aff ord to bear it. Investors look to the 
fi nancial system to capture government subsidies to debt. Many are 
lulled into a false sense of security that they are holding super- safe 
assets, thereby fueling unsustainable bubbles. Th e fi nancial system 
is associated with frequent boom- and- bust cycles, leaving everyone 
worse off . Th e fi nancial system is earning a higher and higher frac-
tion of our national income, but many Americans don’t trust it.
Our proposals bring the fi nancial system closer to what it should 
ideally look like. Households should use the fi nancial system to 
share the risk associated with purchasing a home or investing in 
education. Investors should look to the fi nancial system not to ex-
ploit government subsidies, but to take some risk to earn a legiti-
mate return. Th e fi nancial system should facilitate a growing but 
stable economy.
Th e culprit is debt, and the solution is straightforward: Th e 
fi nancial system should adopt more equity- like contracts that are 
made contingent on risks outside the control of households. Inves-
tors should earn a return for bearing those risks, and households 
should be protected when those risks materialize. Th e government 
should stop subsidizing the use of infl exible debt contracts, both in 
the banking and household sectors.
While the solution in principle seems clear, we have no illusion 
about the challenges of moving toward it. As it currently stands, 
the fi nancial system benefi ts very few people, and those few have a 
vested interest in staving off  any reform that could move us away 
from debt fi nancing. However, we cannot continue down the road 
of unsustainable debt binges and painful crashes. We must change 

S H A R I N G  187
course to stabilize the world economy. In this book, we have tried 
to provide an intellectual framework, backed by a plethora of evi-
dence, that can serve as a template of reform. We may not have the 
specifi cs exactly right, but we are confi dent that the general prin-
ciple of more equity- like fi nancing can help avoid painful reces-
sions and nurture sustainable economic growth.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Th e research underlying this book was conducted over more than 
half a decade. Countless colleagues, seminar participants, discus-
sants, and referees contributed to our ideas. We would like to fi rst 
acknowledge the stimulating intellectual environment of the uni-
versities that have employed us over this period: Princeton Univer-
sity, the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of 
Chicago Booth School of Business. For funding our research, we 
are very grateful to the Fama- Miller Center at Chicago Booth, the 
Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at UC Berke-
ley, the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth, the Julis- 
Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance at Princeton, and 
the National Science Foundation.
Our gratitude also goes out to Kamalesh Rao and Francesco 
Trebbi, who were our invaluable coauthors on some of the work 
summarized in this book. Dylan Hall provided excellent research 
assistance, and his thorough reading greatly improved the book. 
Comments from Lord Adair Turner, Hal Weitzman, and two 
anonymous reviewers were extremely helpful. We also thank Sarah 
Niemann, who provided excellent administrative assistance.
Joe Jackson, our editor at the University of Chicago Press, has 
been a fantastic adviser throughout, helping us extract from our 
academic research readable and hopefully enjoyable prose. We also 

190 A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
thank Carrie Olivia Adams and the rest of the University of Chi-
cago Press team who made this book a reality.
Th e book and the research underlying it would not have been 
possible without the strong support of our families, who somehow 
put up with our constant absentminded- professorial habits. We 
dedicate this book to our parents and spouses.
Atif is not eloquent enough to be able to put in words how much 
he appreciates his parents’ love, aff ection, and innumerable sacri-
fi ces. He is also immensely fortunate to have as supportive a life 
partner as Ayesha Aft ab.
Amir thanks Saima Abedin Sufi  for her unfl inching love and 
support. She has played the instrumental role in his professional 
success. He also thanks his parents for always being there to guide 
him through life’s most challenging times.
Last but certainly not least, we thank our children for providing 
a wonderful distraction from our research while simultaneously 
providing us a reason to do the research in the fi rst place: to hope-
fully make the world a better place for future generations.

NOTES
C H A P T E R  O N E
. Th e information on northern Indiana, including direct quotes, is gathered from 
the following sources: Jim Meenan, “, Monaco Jobs Lost,” South Bend Tribune, 
July , ; James Kelleher, “Economy Slams Brakes on Winnebago,” Global and 
Mail (Canada), July , ; Jim Meenan, “Monaco Says State Requirements Met,” 
South Bend Tribune, August , ; Tony Pugh, “Is RV Capital of America on the 
Road to Ruin?,” Knight Ridder Washington Bureau, December , ; Andrea Hol-
ecek, “Notices of Closings or Layoff s Tell Sad Story in Indiana,” Times (Munster, IN), 
August , ; “Corporate Fact Sheet,” Monaco Coach Corporation, http://media
.corporate- ir.net/media_fi les/IROL///Monaco_factsheet...pdf; Joseph 
Dits, “Agency Leaders Digest the News,” South Bend Tribune, July , .
. Foreclosure numbers from CoreLogic Press Release, “CoreLogic Reports , 
Completed Foreclosures in January,” February , , http://www.corelogic.com
/about- us/news/corelogic- reports- ,- completed- foreclosures- in- january.aspx. 
Income destruction fi gure based on a linear projection of long- term trend growth in 
GDP according to NIPA data.
. Suicide risk study is Timothy Classen and Richard A. Dunn, “Th e Eff ect of Job 
Loss and Unemployment Duration on Suicide Risk in the United States: A New Look 
Using Mass- Layoff s and Unemployment Duration,” Health Economics  (): – 
; Loss earnings study is Steven J. Davis and Till von Wachter, “Recessions and the 
Costs of Job Loss,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall .
. Franklin Delano Roosevelt, “Fireside Chat,” September , .
. John Maynard Keynes, Th e General Th eory of Employment, Interest, and Money 
(; reprint, CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, ).
. Arthur Conan Doyle, “A Scandal in Bohemia,” in Th e Adventures of Sherlock 
Holmes (London: George Newnes Ltd., ), http://.../bcollection
/canon/scan.htm.

192 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  4 – 2 5
. David Beim, “It’s All about Debt,” Forbes, March , , http://www.forbes
.com////household- debt- gdp- markets- beim.html.
. Charles Persons, “Credit Expansion,  to , and Its Lessons,” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics  (): – .
. Martha Olney, “Avoiding Default: Th e Role of Credit in the Consumption Col-
lapse of ,” Quarterly Journal of Economics  (): – .
. Barry Eichengreen and Kris Mitchener, “Th e Great Depression as a Credit 
Boom Gone Wrong,” Bank for International Settlements Working Paper  (): .
. Olney, “Avoiding Default,” ; Frederic Mishkin, “Th e Household Balance 
Sheet and the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History  (): – .
. Persons, “Credit Expansion.”
. Peter Temin, Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? (New York: Nor-
ton, ).
. Reuven Glick and Kevin J. Lansing, “Global Household Leverage, House Prices, 
and Consumption,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, January , 
.
. International Monetary Fund, “Chapter : Dealing with Household Debt,” in 
World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain, April .
. Mervyn King, “Debt Defl ation: Th eory and Evidence,” European Economic Re-
view  (): – .
. Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff , “Is the  US Sub- Prime Financial 
Crisis So Diff erent?: An International Historical Comparison,” American Economic 
Review  (): – .
. Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff , Th is Time Is Diff erent (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, ).
. Oscar Jorda, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, “When Credit Bites Back: 
Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crisis” (working paper no. , NBER, ).
. Th e IMF study also confi rms this. Th ey show that elevated household debt 
leads to more severe recession, even in the absence of a banking crisis. IMF, “Chapter 
: Dealing with Household Debt.”
. Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor, “When Credit Bites Back,” .
. George W. Bush, “Speech to the Nation on the Economic Crisis,” Septem-
ber , , http://www.nytimes.com////business/economy/text- bush
.html?pagewanted=all&_r=.
C H A P T E R  T W O
. All of the fi gures in this subsection are from the Survey of Consumer Finances 
produced by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
. Th e leverage multiplier is mathematically defi ned as /( − LTV), where LTV is 
the loan- to- value ratio on the home. In this example, the LTV was  percent, which 
puts /( − .) = . Th e higher the LTV, the higher the leverage multiplier.
. For a comprehensive summary of the data sources we have used in our research, 

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  2 6 – 3 9  193
see the following studies: Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “Th e Consequences of Mortgage 
Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics  (): – ; Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “Household Leverage 
and the Recession of – ,” IMF Economic Review  (): – ; and Atif 
Mian, Kamelesh Rao, and Amir Sufi , “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and 
the Economic Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
. CoreLogic Press Release, “CoreLogic Th ird Quarter  Negative Equity Data 
Shows Slight Decline but Remains Elevated,” November , , http://www.core
logic.com/about- us/news/corelogic- third- quarter- - negative- equity- data- shows
- slight- decline- but- remains- elevated.aspx.
. Daniel Hartley, “Distressed Sales and Housing Prices,” Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland Economic Trends, February , .
. Atif Mian, Amir Sufi , and Francesco Trebbi, “Foreclosures, House Prices, and 
the Real Economy” (working paper no. , NBER, May ).
. Another study using a diff erent methodology found very similar results: Elliot 
Anenberg and Edward Kung, “Estimates of the Size and Source of Price Declines Due 
to Nearby Foreclosures” (working paper - , UCLA, January , ). Th ey fi nd 
the same channel: foreclosures push down nearby house prices by forcing them to sell 
below the price previously posted in the market.
. Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A 
Market Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance  (): – .
. John Geanakoplos, “Th e Leverage Cycle,” in NBER Macroeconomic Annual 
, vol. , ed. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff , and Michael Woodford (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, ), – .
. See National Fire Protection Association data, http://www.nfpa.org/research
/fi re- statistics/the- us- fi re- problem/home- fi res.
C H A P T E R  T H R E E
. Th e exact quote comes from Alan Blinder, who wrote that the failure to 
save Lehman “was a colossal error, and many people said so at the time.” See Alan 
Blinder, “Six Errors on the Path to the Financial Crisis,” New York Times, January , 
.
. Jacob Weisberg, “What Caused the Great Recession?,” Daily Beast, January , , 
http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek////what- caused- the- great- reces
sion.html.
. Th e facts in this section are based on two research studies: Atif Mian, Kamalesh 
Rao, and Amir Sufi , “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic 
Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming; and Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , 
“Household Leverage and the Recession of – ,” IMF Economic Review  
(): – .
. James Surowiecki, “Th e Deleveraging Myth,” New Yorker, November , . 
He also wrote in his column that “borrowing furiously against home equity to fuel 

194 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  4 2 – 5 3
a spending spree wasn’t sustainable, and we shouldn’t be looking to get the economy 
back to that state.” We wholeheartedly agree with this view— see chapters  through .
. Karen Dynan at the Brookings Institution also found a strong eff ect of debt on 
household spending using a completely diff erent research design and data set. Her 
analysis found that “highly leveraged homeowners had larger declines in spending 
between  and  than other homeowners, despite having smaller changes in 
net worth, suggesting that their leverage weighed on consumption above and beyond 
what would have been predicted by wealth eff ects alone.” Karen Dynan, “Is a House-
hold Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption?” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity (Spring ): – .
C H A P T E R  F O U R
. Hal Varian interviews from two sources: Holly Finn, “Lunch with Hal,” Google 
Th ink Quarterly, March , http://www.thinkwithgoogle.co.uk/quarterly/data/hal
- varian- treating- data- obesity.html; and McKinsey & Company, “Hal Varian on How the 
Web Challenges Managers,” McKinsey Quarterly, January , http://www.mckinsey
.com/insights/innovation/hal_varian_on_how_the_web_challenges_managers.
. Macroeconomists refer to this fundamentals- based theory as real business cycle 
theory, because fl uctuations are driven by “real” shocks— that is, shocks to the pro-
ductive capacity of the economy. Th e classic citation is Edward C. Prescott, “Th eory 
Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quar-
terly Review , no.  (): – .
. Robert Barro uses this example in chapter  of his textbook Macroeconomics, th 
ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, ).
. In addition to our own work, four studies have infl uenced our thinking on these 
issues a great deal: Gauti Eggertsson and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and 
the Liquidity Trap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , no.  (): – ; Ve-
ronica Guerrieri and Guido Lorenzoni, “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and 
the Liquidity Trap” (working paper, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, 
July ); Robert E. Hall, “Th e Long Slump,” American Economic Review  (): 
– ; and Virgiliu Midrigan and Th omas Philippon, “Household Leverage and the 
Recession” (working paper, NYU Stern School of Business, April ).
. A closely related reason for a pullback in spending aft er a wealth shock is pre-
cautionary savings, as in Christopher Carroll and Miles Kimball, “On the Concavity 
of the Consumption Function,” Econometrica  (): – . Christopher Carroll 
has done a large amount of work exploring how wealth distribution matters for the 
pullback in spending during recessions. Related here is also the work of Richard Koo 
on what he calls the “balance sheet recession” in Japan, where indebted fi rms pull 
back on investment to deleverage. See Richard Koo, Th e Holy Grail of Macroeconom-
ics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession (Singapore: John Wiley & Sons [Asia], ).
. See Paul Krugman, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity 
Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity  (): – .

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  5 4 – 6 7  195
. In theory, cash could have a negative return if the government, or Federal Re-
serve, taxed it. For example, the Federal Reserve could tax reserves held by banks. In 
practice, we almost never see such an action, which means the zero lower bound on 
nominal interest rate remains relevant.
. Robert Hall explains the intuition of the zero lower bound nicely when he says: 
“A government issuing currency with a return [higher than the negative real interest 
rate] is doing something fundamentally uneconomic that no private organization 
would do— it is overcompensating people who lend to it.” In other words, cash be-
comes an ineffi  ciently high yielding asset, which leads to too much hoarding of it. 
See Robert E. Hall, “Th e Long Slump,” American Economic Review  (): – .
. Irving Fisher, “Th e Debt- Defl ation Th eory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 
 no.  (): – .
. For example, Zhen Huo and Jose- Victor Rios- Rull build an economic model in 
which a recession is generated when wealth is destroyed because it is diffi  cult to shift  
resources to the production of goods for export. Zhen Huo and Jose- Victor Rios- Rull, 
“Engineering a Paradox of Th rift  Recession” (working paper, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, December ).
. We build this formal model in Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “What Explains High 
Unemployment?: Th e Aggregate Demand Channel” (working paper, University of 
Chicago Booth School of Business, ).
C H A P T E R  F I V E
. Senator Bob Corker, “Corker: Obama Administration’s Principal Write- Down 
Proposal for Underwater Home Mortgages Is ‘Terrible Public Policy,’ Forces Tennesse-
ans to Pay for Reckless Housing Practices in Other States,” press release, January , , 
http://www.corker.senate.gov/public/index.cfm///corker- obama- administration
- s- principal- write- down- proposal- for- underwater- home- mortgages- is- terrible- public
- policy- forces- tennesseans- to- pay- for- reckless- housing- practices- in- other- states.
. Th is methodology is based on our research study: Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , 
“What Explains High Unemployment?: Th e Aggregate Demand Channel” (working 
paper, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, ).
. Th e most important of these assumptions is related to household preferences, 
where we assume households have Cobb- Douglas preferences over tradable and non- 
tradable goods. Th is assumption allows for a simple proportionality calculation. Th e 
fraction of jobs losses in the non- tradable sector coming from the levered losses shock 
allows us to back out the fraction of total jobs lost in the whole economy. See Atif 
Mian and Amir Sufi , “What Explains High Unemployment?: Th e Aggregate Demand 
Channel.”
. John Maynard Keynes, Th e General Th eory of Employment, Interest, and Money 
(; reprint, CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, ).
. Mary Daly, Bart Hobijn, and Brian Lucking, “Why Has Wage Growth Stayed 
Strong?” FRBSF Economic Letter, April , .

196 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  6 9 – 8 3
. Mary Anastasia O’Grady, “Th e Fed’s Easy Money Skeptic,” Wall Street Journal, 
February , .
. Kyle Herkenhoff  and Lee Ohanian, “Foreclosure Delay and U.S. Unemployment” 
(working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, June ).
. Jesse Rothstein, “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Reces-
sion,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall , – .
. Johannes Schmieder, Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender, “Th e Eff ects of Ex-
tended Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression 
Discontinuity Estimates over  Years,” Quarterly Journal of Economics  (): 
– .
. Steven J. Davis and Till von Wachter, “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall .
C H A P T E R  S I X
. We defi ne the west side of Detroit as people living in the following zip codes: 
, , , , . Background information is from the Wikipedia 
entry on Brightmoor, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brightmoor,_Detroit, and authors’ 
calculations.
. Ron French, “How the Home Loan Boom Went Bust,” Detroit News, Novem-
ber , .
. Mark Whitehouse, “‘Subprime’ Aft ermath: Losing the Family Home,” Wall Street 
Journal, May , .
. French, “Home Loan Boom Went Bust.”
. Highest and lowest in this calculation are the top and bottom  percent of the 
credit score distribution, and the denial rates are as of .
. Ben Bernanke, testimony on “Th e Economic Outlook” on October , , 
before the Joint Economic Committee, th Congress.
. For details on these calculations, see Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “Th e Conse-
quences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default 
Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics  (): – .
. In reality, the debt and animal spirits view are not independent. For example, 
debt may allow those with irrational beliefs to buy homes, a channel that we empha-
size in chapter .
. Edward Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz, “Housing Supply and Hous-
ing Bubbles,” Journal of Urban Economics  (): – , provide the motivation 
for the use of housing - supply elasticity to generate variation in how bubbly a hous-
ing market is.
. Mian and Sufi , “Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion”; Albert Saiz, 
“Th e Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
 (): – .
. We have on purpose set the y axis labels to match the y axis labels from fi g. .. 
Th is allows for a direct comparison between inelastic  and elastic housing- supply cities.

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  8 6 – 9 6  197
. Th e expansion of credit availability allowed some existing home owners to buy 
bigger homes, but this represented a small part of the population.
. See Ron French and Mike Wilkinson, “Easy Money, Risky Loans Drive Area 
Home Losses; , Filings for Foreclosure in the Past Two Years,” Detroit News, No-
vember , . Th e article notes that Ms. Cochran was tricked by mortgage brokers 
into refi nancing her mortgage into such a large balance.
. Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “House Prices, Home Equity- Based Borrowing, and 
the U.S. Household Leverage Crisis,” American Economic Review  (): – .
. Glenn Canner, Karen Dynan, and Wayne Passmore, “Mortgage Refi nancing in 
 and Early ,” Federal Reserve Bulletin , no.  (): – .
. Other research shows similar aggressive borrowing in the context of credit 
cards and subprime auto sales. See David Gross and Nicholas Souleles, “Do Liquid-
ity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior?: Evidence from 
Credit Card Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, no.  (): – ; and Wil-
liam Adams, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin, “Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect 
Information in Subprime Lending,” American Economic Review no.  (): – .
. See, for example, R. H. Strotz, “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility 
Maximization,” Review of Economic Studies  (): – ; E. S. Phelps and R. A. 
Pollak, “On Second- Best National Saving and Game- Equilibrium Growth,” Review of 
Economic Studies  (): – ; and David Laibson, “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic 
Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics  (): – .
. Distinguishing the borrowing constraints theory from the behavioral biases 
view remains one of the biggest challenges in the study of household spending be-
havior. Th e problem is that observed behavior is almost identical under both theories. 
Despite the challenges, it remains one of the most important issues in macroeconom-
ics, and we expect to see progress on this question in the future.
C H A P T E R  S E V E N
. Laurids Lauridsen, “Th e Financial Crisis in Th ailand: Causes, Conduct, and 
Consequences?” World Development  (): – .
. Lester Th urow, “Asia: Th e Collapse and the Cure,” New York Review of Books, 
February , .
. Ramon Moreno, “What Caused East Asia’s Financial Crisis?” Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter - , August , .
. Paul Krugman, “What Happened to Asia,” Mimeo, January , http://web.mit
.edu/krugman/www/disinter.html.
. Franklin Allen and Joo Yun Hong, “Why Are Th ere Global Imbalances?: Th e 
Case of Korea” (working paper - , Wharton Financial Institutions Center, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, February , ).
. Leon Kendall, “Securitization: A New Era in American Finance,” in A Primer on 
Securitization, ed. Leon Kendall and Michael Fishman (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
).

198 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  9 7 – 1 0 8
. See, for example, Claire Hill, “Who Were the Villains in the Subprime Crisis, and 
Why It Matters,” Entrepreneurial Business Law Journal  (): – . As she notes, 
“In the late s, Wall Street began securitizing mortgages made to borrowers who 
did not have ‘prime’ credit. Origination of such mortgages had been a very small pro-
portion of overall mortgage originations, but that quickly began to change.”
. Adam Levitin and Susan Wachter, “Explaining the Housing Bubble,” Georgetown 
Law Journal  (): – .
. Joshua Coval, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Staff ord, “Th e Economics of Structured Fi-
nance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives  (): – .
. Coval, Jurek, and Staff ord, “Th e Economics of Structured Finance.”
. Th is was the title of an Economist article that covered our research in February 
. See the Economist, “Chain of Fools,” February , .
. Benjamin Keys, T. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Did Securitization 
Lead to Lax Screening?: Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics  (): – .
. Christopher Mayer, Karen Pence, and Shane Sherlund, “Th e Rise in Mortgage 
Defaults,” Journal of Political Economy  (): – , provide further support. 
Th ey “fi nd that underwriting deteriorated along several dimensions: more loans were 
originated to borrowers with very small down payments and little or no documenta-
tion of their income or assets, in particular.”
. Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and James Witkin, “Asset Quality Misrepresenta-
tion by Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from RMBS Market” (working paper, Co-
lumbia Business School, Columbia University, February , ).
. Adam Ashcraft , Paul Goldsmith- Pinkham, and James Vickery, “MBS Ratings 
and the Mortgage Credit Boom,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff  Report #, 
May .
. Piskorski, Seru, and Witkin, “Asset Quality Misrepresentation.”
. Yuliya Demyanyk and Otto Van Hemert, “Understanding the Subprime Mort-
gage Crisis,” Review of Financial Studies  (): – .
. Th is estimate is based on the ABX index that tracks the value of mortgage- 
backed securities with mortgage originated in .
C H A P T E R  E I G H T
. Daniel Altman, “Charles P. Kindleberger, , Global Economist, Is Dead,” New 
York Times, July , .
. Robert Solow, foreword to Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial 
Crises, th ed., by Charles Kindleberger and Robert Aliber (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
& Sons, ).
. Vernon Smith, Gerry Suchanek, and Arlington Williams, “Bubbles, Crashes and 
Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets,” Econometrica  
(): – .

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 0 9 – 1 2 1  199
. Robert Shiller, “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justifi ed by Subsequent 
Changes in Dividends?” American Economic Review  (): – .
. Jeff rey Pontiff , “Excess Volatility and Closed- End Funds,” American Economic 
Review  (): – .
. David Porter and Vernon Smith, “Stock Market Bubbles in the Laboratory,” 
Journal of Behavioral Finance  (): – .
. See the following studies for models describing this logic: Michael Harrison 
and David Kreps, “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with Heteroge-
neous Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics  (): – ; Jose Scheink-
man and Wei Xiong, “Overconfi dence and Speculative Bubbles,” Journal of Political 
Economy  (): – ; and Dilip Abreu and Markus Brunnermeier, “Bubbles 
and Crashes,” Econometrica  (): – .
. Th e discussion below is inspired by John Geanakoplos, “Th e Leverage Cycle,” in 
NBER Macroeconomic Annual , vol. , ed. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff , 
and Michael Woodford (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), – .
. Th is can be confi rmed by noting that  × $, = $. million.
. See, for example, Edward Glaeser, Joshua Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko, “Can 
Cheap Credit Explain the Housing Boom?” (working paper no. , NBER, July 
).
. Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Neglected Risks, Finan-
cial Innovation, and Financial Fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics  (): 
– .
. Solow, foreword to Manias, Panics and Crashes.
. Jon Hilsenrath, “A - Year- Old Who Foresaw Selloff  is ‘Dubious’ of Stock- 
Market Rally,” Wall Street Journal, July , .
C H A P T E R  N I N E
. Euronews, “Spain’s Unforgiving Eviction Law,” December , ; Suzanne Daley, 
“In Spain, Homes Are Taken but Debt Stays,” New York Times, October , .
. Gabriele Steinhauser and Matthew Dalton, “Lingering Bad Debts Stifl e Europe 
Recovery,” Wall Street Journal, January , .
. Daley, “In Spain, Homes.”
. Matt Moff ett and Christopher Bjork, “Wave of Evictions Spurs Sympathy in 
Spain,” Wall Street Journal, December , .
. Ilan Brat and Gabrielle Steinhauser, “EU Court Rules against Spanish Mortgage 
Laws,” Wall Street Journal, March , .
. Wall Street Journal, “Spanish Mortgage Misery,” March , .
. Sharon Smyth and Angeline Benoit, “PP Aims to Change Spanish Mortgage Law 
within Two Months,” Bloomberg, March , .
. Daley, “In Spain, Homes.”
. Raphael Minder, “Bailout in Spain Leaves Taxpayers Liable for Cost,” New York 
Times, June , .

200 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 2 2 – 1 3 5
. “Robert Reich,” Daily Show with Jon Stewart, Comedy Central, October , .
. Stephen G. Cecchetti, “Crisis and Responses: Th e Federal Reserve in the Early 
Stages of the Financial Crisis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives , no.  ().
. Pietro Veronesi and Luigi Zingales, “Paulson’s Gift ,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics  (): – .
. Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “Too- Systemic- to- Fail: 
What Option Markets Imply about Sector- Wide Government Guarantees” (Fama- 
Miller working paper, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, March , ).
. George W. Bush, “Address to the Nation on the Financial Crisis” (speech, 
Wash ington, DC, September , ), New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com
////business/economy/text- bush.html?pagewanted=all&_r=.
. Ben Bernanke, “Nonmonetary Eff ects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation 
of the Great Depression,” American Economic Review  (): – .
. Th e NFIB survey, led by Chief Economist William Dunkelberg, is available at 
http://www.nfi b.com/research- foundation/surveys/small- business- economic- trends.
. Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “Aggregate Demand and State- Level Employment,” 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter - , February , .
. Atif Mian and Amir Sufi , “What Explains High Unemployment?: Th e Aggre-
gate Demand Channel” (working paper, University of Chicago Booth School of Busi-
ness, ).
. Kathleen Kahle and Rene M. Stulz, “Access to Capital, Investment, and the 
Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
. Atif Mian, Amir Sufi , and Francesco Trebbi, “Th e Political Economy of the U.S. 
Mortgage Default Crisis,” American Economic Review  (): – .
. Th e printed transcript was made available on the Columbia Journalism Review 
website, and is located here: http://www.cjr.org/the_audit/so_thats_why_the_press
_wont_co_.php?page=all&print=true. Davidson later apologized to listeners for this 
segment of the interview.
. Th e question was posed during the London School of Economics confer-
ence entitled “What Should Economists and Policymakers Learn from the Financial 
Crisis?” on March , . Th e transcript is on Brad DeLong’s website located here: 
http://delong.typepad.com/sdj///reconstructing- macroeconomics- exchange
- mervyn- king- ben- bernanke- olivier- blanchard- axel- weber- larry- summers.html.
. Clea Benson, “Obama Housing Fix Faltered on Carrots- Not- Sticks Policy,” 
Bloomberg News, June , .
. Kristin Roberts and Stacy Kaper, “Out of Th eir Depth,” National Journal, 
March , .
C H A P T E R  T E N
. CNBC video can be found at the following link: http://video.cnbc.com/gallery
/?video=.

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 3 6 – 1 4 0  201
. Dina ElBoghdady, “HUD Chief Calls Aid on Mortgages a Failure,” Washington 
Post, December , .
. SIGTARP, “Quarterly Report to Congress,” April , , http://www.sigtarp
.gov/QuarterlypercentReports/April___Report_to_Congress.pdf.
. Offi  ce of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, 
“Quarterly Report to Congress,” April , . Available at http://www.sigtarp.gov
/Quarterly%Reports/April___Report_to_Congress.pdf.
. Zachary Goldfarb, “Why Housing Is Still Hindering the Recovery,” Washington 
Post, November , .
. Kristin Roberts and Stacy Kaper, “Out of Th eir Depth,” National Journal, 
March , .
. See, in particular, Anna Gelpern and Adam Levitin, “Rewriting Frankenstein 
Contracts: Workout Prohibitions in Residential Mortgage- Backed Securities,” South-
ern California Law Review  (): – .
. Ibid.
. Ibid.
. John Geanakoplos, “Solving the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage 
Cycle,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review , no.  (August ).
. Christopher Mayer, Edward Morrison, and Tomasz Piskorski, “A New Proposal 
for Loan Modifi cations,” Yale Journal on Regulation , no.  ().
. Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben- David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, 
Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru, “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evi-
dence from the Home Aff ordable Modifi cation Program” (working paper, University 
of Chicago Booth School of Business, ).
. Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Securitization and Distressed 
Loan Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,” Journal of Finan-
cial Economics  (): – .
. Sumit Agarwal, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben- David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, 
and Douglas Evanoff , “Market- Based Loss Mitigation Practices for Troubled Mort-
gages Following the Financial Crisis,” (working paper, SSRN, October ).
. Research by Christopher Mayer, Edward Morrison, Tomasz Piskorski, and 
Arpit Gupta, “Mortgage Modifi cation and Strategic Behavior: Evidence from a Legal 
Settlement with Countrywide” (working paper no. , NBER, May ), provides 
support to these strategic default concerns.
. See Jesse Eisenger, “Fannie and Freddie: Slashing Mortgages Is Good Business,” 
ProPublica, March , , http://www.propublica.org/article/fannie- and- freddie
- slashing- mortgages- is- good- business.
. See Ben Hallman, “Ed DeMarco, Top Housing Offi  cial, Defi ed White House; 
Geithner Fires Back,” Huffi  ngton Post, July , , http://www.huffi  ngtonpost
.com////ed- demarco- principal- reduction_n_.html.
. Annie Lowrey, “White House Urged to Fire a Housing Regulator,” New York 
Times, March , .

202 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 4 0 – 1 4 6
. See interview with Mike Konczal of Next New Deal, http://www.nextnewdeal
.net/rortybomb/post- debate- interview- glenn- hubbard- housing- policy.
. Th e general insight is that in the presence of nominal rigidities, fi nancial mar-
ket outcomes may be ineffi  cient because of an aggregate demand externality. See Em-
manuel Farhi and Ivan Werning, “On the Ineffi  ciency of Financial Market Equilibria 
in Macroeconomic Models with Nominal Rigidities” (working paper, Harvard Uni-
versity, ). As they show, transfers such as the one we propose make sense.
. For example, a common counterargument goes something like this: Th ere 
was $ billion of underwater mortgage debt. Even if the indebted households were 
given this $ billion, they would have spent only $. on the dollar, which is only 
$ billion. Th is is small relative to total GDP. However, such a calculation ignores the 
knock- on eff ects of foreclosures on house prices and the knock- on eff ects on employ-
ment, which as we explained in chapter  were very large.
. Martin Feldstein, “How to Stop the Drop in Home Values,” New York Times, 
October , .
. Goldfarb, “Why Housing Is Still Hindering the Recovery.”
. Craig Torres, “Household Debt Restructuring in U.S. Would Stimulate Growth, 
Reinhart Says,” Bloomberg, August , .
. Murray N. Rothbard, Th e Panic of : Reactions and Policies (New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, ), .
. Patrick Bolton and Howard Rosenthal, “Political Intervention in Debt Con-
tracts,” Journal of Political Economy  (): – .
. Rothbard, Panic of , .
. Bolton and Rosenthal, “Political Intervention.”
. Rothbard, Panic of .
. Ibid.
. Ibid., .
. Price Fishback, Jonathan Rose, and Kenneth Snowden, Well Worth Saving: How 
the New Deal Safeguarded Home Ownership (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
).
. Ibid.
. Randall Kroszner, “Is It Better to Forgive than to Receive?: Repudiation of the 
Gold Indexation Clause in Long- Term Debt during the Great Depression” (manu-
script, University of Chicago, ).
. John Geanakoplos and Susan Koniak, “Mortgage Justice Is Blind,” New York 
Times, October , .
. Information on Chapter  bankruptcy comes from Mark Scarberry and Scott 
Reddie, “Home Mortgage Strip Down in Chapter  Bankruptcy: A Contextual Ap-
proach to Sections (b)() and (b)(),” Pepperdine Law Review , no.  (): 
– .
. Th ere is considerable legal controversy on this interpretation. A series of cases 
in the late s and early s ended with Nobleman v. American Savings Bank in 
. Th e court ruled that secured mortgage debt on a principal residence could not 

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 4 6 – 1 5 3  203
be written down according to the original Chapter  bankruptcy statute. Before then, 
many judges allowed for mortgage cram- down in bankruptcy. Scarberry and Reddie, 
“Home Mortgage Strip Down in Chapter  Bankruptcy.”
. Clea Benson, “Obama Housing Fix Faltered on Carrots- Not- Sticks Policy,” 
Bloomberg News, June , .
. Binyamin Appelbaum, “Cautious Moves on Foreclosures Haunting Obama,” 
New York Times, August , .
. Ibid.
. Doris Dungey, “Just Say Yes to Cram Downs,” Calculated Risk, October , , 
http://www.calculatedriskblog.com///just- say- yes- to- cram- downs.html.
. Doris Dungey, “House Considers Cram Downs,” Calculated Risk, Decem-
ber , , http://www.calculatedriskblog.com///house- considers- cram- downs
.html.
. Bill McBride, “Mortgage Cramdowns: A Missed Opportunity,” Calculated Risk, 
August , , http://www.calculatedriskblog.com///mortgage- cramdowns
- missed- opportunity.html.
. A related proposal came from Eric Posner and Luigi Zingales that would have 
modifi ed Chapter  to allow home owners in zip codes especially hard hit by falling 
house prices to have mortgages written down in bankruptcy if they gave up some of 
the upside potential when they sold the home in the future. See Eric Posner and Luigi 
Zingales, “A Loan Modifi cation Approach to the Housing Crisis,” American Law and 
Economics Review , no.  (): – .
. See Geanakoplos, “Solving the Present Crisis.”
. OCC Mortgage Metrics Report, “OCC Reports on Mortgage Performance for 
Fourth Quarter,” March , .
. Roberts and Kaper, “Out of Th eir Depth.”
. Benson, “Obama Housing Fix Faltered.”
. International Monetary Fund, “Concluding Statement of the  Article IV 
Mission to the United States of America,” July , , http://www.imf.org/external
/np/ms//.htm.
. Daniel Leigh, Deniz Igan, John Simon, and Petia Topalova, “Chapter : Dealing 
with Household Debt,” in IMF World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers 
Remain, April .
. Will Dobbie and Jae Song, “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the 
Eff ects of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection” (working paper, Harvard University, 
May ).
C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
. Irving Fisher, “Th e Debt- Defl ation Th eory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 
 no.  (): .
. Ben Bernanke, “On Milton Friedman’s Ninetieth Birthday” (speech, Conference 
to Honor Milton Friedman, University of Chicago, November , ).

204 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 5 4 – 1 6 3
. Technically, the Federal Reserve also purchases securities from the non- bank 
public. But if the non- bank public deposit the proceeds into the banking system and 
the banking system holds the increased funds in reserves, then the implications are 
similar.
. Paul Douglas, Irving Fisher, Frank Graham, Earl Hamilton, Willford King, and 
Charles Whittlesey, “A Program for Monetary Reform” (paper, reprinted by the Kettle 
Pond Institute, July ).
. Richard Koo makes a similar argument studying Japan during the s. See 
Richard Koo, Th e Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession 
(Singapore: John Wiley & Sons [Asia], ).
. See Peter Temin, Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? (New York: 
Norton, ); and Paul Krugman, “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the 
Liquidity Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity  (): – .
. Richard Koo, “Th e World in Balance Sheet Recession: What Post-  West Can 
Learn from Japan – ” (presentation, “Paradigm Lost: Rethinking Economics 
and Politics” conference, Berlin, April , ), http://ineteconomics.org/conference
/berlin/world- balance- sheet- recession- what- post- - west- can- learn- japan- 
- .
. Th e most cited reference to such helicopter drops of money is Milton Friedman, 
“Th e Optimum Quantity of Money,” in Th e Optimum Quantity of Money and Other 
Essays (Chicago: Aldine, ), – .
. Ben Bernanke, “Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self- Induced Paralysis” 
(paper, Princeton University, ).
. Martin Wolf, “Th e Case for Helicopter Money,” Financial Times, February , 
.
. Willem H. Buiter, “Helicopter Money: Irredeemable Fiat Money and the Li-
quidity Trap; Or, Is Money Net Wealth aft er All?” (working paper, January , ), 
http://www.willembuiter.com/helinber.pdf.
. Alan Boyce, Glenn Hubbard, Christopher Mayer, and James Witkin, “Stream-
lined Refi nancings for Up to  Million Borrowers” (draft  policy proposal, Columbia 
Business School, Columbia University, June , ), http://www.gsb.columbia.edu
/sites/realestate/fi les/BHMW- V- post.pdf.
. Krugman, “It’s Baaack.”
. Christina Romer, “It Takes a Regime Shift : Recent Developments in Japanese 
Monetary Policy through the Lens of the Great Depression” (speech, NBER Annual 
Conference on Macroeconomics, Cambridge, MA, April , ).
. Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evi-
dence from U.S. Regions,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
. Gabriel Chodorow- Reich, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui 
Woolston, “Does State Fiscal Relief during Recessions Increase Employment?: Evi-
dence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Jour-
nal: Economic Policy  (): – ; and Daniel Wilson, “Fiscal Spending Job Multi-

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 6 3 – 1 6 8  205
pliers: Evidence from the  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” American 
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
. Gauti Eggertsson and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquid-
ity Trap: A Fisher- Minsky- Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , no.  
(): – .
. Paul Krugman, End Th is Depression Now! (New York: Norton, ).
. Th ere are, of course, examples where government spending took the form of 
principal forgiveness. Th e most obvious is the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation dur-
ing the Great Depression that we discussed in chapter .
. Th e estate tax is an exception, but accounts for only . percent of overall tax 
revenue. See Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, “Where Do Federal Tax Reve-
nues Come From?” April , , http://www.cbpp.org/cms/?fa=view&id=.
. Hans- Werner Sinn, “Why Berlin Is Balking on a Bailout,” New York Times, 
June , .
. Atif Mian, Amir Sufi , and Francesco Trebbi, “Resolving Debt Overhang: Political 
Constraints in the Aft ermath of Financial Crises,” American Economic Journal: Macro-
economics, forthcoming.
. Ibid.
. Th ese are fi nancial crises defi ned by Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff .
C H A P T E R  T W E LV E
. See Heidi Shierholz, Natalie Sabadish, and Nicholas Finio, “Th e Class of : 
Young Graduates Still Face Dim Job Prospects,” Economic Policy Institute Briefi ng 
Paper  (): – .
. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly Report on Household Debt 
and Credit, February , http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/national_economy
/householdcredit/DistrictReport_Q.pdf.
. Andrew Martin and Andrew Lehren, “A Generation Hobbled by the Soaring 
Cost of College,” New York Times, May , .
. Tara Siegel Bernard, “In Grim Job Market, Student Loans Are a Costly Burden,” 
New York Times, April , .
. See Charley Stone, Carl Van Horn, and Cliff  Zukin, “Chasing the American 
Dream: Recent College Graduates and the Great Recession,” in Work Trends: Ameri-
cans’ Attitudes about Work, Employers, and Government (Rutgers University, May 
), http://media.philly.com/documents/_Chasing_American_Dream.pdf; 
and Meta Brown and Sydnee Caldwell, “Young Student Loan Borrowers Retreat from 
Housing and Auto Markets,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Econom-
ics Blog, April , , http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org///young
- student- loan- borrowers- retreat- from- housing- and- auto- markets.html.
. Martin and Lehren, “A Generation Hobbled.”
. Bernard, “In Grim Job Market.”

206 N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 6 9 – 1 7 7
. We have been infl uenced heavily by the work of Robert Shiller for many of the 
ideas in this chapter. He has been a strong advocate for fi nancial contracts that more 
equally share risk in the context of household and sovereign debt. See, for example, 
Stefano Athanasoulis, Robert Shiller, and Eric van Wincoop, “Macro Markets and 
Financial Security,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review, April . Kenneth Rogoff  has 
also advocated more equity- like instruments in the context of sovereign debt. See 
Kenneth Rogoff , “Global Imbalances without Tears,” Project Syndicate, March , , 
http://www.project- syndicate.org/commentary/global- imbalances- without- tears. 
Lord Adair Turner has summarized excellently the problems with debt and advan-
tages of equity fi nance. See Lord Adair Turner, “Monetary and Financial Stability: 
Lessons from the Crisis and from Classic Economics Texts” (speech at South African 
Reserve Bank, November , ), available at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/static/pubs
/speeches/- at.pdf.
. Many have argued for student education fi nancing to be contingent on income. 
See, for example, Kevin Carey, “Th e U.S. Should Adopt Income- Based Loans Now,” 
Chronicle of Higher Education, October , ; and Bruce Chapman, “A Better Way 
to Borrow,” Inside Higher Ed, June , . Elena Del Rey and Maria Racionero argue 
that “an income contingent loan with risk- pooling can induce the optimal level of 
participation provided that the scheme is universal and the loan covers both fi nancial 
costs of education and foregone earnings.” See Elena Del Rey and Maria Racionero, 
“Financing Schemes for Higher Education,” European Journal of Political Economy  
(): – .
. Milton Friedman, “Th e Role of Government in Education,” in Economics and 
the Public Interest, ed. Robert A Solo (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 
), 
http://www.edchoice.org/Th e- Friedmans/Th e- Friedmans- on- School- Choice
/Th e- Role- of- Government- in- Education- percent percent.aspx.
. We are not the fi rst to propose risk- sharing arrangements in mortgage fi nance. 
See, for example, Andrew Caplin, Sewin Chan, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy, 
Housing Partnerships (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, ); Andrew Caplin, Noel Cun-
ningham, Mitchell Engler, and Frederick Pollock, “Facilitating Shared Appreciation 
Mortgages to Prevent Housing Crashes and Aff ordability Crises” (discussion paper 
- , Hamilton Project, September ); and David Miles, “Housing, Leverage, 
and Stability in the Wider Economy” (speech at the Housing Stability and Macro-
economy: International Perspectives Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 
November ), available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages
/news//.aspx.
. Th is is a yearly mortgage payment, not a monthly one.
. If the mortgage payment were linked to the exact value of Jane’s house, she 
would have a perverse incentive to hurt the home’s value through neglect in order 
to reduce the payment. Th is moral hazard problem is important and explains why 
equity- like contracts should be made contingent on a measure of asset performance 
outside the control of the borrower.
. CoreLogic estimates $ billion in negative equity of . million home owners 

N O T E S  T O  PA G E S  1 7 8 – 1 8 5  207
in the fi rst quarter of . Our debt write- off  is signifi cantly less because the decline 
in house prices is less severe in the SRM scenario with the avoidance of foreclosures.
. See also Xia Zhou and Christopher Carroll, “Dynamics of Wealth and Con-
sumption: New and Improved Measures for U.S. States,” B.E. Journal of Macroeconom-
ics , no.  ().
. Nakamura and Steinsson, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union.”
. Frank Fabozzi and Franco Modigliani, Mortgage and Mortgage- Backed Securi-
ties Markets (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, ).
. Miles, “Housing, Leverage, and Stability in the Wider Economy.”
. See Gregor Matvos and Zhiguo He, “Debt and Creative Destruction: Why 
Could Subsidizing Corporate Debt Be Optimal?” (working paper, University of Chi-
cago Booth School of Business, March ).
. See Pierre- Olivier Gourinchas and Olivier Jeanne, “Global Safe Assets” (Bank 
for International Settlements working paper , December ). As they note, “Pri-
vately produced stores of value cannot provide suffi  cient insurance against global 
shocks. Only public safe assets may, if appropriately supported by monetary policy.”
. Annette Krishnamurthy and Arvind Krishnamurthy, “Short- Term Debt and 
Financial Crisis: What Can We Learn from U.S. Treasury Supply” (working paper, 
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, May ).
. Mark Kamstra and Robert Shiller, “Th e Case for Trills: Giving the People and 
Th eir Pension Funds a Stake in the Wealth of the Nation” (discussion paper No. , 
Cowles Foundation, Yale University, August ).
. Rogoff , “Global Imbalances without Tears”
. Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig, Th e Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong 
with Banking and What to Do about It (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
).


 INDEX
Admati, Anat, 
Agarwal, Sumit, 
AIG, –
Allen, Franklin, 
American Housing Rescue and Foreclo-
sure Prevention Act, –
American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of , 
Amromin, Gene, 
Anenberg, Elliot, n
animal spirits view, , –, , , 
n
Appelbaum, Binyamin, 
asset price bubbles, –, –, , 
–. See also housing boom of 
–
asset price collapses, –, 
austerity measures, 
auto industry: sales rates in, –; unem-
ployment in, –, –
Bagehot Rule, 
balance sheet recession, n
bank bailouts, –, , ; FDIC 
loans in, ; Federal Reserve pro-
grams in, –, –; protection 
of deposits in, –, ; protection 
of stakeholders in, –, –; 
Troubled Asset Relief Program 
(TARP) as, 
bank crises, –, n; bank runs in, 
–; current-account defi cits in, 
–; government protections in, –
, –; household debt in, –; 
IMF loans in, –; real estate prices 
in, ; short-term fi nancing instru-
ments in, ; Spanish bankruptcy law 
and, –, –; stakeholders in, 
–; stress in, , f. See also the 
Depression; Great Recession
bank-lending view, –, –, –; 
infl ation in, –; lowered interest 
rates in, –; political power and, 
–; refutation of, –; risk-tak-
ing in, –; small business concerns 
of, ; unemployment in, –
Bank of England, 
bank reserves, –, 
bank runs, –
bankruptcy, –, n, n; 
mortgage cram-downs and, –; 
student loans and, 
behavioral biases view, –, n
Beim, David, –
Ben-David, Itzhak, 
Bender, Stefan, 

210 I N D E X
Benson, Clea, –
Bernanke, Ben, , , –, , 
Biden, Joseph, 
Blinder, Alan, n
borrowers: consumer spending of, , 
–; declining income growth of, 
–, ; defl ation and, –; ex-
pansion of mortgage credit to, –, 
–; forgiveness practices for, , 
–, n; home equity loans 
of, , –, ; junior claims of, 
–, ; in the levered-losses frame-
work, –, –, , –, ; 
lowered interest rates and, –; as 
marginal borrowers, –, –, 
n; moral hazard and, –, 
n; net worth of, . See also col-
lapse in housing prices; housing boom 
of –
borrowing constraints, –, n
Brown, Derek, 
bubbles, –, , –; appear-
ance of safety in, , ; credit supply 
in, ; lending and neglected risks in, 
–; optimists and pessimists in, 
–; proof of existence of, –; 
role of debt in, –; shared-respon-
sibility mortgages and, –. See 
also housing boom of –
Buiter, Willem, 
Bush, George W., , 
business investment, –
Calculated Risk website, 
campaign fi nancing, 
capital gains, 
Carroll, Christopher, n
cash, , nn–
central banks, –; infl ation-busting 
roles of, , –; injections of cash 
by, –. See also Federal Reserve
Central Valley, CA: net-worth destruc-
tion in, –; population growth in, 
; spending declines in, ; unem-
ployment in, –
Chapter  bankruptcy, –, n, 
n
Chomsisengphet, Souphala, 
Cobb-Douglas preferences, n
collapse in housing prices, –, –, 
–, –, ; borrowers’ junior 
claims and, ; debt and spending dur-
ing, –, n; foreclosures and, 
–, , –, , n; forgive-
ness practices and, –, n; 
government programs on, –; 
lenders’ senior claims and, –, –
, ; leverage multipliers of, –, 
n; renegotiation of mortgages 
and, –, –, n, n; 
shared-responsibility mortgages and, 
; Troubled Asset Relief Program 
(TARP) and, ; underwater mort-
gages and, , –, , 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
(CPFF), 
consumer spending, –, –; bor-
rowing constraints on, –, n; 
declines in, –, –, , ; geo-
graphic distribution of, –, ; 
government stimulus of, ; home 
equity loans and, , ; household 
debt and, –, –; housing-wealth 
eff ect on, –, –; infl ation 
and, , –; in the levered-losses 
framework, –, , n; lowered 
prices and, , ; marginal propensity 
to consume levels and, –, –, 
, , n, nn–; multi-
plier eff ects of, ; precautionary 
savings and, n; on residential in-
vestment, –; of savers vs. borrow-
ers, , –; shared-responsibility 
mortgages and, –; unemploy-
ment and, , –
Corker, Bob, –
Coval, Josh, , 
cram-down practices, –
crash. See collapse in housing prices; 
Great Recession

I N D E X  211
Crawford, William H., 
creative destruction, 
credit, , ; in bank bailout arguments, 
–; borrowing constraints on, 
–, n; myopic consumers of, 
–, n; tight availability of, 
, –, . See also debt; lending 
boom; mortgage credit expansion
creditors. See mortgage lenders; savers
credit-rating agencies, –
currency in circulation, –
Daley, Suzanne, –
Davidson, Adam, –, n
Davis, Steven, 
debt, –, –, –, ; animal 
spirits view of, –, n; as anti-
insurance, –; bubbles and, –, 
, –; equity-like fi nancing 
of, –, –, n; forgive-
ness programs for, , –, n; 
government subsidy of, –; in 
the levered-losses framework, –, 
–, , ; marginal propensity 
to consume levels and, –, n; 
in neglected risks frameworks, –; 
optimists’ use of, –; risk-sharing 
principle of, –; risks of home 
ownership and, , –, –, , 
–; spending declines and, –; 
for student loans, –, –, 
n; wealth inequality and, –, 
–, . See also household debt
debt-defl ation cycle, , –, 
“Debt Defl ation: Th eory and Evidence” 
(King), 
debt fi nancing system, , , –, 
–
debtors. See borrowers
default, ; probabilities of, –; 
rates of, –, n
defl ation, , –, 
“Deleveraging Myth, Th e” (Surowiecki), 
–, n
Del Ray, Elena, n
demand-driven economic activity, 
DeMarco, Edward, –
Demyanyk, Yuliya, 
Depression, the, , n; bank failures 
of, ; central bank policy of, –; 
debt-defl ation cycle of, , –, ; 
debt forgiveness programs of, –; 
household debt prior to, –, ; 
household spending and, –; per-
sonal savings rate prior to, 
Detroit’s west side, –, , –, 
n
distribution of housing-based losses, 
–. See also shared-responsibility 
mortgages (SRMs)
Dobbie, Will, 
dollar-denominated borrowing, –, 

Donovan, Shaun, –
dot-com collapse, –, 
downside protection, –, 
Dungy, Doris, 
durable goods purchases, –, –. See 
also consumer spending
Dynan, Karen, n
educational debt, –, –, n
Edwards, Ninian, 
Eggertsson, Gauti, 
elastic housing supply, –, n
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, 

employment, –, n; in the 
levered-losses framework, –; 
migration for, ; productivity gains 
and, ; reallocation and, , n; 
shared-responsibility mortgages and, 
–; wage cuts and, , –. See 
also unemployment
equity-like fi nancing, –, –, 
n
estate tax, n
European Central Bank, 
Evanoff , Douglas, 
excess volatility phenomena, 

212 I N D E X
exchange rates, 
expectations of infl ation, –
exporting eff ect, –
externalities of foreclosure, –, , 
n; in the levered-losses frame-
work, –, , ; underwater mort-
gages and, , –, , , n
Fannie Mae, , –
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), , 
Federal Housing Administration (FHA), 
–
Federal Housing Finance Agency 
(FHFA), 
Federal Reserve, ; Great Recession 
programs of, –; infl ation bust-
ing policies of, –; interest-rate 
manipulation by, –; non-bank 
deposits in, n
Feldstein, Martin, 
fi nancial assets, –, –; cash as, 
, nn–; government protections 
of, –, –, –; leverage 
ratios and, –; price collapses of, 
–, 
fi re sales, –. See also foreclosures
fi scal stimulus policies, –, n
Fishback, Price, 
Fisher, Irving, , –, 
foreclosures, , –, , –, , 
n; delays in, ; federal govern-
ment programs on, –; in the 
levered-losses framework, –, ; 
negative externalities of, –, , 
–, n; shared-responsibility 
mortgages and, –; in Spain, –
; state policies on, , f; on under-
water mortgages, , –, , 
forgiveness, , –, n; bank-
ruptcy mortgage calm-downs and, 
–, n, n; FHFA poli-
cies on, –, nn–; his-
torical precedent of, –; MBS 
impediments to, –; moral hazard 
arguments against, –. See also 
restructuring of household debt; risk 
sharing
Freddie Mac, , –
Friedman, Milton, , 
fundamentals view, –, –, n; 
exporting eff ect in, –; labor 
migration in, ; lowered interest rates 
in, –, –; mortgage-credit 
boom and, –; natural corrective 
forces in, –, –; price declines 
in, ; on reallocation, , , n; 
on unemployment, –
GDP (gross domestic product), –
Geanakoplos, John, –, , , 
–
Geithner, Timothy, 
Gennaioli, Nicola, 
geographic distribution: of declines 
in household spending, –, ; 
of housing-supply elasticity, –, 
n; levered-losses framework and, 
–, ; of net-worth destruction, 
–; of unemployment, –
George Bailey (character), 
Glick, Reuven, , 
gold-clause abrogation, 
government: central banks of, –; 
debt of, , n; monetary policy 
of, –; protection of bank depos-
its by, –, , –; protec-
tion of depositors by, –, –; 
protection of home owners by, –; 
protection of stakeholders by, –, 
–; stimulus spending by, , , 
–, , n; subsidy of debt 
by, –; tax policies of, . See also 
Bush, George W.; Obama, Barack
government-spending multiplier, 
government-sponsored enterprises 
(GSEs), –, –; minimum 
conforming requirements of, ; 
mortgage renegotiation policies of, 
–

I N D E X  213
Great Depression. See the Depression
Great Recession, –, ; asset price 
collapses of, –, ; bank bailouts 
of, –, , ; banking system 
stress of, , f; bank-lending 
view of, , –, , –; begin-
nings of, , ; collapse of housing 
prices in, –, –, ; consumer 
spending declines in, –, –, 
–, –, nn–; default 
crisis of, –, n; Federal Re-
serve programs in, –, –; 
foreclosures in, , –, n; 
GDP growth in, –, f; govern-
ment stimulus spending in, –, 
n; household debt and, –, , 
–; housing boom and, , –, 
–f, –, –, –; inter-
national experiences of, –, –; 
lending collapse of, ; lowered 
interest rates of, –; mortgage 
forgiveness of, , –, n; 
neglected risks and, –; net worth 
declines in, –, –; political 
polarization of, –; Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP) of, 
; unemployment rates in, –, 
–, –, –; wage growth 
in, ; wealth inequality in, –, 
–, , 
Hall, Robert, n
Hartley, Daniel, 
helicopter money, –
Hellwig, Martin, 
“Help to Buy” program (United King-
dom), –
Herkenhoff , Kyle, 
high-credit-score owners, n; home 
equity lending to, –; mortgage 
lending to, –, –, –f; pri-
vate-label securities and, –
highest  percent: leverage ratio of, 
–; net worth of, , , f
Hill, Claire, n
Home Aff ordable Modifi cation Program 
(HAMP), –
home equity loans, , –, 
home improvement. See residential in-
vestment
home ownership: Chapter  bankruptcy 
and, –, n; debt risk in, , 
–, –, , –; foreclosures 
and, , –, , –, , n; 
housing assets of, –; leverage 
multipliers of, –, n; leverage 
ratios of, –; mortgage credit ex-
pansion and, –, –; mortgage 
refi nancing and, –; net worth 
declines and, , f; rates of, –. 
See also collapse in housing prices; 
housing boom of –
Home Owners’ Loan Corporation 
(HOLC), , n
Hong, Joo Yun, 
household debt, –, –, , –, 
, n; in banking crises, –; 
consumer spending and, –, –; 
of the Great Recession, –, , –
; home equity loans and, , –, 
; housing price declines and, –, 
–; mortgage credit expansion and, 
–, –, –; negative equity 
and, ; restructuring of, –, –
, –, , n, n. See 
also collapse in housing prices
household debt-to-GDP ratio, –
household debt-to-income ratio, f
household spending. See consumer 
spending
house-price growth, –, –f, –
, –; borrowing against, –, 
n; debt fi nancing and, –; in 
Spain, –
housing assets, –
housing boom of –, ; debt 
and, –; elasticity of the housing 
supply in, –, n; home equity 
borrowing of, –, ; house-price 
bubble of, –, –f, –, –

214 I N D E X
, –; international markets and, 
–; mortgage credit expansion of, 
–, –; refi nancing during, 
–; in Spain, –; in Tennes-
see, –
housing crash. See collapse in housing 
prices; Great Recession
housing supply: elasticity of, –, 
n; lending boom and, 
housing-wealth eff ect, –, –, 
Hubbard, Glenn, 
human consequences of unemployment, 
–, 
Huo, Zhen, n
hyperbolic consumers, –, n
income, . See also wages
income destruction, , n
income taxes, 
inelastic housing supply, –, n
inequality (in wealth), –, –, 
, 
infl ation, –, –; currency injec-
tions and, –; expectations of, 
–; interest-rate manipulation 
and, –
installment fi nancing, 
insurance, , 
interest rates: banking system stress and, 
, f; Federal Reserve manipu-
lation of, –; in fundamentals 
view of recession, –, –; IMF 
loan policies and, –; negative re-
turns in, –, , n; zero lower 
bound in, –, , , n
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
n; East Asian bailouts by, –; 
on household debt and spending, –; 
on household-debt restructuring, ; 
voting power in, 
investment, –. See also residential 
investment
investor-purchased properties, –
investors. See mortgage lenders; savers
irrational behavior, –, –
It’s a Wonderful Life, , 
Jorda, Oscar, –
judicial foreclosure, , f
junior claims, –, . See also bor-
rowers
Jurek, Jakub, , 
Kahle, Kathleen, 
Kamstra, Mark, 
Kaper, Stacy, 
Kazee, Ezra, 
Kelly, Bryan, 
Keynes, John Maynard, , , , 
Keys, Benjamin, –
Kimball, Miles, n
Kindleberger, Charles P., –, , 
–, 
King, Mervyn, 
Koniak, Susan, –
Koo, Richard, , n
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 
Kroszner, Randall, 
Krugman, Paul, –, , , 
Kung Edward, n
labor migration, 
Lansing, Kevin, , 
Large-Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP), 
Lehman Brothers, –, n
Lehren, Andrew, 
lenders. See mortgage lenders; savers
lenders of last resort, –
lending boom, –, –, –, 
–; appearance of safety in, 
–, , , ; default crisis and, 
–, n; East Asian capital and, 
–; home construction boom and, 
; low-credit-score lending of, –, 
–; myopic consumers and, –, 
n; originator misrepresenta-
tion and, –, n; securitization 
practices of, –, n. See also 
bubbles; mortgage credit expansion
housing boom of – (continued)

I N D E X  215
leverage multipliers, –, n
leverage ratios, –, –, n
levered-losses framework, –, –, 
, ; borrowers in, –, –, 
–; consumer spending cuts 
in, –, , n; debt in, –, 
–; defl ation in, , –, ; 
foreclosure externalities in, –, , 
; household-debt restructuring in, 
–, ; infl ation in, –, –
; interest rates in, –, ; un-
employment in, –, –, n; 
wage reductions in, ; zero lower 
bound in, –, , , n
Levitan, Adam, 
liquidity traps, –
loan-to-value (LTV) ratios, , 
local-economy jobs, –, n
local house-price index, 
low-credit-score owners, n; home 
equity lending to, –; mortgage 
lending to, –, –, –f; 
private-label securities (PLS) and, 
–, n
low-documentation mortgages, –
lowest  percent: collapse of housing 
prices and, –; leverage multipli-
ers of, –, n; leverage ratios 
of, –; net worth of, , , f; 
shared-responsibility mortgages and, 
–
Lustig, Hanno, 
macroeconomic market failures, , 
–, nn–
Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History 
of Financial Crises (Kindleberger), 

marginal borrowers, –, –, 
n
marginal propensity to consume (MPC), 
–, nn–; asset price col-
lapses and, –; housing leverage 
ratios and, –, n; shared-re-
sponsibility mortgages and, , 
market failures, –; macroeconomic 
categories of, , –, nn–
; microeconomic categories of, 
–
Martin, Andrew, 
Mayer, Christopher, n
McBride, Bill, 
microeconomic market failures, –
middle  percent, f
Miles, David, –
modifi cation of mortgages, –; 
Chapter  bankruptcy cram-downs 
and, –, n, n; FHFA 
failures in, –; MBS servicer 
failures in, –, –. See also 
forgiveness
Monaco Coach Corporation, , –, 
Monetary History of the United States, A 
(Friedman and Schwartz), 
monetary policy, –
money-market funds, 
Monroe, James, 
moral hazard, –, n
mortgage-backed securities (MBS), 
–, , n; appearance of 
safety of, –, , ; credit-rating 
scores and, –; default probabili-
ties of, –; default rates of, –; 
Federal Reserve purchase of, ; of 
government-sponsored enterprises 
(GSEs), –, –; lowering of 
interest rates on, ; originator mis-
representation of, –, n; per-
formance of, , n; private-label 
varieties of, –; renegotiation of 
mortgages and, –
mortgage cram-downs, –
mortgage credit expansion, –, 
–, n; animal spirits view of, 
–, , , n; cause and eff ect 
in, –; declining income growth 
and, –, ; fundamentals view of, 
–; government-sponsored enter-
prises and, –, –; house-
hold debt and, –; housing-supply 

216 I N D E X
elasticity and, –, n; housing 
wealth eff ect and, –; low-credit-
score lending and, –, –; rates 
of, ; securitization practices in, –
, n, n; in Spain, –; 
in Th ailand, –. See also housing 
boom of –; lending boom
mortgage-interest deduction, 
mortgage lenders: application denial 
rates by, –, –; expansion of 
credit by, –, –; forgiveness 
policies of, –, n; lowered 
interest rates of, –; refi nanc-
ing rates of, –; senior claims of, 
–, –, ; shared-responsibility 
mortgages and, –, –. See 
also forgiveness
mortgage refi nancing, –
mortgages. See more specifi c headings, 
e.g. shared-responsibility mortgages
Mukherjee, Tanmoy, –
multiplier eff ects, 
myopic consumers, –, n
Nakamura, Emi, , 
national-economy jobs, –, n
National Federation of Independent 
Businesses (NFIB), 
National Income and Product Accounts 
(NIPA), –
negative equity, 
negative externalities, –, , n
negative interest rates, –, , n
neglected risks frameworks, –
net worth: of borrowers, ; distribution 
of, –; home values and, –, –
; housing-wealth eff ect in, –, 
–; leverage multipliers of, –, 
n; leverage ratios of, –
net-worth destruction, –, –; 
geographic distribution of, –; 
spending declines and, –, ; un-
employment and, –, 
Niewerburgh, Stijn Van, 
Nobleman v. American Savings Bank, 
n
nominal income growth, –
nominal wage rigidity, 
non-conforming mortgages, –
non-residential investment, –
non-tradable jobs, –, n
Obama, Barack, –; bank-lending 
view of, –; bankruptcy reform 
proposals of, –, n; mort-
gage forgiveness policies of, , –
; underwater mortgage proposal of, 
, 
Occupy Wall Street movement, 
Ohanian, Lee, 
Olney, Martha, 
Olson, Bob, 
optimists, –
Orszag, Peter, –
owner-occupied properties, –
panic of , –
paper money, 
Pence, Karen, n
personal savings rates, 
Persons, Charles, –
pessimists, –
Piskorski, Tomasz, –, 
Plosser, Charles, –
PNC Financial Services Group, 
political polarization, –
political power: bank-lending view and, 
–; fi scal stimulus policies and, 
–, n. See also government
Pontiff , Jeff rey, 
poor. See lowest  percent
Porter, David, 
Posner, Eric, n
precautionary savings, n
Preston, Steve, 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), 

mortgage credit expansion (continued)

I N D E X  217
principal write-downs, 
private debt. See household debt
private-label securitization (PLS), –, 
; appearance of safety in, –, 
, ; credit-rating scores and, 
–; originator misrepresentation 
in, –, n; servicers of, –, 
–. See also securitization market
quantitative easing, 
Racionero, Maria, n
real business cycle theory, n. See also 
fundamentals view
reallocation, , ; exporting eff ect in, 
–; fl exible wages and, , 
recessions, –; animal spirits view of, 
; banking crises in, –, n; 
bank-lending view of, –, –, 
, –, ; bank reserves in, 
–; collapse in housing prices 
in, –, –; debt and bubbles 
in, –, , –; fundamen-
tals view of, –, –, –, , 
n; government stimulus spending 
in, –, n; household debt 
and spending patterns in, –, –, 
n; infl ation in, –; levered-
losses framework of, –, , ; 
risk sharing and, –. See also 
Great Recession
Reinhart, Carmen, –, 
renegotiation of mortgages: Chapter  
bankruptcy cram-downs and, –, 
n, n; FHFA failures in, 
–; MBS servicers and, –, 
–. See also forgiveness
residential investment, –, , . 
See also consumer spending
restructuring of household debt, 
–, –, –, , n, 
n
rich. See highest  percent
Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor, n
risk, –, –; of home owner-
ship debt, , –, –, , –; 
neglected risks frameworks of, –; 
vs. safe assets, –, , , –, 
n; of student-loan debt, –, 
–, n
risk-free assets, , –, , , 
–, n
risk sharing, –, n; benefi ts of, 
–; bubbles in, –; downside 
protection in, –, ; employ-
ment protection in, –; equity-
like fi nancing in, –, –, 
n; shared-responsibility mort-
gages in, –; student-loan debt in, 
–, n
Roberts, Kristin, 
“Robinson Crusoe” economy, 
Rodriguez Zapatero, Jose Luis, 
Rogoff , Kenneth, –, 
Romer, Christina, , 
Rose, Jonathan, 
Rothbard, Murray N., 
Rothstein, Jesse, 
safe assets, –, , , –, 
n
Saiz, Albert, 
Santelli, Rick, , 
savers: consumer spending of, , –
; debt fi nancing by, , , , –
; defl ation and, –; liquidity 
traps of, –; lowered interest rates 
and, –; personal savings rates 
and, ; senior claims of, –, –, 
; tax policies for, , n. See 
also mortgage lenders
Schmieder, Johannes, 
Schularick, Moritz, –
Schumpeter, Joseph, 
Schwartz, Anna, 
securitization market, –, , 
n; appearance of safety in, –, 
, ; borrower default rates in, 

218 I N D E X
–; credit-rating scores in, –; 
default probabilities in, –; 
government-sponsored enterprises in, 
–, –; neglected risks in, –
; originator misrepresentation in, 
–, n; private-label securities 
in, –; renegotiation of mortgages 
and, –, –
senior claims, –, –, . See also 
savers
Seru, Amit, –, 
shared-responsibility mortgages (SRMs), 
–; benefi ts of, –; bubbles 
and, –; downside protection in, 
–, ; equity-like fi nancing of, 
–, –, n;  percent 
capital-gain rule for, ; government 
policy on, –; job protection and, 
–; lender fees for, , 
Sherlund, Shane, n
Shiller, Robert, , , n
Shleifer, Andrei, , 
short-term fi nancing, 
Sinn, Hans-Werner, 
skills mismatch, –
Smith, Vernon, –, 
Snowden, Kenneth, 
Solow, Robert, 
Song, Jae, 
Spanish mortgage law, –, –
spending. See consumer spending
Staff ord, Erik, , 
standard asset pricing theory, –
Steinsson, Jon, , 
Stewart, Jon, 
stimulus spending, –, n
student-loan debt, –, –, 
n
Stulz, Rene, 
subordinated debt, 
subprime mortgages. See securitization 
market
Suchanek, Gerry, –
Summers, Lawrence, 
supply-side view of resources, –
Surowiecki, James, –, n
Swire, Peter, 
TARP (Troubled Asset Relief Program), 

tax policy, –, , n
Taylor, Alan, –
Tea Party movement, , 
tech bubble collapse, –
Temin, Peter, , 
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Fa-
cility (TALF), 
Term Auction Facility (TAC), 
Term Security Lending Facility (TSLF), 

Th ai/East Asian banking crisis of s, 
–
tradable jobs, –, n
tranching, –
Trebbi, Francesco, , , –, 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), 

Trust Indenture Act of , 
Turner, Adair, n
underwater mortgages, , –, ; 
forgiveness programs for, –; 
government programs for, –; 
Obama’s bailout proposal for, , ; 
refi nancing rates and, –; shared-
responsibility mortgages and, –
unemployment, –; in bank-lending 
view of recession, –; of college 
graduates, –; foreclosures and, 
, n; in fundamentals view of 
recession, –; government poli-
cies on, ; human consequences of, 
–, ; layoff s in, –, , –; 
in levered-losses framework, –, 
n; local banking risks and, –; 
net-worth shock and, , ; shared-
responsibility mortgages and, –; 
securitization market (continued)

I N D E X  219
skills mismatch and, –; in Ten-
nessee, –
unemployment-insurance payments, 
U.S. Treasury, –
Van Hemert, Otto, 
Varian, Hal, 
Veronesi, Pietro, 
Vig, Vikrant, –, 
Vishny, Robert, , 
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 
Wachter, Susan, 
Wachter, Till von, –
wages: cuts in, , –; declining 
 income growth of, –, ; nomi-
nal wage rigidity and, ; reallocation 
and, , ; taxation on, ; unem-
ployment-insurance payments 
and, 
Wanichek, Craig, 
Warren, Elizabeth, –
wealth inequality, –, –, , 
wealth transfer, 
Weisberg, Jacob, 
Well Worth Saving (Fishback, Snowden, 
and Rose), 
Whitehouse, Mark, 
Williams, Arlington, –
Witkin, James, –
Wolf, Martin, 
zero lower bound, –, , , n
Zingales, Luigi, , n

